THE GOLDEN BOOK OF MARCUS AURELIUS EMPEROVR AND ELOQVENT ORATOVR.

ANNO. M.D.XXXVI.

THE TABLE.
OF the birthe and lynage of Mark Aurely Anthony emperor. Cap. primo. What
masters Mark Aurely had in his youth. cap. ii. What sciences Marcus the
emperor learned, And of a meruaylous letter that he sent to Polion. capitulo.
iii. How for the wisdom of Marcus many wise men floryshed in his time.
capit. iiii. Of the emperor Marcus son named Verissimus. capit. v. What wise
and ancient men Marcus chose to instruct his son. cap. vi. How it chanced
to five wise men, wherefore they were put out of the emperors house. cap.
vii. How the emperor reasoned with the masters that should learn his son.
cap. viii. How the masters of princis ought to keep them from vices. cap. ix.
How the emperor Marcus nouryshed the princessis his daughters. capit. x. How
Marcus the emperor did chose and proved his sons in law. cap. xi. What the
emperor Marcus said to the father of a young manne, that would mary one of
his daughters. capitulo. xii. How a son in law ought to be well examined
er he be accepted to his purpose. ca. xiii. How Marc the emperor favored al
noble exercyses, and hated trewandes and fools. cap. xiiii. Of the good
conversation of this emperor Marcus Aurelius. cap. xv. Of the feast that the
Romans kept to the god Iano in Rome, and what chanced to the said emperor
there. cap. xvi. How Marcus the emperor answered a senator in the senate.
capitulo. xvii. How the emperor Marcus divided the hours of the day for the
busynesses of thempire. capitulo. xviii. The answer of Mark the emperor when
Faustine his wife demanded the key of his study. capi. xix. The emperor
reherseth the perils of them that haunte women excessyuely. capitul. xx. The
emperors answer to Faustine for that she said, she was with child. capit.
xxi. How tidings was brought to the emperor, that the Mauritaynes would
conquer great Brytayn. cap. xxii. What the emperor said to them of his court
in eschewinge ydelnes. capit. xxiii. Of the peryllous living of them that
haunte the court continually. capit. xxiiii. How the emperor would have them
of his court to live, capitulo. xxv. Of a meruaylous and fearful monster
that was seen in Scicile, and of his writings. cap. xxvi. What befell to a
citesen of Rome in the time of this emperor Marcus. capi. xxvii. Of a great
pestilence that was in Italy in this emperors time. cap. xxviii. How Marcus
ansewred his physicians that would have him leave his study. cap. xxix. How
science ought to be in prnicis. capi. xxx. What a villayne said to the
Senators of Rome in the presence of the emperor. cap. xxxi. Of diverse other
things that the vyllayn said before the senate. capi. xxxii. How the emperor
desired the welthe of his people, and the people his welthe. cap. xxxiii. How
the emperor gave Lucilla his daughter license to sport her at his palace.
cap. xxxiiii. What Marcus the emperor said to a Senator as touching
triumphs. capit. xxxv. Of the great reproach that the emperor gave to his
wife Faustine and her daughter. capit. xxxvi. How the emperor counsayled
Faustyne to eschew ylle occasions of her daughter. cap. xxxvii. What thought
Marcus the emperor took for the marriage of his daughters. cap. xxxviii. Of a
sycknes, whereof the emperor dyed, of his age, and where he dyed. cap. xxxix.
The words of Panutius, secretary to the emperor, at the hour of his death.
cap. xl. How the emperor demanded to have in writing all that the secretary
had said. cap. xli. The answer of the emperor to Panutius. cap. xlii. What the
emperor said to the masters of his son and to the rulers thempire. cap.
xliii. How the emperor at the hour of his death, sent for his son, and
declared to him, who should govern the empire. cap. xliiii. What the emperor
said to his son at the hour of his death. cap. xlv. Of other more
partycular counsels given by the emperor to his son. capit. xlvi. Of diverse
and particular recommendations, which the emperor commanded his son. cap.
xlvii, Of the last words that the emperor spoke to his son, and of the
table that he gave him. ca. xlviii. A letter sent by Marcus Aurelius to Pyramon
his special friend. The first* letter. A letter sent by Marcus the emperor
to Cornelius, of the travail of war, and vanity of triumph. the.ii. letter
To Torcatus being at Gayette in consolation of his banyshement. The.iii.
letter. A letter to Domitius of Capue to comfort him in his banyshmente.
The.iiii. letter. A letter sent fro the emperor to Claudius and Claudine his
wife, because they being old lived as young persons. The fyfthe. letter. A
letter sent from Marcus the emperor to Labinia a Roman wydowe for to
comfort her for the death of her housebande. the.vi. letter. A letter sent
by Mark the emperor to Cyncinatus his friend, because he being a gentilman
became a merchant, the.vii. letter. A letter sent from Marc the emperor to
Catulus censorius* that was sorrowful for the death of his son Verissimus.
The.viii. letter. A letter sent by Marc the emperor to Marcurino, being at
Sanny now called Benauent. The.ix. letter. A letter sent by Marc the emperor,
to Antigonus, comfortynge him in a sorowefulle case, the.x. letter. A another
letter sent by Marc the Emperor to the same Antigonus against cruel judges,
The.xi. letter. A letter sent by Mark to Lambert governor of the isle of
Helespont, when he did banyshe the vacaboundes fro Rome, the.xii. letter. A
letter sent by Marc the emperor to Catulus his special friend of the novelties
of Rome. the.xiii. letter. A letter sent by Marc the emperor to the amorous
ladies of Rome, because they made a play of him, the.xiiii. letter. A letter
sent by Mark the emperor to Boemia a lover of his that would have goone with
him to the wars. The.xv. letter. The answer to the emperors letter sent
by Boemia. The, xvi. letter. A letter sent by Mark the emperor to Matrine a
young maiden of Rome, of whom he was enamoured, seeing her at a wyndowe.
The.xvii. letter. A another letter sent by Mark the emperor to the said
gentle woman Matryne. The.xviii. letter. A letter sent by Mark the emperor
to Libia a fair lady Romayne. The.xix. letter,
FINIS TABVLE
LVCRECIA ROMANA

THOMAS BERTHELETVS



THE PROLOGVE.
AS the time is an inuenter of novelties, and a register certain of things
aunciente, and at the end time gives end to that suffrethe end: The truth
all only among all things is priuileged, in such wise, that when the time
semethe to have broken her wings, than as immortal she takes her force.
There is nothing so entier, but it diminishes, nor nothing so hole, but that
is weary, nor nothing so strong, but that it breaks, nor nothing so well kept,
but that it corrupts. So all these things time acheueth and burieth, but
only truth, the which (of the time and of all thing that is in the time)
triumphs. Neither to be favored of the good, nor to be persecuted of the
ill, may be, but that sometime troth may be stopped and hid, but when it is
displeased, and will displease, than at the last she comes to a good port,
and takes land. The fruits in the spryngyng time have not the virtue to give
sustenaunce nor perfyte sweetness to satisfy the taste of them that eatetth
thereof: but thanne passes the season of summer, and harvest comethe, which
time does better ripe them, and thanne that that we do eat does profit us,
the proof thereof is right sauerynesse, and gyuethe the more force and virtue,
and the greatter is the taste. I will in these first words say, that in the
first aeges men were more esteemed by their meke customs and delycatenes,
than they were after reproved by their gross and rude understandings.
Certaynely sum of the aunciente philisophers, I speak of the most
aunciente, as well Caldees as Greeks, who first lyfted them selves to
regard the sterres of the heaven, and surmounted the high mount of Olympius,
there to contemplate and regard the influences of the planettes in the heaven:
I dare well say, that they have rather merited pardon by their ignoraunces,
than praysynge or grace by their wisdom. These were the first that would
search the truth of the elements of the heaven, and yet they were the first
that did so we errors in things natural of the earth. Homere in his Illiade
said these words in speaking of philosophers: I praise nothing the knowledge
of mine auncesters, but I can them greatte thank and praise, in that they
desired knowledge. This was well said of Homer. For if among the aunciente
men had not rayned such ignorance, there had not ben so many sects and
parcialities in every schole. He that has read the ancient antiquities of
the philosophers, shall not denay me, the presumption of the knowledge and
ignorance of that they desired to know, the which is chief cause, that
science is not all one. There is greatte nombre of parcialities, Cynitiens,
Catoniens, Peripaticiens, Academyens, and Epicuriens, who were as contrary in
their opinions, as diverse in their naturalities. I will not that my pen be so
dismeasured to reprove so much the ancient men, that the glory all only
should abide with them that be present. Truly if he merit guardon and
praise, that shows me the way, whereby I think to pass: yet no less
meriteth he that shows and aduisethe me of the way, whereby I may fail. The
ignorance of the ancient men has been but as a guide to advise and advertise
all other, and because they erred, we have found since the way, to their great
praise, and to our great shame. I say that if we that be no we present had benne
than, woe had known less than they did. And if they that were than were now
at this hour, they should surmounte us in knowledge. And that this is true,
tt appears well. For the ancient sages, with their diligence to know the
troth, by their close and ferme made the ways: But we by our slouthe follow
not the open ways. Than to the purpose that I will say, we that be now
present, can not complain of them that have been, but that the truth (the
which according to Aule. Gel. is daughter of the time) In this time of the
world declarethe to us the errors that we ought to flee, and the truth of
the doctrine that we ought to follow. But as now the humayne malice is so
expert, and the understanding of mortal men is so dulle, that in time of
need, in goodness of wit we fail and in all ill we know more than we ought to
know. In such wise, that some with one part of the more, and some with
less, al presume to win the game. And though this be true, yet it is but a
small thing to that we abide fore: There is so much that we ought to know.
For the most that we know, is the least part of that we be ignorant of, as
the things natural, according to the variety of the time, like manner does
the operations of the elements. In semblable wise in things mortal, as the
ages has succeeded, so are discovered the sciences. For certain all the
fruits comes not together. When one fails an other begins to enter in
reason. I will say, that neither all doctors among christen men, nor all
the philosophers among the gentylles were concurrante in one time, but after
the death of one good, an other came better. The high and supreme wisdom,
the which all mean things governs by Justice, and departs it according
to his bounty, will not that at oone time the world should want or be
destitute of sage men, nor at an other time want of simple persons: some
desyringe the fruit, and some the leaves. In such sort that they should have
envy of that other were impeched. This ancient world that ran in Saturnus
days, the which other wise was called the golden world, the which was so
esteemed of them that saw it, and so much praised of them that hard the
writynge thereof, and so much desired of them that felt no part thereof, was
not gold by the sages that did gylte it, but because that there was none ill
that did vngylt it. This our age now is of iron: yet it is not called of iron,
for fault of sages, but because the malycious people surmounte. I confess one
thing, and I think I shall have many will favor me in the same, that there
was never in the world so much people teaching virtue, and so few
following the same. Aul. Gele says in his book, that the ancient sages were
holden in reputation, because there were few teachers and many lerners: and at
this hour it is contrary, there be but few lerners and many teachers. The
small esteem that the sages be in at this time may be seen by greatte
veneration that the philosophers were holden in as than, the which thing was
true: Homer among the greeks, Salomom among the Hebrews, Lygurge among the
Lacedemonyens, Lyuie among the Romans, Cicero among the Latins, Apolonius
Thianeus among all the barbarike nations. I desire to have been in all these
ages, when the world was so rich of sage persons, and so poor of simple
persons, when they assembled out of far countries, and of diverse realms and
strange nations: not all only to have hard their doctrines, but also to have
seen their persons. I think I am not begyled in the histories, for when Rome
in his most prosperity was highest in tryumphe, Titus Liuius does write it
in his histories, and the glorious saint Jerome affirmethe it in the prologe of
the bible, that mo people came to Rome to se the eloquences of the books, more
than to joy any Romayne trumph. When Olympias was delivered of her child the
great Alexander, Philip her husband and father to the young child wrote a
letter to Arestotle, wherein he said: I give great graces to the gods, not
all only that they have given unto me a son, but because they have given him
to me in the time that thou may be his master, and he thy disciple. Marc
Aurele the emperor, of whom this present book entreatethe, he speaking of
him self wrote to Polion these words: Friend I will thou know, that I am not
made emperor by reason of the blood of my predecessors, nor yet for the
favor of my lynage now present, but it was because I have been always a friend
and lover of the sage people, and enmy to them that have no good knowledge.
Right happy was Rome to chose so valyant an emperor, and right fortunate was
that emperor to come to such an empire, not by patrimonye but by sagenes. And
if that aege was glorious in ioyinge of his person, no less it is to us to
joy of his doctrines. I will entitle this book the Golden book. It may be
called golden, because in so high estimation it holdethe the virtuous,
discoueringe in their time this book with the sentences, as these princes
holdethe their minds of gold in their Indes. But I say that at this hour
there be moo hearts banyshed into the Indes of gold, than to employ them to
read the works of this book. Salust says, that there ought great glory be
given to them that have done there high and great acts: And that there ought
no les fame and renown be given to those that in a good style have written
them. In this case I confess to deserve no merits for my traduction or any
fame, but I demand pardon of all them that be sage, for the fawtes that they
shall find therein. For except the divine letters, there is nothing so well
written, but that there may be found necessity of correction, line, and
sensure. Seemed this to to be true, by that Socrates was reproved of Plato, and
Plato of Aristotle, Aristotle of Abenruyz, Scilio of Sulpice, Lelie of Varro,
Marinus of Tome, Enio of Horace, Senec of Aule Gele, Estratocles of Strabo,
Tesato of Galene, Hermagore of Cicero, Origin of saint Ierom, saint Jerome of
Ruffyn, and Ruffyn of Donate? Sithe that in them and in their works there has been correctyon, who were men of high knowledge, it is no reason that I should
be in their fraternity, saying that I know so little as I do to the
examynation of wise and virtuous men. To them I submyt this present warke, and
to them that have been such, I them require to be content to be the reders,
and not iuges thereof. It were no patience to suffer, nor law to permytte, that
a thing that a sage person with great maturite and delyberation has
written, to be dispraysed by a simple person. For ones redynge, oftentimes the
auctours and writers are dyspraysed, not of them that can traduce and compose
works: but of them that can not understand them, and yet less read them. I
say further of advantage, that diverse have written of the time of the said
Mark Aureleo emperor, as Herodian wrote lyttel, Eutropio less, Lampridio yet
less, Julius Capitolyn some what more. The writings of them and of other
seems rather epitomes than histories. There is difference between this
writynge, and that they wrote by herynge say: but they by whom I have
composed this present warke, they were witness by syghte, and not by herynge
of other, but they wrote what they saw them self: That is to say among the
masters, who learned the said emperor their sciences, there were three, that is
to say, Iunto Rastico, Cina Catule, and Sexto Cheronense, neue we to the
greatte Plutarke. These been they that have written this present history,
Sexto Cheronense in greek, and the other two in latyne. I think of this
history is but small notice, because unto this hour it has not be seen
imprinted. When I departed from the college of my study, and went to preach
in the palace, where I saw so many new novelties in the courts, I delybered
my self with greatte desire to know things, and gave my self to search and
know things aunciente. And the case fortuned on a day, redynge an history, I
found therein matter to be noted in a pistel, and it seemed to me so good, that
I put all mine humayne forces to search farther. And after in reuoluyng diverse
books, serchyng in diverse libraries, and also speaking with diverse sages of
diverse realms, finally I found this tretise in Florence, among the books
left there by Cosme de Medicis, a man of good memory. I have used in this
writing, the which is humayne, that that diverse times has been used in
divinity, that is to reduce, not word for word, but sentence for sentence. We
other interpretours are not bound to give for the mean the words, it
suffiseth to give for the weyghte the sentence: As the historiographes, of whom
there were diverse, and the history that they made was all but one thing. I will
not deny, but I have left out some words, which were not mete, nor well
sittynge, rude, and least of valor, and I have meddled it with outher more
sweet and profitable. I think that every wise man, after he has read this
book, will not say that I am the principal auctour of this warke, nor yet to
judge me so ignorant to exclude me clean from it, for so high sentences are not
found at this present time, nor to so high a style they of time past never
atteyned.

Here ends the prologue.
Here begins the book of the life of the noble and eloquent Mark Aurely
emperor.
Of the birth and lyguage of Mark Aurele Anthony emperor. cap. primo.
IN the year of the foundation of Rome.vi.C.lxxxxv. in the Olimpiade a.
C.lxiii. Anthony the meke, being deed, than consules Fuluie Caton, and Gnee
Patrocle in the high capytol, the.iiii. day of Octobre, at the demand of all
the people Romayn, and consent of the sacred Senate, was declared for emperor
universal of all the monarche of Rome, Marc Aurely Antony. This excellent
baron was naturally of Rome borne in the mount Celye. And according as Julius
Capitolyne says, he was born the.vi. kalendes of May, the which according to
the account of the latyns, was the xxvi. day of the monethe of Apryll passed.
His father was named Anio Vero. For the occasion whereof the histories diverse
times call him Marc Anthony Vero. True it is, that Adriane the emperor called
him Verissimus, because in him was never found no lies, nor never failed the
troth. These Anius Veres was a lignage, that auaunced them to be descended of
Numa Pompilio, and of Quintus Curtius the famous Romayn: which for to deliver
the town of Rome from peril, and to give his person perpetualle memory, of
his own good free will he yielded him self to the same vorage, that as than
was seen in Rome. The mother of this emperor was called Domiciade, as Cyne
historien recounteth in the books of the lygnages of Rome. The Camilles were
persons in that time greatly esteemed, by cause they were accounted to be
descended of Camille the famous and ancient capytayne Romayne, which
delivered Rome from the Gaulles, that had won hit. The men that descended of
that lygnage were called Camilli, for the remembrance of Camille, and the women
were likewise called Camilles, in the remembrance of a daughter of the said
Camylle, that was called Camilla. There was an ancient law, that al Romans
should have a partycular priuylege in the same place, where their predecessors
had done to the Romayne people any great service. For this ancient custom
they had priuylege, so that all they of the lygnage of Camylle were kept and
maynteyned in the high capytol. And though the variety of the time, the
multitude of tyrants, the ebulition and mouynge of cyuill wars were cause of
the diminyshing of the aunciente Polycie of Rome, and introduced in manner a
life not very good: yet for all that we reed not, that the preemynences of the
Romans were broken, but if it were in the time of Sylla, when he made the
universal prescription against the Marians. After the death of this cruelle
Sylla, in exalting of him self, Julius Caesar the pitiefull, made dictatour of
Rome, and chief of the Marians, adnulled and vndydde all that Sylla had made,
and brought again into the ancient estate the common welthe.

What has benne the condycions, the estate, poverty, richesse, favor, or
disfavor of the ancestors of this Mark Aurelye Emperor, we find not in
the aunciente hystories, and yet it has been dilygently serched for. The
ancyent Romayn hystoriens were not accustomed to write the lives of the
emperors fathers, namely when they be made monarchs, but the merytes and
graces that their children had, as for the authority that they had
inheritynge their fathers. Truth it is, as says Julius Capitolyn, the
father of Mark Aurelee the emperor, had been pretour in exercises, and captain
in the Frontiers, in the time of Traian the good, and Adrian the wise, and
Anthony the meke, emperors. This is confirmed by that the same Marc Aurelee
wrote (being at Rodes) to a friend of his called Polion, that was at Rome,
saying thus: Many things have I felt and known friend Polyon, by the
absence of Rome, namely of that I se my self here alone in this isle: but as
virtue makethe a stranger natural, and vice tournethe natural to a
stranger: And as I have been.x. years here at Rodes to read philosophy, I
thereby repute my self as natural of this land, and that has caused me to
forgette the pleasures of Rome, and it has learned me the manners of the isle.
And here I have found many of my fathers friends. Here was captain against
the Barbariens, to my lord Adrian, Anthonye my father in law, the space
of.xv. years. I let the to wit, that the Rodian people are curteis, and full
of good graces. I would have read philosophy as long as my father had been at
Rodes in war, but I may not: for Adrian my lord commaundethe me to go and
keep reside^ce at Rome, how be it every man reioysethe to see his natural
country.

So by the words of this letter it is to be believed, that Anio Vero, father to
this emperor Marc, had applied the most part of his life in war. It was
not the custom lightly to trust a person to have the office of a governor on
the Frontiers, without he had been well exercysed in the feats of war. And
as all the glory of the Romans was to leave after them good renown, the
said Marc certainly was taken for the most virtuous, and had greatteste
friends in the Senate, whereby he trusted on the conquest of the most cruel
enmyes: according as the said Sexto Cheronense historien says. The Romans
all though they had in their hands most peryllous wars, yet they had in
four parts of the empire strong and entier garnisons. That is to say in
Byzance, the which is now Constantinople, by reasone of them of the oryente:
And Engades, the which now is called Calex a city of Spain, for love of
them of the weste: In the river of Rhodano, which is now ye river of Ryne, for
the Germaynes: And in Collosse, which now is calledde the Rhodes, because of
the Barbariens. In the kalendes of January, when the senate divided the
offices, being pourueyed of a dictatour, and of two consulles yearly.
Incontynente in the third place they provided for four most excellent
barons to defendethe said four Frontiers: The which seems to be true, for
the most famous and renowned barons of their young days were capitaines in the
said Frontiers. The great Pompeius was sent to the Byzaunces Canstantinople:
The worthy Scipio was sent to the Collossences and Rodyans: And the courageous
Julius Caesar was sent with the Gadytaynes of Calyx of Spain: and the strong
esteemed Marcus was sent to them of the river of Ryne. This we say because
that Anio Vero father to Marc Aurele emperor, had been prouoste and pretour in
the offices, and one of the capitaines of the Frontiers, which ought to be in
Rome one of the persons most esteemed.

What masters Mark Aurely had in his youth. cap. ii.
We have not by any autentike histories, fro whens, when, or how, in what
manner, or in what exercyses, or with what persons, or in what lands was spent
and consumed the most part of the life of this good emperor. But to be
short, Julius Capitolyn says, that he had been xxiii. year under the
commandment of Adrian the emperor. How be it contrary wise is found by
other hystoriens, according as says Sexto Cheronense in his history. It was
not the custom of the Romans cronyclers, to write the things done by these
princes, before they were pryncis, but only of young people, being in their
young age, having greatte and hye magnyficence, and doing great interprises.
This seems to be of troth: for Sueton Tranquyll recounteth largely the
fearefulle deeds and enterpryses done by Caius Iul. Caesar in his young age, to
show to princes to comme, how it was a great ambicyon, that they had to
attayn to the monarchy, and but of small wit and maturitie to keep them
self therein. It is no new thing that men gape for hye and frail things.
And the more higher the magnifice^ce is, the more lower they feel fortune. And
when they were diligent to accomplysshe their desire, as much thought had
they to conserve their quyetnes and rest. In case tha^ that Anio Vero, father
to Mark the Emperor, followed the exercise of wars: yet he put his son in
the way to learn science. For there was a law sore used and accustomed, and
well kept in the Romayne polycye, that every citesens sons, that enjoyed the
liberty of Rome, and had accomplyssed.x. years, should not be suffered to goo
by the streets as vacabundes. Nor it should not be suffered by the Censure, who
governed Rome, and daily took head to the forfaytes done therein, to suffer a
child no lengar than.x. years of his age to play the child. But fro thense
forth the father of the child should be bound to noryshe him out of the
circuit of Rome, or to lay a pledge, that his son should do no folyes.
When Rome tryumphed, and by their policy governed all the world, it was
certainly a meruaylous and monstrous thing to se it then, and no less
fearful unto us now to here thereof. There was at that time in Rome.iiii.
hundred. M, inhabitants, among whom there was.ii. hundred. M. young people,
that were refreyned and brydled from their young pleasures. The son of Cato
was chastysed, because he was wylfull and presumptuous. And also the brother of
good Cyna was banyshed, because he went ydelly as a vacabounde. Without that
Cicero begyleth us in his books of the Romayne laws, no Romayne ought to
straye abroad in the streets of Rome, but if he bare in his hand the sign or
token of the office, whereby he lived. To thentente that every man should know,
that he lived by his trauayl, and not by the sweat of other men. This law was
kept of every person. The emperor had borne before him a brennynge brande:
The consulle an axe of arms: the priests a hat in manner of a coyfe: the
senators a tongue in manner of a crusyble on their arms, the Censure a
lyttelle table: the tribunes a mace: the centuryons a sign or baner, the
orators a book, the gladiatours a sword, the tayllours sheres, the smethes a
hammer, and in like wise of all the other offices and crafts. We may know
than by this that is said, that after that Mark Aurelye was borne at Rome,
his father in his youth had taught him good norture. And though it so were,
that the beginnynge of his young aege should be hid from us: at the least way
we are certain, that the myddell aege and end of him was right glorious. His
father Anio Vero would that his son Marcus Aurelius should leave feats of
arms, and follow study. And surely it is to be thought, that it was done more
by the valyauntenes of the father, than the cowardenes of the son, except
the deeds of them that be deed begyle us that been alive, and the cause judged
by clear understanding, and that we find moo sentences of diverse sad
persons, that there has benne but few that been lost by writings and
learning, ye and a great meynye fewer that have had auantage by arms. Reuolue
all books, and search through all realms, and finally they show us, that
very few in their realms have been happy in arms, but there have been many
famous and renowned by scripture and learning. Take here example and se if it
be true or not that I say. Had the Assiriens mo than one king, that was
Ninus, one Lygurge among the Lacedaemonians, the Egyptiens one Ptholome, the
Hebrews one Machabee, the Greeks one Hercules, the Macedoniens one Alexander:
the Epirotiens one Pirrhe, one Hanyball the Carthageniens, and one Julius Caesar
among the Romans? It is not thus of learned men: for if the Greeks had one
Homer, no less the Greeks vaunteth them of the.vii. sages, whom we believe
more in their philosophy, than Homer in the wars of Troy. For as difficile it
is to find a truth in Homere, as a lie in these sages. Semblably the
Romans had not only Cycero as right eloquent, but also they had Salust,
Lucan, Titus Liuius, with a great company of noble men, and well approved, who
have left right great credence in their scriptures in the saying of truth.
What lost Cicero in the senate for vsyng of inuectiues? And as we say of so
small a nombre of Greeks and latynes, we may say of the Assitiens, Persians,
Medes, Argiues, Acayens, Peniens, Frenchemen, Britons, Englyshemen, and
Spanyardes. All the which nations without comparyson have of them self
left more memory, and have honored their lands and countries more by
writing, thanne they that have left signs by arms. Than let us leave these
strange histories, and return to the pythe of our emperor Marcus Aurelius,
as Eutrope recountethe. According as this excellent baron learned diverse
sciences, so he had diverse masters to teache him. He studied grammar with a
master named Euphorion, musyke with an other named Gemino Comode, eloquence
with Alexander a greek, In naturalle philosophy he had to his masters Comode
Calcedonien an ancient baron, which expounded to him Homer: and Sexto
Cheronense, neuewe to the great Plutarche. Also he studied in the laws, and
Volusie Meciano was his master. This emperor esteemed to have the knowledge of
payntinge, and to grave in wood and metal, in earth, and other sculptures, in
which art his master was Diogenito, in his time a famous and renowned
paynter. He trauayled also to know and search what extended to the art of
Nygromancye. By accasion whereof he went openly to here Apolonio. And to
thente^t that there should be nothing unlearned of him, he above all sciences
set his mind to Cosmography, in the which for his masters, he took Iunio
Rostyco, that sithe wrote his life, and Cina Catule, the which wrote of his
death, and the life of Comode his son. Of these noble and excellent barons,
that flourysshed in those days, he was taught in virtues and sciences. Cicero
lamentethe the ancient policy of Rome, because that he saw great loss in
the common welthe than present, saying in his Retorike, that the ancient
Romans had always regard to that part, where they thought most damage and
peril should grow. There were.v. things among all other in Rome, whereunto
they had ever a vigilante respect, the which the senate neded not to care
for, nor no law dispensed for them: and these been they, the pryestes were
honest: and the virgins vestales right chaste: the penalties right just, the
capitaynes full valiant: They that taught young children were virtuous. It was
not permytted in Rome, that he that was a master in scyences, should be
disciple of vices.

What sciences Marcus the emperor learned. And of a meruayllous letter that he
sent to Polyon. cap. iii.
PHilostrate says, that it was demanded of Polion, who was the rycheste
manne of the world: He answered, It was he that had most wisdom. He was
demanded again, who was most poor: He answered, he that had least wit.
Of troth it was a worthy sentence of such a person. The effect thereof we
se daily by experience, the wise slydynge in diverse chances of fortune,
releueth him self: The vnwytty person, in very small things thouchynge his
living not greatly decayed, fallethe down. There is nothing that is so lost,
but that there is hope of recoueryng, if it be in the hands of a wise man. And
contrary wise, there is no thing so assured, but the recouerance thereof ought
to be feared, if a fool have the guidinge thereof. It was axed of Xenophon the
philosopher, whether he had rather to be foolyshe and a greatte lord, or to
be wise and poor. He answered and said, I have pity of a rich fool, and I
have envy of a wise manne waxen poor. For if a wise man have but one foot,
yet will he rise and keep him self from falling: And if ye give an abbaye to a
fool, if by fortune he fall, he will never releue again. ye may think that
the father that dies and leaves his son poor and wise, that he leaves to
him much: And he that leauethe his son ryshe and folyshe, I think he has
left him nothing. These things considered, Anio Vero, father of the
emperor, as a father that loved his son hartly, was not content, to deliver
one master to his son, to make him virtuous, and to learn one science,
wherewith he might occupy his understanding, but he gave him many masters,
that refreyned him from vices, and commanded, that he should learn many
sciences, to thente^t that he should be the more besily exercised. When and how
much he trauayled to learn, and what sciences, and with whom, and with what
will he learned, and what he knew, he wrote him self, being at Agrippine,
now called Coleyn, to a friend of his, named Polion, as it follows.

Friend Polion, thou meruaylest, why that I leave not to learn new things at
the end of my days. He that has but one meat to eat, and can not eat
thereof, he leueth it, and peradventure it was holsom for him, and eats other
things, that he sees, which may be hurtful to him. It is a great
magnificence to a man, to have diverse sorts of meats: for if he have no lust
to one, that is good for him, he may take of an other, that is better. He that
is wise, may understand me, without any more declarynge. As in all arts, a
man is content at the last: so at the last, be they never so sweet, they
torn to a werinesse. He that knows but one science, though he be wise, yet
he renneth in great daungier. For being annoied therewith, he will occupy his
life in other hurtefull things. The noble and worthy persons, that did cast
slouthe away fro them, have left of them eternal memory, not wyllyng to
learn al only one science, to attempre their understanding with, but also
trauayled, to learn diverse other, wherewith they sharped their wits, to
thentente that they should not be dulled and made blonte. In all natural
things, nature is with right little content, but the spirit and
understanding, is not satisfied with many things. And sith the
understanding is of such condition, that it is lost by liberty, and is
lyghtely encombred, with subtilite it percethe, with quicknes it knows, and
with ignorance it wastes: it is necessary, by time to remount to very high
things, lest it bow unto low and ill things. Al corporal domages, that
chance to mortal men, are by medicynes healed, or by reason remedied, or by
length of time cured, orels by death ended: The only understanding, which is
dusked in errors, and depraved in malyces, can not be healed by medecines,
nor redressed by reason, nor help by counsel. The aunciente philosophers, in
the said happy golden world, and golden age, did not all only learn one
thing, whereby they might sustain their life, and increase good fame: But they
trauayled, to know all that was to be known, and yet ever sought to know
more. In the.lxxv. of the Olympiade, as diverse persons were assembled in the
high mountayn Olympius, to celebrate the plays, by fortune thither came a
philosopher of Thebes, which had made all that ever he brought with him. He
made his shows, his cote, and sewed his sherte, and had written his books, and
so of all other things. They that were there assembled, were abashed, and
meruaylled greatly, that one man could do it. He was diverse times asked, where
he learned so many things. And he answered and said, The slouthe of man is
the cause, that one art is divided into diverse arts. For he that knows al
arts together, must needs know one alone. This philosopher answered highly.
And surely, they that herd him, ought to have been as greatly ashamed of his
words, as the philosopher was of the vainglory of his apparel. Let every man
remember him self, and let no man blame the shortness of the time, nor wekenes
of our nature. For there is nothing so hard, but it is made soft: nor so high,
but it may be raught: nor kept so close, but it may be seen: nor so subtyle,
but it may be felt: nor so dark, but it may be lighted: nor so profounde, but
it may be discovered: nor so disseuered, but it may be gathered to gether: nor
so lost, but it may be found: nor so impossible, but it may be conserved, if
with all our hearts, we occupy our powers in good exercises, and apply our
understanding in high things. I deny not, but our nature is little worth:
But I know well, that less worth is our slouthfulnes. I would dema^de of evil
men, the which pray us to be good, and axeth counsel of us, for their
sensuality, saying, that they be weyke and frail, although they have
understanding, to invent euyls, and have strength enough, to put them in
effect, and to persevere therein, they never lack constance. The cause is, we
call it natural, for to do and commit vices and miseries. And sloth in virtue,
we call strange and weak, because of the works.

Let no man blame our nature, for being weak and fainte: nor lay against
the gods, that they be cruel: for we have no less ablenes to do well, than
redynesse to do ill. Let none say, I would, and I can not withdraw me from
vice. It is better said, I may, but I will not follow virtue. I will not
defame strange realms, but I will speak of us, that be latynes, and by them
shall be seen, how they have benne full of malice, and that they might have
done well. I would wit of the deeds, that Marcus Anthonius did with
Cleopatra: The proscription, that Scilla made of the nobles of Rome: The
coniuration, that Catilina invented against his countreye: The bloudde, that
was shed for the cause of Pompeye, in the camp of Pharsale: And the greatte
theft, that Julius Caesar made of the treasour, the cruelties, that Nero did to
his mother: the shames, that Calygula committed with his sisters, the treson,
that Brutus did to his father Gaius: the shrewdenes and cruelties, that
Domician did to the virgins vestales: the treasons, that Julius Patroclus used
with the Syliciens and Syculians, the frayes and murders, that Vlpio, the
mariner, made in the temples and churches of Campayne. I would know of such,
as I have rehearsed, and diverse other, that I speak not of, that applied them to
so many shrewde turns, who let them (if they had would) to have applied
them self to do other good deeds? All this I have said, my friend Polyon, to
answer, to that ye have demanded of me. That is, in what sciences I have
wasted and consumed my time. Wherefore it pleases me, to tell it to the. Anio
Vero my father, suffered me but.viii. year in my childhode: and than, till I
was.x. year of age, I went to schole for to write and read: and fro.x. year
to.xiii, I went to study with Euformion, and learned grammar: Fro.xiii. year
to.xvii. I learned eloquence, with Alexander ye greek, a famous orator: fro
that time to.xxii. year, I was with Sexto Calcedon, learning natural
philosophy. Those years passed, I was at Rhodes, and studied humanity, till I
was.xxxii. year of age. And than I went to Naples, where as I was three year
with Fonton a greek, learning greek letters. And I put my good will so much
thereto, that I spoke, and wrote greek more easily than latin. Than I returned
to Rome, where the war of Dace arose, to the which Adrian my lord sent me:
And because that in arms, and in time of war, I could carry no books of
science, I determined me, to learn the science of music with Hieronyme Comode,
to thentent that I might with swetenes of instruments, restrain my body fro
certain vices, which as than in my house began to take force. All the rest of
my life, thou know, it has been in bearyng of offices in Rome, unto the time
that the weight of the monarchye was laid on my shulders. Hitherto the
emperor spoke.

Than by this letter, written to his friend, it seems well, that without sleuth
he passed his time. It is reason, to believe it holly, in that he has said. For
so excellent works, that he made, and so high sentences, as he wrote, might
not proceed, but of a prudent man, and a very wise spirit.

How for the wisdom of Marcus, many wise men flourished in his time. Cap.
iiii.
AS the life of the prince is but as a white, for all other to shote at, and as
a glass wherein all the world does behold: so we se by experience, that
whereunto a prince is inclyned, the people trauaylynge to follow the same, have
not the discretion, to eschew the evil, and follow the good. Certainly they
muse no less upon a counterfayte foul, made of feathers, thanne though it
were of flesh, and yet at the first flight, it leeseth the liberty, and yet
his hunger is not thereby quenched. Whereby all the wings of liberty are
turned to pain of seruage. It is a greatte offense, and an immortal infamye,
to a prince, that in the steed of gyuynge his hand of good living, to releue
other, casts backewarde his foot of evil example, whereby all other
overthrow. Than without comparison, greatter is the wickedness of the
people, than the negligence of the prince. For if one lives ylle, and an
another loweth him, it is no marvel: and though there be but few, that
follow him, it is no new thing. Nor in case, that many follow him, is no
fearefulle thing: but all the hole to follow him, is a great sclander. If the
people were such, as they ought to be, one should rather turn from ill to good
for many, than that many for one should torn from good to ill. Certainly every
man knows, that though we be bound to follow the honest commandments of
our princes, yet we be not bound to follow their ill living. What shall we
say thanne, seeing that now adays, the delytes of men are of so greatte
price, and the rygour of their empire, in so poor estimation, that without
shame, some disprayse their just commandments, and follow their evil
works. O, if the princes had such nombre of good folk, that would fulfill
their commandment, as they have greatte nombre of wretches, that follow
their doings, I swear, that there should be no need of any prison for the
mysdoers, or carcans for blasphemers, chains for sclaues, nor heddynge blocks
for traitors, nor knyues for aduoutrers, nor galowes for thieves. I will give
you example of all this, whereby ye shall se, that it is true, that I say. If
the king be inclyned to hunte, all will be hunters: if he be a player, all
will play: if he use arms, all will tourney: if he be an aduoutrer, other
will use the same: if he be fierce, other will be fierce: if he be virtuous,
all will be virtuous and valiant: if he be temperate and moderate, all will
absteyne: if he be hardye, all will be bold: if he be pitiefull, al will have
pity: if he be wise, all will learn. And to the entente, that we blame not all
only the princes of our days, let us call to memory, the princis of times
paste. Who that has read Sextus Cheronense, in his book called the diverse
inclynatyons, that princis have had, shall find, that Romulus, foundatour of
Rome, honored greatly grauers in stone: Numa Pompilius, his successor,
honored priests: Paulus Emilius, mariners: Caius Caesar, goldsmythes: Scipio,
the capitaynes: Augustus Octauius, tennis players: Calligula, ruffyens,
Tyberius, baudes: Cruel Nero, sword players: Claudius, writters: Scilla,
armorers: Marius, his compagnion, grauers of images: Vaspasian, good paynters:
Titus his eldest son, mynstrelles: Domitian, his mighty brother, crossebowe
makers: And above all other, our Marcus Aurelius emperor, wise men. The
diverse inclynations, that princis had in diverse things, has made to vary the
favor and disfavor of many pryncis, with their people. And as the common
people regards more favor, than Justice, such officers are most favored,
to whom princis does most inclyne. All this we say, to show, how that in
the time of this good emperor, wise men were favored. If the hystorians do
not lie, sithe the time of Mecena, the Romayne (which was much more happy,
to have wise men to his friends, than to invent new manner of meats and
bankettes) unto this Marcus Aurelius, have passed.xvii. emperors, which were
Julius, Octauius, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Othus, Vitellus,
Vaspasianus, Titus, Domitianus, Nerua, Traianus, Adrianus, Anthonius, and
Aurelius. And of all these, we can find al only but two, that favored wise
men, that is to say, Nerua and Traian. All the other emperors were not only
dysciples of liers, but also were persecutours of the truth. This seems to
be true: for Julius persecuted Cicero: Octauius banished Ouide: Tyberius
enpoysoned Caluitio: Caligula caused to cut the throtes of.iiii. orators to
gether: Nero slew his master Senec: Claudius set his uncle Lucan in prison:
Othus hanged up Patroclus: Domitian banysshed all the orators of Rome: And the
more to show his cursednes, wha^ the wise men, yt were banished, went out at
one gate, there entered in at an other gate all unthrifts, the which by Tytus
his brother, had been banysshed and exiled. And as I say of these few in
nombre, I might say of many other. For certaynely the wise men were not thus
entreated in the time of this good emperor Marcus: and that this is true, it
seems by diverse excellent barons, well learned in diverse sciences, that
flourished in his time: Julius Capitolin recounteth of them as follows.
Alexander, a greek, Trasion, Polyon, Euticius, Anius Macrion, Caninius,
Crodiaticus, Fornius, Cornelius, Apolonius, Nius, Sextus Cheronense, Iunius
Rasticus, Claudius Maximus, Cina Catulus, Claudius Seuerus, and the renowned
Diogenitus paynter, and the well learned lawyer Volusius Mecianus. All these
were in this emperors palace, and residente in his persence: And yet for all
that, he had diverse other wise presons in Rome, and abroad in Italy. It was no
meruail, to se in those days, the multitude of men, that flourisshed in
wisdom. There was no father, but if he had two sons, he would set one of
them to study, and the other, according to the Romayne law, should be set to
the wars. And if this emperor wist of any wise young man above al other he
would favor him.

Of the emperor Marcus son named Verissimus. Cap. v.
THis emperor Marcus Aurelius, had only two sons, as Herodian says. The
greattest and eldest, was called Comode, and the yo^gest was named Verissimus.
He was a fair child of person, and right virtuous of living. With his beauty
he drew to him the eyes of many, and with his good inclinations, he robbed the
hearts of all men. He was the hope of the people, and the glory of his fathers
age. And though the eldest was prince, yet the emperor determined, that the
last borne, for his virtues, should inherit as the eldest: And he that was
first borne, for his demerites, should be disherited. And as good desires in
the best time fail often by unhappy chance, this emperor being of.lii. years
of age, and the son. of.xvi. the glory of Rome, and hope of the father, the
life of the son took an end. And as much was the death bewailed, as the
life desired. It was great pytie, for the senate by reason thereof saw not
the emperor, nor the old emperor for sorrow saw not the senate of a long
space. Rome was right heavy, and the senate withdrewe them to the heighte of the
capitol diverse days. And as the mystes and wyndes cause the leaves to fall,
that were grene in summer, and the deeds of honor constrayne us to forget the
myshappes of fortune, and as a man of high lynage, and of strong courage,
though that sorrow remain in his heart, and abydethe locked therein,
determynethe to cleanse the branches of sorrows that is outward, fayning joy
and myrthe outwardely, keeping the sorrow within: so this Marcus the emperor,
as a man whose vine freseth and dyethe, wherein he had al his hope, contented
him with that was left behind. When his dear son Verissimus was deed, he
sent for the prince Comode his only inheritour, which sithe the child his
brother was deed, entered not in to the palace. And the emperor seeing the
proud and outrageous port of his son Comode, bedewed his eien with salt
tears, remembrynge the shame of the one, and the death of the other. The
which perceived by Faustyne his mother, which loved him most entierly,
commanded to have her son away fro the presence of his father.

What wise and ancient men Marcus chose to instruct his son. Cap. vi.
Though that the heart of this emperor was occupied with the death of his
child, yet for all that he raised his understanding, to have the prince his
heir right well brought up. For certaynely princis been such, when they
come to man's estate, as they be brought up in their tender youth. The father
than knowing the frail inclinations of his child, not correspondent to the
good governance of the empire, as a good emperor sent over all Italye for the
most wysest persons in learning, the most famous of renown, and the most
virtuous in deeds. And as in diverse things the infamye is greatter in the ill
doing by malice, than the fault of the trespassour by weakness: so in diverse
other things, the common voice is more than the secret virtue. For the which
occasyon after the assemblynge of these wise men, the emperor commanded to
examyne them, and to be informed of the blood of their predecessors, of the
appoyntement in all their things, and of the treaty of their busynes, and of
the credence among their neighbors, and of the pureness of their lives, and
gravity of their persons, and finally of their sciences, what they could do,
and this to be done in an order. The astrologiens in astronomy, the musitiens
in musyke, the orators in their art of rhetorike: and some in other sciences.
And this not in one day, but in many: and not only by informacyon of other,
but he would know hit by his own propre experience. Thus they were all
examyned, so that there was none left behind. And as for perfect knowledge
of things, wherein we have great affection, it behooves to have strange
advise, clear understanding, and propre experience: so the emperor commanded
to chose out of diverse a few, and out of few the wysest, and of the wysest
the most expert, most worthy, and most ancient. And according to the vii.
arts lyberall there was assigned to every science two masters: so that the
prince was one, and the masters xiiii. This renown that the Emperor sent
over all, to have masters for his son the prince, caused to come to him moo
wise men from strange countries, than of the marches and neighbors of Rome.
The good emperor considering that it was no reason, that such as came to his
service, should return myscontented, some with joyful words, some upon
certain hope, and some with gifts and presents were dispatched, so that
they were all pleased. And if this doing was renowned by the report of the
wise men, it was no less virtuous by the wisdom and worthynes of the
emperor, to send them home so well content. For he sent them away as well
satisfied that were overcome, as they were contented that ouercam them. And
certainly they had all reason, for some bare the sweet words and satisfienge
of the father: and sum aboode there charged with the enterprise of the son.
Yet the good emperor, not being contented with this, commanded that these
masters should be lodged in his palayes, and eat in his presence, and
acconpany his person, to se if their life were conformable to their science,
and whether their pleasant and well couched words, agreed in effect with their
warkes. It was a meruaylous thing to se the study and thought that the
emperor had to regard them, as well in going as fedynge.

How it chanced to five wise men, wherefore they were put out of the emperors
house. Cap. vii.
IN the month of Septembre, the.xi. day thereof, in halowyng the feast of the
Emperors nativity, in the same house where as he was borne, in the place of
mount Celio: As a trewande and fool does like him self, and semblably as he
is accustomed to do: And like as oone does the semblable things and
customs, that he is wont to do: so the emperor set more his intention on
wise men, than his eyes on fools. He saw.v. of them satte beatyng the
pauement with their feet, and arose from their places, clappynge their
hands, speaking loud, and laughyng excedyngely, the which was no less
marked of the emperor than beholden. When the feast was done, he called them
aside, and said: Friends let abide with me the pitiefull goddis, and let
the good deeds go with you. I have chosen you to thentent that foles should be
converted to wise men, but I see wise men become foles. Do ye not know, that
with the fire of myxture gold is drawn, and by the lyghtnes of fools wise
men are proved? Certainly the fine gold defends his qualities in the quycke
fournayes: and likewise the wise man shows his virtues among fools. Wot ye
not, that a fool can not be known among fools, nor a wise manne among sage
folk? Among wise men, the fool is made bright, and among foles wise men do
shine. Do you not know, what shame it is to make the disciples of foles,
masters of princis? Know ye not, that of the courageous understanding
procedethe the composytion of the body, the rest of the person to be the
temperance of the tongue? What profits it you to have an expert tongue, a
quick memory, a clear understanding, great science, profounde eloquence, or
a sweet style, if with all these graces ye have a wicked will? Wherefore will
wise men have their words so distinct and moderate, if their words be light?
And to thentent that it should not seem to you that I speak of pleasure, I will
bring to you an antyke law of Rome. In the seuenthe table of the laws of our
fathers was written these words: We command, that a more grievous
chastysement be given to the wise manne for a light deed done openly, than to a
secret murderer. O just law and just men that ordained it. For the simple
labourer sleeth but one with his knyfe in his anger, but he yt is wise sleeth
many with the evil example of his living. Curiousely I have regarded, that
Rome begins to declyne, when our senate fayllethe of meke and wise
Senators, and multyplieth with these serpentines. The holy senate was adorned
with old prudent persons: And not without tears, I say at this hour it is
full of ianglers and liars. Auncientely in the scoles of Greece was taught only
words, leaving the works: and than in Rome was taught to do works, and
leave words. But now it is contrary, for now in greece the liars and
ianglers are banyshed, and has sent them to Rome: and Rome has banished and
sent the good wise men in to Greece: and in this manner I desire rather to be
banyshed into Greece with wise men, than to abide in Rome with fools. To the
praise of a good man (I swear to you my friends) that whiles I was young, I
saw in the senate the philosopher Crisippus (brought up with good Traian)
speak oftentimes: and he was so sweet in his words, that many times he was
hard more than three hours to gyther: And he never spoke word but it was of
eternal memory. And when so ever he went out of the senate, I never saw him
do deed, whereby he deserved to have grievous peyn. Certainly it was a meruaylous
thing to se and here the estimation of his eloquence, and the infamy of his
person. All Rome was abashed of his high eloquence: and all Rome and Italy
were sclandered with his wicked works. The prosperity of Rome dured CCC.
year. And so long Rome was Rome, as it had simplicity in words, and gravity
in works. One thing I shall show you* which is great confusion to them alive,
and great admyration of them that be deed, that of all the ancient men I never
read a light word that they spoke, nor an yuell deed that they did. What
thing was seen than in that glorious world, but to rejoice in so glorious
wise men? And now at this day the world is so corrupted, because there is so
many young corrupt, surely I have greatter envy of their deeds thanne of our
wrytynges. Their few words and good works have left us example of great
admyration. And the wise men of this time teach us openly, and write us
secretly doctrines of pardition. Than by this that I have said, and by other
examples that I shall say, ye may know, what I mean. When the realm of
Acaye submitted his peryllous horns and his proud heed, to the sweet
obeisance of the empire, they drew them to this condition, that they would
have benne the hoostes of the garnysons of all Asye, and not disciples of the
orators of Rome. At that seson there was in Rome a great lord, ambassador of
Acaye, temperate in words, and honest of living, with a white heed: He was
enquired of the senate, why he was so cruel, to lead into his country for men
of war, poor and covetous squiers, and leave wise men of greatte heart. He
answered with such love as he had to his country, and with such gravity as
longed to such a person, and also with such hardynes as his office required,
saying O fathers co^scriptes, O happy people, It is.ii. days sith I yete any
thing, and.ii. days sithe I slepte, cursynge the fatal destenyes of fortune,
that has brought me into Italye, and lamenynge unto the goddis, that keep me
in this life, because my spirit is between the hard anuelde and the
importunate hammer, where as I do se all is as hard as the anuelde, whereon the
hammer often strykethe. The thing most peryllous among all perils, is to
make election. ye constrayne me to chose, and mine understanding can not
attain thereto: and the goddis do not show me, what I have to choose. If I
lead garrysons of men of arms, it shall be very noyfull to the familyes:
if I bring advocates, it shall be peryllous for the common welthe. Sorrowful
that I am, what shall I do? Oh heavy and unhappy realm, that abides for them,
and ye cruel, that commands them. Than sithe hit is thus, I determyne me to
lead them, that shall waste our goods, and spend them, rather thanne those
that should corrupt and break our customs. For a legyon and an army by
necessity may put to affliction and sorrow only a people: But an orator or
an Advocate by his malice, may corrupt a hole realm. Than said the emperor
to these wise men: Friends, how greatte is the credence of ignorant people,
and loss of learned men? Wherefore should they of Acaie rather give meat to
poor sowldiours, men of arms, than to have for their neighbors orators and
wise speaking advocates? So when this communycation of the emperor was ended,
the.v. great masters went away with greatte shame, and the.ix. other tarried
with great fear. In all this while it passed not two months after, that the
prince Comode was come from his norces, where as he had learned the doctrine
of suckyng of breasts. Also he was but of tender age, and not of great delycate
understanding. This prince Comode was borne in Rome on the mount Celio, and
nourished at the gate of Hostie. He was more derely beloved of Faustina his
mother, then hated of Marcus Aurelius his father. And to speak with all due
honor among them, the mother held her for certain to be the chyldes mother:
and the child according to his customs was much like his mother: and the
father was in doubt, whether he were his son, because he resembled but little
in virtues to the father.

How the emperor reasoned with the masters that should learn his son
Capitulo. viii.
AL these matters being paste, the good emperor for to esteem the thing that
he had done, and to pouruey for that he had to do, he called aside the nine
wise men, and said to them, There is greatte fame in Rome of that I have done
in thempire, to do such dilygence as to discover all the wise men, and of the
curiosity that I have showed as in certaynynge of the best. Of troth if ye
be wise, ye can not be sclaundered of any thing. The annoyance of ill things
comes of wisdom and virtue, but the admyration of good things procedethe
of small understanding or less experience. The wise person will suffer none
admyration. To show at the first bronte mocion in every thing, shows to be
constant in nothing. I have made strayt examynatio^ among you, for so ought
such to pass as should be admytted to strayte amytyes. New amities is weary in
three days: and ever have I seen and proved by experience, that friends
lyghtelye taken, are lyghtely left again. I chanced in company of an
ancient Romayne, which was all white for aege: and because he merited it, I
called him father, and he for love and nurture called me son: the which in
case of adventure inquired many things of me, but I would make him none
answer. Than he said these words to me: Son behold, In the law of
frendshyp it is written, that the friend in all things trusts to his friend,
first regarding who is his friend. Surely this council was good. The curious
man of arms (if he will bye a horse) first he will se him renew and assayed,
or he speak of the sale of him: if he please him not, though he might have
him for a less price, he will not have him: if he please him, what so ever the
price is set, he will not leave him. Than it is a lefull thing, that the
beast be examyned and felt er he be had into the stable. In like wise a man
should be examyned, er he be received in to amytie. And if the horse that
eats but hey, straw, and otes, be left for one ill tatche, much more the
friend, which is the intestyne of the heart, and ought to keep our secrets
and affectyons, for diverse fautes ought not to be received in to the same.
There was a philosopher named Arispo, the first that was in the time of Silla
and Marius, who said, that friends ought to be like good horses: That is to
say, that they ought to have a little heed by humble conversation: quick of
herynge, to the intent that they be redye when they are called: a soft mouth,
to the end that their tongue be temperate: The houe of the foot hard, to
suffer trauaylle: and their hands open to do good deeds: their fete sure to
persevere in amity: a baye color for his good renown: And finally the horse
retournethe, that is the manual friend: And thereto is joined these words:
That is, that he be without curbes or byttes: and that he may go where as any
fatal destenyes tourneth the brydell and reyne of fortune. The gods
understand me, though that men can not atteyne thereto or comprise it.
Retournynge than to the purpose, I will ye know, because I have taken you for
friends, not to put you away at length. And though that cherytrees produces
their flowers in February, we abide not to have the cheries but in May.
Friends ought to be as molberies, that in such time producethe their beries,
which is their fruit, that they fear not the frostes of May, as the vynes
do: nor the mystes of Octobre, as the peches and quinces do. I will not that
they come when the prosperity is good, and go away when the fortune is naught.
For that is no point of true friends. As the lies of wynes causes dronkardes
to vomit in the tauernes, like wise adversity drives away faint friends out
of the house, because the service is not acceptable, without the will be known
of him that does it. Than hold you sure of my contentation, sithe that I have
it of your warkes. I come now to the effect of our purpose. I have taken you
for to be masters of this child: and regard, that I have taken you few
among many, to the end that my son should be noted among few. His nurses at
the gate of Hostie have given him two years suck of their milk, and his
mother Faustyne has given him other two years to sport him in the Palace, And
I like a good father will give him.xx. years of chastisement. It soore
displeasethe Faustyne his mother to leave him so sone, and I am sorry that I
took him so late. It is no marvel, for these womenne with their lyghtnes, and
these children with their small knowledge, occupy them self in things
present: But worthy wise men ought to think on that is passed, and also to
ordeyne for that that is present, and with great study to provide for the time
to comme. I think on every day in the year, and of the day that the goddis
have given me, and of the day that I give unto you. The goddis to me, and I to
you do give him mortal to be as a man, and than you to me and I to the
goddis do render him immortal to be wise. What will ye that I say more?
Certainly god has made him man among men by the soul: and I have engendered
him a beast among beasts by the flesh, ye shall make him a god among
goddis by shape. I assertayne you of one thing, which is, I have not given to
my child but mortalle flesh, wherewith he shall take an end of his life: but
ye shall give him doctrine, wherewith his memory shall never peryshe. If his
youth knew the weak and faint flesh that I have given him, and that his dull
understanding would reach to the wisdom that ye may give him, he should
call you fathers, and me an ylle stepfather. And though he say not so, yet
I confess it, that is, that the naturalle fathers of the flesh are
stepfathers of nobleness, sithe that we give the naturalitie of them subject
to so many mutabilities, and bond and captive to so many myseries. For
certain ye shall be just fathers to him, if as now ye can enable his
flesh in good customs, and then to bring his understanding to be occupied
with high sciences. And syrs, repute it not small, that I commit to your
charge and arbytrement, that thing which pryncis ought most to regard,
that is, to se to whom they commytte the nourysshynge of their chylderne. To be
masters of princes in earth, is to have the office of the goddis that been in
heaven. For they govern him that has cure to govern us: They endoctrine him
that should teach us: they show unto him, that ought to show us: Chastyse
him that ought to chastise us: and finally they command one, the which
afterward aloone may command all the world. What will ye that I shall say
more? For certain they that have the charge of a prince, be the gouernall of
the ship, The standerde of an army, the governance of people, the guide of
ways, the shylde of kings, the treasure of all, because they have among
their hands him that afterward ought to govern all the world. And
furthermore to the entente that ye have him in more estimation, I will tell
you, that in gyuynge my son unto you, I do give you more, than if I had
given you a realm. The pure and clean lyuinge of the son alive, is the
glorious fame of his father that is dead. For of him, that the son trusts
in his life, depends the renown of the father that is dead. Thus have ye
had the goddis at will, and the bryttel destenies of fortune happy to you,
as unto this hour ye have not watched with children of strangers. Fro
hensforthe wake ye with the prince, which is the profit of al other. And take
good head my friends, that there is greatter difference in bryngyng up of
princis children, than to teach young boys of the common people. The most
part of them, that come to schools, come for to learn to speak, but I
delivered not my son Commode to you to learn him to speak many words, but
for to set him in the way to do good deeds. The glory of folishe fathers is
to se their children vanquyshe other in disputynge: but my glory and joy is
to see my son surmounte other in virtue: for the glory of the Greeks was to
speak much and to do little, and the glory of the Romans is to do much
and to speak but little.

How the masters of princis ought to keep them from vices. Capitulo. ix.
MArcus Aurelius following his purpose, joined this to his foresaid words, and
said: Regard well my friends, and forget not, that I trust you in mine honor,
who am my sons father, and of the study of Comode my son, and of the
glory of Rome my natural country, And of the solace and rest of Rome, which
is my subject: Of the governance of Italy, which is your country: And above
all things of the peace and tranquillity of our common welthe. Than he that
is put in trust with such administration of other, has no cause to sleep.
Now let us come to more partycular things. Regard as now, what thing is
most conuenable for my son, which as a young colte would go play in the
grene meadows, and noisome shall be the keeper to him, and a thing peynefulle
to keep him therfro. The first thing, whereof I pray you, is to give him a
strong bridel, and a sharp bytte, to thentent that he be well mouthed, so
that none take him with lies. The greattest faut that can be in men of
honesty, is to spare the truth, and not to be veritable: And the greatteste
vyllanye in a vyllayne is to be given in largess of lies. Set good order
upon him. Take heed to his hands, to the entente that he accustom him not to
demand to play at the tables and dyce with such as be lost and naught. The
greattest token, that a prince will loose and dystroye the empire, is when in
his young age, he is known to be vycious in play. The play is such a vice,
that who so ever it bytethe, hit is like the bytynge of a mad dog, the
which rage endures unto death. I recommende to you my child, though he be
young, make him sad and moderate. Certainly it is not so great a glory unto a
prince to have the crown on his heed, nor a chayn of gold about his shulders,
nor the scepter in his hand, nor the greatte company and guard that he has
about him, as to show sadness from his youth. The open honesty suppliethe
many fautes and debilities. Spare not to cast on him a strong chain, and to
tie him fast, that he goo not to delytes and vanities. For an effeminate
person never has spirit to any hye or noble deeds. I am greatly satisfied
with that the teacher of Nero said to his disciple: Though I wist that god
would pardon me, and that men knew no mysse of me, yet for the vilany of the
flesh, I would not sin in the flesh. Surely they were good words, and ill
borne away of Nero. Let not yet go the reyne. For if he see the young mares,
he will neigh or bray if he see time. The vice of the flesh in all times, in
all ages, and in all estates holds his seasone or course, if it pass not in
the grene age of chyldehode, casting of the reyne of reason, and stryking with
the spurs of the flesh, and blowynge with the trompe of sensualite: Taking
the brydell in the tethe with a furious will, rennyng through mountains and
woddes after the mare: In leaving her goinge but softely, and in the
ouertakynge much less. And than afterward being therein deliberate, the body
remains impotent, the understanding acloyed and blinded, the reason
troubled, the good name lost, and yet nevertheless at the last the flesh
remains flesh. What remedy for this? I find none other but that a great
quycke fire, covered and laden with earth, dies. And when the vicious man is
laid in his grave, he makes an end and may never correct him self.
Wherefore I advise you to give no place to this young child to be vycious. And
in the chastysing of him, give no respyte, though he be young, and my child,
and well loved and cheryshed with his mother, and though he be the only heir
of thempire. With children of a stranger cruelty is tyranny, but with a man's
own child pity is the occasion of his loss in time to come. It is showed us
by trees, how we ought to norishe our children. Of truth the chestain trees
bring forth the soft sweet chestnutte out of the sharp prickinge and hard
husk: And on the nut tres among the sweet soft leaves, is nourisshed the
hard nutte. Applieng this to our purpose, we have seen a pyteful father,
bring forth a cruel son, and a cruel father a piteful son. He that was
learned among all other learned, and renoumed among al other renoumed, Ligurgus
king of the Lacedemoniens, in giuinge his laws in his realm, I remember to
have red therein these words: We command as kings, and pray as men, that all
thing be forgiven to them that be old and broken: and to them that be young
and lusty, to dissimule for a time: and nothing to be forgiven to very young
children. In good soth these were good words spoken of such a person, and
seems reasone. For it is reason that the horse, that has run and passed his
course of carriage, should rest him. And who that has passed rightousely, it
is Justice that he be suffered in rest. And the child that will pass
reasonne, ought to be reformed. Cause him to be always occupied in virtuous
acts. For if the understanding be dulled, and the body slothful in such
aege, with greatte difficulty will they draw to things that be strange to
their delectations, because that the lyghtenesse is in the heed, and reasonne
under the eyes. His youth will demand you some recreation, which ye shall
consider, so it be not often nor to seldom. First that it be by reasonne:
Secondely that they be taken in noble exercyses. Take heed, For I give not my
son unto you, that ye should give him recreation, but only for to teach
him. The hen having her eggs under her wings, in that season gothe not
abroad in the yardes, and though the eggs be not her own, yet she hatchethe
them, as if they were her own. For this cause at this time in Rome of a C.
disciples.lxxxx. comes forth without doctrine, for if their masters wast two
hours in doctrine with them, they lose with the^.xx. hours in mockerye. And
thereof it is, that of the small gravity of the master, spryngeth great boldness
and little shame in the disciple. Believe me friends, that the teachers to
princis, and masters to disciples, profit more in one day with good
exaumples, than in a year with many lessons. My son seeing you draw to
virtues, will draw to the same, if he se you study, he will study, if he se
you peasible, he will be still: he saying you temperate in fedynge, will eat
but lyttel: seeing you shamfast, he will fear you, saying you restefulle, he
will rest, and if ye do contrary, he will do contrary. This surely is true,
for the ancient men only with the evil that they se, either do they corrupt
their bodies, or sclaunder their own iugementes, as chyldern do, that can say
nothing but that they here: nor do nothing but that they se. I will also that
the prince my son learn the.vii. arts lyberalle. For I have taken many of
you, to thentent that ye should teach him much. And if at the last we should
be sorrowful, because he has not learned all, we shall not be sorry, if he know
much, nor think his time ill spent, nor be begyled, in saying, that he
knows enough of that so yo^ge a child should have to govern and rule
thempire. A very philosopher after the law of lygnage, ought to have speech at
place and time convenient, to fight in the field, and to speak in the senate.
If mine own remembrance begyle me not, among mine antiquities I have brought a
stone out of Greece, the which Pythagoras ye philosopher held at the gates of
his schole, wherein was written with his own hands, these words: He that
knows not, that he ought to know, is a brute beast among men: He that
knows no more, than he has need of, is a man among brute beasts: He that
knows all, that may be known, is a god among men. O most high words,
Glorious is the hand that wrote them, the which not at the gates, as they
were than, ought to be written, but within men's breestes they should be
painted and graven. Our forefathers took the last sentence of this
philosopher, and the first rebuke abides to us their last children. For
certain among the Greeks and Lacedemoniens was atteyned as much fame by
their philosophers and conquestes, as by their writings, which they have left
us. And our former emperors gatte no less love in their empire, by their
profound eloquence, thanne they feared all the world by their noble triumphs.
For a proof whereof, behold Julius Caesar, which being in the myddell of his
camp, with his lift hand would hold his spear, and his pen in his right
hand. Ne he never left of his armor, but forthewith he took his books. We
must not lay excuses, saying with them that be ignorante, that the lyberall
arts are to hye, and the time that we have, very short. For certain the
diligence of men in times paste, reproves our sloth at this day. One thing I
do se, that in a short while we learn all ill, but in a long season we can
not learn goodness. Will ye se, what is our fortunes and destenyes, and in
what thought the gods do keep us, that for to do one good deed we lack
time, and for to do many shrewde tournes, we have to much time. I will say no
more, but that I would my child should be nouryshed in such wise, that he
should learn the fear of god, the science of philosophers, the virtues of
aunciente Romans, the quietness of you his masters, and the goodness of all
them that be good, as he has taken of me to be the heir of the empire. I
protest to the immortal goddis, to whom I trust for to go: and protest to the
high capitol, where my bones shall be brent, that neither Rome now in my life,
nor the heuens in time to come shall curse me after my death, if by ill living
my son should lose the common welthe, if by your small chastisement, ye shall
be cause of the loss of the empire.

How the emperor Marucs nourished the princesses his daughters. Cap. x.
MArcus Aurelius the emperor had but two sons, that is to wit, the
prince Comode and Verissime: He had four daughters by Faustyne his wife,
legittimate and heirs of thempyre. This emperor was excedyng diligent for to
nourishe his daughters. As soon as any of them were borne, forthwith they were
put to nours into some ferme without Rome: He would never suffer any of his
children, sons nor daughters, to be nourysshed within the walls of Rome: Nor
consent, that they should suck the breasts of delycate women. He hated
delycate and gaye nourses, and they that were laborous homely and wholesome he
loved, and to them and none other he betoke his children to nouryshe, and he
would never agree, that they should be brought home to his house. He was wont
to say in his sporting: I have more adoo to content these nourysses, than to
mary my daughters. Homere shewethe, that in Greece there dyed Arthemio, that was
king of Argiue, without any son to inheryte: and the nourse, that had
nourysshed him, with all her might demanded the realm for a son of hers,
which had sucked of the same milk, that the said king had done,
allegynge, that sith they were both nourysshed together, and sucked one milk,
that they both should enheryte one realm. This said Homer, to reprove the
nouryces of Greece, which took more presumption for nourisshynge of princis,
than queen's did in bearing of them. Therefore this noble Marcus Aurelius
emperor, would not that his daughters alonely should suck gross and rude
milk, but he would not agree, that any reverence honor or service should be
done unto them, as it belongs to the children of so high princis to be
done, and as the custom is to be done. On a day as the said emperor was
at supper, a fool named Galindo, at whose words the emperor often took
pleasure, said, Sir yesterdaye I came from Salon, and fro the gate of Hostie,
and there I saw the emperors children goo like laborers, and I se here in
thy house laborers children go like emperors: Tell me, why do ye dissimule
as a wise man, for I that am but a fool, vnderstandethe hit not. The emperor
answered: O Galyndo, because that yet at this time, Rome is not Rome, all
though through all the world hit be renowned Rome. In my self I find far
more assurance, that my children begin like poor laborers, and end as
rich emperoures, thanne to begin as rich emperors, and end as poor
squiers. Do thou not know why Italy is now lost? They would have their
children to be wantonly and delycately nourysshed, and will not suffer them to
live in travail, and to leave their heirs poor and nedy, and them self to
end in greatte peril. This answer was so excellent in fame, that it was ever
taken for a proverb in Rome. When this emperors daughters were of two year
old, incontinent he provided women and maystresses for to teache them. Sextus
Cheronense says, that he serched among the ancient matrones of Rome, which
were cleanest of life, most esteemed of good fame, of nobleness of bloudde,
of sad wit, and that had been most used in bringing up of princis
children. This emperor was so thoughtefull in the ordering and teaching of
his children, that he would have no woman, but if she were of.l. year of age at
the least, and.x. year a widow, and that she had nourished a. C. children,
daughters of senators. Imagining, that she that had meddled in so many things
of other men's, should not be ignorant in her own. After that he had provided
these maystresses, he caused his daughters to be brought to their houses, and
there gave them their charge. And from the birth of any of his daughters, he
would never consent, that they should come into his palace, till they should
have husbands. It chanced, that Faustine the empress chylded a daughter, and
she being certified, that it was like her, and very fair, moved with a soft
heart of womanheed, and with a motherly affection, prayed the emperor, that the
said child might be noryshed in her presence, sithe every man said, the
child was so fair and so like unto them. The emperor answered and said:
Faustyne, for those things that all other have said to you, does it beseme
you, to demand this of me? But I that have red in this case, and in other
cases have seen, in no manner I ought to condiscende thereto. Do you not know,
that the time, that the daughter is nourysshed in the house, the father is
charged with thought, the mother with wanto^ flatteringes, envy in the
brethren, boldness in the daughter, and folly in the nouryce. I would wit of
you, if she were nourysshed in the house: what profyttethe it, if her maystres
teach her saddenesse and honesty with her words: and we entice her to
lewdenes with our works and deeds? what profits it, if the daughter deserve
chastisemente, and the mother flatter and make her wanton? More reason it were,
that your daughter should follow the good doings of you, that are her mother,
than the words of the strange wydowe, that is her maystres. Mark well
Faustyne, if ye ought to rejoice at her chyldyshe toys. Remember, that the
pleasure of young children, is but chyldysshe trifles. But if you nouryshe them
not well, as the pleasures were joyful when they were young, so when they be
old, to refrain them, shall be greatter displeasure. Therefore, if you be
virtuous, with draw their iapynge trifles as now, for them that shall be
virtuous. I will tell you one thing, I would rather my daughters, in mine
absence, should be disciples to virtues, than to be maystresses in lewdenesse
in my presence. And sithe it is so, I desire you, require it not of me. And I
desire you, that it be not so. I am importune on you, that ye be not
importunate on me. I pray you, that you pray not me. Orels I command you,
that you demand it no more of me. This hard answer of the father, ceased
the importunity and pitiefulle request of the mother. Thus Faustine, all
fearefulle, saying the father within the walls of Rome, durst not go se her
daughter without, but as privily as she might.

How Marcus the emperor did chose and proved his sons in law. Cap. xi.
LIke wise as Marcus Aur. the emperor surmounted in virtues al mortal men, yt
died, so for certain in marriage of his daughters he seemed to be kin to the
gods, yt ever live: and by the grace and gift of god, or by his fortune, he
was as happy in virtuous sons in law, as greatly unfortunate of dyshonest
daughters. After the death of the good old man, with the small thought of
the prince his son in his governance, and ungoodly fame of his doughtes in
their lyuinge, it seemed to have made an end of the glorious memory of the
father, but if it were by the sovereign goodness of his sons in law, that he
had chose by his life time. It is daily seen, that the loss of the father
by evil children, is won by virtuous sons in law. Than Marcus Aurelius,
in chosinge husbands for his daughters, he took not of diverse, that the
vanitye of the world offered him: but of a few, that of many folks were
esteemed to be of good behauour, and that to his semynge were such in deed. And
as in marriages all the error is to couete goods that be in the pourse, and
not to examyne the person that is brought to the house, He regarding this,
married not his daughters to straung kings, but to natural borne Senators,
not to such as descended from high lygnage, as were the Sipions, Fabricions,
and torquates: but to such that with their virtues raised newely good
lygnages: Nor he married them not to such as were presumptuous of the prowes
and deeds of their predecessors: but to them that resplendyshed by the deeds
of their own persons. Nor of truth he chose none that were very rich, but
such as were virtuous: nor such as were soon moved, but such as were
quiet: not the high minded: but to the moderate, that were no bosters, but
shamefast: no bablers, but small spekers: no quarellers, but suffrers: not to
presumptuous, but to them that were meke, not to hasty men, but to them that
were pacient: not to them that were esteemed among the commons, but unto them
that deserved laud among wise men. In this manner he trusted no person, for he
married not his daughters to such as were praised a far of* but to them that
of long time had been proved nerehand. In good faith herein his reasone was
good. For in the thing that towcheth a man's honor, he that is wise ought
not to trust in the only information of strangers: Nor he is not wise, that
is so hardy, to do al things by his own semynge and opinyon. And he is but a
simple person, that will do all thing after the opinion of strangers. And in
these points the emperor Marcus had a good respect to keep them: In
walking good rest, In speaking great eloquence, in eating good temperance:
In answering great subtlety: In his sentences and determynations great
gravity. And therefore in this case of marriage he was full of gravity, till he
was therein determined. And this only came not of him, but of other, when they
came to pray him. It befell that in a feast of the god Ianus, the emperor
goinge to the camp of Mars, upon a lusty horse fyers and flyngynge, he met
so rudely with a tru^pettour, that coursed as a knight upon a horse, that with
the stroke of metyng, the trumpetour was overthrown with his horse, so that he
was slain, and themperours horse leg broken, and his own foot hurt, and his
arm out of ioynte. So greattely encreaced his hurt, that he was in peril,
Italye in heaviness, and all Rome was in doubt of his life. And because a few
days before that, he had communication of a marriage for his third daughter,
named Matrina, for the determination that he should have made the same day,
great suite was made to him. But for the great pain of his arm, and the
blood that was congeled in his body, and the anguysshe that was at his heart,
as for the demand that was offered him, he dyfferred the answer till an
another day. The which day commen, in open presence he said in this manier.

What the emperor Marcus said to the father of a young man that would marye
one of his daughters. Cap. xii.
OFtentimes I have seen in other, and have proved by experience, that the small
consyderation passed, and the great acceleration in busynesses now present,
makes great inconveniences in time to come, onles that at that point the
thing be committed to the virtue of some wise person, rather than to his own
sole opinion. Never the less in the case of marriage, though the father be
wise, yet without the opinion of an other, he ought not to determyn him
lightly: For enuyous fortune, though she show her self somewhat froward in
all things, yet in this case of marriage, she overthrows more than in all the
other. He that will speak of marriage, ought to enter into his own secretenes,
and to think profoundly thereon, as of a thing that all his welthe lies in,
his credence, his life, his honor, his good fame, the rest of his own
person, and his flesh, which is his child. I am of opinion, that if all
wise men were molten in a fournayes, they could not give one good counsel to
make a marriage: And would ye that I, which am simple, should do it lightly by my
self? Truly therein behooves ripe and sad counsel. For ones fallen into the
peril thereof, none may have remedy without greatter peril. The renowned
Marcus Portius, whose living was a myrrour in his days, and his words and
counsels remain for a remembrance, said openly in the senate: O noble fathers
and happy people, by the decrees openly proclaimed in places accustomed, I know
that in a counsel and senate ye ordained three things, that is, ye undertook
to make a new war against the Parthes, to continue the enmity against the
Peniens, and to marie.v. hundred matrones of Rome, to.v.C. knights of
Mauritanie. And certaynely I am abashed, that among wise men so high affairs
should be so soon and sodaynely concluded and determined. To satisfy mine
understanding, and for the good will that I owe to the country, I shall say
one word, that is, to begin war, and to pursue hatred and ill will, and to
conclude marriages, In these causes a man ought to ask counsel of all the men
of the world, and all the goddis ought to correct and amend it. And.x.M.
counsaylynges would be holden upon each of these things. These words were
worthy of great recommendation. For one thing by diverse opinions ought to be
determined: But many things by one opinion ought not to be determined. And if
this be for all things, it serves then most specially in marriages. My
fre^des, ye say, that he that offreth him to be my son in law, is greatly
desired loved and well named among the common people. To sell such
marchandyse, set it not in so ill a show* The credence of an honest manne
lyethe not among the common voice of the people, but among philosophers: not
among many, but among few: not among how many, but what they be. Ye know
your self, that at this hour all that the commons think is but a vain
thing: that they praise is false: that they condemn is good, that they
approve, is naught, that they allow is shameful: and finally all that they
laud, is but folly. Their praysinge begins with lyghtnes, their following
without order, and it ends with fury. O how many have I seen in Italye like
the lies of wine cast out of the senate, and after put as fyrebrondes of
tauernes in Rome, by whose opinions the common wealth is governed, and with
great lyghtnes men put down, and with no les lyghtnes exalted again. Behold
here, that the works of the people are holden in mockage with wise men: and
that that is agreed among them, is esteemed but for vanities with wise men.
For that that is meal with philosophers, is eaten but for branne and chafe
with simple folk: and contrary wise, the meal of the simple, is but branne
and chafe among wise men. Of all that our predecessors have syfted, in these
days the chylderne of vanity work thereafter, for they will be desired, and
hate to be hated. All such holds a general rule, that every man that
desires to be beloved of every man openly, can not escape fro diverse secret
fautes. Shall I tell you, who is best beloved now adays? Than harken to me,
and I will tell you, as much as it touches, to whom it may touch, hurt who
it may hurt, feel it who that may feel it. The people loves him that can
dissimule with them, and him that is naught, and envious of them that be good,
and also such as favor liars, and sets troth aside, and such as
accompanies with mankyllers and murderers, and to be served of thieves, and
favors quarellers, and pursues such as be peasible, delyuereth offenders,
and sleeth innoce^tis, renometh them that be shameful, and shameth them that
be of good fame: Finally he is most set by, yt puts them that be good fro
him, and is the most vain among them that be vain. Certainly there is great
suspection to set him among wise men, that is allowed of all fools. And the
reason thereof is, that the commons lightly love none but men that with malice
refrayneth them that be virtuous, and lets the rain slyppe to them that be
vicious. Truly wise men have him as suspect that the commons desire, which
will not be displeased with his ill doings. O how often times does the goddis
permytte the ambicious man in honors, that procures to do ill many dais
without Justice, and does not behold the sudden hole loss thereof with
shame? Than take this word of me, that in the multitude of men there are few
to be praised, and many to be repreued.

How a son in law ought to be well examyned er he be acceptep to his purpose.
cap. xiii.
Now to come to our particular purpose. ye among you do praise this young
man, and if his works be as your words, ye should not only say, that he
has merited to be my son in law, but rather meriteth to be only inheritour
of the hole empire. And therefore I would wit of you, whereof you can praise
this your kynseman, that there be no contraritie between his works and your
words. If he be rusticall, it abateth him soore: if he be of high blood, he
will be presumptuous: if he be rich, he will give him to viciousnes: if he be
pore, he will be covetous, if he be valiant, he will be ouerbolde: if he be a
cowarde, he is defamed: if he be a great speaker, he shall be a liar: if he be
to lyttelle a speaker, he shall be noted as unwise: if he be fair, he will be
coueted: if he be foul, he will be ielous. Than if he be quite of al these, I
swear to you, that I will give him my daughter Matrine with all my heart. I do
not say this unto you, because I suppose any ill in your kynsman: but to
thentent that ye should think, that I say it according to my naturalitie. And
than sith I say it not against your credence, for the knowelege that ye have of
him, mistake not my suspection, since that I am hole ignorant of this young
man's living. And I will not, that ye should think, that the child my
daughter, that has been brought up in so great virtue in my palais, should be
married to this young man for the only fame that he has among the people. O
how often have I seen in our time now, and have read of the world passed,
the which as now by commandment of the goddis, at an other time by their
ill works have deserved it, at an another time by their sorrowful destenies
have permytted it, wenynge for to bring sons in law into their house, have
brought in a hell: Instead of wise and fair daughters, have recovered adders:
And seekynge sons, have found basilycke serpents: In bienge of bloudde,
poison delivered: In seeking friends, they have found ennemies: In demaundyng
honor, shame has be given: and finally in marienge their children, wenynge to
have lived merrily, the sorrowful fathers have had evil life and a wors
death. And in case that such ought to be moved more of them that be joyous,
than they that been sorry, of them that been joyous, as well ought we to approve
the just chastisement of the just goddis, by the unjust works done to just
men. For he deserves great chastisement, that with fearful hardynes as a
fool determines him self in high and difficult things with sodayn counsel.
And therefore my friends, if ye be virtuous, be not abashed of that that I say,
nor take the examination that I make in a sclaunder: If I take this young man
to be my son, to be son in law to Faustyne my wife, husband to my
daughter Matrine, brother to Comodus the prince, fellow to them of the senate,
kynsman to my kynsfolke, and lord of my servants: It is reason, that such a
robe ought well to be regarded, sithe that so many persons must wear the
lyueray thereof. The garmente that so many persons must wear, must be wisely
cut, to content them all. We se naturally many things noyfull to us, if it
be nere us, and yet not domageable to us far of. The son with his shynynge
beams does parche the flesh of the people of Ethiope, because hit is nere
unto them: and contrary wise it doothe no grief to their persons that
inhabit in the end of Europe: for because it touches them afar of. There
have been diverse sons of Rome, which being in strange countries, have done
greatte proufyte to the common welthe, and no less famed throughout the
world, which after they were returned to their own howses, have spylte more
blood of innocents, than they had done before of the Barbariens. And that it
is sothe demand of Julius Caesar, of Pompeius, of Sylla, of Marius, of Casius,
of Catilina, and of Lypulus, of Octauius, and Marcus Anthonius, of Caligula,
and of Nero, of Othus, and Domitianus. And as I say of so small a nombre of
bastard chylderne that held Rome, I may say of diverse other tyrauntes
brought up in Italye. Believe me in oone thing, All that is agreeable to us
abroode, agreethe not to us if we bring them into the house. For there gothe
many things between the entreatynge of a man in words, and to belong
conversant with him in works. Little nedethe humayne ignorance for to begyle
an other, and yet less to be begyled of many an other. With a meke vysage,
sweet words in the tongue, good delyberation in the person, temperaunce in
the word every one may begyle an other now adays: and by shrewdenes and
malice, is begyled him self. I say to you, I being a young man knew the
famous orator Taurin propose diverse times in the senate: And on a day he spoke
for a Romayn matron, which should have married an honest daughter of hers to a
master of horses, by semynge a Romayne, and not very well appointed: And
among other words he said: O noble fathers, O happy people, command not
that thing, that afterward ye would were not commanded. An ill marriage is
like as he that shoteth a pellet of duste, it hurts him that it touches, and
blyndeth them that stand next. Sothelye these were hie words, and the
comparison well understood, conteyneth in it sentences of gravity. It is
manifest to all men, that an ylle son in law is the death of the wife that
has him, shame to the friends that procured it, and at the last an ill end
for him self, and for his father that offered it. Than by all these things
that I have said, ye may understand what I think in this marriage. His
sayings thus ended, the Senate was greatly edified therewith, and the knights
kynsfolke to this young man, greatly abashed: and Faustin the empress sore
confused, for by her introduction the matter was moved. And how this marriage
failed, the historiens write not, whom we have followed in this work.

How Mark the emperor favored al noble exercyses, and hated trewandes and
fools. ca. xiiii.
THe virtues of this good emperor, and the knowledge of sciences, the worthiness
in arms, and the pureness of his living, caused him to be named among the
famous men of Rome. The gentel conversation that he had with every man, made
him to be renowned among the worthyest of all the world. The thing most
agreeable without reprehencion of the greattest, mean, and least is, that a
lord and prince of many, be communicable and conuersaunt with many. All the
good works of good men may be condemned with the ill intentions of them that
be ylle: But the good conditions have such a privilege, that of ill the good is
praised, and the good approves the ill. In a man's living, there is none so
great a vice, but by good conversation it is covered and hid. And contrary
wise, no crime is secret, but with ylle conversation, at the time that it
hurts, it is more openly known. Of two extremities hit is not so grievous to
the common welthe, a man to be weak and faint in secretenes, and of gentle
conversation abroad, as it is of him that is secret, and is rude and of ill
conversation openly. Diverse not being of good order and policy, we have seen
co^uersant a great while in Rome, only for being well condicioned. And many mo
we have seen, that in a short while after they were put in office, have been so
proud and hasty in their conditions, that they have been deprived from their
offices. And this we say because this good emperor was so joyous of vysage,
so amyable in his customs, so loving in his conversation, that lightly he
would cast his arms about the neck, and on the shulders of them, and take
them by the hands, that had any thing to do with him. The porters should not
let them that would accompany him in the palace: nor his guard was not so
hardy to put abacke such as would speak with him in the fields. In all his ages
he applied to that that every age gave him by nature: He was a child among
children, young among young folks, worldely with them that were worldly, good
fellow with good fellows, a baron among barons, hardy with hardy men: and
finally old with old men. He was wont to say, when any in his presence
that were young and not well taught in their language, iested at the debilitie
of age, or old men at the folly of youth: Leave them, since they leave you. Many
times of wise young men comes old foles, And of young fools customably
comes wise old men: Naturalyte at the last makes all thing in kind. As of
greatte debilitie we can draw but small strength, by our naturalitie we
may for a time resist it, but not utterly master it. I am sore abashed, that
sum will be so lordely and valiant in virtues, and so high minded, and yet
will make us believe, that they lyuinge in the flesh, and being of flesh,
only feel not the flesh. I can not tell, if nature has made other of an other
nature than I am of, or me of an other nature thanne other be. For I being
never so fast enclosed in the sweet conversation of philosophy, yea in the
best time, this false flesh wolle calleatte the gate with his noughtye
flesh. The more that we reyse and exalte us with science and get lyberties,
the more lower we do put the flesh with her myseries. Believe me one
thing, that if a tree bears not in Prymetyme his flowers, we hope not to
have the fruit in harueste type: and a young man that has not passed his
youth with young people, we have no hope that he should pass his age with
old men. And as we may resyste our naturalitie, and not clean to for do it,
so those fathers err, that are so extremely affectioned, to have their
children to begin as old men, whereupon it follows, that they end as young.
This emperor was so wise in all things, that among them that were merry, he
was of great myrthe. And in verities he was very veritable. In his pastimes he
was greattely temperate, and a lover of music, specially in good voice and
instruments, and soore displeased if he hard any discord therein. He passed
most of his youth in learning of sciences. When he came to man's state, he
exercised feats of knyghthode: he loved disciplyne and not of adulation. He
was apt and happy in arms, but yet in rydinge of horses he had often times
ill hap. In his young age he delyted to play at the tennys, and at the chesse
in his aege. He loved not these counterfaytyng players of farces and mummeries,
and yet less trewandes, that been natural fools, iuglers, and gesters for
pleasure. The players and gesters suffered great variety in the empire,
according to the diversity of emperors. Julius Caesar sustained them,
Octauian his neuewe drove them away, Caligula called them again, Cruel Nero
banyshed them, Nerua made them come again, Good Traian banyshed them out of
al Italy, Anthony Pius brought them in again: And by the hands of this good
emperor Marcus Aurelius, they ended. And the occasion was, the Romans did
celebrate with great joy, the.iiii. day of May, the great feast of the mother
Berecynte, mother of all the goddis. The sacred priests flamines diales, would
have brought thither these mynstrelles iugglers and gesters, for to rejoice the
feast, and contrary wise the holy nuns vestales would have done the same,
so that variance fell between them, some with force, and sum with
resistance, and some ran thider in fauourynge of both parties, and not a
few, to depart them. The cruel and great noise of slaughter among them,
was such, that it turned the feast to wepynges, the pleasures into sorrows,
and their songs into waylynges. This good emperor labored to pease this
fury of the people, and to set peace among the neybours of Rome. When all
was done, he made curious diligence to search out all the players, iuglers, and
iestours of Rome, and in all the circuit of Italy, that they might be
chastised, and Rome delivered of them. And for example of all the world, he
sent them to the gate of Hostie, and commanded to set them in Galies, and
to banyshe them for ever, into the yles of Hellispont: which was accomplyshed,
as the emperor commanded. And fro that day, was never seen at Rome, iugler
nor iester, as long as the emperor lived. But it passed not two years after
his death, but they returned, when his son had the rule. And except the
books do lie, there was in Rome greatter nombre of fools than of wise men.

Of the good conversation of this emperor Marcus Aurelius. Cap. xv.
WE have said of the hatred that this emperor had to trewandes, reuelers,
getters, iuglers, gesters, and such other: Now will we speak of his laudable
exercyses of them that came to him. To be well condicioned, the malice of
mankind is so great, that as good men are bound to regard the ill, so do they
that be ill, regard to distroy the good. The trace of virtue is as good in good
thingis, with them yt be good, as the vice and dishonestie of evil folks, is
in evil things. What greatter corruption in this world may be, than a
virtuous person, for one work of virtue, can not find one to help him to
work it, and when he alone has wroughte it, there comes ten thousand to
gaynsaye him? The greattest goodness of all goodness is, when tyrannies are put
under by virtues acquyred: or to find remedy against accustomed vices, with
good inclynations. And the greattest evil of all euyls, is when a person
forgets that he is a man, putting reason under foot, straynynge his hand
against virtue, and lets vice rule the bridell. This emperor Mar. Aurel.
sustained in his life great glory, in the eschewyng the villainy of vyllaynes:
no less merited he immortal memory, in sufferynge diverse dyshonesties in the
execution of his virtues. An infallible reule hit is, among the children of
vanity, to child the vices of them that be vycyous. And the virtues well
incorporate, nourysshe many envious. They that be ylle, benne always double
ylle, because they bear armor defensive, to defend their own yuelles: and
arms offensive to assaylle the good manners of other. The trowthe is, if good
men be dylygente to seek other that be good, no less ought they for to hyde
them from them that be ylle: for a good manne with one finger, has power
over all them that be virtuous, but for to withstand one ylle person, he
has need of hands feet and friends. And though fortune be ylle to good
men, their own propre fame shall be spente as of straungiers. This good
emperor was strong in virtue, meek in words, attemperate in his exercyses,
homely with every manne, sad among sad men, hasty among hasty men, merry
with merry men, and wise among wise men, as it is conuenable for a curyous
prince to be. And when these are approved in the law of good men, by clear
understanding, as well shall they be condemned by them that have ill
intencions. Thanne as the cooles can not be in the embres without sparkis,
nor corruption of the carrion without stenche: no more can he that has a hole
and clear heart be, without inforsynge him to utter loving words: And he that
has an ylle heart, always overcomes other with words of malice. For it is
certain, for a small seasone the lover may absteyne his love, and yette less
time the pain of him, that is payned with love hid. The sorowfulle syghes,
show the hurt of the heart, and the malicious words discover the ill of the
heart. We have said all this, because that the bounty of this good Emperor
Marcus Aurelius set all his joy and gladness in them that were good, and
bewailed them that were ylle. And as in semblable things, the worthy men
show their worthynes, and wise men their wisdom, being virtuous in
workynge, and wise in knowlegynge, were very wise in dissimulyng. One of the
virtues, that a wise man ought to have (wherein he shall be known as wise) is
that he can suffer well. For a man yt can suffer well, was never but wise and
well manerd, and therewith to suffer the virtue of ill business, is a thing
reasonable, of all reasonable beastis, and of them that be good, very good. And
by contrary wise, the man that can not well suffer, though it be in very just
things, hops not to be well treated. And likewise as this Emperor Marcus
in all virtues, has been egall with all the emperors of Rome, that have benne,
In this virtue of sufferaunce, he has surmounted all them of the world. He was
wont to say many times, I have not attained to the empire, by the sciences
that I have learned of the philosophers, but by the patience, that I have had
with them that were froward and not learned. And this seems to be true: for
oftentimes this Emperor, being with the Senate at Collisee, or the Senate
with him in the high Capytolle, he seeing in his presence diverse that praised
him, and other, that in his absence among the people blamed him, and rebuked
him, his attemperance yet was so greatte, and showed him self so just with
one and other, that neither his friends, that agreed with him, were sorrowful,
nor his ennemies, for any disfavor, went away complaining and angrye.

Of the feast that the Romans kept to the god Iano in Rome, and what
chanced to the said emperor there. Cap. xvi.
Among the solemn feasts, yt the ancient Romans had invented, was one of
the god Ianus, kept the first day of the year, which as now is the first day
of Ianiuer: He was painted with two faces, to show, that it was the last day
of the year passed, and the beginning of the new year. To this god was
dedicate a sumptuous temple in Rome, which temple Numa Po^pilius, called it the
temple of peace. And except the temple of Jupiter, it was holden in most
reverence of all other. When the Romayn emperors went or came to Rome, to
vysite the high capitol, and the vestall vyrgins, forthwith they went to
pray, worship, and to offer at the temple of Ianus. The day of celebration of
the said feast, all Rome rejoiced, and put on them the best clothes that they
had, brennynge great lyghtes in every house, and made many plays of
interludes, of gestes and iuglyng, and watched all night in the temples, and
delivered all the prisoners that were in prison for debt, and paid the debtes
with the common treasour. They had tables with meat before their doors, in
such haboundance, that more was left tha^ eaten, wherewith all the poor folks
in Rome were releued. The Romans thought, that what so ever they spent that
day, that the god Iano (which was god of times) would reward them double.
The Romans said, that this god Ianus was not unkind nor no nygarde, for if
they spente a little, he would recompense them with a great deal. At this
feast was made great processions, every sort of people by them self, the
senate went apart, the priests aparte, The Censores aparte, the Plebeyens
aparte, The matrones and young maidens by them self, and the ambassadors went
in procession with all the captives and prisoners. Thus they went ever two and
two: the end of one company, was the beginning of an other. And thus out of
the temple of Ianus, they went about all the temples of Rome, and so out of
Port latin into the fields, and round about the walls of Rome. And because
the circuit of Rome was greatte, the processions went but from one gate to an
other, so that toward night all the processions of Rome had gone euerychone in
their company about: And that done, they returned all into the temple, that
they came out of, and there offered echeone as they might. And in the said
processions it was of custom, that the emperors went accompanied with the
senators: but this good emperor was so famylier, that he would honor and
accompany every man. It was accustomed in Rome, that the said day the emperor
should wear on his robe, and mantelle unperiall. And all prisoners and
captives that might touch him with their hand, were delivered, and al
trespassours were pardoned, and banished folk were forgiven, and called again.
And this emperor to use his clemency, and to leave after him perpetual
memory, left the procession of senators, and without any guard, went the
procession with prisoners and captives. The which doing, was occasion to
leave behind him perpetual memory of him self, and great example of
clemency and lowlynes to princes for to come. How be it there is nothing so
well done of them that be good, but forthwith it shall be contraried of them that
be ill: And therefore this example was so much dispraysed of them that were
ill, as praised and allowed of them that were good. And in likewise as among
them that be good, there is one noted to be pure good, so among them that be
ill, there is one noted to be right ylle. And that worse is, that the virtuous
person estemeth not the glory his virtue so great, as the malicious person by
his malice is shamid. This is said, because there was a senator in the
senate, named Fuluius, which was as black by his malice, as white by his
hears. He labored soore in the days of Adrian to have been emperor, and had
Marcus always as competitour. And as it is a natural thing to them that have
ill hearts, to show their malice in small things, so this emperor did never
no good thing openly, but this Fuluius would grudge thereat secretly. And
though this emperor was greatly praised for the delyuerynge of prisoners, yet
the said senator could not have the prudence for to suffer it, and so part in
mockery, and part in erneste, he said these words to the emperor in the
senate: Why gyuest thou thy self to all men?

How Marcus the emperor answered a senator in the senate. Cap. xvi.
THe emperor Marcus Aur^hering what the senator had said to him, in the
p^sence of the senators, yt is to wite, Wherefore he gave him to all men, He
answered, Friend, I give me to all men, because all men give them to me, and
ar glad of me. Believe me, that over great rigor in a prince, causes hatred of
the people. The goddis will not, nor the laws permit not, nor the agreement of
the common welthe will not suffer, ye princis be lords over many, and to
accompany but with a few. I have read in books, and have proved it by my
self, that the love of subjects, the surety of the prince, the dignity of
thempire, and the honor of the Senate, do conserve the prince, not with
rigor, but with gentle conversation. The fysher goth not to take diverse
fyshes of the river with one bait, nor ye mariner with one net enters into
the sea. I promise you the depenesse of good wylles ought to be won with the
depenesse of the heart, some with gifts, some with words, some with promyses,
and some with favors. The insaciate covetous men are never content, nor will
open their affection, but lock up their treasours. And such as serves for
love, ar less content with openyng of their treasure, than locking up their
wylles. It is an old proverb of Pythagoras: Love is paid with other love. O
how ill fortune it is to a prince, and how unhappy it is to a common wealth, wha^
ye people serve not their lords, but for rewards, and the lords to keep and
maintain them, but for their service. With diverse stones and one ciment,
building is raised, and of diverse men, and one lord, is composed a common
welthe. And if geometry begile me not, the mortar that joins one stone with
an other, ought to be meddled with sand and slecked lyme by reason. Separate the
stones, and the wall opens, and let the cyment fail, and the edifice falls.
He that is wise, may well understand me. Love between neybours suffers to be
mitigate with water: but hit is requysite, that the love of the prince and his
people be pure. Diverse trowbles, and act diverse times, I have seen among the
common people of Rome in one day moved and appeased: but one discord, raised
between the lord and the common welthe, unto the death, is never accorded. It
is a difficile thing, to make appointment of many with many, and more
difficile, to accord one with an another. But without comparison, more harder
it is, to appoint diverse with one, than one with diverse. And in this case I will
not save the prince, nor leave the people vnconde^pned. Fro whens (as ye thynk)
comes it now adays, that lordis with annoyance command unjust things, and
in just things the subjects are vnobediente? Now here me, and I shall tell
you. The prince doing a thing in deed, and not of right, will confound the
will of every manne, and believe his own understanding, and draw of him self
and all other his only will. Contrary wise, the multitude of the people
dispraysynge their lords understanding, do as they will: not as all will, but
as every manne desires him self. Of troth it is a grievous thing, although it
be greatly accustomed, to will, that all gounes should be mete fore one man,
and that one man's harneis should be mete to arm all men. Than what shall we do,
that our fathers have left thus in the world, and also we hold that we be
their children, and that worse is, we leave the same to our heirs? O how many
princis of my predecessors, I have read of, that have been lost in showing
them self over strange, and beloved of none? I will tell you of sum of
them for exaumples, that I have read in my books, to the intent that pryncis
may se what they win by amiable conversation, and what they lose by ouermoch
straungenes. In the realm of Assiens, greatter in arms than the Caldeens, and
less in advantage and antiquity than the Assiriens: One manner form of kings
endured among them. CC. and.xx. years, by reason they were of lowable
conversation. And an another form and manner (as Homer says) lasted but.xl.
years, because their kings were of an ill condition. And the.ix. Epiphanes of
the Egiptiens was vnnombred and put down, because there was a law that each
one should be bare legged in the temples upon the holy days. And this king on
a day riding came before the god Apis, god of the Egiptiens, the which thing
was not suffered, for beside that he was put out of his realm, he was
chastised. Also the.vi. Arfacidauel the invincible king of Parthes, not only
was deprived, but also banyshed out of his realm, because he dyned at a
knights bridale, and would not eat at the bridale of a co^muner. Yet also
though the realm of Italy was scant, their hearts were greatte: for because
one of their Marranes, for so were their kings called, had shette his gates by
night, for to sleep the surelyer, he was deprived of his realm: because a
law was made, that no prince should shette his gates night nor day. for they
said, they had made him king for to drive away their enemies, and not to be
daintily nourished. Tarquine the last king of the Romans was unkind to his
father in law, diffamed his blod and kynrede, was a traitor to his country,
cruel of his person, and aduoutrer with Luctece: but for all that he was not
called ungentle, nor infamed, nor traitor, nor cruel, nor aduoutrer, but he
was named Tarquine the proud, because he was of ylle conditions and
complexions. And yet by the law of good men, I swear to you, that if the
said unhappy Tarquine had had good will in Rome, for the aduoutry of Lucrece he
had not be put out of his realm, for as much as other greatter and more
grievous harms had benne done before his time, and also much wors sithen by
aged emperors in the empire, the which crimes by them committed were such,
that the offense of this frail young man was but small in estimation. For
thing certain these princes hold, that if they give diverse occasions for
their ill will, yet a little thing suffiseth if he show, that the hate that
he has is for none ill will: but the hate that the subject has to the lord,
is because he has no power. Julius Caesar, the last dictatour and first
emperor, because he forgate to be a man among men, but thinking to be a god
among goddis, being a lawdable custom, that the senate should salute the
emperor on their knees, and the emperor to rise courteysly against them:
because of a presumptuous mind, he would not keep the seremonie, he merited to
lose his life with.xxiii. strokes of pen knives, And as I say of these so few
a nombre, I may say of many other. The physicians with a lyttel Rubarbe purge
many humors of the body, and the emperor with a littel benevolence takes many
greues fro the stomakes of his subjects. The people owe obedience to the
prince, and to do his person great reverence, and fulfill his commandments,
and the prince owes egall justice to every man, and meke conversation to all
men.

Marcus Portius said diverse times in Rome: That the publycke welthe is there
perpetual and without any sudden fall, where the prince fyndethe obedience,
and all the people fyndethe love with the prince. For of the love of the lord
bredethe the good obedience of the subject, and of the obedience of the
subject bredeth the good love of the lord. The emperor in Rome is like to a
spider that is in the mids of her web. For if the said coppe web be
touched with the point of a nedell, forthwith the spider feleth hit. I mean
that all the works of the emperor in Rome benne streyghte way known in all
the earth. I believe that this day I have been judged of humayne malice, for
accompanyenge the processyon of the captives, and that I suffredde them to
towche me, that they might enjoy the privilege of liberty. I yield and give
great graces to my goddis of my good hap, because they have made me pitiful
for to deliver prisoners, and not cruel as a tyraunte for to make them bond
that be free. The proverb says: One snare may take two birds: So it has been this day, for that benefyte rebounded only to the miserable prisoners,
but the favor, to all their nations. And do ye not know, that by the taking
away of their yrons, I have drawn to me the hearts of all their realms and
countries? Finally hit is more sure to a prince to be served with free hearts,
and love of them that be at liberty, than of subjects constreyned with fear.

How the emperor Marcus divided the hours of the day for the busynesses of
thempire. Ca. xviii.
HEre before we have shewid how this good emperor had great hatrede of men
that were of ill living, and that passed their time in ylle exercise. It
suffiseth not the philosopher to repreue the vice of other by words, but it is
necessary that he do the werkis that he requires other to do: It is reason
now to show, how this Emperor by his great prudence compassed and
dispatched the great and huge busynesses of the empire, the particularities of
his householde, the recreation of his person, thexercyse of his studies, the
infinite reasonynge with one and other, with such pain taking, and in so
short time. He was so apt and well aduysed, that by him there was no time ill
spent. Nor never failed to dispatche the besynes of the empire. And because the
time is glorious of him that gloriously spends it, and the time is accursed,
that to our damage and without profit to other passes, leaving us ignorant as
brute beasts: He departed the time by times, the order whereof was thus. Seven
hours he slepte in the night, and rested one hour in the day: At dinner and
supper he wasted but only two hours: he deputed two hours for the matters of
Asie: Other two hours for the business of Europe and Affrike: and in
conversation of his house, and with his wife and children servants and fre^des
that came to see him, he spente other two hours: And for the outward
business, as to here the complayntes of them that were grieved: The suites of
poor men wantynge justice, the wydowes, the robberies of pyckers, of mychers,
and vacaboundes, he deputed an other hour. All the rest of the day and night
in reding of books, to write works, to make metres, to study antyquities, to
practyse with wise men, to dispute among philosophers, he passed thus
ordinately in winter: And in summer if cruel wars let him not, or that he
were troubled with great and heinous matters, he went ever to bed at.ix. of the
clock, and awoke at.iiii. It was of custom that emperors had euerlyghtes
brennynge in their chaumbre. And therefore when he awoke, because he would not
be ydel, he had ever a book at his beds heed. And thus in redynge he spente
the rest of the night, till it was day. He rose at.vi. of the clock, and made
him ready openly, not angrely, but merrily: he would demand of them that were
present, how they had spent all the night time. And there he would rehearse
what he had read that night. When he was redye, he would wash his hands with
very well smelling waters: for he was a great lover of al sweet odours. He had
a good and a quycke smelling. Than in the morning before every man, he would
take.iii. or.iiii. morselles of electuarie of sticados, and two draughtes of
Aqua vite. After that in summer he would go forthwith a foot to the riuerside,
and there pass the time the space of two hours. And as soon as the heat
came, he would goo to the high capitol to the senate. That done he went to
the college, where as all the procurours and ambassadors of al provinces
were, and there he would be a greatte part of the day, and here every nation
by hit self, according to the time that was deputed by order. And toward the
euennynge, he would goo to the temple of the vyrgins vestales. He eat but ones
a day, and that was somewhat late, and thanne he would make a good meal, and
but of few meats. He had a custom every weke in Rome, or other cities,
where as he was, that two days late in the euennynge he would walk in the
streets without his guard or knights, only with.x. or.xii. pages, to se if
any person would speak with him, or complain of any officer of his court
and house, and this he caused to be demanded of other men. This good emperor
would often times say: A good prince that will rule and govern well, and not
to be a tyraunte, ought to do thus: That is, that he be not covetous of
tributes, nor proud in his commandments, nor unkind to services, nor bold
in the temples, nor defe to here complayntes. In fulfyllynge hereof he shall
have the gods in his hands, and the hartys of men shall be his. All the while
that this Mark was emperor, he had never porter at his chaumbre door, but if
it were the two hours that he was with Faustine his wife. This good emperor
had in his house a secret closette locked with a key that he bare him self,
and never trusted none other therewith to the hour of his death. And than he
commanded to deliver it to Pompeiano, a prudent ancient bacon that was married
to his daughter: In the which closet he had diverse books written in all
langages, as Greek, hebrewe, latyne, and Caldee, and other antike hystories.

The answer of M. the emperor, when Faustine his wife demanded the key of his
study. ca. xix.
AS it is natural to women to despise that thing that is given them unasked, so
it is death to them to be denayed of that they do demand. This emperor had
the study or closet of his house in the most secret place of his palace,
wherein he neither suffered his wife servant nor friend to enter. On a day it
chanced, that Faustin thempresse desired importunatly to se that study, saying
these words: My lord, let me se your secret chaumbre. Behold I am greatte
with child, and shall dye, if I see it not. And ye know well, that the law
of the Romans is, that nothing shall be denied to womenne with child, of
that they desire. And if ye do otherwise, ye do it in deed, but not of right.
For I shall dye with the child in my body. And more over I think in my
mind, that ye have some other lover within your study. Therefore to put away
the peril of my trauaylyng, and to assure my heart from Jealousy, hit is no
great thing to let me enter into your study. The emperor saying that
Faustines words were of troth, and because he saw her words washed with
weeping, answered her on this wise: It is a thing certain, when one is
contented, he says more with his tongue, than he thinks with his heart. And
contrary wise, when one is heavy, the eyes weep not so much, nor the tongue
can not declare that is locked in the heart. Vain men with vain wordis show
and declare their vain pleasures: And the wise men with prudent words,
dissemble their cruel passions. Among wise men he is wysest, that knows
much, and shows to know but little: And among the simple, he is most
simple, that knows but lyttelle, and shows him self to know much. They
that are prudent, though they are demanded, say nothing: but simple folk will
speak enough without asking of any question. This I say Faustine, because
thy weeping has so hurt me, and thy vayn speech so turmented me, that I can
not declare that I feel, nor thou can not feel yt that I say. Diverse
aduertisementes have they written, that have written of marriage, yet have they
not written, how many travails that one womanne causes her housbande to suffer
in one day. Of a surety, it is a joyful thing to rejoice in the chyldhode
of children, but it is a right cruel thing to suffer the importunities of their
mothers. The children do now and then a thing that tourneth us to pleasure,
but ye women do nothing but give us displeasure. I shall agree with all married
men to pardon their chyldrens plesures, for the annoyance that the mothers give
to them. One thing I have seen, the which never begyled me, that the just
gods do give to the unjust men, that all the euylles that they do in this
world, shall be remytted to the furies of the other world: But if they do
commytte any sin for the pleasure of any woman, the goddis command, that by
the hands of the same womanne, we shall receive pain in this world, and not
in the other. There is not so fyers or peryllous an ennemie to a man, as is
his wife. And though a man can not live with her as a man, I never saw none
so light, being with a vicious woman, in doing vice, but that by the same
woman at the last he received shame and chastysement. Of one thing I am sure,
and I say it not because I have seen it, but experimented in my self, that
though the husband do all that his wife will, yet will she do nothing that
her husband would have done. Great cruelty is among the barbariens to hold
their wives as sclaues: And no less madness is it of Romans, to keep them as
ladies. Flesh ought not to be so lean, that it abhor: nor so fat that
it cloye the stomach: but mean and enterlarded, to the end that it be
sauourye. I say that a wise manne can not give so strong a brydelle to his
wife, that she will obey as an hand maiden: nor give her so little of the
brydell, but she will exalte her self as maystresse and reuler. Behold
Faustine how ye womenne are so extreme in all heedlonge extremities, that
with a little favor ye will exalte, augemente, and grow into great pride:
and with a little disfavor, ye recover greatte hatred. There is no parfite
love, where is no egalitie between the lovers. And as ye and other are
imperfect, so is your love imperfect. I wot well ye understand me not.
Therefore understand Faustine, that I say more than ye wene. There is no woman,
that with her will would suffer any greatter than her self: nor to be content
to have an other egall with her. For though she have a. M.li. rent, yet she
has, x.M. folyes in her heed. And that worse is, though it chance her
husband to dye, and she lose all her rent, yet ends not her folyshenes.
Harken to me, and I shall tell you more. All women would speak, and have all
other to be stylle: they would govern, and be governed of none other. One
thing they desire, that is to se, and to be seen. And such as be light in
following their lyghtnes, they hold as their subjects and sclaues: and such
as be wise, and reprove their appetites, they pursue as enemies. In the annals
Pompeyens, I have found a thing worthy for to be known, and that is: When
Gnee Pompeie passed into the Orient on the mountains Rifees he found a manner
of people called Masagetes, which had a law, that every inhabitaunt or
dweller should have two tonnes or fattes, because there was lack of houses in
the said mountains: In one was the housbande, the sons and men servants:
and in the other the wife the daughters and maidens. On the holy days they
did eat to gether, and ones in the weke they lay together. When great
Pompeye had questioned the cause of their living in that manner, for that he
never saw nor knew a more extreme thing in all the world, One of them
answered: Pompey behold, the goddis have given us but a short life, for none
of us may live above.lx. year at the most, and those years we travail to live
in peace. And in having our wives with us still in company, we should live
ever dyenge: for we should pass the nyghtes in herynge their complayntes: and
the days in sufferynge their brawlynges and chydynges. In keeping them this
wise from us apart, they nourishe their children more peasibly, eschewynge the
noyses that sleeth the fathers.

I tell the Faustin, that though we call the Masagettes barbariens, in this case
they be wiser than the Romans. One thing I will tell you Faustin, and I pray you
mark it well. If the beastly mouynge of the flesh enforced not the will of
man to do his lust, and that he would not desire women, I doubt whether women
would suffer it or love it the less. Of troth if the goddis had made this
love voluntary, as it is natural, that is as we would we might, and not as we
would and may not: with great peyn a man might be satisfied, though he should
lose him self for any woman. It is a great secret of the goddis, and a great
myserie to man, that the faint and weke flesh does force the heart which
should be free, to love that it abhors, and to allow that that domageth.
This is a greatte secret, that men can feel hit every hour as men: and yet by
discretion may not remedy it. I envy not the living goddis, nor the men
that be deed, but for two things, and they ben these: The goddis live without
fear of the^ that be malycious, and they that be deed are in peace with out
need of women. The air is so corrupt, that it corrupts every man with two
pestilent plages so deadely, tha the flesh and the heart ends. O Faustine,
is the love of the flesh so natural, that wha^ the flesh flees scornefully
we should leave the true heart as captive? And the resonne as reason put her to
flight, the flesh as flesh forthewith yeldeth her to you as overcome.

The emperor reherseth the perils of them that haunt women excessiuely. Cap.
xx.
The Emperor following his purpose declares the universal domages, that come
to man by ouermoche conuersacyon and hauntynge of women. And after he had told
some particular cases that he had suffered with Faustin his wife, he said: I am
well remembered, yt in my young age I followed the flesh to much, with purpose
never to return. And therefore I confess, yt if I had good desires in one day,
instead thereof a. M. days I wrought ill. It is reason that ye women flee from
them that flee from you: to hyde you from them that hyde them fro you, to leave
them that leave you, to separate you fro them, that separate them fro you: to
forgette them that forget you. For some escape fro your hands ill famed and
effeminate: and other are hurt with your tongues, many ben persecuted with your
works, and the better to escape free, they come away abhorred of your hearts
and bound to your lyghtnesses. Than who that feleth this, what gets he by
the attaynynge thereof? O to how many perils offerethe he him self, that
with women is greatly conversant? If a man love them not, they count him as a
villeyne: if he love them, they think him light: if he leave them, they
repute him for a cowarde: if he follow them, he is lost, if he serve them, he
is not regarded, if he serve them not, he shall be hated of them, if he will
have them, they will not have him: if he desire them not, they will seek
on him: if he haunte them, he is ylle named: if he haunte them not, they
reckon him no man. What shall the unhappy man do? Let men take this for
certain, that though the husband do for his wife all that he can do as a
man, and that he ought to do as a husband, and with his weakness do the best
that he can, for to find remedy against poverty with his travail, and put
him self in danger for her every hour: all this shall not please his wife,
nor make her the better, but she will say, that the traitor louethe other, and
that all that he does, is only to accomplysshe his pleasure on them. Many
days ago Faustyne, I have wylled to tell the this, but I have differred it
till now, hoping that thou would give me occasion to tell it the: the
which long agoo thou haste caused me to feel. It is no point of wise men,
that for every time they are annoyed with their wives, forthewith to hurt
them with words. For among wise men the said words are most esteemed when
they are well appropried and said to good purpose. I do bethynke me, that it
is.vi. year since Anthony Pie thy father did choose me to be his son in law,
and thou me to be thy husband, and I the for my wife: this my fatal destenie
did permytte, at the commandment of Adrian my lord. My father in law gave
the his fair daughter to me for wife, and the very sad and ponderous empire
in marriage. I trow we were all begyled: He to take me for his son, and I to
choose the for my wife. He was named Anthony Pius, because he was pitiefull in
all things, save unto me, to whom he was cruel, for in a little flesh he
gave me many bones: and to say the truth, I have no tethe to gnawe it, nor no
heat in my stomach to dygeste hit: and many times I have thought my self
lost with it. For thy beauty thou were desired of many, but for thyn yuell
conditions thou were abhorred of all. O how unhappy ben thy destenies
Faustyne, and how yuell have the goddis provided for the. They have given the
beauty and richesse for to undo the: And they have denied and refusid to the
the best, that is good conditions, quality, and wisdom to maynteyne them. I
say to the again, that the goddis have been very cruelle to the, sithe they
adressed the to the whyrlepoole, where as all ill folk peryshe, and have taken
from the, the sails and oores, whereby all good folk escape. The.xxxviii.
years, that I was without wife, seemed not to me.xxxviii. days: and the.vi.
years that I have been married, seem to me.vi. hundred years. I will assure the
one thing, that if I had known before, that I know now, and had felt than,
that I feel at this hour, I would say an other thing. And though the goddis
would command me, and Adrian my master would command me, I would not change
my poverty and quietness, for the marriage of the and thempire. But I have
desired the in thy good fortune, and my self to mine ill fortune. I have said
but a lyttelle, and have suffered a great deal: I have feyned a great while,
but I can feyne no longer. No man suffers his wife so much, but he is bound
to suffer more. Let a man, that is a man consider, and likewise a woman that is
a woman consider, what boldenes she is of, that quarellethe with her husband,
and that he is a fool that brawleth openly with his wife. For if she be good,
he ought to favor her, that she may be the better: if she be a shrewe, he
must suffer her, that she wax not wors. Every man knows, that all things
suffers chastisement save a woman, which (as a woman) will be desired and
praide. Faustine believe me, if fear of the goddis, the shame of her person,
and speech of the people, withdraw not a woman from evil, all the
chastisement of the world will not overcome her. The heart of man is very
noble, and the heart of a woman is deyntie, and will have great hyre for a
little goodness, and for much evil no chastysement. A wise man will know what he
has to do or he marie. Than if he determyne him to take the company of a wife,
he ought to enlarge his heart to receive all that may come with her. It is but
a small wit in a man to set by the small fantasies of his wife, or for to
chastise openly that may be righted between them secretly. He that is wise and
will live quietly with his wife, ought to keep this rule: Admonish her often,
and reprove her but seldom, and lay no handis on her. For by other means he
gets no fydelitie in her, nor good entreatynge of her, nor good bringing up
of their children, nor service to the goodis, nor any hope of profit of her.
And thus Faustyne I will say no more to the, but that thou consider, that I do
consider, and know that I do se, and that my suffrance unknown to the, may
suffyse to amend thy life.

The emperors answer to Faustine for that she said, she was with child.
Cap. xxi.
Now that I have opened and put out the old venym, I will answer to thy
present question or demand. To thentent that medicines may profit them that
be sick, it is necessary to dispoyle the opilations and lettes of the stomach:
Likewise none can counsaylle his friend conuenientely, but if he show first
his grefe. Thou demaundest of me the key of my study, and thou thretnest me,
that if I give it the not, thou shalt be lost and hurt with thy fruit: ye
womenne with child have a good hostage or pledge, for under color of
trauaylynge before your time, ye would have us fulfylle all your fond
appetytes. When the holy senate in the unhappy time made a law in favor of
Romayne matrones, they were not so desirous. Now I wot not how it is, but ye
all anoyed and weary of all goodness. And all ye in all ill are desirous and
covetous. As far as I can remember, when Camylle made his vow to Cybille
the mother of goddis, to send him victory in a battle, when he had won
the victory, Rome was so poor, that it had neither gold nor silver for to
make the statute of promise, the matrones than being, seeing that their
husbands did offer their lives in the said war, they granted to present
their jewels to the holy senate. It was a meruayllous thing to see, that
without any speaking to them, or without any man's entysement they determined
all together to go to the hye capitol, and there in the presence of every man
presented their owches hanginge at their ears, The ringes of their fingers,
the bracelettes of their arms, the perles from their attires of their heads,
the collers from their necks, The broches of their breasts, the girdelles
about their myddels, and borders of their gowns. And though that their gift
was esteemed to a great value, yet their good wylles was esteemed a greatte deal
more. The rychesses that they offered there was so greatte, that there was not
all only enough to perform the vow of the statute, but also to pursewe the
war. And as than the custom of Rome was, that none did them any pleasure, but
he was shortly recompensed: the same day that the matrones did offer their
rich and fair iewelles in the capitolle, there was granted unto them five
manner of things in the Senate: The first, that at their deaths the orators
should preach, publishe, and show their good living: The second that they
should sit in the temple, where as before they were wont to stand: The third,
that they should were furred and lyned gowns, where as before they ware none
but syngle: The.iiii. that in their diseses they might drink wine, where as
before on their lives they durst drink none, but water: The.v. that the
matrones of Rome great with child, should not be refused of any thing that
they desired. These five things for certain were iustlye and wyllyngely
granted by the senate. And why this law that commaundethe to denaye nothing
to a woman with child was made, I will tell the the occasion that moved the
senate so to do. Fuluius Torquate being consul in the war against the
Volseos, the knights of Mauritayne brought to Rome a wild man, that had but
one eye, that they had taken in hunting in the deserts of Egypt. And the
matrones of Rome were at that time as sad and honest, as they be now bold
and light: so was the wife of the said Torquate, that was nyghe the time of her
delyueraunce great with child, of troth a woman so honest, that for the
sobre solytarines that she kept in Rome, she had no less glory thanne
had her husband in the wars for his worthynes, the which was well proved.
For in the.xiiii. year that Torquate her husband was in Asye a war fare, the
first time that he went thither, she was never seen at the wyndowe lokynge
out, and she was not all only regarded for that, but in all the said.xiiii.
years never manchylde nor manne above the age of.viii. years came within her
gates. And not content with this, that she did to give example to all Rome,
and to attain perpetual memory, where as she had left with her three sons,
the eldest of whom was but three years of age: and as soon as they came
to.viii. year, she sent them out of her house to their grauntefathers. And
thus did this excellent Romayne lady, to the entente that under color of her
own children there should none other young children enter into her house.
Those years passed, after that the good old man Torquate was returned fro the
wars of the Volseos, the said wild man with one eye went by the door of
the said Torquate, and one of her maidens told her, that it was a meruaylous
thing to se: and the good lady had great desire to see him, and because there
was none to bring him to her, that she might see him, she dyed for sorrow.
And for certain though he came often inoughe by her door, yet she would
never goo nor look out at her wyndowe to se him. Her death was greatly bewailed
in Rome, for she was in Rome most derely beloved, and good reason: for many
days before was no such womanne brought in Rome. And by the commandment of
the senate, the tenor of this writing in verses were set upon her sepulcher,

Here lies the glorious matron wife of Torquate, that would adventure her life
to assure her good fame. Behold Faustine, this law was not made to remedy the
death of this matrone, but to the end that to such as ye be, and to all the
world it should be a perpetual example of her life, and memory of her
death. It was well done to ordeyne that law for an honest woman being with
child, that it should be kept to all virtuous women. And as women would, that
the law of them that be with child should be kept, so by the same law it is
requisite to require that they be honest. In the.vii. table of the law it is
said: we command, that where there is coruption of customs, there lyberties
shall not be kept.

How tydinges was brought to the emperor, that the Mauritayns would conquer
great Britayne. Cap. xxii.
IN the.liiii. year of Marcus the emperors aege, and the tenthe year of his
election to thempire, In the month of July, as he was in the city of Naples,
and not in very perfect health, for he was soore payned with the gout in his
foot: there came a Centurion in manner of a messager with great have, saying,
that in great Britayn was suddenly arrived a great nauye of war, to the nombre
of.C. and.xxx. shyps of the realm of Mauritain, and the quantity of.xx.M. men
of foot: and.ii.M. men of arms: and that the king of Mauritayns brother was
their captain, named Aselipio, the which had taken land at a haven of the
isle called Arpine, and that to resyste so great a power, there were but a few
people in the said isle. The good emperor heringe these tidings, though he
felt it inwardely as a man, yet he feyned it outwardly as a discrete man with
a sad countenance, and made few words. Than saying, that business might not
be delayed, he said these words: I will go with a few people, and do what I
can. For better it were with a few to go betymes, than to tarry for many and
goo to late. And forthwith the good emperor pourueyed, that all they of his
palace should depart to go to Brytayne, and none to tarry behind, to do him
service. The custom was, that the emperors should have always in their houses
such men as were mete to be sent forth in any besynesses that should happen
for war. And after that they were shypped, there arrived one of Britayne, that
showed, how the Mauritayns were returned, so that none of them was left in
the i will. Than this emperor kept his house in a good point. Lyttel occasion
suffiseth to them that be naturally of ill inclynation, to depart and sprede
through countries to do harm: therefore he sent them of his house to the
intent, that by occasion of the war, they should not lead an ill life. Than
the emperor fearyng the dissolution of his court, and boldenes of his
officers, to the intent they should not leave virtue and grow in vice, he
determined on a day to call them to him secretly, and to say these words to
them.

What the emperor said to them of his court in eschewyng ydelnesse. Cap. xxiii.
THe greattest sign in a virtuous man is to do virtuous works, and virtuously
to spend and occupy his time: and the greatest sign of a lost man is to
lose his time in naughtye warkes. The greattest hap of all, and the greattest
desire of men is to live long. For diverse chances that fall in short time may
be suffered and remedyed by long space. Plato said: A man that passes his
life without profit, as one unworthy to live, ought to have the rest of his
life take from him. The fylthe of secret chambres, the stynche of the pomp in
ships, nor the ordures of cities do not corrupt the air so much, as ydell
folk do the people. And as there is in a man, that occupies his time well, no
virtue but it increases, so in him, that occupies his time ylle, there is no
villainy but it is suspecte in him. A man that is always well occupied,
ought ever to be reputed as good: and the ydel man with out further enquerie,
ought to be condemned as naught. Show me now, I desire you, what does
nourysshe the corrupt and foul wiedes, the nettelles that stynge, and the
briers that prick, but the earth that is untilled, and waxen wild, and the
fyeldes fulle of thystelles, which is not wyeded, and vysyted with the
ploughe? O Rome without Rome, that now as unhappy have but only the name of
Rome, because thou art so dear in virtues, and make vices good cheap. Yea
yea, and I shall tell the, know thou wherefore thou art so? because thou
haste unpeopled the lanes and streets of werkemen and officers, and haste
peopled it all about with infinite vacaboundes. I know for truth, that the
Samytes, Vosigoths, Astrogoths, and Peniens spredde in your territories, do you
not so much damage as do these ydell and lost people stuffed in every shop.
All writers can not deny me, that if al nations would co^quere Rome, they
could not take away one loope of the walls of it: and these ydell people have
trodden and pulled under their feet the good renome of it. An infallyble rule
it is: a man given to exercyses is virtuous, and one given to lewtringes is a
vicious person. What a divine thing was it to se the divine worlds of our
predecessous, the which sith Tullius Hostilius, unto Quintus Cincinatus
dictatour, and since Cincinatus unto Cyncinos, which were of the Syllans and
Marians, there was never Consulle at Rome, but he could do some manner of office
or occupation, wherewith they were occupied when their office in the Senate was
ended. Some could paynte pyctures or other flat works: Other could grave
images and portry in wood or earth, or other things, or could work in
silver, and other mettalles: and other read in schools: In such wise that the
holy senate might choose none, but if he were first known in some manner handy
craft. I do find in the annals all that is above said: and if I lie, I do
give me to the flames of Vulcan. And there was an ancient law, that a myller,
a smyth, a baker, or a point maker, might not be a Senator, because men of
the said occupations were commonly taken with deceytes and gyles. Than regard
the manner and change of time, and the corruption of customs, that.CCC. years
every man trauayled for ye renoume of Rome, and this.viii.C. years every man
slepeth to the sclander of Rome. Other things I find in the said annals
worthy of eterne memory, the people of Rome having.iiii. peryllous wars
together (young Scipio against the Peniens, Mucio against the Cayens, Metellus
against Alexander of Macedonie, and an other Metellus his brother against the
Celtiberes of Spain) the law being so soore kept, that none should be taken
from the mystery and office that he occupied, and the senators having
extreme necessity of messangers to send to the wars, when the senators had
gone three days about with the censors of Rome, they could not find one
ydell man to be sent forth with their letters. I weep for joy, that I have
of this antyque felicity: and I mourn for compassion of the myserie now
being. It is a confusion to say, but I will say it: Twenty years I had office
in the senate, and it is.x. years sithe I have ruled the empire, which is.xxx.
in all, In the which season I swear by the goddis immortal, I have caused to
whyppe, cast in wells, to bury quick, to hang, to prycke, and to banishe mo
than.xxx.M. vacabundes, and.x.M. ydell women. Than what difference is there
between that life and this death, that glory and this pain, that gold and
this ordure, that antike Romayn work and this our present inuentife ydelnes of
Rome?

In the laws of the Lacedemoniens this was written in the table of the ydell
people: We command as kings, we pray as servants, we teache as philosophers,
and admonyshe as fathers, that the fathers shall first teach their children
to labor the feldes, where by travail they may live, and not brought up in
places, where by ydelnes they may be lost. And that law says ferthermore: If
that young people obey not as young, we will that the aged people do correct
and punyshe them as aged. And in case that the fathers be negligent to
command them, or that they be disobedient: We command the prince than to be
diligent to chastise them.

Certainly these words are worthy to be noted: whereby Lygurge the king
deserved eternal memory for his person, and the said realm perpetual peace
in the common welthe. O Rome, what doste thou? why regardest thou not these
laws of the Lacedemoniens, which with their frendely customs, does mock
thy brutall vices? Slepest or wakest? O Rome thou wakest all the world to
leave sweet trauayles, and slepest in unjust ydelnesse. Thou art sure of
ennemies, and thou careless art drowned in sloth and ydelnes. Than sithe that
they that been far of, do waken the, thou ought to awake^ them that thou
kepest with the. I would speak to al them to gyther of my palace, and long
ago I wylled so to do, but the multitude of strange besynesses sometime
causes a man to forget his own.

Of the peryllous living of them that haunt the court continually. Cap.
xxiiii.
THan the emperor joined these wordis to that he had said. Many things I have
seen, and of credible persons I have hard, which me seemed to be ill, and
none of them good. Specially one, which offends the goddis, sclandreth the
world, peruerteth the common welthe, and endomageth the person self: which
is this cursed sloth, and ydelnes that distroyeth them that be good, and
utterly brings to naught them that be ill. Sometime secretly, and half as
in sport openly I have admonysshed and rebuked some of you, but I se it
proufite none of you. On one side the prick of reason constrayneth me to
chastise you: ageine considering the malice of mankind, all though that it
be prompte to ill, sometime I am determined to suffer you. Many times I would
with fury chastise you as children, but I do refrain it, consideringe that ye
are young, and as yet know not the wiles of the world: for they hold so
styffely together the ill with the ill, and among them make so great a leage of
vices with the vices, that there be many that do by gyle suffer them self to
be begyled, and that when we escape fro a littell wyle, and know the begyler,
we think that we are begyled all ready with other greatte wyles. I have
meruaylous great compassion of you my servants, speaking to you as a lord:
and to you my children speaking as a father, for to se you all the day and night
wandryng through Rome as lost persons: and that worste of all is, I perceive
that ye do not perceive your own perdition. What greatter beastlynes can
there be, than to se you wander like foles from house to house, fro tavern to
tavern, from one gasinge to an other, fro street to street, fro place to
place, fro play to play, fro reuellers to reuellers? And that more is, that ye
know not, what ye desire, nor what ye would, where ye go, nor whens ye comme,
what pleasethe you, or what displeases you: what is proufytable or loss unto
you. Nor ye remember not, that ye were borne reasonable men, and that ye live
as wild folk among men, and after shall dye as brute beasts. Fro whens
wene ye that this comethe? The cause is the desire of beastelye mouynges, not
resystynge the desires of the lust of youth, and above all not applienge your
minds and wills to be well ocupied. Take heed among you of my court, and
forgette not this. Have ye no thought but to seek new pastymes, and to borowe
every day? No man, of what condition so ever he be, except he haunt feats of
arms, or other learning in some ordinary exercise, shall have his body lustye
and his spirit quick: but shall be acloyed in all other things, and wander
from street to street, as a vacabounde. The heart of man is noble, and has
power continuallye for all acts, and all pastymes of the body: and yet in
three days it is annoyed of him self alone, so that with him can not rest
one laudable exercise. Like as I am emperor of all the world, so it is reason,
and must needs be, that I have folk of all nations in my palace. And such as
the prince is, such shall be his householde: and as his house is, so shall his
court be: and as the court is, so shall the hole empire be. For this cause a
king ought to be right honest: his house well ordered and ruled, his
officers well learned, and his court well kept in awe. Of my good life
depends their good lives, and consequently the ill lives. Every nation lerneth
in their particular scoles, The Syriens in Babylon: the Persians in Dorkes: the
Indiens in Olympe: the Caldees in Thebes: the Greeks in Athenes: the Hebrews
in Helye: the Latins in Samie: the French men in Orliance, the Spaniardes in
Gades: and they all together in Rome. The universal scole of all the world is
the person, the house, and court of a prince. As we emperors do say, the
same will our subjects say: as we do, they will do: that we forsake, they will
leave: if we lose our selfs, they will lose them selves: if we win, they will
win: and finally our wealth is their wealth, and our harm is their harm.
Truly the prince is bound to keep his own person honestly and well besene,
his house and court so well ruled, that all they that shall se it, may have
desire to follow and do thereafter: and that all they, that here thereof, may
desire to see it. Take ye head, and let us take heed: Have ye in mind, and let
us have in mind, that they, which be of strange lands, going through strange
lands into strange lands, by their great trauayles coming to have and
demand succor and remedy of us, may have no cause to report any sclanders of
our ill customs. What thing more monstrous can be noysed among men, than that
they should come and complayn of the thieves of their countries, to the thieves
of my court? What greatter shame and inconvenience can be, than to demand
Justice of their mensleers, of the mankyllers of my court and house? What
cruelty were so cruel, as to complain of the vagaboundes of their lands, to
the slothful and ydell folk of my house? What thing can be more shameful,
than to come to accuse them that have said ylle of emperors, before them that
every day blaspheme the goddis? What thing can be more inhumayne, than to come
to ask justice on him, that has transgressed but ones, of them that never did
good warkes? Truly in such case the pore men should return with their
ignorance begyled, and we should tarry with our cruel malice shamed of men,
and culpable before god. O how many small matters do we chastise in men of
small reputation, which without breakyng of Justice we might forbear? and how
many great things do the goddis suffer in the hye pryncis and lords, the
which not without Justice, they may greuousely punyshe? And by that cruel men
as cruel, can pardon nothing: and the goddis pitiefull scantely will chastyse
any thing. Yet for all this, I would that none should deceive him self, for
though the goddis forbear their injuries, yet they leave them not
unpunished, by strange Justice. The goddis ben in their chastisementes as he
that gives a blow to an other, the hyer that he lyfteth his band, the
greatter is the stroke on the cheke. By semblable wise, the mo years that they
forbere our sins, the more afterward do they hurt us with peynes. Truly I
have seen the goddis diverse times to diverse persons forbear diverse sins a
greatte while, but at the last I have seen them all vnwaares chastysed with
one chastisement.

How the emperor would have them of his court to live. Capit. xxv.
Sith that the goddis have ordained, and my fatal destenies have permytted,
that I should be chosen emperor (not to slothful) I have labored all that I
might, to vysyte the Empire: ye lyttelle young folks that are here, were given
to me of your fathers, for to nouryshe you in my palace. And for you that are
bygger, I was desired to receive you, in hope to have gifts and rewards, and
other I did choose to do my service. The intention of the fathers, wha^ they
bring their children to the court of princis, is to put them from dalyance of
their friends, and banyshe them from the wantonness of their mothers. And me
seems it is well done, for the chyldern from their youth ought to give them
self to travail, whereby they ought to live, and resist the disfavor and
falls of fortune. Ye are not come from your countries to learn the vices of
Rome, but to learn many good manners that are in Rome, and leave the ill manners
of your lands. All that do not this, and forsake travail: give them self to
very ydelnes. The miserable Rome has moore need of laborers for to labor,
than of lords and habytauntes, Patriciens, that will but pass the time in
rest and pleasures. I swear to you, that not for werynge the arms with the
craft of weuynge, and the fyngers with spinnyng, the bordell houses now adays
are fuller of ydel women, than the churches of good priests. And I swear
again, that easelyer may be found.x.M. ill women in Rome to serve in pleasure
of vices, than.x.M. good men to serve in the churches. I pray you, who sleeth
the marchantes in hye ways? Who dispoyleth wayfaringe men and pylgrimes on the
mountains? Who piketh the locks and breketh honest men's doors and wyndowes?
Who rob by strength the churches? but these lewtrynge thieves, which will not
labor by day, but dispose them to rob by night. O Rome, what harms come to
the for one only evil? Who has filled Italy so full of lost people, the
palace so full of unable persons, the mountains so full of thieves, the
tauernes so full of ill women, and every place so full of vacabu^des? but one,
the canker of ydelnes and sloth, which destroys the god customs more than
the winds and waters thine old worn walls. Believe me oone thing, for I
wot that I say troth therein, that the craft of weauing, wherein all the
naughty vilanyes are wouen and wrought, and the seed of all unhappy vices,
the slydynge of all goodness, the falling of all them that be evil, and the
awakynge and provoking of all these, is but this foul vice of slouthe and
idelnesse. And more over I say, that there is no vice among all vices, that
bredeth so great a fire, and causes so contynualle a syckenesse of sleep
among aaged folk, and that puttethe good folk in so great peril, and does
so much damage to them that be evil, as does ydelnes. Who is it, that
causes sedition among the people, and sclaunder in Realms, but they that
rest and do nothing: because they would eat the food gotten by sweat of
them that labor? Who is it, that fyndeth new inuencions of tributes and
forayne exactions, but ydell men, the which because they will not work with
their hands, find profit with infinite exactions? who makes disce^tion
between neighbors but idel folk? they divide their ylle among their
neighbors, because they occupy not their forces in good works, nor refrain
their tongues to clatter of other men's lives? who imagines in these days so
many malices in Rome, the which was never hard of our fathers, nor read in
our books: but vacabundes, that neither apply nor set their wits about
nothing else: but think how to endomage other? The emperor that could
vanyshe all these ydell persons out of his empire, might well auant him self
to have oppressed all the vices of the world. I would it pleased the immortal
goddis, that of so many triumphis, that I have had of strangers, occupied in
good exercyses, that I had seen one of the vacaboundes of Rome driven out of
all houses. There was an ancient law, none might be taken and received for a
citisen in Rome, but he were first examined by the Censure. In the time of Cato
Censorius, when any would be a citiesin of Rome, this examination was made of
him: He was not demanded, of whens he was, nor what he was, nor whens he came,
nor wherefore he came, nor of what kin or ancient stock he came: but only
they took his hands between theyrs, and if they felt them soft and smothe,
forthewith as an ydell vacabunde man they dispatched and sent him away: and if
they found his hands hard and full of hard knottes, by and by they admitted
him a citezen and dweller in Rome. Also when any officers took any ill doers,
and put them in prison, that was called Marmotine, instead of information, the
first thing that they took head of, was their hondes, which if they had been
as a laborers hands, and a work man, though his crime were grievous, yet his
chastisement was mitigate, and more easy: and if the unhappy prisoner cha^ced
to have ydell hands, for a littel faut he should have sharp punishment. It
has been an old saying: He that has good hands, must needs have good
customs. I say, I chastised never a labouringe man, but I was sorye for it:
nor I never caused to whyppe a vacabunde, but I was glad of it. I will tell
you more of this Catho Censorius, which was greatly feared. For even as
children in the schools, herynge their master coming in, run to their
books, So when Catho went through the stretez of Rome, every body went to their
work. O right happy baron, before whom the people feared more to be idel, than
to do ill before any other. Than behold ye at this hour, what force virtue
has, and how valiaunte a virtuous man is, saying that all the world feared
Rome only, for her worthynes in arms: and all Rome feared Catho, only for
his virtues. The adventures of men are so diverse, and the suspect fortune
gives so many overthwart turns, that after that a great space she has
given greatte pleasures, incontinent we are cyted to her subtle trauayles of
repentance. O happy Cato Censorine, who with such as have followed his ways,
are now sure fro the abatementes of fortune. Than he that will have glory in
this life, and attain glory after death, and be beloved of many, and feared
of all: let him be virtuous in doing of good works, and deceive no man
with vain words. I swear unto you by the law of a man of worship, that if
the gods would accomplisshe my desire, I had rather to be Cato with the
virtuous policies that he used in Rome, than to be Scipio, with the abundance
of blood, that he shed in Affrike. All we know well, that Scipio had a
great fame in beatynge down of cities, and cuttynge innocents throtes, and
Catho has attained eternal, memory in reformyng the people, pardoning
trespassours, and teaching ignorant folk. Than ye may all see, if I have not
good reason, more to desire to be Cato, to the profit of many, than to be
Scipio, to the preiudyce of so many. Lo my friends, these words I have said,
because ye may see, that our predecessors, sum in their own lands, other
in strange lands, some being young, and some old, in their times had glory
in their persons, for them self: and for the world to come have left no less
memory for their successors and ofsprynge. And we do all the contrary, I
being emperor am loathe for to command any ill, and our officers for their
interest do wors. And where as we are set in diverse pleasures by our vice, we
fall hourly into diverse myseries, and are noted to our great infamy. By the
which occasion the just gods for our unjust works, gyuinge just sentence,
command, that we live with suspection, dye with shame, and to be buried with
forgettefulnes, never to be had in memory. Than you of my court take good
head, and prynte well my words in your minds: for who so sever I se or find
ydell from hensforth, I discharge him out of my service. ye that be learned may
write and read, ye that be men of arms and knights, exercise you in feats of
war, ye that be officers, occupy you in your offices. And take this for
certain, that if ye take not this for a warning and monition, that I have
given you between you and me, the punyshementes that I shall give unto you,
shall be openly. And to the entente that ye have it better in your memory, and
to be a doctrine to pryncis hereafter to comme, this present practice and
remonstrance I have written in all tongues, and set it in the high Capitol
with many other of my wrytynges. The goddis be kepers of you, and also they
defend and keep me from ill fortunes and mysaduentures.

Of a maruaylous and fearful monster, that was seen in Scicile, and of his
wrytynges. cap. xxvi
IN the year of the foundation of Rome vii.C.xx. and.xli. of the aege of Marcus
the emperor, and.ii. years before he took possession of the empire, the.xx.
day of the month Sextilis, which now is called August, about the time of the
son setting, in the realm of Sycil, than called Trinacrie, in a city
called Bellyne, on the sea now named Palerme, a port of these, there cha^ced a
thing right perilous to them that saw it, and no less fearful to them that
shall here it now. As they of Bellyne or Palerme were then celebratynge a
feast with great joy: for the gladness that their Pirates had overcome the
army of the Numidiens, and had taken.x. of their ships, and cast xxxii.
persons into the sea, because at that time they were ennemies each to other,
and for the ill works they did, were showed the great passions, that passed
among them. And as it is the customme, the thing that these Pirates get on the sea, they depart it among them all, when they come home. And when they comme
to land, they spend that merrily, that they gatte with greatte travail. It is
a thing well to be noted, how all good and ylle hearts are applied: The good
men have greatte desire to their triumphs, and covetous men to their lucre and
winning. Thus men ought to be beloved, though shortly after they ought to be
abhorred. And also they ought to be abhorred* as though shortly after they
ought to be beloved. Thus than the governors of the said city, commanded
all the said ships to be sequestered into their own hands, to the intent,
that they should not be sold, nor the coueytous people to have the advantage
in the byenge of them. The cause was, for the custom of the men of the yles
was, that all things should be kept together, unto the end of the war, or
at least till they had peace. This was a just law: For many times is made
steadfast appoyntmentes between great enmyes, and not all only for the
ancient hatred, but also for lack of richesse to satisfy the present
domages. Thanne as all the people were withdrawn into their houses about
suppertyme, for it was summer, suddenly there came a monster into the mids of
the city, after this shape: He seemed to be of two cubytes of heighte, and he
had but one eye, his heed was all pylled, so that his scul might be seen: He
had none ears, but that a little of his neck was open, whereby it seemed yt he
hard: He had two crooked horns as a got: His right arm was longer than the
left, his hands were like horse fete, he had no throat, his neck was egall
with his heed: his shulders shone as pytche, his breast and stomach was all
rough of hear, his face was like a man, saufe it had but one eye in the mids
of his forheed, and had but one nosethryll, from the waste downewarde he was
not seen, for it was covered, he satte on a chariot with.iiii. wheles, whereat
were two lions fastened together before, and two bears behind: and it could
not be determined, whereof the chariotte was made, but there was no difference
in facion thereof, and other that were used commonly: In the myddis of the
said chariotte was a caudron like a table with two ears, wherein the said
monster was: and therefore it was seen but fro the gyrdelstede upward. He went
about in the city fro gate to gate a long space castyng out spercles of fire.
The fear was so great, that diverse women with child were delivered with great
peril, and other that were weak hearted fell in a swowne. And all the people
great and small, less and more, ran to the temples of Jupiter, Mars, and
Phoebus, making importunate cries and clamours. And the same season all the said
Pirates were lodged in the governors palayes named Solyn. He was of the nation
of Capue, and there was all the richesse kept. And when this monster had been
over all the city with his charyot, than the lions and bears brought him to
the palace, where the Pirates were, and being very nygh to the gates that were
fast closed, the monster cut an ear of one of the lions, and with the blood
thereof he wrote these letters. R. A. S. P. I. P. These letters were a proof to
all them of high spirit, to give declaration of them: and there were mo
declarations than there were letters. But finally a woman diuineresse, or
contrary, a sothsayer, that was had in great reputation for her crafts, made
the very declaration of the said letters, saying thus. R. reddite. A, aliena.
S, si vultis. P, propria. I, in pace. P. possidere. Which all together is to
say, Render that perteyneth to other, if that ye will in peace possess your
own. Surely the Pirates were soore affrayde of that dredeful commandment:
and the woman was greatly praised for her high declaration. Than forthewith the
same night the monster went into a high mountain called as than Ianitia, and
there by the space of three days was in the sight of all the city: and in that
season the lions made great rorynge and howlynge, and the bears and monster
keste out great fearful flames. And all that season there neither appeared
byrd in the air, nor beast in the feldes, and all the men offered great
sacrifices to the goddis, in such wise that they brake the veins of their
hands and fete, and offered their blood, to se if they might appease their
goddis. After the three days passed, suddenly appeared a cloud black and derke
upon the earth, and it began to thunder and lyghten, with a great erthequake,
so that many howses fell in the city, and many of the dwellers and citesins
dyed. And than sodaynely there came a flame of fire from the monster, and brent
all the palace, where the said Pirates were, and the rychesses that were in it,
so that all was consumed in it, yea the very stones: and the damage was so
great, that there fell mo than.ii.M. houses. And there died as good as.x.M.
persons. And in the same place on the top of the mountain, where as the
monster was, the emperor commanded to edify a temple to the god Jupiter in
memory of the same. Of the which temple the emperor Alexander, having war
with them of the realm, made a strong castle.

What befell to a citesin of Rome in the time of this emperor Marcus. Cap.
xxvii.
THe same time that this adventure chanced in that I Will, there was dwelling in
the same city a Romayne named Antygone, a lord of noble blood, and sommewhat
entered in age: and about two year before, he, his wife, and a daughter of his
were banyshed Rome, and not his sons. The occasion was, There was an ancient
laudable custom, since Quintus Cincinatus dictatour, that two of the ancient
senators together should goo with the censure newly created, and the old, in
the month of Dece^bre for to visit all Rome: and they to call every Romayne
aparte alone, showing him the.xii. tables of their laws and particular
decrees of the senate, demandyng of them if they knew any neighbor in their
quarter, that had broken these laws. And if they did, it should be informed
to the senate. And there all together to ordeyne punysshement, according to
the diversity of the fautes that they had committed: But the fautes
committed that present year, they might not chastise, but to aduertyse them to
amend afterward. And all such as were ones warned, and in the next
visytation found stylle vnamended, to be grievously punyshed, and sometime
banyshed. These were the words of the law in the.v. table and third chapter:
It is ordained by the holy senate, by consent of blisfull men, receyuyng the
ancient colonies, that if men being men in one year do trespass, the men as me^
for the said year shall dissimule and forbear: but if they that be ill as ill
do not amend, they that be good, as good, shall chastise them. Also the said
law says, the first fautes are suffered, because they are committed with weak
ignorance: but if they continue them, yt they be chastised, because their ill
comes of sloth and malice. This inquisition was ever made in the monethe of
Decembre, because that soon after in the month of Ianiuer the offices of Rome
were dyuided. And it was reason, that they should know to whom they should give
or deny their dignities: to thentent that good should not be chosen instead
of ill, nor the ill instead of good. The particular cause why they banyshed the
man and his wife with their daughter was this: The second emperor of Rome
August ordained, that none should be so hardy to pys at any doors of the
temples: and Caligula the.iiii. emperor commanded, that no woman should give
any cedules to hang about the peoples necks, to heal the fever quartayne.
And Cato Censorine made a law, that no young man nor young maiden should
speak together at the conduites or wells, where they fetched water, nor at
the river, where they washed their clothes, nor at the ouens where they baked
breadde, because all the young people of Rome that were wild and wanton, ran
ever thither. So it befell, that as the censures and consules vysited the
quarter called mount Celio, there was a dweller named Antigonus accused, that
he was seen pyssyng against the temple wall of Mars: and his wife was accused,
that she had sold cedules for fever quartaynes: and likewise his daughter
was accused, that she was seen at the conduytes, ryuers, and ouens, spekyng and
laughing with young men of Rome. The which was a great shame to the maidens of
Rome. Than the censures saying the ill order, that they had found in the house
of the said Anthygone by the regesters, by due examination, being warned
before, they were banyshed into the yles of Cycill, for as long as it should
please the senate. And like as in edifices, sumptuous and of great estimatoin,
one stone is not decade or writhed out without shaking or mouynge of an
another: even likewise is it in the chances of men. For commonly one unhappiness
chances not, but an another follows. And I say this because Anthigone lost
not allonely his honor and welthe, but also he was banyshed, and beside that
by the trembling of the earth his house fell down, and slew a well-beloved
daughter of his. And all the while that this was done at Rome, and that that
befell of the monster in Cicile, Mark the emperor was in the wars against
the Aragons, and there he received a letter from Antygone, wherein was rehearsed
his banysshynge* whereof the Emperor had great compassion, and to comfort
him, sent him an other letter.

Of a great pestylence that was in Italy in this emperors time. Cap. xxviii.
Five year after the death of Anthony the meke, father in law to Marcus
Aurelius, and father to Faustine, there fell a pestilence in Italye. and it
was one of the.v. great pestylences among the Romayne people. This mortality
dured the space of two years, and it was universal thorough out all Italy, to
the great damage and fear of all the Romans: for they thought that the goddis
would have distroyed them, for some displeasure that they had done against them.
There dyed so many, as well of great estate, as rich and poor, greatte and
small, young and old, that the writers had less travail to write the small
nombre of them that were left alive, than to write the multitude of them that
were deed. Like as when a great building will fall, first there falls some
stone: In like wise the Romans never had no great pestilence in their time,
but first they were thretned with some token, sign, or prodigy fro heaven. Two
year before that Hanyball entered into Italy, in an euenyng, when the wether was
clear and fair, sodaynely it rayned bloudde and milk in Rome. And it was
declared by a woman, that the blood betokened cruel war, and the milk a
mortal pestilence. When Scilla returned from Champayne, to put Marius his
ennemy out of Rome, his men of war and knights saw in a night a fountain
that ran bloudde, and who so ever was bathed therein, seemed to be poisoned
with venyme. Of the which prodigy followed, that of.ii.C. and.l.M. dwellers in
Rome, what with them that dyed with the sword, and other consumed by
pestilence, were consumed with Scilla, and of them that sledde with Marius, of
the said great multitude of Romans, there abode alive no mo but.xl.M.
persons. Certainly Rome never received so great damage in.vi.C. years before,
as they did by their own propre people. All the tyrants were never so
cruel against strange lands, as the Romans were than against their own
propre landis. And this seems to be true, because the same day yt Scilla
passed through Rome with his bloody sword, a capitayn of his said to him: Sir
Scylla, if we slay them that bear armor in the feldes, and them that bear no
armor in their houses, with whom shall we live? I conjure the by the hye
goddis, since we be borne of women, let us not slay the women: and sith we be
men, let us not slay the men. Thou thynkest that in sleinge all the Romans,
to make a commonwealth of beastis of the mountains. Thou entrest with a cry
to defend the common welthe, and to put out the tyrants that distroye the
common welthe, and we do remain tyrants our selves. To mine understanding
that capitayn merited as great glory for the good words that he spoke, as
Scilla did merit chastisement for the cruelty that he did. This we have
said, because that ere such damages did fall, there appeared before certain
prodigyes and tokens. No less token was showed before the mortality that fell
in the time of this good emperor, the which was a fearful thing. The case
was so: On a day as the emperor was at the temple of the Virgins Vestales,
suddenly there entered in two hogs, and ran about his fete, and there fell
down deed. And on an other day as he came from the high Capitol, for to have
gone out at the gate Salaire, he saw two kytes ioynynge together with their
talantes: and so fell down deed at the emperors fete. And within a short
while or season after, as the said emperor came fro hunting, his hounds
rennynge at a wild beast, as he gave two greyhoundes that he loved well, water
to drink with his own hands, suddenly they fell down deed at his fete. Than
he remembryng the swyne, the kytes, and the greyhoundes deed so suddenly, he
was greatly dismayed, and assembled all his priests magitiens, and divines,
demandynge what they said to the prodigies. And they by those things passed,
judged the deed present, and determined, that within two years the goddis would
send great and grievous punyshementes to Rome. Than within short while after
there began a war against the Parthes, whereby there fell the year after
great famyn and pestylence among the Romans. This pestilence came with sores
under the arm pittes, so that all the senate fled away, and the emperor
alone abode still in the capitol. Than the air began to be so corrupt, that
though he escaped the pestylence, yet he was vexed with hot fevers. Wherefore he
was fayn to leave Rome, and went into Champayne: and finally in the city of
Naples he made his abode during the time that the pestilence was in Rome.

How Mar. answered his physicians that would have him leave his study. Cap.
xxix.
THe emperor being in the said city of Naples, where as other sought
pastyme to conserve their lives, this emperor occupied him self in his books
to augment science. A man could do him no better service, than to seek to get
him a new book: not such as was written in his time, but such as were
forgotten for age. This emperor was not only a lover of old and antike
books, but also of ancient stories, and set very great stoore by them. And
he thus being in the city sick and very ill at ease, there was brought to
him out of a city of Asia called Helia, by certain Hebrews, a book written in
Hebrew: and he took such pleasure in that book, that often times he would leave
his meat and goo to study: and for all that he was in his hot fever, he would
not leave to reed, for all that his phisitiens warned him, and his friends
prayde him: and they that were about him, counsaylled him, and demanded him,
why he left to procure the health of his person in so much redynge. He
answered: By the goddis that we honor I conjure you, and for the frendshyp
that is between us, I pray you let me alone. Ye know well, that such as are
of a delycate blood, have not so much solicytude as the rusticall people,
that have hard synewes and be of a more harder complexion. Like manner they of
clear understanding have need of other medicynes, and to be heled with other
syropes tha^ they of gross understanding. This is the difference that I have
of either of them: The ydeote keeps dyete from books, and rests on his
meat, and the wise man abhors meat, and draws him to his books. If they
knew, that know not, what thing knowledge is, I swear to you, they should see
what avails more the little knowledge that a wise man has, than the greatte
riches of the rich man. For the miserable rich person, the more that he
increases in richesse, the more he diminishes in friends, and grows in
enemies to his damage. And he that is wyttie, the wiser that he is, the better
he is beloved of them that be good, and feared of them that be ill for his
profit. One of the things, wherein I hold my self most bound to the goddis
is this, that they have caused me to compass the time as I have done, the which
is no lyttel gift for a man to live in this world. I say it is, because I have
had great compassion of the poor, that be very poor, of wydowes, of them
that be sorrowful and unhappy, and of Orphelins. But without comparison, I have
had greattest compassion of them, that lack knowledge. For the goddis, making
men ignorant by naturalitie, might have made them goddis by conning and
knowledge: and as the slouthefull men are tamed and made less than men, by
their negligence, so certainly blessed he is, that is not content to be a man,
but if he procure to be more than a man, by his virtue. And cursed is that man,
that knows not to be a man, but makes him self less than a man by his
vice. By the judgment of al philosophers, there is but one, that is the first
cause, which is one god immortal, and if there be diverse goddis in the heuens,
it is because there are diverse virtues in the earth. And in the world, that is
paste, when the simple men were servants and bond men, and the good men
rulers and governors, they were then so esteemed, because they were known and
renowned for their good works in their life. So that they were holden and
reputed as goddis after their death. This is the right reward, that comes
of virtue. It is a thing consonaunt to reason, that they that be good among
so many ill in this life, should be greattely honored among the goddis after
their death. Ye are not well content with me, because I am always redynge* but
I am worse content with you, because I never se book in your hands: ye think
it great travail, to a sick man, to read, and I repute it a very peryllous
thing, for a hole manne, to rest and be idell. Ye say, my redyng is cause of
my fever quartayne in my flesh: and I say, that ydelnes engenders great
pestilence. Sith I may profit by my books, let no man have compassion of my
travail. For I desire rather to dye as a wise person, among wise men, than to
live ignorantly among men. I demand one thing of you: A man, presuming to
be a man, and is not learned, what difference is between him and other beasts?
Certainly, the beasts are more profitable to labor the earth, than simple
persons be, to serve the common welthe. A pore ox gives his skin to make
shone, his flesh to be eaten, and his strength to labor: and a poor simple
sheep does profit, his flece and wol to make clothe, and his milk to make
chese: But what profits a folishe ideote man? Nothing, but offends the
goddis, sclaundereth innocents, eats the bread of other, and is chief heed
of vacabundes. Of troth, if it lay in my hands to do, I had rather give life
to a simple ox, than to a malycious idiot. For the beast lives, for the
utility of diverse, without doing damage to any other: and the simple idiot man
lives, to the damage of all other, and without profit to any person. Therefore
think well, why I am not pleased with them that be ignorant, and love them
that be learned. Hark syrs, what I shall show you: That man seems good, that
is meke and gentle of condition, soft in words, and restefull in his
person, and gracious in conversation: And contrary wise, that person soore
displeases me, that is sharp of words, soore moved in his warkes, riottous
in his condition, and double of his promys, and hard hearted. Also I say, that
if any thing want in a wise man by nature, he supplyeth it by science: and he
that is ignorant and folyshe, if he want discretion, he supplyethe it with his
malice. And trust surely, that a worthy virtuous man thereby becomethe wise, and
he is to be trusted: and he that is of an other manner, beware of him, for he
goes about to sell his malice. He that will begile an other, the first thing
that he does is, he shows him self to be simple and ignorant. For a man
being in credence, may soon sprede abroad his malice. The mothes and soft
worms, freete freate the clothe, and the canker worm perseth the bone, and
flattering men begyle all the world.

How science ought to be in princis. Cap. xxx.
THe said emperor, following his purpose, said: Friends behold, how great
damage ignorance does to all men. And though it be domageable to every man,
yet it is most hurtefull to a prince, which ought, not only to be content,
to know as much as any other wise person knows, but to know that every man
knows, sithe he is lord over all other. To my judgment, these princis are not
chosen, that they should eat more meat, tha^ all other, nor to be apparayled
rychelyer than all other, nor to run faster than all other: but with
presupposition yt they ought to know more than all other. When a prince will
refrain his sensuality, than he ought to regard, that his person be right
honest, and remember this word, that is, The gretter that a prince is of
power, above other, the more ought he to be virtuous above al other. For
certainly the greattest infamy is, to se a man most mighty and most rich above
all other, and than to be known an idiot, and less of knowledge than other. Al
defautes in a governor may be borne save ignorance: for ignorance in a
prince, is a stroke of pestilence: and it sleeth diverse, and infecteth all
persons, and vnpeopleth the realm, chaceth away friends, and gives heart to
enmies of strange nations, that were in dread, and finally domageth his person,
and sclau^dreth every one. When Camyll triu^phed over the french men, the day
of his triumph he wrote these words in the capytoll: O Rome, thou have ben
mother of all wise men, and stepdame to al fools. These were worthy words of
such a lord. and but if my remembrance begyle me, certaynely Rome was more
renoumed for wise persons, that came thither, than for the featis of war,
that were sent from thense. Our ancient Romans were more feared, for their
wisdom and knowledge, than for their conquestes. All the earth feared them more,
that turned leaves of books in Rome, than them, that were armed with armor.
For that cause Rome was never vanquished: and though their armies were divided
and broken, yet they never lacked wise me^. I can not say it without tears,
Rome is fallen from the most hight of her estate, not for faut of money and
arms, for to fight withal, but for lack of wise men, and virtuous, for to
govern. Our forefathers wanne like men, and we lose like simple children. All
things that are desired of men, they atteyn by travail, susteyn with thought,
and depart fro, with great annoyance. And the reason is this: There is
nothing so good, nor so well beloved, but the course of time, causes us to
leave it, and to disprayse and abhor it, or to be weary thereof. This is the
vayn vanite of the world, and lost time lost: for with their young desires,
they do refrain their desires. They would oftentimes attain a thing, and
after they study, how to go therfro again. And yet to show further their
lyghtnes, that that cost much, they give for a little price. That that they
love at one time, they hate at an other: and that that they with great study
and labor have atteyned, with greatte furye they forgo. And me thinks this
is the ordinance of the goddis, that he that loves, shall have an end, and
it that is beloved, shall take an end: and the time that we are in, shall
end. Than it is reasone, that the love, wherewith we do love, shall end in
likewise. Thus our appetite is so dishonest, that in saying we desire it, and
in desyryng we procure it, and in procuring, we attain it, and in the
attayninge we abhor it, and in the abhorryng, we leave it: and than
forthewith again, we procure an other thing, and that new procuring, we
abhor again: In such wise, that when we begin to love a thing, than we
fall again to hate it, and in the falling to hate it, we begin ageyn to love
an other thing. So thus finally, our life does end, er our couetyse does
leave us. It is not thus of wisdom and knowledge, the which, if it ones enter
into a man's heart, it causes him to forget the travail, that he took in the
attaynynge thereof. For he takes the time past as good, and enjoys with
rightful joy, the time present, and hates ydelnes. Nor he is not content with
that he knows, but inforceth his appetite, to know more, loving that other
leaves: and leauyng, that other loves. Finally, he that is perfittely wise,
sporteth in this world with travail, and in trauailyng in books, is his
rest. We have not to say of all things, but of that we feel of them. For it
is an other manner to speak by similitude of a stranger, and of our own
experience. And in this case I say, that though we hope of no reward of the
goddis, nor honor among men, nor memory of the world to come: yet am I
right glad, to be al only a philosopher, to se how gloriously the
philosophers have passed their time. I demand one thing, when mine
understanding is dulled, in that I have to do, and when my memory is
troubled, in that I have to determyne, and when my body is compassed with
dolours, and when my heart is charged with thoughts, and when I am without
knowledge, and when I am set about with peryls, where can I be better
accompanied, than with wise men, or else redynge among books? In books I find
wysedom, whereby I may learn: also there I find worthynes, which I may follow: I
find there prudence, to counsel me, I find such as be sorrowful, with whom I
may weep. I find them there that be merye, with whom I may laughe: I find
there, simple folk, at whom I may sport: I find that is naught, which I may
leave: And finally, in books, I find, how in prosperity, I ought to behave
me: and how in adversity, I ought to guide me. O, how happy is that manne,
that has well red: And yet more happy is he, that though he knows much, yet
stays upon counsel. And if this be true generally, than much more is it
necessary, yt he keep the true way, which governs all other. It is a rule
infallible, that a prince being wise, can never be simply good, but very good:
and the prince that is ignorant, can not be simply ill, but very ill. A prince,
that is not well fortunate, his wisdom may greatly excuse him to his people,
of his mysfortune given to him by fortune. When a prince is greatly beloved of
his co^montie, and is virtuous of his person, than every man says, if he
have not good fortune: Al though our prince want good fortune, yet his worthy
virtues fail not: and though he be not happy in his ententes, yet at the
least he shows his wysdom in the mean season. And though fortune deny him
at one hour, yet at an other time. she agrees, by his wysedom. And contrary
wise, an unwise prince, and hated of his people, by yuell fortune, renneth into
great peril. For if ylle succeed to him in weighty mattiers, than incontinent
it shall be said, it is by reason of the ignorance of him self, or by ill
counsel of such as be about him: and if goodness succeed to him, it shall not
be attrybuted by reason of his good governance, but that fortune has suffered
it, and not by the circumspecte wisdom, that he has had in the mean
seasone, but that it was of the pity, that the goddis had of him. Than sith
it is thus, a virtuous and a worthy prince, in his ydell times, ought secretly
to read is books, and openly to common and counsel with wise men. And in case,
ill fortune will not permyt him, to take their counselles, yet at the least, he
shall recover credence among his subjects. I will say no more to you, but I
estem the knowledge of a wise person so much, that if I knew, that there were
shops of sciences, as there is of other marchaundise, I would give al yt I have,
only to learn, that a wise man lerneth in one day. Finally I say, that I will
not give, that litel that I have learned in one hour, for all the gold in the
world: And more glory have I, of the books that I have red, and of such
works, as I have written, tha^ of all the victories, that I have had, or of ye
realms that I have won.

What a vilayne said to the senators of Rome, in the presence of the
emperor. Cap. xxxi.
THis emperor, being sick, as it is aforesaid, on a day, as there were with
him diverse phisitio^s and orators, there was a purpose moved among them, how
greatly Rome was changed, not all only in edifices, but also in customs,
and was full of flaterers, and vnpepled of me^, that durst say the truth.
Than the emperor said: The first year, that I was consul, there came a poor
vilayne from the river of Danubie, to ask justice of the senate, ayenste a
censure, who did diverse extortions to the people: and he had a small face,
and great lyppes, and holowe eyes, his hear curled, bare heeded, his shoes of
a porkepes skyn, his cote of gotis hear, his gyldell of bulle rushes, and a
wyld eglantine in his hand. It was a strange thing to se him so monstrous:
and meruayl, to here his purpose. Certainly, when I saw him com into the
senate, I wend it had been some beast, in the figure of a man. And after I
had hard him, I iuged him one of the gods, if there be gods among men.
And as the custom in the senate was, that the complayntes of the poor persons
were hard, before the requestis of the rich: this villayne had license to
speak, and so began his purpose, wherein he showed him self as bold in
words, as extreme and base in his array, and said: O ye ancient fathers, and
happy people, I Miles, dwelling in a city on the river of Danubie, do salute
you Senators, that are here assembled in the sacred senate. The deeds do
permytte, and the goddis suffer, that the capytayns of Rome, with their great
pride have redused under subjection, the unhappy people of Germany. Great is
the glory of you Romans, for your battayles that ye have won throughout all
the world. But if writers say true, more greater shall be your infamy, in time
to come, for the cruelties that ye have done to the innocents. My
predecessors had people nyghe to the flode of Danubie, and because they did
ylle, the earth wared dry, and they drew to the frseshe water: than the water
was noyful to them, and they returned to the main land. What shall I say than?
your couetise is so great, to have steangers goods, and your pride so
renoumed, to command all strange lands, that the sea may not profit us, in
the depenes thereof, nor the earth, to assure us in the caves thereof. Therefore I
hope in the just gods, that as ye, without reason, have cast us out of our
houses and possessions: so other shall com, that by reason, shall cast you out of
Italy and Rome. And infallible rule it is, that he, that takes wrongfully an
other man's good, shall lose the right of his own. Regard ye Romans, though I
be a villain, yet I know, who is just and rightwise, in holding his own: and
who a tyrant, in possessynge others. There is a rule, that what so ever they,
that be ill, have gathered in many days, the gods takes fro them in one day:
and contrary wise, all that ever the good have lost in many days, the goddis
restores to them again in one day. Believe me in one thing, and have no doubt
therein, that of the unlawful wynning of the fathers, there follows the just
loss to their children. And if the gods took from them, that be ill, every
thing, that they have won, as soon as it is won, it were but reasone: but
in lettynge them alone, thereby they assemble by lyttel and little diverse
things, and than, when they think least thereon, is taken from them all at
ones. This is a just judgment of the goddis, that sith they have done ill to
diverse, that some should do ill to them. Certaynely it is not possible to any
virtuous man, if he be virtuous, that he take any taste in an other man's good.
And I am sore abashed, how a man, keeping an other man's good, can live one
hour. Sith he sees, that he has don iniure to the goddis, scla^dred his
neighbors, plesed his enmies, lost his friends, grieved them that he has robbed,
and above all, has put his own person in peril. This is a shameful thing
among men, and culpable before the goddis, the man that has the desire of
his heart, and the brydelle of his warkes at such liberty, that the lyttel,
that he takes and robs fro the poor, seems much to him: but a great deal
of his own, seems to him but lyttel. O what an unhappy man is he, whether he
be Greek, or latin, that without consideration, will change his good fame into
shame, justice into wrong, right into tyranny, or troth into lesynge, the
certain into uncertain, having annoyaunce of his own goods, and dye for
other men's? He that has his principal intention, to gather goods for his
children, and seek not for a good name, among them that be good: it is a just
cause, that he lose all his goods, and so without good name to to be shameful
among them that be ill. Let all covetous and auaricious people know, that
never among noble men was gotten good renoume, with spredynge abroad of ill
gotten goods. It can not endure many days, nor yet be hydden under covert
many years: a man to be holden rich among them that be rich, and an
honorable man among them that be honorable: for he shall be infamed, of that he
has gathered his riches, with great couetyse, or keeps it with extreme
avarice. O if these covetous people, were as covetous of their own honor, as
they be of other men's goods: I swear to you, that the lyttel worm or mothe,
that eats the gounes or clothes of such covetous people, should not eat the
rest of their life, nor the canker of infamy, distroye their good name and
faame at their deaths. Hark ye Romans, hark what I will say, I would to
the goddis, that ye could taste it. I se, that all the world hates pride, and
yet is there none, that follows mekenes and humility. Every man condempnethe
aduoutrie, and yet I see none, that lives chaste: Every man curses excess,
and I se none live temperately: every man prayseth patience, and I se none that
will suffer: every man blames sloth, and I se none, but they be ydel: every
one blames avarice, and yet every body robs. One thing I say, and not
without weeping: I say every manne, with his tongue only, prayseth virtue, and
yet they them selfs, with all their lymmes are servants unto vices. I say not
this only for the Romans, which been in Illirie: but I say it, by the
senators that I se in the senate. All ye Romans, in your devises about your
arms bear these words: Romanorum est debellare superbos, et parcere
subiectis, That is, it pertainethe to Romans, to subdewe them that be proud,
and to forgive subjects. But certainly ye may better say: hit partayneth to
Romans, to expel innocentis, and to trouble and vex wrongfully peasible
people. For ye Romans are but distroyers of peasible people, and thieves to
rob from other, that they sweat for.

Of diverse other things that the vylayne said before the senate. cap. xxxii.
O Ye Romans, said this vyllayn, what action have ye, that are brought up
nygh to the river of Thyber, against us, that are nyghe to the river of
Danubie? Have ye seen us friends to your ennemies? or have we declared us your
enemies? or have ye hard say, that we have left our own land, and
inhabyted any strange lands? or have ye hard, that we have rebelled against
our lords, or have troubled any strange realms? or have ye sent us any
ambassadors, to desire us to be your friends? or has any hooste of ours come
to Rome to distroye you, as our enmies? or has any king dyed in our realm,
that in his testament made you heirs to our realm? or what antyke law have
ye found, whereby we ought for to be your subjects? Of truth in Almayne
hereby, they have felt your tyranny, as well as we have herd of your renoume.
And more over I say, that the names of the Romans, and the cruelty of
tyrants, aryued together in one day upon our people. I wot not what ye will
say, that the goddis care not for the hardines of me^: for I see, he that has
much, does tyranny, to him that has but little. And he that has but
little, though it be to his infamy, will serve him that has much. So that
disordred men appoint the^ with secret malice, and secret malice gives place
to open theft: and the open robbery no man resists. And therefore it comes,
that the couetyse of an ill man necessarily is had to be complete, to the
preiudyce of many good men. One thing I will say, that either the goddis ought
to think, how these men shall have an end, or else that the world must
end: or else the world, to be no world: Or fortune must hold sure with you,
if all that ye have won in.viii.C. years, ye lose not in.viii. days. And where
as ye are become lords over many, ye shall become slaves to all the world.
Certaynely the goddis shall be unjust, without that thing come, that must
fall to the world hereafter. For that man that makes him self a tyrant
perforce, it is right, that he return to be a slave by Justice. And it is
reason, that sith ye have taken our miserable land, that ye keep us in
Justice. I have great marvel of you Romans, that ye send so smple persons to
be our iuges. For I swear to the goddis, they can not declare your laws, nor
understand ours. I wot not whether ye sent them thither or no, but I shall
show you, what they do there. They take openly, what so ever is delivered to
them: and they do their profytte with that they desire in secret. They
chastise the poor person greuousely, and they forbear for money, them that
be rich: they consent to many wrongs, to bring them after to the laws: and
without goods it boteth not to demand Justice: and finally, under ye color
that they be iuges, under the senate of Rome, they say they may rob all the
land. What is this ye Romans? shall your pride never have an end in
commandyng, nor your couetyse in robbynge? Say what ye will. If ye do it for
our children, charge them with yrons, and make them sclaues: If ye do it for
our goods, goo thither and take them: If our service does not content you,
stryke of our heedes. Why is not the knyfe so cruel in our throtes, as your
tyrannies be in our hearts? Do ye know, what ye have done ye Romans? ye
have caused us to swear, never to return to our wives: but to flee our
children, rather than to leave them in the hands of so cruel tyra^tes. We had
leauer suffer the beastly motions of the flesh for.xx. or.xxx. years, than to
dye without wound, leaving our children sclaues. ye ought not to do this ye
Romans. Alond taken per force, ought the better to be ruled, to the^tent that
the miserable captives, saying Justice duly ministered to them, should thereby
forgette the tyranny passed, and to set their hearts to perpetual servitude.
And sithe we are come to complain of the grefes that your Censures do upon the
fludde of Danubie, peradventure you of the senate will here us. Wotte ye what
they do? Hark, and I shall show you. If there come a right poor man, to
demand Justice, having no money to give, nor wine to present, nor oil to
promise: they feed him with wordis, saying, how he shall have Justice, but
they make him to waste the little that he has, and give him nothing, though
he demand much. And so the miserable person, that came to complain,
retourneth complaynyng on you all, cursynge his cruel destenies, and makes
exclamatio^ upon the rightwise goddis. I live with acornes in winter, and
cut down the grene corn in summer, and sometime I go a fyshynge for
pastyme, so that the most part of my living, is feedyng in the fields, and
ye wot not why: here me, and I shall show you. I se such tyrannies in your
censures, and such robberyes among the poor people, and I se such wars in
that realm, and hope of so small remedy in your senate, that I am determined,
as most unhappy, to banyshe my self out of mine own house, and honest company,
to thentent that my heart should not feel so great a hurt. It is a great pain
to suffer the overthrow of fortune: but it is a greatter ill, when one feleth
it, and can not remedy it: and yet without comparison my greattest grefe is,
when my loss may be remedied, and he that may, will not, and he that will, can
not remedy it. O ye cruel Romans, if the sorrows all only should be reduced
to memory, that we suffer, my tongue should be weary, and all my members faynte,
and mine eyes should weep bluddy tears, and my flesh would consume. This in
my land may be seen with eyes, hard with ears, and felt in propre person.
Certainly my heart departs, and my soul is troubled, and mine entrayles
break. And I believe yet, the goddis will have compassiion. I will desire you
to take my words for sclaunder. For ye Romans, if ye be Romans, ye may well
see, that the trouble, that we have, comes by men, and among men, and with
men, and by the hands of men. Than it is no marvel, though men feel it as
men. One thing comfort me, and diverse times among other, that be
unfortunate, it comes to such purpose, the which is, I think the goddis be
so ryghtwise, that their fierce and cruel chastisementes come not but by our
own cruel shrewdnes: and our secret sins awaketh us so, that we have open
justice. But of one thing I am sore troubled, because the goddis can not be
contented. For a good person, for a lyttel faut, is greatly chastised, and he
that is ill, for many fautes, is not punished at al. So thus the goddis forbear
some, and some have no mercy. Thus it seems, that the goddis will turment us by
the hands of such men as grieve us extremely. So that if there were any
justice in the world, when they chastise us with their hands, we should not
merit to have our heedes on the shulders. Therefore I say to you, ye Romans,
and swear by the immortal goddis, that in.xv. days, that I have been in Rome, I
have seen such deeds done in your senate, yt if the leest deed of them had been done at Danubie, the galowes and gibettes, had been hanged thycker of
thieves, than the vineyard with grapes and reysons. And since yt my desire has
seen, that it desires, my heart is at rest: in spredynge abroad the poison
that was in it. If my tongue has offended you in any thing, I am here ready, to
make recompense with my throat. For in good sothe, I had rather to win
honor, offering my self to the death, thanne ye should have it, in taking
my life fro me. Thus this vilain ended his purpose. Than the emperor said: How
think ye my friends, what kernel of a nut? What gold of filth? what grain of
straw? what rose of thorns? What marowe of bones, did he uncover? what reason
so hie? what words so well set? what troth so true, and what malice opened
he so? He discovered the duty of a good manne. And I swear to you, as I may
be delivered from this evil fever, that I have, that I saw this vilayn
standing a hole hour on the earth boldly, and we holdinge down our hedes
abashed, and could not answer him a word. The next day it was accorded in the
senate, to send new iuges to Danubie. And we commanded the vilaine to deliver us
in writing, all that he had said, that it might be regestred in the book of good
sayings of strangers. And the said vilayne, for his wise words, was made
patricien, and so tarried still at Rome, and for ever was sustained of the common
treasure.

How the emperor desired the wealth of his people, and the people his welthe.
ca. xxxiii.
IN the second year that Mar. was chosen emperor, the.xlv. year of his aege,
as he returned fro the wars, that he had in conqueryng the Germains and the
Aragons, whereby he got glory and riches for the Romans empire, he lay at
Salon to rest him, and to appointe his army, and to the intent, that the
Romans should apparel his triumph in Rome right glorious and rychly: There
was one thing done, that was never seen before in Rome. For the day of his
triumph, by all the people and consent of the senate, the prince Comodus, son
to Marcus Au. was chosen after the death of his father to be emperor
universal of thempire. He was not chosen by the petition of his father, for he
was against hit with all his power, saying, that the empire ought not to be
given for the lawde of them that be deed, but he should be chosen, for his
own good warkes. Often times this emperor would say, Rome shall be lost,
when the election shall be taken from the Senate, and the Emperor to enheryte
the empire by Patrimony.

Now to return where as we left. This emperor being at Salon, studied sore
to enter into Rome in good order, and Rome studied soore how to receive him,
as it appertained triumphantly for such a war. He was sore desired of
thempire: and ever he imagined, how to do pleasure to the people, and the
people were ready to dye in his service. Diverse times was moved a pleasant
purpose in the senate, which of these things was most to be loved: The
emperor to love the people of the empire, or the people of thempire
the emperor. On a day hit was determined, to set iuges in that case: There
were chosen the ambassadors of the Parthes and Roodes: and upon that effect
they had writynge. It was laid for the emperor, the good deeds that he had
done in his absence, and the tokens of love, that they had always showed in
his presence. And on an other day the emperor moved an other question before
the senate, saying, that it was a greatter glory, to have such subjects, than
the glory of the senate, to have such an emperor. Than the Senate said nay:
Affirming that it is a greatter glory that they had of him, than he could have
of them. And in this manner the emperor gave the glory to the people, and the
people to the emperor. Thus in sport and play they took judges again. It was
a merueylous thing to se the joy that they al had to prove their intentes. And
the good emperor for a memory gave the laud to the people, because of their
great obedience and service, and extreme love that he had found in them: And
the happy people recounted the great clemency and mercy that was in the
emperor, and his virtue and worthynes in gouernynge, his honesty of living,
and his force and valiantnes in conqueringe. It was a great thing to se the
honor that the people gave to the emperor, and the good renoume that the emperor
gave to the people. The writings were given to the strange ambassadors, to
thentent that the people might learn to obey their princes: and princes to love
their people. To the end that by such examples, as it was reason, the good
people should enforce them selfs, and the ill to withdraw. Thus this emperor
adressed his enter with his capitaynes and captives, and Rome apparayled them
with all their senators and people to receive him. It was a huge thing to se
what people was at Rome to go forth to mete him, and what people were with the
emperor to enter. They that were at Salon had their eyes and also their
hearts at Rome: and they that were at Rome had their hearts at Salon. In
such wise that their eyes daseled with that they saw, and their hearts aked
for that they hoped to se. There is no greatter pain, than when the heart is
deferred fro that it longs sore to have.

How the emperor gave Lucilla his daughter license to sport her at his palace.
ca. xxxiiii.
IT is to be known, that the Romans had a custom, that in the monethe of
Ianiuer, they should make triumphs to their emperors: and in the same seson
that the triumphs were apparailed, Faustin thempresse caused diverse high
persons to pray the emperor to give license to a daughter of his, to com from
there as she was kept, to the palace, and sport her at the feasts. This
maiden was named Lucie or Lucyll: She was higher than the prince Commodus her
brother: she was of a goodly gesture and well proporcioned of her body, and well
be loved of her mother. And she resembled her not all only in her beauty,
but also in her living. And though the request was pytifull, and they that
made it familier, and he to whom it was made was the father, and the demaunder
was the mother, and she for whom it was made, was the daughter: the emperor
granted it, but not without great displeasure. Nevertheless Faustine was full
glad, and as soon as she had obtained license, she brought her daughter to
the palace. And so when the day of the great feast and triumph was comme, the
damoysell Lucylle being out of governance, and saying her self at large,
trustinge thanne upon her own innocencye, took no head of any strange
malice, laughed with them that laughed, talked with them that talked, and
beheld them that beheld her, and without care she thought that none thought
ill of her, because she thought ill of none: yet in those days a maiden to
laugh among men was reputed as much as a woman to have done aduoutrie with the
priests of Greece, so great was the honesty of Romayn women esteemed. And
lightness of maidens was a great infamy: for they were wors punished for one
open lyghtnes, than for two secret fautes. Among all other seven things the
women did observe surely, that is to wit, not to speak much at feasts, not
to eat much at bankettes, to drink no wine in their health, nor to speak
alone with men, nor to lift up their eyes in the temples, nor to stand long
lokynge out at wyndowes, nor to go out of their houses without their husbands.
The woman taken with any of these dyshonest things, was always after reputed
infamed. Many things were suffered of persons in small reputation, that were
not suffered in persons of honor. For the noble women could not co^serue the
reputation of their estate, but by reason of keeping their person in great fear
and good order. Al things done unkindly is syn, and may be amended: but the
dishonest woman is always shamed. The noble ladies, if they will be taken as
ladies, wha^ they excede other in riches, the less lyce^ce ought they to have
to go wandering about. Certainly the plenty of goods, and the liberty of
psons, should not be a spur to prick the^ forward, but rather a brydell to keep
them in their closettes. And this is said, for because that during the said
feastis, the damoysel Lucille, as a young maiden, and Faustyne, her loving
mother not being old, sommetyme a foot, and sometime riding on horseback,
sommetyme openly, and sommetyme meruaylous secretly, sommetymes with company,
and sommetymes without company, sommetyme on the day, and now and than by
night, they would walk abroad in the streets of Rome to se the feldes of
Vulcan, in gardeynes Saturnynes, and drink at the conduites of Neros water,
and sommetyme pass the time by the fair river of Thiber, and in all such
other pleasant sportes as apperteyned to their age. And though the fore ryped
primetyme provoked them thereto, yet the gravity of such ladies should not
suffer it. I will say one thing, to thentent noble women should take
aduertiseme^t thereby, and that is this: I know not which was the greatteste
dissolution, either the walking abroad of Faustyne and Lucylle through the
streets and other places, or else the boldness of ill speakers, speaking
against their persons and good names. The withdrawyng and kepinge of women
cloose is a brydell to the tongues of all men: and the woman that does
otherwise, otherwise puts her good name in danger. Of truth it were
better for a woman never to be borne, than to be defamed. Among the Romans
the lygnage of the Cornelies were had in great estimation. For of them all,
never none was found a cowarde, nor a woman defamed. The hystories show, that
ones a lady of that lygnage being only defamed, was hanged on the galowes by
the hands of her own kynsfolke. Surely it was well done of the Romans, to
the intent that the wyckednes of one woman should not suffer ill fame to run
upon the hole lygnage: where is there noblenes without shame? The things that
to wche honor, ought not to be hyd but amended by Justice, and to put them to
death, that lose their good fame. It is not sufficient for a person to be
good: but it is necessary that he put fro him all occasions that are reputed
to be ill. All the losses that a man may have of any temporal goodis, can not
countrepeyse the leest loss of good fame. A man that lays his good name for
a farthynge at a but of this world, at a hundred shottes scantly shall he
shoot one aryght. And contrary wise the man that fears no shame, nor will
not have his person in reputation, there is no hope of goodness in him. Than
this emperor, as a shipmaister, sailing in most fair and calm wether,
forecastethe, and is in greatte thought and fear of tempests and storms to
comme, in the feastis of his greatte glory, was in doubt of these two ladies,
lest suddenly any mysfame should follow. And certainly he had great cause. For
hit is an infallyble rule of envious fortune, that this present felicity is
given with a prycke of a sudden fall of myschaunce. In things natural, we
se sometime the sea caulme, and yet forthewith follows a peryllous storm, and
consequently the great heat of the day is sign of thunder at night. I say
fortune coming with some present delight or pleasure, is a token that by
flattering us, she has made ready her snares to catch us. When the miller is
sure, he dresseth his water gaate, and the labourer when it reyneth not,
covers his house, thinking that an other time the wethers or raynes will
fall thereon and trouble him: In like wise a wise and a virtuous man ought to
think, as long as he lives in this world, he holds his felicity but at
adventure: and his adversity for his natural patrimony. Among all them that
could rejoice in prosperity, and help them self in adversity, this
emperor Marcus Aurelius was one: which for any flatterynges that Fortune
could show him, he never trusted in them: nor for myshappe that he had in
this life, he never dispayred.

What Marcus the emperor said to a Senator as touching triumphs. Cap. xxxv.
When these feasts were passed, as Sertus Cheronense says, a senator named
Aluinus said to the emperor, the same night that the triumph ceased: Sir
rejoice you sithe that this day ye have given so great riches to the common
treasure of Rome: and I have seen your person in the triumph of glory: and to
the world to come of you and your house you have left perpetual memory. The
emperor hering these wordis, said in this manner: Fre^des it is good reason we
believe, the hu^ter knows the fiersnes of vestis, the physician the propretie
of herbs, the mariner the perils of rocks, the capitaines the chances of
war, and the emperor that triumphs, the joys that he has of triumphs.
As god help me, and as ever I have part with my predecessors, and as ever I
have good fortune, the thoughts that I have had for these festes, have been
far greatter than the fears that I have had in all the iourneyes and
battayles before. And the reason thereof is very euydent to them that have clear
understanding: For always in cruel battles I was ever in hope to have glory,
and feared not the overthrow of fortune. What could I lose in battle?
Nothing but the life, that is the leest thing that men have, and always in
these triumphs I fear to lose renown, which is the greatest gift that the
goddis have given me. O how happy is that man, that loses his life, and
leaves behind him perpetual memory? Let every man understand this that
will, and say what they list: that among noble and valiant barons, he
dies not, that leeseth his life, and leaves good renown after him: and much
less time lives he that has an ill name, though he lived many years. The
ancyent philosophers reckened not the life of a man, though he lived many
years, but they reckened the good works that he had done. The senate was
importune upon me, that I should take this triumph, as ye know well: and I
can not tell which was greattest, their desire or my resistance. You know not
the truth why I say thus. I did it not because of ambicion, and for
covetousness of glory, but it was because I fere ye humain malice. At the day
of the triumph there was not so great joy showed by the simple persons, but
the hyd envy was greatter among the greattest persons. This glory passes in
one day, but envy abides a hole year. The plentifulle realm of Egypt, so
happy in the blodshed of their enmies, as in the waters of Nyle, had a law
immouable. They never denied their mercy to the captives overcome: nor they
gave no triumph to their capitaynes ouercomers. The Caldees mock at the
Romayne triumphs, affirmyng how there is not given so great chastisement to
the captain of Egipte overcome, as the empire Romayne give to the ouercomer,
when tryumphe is given to him. And surely the reason is good, for the
thoughtefull capytayne, when he has chased his enemies, that Rome has in
strange lands, with his own propre spear, in payement for his travail they
give him enemies in his own propre land. I swear to you, that all the
Roman capitaynes have not left so many enmyes deed by swerd, as they have
recovered ylle wyllars the day of their tryumphes. Let us leave the Caldees,
and speak we of our ancient Romans, which if they might return now
again in to the world, they would rather be tied fast to the chariottes as
captives, than to sit in them as vyctours. And the cause is, their neighbors
saying them goinge as captives, would move their hearts to set them at
liberte, so that the glory of their tryumphes is a mean to cause them to be
persecuted and pursued. I have read in writing, and herd of my predecessors,
and have seen of my neighbors, that the abundance of felicity has caused
cruel envy to be in many. O in what peril are they that with particular honor
would be exalted among other? In the most higheste trees the force of wyndes is
most advanced. And in most sumptuous buildings lyghteninge and thunder
doothe most hurt, and in greatte thycke and dry busshes the fyers kendle
most easelye: I say that in them that fortune has raised most hyghly,
against them spredeth the greattest poison of envy. All such as be virtuous
say: The mo ennemies they subdue to the common welthe: the moo envious they
recover of their renoume. One ought to have great compassion of a virtuous
manne: because where he trauaileth to be good, there abides one thing in him,
of the which all only at the death he sees the end. And that is, the more a
man recouereth here renoume among strangers, the more he is persecuted with
envy among his own nations. Homer shewethe in his Illiades, that Caluitio
king of the Argiues was expert in clergy, valiant in arms, and endued with
diverse graces, beloved with his people, above al other he was a great lover of
his goddis and worshypper of them. This good king had a custom, that in all
things that he had to do, he would first ask counsel in the temples of the
gods: he would begin no war against other, nor ordeyne no new law nor
custom in his realm: nor give answer to the ambassadors, nor put no
trespasours to death: nor set no tribute on his people: but first he would go
to the temple, and make diverse sacrifices to know the will of the gods. And
because he went so often to the oracles, he was demanded what answer the
goddis made to him in secret, saying he was so importunate. Then he answered
and said: I demand of the gods, that they should not give me so little,
that every man might abate and overcome me: Nor also that they should give me
so much, that every manne should hate me: but my desire is to have a mean
estate, wherewith every manne might love me. For I had lever be fellow with
many in love, than to be king of all with hatred and envy.

Of the great reproach that the emperor gave to his wife Faustyne and her
daughter. Capitu. xxxvi.
AFter the feasts of the triumph before said, this good emperor willing to
satysfye his heart, and to advertise Faustine his wife, and to teache his
innocent daughter, without knowledge of any other, he sent for them and said:
I am not content Faustine, with that your daughter does, and yet less with
that you do, which are her mother. These maidens, for to be good maidens, ought
well to know, how to obey their mothers. And the mothers to be good mothers,
ought to know how to bring up their children. The father is excused in gyuynge
counsel, if the mother be virtuous, and the daughter shamefast. It is a
greatte shame to the father, being a noble man, that his wife being a woman,
should chastise his son: And a great inconuenie^ce of the mother, being a
mother, that her daughter should be chastised by the hands of her father. There
was a law ordained by the Rodiens, that the father with the daughter, if she
had a mother, nor the mother with the son, if he were a man, should not
entermedle each with other, but alonely men with men, and women with women,
ought to be brought up. And thextremitie of the law was such, that among them
that dwelled in one house, seemed yt the fathers had no daughters, nor the
mothers no sons. O Rome, I weep not to se thy streets vnpaued, nor that there
is so many gutters in thy houses, nor that the batylmentes fall down, nor the
tymbre hewed down, nor for the mynyshynge of thine habitantes, for all this
the time brings, and the time bears away: but I weep for the, and weep for
the again, to se the unpeopled of good fathers, and unprovided in the
nourishing of their sons. Our country began to faille utterly, when the
doctrine of sons and daughters was enlarged, and their bridell let go at
liberty. For there is now such boldness in men children, and so little
shamefastnes in women children, with the dishonestie of the mothers, that where
as one father suffised for.xx. sons, and one mother for.xxx. daughters,
now.xx. fathers, scantly dare undertake to bring up well one son, and.xxx.
mothers, one daughter. I say to you thus Faustin, you remember not how you ar a
mother, for you give more liberty to your daughter, than ought to be suffered.
And you Lucill remember not, how you are a daughter: For you show to have more
liberty, than requires for a young maiden. The greattest gift that the
goddis have given to the matrones of Rome is, because they are women, they keep
them self close and secret: and because they be Romans, they are shamefaste.
The day, when the women want the fear of the goddis secretelye, and shame of
men openly, believe me, either they shall fail the world, or the world
them. The commonwealth requires so greatte necessity, that the women that
dwell therein, should be as honest, as the capitaynes be valiant. For the
capitaynes going to war, defend them, and the women that abide at home,
conserve them. As a. iiii. years passed ye saw the great pestilence, and I
demanded then to have a count of the people, and I found, that of a. C.xl.M.
women well living.lxxx.M. dyed: And of.x.M. ill womenne, in manner they escaped
all. I can not tell for which I should weep, either for the lack, that we
have of the good and virtuous women in our common welthe, or else for the
grievous hurt and damage, that these ill and wicked women do to the youth of
Rome. The fire that brenneth in mount Ethna, does not so greatte damage to
them that dwell in Scycille, as one ylle woman does in the circuit of Rome. A
fierce beast and a perilous, ennemie to the common wealth, is an ill woman: for
she is of power to do much harm, and is not apt to follow any goodness. O
how many realms and kings read we of, to be lost by the ill governance of
women, and to resyste against them has been need of wysedom, peryls, money,
force, and worthynes of many men. The vices in a woman is as a grene read, that
boweth every way: but the liberty and dishonestie is as a dry kix, that
breaks: in such wise that the more ill they utter, the more unlikely is the
redres thereof ageyn. Behold Faustin, there is no creature that more desires
honor, and wors keeps it, than a woman. And that this is true, se by Justice,
by orations, by writynge, and other trauayles, manne gets renown: but
(without it be by flattering and fair speaking) unto this hour, by antyke
writing, we can read of few women or none, that either by writing, redynge,
workinge with nedell, spynnyng, or by weauyng, have gotten them any great
renoume. But as I say of one, I say of an other. Certainly of diverse we read,
by keeping them close in their houses, well occupied in their besynesses,
temperate in their words, faithful to their husbands, well ordered in their
persons, peasible with their neighbors, and finally being honest among
their own famylye, and shamefaste among strangers, such have attained great
renown in their life, and left eternal memory of them after their death. I
wol tell you an antike histore, as profitable to restreyne our vices, as it did
than augment virtues, and it is this: The realm of Lacedemoniens (as Plato
shows) was at a season more dissolute by the unthriftiness of women, than
infamed by the cruelty of men: so that of al manner nations they were called
Barbariens. What time Greece as a mother, called philisophie of philosophers,
Lygurge, a wise philosopher in knowledge, and a right just king to govern,
partly with his doctrine right profitable, and partly with his pure life,
made laws in the said realm, whereby he extirped all vices, and planted all
virtues. I can not tell, which of these two were most happy, The king,
having so obedient people, or else the realm, to have so rightful a king.
Among all other laws, for women he made one greatly to be commended: He
commanded, that the father that dyed, should give nothing to his daughter. And
an other, that neither lyuinge nor dienge, he should give any money to mary her
with: to the intent that none should marye her for her riches, but all only
for her goodness: and not for her beauty, but for her virtues. And where as
now, some be unmarried, because they are poor, so then they abode unmarried,
because they were shamefulle and vicious. O time, worthy to be desired, when
maidens hoped nothing to be married with their fathers goods, but by the
virtuous works of their own persons. This was the time, called the golden
world: when neither the daughter feared to be disherited by the father in his
life, nor the father to dye sorye for leaving her without remedy at his
death. O Rome, cursed be he that first brought gold into thy house: and cursed
be he, that first began to hurde up treasure. Who has made Rome to be so
rich of treasure, and so pore of virtues? Who has made men wedde villaynes
daughters, and leave the daughters of senators unmarried? What has made, that
the rich man's daughter is demanded unwilling, and ye daughter of a pore man
none will desire? what has caused, that one mariethe a fool with five.C.
mark, rather than a wise woman with.x.M. virtues? Than I say, that in this
point the flesh vanquysheth the flesh, and er ever the vanytie of the
malice thereof is vanquished. How comes it, yt a covetous person will sooner
now adays have a wife, that is rich and foul, than one that is poor and
fair? O unhappy women that bring forth children, and more unhappy be the
daughters, that are borne, which to have them married, no store is set by the
blodde of their predecessors, nor the favor of their friends, nor the value
of their warkes, nor the beauty of their persons, nor the clennes of their
life. O cursed world, where the daughter of a good man, without money, shall
have no marriage. But it was not wont to be so. For in the aunciente time,
when they treated of maryages, first they spoke of the persons, and after of
the goodis: not as they do at this hour, in this unhappy time: for now they
speak first of goods: and last of all, of the person. In the said golden
world, fryste they spoke of the virtues, yt the person was endowed with, and
when they were married, in sporting, they would speak of the goods. When
Camillo triumphed upon the Gauls or frenchemen, he had then but one son, and
he was such one, that his person merited great lawdes. And for the renome of
his father, diverse kings desired to have him to their son: and diverse
senators desired to have him to their son in law. This young manne, being
of the age of.xxx. years, and the father at.lx. was importunatelye styred by
his naturalle friends, and desired of strange kings, for to mary him: but
always the old Camyll repugned the counsel of his friends, and the
importunity of the strangers. when it was demanded, why he determined not
upon some marriage for his son, sithe thereby should follow the restefulle
life of the young man, and the quietness of him self in his aege, He answered:
I will not mary my son, because sum offer me rich daughters, some noble of
lygnage, some young, and some fair: but there is none has said to me, I give
you my virtuous daughter. Certainly Camylle meryted to have triumph, for that
he did. And he deserved eternal memory, for that he said. I say to you
Faustine al these words, because I se you led your daughter to the Theaters
and plays, and do bring her into the Capitol. You put her to the keeping of
the sword players, you suffer her to se the toumblers, and yet you do not
remember, that she is young, and you not aged: ye go into the streets without
license, and play by the ryuers. I find no vilany therein, nor think that your
daughter is ill: but I say it, because you give occasion, that she should not
be good. Beware Faustine, never trust in the case of the flesh of young
people. Nor have no confidence in old folks. For there is no better way, than
to flee the occasion of al things. For this intent the virgins vestales are
closed up between the walls, to eschew the occasions of open places, not to
be more light and foolyshe, but to be more sad and virtuous, fleing
occasions. The young shall not say, I am young and virtuous, nor the old shall
not say, I am old and broken. For of necessite, the dry flax will brenne in
the fire: and the grene flagge smoke in the flamme. I say, that a man being a
diamonde enchaced among men, yet of necessity he ought to be quick and merry
among women. And as wax melts in the heat, we can not deny, that though
the wodde be taken fro the fire, and the ymbres quenched, yet never the les the
stones oftentime remain hot and brennyng. In like wise the flesh, though
it be chastised with hot and dry maladies, or consumed by many years with
travail, yet concupiscence abides still in the bones. What need is it to
blasen the virtues, and deny our naturalities? Certainly there is not so
crooked a horse, but if he se a mare, he will bray ones or twice. There is no man
so young nor old, but let him se young damoysels, either he will give a sigh or
a wish. In all voluntary things I deny not, but that one may be virtuous: but
in natural things, I confess every man to be weak. When ye take the wood fro
the fire, it leueth brennyng: Wha^ somer comes, the cold winter cessethe:
when the sea is caulme, the wawes leave their vehemente mouynge: when the son
is set, it beshyneth not the world. I will say that than, and not before, the
flesh will cesse to peyn us, when it is laid in the grave. Of the flesh we
are borne, and in the flesh we live, and in the flesh we shall dye. And
thereby it follows, that our good life shall sooner end than our flesh.
Oftentimes some wholesome flesh for meat corrupts in an unwholesome pot: and
good wine sometime sauoureth of the foiste. I say, though that the works of
our life be virtuous: yet shall we feel the stenche of the weak flesh, I say
this Faustyne, since age can not resist the hot enterprise, how can the tender
members of youth resist it? you being the mother, without you go the right way,
she being your daughter can not go the same way. The Romayne matrones, if they
will nourishe their daughters well, ought to keep these rules. When they se, that
they would goo abroad, than break their legs: and if they would be gasing,
than put out their eyes, and if they will hark, stop their ears: if they will
give or take, cut of their hands: if they dare speak, sow up their mouths:
and if they will entend any lyghtnes, bury them quick. words ought to be given
to an ill daughter: and instead of presents and gyftis at her weddyng, give
her worms: and for her house, a grave. Take heed Faustine, if you will have
great joy of your daughter, take fro her the occasions, whereby she shall be
ylle. To vndersette a house, behooves diverse proppes: And if the principalles be
taken away, hit will fall down. I will tell you, womenne are so fraylle,
that with kepers with great pain, they can keep them self: and for a small
occasion they will lose all to gether. O how mamy ill has there ben, not
because they would be so, but by cause they followed such occasions, the which
they ought to have eschewed? It is for me to enter into this battle, but yet
it is not in me to attain the vyctorie. It is for me to enter into the sea,
yet it lies not in my hands to escape the peril. It is in the hands of a
woman to entree into the occasion, and after that she is therein, hit is not in
her hands to deliver her from fault.

How the emperor counsayled Faustine, to eschew ill occasions fro her
daughter. cap. xxxvii.
PAraduenture Faustine ye will say to me, that none may speak to your daughter
Lucylle, but if you here hit: nor se her, but in your syghte, nor hyde her, but
you know where: nor make none appointment, with out your knowledge. And at
this hour you know not, that they that do hate her, and would her ill, what
dishonor their tongues do speak of her. New love in young bloudde in the
springinge time and flouryshynge youth, is a poison, that forthewith spredethe
in to every vain: It is an herb, that by and by enters the entrayles: a
swownyng, that incontinently mortifieth all the members, and a pestilence, that
sleeth the hearts: and finally it makes an end of all virtues. I wot not
what I say yet, al though I know what I will say: For I would never blasen
love with my tongue, without I were sore hurt in mine understanding. Ouyde
says in his book of the art of love. Love is I wot not what: that comes I
wot not whens: who sent it I wot not: it engenders I wot not how: it is
contented I wot not wherewith: it is felt I wot not how often, nor I wot not
wherefore. And finally love takes rote without breaking of the flesh
outward, or percinge the entrayles inward. I wot not what Ouide means
hereby: but I trow when he said these words, he was as far banysshed from
him self, as I am at this time from my self. O Faustin, they that love
together, show the signs of their hearts by diverse ways, and in slepyng they
reason and speak: and by signs they understand each other. The great voice
outewarde is sign of little love inward: and the great inward love keeps
silence outward. The entrayles within embraced in love, cause the tongue
outward to be muet. He that passes his life in love, ought to have his mouth
close. And to the entente that ye shall not think, that I speak fables, I
will prove this by ancient hystories. We find aunciently, that in the
year.ii.C. and.lx. after the foundation of Rome, Estrasco a young Romayne that
was dombe, and Veronne a fair lady of the Latins, that was dombe also. These
two saw each other on the mount Celyoit at a feast, and there fell in love each
with other. And their hearts were as soore fixed in love, as their tongues were
tied for words. It was a meruaylous thing to se them, and fearful to note
here. The young lady came fro Salon to Rome: and he went fro Rome to Salon, by
the space of.xxx. years together without the wityng of any person, nor they
two spoke not. Than at the last died the husband of the lady Veronne, and the
wise of Estrasco, and than they discouerd their love, and treated a marriage
between them, of whom descended the noble lygnage of our Scipions: which were
more lyberalle in the feats of arms, than their father and mother were in
their tongues. Than Faustine mark this thing: Little advantage it had been to
have cut out the tongues of the two do^be folks, to have remedied their love,
and not to have cut out their hearts.

Also I shall tell you of Massinissa a worthy knight of Numedie, and Sopharise
a famous lady of Carthage, al only by one sight, as they saw each other on a
ladder, he declared his desire unto her: and she knowing his lust, breaking
the oores of fear, and lyftynge up the ankers of shame, incontinent raised the
sails of their hearts, and with the ships of their persons, they joined each
to other. Here may we gather, how the first sight of their eyes, and knowledge
of their persons, and the leage of their hearts, and the marriage of their
bodies, and the pardition of their estates, and the infamy of their name, in
one day, in one hour, in one moment, and in one step of a ladder were
agreed. What will ye that I say more to this purpose? Do ye not know that
Helayne the Greek, and Paris the Troyan, of two strange nations and of far
countries, with one only sight in a temple, their wylles were so knyt together,
that he took her as his captive, and she aboode his prisoner. In Paris appeared
but small force, and in her but lyttel resistance. So that in manner these two
young persons, the one procuring to vanquishe, and the other sufferinge to be
vanquisshed, Paris was cause of his fathers death: and Helayne of the infamy
of her husband, and they both of their own deaths, loss to their realms,
and sclaunder to all the world. All this love caused one only sight.

When great king Alexander would have given bataile to the Amazons, the queen
capitayn of them no less fair than strong and virtuous, came to a river
side, and the space of an hour each of them beheld other with their eyes
without speaking of any word, and when they returned to their tents, the
fiersnes was turned into sweet wa^ton amorous words.

When Pyrrhe the faythefull defender of the Tarentynes, and renoumed king of
Epirotes, was in Italy, he came to Naples, and he had not ben there but one
day, the same season there was a lady in the same city named Gamalicice of a
high lygnage, and greatly esteemed in beauty: The very same day she was gotten
with child and shamed through out al Italy, and was thruste out of the city,
and after she was delivered of child, she was slain, by one of her own
brethren.

Also Cleopatra in the province of Bithinye, in the wod Sehyn, made a goodly
banquet or solemn feast to Marcus Anthonius her lover. And though she was not
very honest, yet had she with her right chaste women: and thus the banquet
enduryng a great part of the night, and the wod being thick, the young
damsels were not so wily to hyde them, but the young men Romans found them:
so that of.lx. daughters of senators.lv. were gotten with child among the
thycke bushes: which thing made a great sclandre in the people, and augmented
the infamy of Cleopatre, and minished the honesty of Marc Anthony. Thus as I
have showed of a small nombre, I could say of many other. Al men are not men,
nor all women be not women. I say it because I would it should be said: let it
touch them that it touches, and let them that can, understand me. There is
some ships, that are so light, that they will sail with a little wind, and
there be some milles that will grind with a little water. I say there be
some women so brittel, that as a glass with a fyllop will break, and will slyp
with a little mire. Show me Faustin, have you suffered your daughter to speak
but with her uncles, and kept company but with her cosins? I say in this case
as much wilenesse has the mother as the daughter to run in peril. Do you
not know, that the quick fire does not forbere the wod be it wete or dry, but
in likewise it consumes the hard stones? Do you not know, that the hongre
excessive causes beasts to devour with their tethe the thing that was bredde
in their entrayles? Do you not know, that the gods made a law over al
things, except on lovers, because they may not abide it? And doubtless it is
ryghtwysely done, that Rome condemns not these folyshe innocents, because
they have none understanding. The gods give no peyn to amorous people,
because they are deprived fro reason. Ye know when I was censure, there was a
young woman that had a child by her own father, and an other that had a child
by her son, and a niese by her propre uncle: and there was sentence given on
them, that the fathers should be cast to the lions, and the children buried
quycke, and the mothers were burnt in the camp of Mars. The mattier was so
horrible to here, that I might not endure to se the cursed men. And I commanded
by my decrees, that none should be so bold to speak in such a case any more.
And if this case were fearful to men, than certaynely the Romayne matrones
ought to live chastely. Than if the fire of the father do chaufe the
daughter, enflameth kynsfolke, and bourne them self: ye may be sicre, if he
find after either cousyn or fair sister, the flames of his concupiscence will
not leave to take hold on her for any parentage. If this riotous flesh will
obey reason, than it may be, that your daughter may speak liberally with her
cousins: but since that passion repugneth so much at reason, I council you
trust not to much in her brethren. you see by experience: that the worm that
is bredde in the thymbre, eats the same tymbre: and the moothes that are
bredde in the clothe, eats the same clothe. I say that sommetyme a man
brings up in his house some person, that after takes his life fro him.
Faustine take this that I have said for a warnyng, and these last words I give
you for council, If you will keep your self from thought, and your daughter
fro peril, always let your daughter be occupied with some good works. When the
hands are occupied with any good exercise, than the heart is void fro many
ydell and vayn thoughts. Every lightness done in youth breaks down a loope
of the defense of our life: but ydelnesse, whereby our envy enters, is it,
which opens the gate to al vices. Faustine will you wite: I se daily the
parditon of the young Romayne daughters. For as soon as they be borne, they
presume to be amorous: they as vnthoughtfull, with the rechelesnes of the
father, and wantonness of the mother, leave the just travail, and take unjust
idelnes. Of ydell motion and outrageous thoughts the eyes take license without
leave, the mind alters, and the will is hurt: and finally thinking to be
the white, that amorous men shote at, they remain as a butte full of al vices.
And in conclusion there is nothing that more rechaceth the balle of the
thought (in this play) thanne the hand set a work therewith.

What thought Marcus the emperor took for the marriage of his daughters. ca.
xxxviii.
THan the good emperor Marc having a clear understanding, and a quiet wit,
took right great head of things that were paste, prudently wayinge things
present, and things to come. Saying that the pardition of princis, lay al in
will, totally gyuinge them self either to strange things, forgetting their
own, or else to entend to their own, nothing regardinge strange things. His
heart was so agreeable to him, that neither the high businesses of them: nor for
all the affairs of his house, he would not leave one of thempire vnsped. I
say this, because this emperor Marcus had four daughters, whose names were
Lucylle, Porsena, Matrina, and Domitia. All resembled their mother in excellent
beauty, but they resembled not their father in honesty and vertuousnes. And
though they were in governance under their maystresses out of his presence,
yet he had them always in memory: and the elder they were, the more study and
thought he took for them: and when they came to co^plete age, he studied to find
provision for them. It was a laudable custom, that the daughters of the
officers of the Senate, should not marye without license, nor the emperors
daughter without the aduysemente of the senate. Than it was so, that one of the
said princesses his daughters, being of aege, and of will to be married, her
father saying her importunity, to accomplish her desire, because he was
sick, he sent for Faustyne, that she should goo and commune in the senate.
The which with all her power she withstode, because that secretly she had
treated for an other marriage for her daughter. And openly she excused her
self, saying, that her daughter was to young and tender of aege: and as the
goddis had given age sufficient to the father, so had not the daughter of years
When the emperor understood this, he called Faustyne to his bed side, where
as he lay, and said: Diverse things are dissimuled in particular persons, the
least of them is not to be suffered in the^ that should ensign all other. The
prince is never well obeyed, but if he have good credence among his people. I
say this Faustin, because you do one thing in secret, and say an other
openly. Here in fails the credence of so high a lady, and puts
inconvenience in the authority of so great an empire. If ye suppose my good
desires be sinister in your heart for the wealth of your own children: how
should we hope than in any of your good works for the children of strangers?
It seems to you better, to give your daughter to them that dema^d her of the
mother, and refuse them that the father does choose. Certainly because ye be a
woman, you deserve pardon: but in that you are a mother, you augment your faut.
Do you not know, that marriages are guyded sum by fortune, and some by
virtues and wisdom? Such as demand the daughters of the fathers, believe me,
their eyes benne moore upon their own propre utility, than upon the wealth
of an other. I know well, you bring forth the chyldern, but the goddis will
mary them, sith they have endewed them with so meruaylous beauty. Do you not
know, that the beauty of women sets strangers on desire, and puts
neighbors in suspection, to great me^ it gives force, to mean men envy, to
the parents infamy, and peril to the person self? With great pain it is
kept that is desired of many. Of truth I say the beauty of women is
nothing but a sign for ydell folk: and an erly waking for them that be
light: where as of the strange desires lies the renome of them self. And I
deny not, but that a light person sercheth sooner a woman with a fair face than
one of honest living. But I say, that a woman, that is married only for her
beauty, may hope in her age to have a sorye life. It is an infallible reule,
that she that was married for her fairness, is hated for her fowlenes. O what
travail he offreth him self unto, that marieth a fair woman? It behooves him
to suffer her pride, for beauty and folly always go together. Also he must
suffer her expenses. For folly in the heed, and beauty in the face been two
worms, that frete the life, and wastes the goods. Also he must suffer her
ryottes, for a fair woman will that none but she have her commandementes in
the house: Also he must suffer her nyce mynionnesse, for every fair woman will
pass her life in pleasure: Also he must suffer her presumption, for every
fair woman will have preeminence before al other. Finally he that marieth with
a fair woman, aparaileth him to a right great adventure: and I shall tell you
wherefore. Surely Carthage was never so enuyronned with Scipions, as the house
of a fair woman is with light persons. O unhappy husband, when his spirit
is at rest, and the body sleping, than these light persons will come about his
house, drieng his body with ielousy, casting their eyes to the wyndowes,
scalynge the walls with ladders, or clyminge over, singyng sweet songs,
playeng on diverse instruments, watchinge at the gates, treting with baudes,
vncoueryng the house, and waitynge at every corner thereof. Al these things, in
case they shote at the prick of the woman's beauty, they leave not to shote at
the butte of the sorrowful husbands good name. And whether this be true or
not, report me to my self, that married me with your beauty: and let them wite
of my renoume that go so about the city. I say much, but truly I feel more.
No man complayneth of the goddis for gyuynge him a foul wife, among his
destenies. White silver is not wroughte but in black pytche: and the tender
tree is not conserved but by the hard rynde. I say the man that marieth a
foul wife, ledeth a sure life, let every man choose as he lysteth: and I say
a man that marieth a fair wife, casts his good fame at hasarde, and puts
his life in peril. All the infamy of our predecessors stood in none exercysinge
of deeds of arms: and now all the pastime of the Romayne youth is to serve
ladies. When a woman is famed to be fair, than every man gothe thither, and
takes great pain to serve her, and the women woll be seen. I say Faustine,
you never saw a young damoysel Romayne, greatly renoumed in beauty, but
either in deed or in suspection there followed some ill name of her. In that
little that I have read, I have hard of diverse fair women, both of greece,
Italy, Parthe, and Rome: and they be not put in remembrance, because they were
fair, but for the greatte perils and heavy chances that by their beauties
fell in the world. For in manner by reason of their excellent beauties they
were vysited in their own lands: and by their infamye shamed through all the
world.

When the realm of Carthage was flourysshynge in riches and happy in arms,
they ruled the commonwealth by wise philosophers, and sustained it by discrete
armies on the sea. Arminius the philosopher was as greatly esteemed among them,
as Homer among the greeks, or Cicero among the Romans: he lived in this
world six score years and.ii. Of the which happy age.lxxx. years he ruled
quietly as a baron most peasible of mind: and was as strange to women, as
familiar with his books. Than the senate saying he was so broken with the
common welthe, and withdrawn from all naturalle recreations, they desired him
with great instaunce to be married, because that memory might be had of so
perfytte a wise man in time to come: and the more importunate they were the
more he resisted, and said, I will not be married: for if she be foul, I shall
abhor her: if she be rich, I must suffer her: if she be poor, I must
maynteyn her: if she be fair, I must take heed to her: if she be a shrewe, I
can not suffer her: and the least pestylence of all these, is suffycient to
flee a M. men. With such words this wise man excused him self: and he in his
aege, by reason of his great study, lost his sight. And the solytarines of his
sweet lyberties constrained him to take company of a woman, and she had by him
a daughter, of whom descended the noble Amilcares of Carthage, co^petitours of
the Scipions of Rome, the which showed no less worthynesse in defense of
Carthage, than ours were fortunate to augment Rome. Tell me Faustine, may not
such suspection fall upon your daughters, though their virtue succor in the
peril, and their honesty assure their persons? I will discover a secret
thing to you. There is nothing, that can be so quyckely committed, if a
womanne be enuyronned with chaste kepers and feminine shamefastnes. Steadfastly
they desire, and with great leisure they procure these things, that lightly
may be atteyned. There is nothing so certain, but that the wealth of an other
is matter for the own evil. And Faustine ye know, that the most honest
womenne, by our malice are most desired. Certaynely their shamefastnes and
keeping close, ben arowes in defense of our honesty. We read not that bludde,
riches, nor beauty of the unhappy matrone Lucrece was the cause, that she was
desired: But the clerenes of her visage, the gravity of her person, the
pureness of her life, the keeping of her self close in her house, the
exercytie of her time, the credence among her neighbors, and the great
renoume that she had among strangers, waked the foolyshe Tarquine to
commytte with her aduoultrye by force. What think you? Whereof came this? I
shall show you. We that be ill, are so ill, that as ill we use the goodness of
them that be good. This is no fault to the ladies of Rome, but rather in the
immortal goddis. Their clean honesty accuses our cruel malice. Faustine,
you say, your daughter is to young to be married. Do you not know, that the
good father ought to endoctrine his sons fro their young age? and to provide
for his daughters whiles they be young. Of a truth, if the fathers be
fathers, and the mothers mothers, as soon as the goddis have given them a
daughter, forthwith they ought to fyxe in their hearts a new remembrance: and
not forgette it, till they have provided their daughter an husband. The fathers
ought not to tarry for riches, nor the mother for high lygnage, the better to
marie them: So what with the one and the other, the time passes, and the
daughters wax aeged: and than after this manner they be to old to be married:
and to abide alone, they be maidens: and to serve, they be women, they live in
pain, the fathers in thought, the parents in suspection, least they should be
lost. O what great ladies have I known, daughters of great senators, and not
for faut of riches, nor of virtues in their persons, but all only for slack of
time, and driuinge of one hour to an other, so that at last sodeyn death
came to the fathers, and no providence made for the daughters: So that in manner
some were covered under the earth after their death, and some buried with
forgetfulness. Either I lie, or I have read in the law of the Rodiens, where
as it is written, We command the father in marienge.x. sons, to travail
but one day: but to mary oone virtuous daughter, let him travail.x. years,
ye and suffer the water come to the mouth, sweat drops of blood, travail
the stomach, disherite all his sons, lose his goodis, and adventure his
person. These words in this law were pitiful for the daughters, and not less
grievous to the sons. For.x. sons by ye law of men ar bound to discover,
and to go over all the world: but ye daughter, by ye good law ought not to go
out of ye house. I say more over, that as things unstable threte falling, so
like wise it chaunseth to young damselles, which thinks all their time lost
and superfluous unto the day of their marriage. Homere says, it was the
custom of ladies of Greece, to count the years of their life, not fro the time
of their birth, but from the time of their marriage. As if one demanded of a
Grecian her age, she would answer xx. years, if it were.xx. years since she
was married: though it were.lx. years since she was borne: Affirminge after they
had a house to govern and to command, that day she begins to live. The
Melon after it is ripe, and abides still in the gardeyn, can not escape, but
either rotteth, or else must be gathered. I say the maiden that taryethe
long, till she be married, can not escape, either to be taken or infamed. I
will say no more. As soon as the grapes be ripe, it behouethe that they be
gathered: so it is necessary, that the woman that is come to perfect age, be
married and kept. And the father, that does this, casts peril out of his
house, and brings him self out of thought, and contenteth well his daughter.

Of a syckenes, whereof the emperor died, of his age, and where he dyed. cap.
xxxix.
MArcus the Emperor being old, not only by age, but by travail and great
peines that he had taken and suffered in wars: In the xviii. year of his
empire, and.lxii. year of his age, and of the foundation of Rome.vi.C. and.xl.
as he was in Panony, now called Hungary, with his host, and Commode his
son, at a city called Vendebone, situate upon a river, that had.iiii.M. fire
housis, and being in winter, and the waters great, and very weate wether, he
being in the fields about the.xxx. day of December: suddenly upon a night as
he went with lanternes about his camp, there took him a syckenes or palsy in
one of his arms, so that he could not weld his spear, nor yet draw his
sword, nor put on his own clothes. Than this good emperor charged with
years, and with no less thoughts, and winter increasynge with many great
snowes, and fresynge of the earth, there fell on him an other malady called
Lytarge, the which put the Barbariens in great hardines, and his host in
greatte heaviness, his person in peril, and his friends in great suspect of his
health. There was done to him all the experience that could be found by
medicines, as unto great pryncis and lords is accustomed. And all did him no
profit: by reason the maladye was grievous, and the emperor charged with years,
and the air of the land was contrary to him, and the time helped him
nothing: and also he was not well intended. And as men of worship do set
more by their honor than by their lives, and had rather dye with honor,
thanne live dishonored, to assure their honor, they adventure every hour
their lives, and had leauer have one hour of honor, than a. C. years of life:
So thus this sick emperor, caused him self to be borne all about his camp,
and went to see the scarmyshes, and would sleep in the feldes: the which was not
without great peril of his life, nor without great trauaylle of his person.
Thus on a day the emperor, being in a great fever and letten bloudde, hard a
great clamor or noise in the field: made by his men that had brought home
great quantity of forage, and their ennemies set on them, to rescue it:
there was medlynge on both parties, the one to bear away, and the other to
defend: The Romans for hungre, did what they could, to bear it a way: And
the Hungaryens fro whense it came, made resystence: They meddled so one with an
other, and their debate was so cruel, that there was slain.v. capitaynes of
the Romans, the worst of them was more worth, than all the fourage that they
had won. And of the Hungariens were so many slain, that all the fourrage that
they had lost, was not so much worth. Certainly considering the cruelty that
was there done, the profit that came thereby, was very small to the Romans,
so that there went but a few away with the fourage, and of the Hungariens
fewer was left to make resistance. The emperor saying the ill order, and that
by the reason of his bloudde lettynge and fever, he was not present at that
act, he took such a heaviness at his heart, whereby he fell into such a
trance, that it was thought he had been dead: and so he lay.iii. nyghtes and
two days, that he could se no light of the sky, nor speak to any person.
The heat of his syckenes was greatte, and his peynes greatter, he drank much
and eat lyttelle, he cowlde not sleep, his face was yelowe, and his mouth
black. Sometime he lyfted up his eyes, and oftentimes joined his hands
together: He spoke nothing, and syghed many times. His throat was so dry,
that he could not spytte: his eyes were very soore with sobbing and weeping.
It was greatte compassion to see his death, and a great plage of confusion to
his house, and also the very great loss of his war. There durst no man
look upon him, and fewer speak to him. Panutius his Secretarye, sorowynge at
his heart, to see his master so nere his death, on a night in the presence of
diverse other that were there, he said to him.

The words of Panutius his secretary to the emperor at the hour of his death.
Cap. xl.
O Marcus mi lord, there is no tongue that can be still, nor any heart suffer,
nor eyes dissimule, nor wit that can permytte it. My bloudde congeleth, and
my sinews dry, the stones openethe, and my soul would pass forth: the
joints vnioyne asonder, and mi spirits are troubled, because you take not the
wise and sage counsel, the which ye gave to other that were simple. I see you
my lord dye, and I ought for to be soore displeased therewith. The sorrow that
I feel at my heart is, how you have lived like a wise person, and at this hour
you do like a simple man. Ten year a knight gives meat to his horse, to
thente^t that he should keep him from peril: and all that the wise man
studyeth for a long season, ought to be to pass his life with honor, and to
take his death with great virtue. Right dear lord, I demand of you, what
prouffyte is it to the maryner to know the card of the sea, and after to
peryshe in a tourment or tempeste? What prouffytte is it to a captain, to
speak much of war, and after know not how to give battle? What
profyteth it to a knight, to have a good horse, and to fall in the street?
What profyteth it one to teach an other the plain way, and him self to
wander aside? I say, what profyted it the force of your life, that you esteemed
so lyttelle, many times seekynge your death? And at this present hour, that
you have found death, you weep, because it will take away your life? What
things have I written with mine own hand, being your Secretarye, dyuysed by
your high and profounde understanding, towchynge the stroke of death? What
thing was it to se the letter, that you sent Claudine upon the death of her
husband? what wrote you to Anthygone, when your son Verissimus dyed? Wherein
your virtue did consolate his heaviness. What high things did I write in
the book that you sent to the Senate, in the year of the great pestylence:
comfortynge them after the great mortality passed: therein you did show
them, how little men should set by death, and what profit follows thereby.
And I have seen and hard you blason death in your life, and now you weep, as
though you should live here still. Sith that the goddis co^mande it, and your
age requires it, and your syckenes is the cause, and nature permytteth it, and
fortune consents to it, and is the fatal destenie of us all, than you must
needs dye. The trauayles that come of necessity, ought with a good courage to
be abyden. For the courageous feels not so sore the hard strokes, as the
weak that falls, or he be foughten with. You are but one man, and not two:
and ye ought to have oone death and not two. Therefore why would ye for one
life have two dethes, enterrynge the body, and sleinge the spirit with syghes?
After so many perils of long life to take a sure port, will ye lift up the
sails, and enter again into the swolowe of the sea, for to engloutte you? In
the sea you have chased the bulle, and escaped his woodnes, and now ye refuse
to enter into the park, where you may surely slay him. You make assaute with
vyctorie of your life, and will dye atteynyng the death. you have fought.lxii.
years in the camp of myserie, and now you fear to enter into your sepulcher:
you have got out of the busshes and thorns, wherein you were closed: and now
at this hour you stomble in the fair way: you have had in certain the damage
of your death: and now ye put in double the profit of your death: you ar
entered into the camp of defyenge of the world: and now you would turn your
back, when it is time to put your hands to arms.Lxii. year you have
fought against fortune: and now you cloose your eyes, because fortune will
strike you. I say it, because that willyngly you refuse this present death, the
which will cause us, to have your life passed suspect. What do you, high and
mighty prince? Why weep you like a child? and why sigh you, as one in dyspaire?
if you weep, because ye shall die, why did you laugh so much in your lyfetyme?
For of much laughing in the life time, comes much weeping at the death. Will
you do that you can not do? and not be content with that you may do. The
ground and pasture, that is common, you would join to your own, the renown
of the common welthe you applied to your own heritage. Of a subsidy or lone,
you would make your perpetual right. I will show you who be deed. All be
deed and shall dye. And among all other you would all only live. Will ye have
that of the goddis, that they be goddis for? That is, because you are mortal,
that they make you immortal. And you to have that by privilege, which they
have by nature? I that am but simple, demand one thing of you my lord, that
are ancient and wise: which is the greattest or least welthe, to dye well or
live ill? To live well no man can attain certainly, for hungre, thirst,
solitarines, persecution, ill fortune, sicknesses, and disfavors. This can be
called no life, but rather a death. If an ancient man would make a show and
booste of his life, from the time of his birthe, to the layinge in his grave,
and the body to show all that it has suffered by dolours, and the heart to
discover all the strokes of fortune: I think, that the goddis would have
maruayle thereof, and men would be abashed thereof, that the body could suffer
so much, and the heart bear it. I hold the greeks wisest, which weep, when
their children are borne, and they sing, when an old man dies: but the
Romans sing at the birth of their children, and weep when they dye old.
Certainly to laughe at the death of them, that die old, since they dye to laugh:
and to weep at the birth of children, sith they are borne to weep, and that
the life abides the sentence of ill, proves well, that the death is good.
Will you, that I say one verity to you? I have always seen, that counsel
in the wysest man, sonest fails him. Such as would govern al things, by
their opinions, of necessity in some, or in the most part, they do err and
fail. O Marc my dear lord, ween you, that have caused to burye so many,
that some should not burye you in likewise? As you have seen the end of their
days, so other shall se the end of your years. Therefore me seems, it were
better for you to dye, and to go your way, to atteyne so much welthe, than
to escape, and to live in so much mysery. If you feel death, I have no
marvel, sithe you be a man. But I marvel, that you do not dissimule it,
sithe you are dyscrete. They that have clear understanding, feel many things
at their heart, that puts them to pain, which they show not outward, for
the presumption of honor. If all the poison, that is in a heavy heart, were spread
abroad in the weak flesh by small greynes, no walls should suffyse us to
rub, nor our nails to scratche. For certainly the death is but a play,
wherein the player, if he be apt, aduentureth but little, to win much: and
they that play, may se well, that this is a wyly play, and not a strong. And
that also, as well they lose, that have but a small card, not fearyng death, as
they, that with a greatte card, love long life? What thing is death, but a
trappe door, wherein the tent is closed, in the which is sold, all the
miseries of our life? This the goddis do change us, fro an old filthy house,
into a new. And what other thing is the sepulcher, but a castelle, wherein we
be closed against the assautes of the life? Of troth you ought more to couete,
to take that you find at your death, than the hurt of that you shall leave in
your life. I demand of you, what is it, that does you most pain, in lesyng of
the life? If you peyn your self, for Helie Fabrice your wife, because you leave
her young, weary not yourself, for she is well thought on in Rome, for any peril
of your life. And as soon as she knows it, I am in certain, she will not
weep much, though you go your way. Tha^ you ought not to weep, for leuyng of
her. These young damoysels, married to old men, have ever their eyes fixed in
the death of their husbands. And holly fasten their hearts on him, that they
think, to mary with ageyn. They weep with their eyes, and laughe in their
hartis. And think not contrary, though she be an empress, and can not find
an other emperor, to be her husband, yet she will find some other man. For
if they be so determined, they will change their robes of sylke, for a gown
of clothe. I dare well say, they more desire a young sheparde, than an old
emperor. If you care for your children, whom ye must leave behind you: I can
not tell, why you should do so. For if your death be displeasant to them, much
more displeases them, yt you live so long. It is great pein to the child, not
to desire the death of his father: For if he be poor, it is for fear, how they
should be maintained: if he be rich, tha^ because he shall be his heir. They
sing, and you weep, you fere the death and weep, because you leave your life.
Do you not know, yt after the night comes the dewy morning: and after yt
comes the bright son: and after ye son comith a derk cloud, and after ageyn
comes fair wether, and after that comes lightnyng and thonder: and than
again clear air? Also I say, that after infancy, comes childhode, tha^ comes
youth, and age after that, and so at last comes death, and after death,
fearful hope, of a sure life. Sir, believe me, in one thing, The beginning,
the mean, and the end every man has. Certainly, if you had been taken as the
flower fro the herb: if you had been cut grene fro the tree, if you had been
graffed in primetyme: if you had been eaten in the sowernes of the vine: I
mean, if in the first youth, when life was at the swetest, if death had come
and knocked at the gate, ye should have had cause to be sorry: but as now, the
walls are weak and redye to fall, and the flower wythered, and the very
putrified, the spear full of moss, and can not draw the knyfe out of the
shethe. Herein you have desired the world, as if you had never known the
world.Lxii. year you have been prisoner in the dongeon of the body: and now
when the shakles or gyues should be taken from you, you complain: you lord
would make new of other news. He that thinks it not sufficient, to
live.lxii. years in this death, or to dye in this life, he will not be content
with three score thousand.

Auguste the Emperor said, that after that men had lived.l. years, they ought
to dye, orels cause them self to be slain, because that unto that time, is
the felycitie of man. He that lives beyond that time, passes his time in
heaviness, in grievous aches, death of his chylderne, and loss of his goods,
in importunities of his children in law, buryenge of his friends, susteynynge
process, payinge of dettis, and other infinyte trauayles: So that it were
better, with his eyes cloosed to abide them in his grave, thanne with his eyes
open, to abide them in his life days. Certainly it is a fortune of all
fortunes, and he is right privy with the goddis, that at.l. year, leaves his
life. For all the time that he lives after, is in decaying, and never vpryght,
but rollyng, relynge, and ready to fall. O Marc my dear lord, do you not know,
that by the same way, that life gothe, comes death? It is.lxii. year, that ye
have sought the one from the other. And when ye went fro Rome, where as you
left your house, ye went to Illirike, where you left a great pestylence: and
now you are returned into Hungary. Do you not know, that as soon as you
were borne, to govern the earth, incontinent death issued out of his
sepulcher, to find your life? And if you have honored ambassadors of the
strange kings, much more ye ought to honor death, that comes fro the
goddis. What lordshyp can be lost in this life, but you shall find greatter in
the death? Are you not remembered, when Vulcan my son in law poisoned me,
because he desired my goods more than my life, how you, my lord, for love
that you had to me, gave me comfort and counsel, for the death of my sorrowful
youth: and you said to me, the goddis were cruel, in killing of them that be
young, and pitiefull, when they bury them that be old. And also you said to
me, Comfort thy self Panutius: For if thou dydst live to dye, now than thou
dyest to live. Therefore right high and mighty prince, I say to you, as you
said to me: and I counsel you, as you counsayled me, and that you gave me, I
give you again. Finally, of this repynge, take the best in worth, and let the
rest abide.

How the emperor demanded to have in writing, all that the Secretary had said.
Cap. xli.
ANd as of the contenting of the will, oftentimes proceeds health and ease
of the body, the emperor was well satisfied with the words of Panutius, which
he eloquently uttered, and with profounde counsel, hardily and familyarly, and
in due time, as a good friend. Great compassion it is, to them that would die,
wha^ it is showed them, what they ought to do. For of them that be about the
bed, sum rob him of his money, sum serve him well, some hold the place,
to be his heir, some gape for gifts, some weep for losing of him, sum
laugh for the gaynes they have by his death, and so in this manner the poor
pacient, having many, lokynge for their profit, has no body to counsel him.
We se daily, that servants, wha^ they se the going out of the ca^dell of life,
care not for the cle^sing of their lords vices. And thereof comes, that as soon as he is deed, straight way begins to stynke. And so I say, that the
end of his life, is the beginning of his infamy. All they that were there, as
well the old servants as the new, belonging to the emperor, capitaynes of
war, and other, were not a little abashed, of the saying of Panutius, and
they all allowed his saying, and said, he was worthy to have the governance
of thempire. The good emperor, all the season that Panutius spoke, wept with
deep sighs fro his heart. And because he was so sore grieved, he could not
forthwith give him an answer: At the last he commanded Panutius, to give him
in writing, all that he had said, to thentent that he might study thereon. For
he said, it was no reason, to forget things so well said. So all the rest of
that night, the Secretary occupied him self, to put in writing the same
saying: and the next day he delivered it to the emperor, which took it, and
looked thereon all the day: and kept it still in his hands, and often times
read thereon, And the next night the emperor sent for the Secretary, and in
open audience he said, as follows.

The answer of the emperor to Panutius. ca. xlii.
HAppy was the milk, that thou suckedst in Dacie, and the bread, yt thou
did eat at Rome, and the lernyng, that thou had in Athenes, and thy
bringyng up in my house. For in my life, thou haste well served me, and at my
death, thou have well counsayled me. I command Commodus my son, to reward
the for thy good service. And I pray the goddis, to recompense the for thy
council. The reward for diverse services a man may make: but ye reward for good
counsel, all the goddis had need to do. The gretist reward, that one friend may
do to an other, is in a great and weighty matter, to succor him with good
council. All the travails of the world are weighty, but the trauaylle of
death is the weightiest: all be perilous, but that is most perilous: al ben
great, but this is the grettest: al thingis have an end at last by death, saufe
only death, whose end is unknown. He that is hurt with death, is as he, yt is
sick of the sleping evil, having a quick understanding, and yet he knows
no man: and many things being offered to him, he can determine upon none. Yet
again I say, he is a true and faithful friend, that in such time, will give
good counsel to his friend. All they that here this, that I say, will say, that
it is true. But I swear, that no man can know it perfitely, but he that is
in case, that I am in, redye to dye.Lxii. year has been the course of my life,
and now death commands me, to close mine eyes, and to follow the course of
death. Moreover, as thou know not the infirmity, so thou approchest not to
the cure and health. The dolor is not there, as thou have made defensiues, it
is not the fistula, where against thou have given cautere, it is not against
opilations, that thou have given siropes, it is not in ye veins, yt thou have
given me incision: Thou have not well heled the wound, that thou have stitched
me. I say, that thou must enter further in me, to know perfitely mine access.
The sighs that proceed fro the botom of my heart, can not be understood with
heringe of them: the goddis alonly know ye thoughts of ye heart. Also diverse
thingis ar in me, that I know not of my self, no more than that is without
me. O Panutius, thou accusest me that I fear death. To fear it greatly, I
deny it: but I confess to fear it as a man. Of troth, if I should say, that I
fear not death, I must deny, that I am not made of flesh. We se, that the
Olyphant fears the lion, and the bear fears the olyphant, and the wolf
fearethe the bear, and the sheep fearethe the wolf, and the ratte the catte,
and the catte the dog, and the dog the man, and all only their fear is,
that they dread to be slain. Than if these brute bestes refuse death, not
fearing the fighting with furious spirits, nor the enioyenge with the
gods: How much rather ought we to fear the death? For we are in fear to
be torn in pieces with the furies in their peynes, or to be received in
pleasure with the gods. Therefore I say, that the natural fear of death, I
have over come with the bridell and lyberties of reason. Thinkeste thou
Panutius, that I see not my grass wasted, and my grapes gathered, that my
house breaks, and that I have nothing left, but the stock of the grapes, the
skin of the flesh, and but one only blaste of all my life? Thou seeste
well, that by the tokens, the exercise is seen. And nets be cast in the
rivers, and in the parkes bulls been chased. I say that the rumor of death
holds in sauetie the life that is in me, at this hour ready armed against
death. I make battle with death, at this hour barayne and naked of life: and
so ready to enter into the sepulcher: at this hour I shall enter in to the
camp, where as I shall not be gored with bulls, but shall be eaten with
worms: and finally, I shall go, from whens I can not flee. Thus I hope abydyng
death. And this I say, because thou shall know, that I know it, and that thou
shall feel, that I feel. And to the intent thou live vnbegiled, I will tell the
a secret. secret. The novelties, that thou have seen in me, as in abhorrynge
of meat, bereuynge of sleep, living alone, werynes of company, drownynge in
syghes, and pastyme in weeping: Thou may well think, what turment ought to
be in the sea of my heart, when such tremblynges and motions of earth and
reins are set in the earth of my body. Shall I show ye, wherefore my body is in
this thought, and my heart in such trouble? The cause, why I suffer death so
greuousely, is that I leave my son Commode in this life, in a perilous age
for him, and suspecious for thempire. By the flowers the fruits are known,
and the viues in burgenyng: by the colt the horse is known, whether he shall be
meke or stubborn for labor or carriage: and in the youth the young man is
known: and by the little that I se in my life by my son Commode, I fear me,
it will be less after my death. Thou know not, why I say thus. And I say it
not without cause: for my son Commode is very young, and yet younger in wit.
He is of an ill inclination, but he be forced: he governs him self by his
own wit and understanding, as though he were a man of experince: he knows
but lyttelle, and carethe for nothing. Of the time passed he has no
knowledge: all only he occupies him self with the time present. Finally, by
that I se with mine eyes, and think in my heart, I fear me the person of my
son shall be in peril, and the memory of his fathers house perysshe.
Faustyne his mother has fostred him to delycately: and by a hard stony
ground he has a great way to go. He enters as now alone into the pathe of
youth without any guide. I fear me he shall goo out of the right way, and
wander in the bushes and thorns of vices. O Panutius, harken what I say, I say
it not without tears, thou seeste that my son remains rich, young, and at
liberty. Riches youth, solitarines, and liberty ben.iiii. pestilences, that
enpoysone the prince, and waste the common welthe: hit sleethe them that be a
live, and infameth them that be deed. Believe me one thing, diverse graces are
requisite to susteyn diverse virtues. With the fairest women the brothell houses
are peopled, the most vilaynes are made ruffyens: the most hardye are
robbers in woddes: the quickeste of understanding often prove fools: and the
most subtylle become thieves. I say, that such as are clothed with diverse
graces of nature, lack the furs of accquired virtues. We may say, they hold
in their hands a knyfe, wherewith they stryke and hurt them selfs: fire on
their shulders, wherewith they bren: and a cord about their neck, wherewith
they hang: daggers at their stomach, wherewith they are stayne: thorns at
their feet, wherewith they are pricked: a stony way before their eyes, where
they stomble, and stomblynge fall, and falling they lose their life, and win
death. The great trees of whom we have fruit in winter, and shadow in summer,
first be planted the rotes fast in the entrayles of the earth, or ever their
wauerynge boughs are adventured in the wynd. Mark Panutius, mark well. The
man that from his youth has, set before him the fear of the goddis, and the
shame of men, is habited in virtues: and he that accompanies with them that be
virtuous, mainteyneth troth to every man, and lives without prejudice of any
man. Malicious fortune may sometime cleue the bark of the welthe of such a
tree, wyther the flower in his youth, break the leaves of his favor, gather
the fruit of his trauaylle, break down a bough of his offices, and bow
down the height of his counsel: yet for all the strokes that the wind can
strike, it can not be plucked up by the rote. Certaynely the son that the
father has endued with graces, and the son applienge him in vices, ought not
to be borne in this world: and if he be borne, to be buried quick. For the
fathers sweat by day, and watch by night, to leave honor to their children,
which the fathers bye of the goddis with sighs, and the mothers delivered of
them with pain, and bring the^ up with travail: and the child proves so,
that he gives grievous age to the father in his life, and great infamy after
his death. I consider well, that the prince Comode, being young and I old,
against his will, forbear vices, and I fere me, that after my death, he will hate
virtues. I remember diverse of his age, have inherited the empire, which were
so hardy in their lives, that they deserved to be called tyrants after their
dethes. Example of Denis, renoumed tyrant of Sycill, which hired them that
could invent vices, as our Rome rewards them that conquer realms. What
greatter tyranny can be in a tyra^t, than to make most privy to him, the^ that
be vicious? Also I forget not the four kings, that succeeded after great
Alexander, as Ptholome, Anthiocus, Siluius, and Antigonus, which the greeks
called great tirantis: all that Alexander had gotten with renomed triu^phes,
they lost by their viciousnes. And in this manner the world yt Alexander had
divided among them.iiii. came to the hands of mo than four.C. for Antigonus
set so little by that had cost his lord Alexander so much, and was so light in
his age, and so bold in his realm, yt in mockery in ye stead of a crown of
gold, he ware a garlande of Iuie: and instead of a scepter, he bare a thystle
in his right hand: and after that manner, he would sit among his men, and when
he spoke to strangers. I lay shame to the young man so to do, but I marvel,
that the sad and wise men of greece suffered it. I remember also Caligula
the.iiii. emperor of Rome, a young man, in whose time it was hard to know,
which was the greatter, either the disobedience of the people to their lord,
or the hatrede, that the lord bare to the people. And this young prince went
so far out of the way in his youth, and was so far wide from reason in
his tyrannies, that every man studied, how to take his life from him: and he
studied to slay every man. He wrote these words in a table of gold: Would to
god, that all Rome had but one heed, to the entente that with one stroke, I
might stryke it of.

I also remember Tyberie, son adoptiue of good Auguste, called August,
because he augmented Rome. But this good old prince did not so much augmente
it in his life, but this young successor distroyed it much more after his
death. The hate that the Romayne people had against Tyberie in his life, was
right well showed after his death. For the same day that he dyed, or when he
was slain, the people made diverse processions, and the senators offered great
gifts in the temples, and the priests offered great sacrifices to their goddis,
to thentent that they should not receive the soul of the said Tiberie into
their glory: but to send it to the furies of Hell.

Also I mind Patrocle, the second king of Corynthe, which enheryted the
realm, being but.xvi. year of age, and he was so vycious of his body, and so
lyberall of his mouth, that where as his father held the realm.lx. year, he
possessed it but.xxx. days.

Also the ancient Tarquin the proud, the.vii. king of Rome, which was right
goodly in gesture, right valyant in arms, and of a clean bloudde, as an
unhappy prince, defiled al his virtues with noughtye living: in such wise,
that he converted his beauty into lechery, his power into tyranny, for the
villainy that he did to Lucrece, the chaste lady of Rome, whereby he lost not
only his realm, but the name of Tarquine was banysshed for ever out of Rome.

I remember cruelle Nero, which inheryted, and dyed young: and in him ended
the memory of the noble Cesars: and by him was renewed the memory of
Antygones the tyrants. Whom thynkest thou this tyrant would suffer to live,
which slew his own mother? Tell me I pray the, what heart is that of a
child, to slay his own mother, to open the breasts that he sucked, to shed
the blood of her that nouryshed him in her arms, and to behold the entrayles,
wherein he was fourmed? What thynkeste thou, that he would not have done, sith
he committed such an ill deed? The day that Nero slew his mother, an orator
said in the senate, that Agrippyne his mother had deserved death, for chyldyng
such a child in Rome. These three days, that thou haste seen me so altered in
my mind, all these things came before me: and I have drawn them into the
depenes of my heart, and disputed them. This son of mine holds me in the
gulf of the sea, between the wawes of fear, and the ankers of despair,
hoping, that he should be good, because I have nourysshed him well, and
fearing, that he should be ylle, because his mother Faustine has brought him
up wantonly, and the young man is inclined to ill. And as ye se a thing made
by artyfice peryshe, and a natural thing last: I am in great fear, that
after my death, he will turn that way, that his mother has chylded him, and
not as I have norished him. O how happy were I, if I had never a child, to
leave behind me to be emperor? Then a child might be chosen among children
of good fathers, and I should not have been troubled with him, that the goddis
have given me. Panutius, I demand one thing of the, whether thou call
most fortunate, Vaspasian the naturalle father of Domitian, or else Nerua, the
father adoptiue of Traian? Vaspasian was good, and Nerua very good, and
Domitian was of all other most cruelle, and Trayane the myrrour of all
clemency. Tha^ regard, how Vaspasian in the fortune to have children was
unhappy, and Nerua in the mysfortune to have children was happy. I know not
why these fathers desire to have children, since they ben the occasion of so
much travail. O Panutius, I will say one thing to the, as a friend to a
friend (as thou know well we be in this world) I have lived.lxii. years, in
which time I have read many things, and have hard, seen, desired, atteyned,
possessed, suffered, and rested much, and now at this time I must dye: and of
al thing I shall bear nothing away, because both it and I are nothing. Great
besines the heart has to search for these goods, and great travail to come to
them: but without comparison the greattest dolor is at the hour of the death,
to depart and leave them. What greatter disease can be to the body, than
sodaynely to be surprised with ennemies? What peril of the sea, or loss of
friends, can be egall, to se a virtuous man draw to his death, to leave the
sweat of his face, the authority of the empire, the honor of his person,
the company of his friends, the remedy of his dettours, the rewardynge of his
servants? and to leave it to a child, that has not merited it, nor has not
the power to will to merit it.

In the.ix. table of the laws were these wordis written: We command and
ordeyne, that every father, who in the opinion of all men is good, shall
disheryte his son, that is ill in every man's opinion. Also every child, what
so ever he be, that disobeyeth his father, or robs any temple, or hurt any
wydowe, so that she blede, flee fro the battle, or do any treason to a
stranger, who so ever is found in any of these five cases, let him be
banysshed for ever the habitation of Rome, and cast out fro the heritage of
his father.

In good soth this law was good, and in the time of Quintus Cincinate, hit was
ordained, and now by us, which be unhappy, it is clean left and forgotten.
Panutius without doubt I am weary to speak, and also I have such an
impediment in my stomach, that I want brethe: or else I could show the all
by order, if mine understanding failed me not, how many Parthiens, Mediens,
Assiriens, Caldiens, Indiens, Egypeyens, Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans, have
left their children poor, and might have left them rich: and all was because
they were vicious: and other children that were very poor, were left rich,
because they were good and virtuous. I swear to the by the immortal gods,
that when I came fro the wars between the Parthiens and Rome, and that the
triumph and glory was given to me, and my son confirmed to be emperor: I
would the Senate had left me my son Commodus poor, with all his vices,
and that I had made the Senate heir and lord to the empire: and to have
chastised him to the exaumple of all the world. I will that thou know, I
shall carry five things with me out of this world intermedled, the which is
great sorrow to my heart. The first is, that I have not determined and judged
the ple^ and process of the noble wydowe Drusia, with the Senate, saying that
she is very poor, and has no body to do her Justice: The second is,
because I do not dye in Rome, to the intent that I might cause to be cried
and proclaimed every where in Rome, er I dyed, to wit if any complained on me:
the third is, that where as I did slay.xiiii. tyrants that vndyd the
countreye, that I had not as well banyshed all the Pirates that kept the
sees* the fourth is, that I left my dear son Verissimus deed: and the.v.
that I have left alive, as heir to the empire, my son Commodus. O Panutius,
the greattest hap, that the goddis can give to a man (not covetous but
virtuous) is to give him renoume in his life, and a good heir, to conserve him
after his death. Finally to conclude, I pray to the gods, if I shall have
any part with them, that if by my sons offenses, Rome be sclandred, and my
renoume minished, and my house lost by his life, that they will take a way his
life yet or I dye.

What the emperor said to the masters of his son, and to the rulers of
thempire. Cap. xliii.
I Se you ancient fathers and noble Romans, and right faithful servants,
take pain and sorrow, for that I must yield me to death, and leave this life,
and treat with my sepulcher. Ye sorrow for my sorrow, ye are tourmented with
mine anguyshe, and peyned for my pain: it is no meruaylle. For the clear
understanding of the pure blod of true and faithful friends, is to double
their trauayles, and to weep for other: if one brute beast morn for an other,
much more ought one humayne creature to so towe for an other. And this I say,
because I know by the tears of your eyes, the feeling of your hearts. And
sithe that the greattest reward for any benefit, is to know it, and thank
the patie thereof: as much as I can, I thank you. And if my weak thanks be
not correspondente to your pitiefulle weeping, I require the goddis, after they
have taken away my life, to reward you for my duty. It is great pleasure
for the family to know their master go with the goddis, and great pain to
him to leave them. For company of many years is loath to leave the life. In my
life time I have done with you as I ought to do, and as now I must do as I
may. The goddis will take my soul away, Comodus my son the empire, the
sepulcher my body, and ye my special friends my heart. And sothly it is
reason, that since ye were in the life my hearts, that it be yours after my
death. And in that I will speak more particular this night shall be our
reasonnyng. Now my hearty friends ye se, that I am come to the end of my last
journey, and to the beginning of my first journey with the goddis. It is
reason, that sith I have loved you in time past, that ye believe me now. For
the time is come that ye can demand nothing of me: nor I have nothing to offer
you: nor mine ears as now can not here flatteries, nor my heart suffer
importunities: if ye never knew me, know me now. I have been he that I am, and
am he that has been, in times paste like unto you, some what: now ye se I am
but little, and within a little while I shall be nothing. This day shall end
the life of Mark your friend, this day shall end the life of Marc your
parente, this day shall end the fatal destenies of Marc your lord, this day
shall end the seignory of Mark your emperor, and this day shall end his
empire. I have vanquysshed many, and now I am overcome with death: I am he that
has caused many to dye, and I can not as now give my self one day of life: I
am he that has entered into chariottes of gold, and this day I shall be laid
on a biere of wodde: I am he, for whom many have song meryly, and this day
they weep: I am he that has had company in all exercites, and this day I shall
be given to hungrye worms: I am Marcus greatly renoumed, that with famous
triumph mounted into the high capytolle, and this day with forgetfulness I shall
discende into the sepulcher. I see nigh with mine eyes, that was far hyd in my
heart. And as the goddis be favorable to you in this world, and equalle and
favorable to me in an another world, as my flesh never took pleasure to pass
this life, but my heart was suddenly taken with the fear of death: than take
no pain for me, for either I must see the end of you, or you of me. I yield
great thanks to the goddis, that they take away this old person to rest with
them, and leave you young for to serve in thempire. For there is no comparyson
for to speak of death to the life, nor to eschew the death at the hour
thereof. And yet I will not deny, but I do fear death, as a mortal man. When
the life passes, there is no prudence in a prudente, nor virtue in a virtuous,
nor lordshyp in a lord, that can take away the fear of the spirit, nor pain
of the flesh. At this time the soul and the flesh are so combyned and so
conglutinate together, and the spirit with the blood are so annexed, that
the separation of the one from the other is the most terrible, and the last
terrible of all terriblenes. Certainly it accords unto good reason, that the
soul depart dolorously, leauyng the flesh unto worms, and the body as
envious to se the soul go and sport with the goddis. O what little thought
we take in this life, until we fall grouelynge with our eyes upon death.
Believe me, Sithe I have passed from whens ye be, and have experimented that ye
do se, that is the vanities of us that are vain, is so agreeable to us, that
when we begin to live, we ymagyne that our life will endure a holle
world: and when it is ended, it seems us to be but a puff or a blaste of
wind. And because than sensuality peyneth for sensibilitie, and the flesh
for the flesh, reason guyded with them that be mortal tellethe me, that it
peyneth not with the departing. If I have lived as a bruetbeast, it is reason
that I dye as a discrete man ought to do. I dyenge, this day shall dye all my
sickness, hungre shall dye, cold shall dye, al my peynes shall die, my thought
shall dye, my displeasure shall dye, and every thing that gives pain and
sorrow. This day the night shall be taken away, and the son shine bryghte in
the sky: This day the ruste shall be takem from mine eyes, and I shall see
the son clearly: This day the way shall be made smothe for to goo right:
this is, the day shall end the journey, wherein I shall not dread the stays
of Fortune. I thank the gods immortal, that have suffered me to live so
clearly, and so long a time. This day I shall have an end of al unhappy
destenes of enuyous fortune, and not they of me. Of truth if the goddis have
commanded my flesh to be hydden in the sepulcher, and to be as mortalle: yet
if they be just and do well, they will make my renoume to be immortal,
because I have lived well. Than since I change this weary life and company of
men, for the swetenes of the goddis, and the doubts of fortune for this sure
life, and great and continual fear for perpetual peace, and this ylle and
naughty corrupt life for good renoume and glory, I think verily this should
be none ill change.

It is now three score and two years sithe the earth has sustained and fed
the earth of my body: It is now time that the earth knowledge me for her
son, and I will also take her for my mother. Verily it is a pitiful mother,
that will now take me in to her entrayles for ever, sithe that I have so
long space trodden her under my feet. And yet though that I were as I am, for
to be as she is, I am in certain that she would keep me surer among her
worms, than Rome among the Senators. And all though it be peynefulle to you,
if it plese the gods to have it thus, no man can excuse nor escape it. I should
be right well eased, if this web were broken, and my possession taken in the
Sepulcre. Than should I have the first thing propre of mine own, and perpetual
without any fear of lesynge thereof. All things mortal, that mortalle folks
have, and the envy of them that be envious may be broken, except the death and
the sepulcre, the which are priuileged from enraged hongre of envy. I se you
well, shedynge teres from your eyes, and reise heavy sighs from the depenes of
your hearts. Will ye not that I should desire death, since the physicians give
me but three hours of life? and there are contained in me.iii.M. years of
peynes, the length whereof is a cyronisme of death. And all though our debilite
be weak, yet for all that our honor is so sensible, that at the hour of
death, the more that the bones discharges them of the flesh, the more is the
heart charged with thoughts. In manner that when the sinews untie them from
the bones of the body, than newely they tie again a soore knotte to the
heart. Now let us leave speaking of that that to wchethe particularly my
self, and speak we in general of it that is conuenyente to a young Prince,
and to you that are his tutours and masters.

Ye se here my son Comodus only prince and heir, abiding for the heritage
of thempire: neither for being good, that he meriteth praise, nor for being ill
reprefe. For he has taken his naturalitie of the gods, and his norture
among you. Diverse times when he was a child, ye took him in your arms, to
thentente that now he is a man, ye should set him in your hearts. Hitherto
he has taken you for his masters: and now at this time, he must repute you
as his fathers. And whiles I lived, ye held him for your prince in
nourysshynge him, for your emperor in serving him, and as your parent in
helpyng him, and as your son in teaching him. Hitherto ye only held him
charge, as father, mother, and masters: he is now as a new ship put this
day into the right see, fletyng to the botomles swolowe, where as the sails
of prosperity will make him fall, and the rocks of unhappiness will drown
him. Than among so many vnportunate wyndes and unstable waters, there is
greatte necessity of good oores. Surely I am very sorry for thempire, and have
great compassion of this young prince, and such as would his welthe, shall
more bewaylle his life than my death. For scapynge fro the sea I se my self at
a good sure port, and upon main land, and leave him the sweatte and
travail. For as yet he knows not how to adventure to sail on the sea: nor
yet knows not whether he shall abide the age of my long experience, nor
whether he shall be a reasonable emperor or no. But what shall sorrowful Rome
do, when it has nouryshed a good prince, and that fatal destenies makes an
end of him? or that by envy of them that be ill he is slain? or the cruelty
of the gods takes him away: or that the body by his own propre hands be
lift up in such wise, that in the experiment of princes, all the life time
parts in be waylynge of the youth of young princes, and the gravity of
their aunciente princes passed. O if these princis believed at the beginnynge of
their empire, other kings that are failed in the world, how they be taught
when it is so importable for one man without charge to rule so many realms,
and he doing nothing but take their goods, rob him of his renoume, banishe
their persons fro him, and he to end his life, and his subjects augmente
their sorrows: and since he is but one, he can do no more than one, though
diverse hope that he does for all. Regard in what mysaduenture a prince lives,
when the least villain in Italy thinks, that all only for him and on him
alone the prince sets his eyes. And sith the world is so changeable, and
the people so unruly, the day that a prince is crowned and exalted with a
scepter ryalle, the same day he submits his goodis to the covetous, and all
his estate to the semblaunce of other. Thus than in this the goddis show their
power. For all the understandings are tacked to one free will. The semynge of
all they codempne, and allow but one. They give the domination to one, and the
subjection to many. To one they give the chastisemente of all, and not al to
the chastisement of one. For the taste of many, they give meat but to one: the
savor whereof is sweet to some, and sour to other: to some remains the bone,
and to some the flesh: at the last some be drowned and other be hyndred, and
at the end al have an end. I would demand of you that be most familiar, what
is the crown of thempire, or the scepter of gold, or the coler of perles or
p^cious stones, or rubes of Alexander, or vessel of Corinth, or chariottes of
triu^ph, or what offices of Consules or dictatours are desired in change of
their rest? for it is certain, they can not attayn to the one, without lesing
of the other. And this is the cause yt there be ill mariners, and to hardy
pilottes, for they fle fro the sea to the land, and fro the land to the sea.
One thing I will say, yt is against my self: every man hates war, and no man
seeks for peace. Al sorrow for one that is angered, and none is content to
appeace: al would co^mande, but none will be commanded. This has been in the
world passed, and now at this present time men be so light, yt they rather
chose to command with peril, than to obey with rest. Seeing that my days are
diminished, and my sickness augmented, suspectinge tha^ that I se now, when I
returned fro the war of Sycill, I determined to make my testament, the which
ye may see here: Open and behold it, and thereby ye shall se, how I leave you
to be masters of my son, yet in love and fidelity ye be to gyther all as one.
Great peril the prince is in, and the commonwealth in an ill adventure, where
as be many intentions among the governors. Certainly the princis are
glorious, and the people well fortunate, and the senate happy, when all agree
in one counsel, and that the counsaylers be ancient, and many of them, and
all their inte^tions agree upon one thing. When this was in Rome, it was
feared and dred of tyrants, having their consultations approved with iii.C.
barons. And though their reasons were diverse, yet their wylles and intentis
were al one for the common wealth. I desire and conjure you by the goddis, that
ye be al friends in conversation, and conformable in counsel. All the weak
debilities in a prince may be suffered, except ill counsel: and al defautes of
counselors are tolerable, except envy and ire. When the freting worm called
a mothe, enters among them, it causes peril in Justice, dishonor to the
prince, sclaunder in the commons, and parcialitie in the superiors. The
counsaylour that has his mind overcome with ire, and his heart occupied with
envy, and his words outrageous to a good man, it is reason that he lose the
favor of the goddis, his priuitie with the prince, and the credence of the
people. For he presumes to offend the goddis with ill intention, to serve the
prince with ill counsel, and to offend the commonwealth with his ambition. O
how ignorant are these princis, that take heed of such herbs and venims that
might poison them in their meats, and care not for the poison that they of
their priuye counsel do give them? Doubtless there is no comparison, for the
herbs and poisons can be given but on one day: but the venym of ill counseyle
is given every hour. Venym is defended by the horn of an unicorn, by
tryacle, and otherwise by vomites: but the poison of ill counsel has no
remedy, and less defensiues. And finally I say, that the venym given by an
enmy can but slay one emperor in Rome, but the poison given by him that is
most priuye to evil counsel, sleeth the emperor, and distroyeth the common
welthe. And where as every virtuous prince sets more by perpetual renoume
than this fallyble life, ye being governors of thempire, and masters to my
son, they that owe him ill will have not so much power over his life, as ye
have upon his renoume. Therefore if he be awaked by his enmies strangers, much
rather he ought to be awaked among his domestical friends. One thing I
command as to my servants, and I desire you as my friends, that ye show not
your self so privy openly, as ye be in secret: to thentente that some seem
not as natural sons, and other as hired servants. He that is virtuous, ought
to have great regard to the profit of his lord secretly, and to be meke of
conversation with every man openly, else his priuetie will not long endure, and
the hate of the prince with the people will increace. Oftentimes I have read of
our predecessors, and I have seen it in the present Romans, when many hold
with one, that one holds but little with diverse, and less with many, the
which keeps their wylles as far of, as the persons be nigh. And since the ylnes
of the time, and unstableness of fortune never leauethe any thing in one case,
but all is as in manner of a dream: the most sure purchase is to flee fro
peril, for then wha^ the princes have passed their pleasures entermedled in
trauayles, they search for many, and find not one. Thereof comes, that one
present for fear will withdraw him, and an other out of favor and absente,
will not come. I will show you one thing, the which you shall always put in
my sons memory: They that in our trauayles have determined of a long season
to apply them, we ought to win their good wylles. The wyly labourer in one
year labors to get corns together, and in an other year he sows and
gadereth. Be not to presumptuous, for the presumption of an ancient prince,
fordoth the authority of the young prince: yet for all this despair nor
rebuke him not to much: For the lack of manners in the state of a lord
engenders unshamefastness in him, and boldness to the servant. I have left in
my testament the prince Comodus for your son, and you for his fathers. But I
will and command, that every man knowledge him to be their lord, and to be at
his commandment. And ye my other servants and subjects to be in his
obedience, and in all his high besynesses to be well guyded as his fre^des and
lovers. Justice ought to be seen to, by wise orators, according to the
opinion of you that be his governors. And always the determination to be done
by the prince, which is lord of all. One counsel I will give you (and if you
find it ill, blame me before the goddis) whereby the empire of my son shall be
stable and permanent in Rome, and your priuetie sure in his house, if your
counselles be moved by reason, and his will ruled by your counsels. I desire
soore that ye be not covetous: and therefore I have given you diverse gifts and
thanks in my life, to take covetousness from you before my death. It were a
monstrous thing and very dreadful, that such as ought to refrain couetyse
fro strangers, to have their own hands open for their own propre lucres.
The virtuous prive men, ought not to do all the ill that they may, nor to
desire all that they may atteyn unto, to the intent that the prince give them
so much goodis for the profit of their howses, as pain and envy of the
people to their persons. And as in mean ships men escape best in a mean
see, sooner than in great carrackes in the wawes of the rorynge and impituous
sees: in likewise such as be in mean estate among them that be but meanly
envious, live more surely, than such as are set in high estate and priuitie
being rich, to be passioned among ennemies, that disdainfully would put them
under. It is a notable rule among wise men, and an infallible experience
among them that be good, and I think that by herynge thereof the ill shall
knowledge it: The glory of one among great men makes strife, suspection in
them that be egall, and envy among them that be mean. One thing, that they
that govern well, ought to have, is lyberalitie. The less ye be covetous, the
more ye shall be liberal. For with the rage of covetousness the right of justice
is mynished. It is long time sith I determined to give you the gouernynge of
thempire, and the nourishynge of my son. And to have provided to have given
you largely of my goods, to put the coveting of other men's goods from you. I
warrant you one thing: if covetousness be among you, and be enuyed of your
neighbors, you shall live in pain, and your hearts shall be peyned with other
men's besynesses, and your minds shall be ever in suspecte. Than shall ye follow
the Justice of other, where as ye shall se your own propre wealth. One counsel
finally I will give you, which I have taken always my self, Never commytte your
honors to the myshappes of fortune: nor never offer your self to peril with
hope of remedy. For suspecious fortune keeps always her gates wide open for
peril, and her walls ben high, and her wyckettes narow to find any remedy.
And because I feel my self sore trauayled, I pray you suffer me to rest a
little.

How the emperor at the hour of his death, sent for his son, and declared to
him, who should govern the Empire. cap. xliiii.
THus a great part of the night passed, and the day began to break, and the
life of this good emperor began fast to draw to an end: yet for all that he
left not the remembrance of such things as should be ordered after his death.
There were that time in the war with him diverse right excellent men senators
of Rome: and in all things he showed him self right wise, and specially he
would never have any vicious person in his house. He had ever in his
company.l. gentilmen knights, and in each of them he might have put trust to
govern Rome. Oftentimes this good emperor would say, that princis lived more
surely with the gadryng to them men of good living and conversation, tha^ with
tresure of money stuffed in their chestes. Unhappy is yt prince, that estemeth
him self happy to have his coffres full of tresure, and his council full of
men of ill living. These malicious and ill men make princes poor: and a perfyte
man suffiseth to make a holle realm rich. Surely this emperor said well.
For we do se daily, that what the father has gotten in fiftye years, the son
lesethe in half a year. Than chusinge among many a few, and of few to take
the best, this emperor appointed out.vi. notable barons: Three of the^ to be
masters of his son, and.iii. to be governors of thempire. One was called
Partinax, which after was emperor: an other was called Pompeiano, husband to
his daughter, as sure in counsel as he was aged in years: The.iii. Gneo
Patrocle of the ancient stock of the Pompeies, which was no less clean in
this living than his hears were white: The.iiii. was called Andrisco which in
goodlynes of his gesture, highness of body, virtue of courage, and wisdom in
conscience, none was egall to him in Rome: The.v. was named Bononius, which at
that time was consule, and in the aunciente laws very expert: The last was
called Iuan Varius the good, and he was called the good, because that in.lx.
year never man saw him do any ill works, nor hard him speak any ydel word,
nor do any thing but it was profitable to the common welthe. Though in case
they were al egall in gouernynge: yet I say these last three were princypall.
For Iuan Varius particularly was left to be chief captain of the army, and
to him was delyueted all the treasure, and the testament was put into his
hands: and with sore weping the emperor recommended to him the prince his
son. Than when the peine of his sickness encreaced, and that he looked for the
hour of his death, he commanded to awake his son Comodus, which without any
care was fast a sleep, and when he was brought into the presence of his
father, it was greatte pity to se the eien of the old emperor soore
discolored with weeping, and the eyes of the son allmooste closed with
slepynge: the son was waking with small thought, and the father could not
sleep for great thought and pain. And when he was in his presence, seeing the
little care that the son took for the death of his father, and consideringe
the great desire of the father for the good life of his son, it moved to
pity the hearts of all the great lords that were there, no less to leave
the company of the good old man, than the annoyance of the dealing of the
young prince. Than the emperor said to his son these words.

What the emperor said to his son at the hour of his death. Ca. xlv.
Unto thy masters and my governors I have showed how they shall counsel the:
and now my son at this hour I say to the, how they (though they be but a
few) all for the alone shall govern: and it is not to be taken in small
estimation. The most easyest thing in the world is to give council to an
other: and the most hardest and hieste thing is a man to take it for him
self. There is none so simple a man but he may give good council, though there
be no need. And there is none so wise that will refuse council in time of
necessity. I se one thing that al take counsel for all, and at the last take
it for him self. Son I think according to my heavy fatal destenies, and
thine ill customs, that one thing shall not profit the, that is, if the
little goodness that thou have done was for fear of me in my life, that thou
will do less when thou haste forgotten my death. I do more now for to
satisfy my desire and the commonwealth, than for any hope that I have of the
amendment of thy life. There is not a worse complaynt, than that a man holds
of him self. If thou my son be ill, Rome will complain to the goddis, that
they have given the so ill inclinations: They will complain of Faustine thy
mother, that has brought the up so wantonly: and they will complain on thy
self, that thou doste not refrain the from vices: and they shall not
complain of thine old father, that has given the so many good counselles. I
am in certain, thou have not so great dolor to see the end of this night,
and the end of my life, as thou have pleasure to se the day that thou shalt
be emperor: and I have no marvel, for where as sensuality reigns, reason
is put aside. Diverse things are believed because they are not known certainly.
O how many things of truth ben there, that if they were known truly they
should be left. But we ben so doubtful in every thing, and go about our
businessis so variably and inconstantly, that sometime our spirits break the
purpose, and an other time they rydde us not of trouble nor hyndrance. I say
we be so swyfte to do ill, that sometime we lose by a card of the most, and
to do well we be so dull, that we lose by a card of the least: and at the last
we do nothing but lose. Son I will advertise the by words, that I have
known in.lxii. years by long experience: and sith thou art my son and
young, it is reason that thou believe him that is thy old father. As we princes
are regard of all men, and regard all men, and are regarded of al other, this
day thou doste enherite thempire of the world and the court of Rome. I know
well there be inowe in the court of princis, that know nothing what is to make
them self of worthynes, and to maynteyn them self among so many tru^peries as
are treated in the houses of princis. I let the to wit, that in the court
is ancient parcialities, present discentions, fearful understandings,
euidente wittenesses, entrayles of serpents, tongues of scorpions, many
detractours, and few that seek peace: and where as all men should harken to
the common voice, every man sercheth his own proufite. Every manne shows a
good pretense, and all are occupied in ill works: In such wise that some by
avarice lose their good fame, and some prodigally spend and waste all their
goods. What should I say more? In the court every day the lords change and
after the laws, awake stryfes, and reyse noyses, abate noblenes, exalte the
unworthy, banysshe innoce^tes, and honor thieves, love flatterers, and
dispraise them the which be virtuous, they embrace delites, and tread virtue
under their fete: they weep for them that be ylle, and laughe to scorn them
that be good, and finally ly they take all lyghtnes for their mother, and
virtue for their stepmother. And my son I say more unto the, The court, the
which thou shall enherite this day, is nothing but a shop with waares, and a
house of va^aboundes, wherein sum selle vile and corrupt things, and other
byelyes, some have credence, and sum have renoume, sum have goods, and
some have living, and all together is but loss of time: and that worste of
all is, they will not believe the poison thereof, till it be at their hartis,
they are so foolyshe and sturdy. Rome has very hye walls, and the virtues is
very low: Rome vaunteth it self to be very strong in nombre of
inhabitauntes, and afterward Rome shall weep that there is more people than
virtue, and vices are not accounted. In a monethe a man might reckon all the
stones of the proud edifyces, but in a. M. years he might not comprise the
malyces of his ill customs. I swear to the by the immortal goddis, that in
three years I repaired all that was decayed in Rome, and in thirty year I could
not refourme one quarter thereof to good living. Good son believe me, the
great cities full of good inhabitauntes ought to be praised, and not the great
edifices. Our predecessors have triu^phed on strangers as weak and feeble:
and now they may triumph on us also, as men that be more vanquysshed with
vices than any of the other. By the myghtynes and prowesses of our
predecessors, we that be now, are greattely honored and exalted: and by the
small estimation of us that be now, they that come after us shall be greatly
ashamed. Of a very truth it is a great shame to say, and no less infamy to
do, that the goodness and travail of the auncientes should now be turned
and converted to folies and presumption. My son look well on thy self, that
the reyne of thy youth, and liberty of the empire cause the nor to commytte
vice. He is not called only free, that is free borne, but he that dies within
the same. O how well are the sclaues borne, that after their death are free by
their goodness? and how many have died sclaues by their noughtynes, that were
borne free? There is fredome where noblenes abides. The prowes of thy person
shall give the more hardines and liberty than thauctoritie of thempire. It is a
general rule, that every virtuous man of necessity is to be holden hardye:
and every vicious man of necessity is to be reputed a cowarde. Now boldly
they be chastised that be noted with any vice, and coldely they be chastised
that deserve chastisement. Let the prince be in a certain, that the love of his
people, and the liberty of his office, has not wherewith to uphold him in
arms spread abroad on the earth, without the diverse virtues assembled in his
person.

Certainly Octauius Caesar subdewed mo nations by the renoume of his virtues,
than did Gaius his uncle with his army of many men. All the world joy of a
virtuous prince: and it seems that all the world ryseth against a vicious
prince. Virtue is a strong castle, and can never be won: it is a river where
needs no rowing, a see that moves not, a fire that quenches not, a treasure
that never has end, an army never overcome, a burden that never werieth, a
spy that ever retourneth, a sign that never deceyueth, a plain way that
never fails, a syrope that heals forthwith: and a renoume that never
peryssheth. O my son, if thou knew what thing it is to be good, and what a
man thou should be if thou were virtuous, thou would do service to the
gods, good renoume to thy self, pleasure to thy friends, and engender love
of strangers, and finally all the world should fear and love the.

I remember, that in the book of years, of the battle of Tarentyne, I found,
that the renoumed Pyrrhus, king of the Epyrothiens, bare in a ring graven
these words: To a virtuous man, is but a small reward, to be lord of all
the earth: and it is but a small chastisement to take a vicious man's life fro
him.

Truly it was a worthy sentence of such a prince. What thing is it, be it
never so difficile, begone by a virtuous man, but there is hope to have a good
end thereof. Sothly I have seen in diverse parties of mine empire, diverse men
very dark of good fame, very low in goods, and unknown of their kynne and
blood: undertake so great things, that to my semyng, it was a fearful
audacitie to begin: And yet by the wings of virtue all only they have had
good renoume at the last. By the immortal goddis, and as the god Jupiter bring
me in his mancion, and stablyshe the, in all that is mine. There were ones, a
gardyner and a potter, dwelling in Rome, which only by their virtues, caused
to put ten vycious senators out of the senate, and the first occasyon was,
for making a hedge of thorn, and a pot, for the workemanshyp and labor
whereof, the Senators would not pay them. I tell it the my son, because
that vice makes a bold person thoughtefulle, and virtue causes him, that
is in thought, to take strength and boldenes. I was well ware of two things in
my life, not to plead against the clerenes of justice, nor to take part
against a virtuous person: For with virtue god susteyneth us, and with Justice
the people are well governed and ruled.

Of other more partycular counsaylles, given by the emperor to his son. Cap.
xlvi.
Now to come to things more particular. Saying son, that thou art young,
and that nature can not deny the: And as in all dyfficile things, ripe
counselle is necessary, no less to comfort thestate of our living, we desire
some recreations. For thy youth, I leave ye with great lordis children, with whom
thou may pass the time: And to teach the, I leave old Romans, that have
nouryshed the, and served me, of whom thou shall take counsel. The invention
of interludes, of theaters, to fyshe in po^des, to hunt wild beasts, to
course in the fields, to hawk for birds, and to exercise deeds of arms, are
the things that thy youth desires. And youth with youth ought to keep
company, in doing the same: But behold my son, that in orderyng of armies, to
apply the wars, to pursue vyctories, to accept truce, to confyrme peace, to
reyse tributes, to make laws, to promote some, and dismiss other, to chastyse
the ill, and recompense the good: in all these things, that be so chargeable,
they that be of clear mind, ready broken and trauayled of their bodies, and
whyt heared, ought to be taken to counsel the. And since thou art yo^ge and
lusty of body, rejoice and sport with them that be young: and when thou art
emperor, than touching thy secret affairs, take counsel of them yt be old.
Beware my son of all extremities. For as ill may the prince be, under the
color of gravity, to be ruled by the ancient persons, as under the color of
pastyme, to keep company with young folks. It is no general rule, that all
young persons shall always be young and light, nor that all old persons,
should be always wise. I am sure of one thing, that if the young man be borne
with folly, the old man lives and dies with couetyse. Therefore my son
beware, be not extreme in extremities. For the young people will corrupt the
with their lyghtnes, and old folks will deprive thy mind with their
covetousness. What thing can be more monstrous, than a prince, that commands
every man, to be commanded of one? Sothely the gouernyng of diverse, can not be
governed well by the opinion of one alone. Than the prince, that gouernethe
many, ought to have the intention and opinion of diverse. In the annals of the
Pompeyens, I found a little book of remembrance, the which great Pompeie bare
always with him: wherein were diverse good counselles and aduertisementes, the
which were given in diverse parties of the world: Among the which, I found
these, words: He that governs the common welthe, and puts the governance
to them that are old, shows him self unable: and he that trusts in youth,
is light: and he that governs by him self alone, is hardy and bold: and he
that governs by him self and other, is wise. These were notable words.

Than my son, determine the to take counsel, and specially in high things and
matiers of difficulty, and other wise let them not be determined. For when the
counsaylle is taken of diverse, than if any fault be, it shall be divided among
them al. Though the determination might be done by a few, yet take counsel
of many. Among all thy welthes, here the common counsel. For one will show the
all the inconvenience, an another the peril, an other the damage, an other the
profitte, an another the remedy. And set as well thyn eyes upon the
inconveniences, that they lay, as upon the remedy, that they offer. When thou
begynnest any hard mattier, esteem as well the small domages, that may befall
before, and stop them, as to remedy the great misfortunes, that come after. Of
troth the strong and mighty ship often times for a small taking head of the
pylotte, is sounken and drowned in a little water: and an other ship, not so
strong, with wise diligence, is saved in the gulf of the sea. Be not annoyed
to take counsel in small matters every hour. For many things forthwith require
to be looked to, and in abydinge for council, it endomageth. And that that thou
can dispatche by thyn own authority, without damage of the common welthe,
put it not to any other person. For since thy service al only depends of
thyn, the reward depends of the alone. In the year.vi.C.xxx. of the
foundation of Rome, after the cruel wars done against the king of Numedie,
the day that Marius triumphed, without puttyng of any of the riches, that he
brought, into the common treasury, he divided it to his men of war. And when
he was therefore accused, and asked, why he took not first the opinyon of the
senate: He answered and said: Sithe they took not the opinion of other, to do
me service, it were no reason, that I should take council of other, to reward
and recompense them.

Son, yet I will advertise of other things. Peradventure some will give the
counsel, er thou demand it: In that case keep this general rule: never abide
the second counsel of a man, if he have given the counsel before in the
prejudice of an other. For he offreth his words in thy service, to bring the
besynes to his own profit. O my son, there are many things to know a man.
Xv, year I have been senator, consule, censure, captain, and tribune:
and.xviii. years I have been emperor of Rome, and diverse have spoken to me, in
prejudice of other, and many mo, for their own profit, and none have spoken
clearly to me, for the profit of other, nor for my service. Great compassion
ought to be taken of princis: for every man follows them for their own
profit, and none for love and service. One counsel I took for my self, all
the while that I have governed Rome: I never kept man in my house, after that
I knew him hateful against the common welthe.

In the year of the foundation of Rome.vi.C.lix. of the Olympiade.C.lxviii.
Lucullus Patricien, great friend to Sylla, going to the war of Methridates,
It chanced, that in Tygoano, a city of Caldiens, he found a plate of coper or
brass, upon the kings gatis, wherein were certain lytters, which they said
were graven there by the commandment of Alexander the great: The letters were
in Caldee, conteynyng these sentences, That prince is not wise, that will hold
his life in peril, and will not assure his life and state with the love of all
men: That prince is not virtuous, that in giuinge much to one person, wylleth
all other to have but little: That prince is not just, that will satysfie
more the couetise of one person, than the voices of all men: That prince is a
fool, that dispyseth the council of all other, and trusts all only upon the
opinion of one: And finally that prince is to bold and hardye* that for the
love of one, will be hated of all other. These were words of eternal memory.
And in deed these princis, should have this always in their presence. Son yet
I shall say more to the. This Lucullus Patriciens brought into the Senate, all the tresure that he had, and this plate, with the said words thereon, to
thentente that they should choose the one, and leave the other. And the senate
refused all the treasure, and took the counselles written thereon.

Of diverse and partycular recommendations, which the emperor commanded his
son. Cap. xlvii.
I Have showed, like a father, the thing that touches thy wealth: Now I will
show the, what thou ought to do after my death, for my service. Those
things, that I have loved in my life, if thou will be son to thy father,
esteem them after my death. First my son I recommende to the, the
worshyppynge of the temples, and the reverence of the priests, with the honor
to the goddis. So long shall the honor of the Romans last, as they persevere
in the service of the goddis. The realm of the Carthaginens perished not,
because they were not so rich, or more cowardes than the Romans: but because
they loved their tresors to much, and were but ill worshippers and lovers of
the temples. My son, I recommend to the Helia, thy stepmother, and remember,
that though she be not thyn own mother, yet she is my wife: and on the pain
of my cursyng, suffer not, that she be ill intreted. For the damage that she
should suffer by thy consent, should give evidence of the small thought, that thou
take of my death, which should be an injury to thy life. I have left to her
the tributes and revenues of Nostie, for to maynteine her degree: and the
gardens of Vulcan, which I caused to make for her recreatio^. And if thou take
it fro her, thou she weste thine ylnesse. And to suffer her to enjoy it, I
command the by thine obedience, and to show her thy bounty and largess.
Remember, she is a Romain, young, and a widow, of the house of my lord Traian,
and how she is thy mother adoptife, and my natural wife: wherefore I leave her
under thy reco^mendation. Also I commit to the, thy breterne in law: and thy
sisters, my daughters. I leave them al married not to strange kings, but to the
natural inhabitauntes and citesens of Rome. They dwell all within the walls of
Rome, where as they may do the service, and thou may do the^ good. Son,
intrete them in such wise, that though their good father be dead, yet let
them have favor. And though they se their brother emperor of Rome, yet let
the^ not be defouled. Women be of a right tender condition, they will complain
for a small cause, and for less they will rise up in pride, thou ought to
conserve them after my death, as I have done in my life. For otherwise their
conversation should be fekyll to the people, and importunate to the. Also I
commit to the, Lipula thy sister, that is among the virgins Vestales. Think,
that she is daughter of thy mother Faustin, which I have greatly loved in my
life, and unto the hour of my death, I have lamented hers. Every year I gave
to thy sister.ii.M. sexters, for her necessities: she had been as well married as
the other, if she had not be brent in the vysage: which was esteemed of every
man an ill adventure, and specially of her mother, that wept always for her. But I
esteem that ill adventure, a good fortune. For if she had not ben brent in the
face with fire, she had in the world, as touching her renome, be brent with
diverse tongues. Son, I swear to the, that for the service of the gods, and the
fame of men, she is more surer with the virgins in the temple, than though she
were in the senate, with the senators. I deem, that at the end of the
journey, she shall find her self better at ease, closed and locked in, than
thou with all thy liberty. In the prouynce of Lucany, I have left for her,
the.ii.M. sexters: I will not, that thou take them fro her. Also I committee
Drusia the wyddowe to the, which has laid a great process against the senate,
because yt by motions before passed, her husband was banished: I have great
compassion of her: for it is three months, sithe she put, in her demand, and
because of my great wars. I could not declare her justice. Son, thou shalt
find it true, that in.xxxv. year, that I have governed Rome, there was never
wydow, that held her process before me, passing.viii. days. Take compassion
of such. For womennes necessities are right peryllous, and at the last, if
their besynes be long in hand, they recover not so much of their goods, as
they lose in their renown. Also have compassyon of poor men, and the goddis
shall reward the, with great riches. Also I commytte to the, my ancient
servants, to whom my long years and cruel wars, my often necessities, the
displeasure of my body, and my long syckenesses, has been right paynefull.
For they, as true servants, to give me life, have taken peyn unto the death. It
is reason, that sith I have taken their death, that they inherit part of my
life. One thing I hold for certain, In case that my body abide in the
sepulcher with worms, yet I shall always, before the goddis have remembrance
of them. In this doing, thou shall do as a good child, to satisfy them, that
have served thy father. Take heed my son, every prince, doing Justice,
acquireth ennemies in the execution thereof. And this is done by the^, that are
most nere to him. For the more privy they are with the prince, the more
hateful they are to the people. And though every man loves Justice in
general, yet they all hate the execution thereof in particular. When a just
prince is dead, the people take vengeance of the unjust servants. When thou
were a child, my seruantis noryshed the, to the intent, that thou should
sustain them in their age. Surely, it were great shame to the empire, an
offense to the goddis, an injury to me, and an vngentylnes of the* that thou
have found them.xviii. years, with their arms abroad to halse the, that they
should find one day thy gates shet against them. These things I commit to the
particularly, keep them always in memory. And since I remember them at my death,
consider how I loved them in my life.

Of the last words that the emperor spoke to his son and of a table that he
gave him. Cap. xlviii.
When the emperor had ended his said recommendations, the day began to
spring, and his eye stringes began to break, and his tongue faultred, and his
hands shoke. Than the said happy emperor, feeling that weakness began sore to
draw about his heart, he commanded Panutius to go into his study, and to
bring to him a coffre that was there. And when it was brought to his presence,
he opened it, and took out a table of three foot brood, and two foot long, it
was of wood Lybanus, and round about garnished with unicorn. It was closed
with two leaves, subtylly wroughte of a red wood, that some said was of the
tree that the Phenyx bredeth in: and is called Rasyn. And as there is but one
bird Phoenix bredyng in Arabie: so likewise there is no mo trees in the world
of the same kind. On one of the outward parties of the table was pyctured and
graven the god Jupiter: on the other the goddess Venus: In the inward parties
of the Table that shette, was pictured god Mars, and the goddess Ceres: In the
principal of the said table was pyctured a Bulle subtylly wrought to the
quycke, and under that a king was pyctured. The which payntures were said to
be of the handy warke of the expert Appelles an ancient work man in payntynge.
Than the emperor took the table in his hand, and with great pain, he said:
Thou see my son Comodus, how I am al ready escaped from the trappes of
fortune, and am entering into the heavy adventures of death. I wot not why the
goddis have created us, sith there is so great annoyance in our life, and so
great peril at our death. I understand not why the goddis have and use so
great cruelty to the creatures.Lxii. year I have sailed with great travail
through the great perils of this life: and at this hour I am commanded to
take land and discharge me of my flesh, and to take earth in the sepulcher.
Now vntyeth the lively thredes, now vndothe the spyndel, now ryueth the
web, now ends my life. Now am I awaked from the slepynge evil:
remembrynge how I have passed my life, I have no more desire to live. And in
that I know not which way to go, I refuse death. What shall I do? I am
determined to put me into the hands of the goddis wyllyngly, sithe I must do
so of necessity. Whom I require, if they have created me for any goodness, not
to deprive me fro them for my demerytes. I am now in the last gate: and to
this hour I have kept the greattest and most excellent jewel that I could
find in all my life. In the.x. year of mine empire there arose a war against
the Parthes: wherefore I determined in mine own person to give them battle.
After that war I came by the ancient city of Thebes, for to see sum
antiquity. Among the which in a pristes house I found this table, the
which as a king was raised in Egypt, incontynente it was ever hanged at his
beds heed, and this priest showed me, that it was made by a king in Egipte
named Ptholome Arsacides, that was a virtuous prince. And in the memory of
him, and example of other, the priests kept it dilygently. And son I have
kept it always with me: and I beseech the goddis, that such may be thy warkes,
as therein thou may find good counsel. As emperor I leave the heir of many
countries and realms: and as thy father I do give unto the this table of
counsayles. Let this be the last word, that with the empire thou shall be
feared, and by this table thou shalt be beloved. This said, and the table
delivered to his son, the emperor turned his eyes, and within a quarter of
an hour he yielded the spirit.

Now to return to the said table and writing. There was written between the
bulle and the king a scrowe in Greek letters, in manner of heroical verses,
containing in our vulgar tongue thus: I never chose rich tirant, nor abhorred
the poor just man. I never denied Justice to a poor man for his poverty, nor
pardoned a rich man for his great goods and richesse: I never did good
deeds, nor never gave hyre for affection, nor gave correction only for the
pain: I never left ylnes vnchastised, nor goodness without reward: I never
committed an other to do Justice that was clear, nor dark justice I never
determined by my self alone: I did never deny justice to them that demanded
it, nor mercy unto him that deserved it: I never did correction for anger,
nor promised any reward in my mirth: I was never charged with thoughts in my
prosperity, nor dispayred in mine adversity: I never committed ill by malic,
enor any villainy for avarice: I never opened my gates to flatterars nor
dyssemblers, nor lystened mine ears to murmurers: I have labored always to be
loved of them that be good, and to be dread and fered of them that be ill: And
finally I have favored the poor, that might do but little, and have be
favored of the goddis that may do much.

Hitherto is showed brefely the worthy and laudable life of the emperor Marcus
Aurelius, and of his death.

And hereafter ensues the second part of this book.

A letter sent by Marcus Aurelius to Pyramon his spciall friend. Capitu. xlix.
The first letter.
Mark orator Romayn, borne at mount Celio to Pyramon of Lion, my greatte
friend, desiringe salutation to thy person, and strength and virtue against thy
sinister fortune. In the third Kalendes of January I received thy letter,
whereby I perceive thou have received one of mine. I set small store by thy
words, but I esteem greatly what thou meanest by them. So that without
declarynge thereof I have gadred the sentence. Reason would because I have
written so often to the, that thou should the better understand me: but thou
art so slothful, that though I call the, thou wylt not here: nor though I
stryke the, thou will not feel. But now to comme to the purpose. Thou
know well Piramon, how nere we be in parentage, ancient in frendeshyppe,
steadfast in love, and tender of hearts: and when so ever thou put it in
experyence, than one true friend shall prove an other. Thou remembrest well,
when we were at Rodes, that we dwelled together in one house, and did eat at
one table, and all that thou thoughtest I did it in effect: and that I said,
thou never gaynsaydest. Certainly thou were in my heart, and I in thine
entrayles: I was thine, and thou were mine. We being together, hit seemed to
all other that we were but one, and of one will. What is it my friend Piramon?
Thou writest how thou art heavy, and yet thou do not show the cause why:
thou complaynest yt thou art almost deed, and thou show me not who takes
thy life fro the. If thou will not show to my thyn ill destenies, since thou
art my friend, I will thou know, that I demand it of right. If thou will
not, I will that thou know, that ye pitiefull gods have determined, that all
pleasures and profit shall depart from my house: and that all heuines and
domages shall be registered in my person. Sith I am prince of al honor,
being in tribulation, if thou woldeste, thou canste not escape out of my
seignourie. For if thou complain, that thou art unhappy in fortune, than I
esteem my self to be happy in unhappiness. I demand one thing of the. When
haste thou seen me have sufficient, and thou need? When haste thou seen me
sleep, and thou wake? and when haste thou trauayled, and I rested? Of truth
sith the goods and persons are their own propre, the trauayles and ill
adventures are always common. One thing thou ought to know, if in mine
amity thou will persevere, that all my goods are thine, and all thyn euylles
are mine, sith thou art borne to live easyly, and to be gentilly ordered and
entreated, and I do live for to travail. I say not this faynyngely: for thou
haste had experience of me, that when Iamaria thy sister dyed, that was no
less virtuous than fair, thou saw well when she was buried deed, I was
buried quick: and at the sown of my tears thin eyes daunced. Sithe thou
hold such sureties of my person, surely thou may discover to me thy
pain. Yet as often as I have demanded it, there has not feigned reasons failed
in the. I require the, and desire the again, and in the name of the gods I
pray the, and in their names I conjure the, that thou dispose all thy sorrows
into mine entrayles. For the way that thou goeste, I will not leave one pace to
go fro the same: if thou go, I will go: if thou rest, I will rest: if thou
work, I will work: if thou leave of, I will do the same: if thou wylt dye,
thou know well, I will not live. Regard friend what thou wylt do. For thine
euyls and mine, tormente both one heart. If thou have displesure, all things
displease me: if thou weep, I swear fro hensforthe never to laughe: if thou
discharge the of thy pain, fro hensforth I shall take it for mine: if thou go
alone, I will forsake company, and forth with live solytarily. What wylt thou
that I should desire? For all that ever thou wylt I will. Thou complaynest, that
in all thy trauayles thou can find no parent to remedy the, nor friend to
counsel the. I swear to the my friend Pyramon, that of these two things I have
as much poverty in my house as thou have sorrow in thyn. I know well the
remedy should come by riches, and by council, and consolation of them that be
wise. And by reason of my heavy destenies, slouthe has taken fro me the
knowledge of wisdom: and fortune will not permytte me to have great riches.
Certaynely I weep for thy myserie, and yet there is but small remedy in me.
Thou sayeste in thy letter, that thy neighbors and friends in promising have
behighte the many things: but in giuynge they do nothing. Hereof I meruaylle:
for the virtuous hand is not bound to make the tongue a fool. Truly though our
fete dance, our hands should work at the sown of the tongue: our life
endethe in few days, and our renoume in fewer. Promys is an ancient custom
among the sons of vanite, and of custom the tongue speaks hastily, and the
hands work at leisure. Now let us speak more particularly.

Thou ought not to complain, in that thou fyndest not but in a few, that
diverse have found in the alone. Custom is to receive forthwith and meryly,
and to give slowelye with ylle will and repentance. They that be presumptuous
do the one, and they which be sloutheful, do the other. The Greeks say: that
he that promysethe and is long in fulfyllyng, is but a slack friend. We
Romans say, that he is much better that denies forthwith, because he will not
begyle him that asks. In this case I say, He that may give and gives not, is
a clear ennemy: and he that promises forthewith, and is long or he do it, is
but a suspecious friend. What need wordis to our fre^des, wha^ we may succor
them with works? Is it not right, to whom we give our hartis, which is ye best
thing within us, that we give him our tongue, that is the worste thing of all
our vices? In good sothe the goddis will not suffer in the place of amity, to
desire any thing of our friend in have, and to be driven it of with long
delaying. Plato in his laws says, We command, that in our gouernynge, that
polytike counsel be given to them, that be in prosperity, to thentent that
they decay not: and to succor them that be in heuines and trouble, to thentent
that they despair not. Certainly under these words are comprised diverse great
sentences. Thou know well my fre^d Piramon, that sweet words comfort the
heart but little that is in tribulation, but if there be some good works
therewith. I will not deny, but that they, to whom we have given our good wylles
in the time of our prosperytie, be bound to give us of their goods, and to
show us favor in our adversity. I demand one thing of the, Wherefore hold
thou a presumptuous license to demand? And reprouest on the other part the
liberty of denieng. Truly as there is shame in the demanding, there is
obligation in some thing to deny: an importunate man is not worthy to have
mercy. Thou may know, if thou know it not my fre^d Piramo^, that to attayn
to every thing yt is demanded, belongs only to the goddis. To give al thing
that is demanded is no sign of any servant. And to deny any thing is of
liberte. To weep for yt is denied is the co^ditio^ of tira^tis. And to conne no
thank for that is given, is the condition of the Barbaryens: and to have ever
a steadfast hoope of that is denied, is the guyse of the Romans. One of these
things, wherein Gayus Caesar showed him self to be of high courage was, that
he had most greattest joy when the senate refused any thing desired by him.
Oftentimes he said: There is nothing wherein Rome gives me more glory and
renown to my person, thanne when I show my self most hasty to demand,
and they most styffe to deny me: to thentent that after they should know,
what is my power to abide, and how lyttel their strength is to resist. Me
thynk it is better to have recours to the goddis with virtues, than to
displease them with quarelles. And to give contentation to thy reposed will,
when thou see thy self in tribulation: and that thou demaundest of the
goddis and of men to be frustrate, thou ought to measure it with a right
measure, and to payse it in a right balaunce, the great quantity that has
been given to the, and the little quantity that has be granted the. O how
vncourteyse be we to the goddis, and of small remembrance to men, when we
mynishe with forgetfulness, that we have received of them: and that little that
has been refused us, we augment it with complayntes? Friend Pyramon, I am
begyled if thou be not fyftye years of age, and all that season thou haste done
nothing but received gifts: and yet for all that, I have not seen the do one
day of service. Certainly it is no reason to complain of.viii. days of ill
fortune, being fyfty years of age. Thou say in thy letter, how thou have
much pein, because thou know all thy neighbors to be enuyous. In good soth
I have pain for thy pain, and of thy meruaylyng I have great marvel. For
all admiration procedethe but by surmountynge of ignorance, and fault of
experience. Does the quick understanding of men rule the life of the^ that be
mortal, that they need not to think of the travail to come, having in their
hands hasty remedy? If they be hungry, they may eat: when they are cold,
they may warm them: if they be slepy, they may sleep: when they be weary,
they may rest: When they are sick, they may be healed: when they are heuye,
they may rejoice, in such manner, that the thoughtfull life passes, some to
make tiltes and lystes, some to make armure and scaffoldes, some to inuente
new gynnes, and some to repair bulwarks. I say the world and the flesh do
naught else but fight against us, and we have need at all times to defend us
fro them. All these remedies are against the travail of the flesh. But what
shall we do, that the cursednes of envy extend not among all these? Cursed is
that welthe, that every man enuieth. Certainly against envy is no fortress to
defend, nor cave to hyde, nor hye hill to mount on, nor thycke wodde to shadow
in, nor ship to escape in, nor horse to bear away, nor money to redeem us.
Envy is so venomous a serpent, that there was never mortal man among
mortalles, that could escape fro the bytynge of her tothe, and scratchynge of
her nails, foylynge of her fete, and poisonynge of her poison. I swear to the
my friend Pyramon, that such as fortune lifts up with great riches, she full
of cruelty gives them profounde bytynges. Envy is so envious, that to them,
that of her are most denied, and set fardest of, she gyuethe most cruel
strokes with her fete. This unhappy envy prepares poison secretly fro them
that be in rest among diverse pleasures.

I have read diverse books of Hebrewe, Greek, Latin, and Caldee: And also I
have spoken with many very wise men, to se if there might be found any remedy
against an envious man. I confess the truth: Read all that can be read, and
imagine all that can be, demand all that can be demanded, and ye shall find
none other cure against this cursed envy, but to banyshe us fro all
prosperity, and to sytte with adverse fortune. O how unhappy ar they that be
in prosperity: for justly they that be set up in high estate, can not flee
from the perille of Scilla, without falling into Charibdis. They can not escape
the peril, without castinge their treasures into the sea. I say that the
malady of envy will not suffer them to escape fro death, and the medicine that
is applied to them, will not assure their life. I can not determine me, which
is the best, or to say more properly the worste, extreme myserie without the
danger of fortune, or extreme prosperity, that is always thretened to fall.
In this case to be so extreme I will not determine me, since in the one is a
perilous life, and in the other renoume is sure.

I shall tell the, what wise Cicero said, when he was pursued with many at
Rome: Behold you Romans, I hold you not for so good, nor my self so ylle,
to say the troth always, nor always to make lies. I am certain, that ye bear
me none envy, for that I am not as ye be, but it is because ye can not be as I
am. In this case I had rather that my ennemies had envy at my prosperity,
than my friends at my poverty.

This orator spoke after the appetite of them that be in prosperity, leuynge
to give remedy to them that be sorrowful. And after this Cicero had seen the
feldes of Farsalye, he took other council and remedy, such as pleased him in
Rome. For if Caesar had granted him his goods, yet yt turned not his credence
and renoume. Surely friend Pyramo^ I know no remedy to give the against envy,
since thou see all the world full thereof, we se how we be the sons of envy, and
we live with envy, and die with envy: and he that leueth most riches, leaves
the greatest envy. The ancient wise men cou^sailed rich men, that they should
not have pore folks nere them: and they admonished the pore, that they should
not dwell nere to the rych. And truly it is good reason. For the richesse of
rich men is the sede of envy to the poor. And because the pore man lacks
and the rich has to much, causes discord among the people. I swear by ye
goddis immortal, friend Pyramon, though they that be ill would that I should
swear falsely, as much as riches with thought norisheth couetise, so much the
envious norisheth envy thereby. I tell the one thing, and that is, that it is
no good counsel to flee envy, and to avoid the virtue contrary to the same.
Homer says, yt in his time there were two Greeks extreme in all extremities:
The one was extreme in riches, and therefore he was persecuted by envy, and that
was Achilles: and the other was sore noted of malice, but no man had envy at
him, and that was Thiestes. Certainly I had lever be Achilles with his envy,
tha^ Thiestes without it. Thou know well, that we Romans search not but
for rest in our life, and for honor after death. And sith it is so, it is
not possible but the man that every man enuieth his renoume, ought to be
exalted in the rest of his life. And sith I see these two things in the,
such as be thy friends takes little thought, for that thyn ennemies murmr
ageinste the. Thou wrytest to me, how they of Lions do well, and are merry,
except thy self, that art heavy, and full of pensyuenesse. And since they
show not to have pleasure at thy displeasure, show not thy self dyspleased
with their pleasure. For it may chance one day they shall be sorrowful, when
that thou art merye: Than thou shall be quite with them. In an evil person
there can be no greatter ill, nor in a good man a greatter fault, than to be
displeased with an other man's welthe, and to take pleasure at an other man's
harm. And in case that al do us damage with envy, yet much more a friend,
than the enemy. For of mine enmy I will beware, and for fear he will withdraw:
but a friend with his amity may begyle me, and I by my fidelity shall not
perceive. Among all mortal ennemies there is none wors than a friend that is
enuyous of my felicity. Pyramon my friend, I will conclude, if thou wylt
withdraw thy self fro ennemies, than keep company with thyn own familiar
friends. I wot not what to write more to the, but with all my heart I lamente
thy heaviness. Thou know how thy nyece Brusia was slain with a dagger by
her own husband. I had great compassion for her death, and for the renoume
that she left behind her. Flauius Priscus thyn uncle is newely made Censure.
The process between thy brother Fornion and Britio is determined by the
senate, and hit pleases me right well, that they be friends, and every man
well content. The book intytuled the consolation of heaviness I have ended, and
laid it in the capitol. I have written it in Greek, and that is the cause that
I sent it not to the. But I do send the a rich sword, and a fair gyrdell.
Faustine my wife does salute the, and sendethe thy wife two sclaues. The
goddis be my kepers, and comfort the in thy present heaviness. Mark the man
fortunate, to Pyramon sore discomforted.

A letter sent by Marcus the emperor to Cornelius of the travail of war,
and vanity of triumph. The second Letter.
MArcke emperor of Rome to the Cornelius my faythfulle friend, salutation to
thy person, and good fortune to thy desired life. As thou in time passed, haste
been partener of my trauayles, I have sent to call the to give the pleasure
of my tryumphes. By the haboundance of richesse, diversity of captives,
fiersnes of capitayns that we have brought to Rome, thou may perceive what
peryls we have suffered in this war. The parthes are good men of war: and as
every man finds in their own land defends their houses with strong heart:
and surely they do like good men. For without reason we dye of affection to
take other men's goods: and they with reason do labor to defend that is their
own. Let no man take envy at the Romayn capitayn, for any triumph that is
given him by his mother Rome: For one day of honor, he is a. M. days in
despair of his life. I will not speak that I might say of them that be in
war, and dwell in Rome, and ben cruel iuges of their own fame. And since
that the propre renome of a man lies in other folks tongues, it is not said
because his person has meryted, but because that they do show their envy.
But our foolyshenes is so folyshe, and the reputation of men so vain, that
for one vain word, more than for our profytte, we put our life in danger,
and lay our honor to gauge with travail, rather than to live, and to assure
our renoume with rest. I swear by the goddis immortal, that the day of my
triumph being in the chariot, I was as pensive as I might be. O Rome cursed be
thy folly, and woe be to him that has brought up in the so much pride. And
cursed be he that has invented so great pomp in the. What greatter or more
unequal lyghtnes can be, than that a Romayne capitayn, because he has
conquered realms, altered peasibles, dystroyed cities, cast down fortresses,
robbed the poor, enriched tyrantis, shed much blood, and made infinite
wydowes, should for recompense of all these domages be received with great
triumph? Where have thou seen a greter folly? Infinite nombre is distroyed in
war, and one alone shall bear away the glory thereof. And though such
miserable conquerours merited not to be buried, yet when I went through the
streets of Rome (I tell it as a secret between the and me) that when the
charyotte tryumphaunt came, and the unhappy prisoners charged with yrons,
remembering the infinite treasures ill gotten, and heryng the lamentations of
the wydowes sorowfully weeping for the death of their husbands, and calling
to mind our manyfolde friends deed: though I rejoiced me openly, I wept
drops of blood secretly. I can not tell what person takes pleasure in
him self of an other man's damage. In this case I praise not the Assyriens,
nor I envy not the Persians, nor am content with the Lacedemoniens, nor
approve the Caldeens, nor content me with the Greeks. I curse the Troyans, and
condemn them of Carthage, because they followed not the zeal of Justice, but
what they did in their time was with rage of pride, whereby they and their
realms were brought into sclaunder, and was occasion to lose us. O cursed
Rome, cursed thou haste ben, and cursed thou shall be. For if the fatal
destenies deceive me not, and mine understanding fail me not, and that fortune
hold not fast, we shall se in time to come, Rome shall be in like case as
other realms be now in our days. And where as now with tyranny thou art
lady over all seignouryes, it shall comme by Justice, that thou shalt turn
to be bond to them, that are now under thy bondage. O ylle fortunate Rome: I
say it because that virtue is so dear in the, and make folly so great
cheap. Peradventure thou art more autentike than Babylon, fayrer than Hely,
rycher than Carthage, stronger than Troy, better peopled thanne Thebes, more
stored with ships than Corinthe, more delicious than Thyre, more inexpugnable
than Aquilie, more happy than Numancy: we see how they all are peryshed, for
all their virtues and valiant defenders, and thou hopest to abide perpetually,
stored with them yt be vicious, and peopled with such as be full of vice. O
Rome, mark this for certain, that the glory that thou have at this hour,
was first theyrs: and this destruction that now is theyrs, hereafter shall be
thyn. My dear fre^d Cornelius, shall I show the the loss of the Romayne
people, but I can not tell it the without weeping? I the emperor of Rome
command, I make decrees for the war: if any countreye arise, by sownynge of
a troumpette to make men to reyse their baners, and to create new
Capytaynes. And hit is a thing very euydente to see, that when they reyse
their standerdes, and have leave to make and assail enemies, children leave
their mothers, Students leave their schools, servants forsake their
masters, and officers their offices, to the entente that under the color and
craft of going to war, they should not be chastysed by Justice. They have
no fear of the gods, nor reverence to the temples, nor obedyence to their
fathers, nor love nor awe of the people, and love to live ydylly, and hate
just labor, and their exercyses are domageable. Sum do rob the churches,
sum make qarelles and stryffes, and sum break gates open and bear the
goods away. Sometime they take them that be at liberty, and deliver them
that should be prisoners. They pass the nyghtes in plays, and the days in
blasphemes: Finally they are vnfete to do well: and are holly disposed to do ill.
What shall I say of their neclygence? I am ashamed to write it. They leave
their own wives and take other men's, They dishonor the daughters of honest
men, and begyle young maidens, They enforce their hostesses, and neighbors
wives: and worste of al, the women that do go with them, set them agog that
do tarry. And so in this manner none of these women that so go, scapeth without
loss of honor, and the other ar stricken with vices in their hearts, because
they tarry. Think surely Cornelius, that the enterprises are small, where as
women do goo to war. Thou know, that the women Amazones have made greatter
war in Greece, than the cruel ennemies, and not for because they had not men
ynowe, but because they were so many women. Pyrrhus was overcome by Alexander,
The valyant captain Hanyball was lord of Italy, as long as he suffered no
women to come in his wars. And when he was enamoured of a fair young
damoysell of Capue, he was feign forthwith to turn his back to Rome, because
Rome cleansed the field fro lechery. For the same cause Numancie was cast to
the earth. And I my self have seen in the war of Parthes.xvii.M.
horsemen.lxxx.M. footmen, and.xxxv.M. women. And our besines went so, that fro
our host I sent away Faustine my wife, and so did other senators their
wives home to their houses, to thentent that they should serve them that were
old, and bring up their children. That day that a Patricion is approved by
the Senate, and led about Rome by the Consules, the egle is hanged at his
breast, and his raymente is read, and he after ryseth in such pride, that he
remembers not the poverty of the time passed, but thynkethe to be emperor of
Rome forthwith. Behold than what they do. They writh their berdes, and ruffle
their hears, boystous their words, they change their clothes, and roll
their eien, that they may seem the fierser. And finally, they love to be
feared, and hate to be loved. And wotest thou not, that they will be feared? On
a day being at Pentapolyn, I hard a captain of mine, not saying me, swear and
blaspheme, saying to a woman his hostess: ye vyllaynous people, will not
know the capitaynes of war: I will thou know mother, that the earth never
trembles, but when it is thret of a captain Romayne: and god never causes
the son to shine, but where as we be obeyed. But now friend Cornelius, sithe
I have blasoned his vaunt, harken his virtue and worthynesse. I swear to the,
that the said capytayne, for all his booste, being in a cruel battle, was
the first that fled alone fro the battle, and left the standerde: wherein he
did enough, to cause me lose the field. But when it was done, I caused to
strike of his heed. It is an infallible rule, that they, that show them self
most fierce, in effect are most cowardes. In diverse books I have read, and
of diverse I have hard, and in many I have seen, that it can not fail in a
man, that can suffer and take patience, to have virtue and force: And it is
marvel, that he is strong and valyant, that can not suffer. What shall I
say more of the greues and domages, that these men of war do, in passing
through realms, and of theftes and robberies, that they committee in the
houses, where as they lodge? I ensure the, the worm in ye tymbre, nor the
mothes in the clothes, nor the sparcle in the towe, nor the darnel among the
corn, nor the wesel among the grayn, nor the caterpyllers in fruit trees,
does not so much damage, as one company of men of war does hurt the
poor people. They leave no cattayle vnslayne, no gardeyne vnrobbed, no wild
beast vnchased, nor no maid vndefloured: and yet which is wors, they eat
without payment, and they will not serve without payement, nor no man can
converse and endure among them. When they are paid, by and by they play it
away: if they be not paid, they rob, and grudge: and the case is come to so
great corruption, that if thou saw it, thou would say, that each of them
were the heed of rumor, and the beginning of strife, poison to virtues,
Pyrate of rouers, and captain of al wretched thieves. I say not this without
weeping. It is the greattest mocking of all mockeries: and the cause gothe to
such loss and pardition, that these myscheuous people ar our homely and
familiar enmies: and yet there is no emperor, that can have lordshyppe over
them, nor justice chastise them, nor fear withdraw them, nor law subdue
them, nor shame refrain them, nor death that can kill them, for they be men
remedylesse: They over run, and eat, and dispoyle every manne. O how
sorrowful I am for the Rome, that was not wont to have in the such ill
adventures. Certaynely in the ancient time, when thou were peopled with right
and true Romans, and not as thou art now with bastard chylderne, than the
armies, that went froo Rome, were as well disciplyned and morigerate, as the
schools of the philosophies, that were in Greece. The old ancient hystories
witness, that king Philyp of Marcedony, and his son Alexander, were happy
in war, because they kept their armies so well ordered, that it seemed
better, to be a senate ruled, than an army that would fight. I swear to the by
min honesty, that fro the time of Quintus Cincinatus, unto the noble Marcus
Marcellus, (in the which time was the greattest prosperity of Rome) the
common people had great glory, as long as the discipline of knighthood was
well corrected: and we began to lose, when our capitaynes began to
deserve, to be depraved and condemned. O cursed be thou Asye, and cursed be
the day, that we had conquest of the. The goodness that has followed thereby,
we se it at our eye: and the damage that is come by the, shall all ways be
sorowed. In the we have wasted our treasures, and thou haste filled us with thy
vices: In change of strong and virtuous men, thou haste sent thy wantons to
us: We have overcome thy cities, and thou triumphest of our virtues: we have
beaten down thy fortresses, and thou have distroied our good customs: by
force thou art become ours, and with our good wylles, we are now thine:
Unjustly we are lords of thy realms, and we are just subjects to thy vices:
Finally, thou Asye shall be the sepulcher of Rome, and thou Rome shalt be the
syncke and gutter of the fylthynes of Asye. Certaynely Rome ought to have been
content with the lands of Italye, which is the nauyl of the world, without
conqueryng the lands of Asye, to bereue them from other. I like well al things
that I have red of my predecessors, saving that they were proud, as we their
successors be to hardy. And I swear unto the, that yet peradventure, after
the pain, we shall becomme virtuous and good. All the richesse and tryumphes,
that our forefathers have brought out of Asye, the goods and the richesse,
and they also, with the time at last had an end: but the wantonness and
vices, that are in us their children, doothe remain stylle unto this day. I
would to god, that the princis knew, what an outrageous thing it is, to invent
wars in strange lands and countries, and what travail they search in their
persons, and what thoughts in their minds, and what murmr and mocion in
their subjects, what end and wastinge of their rychesses and treasures, What
poverty to their friends, what pleasure to their ennemies, what damage to their
native countries, and what poison they leave to their own enherytours? I
swear to the, that if I had known, that I do know (I will not say, but by
blood shed they be taken) if they had offered them self with good will,
and shedynge of tears, I would not have taken them. The truth is, that our
capitaynes never slew.xx.M. men of Asie, with their armor, that they bare out
of Italye, but they lost mo than a. C.M. Romans, with the vices that they
brought to Rome: As eating openly in the palayes Ausonios, suppyng in their
houses secretly, the women to cloth them as men, and the men peynted as women,
The Patritiens bearing Measques, The Plebeyens vsinge smelles, and the
emperors to wear purpul. These.vii. vices of Asie, Asie sent for a present to
Rome. Seven noble capitayns brought them, I leave to show their names, lest
I should shame them with their faults, sithe they were so noble men by their
high deeds. Now ye princis, behold what profitte it is, to take strange
realms with our wars: I leave the vices, that they recover, and the virtues
that they lose, with the perdition of their treasure that they love. For
certain there is neither king nor realm brought to extreme poverty, but by
watrynge a strange realm, with fynall and extreme conquest. I demand of the
mine own friend Cornelius, What causes princis, to lose their treasure, and
require them of other? When their own can not suffyse, then they take fro
churches, search diverse lones, reyse tributes, and invent new subsydies, give
and spend on strangers, and make him self hated of his own, pray every man,
and have need of every man: adventure his person, and adventure his renoume?
If thou knoweste not this, I will tell the, if thou will here me. These
princis counsel with men, they live with men, and finally at the last they are
men. At one time by pride, that surmounteth them, an other time by council,
that fails them, some imagininge by their fantasies, some saying, that if he
have great goods, he ought to increase his fame, and that no memory should be
of him, if he invented no war, and that the emperor of Rome by right, is
lord of all the earth. And in this manner, as his fortunes is base, and his
thoughts high, the goddis suffer, yt wha^ he thinks justly to win an other
man's, than justly he loses his own. O princis, I can not tell what begileth
you, for where as ye may be rich with pleasure, ye will be poor with war:
where as ye may be beloved, ye will be hated: where as ye may play and sport
your self, and rest in a sure life, ye will commit your self to the
chances of fortune: and where as other have necessity of you, ye put your
self to be in the necessity of other. And though the prince make no war,
he should not suffer his people to war: Every manne ought to leave the war.
Friend Cornelius, I demand of the, whether is more trauaylle to his person, or
damage to his realm, a kings ennemies, orels his own army? His ennemies
rob on the costs, but our men rob all the land: The enmyes may be
resisted, but we dare not speak to our own men. The ennemies enuade us on one
day, and recule back ageyn, but our garrisons rob daily, and abide still. The
strangers have some fear, but ours are shameless: and at the last, the farther
that our ennemies goo, the more they wax liberal, and our armies of men,
every day increase in cruelty, in such wise, that they offend the goddis,
and be importunate to their princes, and noyful to the people, living to the
damage of every man, and be unprofitable to al men. By the god Mars, I swear to
the, and as I may be helped in the wars, that I govern with my hand, I
have mo complayntes daily from the senate on the capitaynes that been in
Illyrike, than on all the ennemies of the Romayne people: I have more fear in
mainteynynge one standarde of a hundred men, than to give battaylle to.l.M.
ennemies. For the goddis and fortune dispatche a battle in an hour, be it
good or badde: but with these other, I can do nothing in all my life. Thus it
has been my friend Cornelius, and thus it is, and thus it shall be. Thus I
found it, thus I hold it, and thus I shall leave it. Our fathers did inuente
it, and we sustain it, that be their children, and for ylle, it shall abide to
our heirs. I say to the one thing, and I think I am not deceived therein: To
endure so great damage, and to no profitte of the people, I think it a great
folly in man, or else a great punishment of the goddis. Be the goddis so just
in all justice, and so true in all verity, that they will suffer us without
reason, to do ill in strange lands, to whom we did never good, and in our
own howses to have shrewde tournes of them, to whom we have always done good?
These things friend Cornelius, I have written to the, not because I think it
needful, that thou shuldeste know it: but my spirit rests in showing of
it. Panutius my secretatrie went to visit this land, and on the way I gave him
this letter, and I do send to the two horses, I think they be good. The armor
and jewels, that I won on the Parthes, I have departed them. How be it I se^de
the a chariot of them. My wife Faustyne salutethe the, and sends to thy wife
a rich glass, and an ouche of precious stones to thy daughter: I beseech the
goddis, to give the good life and me a good death. Marcus thy love writes to
the Cornelius his friend.

To Torcates being at Gayette, in consolation of his banysshement. The.iii.
letter.
Mark of mount Celio, companion of the empire, to the Torcate, being at
Gayette, patricien Romain, salute to thy person, and virtue and force against
aduers fortune. It is a three months, sithe I received thy letter, the which
mine eyes might not make an end to read, nor my hands to answer. I am so heavy
for thy heuinesse, so peinfull for thy peyn, and so hurt with thy wound, that
where as thou wepest with thyn eyes outwardely, I weep with my heart inwardly.
I wot what difference is between the tree and the croppe, and the dreme fro
the truth: I here of thy trauayles by strange persons, and I feel them in
mine own person. But where as true friends be, the peynes are in common. The
great infortunes ought to be suffered for one thing, because they declare, who
ar the true friends. I know by thy, letter how thou art banyshed from Rome,
and all thy goods confyscate, and that for pure heaviness, thou art sick in
thy body. I would go se the, and counsel thy person, because that thou
myghtest see, with what heart and will, I do weep for thy mysaduenture. But if
thou take me for thy true friend, believe me, as I believe the, that is, how
much I feel thy mysaduenture. Of truth, as thou art banyshed bodyly, so am
I banysshed inwardely in my heart. And if thy goods or substance be taken
away fro the, I am robbed of a good friend and companyon. And if thou lackeste
thy friends, I am abiding among mine enmies. Though I might remedy by workynge
of my power, thy banyshment: yet I will counsel thy spirit with certain
wordis. If I be not forgetful, I never saw the content in this life: because
thou were ever besye in thy prosperity, and weary of any adversity. And as
now, I se the despair, as though thou were but new come into this world. I
have known the this.xxxii. years in great joy: and now thou complaynest
of.vi. months, that fortune has turned her whele. O Torcate, now thou
may know, that virtuous men, fear more two days of prosperity than two
hundred of adverse fortune. O how many men, and how many rich cities
have thou and I seen, slyppe fro their prosperities, through their vycyous
living and strange enmities? In such wise, that their vaynglorye and slypper
prosperity, endured but two days: and the hurtes and loss that they have
had, and the cruel and extreme enmities, the which also that they have
won, lasts to this day in their heirs. Contrary wise, we see some set in
the height of tribulations, the which have escaped by casting away vices,
clothing them with virtues, weary of evil warkes, following goodness, being
friends to all, and ennemies to none. What will thou, that I should say more?
They that are happy, are overcome in peace, and they that are unhappy, do
ouercomme other in war. Therefore my friend Torcate, it seems to me, no less
necessite, to give good counsel, than to prosper with great prosperity, to
remedy them that are in great heaviness. For as weary are they, that go the plain
way, as they that costeth the high mountains. By thy letter I perceive, that
what time thou hopedst to have been in most quietness and rest, this ill fortune
and chance fell on the. Be not abashed thereof. For though that all new
chances causes new thoughts presently, yet thereby comes more cause of
stedfastnes in time to come. Certainly the tree bears not so much fruit,
there as it springs first, as it does when it is new set in an other place.
And all good smelles are more odoriferous, if they be well meddled and chaufed
together. I pray the tell me, abiding in the world, being a child of the
same, and loving the world, what hopest thou to have of the world, but worldly
things? the world shall always be the world. At this hour thou art worldly,
and shall be worldly, and shall be entreated as the world is accustomed to
entreat them that be worldly. If thou knew thy self and thy weakness,
if thou knew fortune and her mutation, if thou kneweste the men and their
malices, if thou knew the world, and the flatteryng thereof, thou would
reyse the fro the hand thereof with honor, and not be chastysed with infamye.
O how we hope to sprede by fortune? O how often without respect unawares we
pass this life? O how often we trust the bobaunce of this world? and we
trust therein as much as though it never begyled man. I say it not because I
have hard it said, nor because I have read it in books: but for we se it
daily with our eyes, sum decay and lose their goods, other fall and loose
their credence, some fall in sight, and leese their honor, and other arise
and lose their lives, and some think, that all are free by pryuilege, where as
never none were pryuyleged. O my friend Torcate, of one thing I am certain,
and let every man take it for a warnyng: Men, by whom we be borne, be of so ill
disposition, and the world so fierce and cruel, with whom we live, and the
glydynge serpente fortune so full of poison, that they hurt us with their
fete, and byte us with their teethe, and scratche us with their nails, and
swelle us with their poison, so that the passing of the life is no less than
taking of death. And in case thou haste seen sum live long without any
fall of fortune, think not it is well, for it is not by good adventure, but
the more his ill fortune. The world is so malicious, that if we take not head
to prepare against his wrinches, it will overthrow us to our greatter loss and
hurt. Much sooner dye they that been helthful with the infirmities and syckenes
of few days, than they that be weke with their la^gour of many years. I say
this because I hold it for most surety, that the miserable manne, that may
not live without myseries, should feel the peynes by little and little, and
not all at ones. We eat diverse things by morsels, which if we should eat
hole, would choke us. In likewise by diverse days we suffer diverse trauayles,
which al together would make an end of us in one day. And than sithe the
goddis will permytte, that thy mysfortune shall fall, and that the river of thy
decay ouerflowe her channel, and where thou wenest to be most sure, thou shall
be in greatest peril, we shall minister to the a syrope, to thentent that thou
lose not thy good renoume, though thou have lost thy goodis that be naught.
Tell me I pray the Torcate, why complaynest thou, as he that is sick? Why
criest thou like a fool? why syghest thou as a desperate man? Why wepest thou
as a child? Thou haste gone an ill way, and complaynest of thy rest. Thou
art clothed to goo through bushes, and thou say that thy gowns do tear.
Thou walk among the stoones, and art sorye because thou fallest. Thou have
leaned, and thoughtest not to fall, and finally thou art set with the world,
and thynkeste to be free with heaven. Will thou have saufeconduite of Fortune,
that is enemy to many? She can not give the naturalitie, which is mother to
all things. I will axe the one thing: I put case the sea had promised the,
to be always in surety of her, and the sky clear wether, the summer snowes,
and the winter flowers. It will not be of a surety Torcate. If nature can
not fulfylle this, being thyn own mother, think thou than, that fortune
will give it the, which is thy unjust stepmother? Keep this rule for
certain, and never forget it, that al natural courses are subjects to
mutation every year. And all worldely folk that trust on fortune, shall
suffer eclyps every moment. And than since natural things can not be always
in one case, of necessity the goodis of Fortune must peryshe, sithe they be
superfluity. Right unjust should the ryghtwyse goddis be, if they had made
perpetual that, which is domageable to so many: Or that which is profitable,
to have created it fallyble. I will speak no more of thy prosperity in times
paste, but now I will comme to the banyshement that thou suffrest presentely.
Suspecious fortune made a fair at thy gate, knowing what she sold: and thou
wyste not what thou boughtest: She made a dear bargayne, and sold it dear to
the: she has given the sour for sweet, and the sweet is turned into
sowrenesse for the: she has given the yuell for good, and has turned thy
good to ill. And finaly she has begyled the at a just price, not wenynge to
the that she would have done the damage: and though that she was malycious in
selling to the, thou were no less foolysshe in the byenge thereof: for the
more there is in fortunes shop, the more suspecte is the marchandyse. O how
unhappy be we, for in that market is nothing sold but lies. And she trusts
nothing but upon the pledges of our renoume: and at last will not be paid
but with the shot of our life, and that is the most greatteste and
myscheuous wound. It is as openly known to every man as to the, that where as
they think not to leese their wares, false Fortune in that they purpose, to
their myshappe lies in awayte, and is ready to bye them. Thou make me very
sore abashed Torcate. I have reputed the right wise and virtuous, and now I
take the for a lost fool. In good sothe when I saw the young in Gayette, I
judged the worthy to govern Rome: and now that thou art old, thou deseruest
nothing but to be cast in a galey as a sclaue. O how many things are there to
know a man by? There is not so high a top of a hylle, but it is trodden with
feet: nor so deep a see, but it is sounded with lead. And in a hundred years
one manne can not attain to know an other man's heart. Tell me I pray the,
what lokedste thou for of fortune, after so greatte welthe? Living to the
world, think to be in the world. The children of vanite goo and walk so
long, that at last their disordynate desire can not take fro the world
their antike vilanyes and shamfulnes, the which fortune does not with them
that she has raised unto the skies, thynkeste than, that she shall bow with
the to the loweste parties? O fool Torcate, thoughteste thou to pass the sea
without peril, to eat flesh without bones, To drink wine without lies,
to walk in the ways without finding stones, To bye wheat without chafe? In
good soth, if thou thoughtest to bye ill goods without hindrance of thy good
fame, and to maynteyn thy good renome without loss of ill gotten goods, I
would wit of the, what thou dydest hope to do, sith so long season thou
haste made a face in the world.xxxiii, year thou have ben in the grace of the
world, now it is time fro hensforth to fall at some discord therewith, Abell,
king of the Assiriens, hoped to have but seven years of good prosperity.
Queen Simiramis but only six. Abell king of the Lacedemoniens five, Eutrete
king of the Caldeens.iiii. Alexander king of the greeks.iii. Amylcar the
great of Carthage but two, and our Gayus Caesar Romayne but one only, and many
before and sithe not one year: And since thou were the most unknown of
lynage, the grosseste of understanding, and the least of power, the darkest
of fame, and the most weke in merits: wherefore than complayneste thou on
fortune? If thou had ben virtuous in all these.xxx. years, thou had
never eaten without thought, nor never spoken without suspection, nor slepte
without stertyng, thinking what thou had to do, and wherein fortune might
begyle the. He that is so long besette about with so many enemies, I can not
tell how he should take any sure sleep. Ah Torcate Torcate, the world has so
many falls, and we know so ill how to continue among them, that be
worldly, that scantly we are fallen when our hands and fete like sclaues be so
fast tied, that we can not lose them. It fylleth our persons full of vices,
strengtheth our sinews to wickedness, weaketh our hearts in virtues, and
finally renders our spirits in a trance, and masethe our understanding, and
changes our taste, and sufferethe us as beasts to show our euylles that we
feel with waylynges, all though as men we durst not show it. And that this is
true, it appears, that when we see, that we lose, we lament and complain,
and none can help him self. This small lesson I writ to the, to the end
thou should live in less thought. The horse colte that thou dyddeste send
me, leapeth very well: The spanyell that thou sent to me, is well, but he is
wild: the calfe was very fat, and I would have eaten it forthwith, but my
wife Faustyn besily prayed me to keep it, and thinks that it was stolen in a
gardeyne. I send to the.ii.M. sexters for to succor the in thy trauayles. And
as touching thy banyshement, at time convenient I shall dispatch thy matters
with the senate. The consolation of the goddis, and the love of man be with the
Torcate. The sodeynnes of evils, and the ire of the furies be separate froo me
Marcus Aurelius. Faustyn my wife greteth the, and in like wise fro her part
and ours, to thy mother in law, and thy wife have us recommended. Marc of Rome
sends this writynge to Torcate of Gayette.

A letter sent to Domitius of Capue to comfort him in his banisshemente. The
fourth letter.
Mark orator Romayn, borne on mount Celio, to the Domitian of Capue salute
and consolation of the goddis consolatours. In this right cold winter there
arose in this land a mighty great wynd, and by reason of the great wind arose
great quantity of waters, and the waters have caused great humidites, and
great humidities bread diverse maladies and diseases: and among all the
infirmities of this land I have the gout in my hand, and the ciatica in my
leg. For the health of my wife Faustine I can neither go nor write. I say it
because I can not write to the so long as the case would require, and as thy
thanks meryteth, and my desire coueteth. It is showed me, that by occasion of
a horse thou have had strif with Patricio thy neighbor, and that thou art
banished fro Capue, and set in the prison Mamartyn. Thy goodis are co^fisked,
and thy children banished, thy house cast down, and thy neuewe is put out
of the senate, and banysshed the senate for.x. years. It is told me, that all
the day thou wepest, and wakest by night: in company thou die, and do
love to rest solytarilye: Thou hateste pleasure, and love pensiveness. And I
have no marvel: for the sorowefull hearts live with tears and weeping, and
be merry and laugh in dienge. I am right sorry to se the lost: but much more,
that for so small a thing thou should be cast away, as for a horse to lose al
thyn estate. O how variable is fortune, and how soon a mysaduenture falls
before our eyes? Fortune gives these euyls, and we see it not: with her hands
she touches us, and we feel it not: she tredeth us under fete, and we know
hit not: she speaks in our ears, and we here her not: she cries alowde unto
us, and we understand her not: and this is because we will not know her: and
finally, when we think we are most surest, than are we in most peril.
Troth it is, that with a little wind, the fruit falls fro the tree: and
with a little sparcle the house is set a fire: a small rock breaks a
greatte ship: and with a little stone the leg is hurt. I say, that
oftentyme of that we fear not, comes greatte peril. In a close Fistula,
rather than in an open, the surgiens doubt the peril: In deep still waters
the pilote fears more than in the great hye wawes: Of secret enbushement,
rather than of open armies, the warrior doubts. I will not only say of
strangers, but of his own propre, not of enemies, but of friends, not of
crewelle war, but of peace, not of open damage or sclaunder, but of secret
peril and myschiefe, a wise man ought to beware. How many have we seen, that
the chances of Fortune could not abate, and yet within a short while after,
vnwarenes with great ignomynious shame has overthrown them? I would wit of
the, what rest can a person have, that trusts ever upon the prosperity of
fortune, sith for so light a cause we have seen so great a strife in Rome, and
such a loss to thy house? Seeing that I see, I will not fear the wyndes of
her trauayles, nor believe in the clerenesse of her pleasures, nor her thunders
shall not fear me, nor will trust upon her flatteringes, nor thank her for that
she leueth with me, nor be sorye for that she takes froo me, nor wake for any
truth that she says to me, nor rise for any of her leasynges, nor lawghe for
any thing that she desires of me, nor weep for gyuing me leave. If thou
know not the cause of this, I shall tell the. Our life is so doubtefull, and
fortune so way ward, that she does not always threate in strykynge, nor
strikes in thretnynge. The wise man gothe not so temperately, that he
thinks at every step to fall, nor live with so small athought, to think
to overthrow in every plain pathe. For oftentimes false fortune shakes her
weapon, and strikes not, and an other time stryketh without shaking. Believe
me of one thing Domitius, That part of the life is in most peril, when
with little thought or care men think them self most sure. Wylt thou se
the truth thereof. Call to thy mind Hercules, that escaped fro many perils by
see and by land, and yet dyed between his le^mans arms. Laomedon peryshed not
under Troy, but was slain in his house. Great Alexander dyed not in making
war over all the earth, but he ended with a little poison. The courageous
Caius Caesar saved him self in.lii. battayles, and after in the senate was
slain with.xxxii. strokes of penknyues. Asclipio brother of Pompeie, peryshed
not flotynge.xxii. year upon the sea, but he was drowned after in drawing
water at a well. Ten capitains that Scipio had with him in Affrike, that
vanquyshed many hard batayles, as they were mockyng on a bridge, they fell fro
the bridge, and were drowned. Good Drusio that had overcome the Parthes, the
day of his triumph, going to his charyot, there fell a tyle that claue asonder
his heed, so that vayneglorie was the end of his good life. What should I tell
the more? Thou know well that Lucye my sister, having a nedel on her bosom,
playenge with her child between her arms, the child with his hand hytte the
nedell such a stroke into her body, that he slew his mother. Gneo Ruffyn the
consulle, sent against the Germayns, of our time was so valyaunte in arms,
that none of our predecessors surmounted him: yet he kembynge his old white
hears, one of the teethe of the comb entered into his heed, whereby grew an
ympostume, by occasion whereof he ended his honorable life for so small a
case. How semethe the Domitius? As I do tell the of so small a nombre, I could
recyte infinite examples, What mysfortunes fell after good fortunes, What
mischaunce after great glory, what mysaduenture after great hap, what
greatte evil they take of their death, after the beginning of greatte welthe
in the life. I being as they, know not what to desire, but they being as I
am, will rather choose the labourous and honorable death, than an ill death and
an honorable life. To my semynge he, that will be a man among men, and not a
beast among bestes, ought to travail sore to live well, and much more to
dye better. For at the fynall end an ill death puts great doubt of the
good life: and the good death excuses the ill life. I have written to the at
the beginning of my letter, that by reason of the humydities, the gowte
greuethe me ylle. But to satisfy thy desire, I would feign write with my hand
more at length. Two days the love that I bare to the, has faught with the
peine that I endure. My will would write, but my fyngers can not hold my
pen. The remedy is, sith I may not as I would, that thou will take as thine
own, that I may do, as mine own deed. Faustine my wife saluteth the, who by
reasonne of my diseases, is half ylle at ease. It is showed her, that thou
haste greatte pain of a hurt of thy face, she has sent the a box with
baume, that thy hurt shall not appear in thy visage. If thou can find any
grene almondes or new nuttis, Faustine prays the, to send her some by this
bearer. I have but lyttel store of money, therefore I send the a gown, and thy
wife a kyrtell. No more, but I pray the goddis to give the that I desire for
the: and to give me, that thou desireste for me. And beside, that I do write to
the with my hand, I give to the mine own propre heart.

A letter sent fro the emperor to Claudius and Claudyne his wife, because
they being old, lived as young persons The.v. letter.
MArcke of mount Celio to the Claudius and Cladine husband and wife, dwelling
in my ward, I desire health, sendynge you this letter. The truth is, because
ye are my friends, and under my charge, I enquire of them that come fro you, of
your estates: and by them that goo to you, I send recommendations to you
both: if ye have my good will, demand hit of your hearts. And if in your
stomach ye repute and take me but as a suspecious friend, thanne I think my
self even clean condemned. The cruelle forgetfulness, the which may be
causex of mine absence, peradventure banysheth the good deeds, that ye have
received of my person. If in any thing I have entreated you with lies, than
I require, that ye entreat me nothing with troth. But if I have been always
your good neighbor and friend, if ye have any need of mine honor, thanne be
to me as good. Gayo Furion my friend, as well as your parent, passing this
way to Alexandrye, has showed me many things, the which were done in Rome:
and among other, he showed me one thing, that caused me to laugh, when I hard
it: and yet it was right grievous to me, wha^ I thought thereon. Sum things we
take suddenly in sport and mockery, the which afterward, well considered,
makes us very sorye. He showed me, how that ye seem to every man right
ancient, and very young in your doing: for you array your self daily with
new apparel* as ye should go to weddynges: and where as men do honor you as
ancient persons, ye show your self wanton: and when folk run to se
gewgawes, ye are not the last. There is no lyghtnes in Rome, but it is
regestred in your house. Thus ye give your self to pleasures, as they that
think never to have displeasure. And finally, when ye should lift up your
hands, ye enter newely into the wages of the world. Truly my neighbors and
friends, to speak with dew reverence, I am asshamed of your unshamefastness,
and am no less sorry for your fautes. There be diverse grievous faults, that are
made light by the honest withdrawynge of them. And some other that are but
small fautes: and fyndyng no ways to leave them, are esteemed very great. By all
the goddis, I can find none occasion, howfor to excuse your euylles: but I see
inowe, wherewith to condemn them. Wherefore pardon me, if that I seem
unhonest to speak so much, when ye be not honest in your living. In good
sothe I denaye not, but that thou Claudius haste been right free and lyberalle
of thy person, and thou Claudine right fair of vysage, and many persons for
the beauty of thy forhed have been curious to have had the to wife, but I would
wit of the youth of ye one, and beauty of the other, in vsyng all your lives
in vanity, what goodly trinkettes ye hope to were in the straitnes of the
Sepulcher. O great foles, ye and foles ageyn, Do you not know yet, that the
time flees with mouyng of wings? The life trauayleth on her way without
lyftynge of her fete: fortune stretches her without styrryng her arms, and
the world voydeth it self saying nothing, the flesh consumes without
feeling, and our glory passes as it never had been: and finally death
assayleth us er ever he knock at the gate. Certaynely it is impossible for to
make synewes of blood, of veins to make bones, of a craggy rock a plain way,
and of possible to make impossible. I mean that none shall think, but that the
grenenes of youth shall waste and wydder in age. O world, what a world art
thou: so little is our force, and our wekenes so great, that without resystynge
drowneste us wyllyngly in the depenes of thy peryllous whyrlepoole: and hydest
us in the thyckest of thy mountains, and leadest us out of the broad way,
wandering by thy narow paths, and bryngest us into the rugged way. I do
mean, that they that be greattest in favor, thou bryngest into danger, to
the entente that with one stroke of thy foot, thou may overthrow them. O
world.lii. year I have benne in the, and yet thou never saydest one truth to
me, and I have taken the with.x.M. lies. I never desired any thing of the, but
thou dyddest promise hit me, but thou never gave me any thing promised me: I
never treted with the, but thou begyledste me, I never arrived at the, but thou
lost me: I never saw thing in the, whereby I should love the. For all that we
see in the, is worthy to be abhorred. And beside this, I wot not what is the
world. O what faut is in us thy worldly wretches? For if thou hate us, we dare
not hate the: if thou braule with us, we must be stylle: if thou spurn at us,
we must suffer the: if thou beat us with a staff, we say nothing: And yet
if thou would have us gone, we will not go. And worste of all is, that we
had rather serve the for nothing with travail, thanne the goddis with prayer
and rest. I swear to the by the immortalle goddis, that oftentimes I make
account of my years passed: and an other time I reuolue my books, to see what
I have read. And likewise I demand of my friends, to give me counsel to know,
wherein it is that I would speak. I being at Rhodes, redynge Rhetorique, My
lord Adrian keeping me there, at the age of.xxi. year, my young flesh, and no
less weak than tender, at the first work I found solytarynesse, and the
solytarinesse with liberty adored the world: In adoryng I felt it, in
feeling I followed it, in following I ouertoke it, in ouertakynge I took it, in
taking I proved it, in proving I tasted it, in tastyng I found it bitter, in
fyndyng in bitter, I hated it, in hatynge it, I felt it, in leaving it, it
returned, and retournynge I received it. And in this manner.lii. years, we have
eaten of one breadde, and dwelled in one house. Wha^ I saw it displesed, I
served it, when it saw me thoughtfull it chered me, when I saw it in
prosperity, I demanded it, when it saw me merry, it begyled me. And thus we
be together unto this day, not gyuynge me leave to goo, nor I willing to
depart fro it. O world, thou haste so many countenances in thy vanity, that
thou leadest all wandrynge in unstableness. Sith we suffer the to take us, thou
wylt never deliver us: if we withdraw our fete fro the snare of fortune,
forthwith thou fettrest our legs fast with yrons: and if by chance we fyle
the yrons, anon thou manaclest our hands: and though the way be strayte, the
pathe sharp, the iourneye long, and our flesh weak, yet our bodies are ever
laden with vices, and our hearts fulfilled with thoughts and pensiveness. Of
one thing I have greatte marvel, and I can not deuyse what it is: without
any constraynt to the contrary, we go surely over the bridge, and yet we will
go an other way: and though the same way be sure, yet we will adventure into
the gulfre: if the ways be dry, yet will we goo through the dyrte and mire
and plasshe: having meat for our living we search for poison to kill us: we
search to be lost, and may be assured: without interest we commytte sin,
saying pain coming withal: and finally, to the entente that we should be
taken for good, we shote at the white of virtues, and hytte the butte of vices.
One thing I confess, though it be mine own shame, Peradventure in time to
come it shall be profitable to sum other. In.l. years of my life, I would
prove all the vices of this life, to see if any thing might have satisfied the
humayn malice: And after I had seen all thing, I found, that the more I did
eat, the more I dyed for hungre: The more I slepte, the more fluggye I was:
the more I drank, the more thyrste I had, the more I rested, the more werye
I was: the more good I had, the more covetous I was: the more I sought, the
less I found: And finally I never took pain for any thing, but I was ever
let: and thanne anon I had appetite to an other. Let no man think to
live in the flesh, and satisfy the flesh. It has power to take fro us our
life: and we have no power to take from it the disordinate couetyse. I would
feign know of the goddis, why our days should have an end. O cruelle goddis,
what is this? We can never pass one good lyfes day, we do but taste it, and so
passes our life, and life is but a dream, and death waketh it. Let every
manne know, that the world takes our will, and we with our good will give it
thereto: and it takethe our will, to the end to content us, and praise that
we praise, and the time passethe so, that we live after the cursed time. To
attain virtues, we have good desire: but to attain to vices we put to all
our warkes. This have I said for you Claudyus and Claudine, that in three score
years, ye will not issue nor goo out of the prysonne of the world: Having
your feet putrifyed with yrons and chains. What is thanne to be hoped of
young persons, which be of five and twenty years old? Except my memory
fail me, when I was with you, ye had your neuewes, sons of your children
married, and nyeces, daughters of your daughters married: and me thinks, when
the guynes comme, the season of cheryes is not comme: and when the new wine
is tounned, the dry husks are cast out. Can ye suffer diverse neuewes,
sons to your children, in your house, and few years in your persons? Very
seldom we see fruit and the floweres together: for when the one is ripe,
and in season, than the other is clean goone and avoided.

In this case I think greatte marvel, how ye can be of many years, and
seem to be young. I know none other thing, but when ye married Lambert,
your own daughter to Drusio, and Matryne your nyece, daughter of your daughter,
with Lamberte, that were all little and young children: and sithe that ye be
of a good aege, and lack good, ye may give unto each of them twenty years of
your aege, instead of their dowry. And so ye shall unlade you of your years,
and charge you with other men's goods and substance. No less this mattier
passes in my thought, than the short clothe doothe in a false weuers hands.
Ye have strayned it on the tentours, and drawn it on the perch, for to to
lengthen the life. If ye were made fair and clear cordwainers wax, and sweet
of savor, that ye might be drawn out at length, hit were well done, but
ye are but as fruit of almondes, semynge dry without, and worm eaten within.
For the love that I have to you, and for neyghbourheed that ye have had with
me, I desire still frendshyppe of you, that like as I knew you young and very
young, so to know you old and very old. I say not that ye surmou^t in age,
but your wit fails you. O Claudius and Claudine, I will ye know, that to
sustain youth, and to deface age, to length the life, and drive away death:
it is not in men's hands that desire hit: it is the goddis that do give it,
which according to justice and our couetyse, gives us life by weighte, and
death without measure. Ye may know, that our nature is corruption of our body,
and our body is putrefaction of our wit, and our wit is guide to our
soul, and our soul is mother of our desires, and our desires are sleers of
our youth, and our youth token of our age, and our age spy of our death, and
death the house of our life, wherinto youth gothe on foot, and from age we
can not flee on horse back. I would wit a thing of you: what find ye in
this life? wherefore does life content you after.lxxx. years of age? either ye
have been good or ill: if ye have been good and virtuous, ye shall not rejoice you
with ill goddis: if ye have benne ill* than as well desire death, to thentente
ye should be no more ill, orels justly ye might be slain by justice. For he yt
has been ill till.lx. years of age, in him there is no hope of amendmente. When
the courageous great Pompeie, and Caius Caesar were ennemies, and being in
cruel civil battles, Rome was infamed, and them self lost. The annals show,
that such as came in favor of Julius Caesar, came out of the west, and the
succors of Pompeie out of the east, among other there came certain people
out of Barbary, dwelling among the mountayns Riffees toward Inde: Their
custom was, when they came to thage of.l. years, to make great fyres, and
brenne them self quick in sacrifyce to their goddis, and the same day the
parents and children would make great feasts, and eat of the flesh half
burnt, and drink wine with the ashes of the bones. This was seen with the
eyes of Pompei, because that some accomplyshed the years of fyftye in the camp.
O golden world, wherein were such men. O happy people, that in all the worlds
to come, has left such a memory of them. They despised the world, and
forgatte them self. What strokes gave they to fortune? What delytes for the
flesh? and how little set they by their lives, and yet more, to set so
small store by death? O what bridel was this for the vicious, and what hope
for the virtuous, what confusion for them that loved this life, and what
ensaumple, not to fear death, have they left us? And since they despised their
own propre life: it is then to be thought, that they dyed, not to thentent to
take other men's goods, to think that our life never shall have end, therefore
our couetyse never has end. O glorious people, and.x.M. times blessed, that
left their sensuality, and vanquyshed their natural will, believe not that ye
se, but give faith to that ye never saw, as they that se nothing go against
the fatal destenies: who goethe against the way of fortune, give a wrynche to
the life, rob the body at the death, win honor of the goddis, not that
they should length your life, but to take the rest of the life. Archagatus
surgien, and Anthonius the phisitien, and Esculapius the father of medicines, I
think wanne but little in that land. Who commanded these Barbariens to take
sirope in the morning, and to take pylles at night, and to refreshe them with
milk, to take clear barley to annoint their lyuers, to day to be let blood,
and to morrow to take a purgation, to eat one thing, and to absteyn fro many
things? Than me think, that they being of.l. year of aege, and you of lxxx.
at the least, should be egall with them in wisdom. And if ye will not take
death in good worth, yet at the leest, amend the ill life. I remember well of a
long time, that Fabricius, our neybour wylled us, to beware of a mockery, the
which if it be not broken, there shall follow great dysshonour. And since he
showed me so good a lesson, I will pay you with the same money. I will show
it you, if ye poor aged folks do not know it: ye be such, that your eyes
are bleared, your noses droppynge, your hears white, your herynge dulle, your
tongue faulterynge, your tethe waggynge, your face wrincled, your fete swollen,
your shuldres crooked, and your stomach distempered, finally if the graves could
speak, they might ryghtfully call for you to come, and inhabit in them. Of
truth it is great compassion to behold young ignorance, that open their
eyes, to know the infortunes of this life, when it is time to close them and
to enter into the grave. And thereof comes, that it is in vain to give
counsel to vain young people. For youth is without experience of that it does,
and is suspect of that it hereth, and will not believe that is said, and
disprayseth other men's counsel, and is right pore of their own. And therefore I
say Claudius and Claudyne, my friends, I find without comparison, none so
ylle an ignorance of goodness, that holdethe these young persons, as is the
obstinacy of these aged persons in ill. The diffinition of ill, is a man
not to know that he ought to know, yet it is wors to have the knowledge of
wisdom, and to live like a brute beast. O ye old goutye people, ye forgette
your self, and run in post after the life, and ye never regard whatte
shall fall, till ye be such as ye would not, and without power to return
back: and hereof comes, that ye lack of life, ye will supplye it with folly.
Than awake ye that be slombringe, have no force to sleep, open your slepy eyes,
and accustom you to do well: Take that is nedeful for you: and finally appoint
you betimes with death, or he make execution of your life.Lii. years I have
known them of the world, yet I could never know none so old, nor so
putrifyed in their members, but that their hearts were hole to think
unhappiness, and their tongues hole to make lies. Take heed, ye poor old
persons, me think sith somer is paste, ye haste forward with the time: and if
ye tarry a small season, yet ye make haaste to take lodging. I mean, that
though ye have past the day in the sea with peril, the night of death will take
you at the port of health. Mockes do pass with mockynges, and troth with
truth: though I have seen you right young and hardy, now I se you very
old: Though the knight pass his course, yet it is not his fault, if the horse
be not well reyned: but at the end of his course, he will trymme his horse.
Let not that begyle you, that of custom has begyled men: That is, ye shall be as
well esteemed thereby, as though ye had much money. I believe ye follow diverse, and
yet they all have envy at you. But trust me, that at the end, honor is given
to a young person poor and virtuous, rather than to an old person rich and
vycious. The rich may have power to be more esteemed with pore people, and
accompanied with rich and covetous: but the virtuous poor person, shall be
better esteemed and less hated. What can be greatter confusyon to a person,
or more shame to our mother Rome, than to se in diverse places, the old people
behave and appoynte them, as young folk, as though they like the vine leaves
did newly burgein? What thing is it to see the old persons, now in our
days, brayde and make fair their white hears, trymme and kembe their
beardes, wear strayte shows, their hosen guarded, their shurtes frounced,
their clokes of scarlette, their bags enbrodred, their chains of gold about
their necks, fringes of gold and silver about their apparel, estrige feathers
upon their hattes like greeks, perles and rings on their fyngers like
Indiens, their gowns long like flamine pristes, and finally worst of al, when
death has given them day, than they answer that newely they will serve a
lady? O how many have I known in Rome, that were highly renoumed in their
youth, and after through wanton lyghtnes they were but lost in their age: and
worste of all, they lost their renown in their age, and the favor of their
parents, and the profytte of their children. Certainly Guagyn Caten of the
ancient lynage of the Catons, was in Rome, a priest of the law.v. years, and
provost.iii. years, and Censure.ii. years, and dictatour one year, and
Consule.v. times, and when he was paste the age of.lxv. years, than he began to
serve Rosane daughter of Gneus Curcius, a lady right fair and young: and he
doted so far in her love, that he spente all that he had to serve her, and
would weep like a child when he saw her. It fortuned this lady fell sick of a
fever, and she lysted to eat new grapes, and it was in spring time, when
there was none ripe as than in Rome. He sent for some to the field of Danubius,
that was a. M. and.v.C. mile thense, and this was showed to the senate, and
they ordained, that Rosana was closed in with the virgins vestales, and the old
man was banyshed perpetually out of Rome, and his children lived in greatte
poverty, and the father dyed infamed. I believe that ye have hard of this.
There were diverse that reputed for a great vylanye the deed of the old lover,
and praised the sentence of the senate. But I think if Guagin had had as many
young persons in his banyshement, as there were old amorous persons that took
by him example, I think there should not be so many men lost, nor so many
women so ill married. And therefore the best is, that such people, when they be
warned by their servants, and reproved by their parents, and desired by their
friends, that they make not excuse and say, how they be not amorous, but in
mockerye. When I was very yo^ge both of age and wit, on a night I met with a
neyghbor of mine nigh to the capitol, I was his neuewe and son to his son,
and said to him, My lord Fabricius ye are amorous thus and thus. He answered
me, I do it but for pastyme. Certainly I had marvel to mete him at that
hour, and I was abashed of that answer that he gave me. In them that be soore
aged and of sadness and gravity, such requests ought not to be called amors,
but rather dolours, not a pastyme, but a lost time, no mockery but a
foolyshnes. For in love with mockery, follows the troth of infamy. To the
Claudius and Claudine, I demand of you old lovers, what is it to be polyshed
and arrayed as ye be so gayly, but the bronde of the tavern, where there is
nothing but vynegre, fair eggs and nothing in them, gylte pylles, and
bitter in taste, an old botell and a new stoppell, a hole wound rancled
underneath, the figure of an ox to take partriches, a slypper way, where no
foot is sure, and finally an old lover is as a knight decayed, that helps to
lose money, and can help no man fro peril. Of troth the old lecherous lover
is as a swyne with a white heed and a grene rail. Than me think ye that be my
friends and neighbors, ye take no head in breakyng the wings out of seson,
when the feathers be gone: and yet ye begyle me not, to say that there is time
enough. Believe me, that that may be done in the day, leave it not tylle the
night of your age. For the blunt knyfe cutteth but ill with the edge, and he
that is wont for to eat the flesh, can not eat the boones. Than let us
comme to the remedy, to redress this dommage, that is, if that the house
begin to fall, shore and stay it not with pieces of sclender tymbre, but with
straight pyllers of the life, that we have to yield the goddis, and to men by
good fame. And if the vine of all our virtues, be ready to be gathered, at the
least let us gather that is left us by understanding. And sithe the waters
of our rest, are wasted with our ill works, let us water them with new
must of good desires, and tha^ the good goddis will be content with the
seruyces, that we ought to do, for the merytes and rewards that they do to us,
so that if we desire, to attain gold for our warkes, yet to pay us with the
copper of our good desires. And finally, I say to you Claudius and Claudine, if
ye have offered the flower of your youth to vices, offer now at this time, the
branne of your age to the goddis. I have written thus largely to you, as I
think: and because ye shall not be taken as cowardes, nor I for hardy, give no
part of this letter to any person.

And I desire you to have me recommended unto all my neighbors in Rome, namely
unto Drusine the honorable wydowe. I send to the two thousand sexters, thou
shalt give a thousand of them to Gaurina the daughter to thy daughter, I
send it to her for a pleasure, which she did me at a feast. Faustine my wife
is very sick. Thou shalt give the other thousand to the Vestale virgins,
that they may pray for her unto the goddis. Unto the Claudine, Faustyne my
wife, sends a coffre, but by the goddis I do not know what there is within
it. Now that ye be aged, I beseech the goddis to send you and me, and my
wife, for to end the rest of our days in a good life. Mark your neighbor
and friend has written this with his own hand.

A letter sent fro Mark the emperor to Labinia a Romain widow, for to comfort
her for the death of her husband. The.vi. letter.
MArc of mount Celio, first Consule Roman, sent against the Daces, to ye
Labinia Romain lady, wife to my good friend Claudine, salute to the, and
consolation of the goddis consolatours. I think well, thou have suspect, that I
have so little set by the, since in thy profounde and grievous hurtes, my
consolation has been sloutheful. But I remember thy noblenes, which can never
fail: and my good will, the which has never desired to serve the. I am in
surety that thy great virtue should put away the suspecte. For though I am
the last to comfort the, yet I am the first that feleth thy dolours, and
shall not be the last to remedy thy troubles. And in case that ignorance is the
end of all virtues, esperance for all vices, as well sometime great pleasure
takes away rest from the wise folks, and sclandreth the innocents: much
better among us latyns we find with ignorance of vices, more than the greeks
do with the knowelege of virtues. If that we be ignorant, we have no pain to
abide it, nor sorrow to take it. I say it because I have known, that I would
not know, and that is, the trauayles are at an end of Claudine thy husband,
and now beginnethe the sorrow of Labinia. I have known it certain days, and
would not discover it to the, for it should have been cruelty. She that has been
in trouble so long a space with absence, that I should have given knowledge of
the death of such an entierly desired husband: and it had been no reason, that
she of whom I have received so many good dedis, should have of me so ill news.
And sith the hour yt I knew, that ye wyste thereof, my pain has been double.
I feel his death, and now I feel in his death my solytarines, and thy
desolation. Thou haste reason to weep, not for that he is with the goddis in
rest, but for us miserable persons, lyuinge in the power of so many ylles,
therefore we should not cesse to take pain and sorrow. O Labinia, oftentimes I
have thought, for what thing I might first weep, for the ill that lyuethe,
or for the good that dies. For as much hurts the ill that is found, as the
good that is lost. It is great pain to see these innocents dye, and surely
it is no less pain to see the malicious people live. But of that that
necessity must needs come, when it comes we ought not to sclaundre hit.
Show me Labinia, doste thou not know of how good conversation the gods be,
to whom we hope to go, and how ill the men be, with whom we are conuersaunt,
that as the ill are borne to dye, in like wise the good dyethe to live? For a
good man always lives in dyenge, and the ill always dies in living. And than
since the goddis have caused him to come to them, it is no greatte thing that
they have taken fro the. I am in certain, thy desired husban Claudyn, and my
true friend, seeing where he is, and remembrynge what he has escaped, had rather
to be stylle there as he is, than to return again to the. Of troth the
remedies for widows is not to think of any company passed, nor of the
solytarines present, but to think of the rest that they hope to come to. If
hither unto thou have ben in peine, abidinge in thy house, now rejoice the
because he abides for the in his, for thou shall be much better entreated
among the goddis, than here among men: nor consent not to think, that thou
haste lost him all only. For sith we all rejoiced of his life, we are than
bound to weep for his death. The greatteste sorrow to a sick heart among all
other sorrows* is to se other rejoice, at his dolours: and contrary wise, the
greattest ease among all greues of fortune, is to see that other feels their
sorrow. All that my friend wepeth for me with his eyes, and all that he feels
of my sorrow, discharges somewhat mine inward pain. The books in the time of
Auguste the emperor shows, how as he was nere to the river of Danubius, he
found a manner of people, having this custom: The same hour when a husband
takes a wife, or a lover, they would swear by their goddis, never to weep nor
sorrow for any manner of infortune, but to forget their own propre troubles,
and to dye to remedy their lover, and so in likewise each to do with other. O
glorious world, O right happy age, O people of eternal memory, wherein the
men were so humble, and their lovers so true, that would forgette their own
sorrow, and weep for others. O Rome being Rome, O time ill spente, O life ylle
applied, O small thought rechelesse in these days, the hearts present
separate from welthe, and assured without remedy in evil, that men
forgetting that they be men, turn them self to be beasts? I desire to
give the life, and thou dyest to take away my life: Thou wepest to see me
laugh, and I laugh to se the weep. And thus without profit of any of us we
lose, and we rejoice in lesynge of our self. By the law of an honest man I
swear to the Labynia, if thy remedy lay in my hands, as thy sorrow does at my
heart, thy pytiefulle wepynges should not hurt me, nor thy heavy and woeful
solitarynes of thy husband: but sith thy remedy and my desire can not be
accomplysshed, and that with death, nor with them that be deed we have no
power: than remyt it into the hands of the goddis, who can much better
deliver us than we can choose. We see by experience natural, that some
syckenesse is healed by words, that be said to us, and sum by words that
be laid to us, and some with words do leave other medicines. I say this,
because the hearts that be in pain make a see of thoughts, sometime comforted
with benefits done to the person, more than with words spoken in their
ears: an other time the sorrowful heart is more comforted with words of a
friend, than with all other seruyces of the world. O how sorrowful am I, for
in all these am I fauty, considering the hyghnes of the honorable lady
Romayn, and the small ability of me Marc of mount Celio? I see my self so
unable to comfort the, and to remedy the I lack substance, I have made the a
sore wou^d, the which would be taken in worth. I will not pay the with ynke
and paper, that which I may do with my person: for he that gives counsel
with words, may remedy with works, if he show him self a friend in time past
not taken in suspecte to be an enemy in time to come. If thou have reputed me
hitherto for thy neighbor and parent to thy husband, I pray the now to take
me for thy husband in love, and for thy father in counsel, and for son in
service, and for advocate in the Senate, in such manner that I hope thou shalt
say, all that I have lost in many, I have found in Mark alone. And because
that in grievous conflyctes, where as craft and subtyltie is forgotten, the
understanding is altered, and the reasone withdrawn, thanne there is as much
necessytie of good counsel as of a mean remedy. Claudyne now deed was my
friend, and I Marc alive am his, and also by thy deseruynge thou may
command me what thou will: and for the love that I have to the, thou may
desire of me any thing needful. I pray the eschew the extremity of the
Romayne wydowes. For in all extremities lies the vice, for all such werieth
them self, and anoyeth the goddis, and lose them that be alive, and do no
profit to them that be deed, but give suspection to them yt be ill, as did
Fuluia wife to noble Marc Mercello, she seeing her husband buried in the field
of Mars, scratched her vysage, and tare her here, and brake her tethe, and at
every pace swowned, and two senators held her by the arms, because she should
not hurt her self. Tha^ said Flauius Censurius, let her alone, for this day she
will follow the journey of widows, and so it was, for whiles yt the bones of
Marcello were a brennyng, she was intreting to mary an other husband, and yet
more to be noted, one of the senators yt led her, gave her his hand, as one
Romain to an other by perpetual marriage. This case was so foul, and taken of
every man for a great vilany, and all the Romans there present were abashed,
and were in suspect never after to believe wydowe in Rome. I say not this
Labinia, because thou wylt do so: for by the god Mars I swear, the heart of Marc
has of the no such suspect, nor thy great age will not suffer it, nor the
authority of so sad a matrone will demand it. I require the right heartily,
forgette not the honesty that ought to be in a Romayn woman, nor retrayte that
is requisite in a wydowe. For if thou be a wydowe of solytarines, that thou
felest by him that is deed, than comfort the of the reputation that is holden
of the by them that be living. I will say no more to the at this time but that
thy renome may be such with all men, to cast such a brydel upon them that be
ill, to cause them to be still, and to them that be good to give them spurs
to serve the. And if ye will thus do, take no thought for any besines that ye
have in the senate. My wife Faustyn greteth the, and oftentimes wepeth for this
mysaduenture. I send the money to pay thy creditours. The goddis that have
given rest to Claudine thy husband, give comfort and consolation to Labinia
his wife. Marc of mount Celio has written this with his own hand.

A letter sent by Marc the emperor to Cyncinatus his friend, because he being a
gentylman became a merchant. The.vii. letter.
MArc Edilis Censure, to the Cincinatus of Capue send salutation for thy
person, force and virtue against sinister fortune. Sith the feast Berescinte,
mother of the goddis, I have seen no servant of thy house, nor letter of thy
hand, that I have read, the which puts me in great suspection of thy
health, and that thou art in some peril, or else thou dispraysest our amity.
Dyschargynge not thy self with so little thought, nor forgette us not with
so great rechelesnes: for thy trauaille can not be so much in writing, as it
should be consolation to me to read thy letters, and if thy hand wax stowe
from trauaylle of writynge, yet enforce mine heart for mine ease, wherein is
semblaunt of true friends. In that I will put the fro annoyaunce, and thou to
do me pleasure: thou know well the small distaunce that is between Capue and
mount Celio, was not the cause of our frendeshyppe, but the space hens to
Illirico should not cause us to be strangers. The delycate wynes sent out of
their own country to strangers take the greatter might: and the ferther that
the persons of true friends be separate, the sooner they ought to unity and
join together their minds. Show me I pray ye Cyncinate, sith thou have ever
found me true, why haste thou any suspecte of my desire? The grene leus
outward shewethe, that the tree is not dry inward: and the good works
openly notifieth the inward heart secretly. Where it is not perfect, there is
always breakyng and faylyng in service: for he that perfytly loves,
perpetually and faithfully serves. And I am as much astonished of thy slouthe,
in demanding somewhat of me, as of thy couwardyse to write. I will confess to
the one truth, if thou haddeste as much hardynes as will and thought of the
small effect of my letter might satisfy to the greatenes of thine
understanding, it should abide than for ill done, but not for short, as he
that throws his spear. In time paste when I was young, and thou old, thou in
thy counsayles, and I which my money each gave to other: but at this hour, that
thy heed is white, men reken the to be old, and yet thy works accuse the to
be young. Reason is that I succor thy poverty with money, and to remedy thy
lyghtenes with council. For the good will that I have to the, and for the law
of amity that I owe to the, I will advertise the as a virtuous man ought to
do, and that is to remember the benefits that he has received, and to forget
the injuries done to him: esteem much his own small power, and hold the
greatness of other at nothing: favor the good, and dissimule with the evil: be
great with the greattest, and communicable with your inferiors: presentlye do
good deeds, and also of them that be absent speak good words: The grievous
losses of fortune, hold them in small estemation, and the small loss of
honor, hold that in great estemation, for one thing adventure not money, and
for diverse doubtful adventure not a certainty: and finally be friend to one
and ennemie to none. These things ought he to have, that among good will be
accounted good. I know well thou have left to be pretour of the war, and
now thou haste set thy self by land and by see to use marchandyse. Thou
make me sore abashed, to conquer thyn enmies as a Romayn, and now to take
on the, the office, to persecute thy friends as a tyrant. Will thou do ill to
thy neighbors, and leave the strangers? Wylt thou take away the living fro
him that gives us living, and take away the death fro him that takes away our
life? will thou to them that be mouers and strangers give moderation, and fro
them that be sobre take away their rest? Thou wylt give to them that take away
fro us, and take fro them that give us: deliver them that be condemned, and
condemn innocents. Thou wylt be tyrant to the commonwealth, and not
defender of thy countreye. Than sith to all this he aduentureth him that
leaves deeds of arms, and becomes a marchaunte: I study soore what has
meued the to leave chiualrye, wherein thou haste had great honor, and now to
take on the an office, whereby follows so much shame and rebuke. Surely I
think in the none other excuse, but that thou art old, and can not clymbe
the mountains, and now thou syttest stylle, and robbest the playnes. To old
men old malady, when outward force fails them, than forthwith they arm
them with malice inward. I say it by the soore covetous persons as thou act
now. One thing I will say, thou haste taken an office, whereby all thy fellows
have robbed in diverse days, thou shall give account thereof in one hour, ye
and after the time shall come, that thou shall lose all in a moment. For the
goddis permyt, that one shall be a chastysement of diverse, and long time
chastyseth all. How is it my friend Cyncinate, that in the house of thy father
Cyncinate were spears, and not writings hanging? I have seen his halle full
of armure, and not of fardels: and portall and gates full of knights, and not
marchantis. Certainly there have I seen the scole of noblenes, and not as it is
now the den of thieves. O Cincinate, cursed be so vilayn an office, the
marcha^tis live porely to dye rich: and let us say ageyn, cursed be it,
because the couetyse of one that is ill, would be accomplished to the prejudice
of many that be good. I will not hurt the by thy predecessors, but I will
advertise the of thy misery and of thy successors. If thou thynkest, yt thy
virtue should hold to the end of the world, as the world holds to the, as
hit seems by thy white hears, hold me excused of the travail in perswadynge
the to here me. How be it, it is reason, that the gate of so great a cause be
knocked at with the hammer of some warnyng, and to bring it to good reason, of
necessity it must pass the myll: and to make clear the understanding from
time to time, of very need there requires counsel. Diverse times wise men
fail, because they would fail, but if the things be of such quality, that
wysedom suffiseth not to assure them, than it is needful, that his will be
untied, and his understanding dissolved, and his own propre opinion void, and
than incontinent to take a threde to the advise of an other. Take good head
Cincinate, where as the fou^dations be not well edified, the buildinges ar in
peril. The dongeon of this world, wherein the children of vanite do abide, is
founded on the sand. For let it be never so sumptuous, yet a little blaste of
wind will cause it to shake, and a little heat of prosperity will open it,
and a little rain of adversity will divide it, and within a short while or
space, when we least take heed, it will fall all flat on ye earth. If the
pyllers be of silver, and benches of gold, and though the benchers be kings,
and continue a thousand year, and rule into the entrayles of the earth: yet
they can find no steadfast rock nor mountain, wherein to cloose the goods of
their predecessors, and their estates perpetual. The goddis immortal have
made all things communicable to men mortal, except immortality: and
therefore they be called immortal, because they never dye, and we be called
mortal and faylyng, because we al take an end. How strong so ever the
walls be, yet great age causes it to fall to ruin. Two things seems to be
free, the which fortune can not set abacke, nor the time cause to be
forgotten, and they be these: The good or ill renoume among men, and the pain
or reward that they that be good or ill have of the goddis. O my friend
Cyncinate, thus acheueth the persons, but the goddis never. What grene or ripe
or rotten holds any season the fruit of the tree floured? I esteem it
nothing, because it must die by nature. How be it diverse times in leaves and
flowers we bear the froste of some malady, or the blaste of some envious
myshap. Long is the web in making: but it that is made in many days, is cut
asonder in a moment: Semblably it is a piteous thing to see a man dye with so
great travail, and to be set in the state of honor, and afterward we,
regarding neither the one nor the other, and yet we se it perish. And without
any memory of any thing abiding. O my friend Cyncinate, for the love between
us I pray the, and by the immortal goddis I conjure the, believe not the world,
the which under the color of a little gold, hydeth much fylthynesse: and
under color of truth changes us into a. M. lies: and for a short delight
gives us a. M. displeasures. To them whom it shows most love, it begyleth
with greattest tromperies: to whom the world gives most goods, it procures
most domages: to them that serves it with mockeries, hit rewards with true
recompenses: and to them that love it truly, it gives them goods of
mockeries: finally when we sleep most surest, it waketh us with greatte
peril. What will thou say than of the world, show me? One thing I will
tell the, and me think thou shuldeste not forgette it: and that is, we ought
not to believe the vain vanities that we se with our eyes, rather than the
greatte meruayles that we here with our eres. One thing I have regarded, and by
long experience I have known it, that but a few howses painted nor stalles
raised up, we have seen in Rome: but of a small time they take no thought for
the walls, but they have cruelle enmities with their neighbors, and great
anoy of their heirs, and importunate shame of their friends, and double malice
of their ennemies, and envious profit in the senate, and sometime to put a
governor out of possession, they set four in honor: and finally all that with
great thought have be gathered for their child, whom they love well with great
rest, sometime an other heir enjoys it, of whom they think leest. It is a
just sentence, that such as begyle diverse with ill deeds in their life, should
be begiled of their vayn thoughts at their death. Cruel should the goddis be,
and right grievous for men to suffer, that the ylle that has gathered for one
heir in the p^iudice of diverse that be good, should enjoy it many years. Me
think it should be a sovereign folly to be borne weeping, to dye syghynge, and
to live laughing. The rule to govern all parts ought to be egall. O
Cincinate, who has begyled the, that for a pot full of water, thou haste
need of a greatte laake of this world to pass this wretched life? Wylt thou
flay away the skin of thy hands with the cord of thoughts, break thy body
in bataylle with great travail, and adventure thine honor for one pot of
water? What will thou more that I should say? but that to fyl a pot of thy
goods thou wylt suffer a. M. perils. And in the vile exercysing of thy
marchandyse, thou doubtest not for lesynge of thy credence. And finally I
swear to the, thou shall abide deed for thirst, as though there were no
water in the feldes. If thou wylt do by my counsel, desire death of the
goddis, to rest the as an aged wise man: and demand not richesse to live ill
as a young fool. I have soore wept for many, that I have seen in Rome
departed out of this world, and for the I have wept drops of blood, to se
the return newly and vylely to the world. My amity and the credit of the
senate, the blood of thy predecessors, the authority of thy person, and the
honor of the countreye ought to refrain thy covetousness. Oh friend, thy
white hears shows honor and wisdom, the which should exercise and be
occupied in noble deeds. Regard, It avails more to follow reason by the ways
of them that be good, than the common opinyon, which is the large way of them
that be ill. For though the one be strayte for the fete, it reiseth no duste
for to blind the eyes, as the other does, to light young persons, the
which procure lyghtnesse, ignorance excuses them: but the disordinate
couetyse of the old persons, causes them to occupy their life with
travail, and to take death with great annoyaunce, and in the one as well as
in the other abides great infamy. O Cyncinate, take this counsel of a
friend: Charge not thy self with taking of these vain goods, sith thou
haste so small a morselle of thy life. For such as thou art, we see
consume, and waste, and not to quicken. Put no trust in friends in the present
prosperity, for it is a pronostication of an evil fortune. And sithe thou
art in a hasarde like a fool, me think thou ought to discende a foot
like a sage person. And thus every man will say, how Cincinate is descended,
and not fallen. I will say no more, but the goddis be thy sauegarde, and
defend both the and me from gylefulle fortune. My wife Faustyne saluteth
the, and she is withdrawn from me, because I wrote this letter to the, and
has coniured me to write this word to the, that is, she says thou ought
to have wit when thy neck is full of hear, and I think thou oughteste in
continente to take a barber and shave away the hear, that thy wit may come
forth. I would thy couetyse should forsake the, and folly Faustin, and the gowte
me, and the sooner our souls may depart fro our flesh, than gile should
remain in our hearts. Marc of mount Celio writes this with his hand.

A letter sent fro Marc the emperor to Catulus censorious, that was sorrowful
for the death of his son Verissimus The.viii. letter.
MArc censore new and young, salute and reverence to the Catulus censorius
old and ancient. I have written two letters to the, and thou haste made
answer to none of them. If it be because thou could not, I hold my peace:
If it be because thou would not, than I complain me: If it be for
forgetfulness, tha^ I accuse the: If it be because thou setteste lyttelle by me,
than I appeal the: If thou haste dreamed, that thou haste written, I say
believe not in dreams: And if thou will not it should veil to glorify me as
a friend, yet thou might take it write in aduertisinge and repreuynge as the
father to the son. Young virtuous persons are bound to honor aunciente wise
men, and no less old wise men ought to endoctrine the young people and very
young, as I am. A just thing it is, that the new forces of youth supply and
serve them that are worn by age. For their long experience mocketh our tender
age and natural ignorance. youth is ill applied, when it surmo^teth the force of
the body, and faylleth the virtues of the soul: and age is honored, wherein the
force dies outward, whereby virtues quickneth the more inward. we may se the
tree when the fruit is gadered the leaves fall, and when flowers dry, than more
grene and perfyte are the rotes. I mean that when the first season of youth is
passed, which is the Somer time, than comes aege called winter, and putrifieth
the fruit of the flesh, and the leaves of favor fall, and the flowers of
delight are wyddered, and the vynes of hope dried outward, than it is right,
that much better the rotes of good works within be good. They that be old and
ancient ought to praise their good works rather than their white hears. For
honor ought to be given for the good life, and not for the white head.
Glorious is that common welthe, and fortunate is that prince, that is lord of
young men to travail, and ancient persons to counsel. As to regard the
susteynyng of the naturalitie of the life, in likewise ought to be considered
the polycie of governance, the which is that all the fruits come nor dry not
al at ones, but when one begins an other fails. And in this manner ye that
be ancient teaching us, and we obedient, as old fathers and young pullettes,
being in the neste of the senate: Of some their feathers falling, and other
young fethered: and where as the old fathers can not fly, their trauaylles
are maynteyned by their tender children. Friend Catulus, I purposed not to
write one line this year, because my pen was troubled with thy slouthe: but
the smallenesse of my spirit, and the greatte peril of mine offices always
called on me to demand thy counsel. This privilege the old wise men hold in
their houses where they dwell: They are always lords over them that be
simple, and are sclaues to them that be wise. I think thou haste forgotten me,
thinking that sithe the death of my dear son Verissimus, the time has been
so long, that I should forgette it. Thou have occasion to think so, for many
things renneth in time, that reason can not help. But in this case I can not
tell which is the greattest, thy trumperie or my dolor. I swear to the by the
goddis immortal, that the hungry worms in the entrayles of the unhappy
child, are not so puisante, as are the cruel dolours in the heart of the
father sore wounded. And it is no comparison, for the son is ded but one time*
and ye heavy father dies every moment. What will thou more that I should say?
but that one ought to have envy of his death, and compassion of my life, because
in dienge he lives, and in lyuinge I die. In ill fortunes in case of life, and
in ye subtyl adversities of fortune, where as her gyles profits but little,
and her strength less, I think the best remedy is to feel it as a man, and
dissimule it as discrete and wise. If all things as they be felt at heart
should be showed outward with the tongue, I think that the wyndes should
break the heart with sighinges, and water all the earth with weeping. O if the
corporal eyes saw the hurt of the heart with a true wound, I swear to the,
there they should se more of a drop of bloudde sweating within, thanne all
the weeping that is made out ward. There is no comparyson of the great dolours
of the body, to the leest pain that the spirit feleth. For all travail of
the body, men may find some remedy, but if the heavy heart speak, it is not
hard: if it weep, it is not seen: if it complain hit is not believed. What
shall the poor heart do? Abhor the life, wherewith it dies: and desire death,
wherewith it lives. The high virtues among noble virtuous people consystethe
not al only to suffer the passions of the body, but also to dissimule them of
the soul. They be such that alter the humors, and show hit not outward:
They bring a fever without altering the of poulce: They alter the stomach:
They make us to knele to the earth, to suffer the water up to the mouth, and to
take death with out leaving of the life: And finally they length our life, to
thentente that we should have the more trauaylle, and denyethe us our sepulture
to thentente that we should not rest us. But consideringe. If I be troubled
with tribulations, as well am I let with consolations. For ever I have either
desire of the one, or werynes of the other. I take this remedy to dissimule
with the tongue, and to weep with the eyes* and to ^ele it with my heart. I
pass my life, as he that hopethe to lose all that he has, and never to
recover that is lost. I say this* though ye se me not now make funeral
wepynges and waylynges, as I did at the death of my son, yet think not but it
does brenne my heart, so that with the inward greatte heat is consumed the
humyditie of the eyes outward, for it brennethe all my spyrites inward. Thou
may know what an honorable father suffrethe to lose a good child: In all
things the gods be lyberall, except in gyuynge us virtuous children. Where
there is abundance of great estates, there is greattest scarsitie of good
inheritours. It is a great hurt to here, and greatter to see, how these
fathers clyme to have riches, and to see their children discende to have
vycyousenes: To se the fathers honor their children, and the children to
infame their fathers: yea and the fathers to give rest to their children, and
the children to give trouble to their old fathers: yea and sometime the
fathers dye for sorrow that their children dye so soon, and we se the children
weep because their fathers dye so late. What should I say more, but that the
honor and riches that the fathers have procured with great thought, the
children lose with little care. I am certain of one thing, that the fathers
may gather riches with strength and craft, to sustain their children, but the
goddis will not have durable that that is begone with evil intention, and is
founded to the prejudice of other, and is possessed with an evil heir. And
though the heavy destenies of the fader permit, that the riches be left to their
children to serve them in all their vices for their pastyme, at last according
to their merits, the goddis will that the heir and heritage should peryshe.
Mark what I say, I had two sons, Comode and the prince Verissimus, the
younger is dead, that was greatest in virtue. Always I imagined, that while the
good lived, I should be pore: and now that the ill remains, I think to be
rich. I shall show the why, the goddis ar so pitiful, that to a pore father
they never give ill child: and to a rich father they never give a good child.
And as in all prosperity always there falls some sinister fortune, either soon
or late, so therewith fortune does arm and apparel us, wherein she sees we shall
fall to our greattest hurt. And therefore the goddis permit, that the covetous
faders in gaderyng with great travail should die with that hurt, to leave their
riches to their vicious children ill implied. I weep as much for my child yt
the goddis have left me, as for him yt they have taken fro me. For the small
estimation of him yt lives makes immortal memory of him yt is deed. The ill
rest and conversation of them that live, cause us to sigh for the company of
them that be deed. The ill is always desired for his ilnes to be deed, and the
good always meriteth to have his death bewailed. I say my friend Catulus, I
thought to have lost my wit, wha^ I saw my son Verissime dye: but I took
comfort again: for either he of me, or I of him must se the end. Considering
that the goddis did but lend him to me and gave him not, and how they be
inheriters, and I to have ye use of the fruit. For all thing is mesured by the
just will of the gods, and not by our disordinate wyls and appetites. I
think wha^ they took away from me my child, I restored him to an other, and
not that they have taken mine. But since it is the will of the goddis to give
rest to the good child, and hurt the father because he is ill, I yield
thanks to them: for the seasone that they have suffered me to enjoy his life:
And for the pacyence that I have taken for his death, I desire them to mytigate
therewith the chastisement of their ire. And I desire, sith they have taken away
the life from this child, to cause good customs to be in the prince mine
other son. I know what heaviness thou haste take in Rome for my sorrow. I
pray to the goddis to send the joy of thy chylderne, and that I may reward
the with some toye, for that thou haste wept for my pain. My wife Faustine
saluteth the: and thou would have co^passyon to se her: For she wepeth with
her eyes, and sygheth with her heart, and with her hands hurts her self,
and curses with her tongue. She eats nothing on the day, nor slepeth in the
night. She loves darkness, and abhors light, and thereof I have no marvel:
for it is reasone, that for that was nourished in her entrayles, she should
feel sorrow in the same. And the love of the mother is so strong, though her
child be deed and laid in sepulture, yet always she has him quick in her
heart. It is a general rule, that the person that is entierly beloved, causes
ever great grefe at the death. And as for me I pass the life right sorowfully:
though I show a joyful face, yet I want mirth at my heart. And among wise
men being sorowfulle, and she wynge their faces merry, is none other thing but
burienge the quick, having no sepulture. And I swear by the goddis immortal,
I feel much more than I have said. And diverse times me think I should fall
down, because I dare not weep with mine eyes, yet I feel it inwardly. I would
feign common with the in diverse things. Come I pray the to Bryette, to
thentent that we may speak to gether. And sithe it has pleased the goddis to
take my child fro me, that I loved so well, I would counsel with the, that
art my loving friend. But few days passed, there came hither an ambassador
fro the Rodes, to whom I gave the most part of my horses: and fro the farthest
part of Spain, there were brought me.viii. of which I send the.iiii. I
would they were such, as might please the. The goddis be thy safeguard, and
send me, and my wife some joy. Marcus Aurelius right sorrowful, has written
this with his own hand.

A letter sent by Marc the emperor, to Marcurino being at Sanny, now called
Benauente. The.ix. letter.
MY special friend and ancient companion, a messanger of thine, and a lackeye
of mine, went out together at Capue, the one bare my desire and affection to
the, and the other brought a letter to me. And if thou look well, thou may
see my heart as full of thoughts, as I se thy letter full of complayntes. Thou
do send to comfort me in my fever tercyan, I thank the greatly thereof, and
it is come in a good season. For the going of the fever out of my poulse, and
the joy of thy letter to my spirit, is all one. And surely if this case be
left in my hand, and that my fever return not, tha^ thy consolation shall
serve. Lo behold the misery of man, that presumethe to take away realms from
other, and yet ca^ not take the fever out of my bones. Thou know well, that
we love together, and of a long season thyn amity has trusted in me. My
truth byndethe me, that thine ylles should be mine, and my goods thine. And
there is true love, where be two bodies separate, and but one heart together.
And there is but a bitter love, where the hearts be as far asonder, as the
straungenes of their persons. Take heed I pray the, that our love be not
inuenimed with unkindness, nor our remembrance enpoysoned with small thoughts,
and I being an other than thou art here, and thou being an other than I am
there, in manner that mine absence with thy presence, and my presence with thy
absence, may speak to gither. Thy messager has showed me the loss of thy
goods, and by thy letter, I know the anguysshe of thy person. And it has been showed me, that thou haste had a ship peryshed, and that thy factours,
like wise men, to save their persons, did throw thy marchandyse in to the sea. Me think, thy ship has eased the of thy charge. But I think, as it
seems by the, they threw not so many fardels into the sea, as thought is into
thy heart. And according as thou were before, I should be moore bound to
search for thy lead and tynne, thanne for thy heart. Thy lead is sonken to
the bottom, but thy counsel is sprede abroode over all the world. If thou
shouldeste now dye, and thy body be opened, of truth I think, that thy
heart should be rather found drowned with thy lead, than alive with thy body. O
Mercurius, at this hour thou felest no maladye of any fever tercian, as I
do, for the heart of thy body, and the dolor of thy spirit, causes the to
have a quartayne. And this evil is not in the body, but in the ship, not on
the earth, but in the sea: not with physicians, but philosophers. I counsel
the to seek health: For there thy life is drowned, where thy lead is sonken. Be
not angry, for though thou haste not thy lead with the, thy lead has the
with it. Often times avarice seeks out the auaricious, and sometime the
auaricious seek avarice. I^^^ showed me, thou art sorry, because thy damage can
have no remedy: and do thou not know, that where no remedy is, thou ought
to take patience? O Mercurius, now thou knoweste, yt when thou did
adventure thy goods to the suspecious rocks, and thy desires to the deep
wawes of the sea, and thy courageous avarice, to the importunate wyndes, and
thy leed to strange waters, and as joyous, and desirous as thy factours went
forth, in trust of winning, as much now thou art sure of the loss: and
thus is thy desire drowned, and thy hope escaped. Do thou not remember, that
Socrates, castinge into the sea, not lead, but gold, not a little, but a
great deal, not goods of other men's, but of his own, not by fortune, but
by his wisdom, said, I will drown these gylefull richesses, to thentent
that they shall not drown me? But I think, if a man should se the do so, he
should here the say: O my sweet rychesses, I had rather drown my self, tha^
other should drown you? This ancient wise man durst not trust in gold, and
thou wylt trust on lead: cast lottes among your goddis, he of Athenes, and
thou of Rome, which of you has most failed, or else is most assured? he, that
cast his gold from the earth, in to these, orelles thou that would bring thy
lead out of these upon the earth? I know, that the ancient Romans will say, it
is he, and the present covetous folk will say, it is thy self. and I think,
in this thou art dispraysed in the praise thereof, and the dispraysed is allowed
of all men. Thy messager told me, that thou were right sorry and heavy, and
crieste out in the night, calling on the gods, and wakeste thy neighbors,
complaining on fortune. I am soore dyspleased for thy heuines, because sorrow
is next friend to thy solytarines, and ennemy to company, and heir of
desperation. I am sorye for thy cryenges in the night: for it induseth folly.
For the night, covering all the world with derknes, thou alone wylt discover
thy heart with crienges. I am not plesed, that thou co^playnest upon the
gods, because they have taken some thing fro the: because thou that were
aloft, they have brought lower: Nor I am not plesed, that thou awakest thy
neighbors for thy riches, that caused them to envy the: thy patience should
move them to compassion. Nor I am not co^te^t, that thou should so complain
on fortune: for the thing so well known of many, should not be infamed by one
alone. O Mercurius remember, that with them, with whom truce is taken, thou
wylt enter again into the field of defiance. We unbend, and thou wylt spend thy
speres. Thou never came into the field, and yet thou woldeste enjoy the
triumph. Al be stopped, and thou would pass surely. Thou yeldest thy self
to fortune, and do thou not know, how she beteth down the high walls, and
defends the old roten houses, and peopleth where there lacks people, and
vnpeopleth where as people be? Of enemies she makes fre^des, and of friends
enmies, and dispoileth the va^quishers, and crowneh them that be ouercom. Of
traitors, she makes true men, and true men she makes suspecte persons.
And finally, fortune is such a maystresse, that she rules realms,
overcomes armies, beats down kings, exalts tyrants, to the deed she
gives life, and to some renoume, and to some shame. Why styckest thou to her?
Do thou not remember the word, that the king of the Lacedemoniens had at
his gate, saying, This house is at the putting down of fortune. In good
sothe these were high words, and of greatte understanding, he knew fortune
much better than thou, since he rekeneth his house at fortunes disposition, and
not for enheritance. And if he had lost any thing, as thou haste done, he
thought, that she restored it to other as theyrs, and had not taken his.
Reason holds confidence, to argue thy treason, by that she deposes the fro
thy heyghte, to be an heriter: for he that lives, heryteth death, and not
death the life, for all dies, and it heryteth al in their life. Will thou take
vengeance, of that has given the so much pein? Therefore take this council: be
friend to fortunes enmye, the which is the grave: Over them that be borne, and
not over them that dye, is her empire. O how many greatte lords have been the
thoughts of thy heart, so as many worms shall be in thyn entrayles? What
greatter victory may be, thanne she that ouercometh all lyuers, shall be
vanquyshed of the alonely by death. I say one thing to the, that all only he
that is closed in his grave, is assured of all things of this life. Thy
messager showed me, that this summer thou would come to Rome, and now that
it is winter, thou will sail into Alexandrye. O, my friend Mercurio, when thy
life draws to an end, thou beginnest to be auaritious. Thou shall find two
cities in this world, in two extremytes, Rome the heed of vice, and Alexaundry
the end of all virtues. I say of thy merchaundyse, in Rome thou do charge
thy body with vices, and in Alexaundrye thy heart with thoughts. I swear by
the oath of a just man, that thou shalt have more desire, of that thou
leauest, then contentation of that thou beareste away. Thou remembrest not,
how it is winter, and thou must pass the sea, and but if the pylotes lie to
me, the caulme season most sure, is the vigil of the more vnfortune. Thou wylt
say, thy ships be void, and therefore they shall go more surely. I believe
they shall go more charged with avarice, thanne they shall come with sylke. O
what a good change shall it be, if the avarice of Italy might be changed for
sylke of Alexandry. I know surely their sylke will lade a ship, and our
avarice will lade a hole flete. Great is that couetyse, which the shame of the
world does not repreue, nor the fear of death stop, nor reason appoint. I
say it, because that he, which in such a time offreth him self to peril,
either couetise surmounteth him, orels understanding fails him. And because
I can find none other excuse sufficient to excuse me to the, but that thou art
as much known by the sea, as unknown to the goddis, that is, the unstable
wawes know the wicked heart and vnrestefull, and the hard rocks unruly
men: and one wind knows an other wind. I pray the show me, what thou
will go search? Wylt thou go into the gulf of Arpino for to seek thy lead?
Than take heed, and think, how the fyshe has eaten thy hard lead, and let
them not eat thy soft flesh. Thou wylt peradventure go seek thy goods with
peril of thy life, and to leave renown at thy death. Know thou not, that
such renoume, is a salve for a rewme, a baume for a swowning, light to a
blind person, a nyghtingale to the deaf? I will discover the enbushment, er
thou fall therein. Thou sekeste thought for thy self, envy for thy
neighbors, spurs for thyn enemies, waking for thieves, peril for thy body,
damnation for thy renome, the ending of they life, flighte for thy friends,
process for thy children, and cursynge for thyn heirs. And because the fever
hastes toward me, I leave my pen to write any more. My wife Faustine
saluteth the, and is sore displeased for thy loss. I send the a provision, to
the intent that a ship may be given the, because thou should not lose thy
wit. If thou be in Alexandrie, return not by Rhodes, least the Pirates take
the. The goddis be thy saufgarde, and send me and other good life, and good
name with strangers.

A letter sent by Marc the emperor to Antigonus, comfortyng him in a sorrowful
case. The tenthe letter.
Mark pretour Romayne, Edile, Censorine, co^panyon of the empire, to the
Antigonus banyshed, sends greting to thy part, and good hope of the senate.
To me being in Champain, thy heavy case was showed, and at this hour in the
temple of Jupiter was thy pitiful letter delivered to me. I feel as much as
thou feleste, and am hurt with as many wou^des. As thou art separate fro thy
neighbors, so in likewise I am banished from my wits: and I weep at this
hour for the, as thou in my trauayles haste wept for me: and now I feel for
the, as thou haste felt for me. For to friends afflicted with sorrow, we
ought to give remedy to their persons, and consolation and compassion to
their hearts. I swear to the by the law of good men, in this case I have not
ben vncourteys of aunciente time, nor cruel at this time, to feel it. As I
read the lines of thy letter, I could not hold my hands from shaking, nor
my heart from syghyng, nor mine eyes fro weeping, to se the small thing that thou
sendest to demand, and much more for lack of power to send to the. The
greattest infortune of all infortunes, is when a man may do little, and would
do much. And the greattest fortune of all fortunes is, when a man may do
much, and will do but little. In this I will se, if thou have forgoten our
amity, and aduenturest at one time, that I have trusted in the diverse times.
Thou know well, that in the young dais of my youth, al things were
discharged fro my heart, and charged them to thine understanding. Than it is a
just thing, that thy trauayles should be discharged fro thy will, and charged
upon my heart. And in this manner, thou and other, shall see and here, that my
hands shall be as ready to remedy the, as my tears of weeping are for thy
damage. Now come to the rest of evil fortune. Thou gyuest me knowledge, that
the goddis have taken a daughter fro the: And the monstrous erthequake has
thrown down thy house, and the senate has given a sentence against the,
whereby thy goods are lost, and thy person banyshed. The goddis be to me as
propyce and meke, as they have been cruelle to the. I am soore abashed, of that
my spirit has conceived in this, as of the loss, that thou and thy wife have
felt: yet am I not abashed of the monster, that fears the people, nor of the
trymblynge, that has shaken down thy howses, nor of the fire, that has
brent thy goods, nor of the goddis that have permitted such things to fall:
But I am abashed, that there is so much malice in the, and in thy neighbors:
For the which justly ye do deserve to have so horrible and cruelle
chastysementes. Believe me in oone thing Antigonus, and doubt it not, if men
lived like men, and changed not the rule of conditours, the goddis would then
be always as goddis, not to cause us to be borne of our mothers, to give us so
cruel chastiseme^tes by the hand of monstrous beasts. Certaynely it is just
and most just, that brute beasts be chastysed by other brute beasts, and
the monsterous, by other monsterous beasts: and such as offend with greatte
fautes, to be punyshed with great peynes. I say to the one thing, the which
seems a new thing to the, and that is this, the evil persons offend more
by infamy, than the goddis give them pain for it, rather than for the offense
that is committed against them. As the goddis naturally be pitiefull, and
always have the name thereof, so we are always evil, and our euylnes and
shameful works deserve to have sore chastisement. The simple folks call the
goddis cruel, in that they se their chastisement openly, and for they see not
our secret ylnesse. Than the goddis have reason to complayn, because we with
our sins offend them, and they by our cruelnes are infamed. An ineffable rule
it is, that the pitiful goddis do not punysshe extremely with extreme
chastysementes, sithe that first the vicious men do extremely with extreme
vices. The time that Camillus was banyshed Capue, and that the french men
possessed Rome, Lucius Clarus consule was sent by the senate to the oracle of
Apollo, to demand counsel, what the Romayne people should do to be delivered
out of their great peril. And there this consule was xl. days within the
temple on his knees before Appollo, offering right strange sacrifices, and
shed many tears with weeping, and yet he could have none answer: and so
with no small inconveniences he returned to Rome. Than the holy senate sent out
of every temple two priestis, and when they were prostrate on the earth, Apollo
said: As one beginnynge is correspondent to an another beginning, and one
place to an another, Meruaylle thou not, though by the reason of an extreme
demand, I showed my self extreme to answer. Ye Romans sithe ye faylle
men, ye come to seek to the goddis, for the occasion whereof we will give you no
good counsel when ye have need, nor permytte that men should favor you, when
ye goo to seek for them. Regard my friends, not for the sacrifyces, that ye
have offered to me, but for the amity, that I have had with your fathers in
time past, I will discover to you a secret, the which is, that ye shall say to
the Romans fro me.vii. things. The first is, let never man leave the
goddis for an other man, for fear that the goddis depart fro the miserable man
in his most greattest necessity. The.ii. is, that more auayllethe to hold
the part of one of the goddis immortal, that is in heaven, than with all the
mortal men in the world. The.iii. is, that men should beware to anoye the
goddis, for the ire of the gods does more damage than the iniquity of all
men. The iiii. is, the goddis never forgette a man at any time, but if the
gods be forgotten by men a. M. times. The.v. is, that the goddis do suffer,
that one shall be persecuted by an other that is ylle, or they have first
persecuted one that is good. And therefore ye are stryke with the feats of the
frenchemen: because ye have persecuted and banyshed Camyllus your naturalle
neighbor. The.vi. is, if the men will have the goddis favorable in the time of
war, they must serve them first in time of peace. The.vii. is, that the
pitiefull gods sends not to any realm some extreme chastisement, but if it
be for some extreme offenses commytttd in the same realm. And show to the
Senate, that I would make none answer to Lucius Clarus, because they sent so
ill a man to their god Apollo as ambassadur, the which they ought not to have
done. Ye Romans take this counsel of me, and if ye find it ill, take no more
of me. In a strange message send always the most eloquent men, and in your
senate set the wysest men: And commytte your hosts to valiant capitayns: and
to your gods send always the most innocent men. The just gods never appease
their ires ageinste unjust men: but if the requirers be very innocente and
meke. For a foul vessel is not made clean but with fair water. For with
foul hands it is hard to make the vessel clean. The goddis be so just, that
they will not give just things but by hands of just me^. Finally I say, if ye
will drive the french men your ennemies out of your lands, first cast out the
passions fro your hearts. Think for troth, that the goddis will never drive
your ennemies out of Italy, till Camyllus and all the gyltlesse that be
banyshed, be returned ageyn to Rome. Certainly the cruel wars that the
goddis permytte at this time present, is but a warning of the chastisementes
for offenses passed. For that the ill men have done to the innocents in diverse
days, after by the hands of other that be ill, the paime^t is made in one
day. This answer Apollo made to the priests flamynes, that were sent to him
out of Rome, which thing made the senate sore abashed. I remember, that in
the book of the answer of the goddis, in the annals of the capitol, there I
found it: the which book the first day of every monethe was red by a
senator, before all the other senators of the senate. Therefore fre^d
Antigonus, as the god Apollo said, if thou wylt not believe me, that am thy
friend, believe the god Apollo. O Antigonus, behold how the understanding of
vayn men are but bestly to the spirits of the goddis, which are secret and
hid: and where as they speak, al other ought to be stylle. For one counsel of
the goddis is more worth in mockery, than all the counsels of me^, though they
be never so ernest. Of whens think thou that this comes? I shall show the:
The goddis are so perfyte in all bounty, and so wise in all wisdom, and we
are so ill in all malice, and so simple in all symplenes, that though they would
err, they can not because they be goddis: and we yt would be assured, err,
because we be men. And herin I se what a brute beast man is: for all these
mortal men are so entier in their own wylles, that they will lose more in
following their own opinion, than win by the counsel of an other man: and
that worst of al is, they take so the bytte in the teeth in doing ill, that
there is no bridell that can refrain them. And they are so slow to do well,
that there is no prick nor spourre that can drive them forward. Thou do
complain of the pytiefull goddis, and of the sacrate senate. Also thou
complaynest of ioyfulle fortune. Three things there be, that one of them is
inoughe with one stroke of a stone, to take away thy life, and bury thy
renoume. And when each of them has drawn the apart, than al together will
stryke on the with stones. Thou have taken great competitours, and yet I know
not what thy worthynes is. I shall show the some strengthes and valiantnes that
the aunciente barons had, and thereby thou shall se, what they of this world
does hold. The felawe of Scipio Nasica took a serpente in the mountayns of
Egypt, which after it was slain, flayed, and the skin mesured in the field
of Mars, it was.vi. score foot of length. Hercules of Thebes proved his force
with the serpente Hydra, And in strykynge of one of his heedes, there sprange
out.vii. other heads. Mylon the giaunt to exercise his strength was accustomed
every day to overtake a bull with renninge a foot, and cast him down, and he
made many courses with the bull, as it were an other naked young man: and yet,
that was more marvel, he with one stroke of his fist slew the bull, and the
same day would eat him all together. On mount Olympe Cerastus the giaunt of
the nation of Greece, wrasteled with mo than.l.M. men, and none could styre
nor shake him. And if Homere begileth us not of this gyaunt, he was of such
fame and deeds, that every four years, there was a custom, that al nations of
the world went to wrestle at mount Olympe. And thereof came the reckoning of the
Olympiades.

In the second war punike among the captives of sorowefull Carthage, Scipio
brought a man, a lord of Maurytayne, right strong and fierce to behold: and
in celebratynge a spectacle in the palayes of Rome, which was than of greatte
renoume, there were innumerable beasts ron at: This captive prisoner lept into
the park, and killed two bears, and wrastled with a lion a great while:
finally being sore hurt with the lions paws, he strangled the lion with his
hands. This was a monstrous thing to se, and now it seems incredyble to be
belued. In the year.CCCCxx. of the foundation of Rome, Curio Ledent a renoumed
captain, coming fro Tarente against Pyrro king of the Epirotes: he was the
first that brought.iiii. Olipha^tes to Rome the day of his triumph. Stages and
places were made for.xxx.M. men to se the rennynge of these Olyphauntes: and in
the mids of the pastyme, the plankes brake, and slew mo than.v.M. persons.
And among them there was Numatian, the which bare upon his shulders a planke
with mo than.iii.C. men, till that he and they were succored.

Gayus Caesar being young, fleinge the company of Sylla, because he was
perteyninge to Marius, he being among the Rodiens wan his meat with coursyng
and runnynge of horses, with his hands bound dehynd him. It was a monstrous
thing to se, as the annals witness: how he would guide the horses with his
knees so fast, as though he had drawn them with the reins of their
bridelles.

In the.xv. year that the captain of Cartagenens entered into Italy, our
ancient fathers sent to the realm of Frigie for the dyesse Berecynthia,
mother of the goddis: and when she arrived at the port Hostie, the ship that
she came in, ran upon the sand, and by the space of.iiii. days.xxx.M. men,
that came in the army, could not remove it: by chance came thither one of the
virgins vestales named Rea, which with her gyrdelle tied to the ship, drew
it to the land as easily as she would have drawn a threde from the distaffe:
And to the intent that we should believe such things, as we here were done in
times past, we may know it by deeds done presently in our days. I remember when
my lord Adrian came fro Dacie, he did celebrate a spectacle in Rome, wherein
there was mo than.ii.M. wyld bestes. And the thing most notable yt we have
seen, there was a knight borne by the river Danubio, who took a horse, and ran
into the park, and slew so many wild bestes, that there fled fro him
lions, leopardes, bears, olyphantes, and we did fle fro them: and he slew mo
of them than they did of men. These strange things I have recyted to the, that
of all these I am not so abashed, as I am of the, to se the redye to do arms
against the goddis, and against the senate, and against fortune. These three are
gyauntes in virtuous valyauntyse, and happy at all times: and they be such as
command them that command other. The goddis by their naturalyte and power
close up the furies, and govern the sterres: And the senate with their Justice
ouercomethe realms, and subdueth tyrants: and fortune with her tira^ny takes
them that they leave, and leauethe them that they take: and honors them that
they dishonor, and chastyseth them that serve her: she begyleth every person,
and no person begyleth her: she promyseth much, and fulfylleth nothing: her
song is weeping, and her wepinge is song, to them that be deed among worms,
and to them that live in fortunes: at them that be present she spurneth with
her fete, and threateth them that be absente. All wise men shrink fro her, but
thou like a fool sheweste her thy face. Of one thing I am abashed of the, to
complain of the senate, and yet I marvel not: for in conclusion they be but
men: yet of troth in things of Justice they ought to be more than men. And to
complayn on fortune, I marvel not a little: for in the end fortune is
fortune among mortalle men. And all the heuens is of an aunciente quarelle, and
when we are besette with most greattest quarelles, than she stryketh us with
most grievous hurtes. I have great wonder, that thou being a Romain, co^plainest
on the goddis, as if thou were one of the barbariens. We Romans are not so
much renowned among al nations, for the multitude of realms that we have
overcome, as we are for the great churches and services that we have made. Thou
complaynest, how the gods have broken thy houses with an erthquake, and have
slain thy daughter, fellow in thy banyshemente, and al in one day: But thou
do not remember the offenses that thou have committed in diverse cases. O my
friend Antigonus, thou know not, yt out of our ill processes comes forth
good sentences: and thou know not, yt our wicked works are but a waking of
true Justice. Know thou not, that the fierce chastisementes, is but a press
that hastes the great co^minges of your young desires? and know thou not,
that it is no thing that the gods do chastise openly, to that they do
dissimule in secret? Do thou not know, that in conclusion the goddis be
goddis, and the mortalles are mortalles, and they may do us more good in one
day, than we can do service in a. C.M. year? Do thou not know, that the
least ill done by the hands of the pitiefull goddis, is more goodness than all
the wealth that may come by the hands of the cruel men? Tha^ whereof do thou
complain? I pray the be still. And since thou art among strangers, suffer. And
thou will have honor, dishonor not the goddis of the Romans. For the unjust
me^ do great injustice to speak ill of them that be just, and specially of the
goddis, for they are most just. Certainly as Cicero says, the greatest faut in
a man that is good, is to approve the ill rather tha^ ye good: and the most
greattest yuell in an ill man is to condemn the good for the ill. Thou know
not how just the goddis be. Of truth they change not for any prayer, nor
leave not for any thretenynges, nor mock not by words: nor be not corrupt
with gifts. Great ought thyn offense to be, sith the earth has taken
vengeance for the goddis: and thy innocent daughter has paid the fault, for
the offense of her father. O Antigonus, doste thou not know, that in all
things the goddis may work after their own opinyon and will, except in
Justice: for in that they be goddis of all, they ought to be egall to all? And
if their bounty does bind them to reward us for goodness, no less their
justice constrayneth them to chastyse us for our ylles. It is a greatte
custom, and a ryghtouse Justice, He that wyllyngely draws to sin, against
his will is drawn to pain. I say it because thy daughter has left to do
some good openly, or else she has done some secret ylle, sith in her youth
her life is bereued from her father for ensample of chastysement in other. And
in the end of thy letter thou complaynest, that the pain that men do to the,
is more greatter than the offenses that thou haste done to the goddis. And if
hit be thus friend Antygone, thou ought to have no displeasure, but
pleasure, no heaviness but joy. And I swear to the by the immortal goddis, I
would gladly change my liberty for thy captiuytie, and the state of Rome for
thy banyshement of Sycile. And I shall tell the why: He is honored among
them that be honored, that fortune abateth without fault: and he is shamed
among them that be shamed, that fortune inha^ceth without merit. For the
shame is not in the inco^uenientes that is done to us by men, but it is of the
offense that we commytte against the goddis. And in like case the honorable
honor restethe not in the dygnyties that we have, but in the good works,
whereby we merit. And thereby the words seem true, that the.xi. emperor of
Rome bare written in a ring on his finger, which said thus: More is he to be
honored, that deserves honor, than he that has it and deserves it not.
These words are greatly to be noted, and spoken by a great lord. Than
return to the purpose. Thou complaynest of the wrongs and greues that men do
to men, and leave the goddis. I have no marvel: for as the goddis do never
unjust things, so the men never lightly do any thing just. Note this that
I say, and forgette it not. The senate gives an open pain, and publyssheth
the secret fault, in such manner that with the pain they hurt us, and with
the fault they shame us. The gods are more pitiefull: for though they give us
pein, yet they keep the faut close. A my friend Antigone, though the gods
gather togider the slouthe and wyckednes, that we commytte secretelye, Believe
me and doubt not, the goddis give life to many, the which men bereueth.
Therefore I think, that thou should think and wyshe, that sith the goddis
have suffered the ylles that thou have done secretly, that thou must suffer open
chastysement, that men have given to the. For otherwise thinking to put away
the pain, thou shall abide charged with infamy. I have written to the this
long epistle, to thentent that thou should have some thing to pass the time
with. Certainly the greattest easemente to ease him that is in travail, is to
exercise the wauerynge heart with some good occupations. I will write no more
to the at this time, but as touching thy banyshemente, trust me I shall bring
the at one with the senate. I send Panutius my secretary to the, give as
much credence to his words, as to my letter. And he brings a gown to the,
and therewith my heart and will for to comfort the. Salutation, peace, and
good age be with the: and their of the goddis and ill fortune be separate fro
me. Mark, my household, wife, and children salute the as thyn own. And we
salute all thy family as our own. Though the half of my letter be not of my
hand, comfort the, for my heart is entirely thine. Thou knoweste how I was
grievously hurt in the wars of Dacye in my hand, and in moist wethers one
of my fyngers slepeth. Thus I make an end as always thyn own.

An other letter sent by Marc the emperor to the same Antigonus against cruel
iuges. The leuenth letter.
MArc the sick manne, to the Antigonus banyshed, desires salute for him, and
rest for the. To eschew the envious trauaylles of Rome, and to se certain
books of Hebrewe, that were brought to me fro Helya, I came hither to Sanya: I
made great haaste in my iournayes, how be it at Salon the fever took me: and
the.xx. day of June I received thy second letter, and the same hour the fever
quartayne took me. I think none of us both had the better hand. For neither
my long letter did put away thy travail, nor thy short letter did put away
my fever. And though as now the feeling of thy travail minissheth that I had,
the more brenneth the desire to remedy the. Therefore I will say some thing to
the, but not that I find any consolation that thou haste need thereof. In the
law of Rhodes I have found these words: we command, that none be so hardy
to give counsel with out remedy: for the words to him yt is in trouble
gyuethe small consolation, wha^ there is no remedy. Also the heart that is in
sorrow, has more rest showing his own greues, then herynge the consolation of
other. Thou say in thy letter, that the censures are right rigorous in that
realm: and therefore all that nation has ill will with the senate. I believe
well they have good occasion thereof: for dishonored men make the ministers of
Justice to be rigorous, and namely they of that isle. For there is an ancient
proverb, that says, lightly all these ylles ar ill, and the Siciliens worst
of all. Now adays the ill are mighty in their ylnes, and the good with their
virtues are kept so close, that if there be not some bridell by justice, the
ill should possess all the world, and the good should fynyshe shortly. But
finally to consider how unable we be borne, and ar enuironned with so many
ylles, being subject to so many miseries. I marvel not of the humanities
that the humain people commytteth: but I am ashamed of the cruel sentence that
our Censures do, not as Romans, but as cruel tyrants. Of one thing I am sore
abashed, and greatly it troubles my wits, saying naturally and of right the
justice of the goddis is good, and we offendyng them, and that have justice but
lent to us, yet we glorify us to be cruel: so yt the goddis do pardon
injuries done to the^, whereby fame of mekenes abides to them: and we chastise
the injuries of other, whereby we win the fame of tyra^tis. In good sothe there
is no man among men, nor humain among the humains, but he is as a brute beast,
and wild among wyld beastis, that names him self to be of the flesh, and
has no pity to hurt other flesh: Nor considers not, that the goddis has
made him a meke beast and lowly by nature, and he becomes a fires serpent by
malice. In the.xii. year of the foundation of Rome, Romulus the first king
sent a co^ma^dement into al places and realms nygh to him: as to the Volgues,
Samites, and Russiens, to Capue, Tarentis, and Albanoys: to thentent that all
such as were banished troubled and persecuted in their realms, should come to
Rome, and there they should be received and well entreated: and except the
hystories lie, Rome was more inhabited in ten years, than Babylon or Cartage
in a. C. years. O glorious heart of Romulus, that such a thing invented: and
glorious tongue, that such a thing commanded: and glorious was the city or
country, that founded them upon such mercy and pytie. I have found diverse
letters of diverse realms of the orient, sent forth, me^cionyng thus: We the
king of Parthes in Asie, to the conscript fathers of Rome, and to the happy
people of Italy, and unto all them of that empire, having the name of
Romans, and surname of clemency, Salutation to your persons. We send peace
and tranquillity to you, as we demand the same of the goddis.

Thus than regard, what glorious title of Clemency our predecessors Romans
had: and what exaumple of clemency they have left for all emperors to com.
Take this for certain, that the Censures or mynysters of Justice, forgetting
the pity of the Romans, shall be reputed cruelle, as Barbariens: Nor Rome shall
not repute them as her natural children, but as cruelle ennemies: and not for
augmentours of the commonwealth, but infamours and robbers of clemency.

When I was of the age of.xxxvii. year, being in the isle of Crete, now called
Cypres, in winter time, There was a mountain called Archadio, whereupon four
pyllers were set, and a sepulcher of a king of worthy fame, and in his life
pitiefull and full of mercy: and as one showed me, there were certain words
written in greek letters round about the sepulcher, saying thus: I have taken
to me always this counsel, where as I might do but little good, I never did
harm: and that that I might have with peace, I never strove for: Such as I
might overcome with prayer, I never feared with thretnynges. Where as I might
remedy secretly, I did never chastise openly: them that I might correct with
warnynges, I never hurted with beatynges: Such as I chastysed openly, I first
aduertysed secretly: and finally I never chastysed one, but I forgave four. I
am right sorrowful, because that I have chastysed: and am glad because that I
pardoned. In as much as I was borne as a man, my flesh is here eaten with
worms: and because I have lived virtuously in my life, my spirit shall now
rest with the goddis.

How thynkest thou my friend Antygonus, what an Epitaphye was this? And how
glorious was his life, sithe the memory of him unto this day abides so
immortal? And as the goddis may help me in all goodness, and defend me fro ill,
I have not so great delight at Pompey with his army, nor at Gaius Julius Caesar
with his Gauls of France, nor at Scipio with his Affricans, as I have at the
king of Cypres with his sepulcher. For that king has more glory in that
mountain being dead, than all the other had in all their lives, with all
their tryumphes, that ever they had in Rome. I say not, but that the wyckednes
of ill people should be chastysed: for with out comparison, he is worse that
favors the ylle, than he that commytteth the ill: for the one proceeds of
wekenes, and the other of malice. But it seems to me, and to al other that be
wise, that as the sin is natural, and the chastysement voluntary: so ought
the rigor of Justice to be temperate, so that the ministers should show
compassion rather than vengeance: whereby the trespassours should have occasyon
to amend their sin passed, and not to revenge the injury present. O whatte
places and realms have been lost, not for the ylnes that the ill people has
committed, but rather by the disordinate Justice, that the ministers of justice
have exercised? Thinkyng by their rigor to correct the domages passed, whereby
has risen sclaunders and strife, never none such hard of before. Wha^ a prince
sends any person with the charge of justice, he ought to say to him these
words, which Auguste Caesar said to the governor of Affrike: I put not the
confidence of mine honor into thy hondes, nor commit to the my justice, to be
a distroyer of innocents, nor an executioner of sinners: but that with one
hand thou should help the good to maynteyn them therein: and with the other
hand to help to reyse them that be ill from their noughtynesse. And mine
intention is to send the forth to be a preceptour of orphans, and an advocate
for wydowes, a surgion for all wounds, a staff for the blind, a father to
every person, to speak fair to mine ennemies, and to rejoice my friends. In
this manner I would thou should use thy self in every place, so that by the
fame of pitiefulnes, such as be mine shall be in rest and content to be my
subiectis, and that strangers shall be desirous to come and serve me. This
instruction August Caesar gave to a governor of his, because it was showed him,
that he was somewhat cruel in that realm. Certainly they were short words,
but they be right co^pendious: And would to god they were written in the hearts
of our iuges. Thou writest, how that i will is sore troubled by reason of the
censures and iuges thereof. It is a noyfulle travail to receive the authority
of justice into the hand of an unjust man: and it is a thing not to be
suffered, that one with tyranny should tyrannyse diverse other: not with the
life, but with the authority to correct good men, thereby to be called a good
ce^sure. The auctorite of his office given to him by his prince ought to be
his accessarie, and his good life for principal: in such manner, that by the
rectitude of his justice, the ill should feel the excution thereof. All that have
auctorite should tempre it with wisdom and pureness of living. It is a great
goodness to the common wealth, and great confusion to him that is chastised with
pain, wha^ the miserable that is chastised, sees nothing in him that
chastises, whereby he has deserved to be chastised. And contrary, it is great
slackenes in a prince to command, and great shame to the common wealth to
consent, and great inconuenyence and reprofe to the judge to execute: when a
poor wretch for a small fault is put to more pain for the same small faut done
in one day, than is given to them that be great for many tyrannyes, that they
have committed during their life. These be they that peruerte the commonwealth,
and sclander the world, and put them self out of authority.

In the.iii. year that great Po^peie took Elia, the which is now Jerusalem,
the same time being there Valerius Graccus, thither came an Hebrewe, or a jew,
as the annals show, to complain to the Senate of the wrongs and greues that
were done to him in that land, and so in doing his erra^de in the name of all that province, he said these words: O fathers conscript, O happy people, your
fatal destenies permit, and our god leueth us with Jerusalem, lady of al
Asie, and mother to ye Ebrues, to be in seruage of Rome, and to the Romans:
Certeynly great was ye power of Po^pey, and much more the force of his army to
take us. But therefore I say, that greatter was the ire of our god, and without
comparison the multitude of our sins, whereby we did merit to be lost. I would
ye knew one thing, and it sore displeseth me, yt ye Romans have not proved it
by experience. That is, our god is so just, yt if among us there had be^.x.
just me^, and among.l.M. ill, one god, he would have perdoned al ye ill: And
than ye Romans should have seen as the Egiptiens did, how our god alone may
do much more than al your goddis together. And certaynely as long as we be
sinners, so long ye shall be our lords. And as long as the ire of the
Hebrews god does endure, so long shall the power of the Romans last. And
because in this case I follow one way, and by your sect ye follow an other
way, ye can not return to honor one god only, nor I to honor diverse
goddis. I will leave this matter to the god, by whose power we have been
nourished, and by whose bou^te we be governed, and return to the case of our
embassade. Ye know what peace has been between Rome and Iudee, and between
Iudee and Rome, we with you, and ye with us. In all things we have obeyed you,
and ye us. No just thing we have denied you. And because there is nothing
more desired of the people, and less put in operation than is peace, and there
is nothing more abhorred, by the which abhorynge every man lives, tha^ is
war: I do warn you of this with truth, provide therefore justice, put them
away yt follow your wylles to do us ill: And let us have no such malycious
folk, as intyse us to rebel. The greatteste sign and strongeste pyller of
peace is to put away the perturbers of peace. What profit is to say peace
peace, and in secret to say war war? I say this because ye have banished
the eldest son of king Idumeo out of Lion for his demerites, and ye have sent
in his stead Campanius, Marcus, Ruffus, and Valerius Graccus for presidentes.
They be.iiii. plages. or.iiii. pestilences, so that the least of them were
sufficient to enpoyson the hole empire of Rome, than much sooner our miserable
realm of Palestyne. What thing can be more monstrous, than that the judges of
Rome should send men to put away ylle customs fro them that be ill, and they
them selfs are the inuentours of new vices? What greatter shame and
inconvenience is in Justice, than they that have authority to chastise wanton
youth, to glorify them self to be capitaynes of them that be wild? What
greatter infamye can be in Rome, than they that ought to be virtuous and just,
to give example to other to be ill and vicious? I lie if they have not so
writhen and enlarged the disciplyne of Justice, that they have taught the
youth of Jude such vices, that have not ben hard of by our fathers, nor red
in no books, nor seen in our time. O Romans believe me in one thing, what
counselles Jude has taken of Rome at this hour, let Rome take of Iudee.
Many realms are gotten with mighty capitaynes, and much shedyng of blood, and
ought to be observed with a good judge, not in shedynge of blood, but in
getting of hearts. Certainly the judge that wynneth moo good wylles than
money, ought to be beloved: and he that serves for money, and loses the good
wylles, for ever ought to be abhorred as pestylence. What think ye is the
cause now adays, that your presidentes be not obeyed in a just cause? Of a
troth it is because, that first they command unjust things. The
commandementes that be just, makes soft and meke hearts, and such as be
unjust, makes men cruel. We be so miserable in all myseries, that to him that
commands well, we obey ill: and the more ill they command, the more obeyed
would they be. Believe me in one thing, that of the great lyghtnes and small
sadness of the iuges, is bredde little fear and great shame in the subiectis.
We that be jews thynk our self well advertised by the mouth of our god that
says, Every prince commyttyng charge of Justice to him that he sees unable to
execute the same, or does not principally for Justice sake accomplish
justice, but does it for his own profit, or else to please the (...) nor can
not remedy a small matter, but invent other more greatter, alteryng and
troublyng the peace for their own particular wealth. They weep for their own
harm, and no less for the wealth of other, and finally lose them selfs. And
therefore they adventure them self into the gulfes, and inflame their lords,
that have given them such offices, to give them to such as have deserved
them. Thou may know, that the beginning of them is pride and ambition, and
their middell is envy and malice, and their end is death and destruction. And
if my counsel were taken, such should have no credence with princis or
governors, but as sclaundred men to be separate, not all only fro the common
welthe, but fro their lives. Surely great is the couetyse of them that be
shameless, which without shame demand offices of the senate or princis: but
it is a more boldenes of malice for the pryncis to give them. In this and in
the other things these are so dampnable, that neither the fear of the goddis
does withdraw them, nor the prince does not refrain them, nor vengeance
does not let them, nor the commonwealth does not accuse them, and above
all other reason, does not command them, nor the law subdue them.

O my friend Antygonus note this word that I write in the end of my letter.
In the year of the foundation of Rome.vi.C.xlii. the Romans as thanne in the
world had diverse wars, as Gayus Celius against them of Trace, and Gneo
Cordon his brother against Sardyne, Iunius Sylla against the Vmbres, Minutius
Ruffus against the Macidoniens, Seruilio Scipio ageynste the Lusitayns, and
Marius consul against Iugurtha king of the Numidiens, It befell so that Boco
king of Mauritayne favored Iugurtha, and upon them triumphed Marius, and
they laded with chains were led before his chariot, not without great
compassion of them that saw it. After this triumph done, incontinent the same
day by counsel of the senate, Iugurtha was beheeded in prison, and his
companion Bocus had pardon of his life, and the cause was, It was a custom
none to be put to Justice, but first the ancient books should be serched,
to se if any of his predecessors had done before any service to Rome, wherdy
the captive should merit to have pardone of his life: and than it was found,
that the grauntfather of Bocus came to Rome, and made great orations before the
senate, by whose words and sentences, his said neuew merited to have pardon of
his life: and among other of his sayings, he rehearsed these verses that said:
what is that realm, where is no good among the ill, nor ill among the good?
what is that realm, that has their houses full of good simple persons, and
banysheth away al wisdom? Or what is that realm, that such as be good are
cowardes, and the ill hardy? or what is the realm, where al peasible are
displeased, and the sedycious praised? What is that realm, that sleeth them
that would their wealth, and are angry with them that would help their ill? or
what is that realm, that permytteth the proud poor folks, and the rich
tyrants? or what is that realm, where they all know the evil, and none
procures any goodness? or what is that realm, where such vices are openly
committed, that other realms fear to do secretly? or what is that realm,
where as all that they desire they procure, and all that they do procure, they
attain, and all that is ill they think, and all that they think they say, and
all that they say, they may do, and all that they may do, they dare do, and
put in operation that they dare do: and worst of all, there is none so good to
resyst it? In such a realm there should be none inhabitaunte. For within
short space the ill men shall be changed, or else dispeopled of good men, or
the goddis will confound them, or the tirantis shall take the^. Diverse things
were said, the which I pass over at this time. How thynkest thou Antigone? I
swear by the immortal goddis, that my heart breketh to think of the great shame
that was laid upon Rome by such writing as was left to them by the
grauntefather of this king Bocus. This my letter I would thou should read in
secret to the pretours, and if they amend not, we shall find the means to
chastise them openly. And as touching thy banisheme^t I promise the to be thy
good friend to the senate, that we may joy our ancient amity to gether. And
to get the out of that isle, certainly I shall do my diligence. I have written
to my secretary Panutius to deliver the.ii.M. sexters to releue thy poverty:
and thus I send the my letter to comfort thy heavy heart. I say no more, but the
goddis give the contentacion of that thou would have joy, and rest to thy
person. And al corporal euyls, cruel enmies, and fatal destenies be separate
fro me Mark. For the behalf of my wife Faustine, I salute the, and thy wife
Ruffa: She is thyn, and I am thyn. With visitation of joy I have received thy
letter, and thankefully I send the mine. I shall not rest to desire to se thy
person in Italy, and there in Sicyle to leave my fever quartayne.

A letter sent by Marcus to Lambert governor of the isle of Helespont, when he
did banishe the vacabundis fro Rome. The.xi. letter.
Mark emperor of Rome, lord of Asie, confederate with them of Europe,
friend of them of Affrike, enemy of the Maures: To the Lambert governor of
the i will of Helesponte, sendethe of his part contentation and surety fro the
sacrate senate. I am furred with ye furs that thou haste sent me, and am
clothed with thy ma^tel, and am right well pleased with thy greyhoundes: If I
had thought, that thin absence fro Rome should have procured so much fruit in
that isle: long ago I should have determined as well for thy profit as for my
service. I sent to the in demanding but small things in my sport, and thou
have sent me many things in ernest. In good sothe thou have better
proporcioned thy service with noblenes, than I to command with my couetise.
For if thou remember, I sent to the for a doseyne skynnes of furre, and thou
have sent me.xii. doseyns: and I did send but for.vi. greihoundes, and thou
have sent me.xii. Truly in this case my pleasure is double. For here in Rome
thy great largess is publyshed, and my small couetise there in Helesponte. And
because I am sure thou have great thanks of me, I pray to go^d to send the
salute and health: And that fortune be not denied the at a good hour. I send
the.iii. barks of master foles, and yet I have not sent the al. For if I had
banyshed all the foles in Rome, we should have peopled us with a new people.
These master foles have been so wily to teache folly, and the Romayn youth so apt
to learn, though they be but in.iii. barks, their disciples would lade.iii.M.
Carrakes. I have great marvel of one thing, and my heart sclaundreth the
goddis: for I se well that erthquakes casts down houses, and great waters
bears away bridges, frostes freseth the vines, sodein thondring and tempests
breketh down toures, scarsitie of water causes derth, corrupt air makes an
end of the^ that be wise: and yet there is nothing that can make an end of
these fools. All things at this day fails at Rome, except all only these
ydel trewandes, gestours, tomblers, players, or dromslayes, iuglers, and such
other, of whom there is inowe and to many. O what a service should thou do
to the goddis, and what profit to Rome, that for three barks full of foles to
send one lade with wise men? One thing I will say, that with the bones of the
wise men that isle is hallowed, that anciently were banysshed by the malice and
envy of them of Rome: if thy smelling wits be not lost, as Italy stynketh
of them that be simple, so that isle smells sweet of wise men. When I came
fro the wars of the Parthes, the.iiii. year of mine empire, I passed into that
isle by diverse sees to see the sepulchers of ancient wise men: and in the city
of Dorbite in the mids thereof, lies Ouide, that was banyshed by August: and
under the mountain Arpines is the sepulcher of the renomed Armeno orator
banyshed by Sylla: at the port of Argonaut thou shalt find the bones of
Colliodorus recapituler of the antyke laws, that was banysshed by Nero the
cruel: and in the field of Elinos, under a marble, is the pouders of Sysifo
Seteno, that was so well learned in the.vii. arts liberal, as though he had new
found them, he was banyshed by the Marians. I say for truth thou shalt
find it thus, for with my knees I have touched their sepulchers. And all that
season my tender eyes were as fulle of water, as their bones were hard in the
earth. These were not banyshed for no vylanies that they had done: but it was
the merit of our forefathers, that they would be priuated fro the company of
so noble barons: and we their chylderne fro the powder of so renowned sages. I
can not tell which is the greatter, the fantasye that I have to thyn isle, or
the compassion of miserable Rome. I do pray the as my friend, and command the
as my servant, to regard the places that I have showed the. For it is a just
thing, and most just, that such cities be priuileged by them that lives,
when they are peopled with such dead wise men. And more over, Centurion
knows by words, the heavy case, that these prisoners had with us, and we with
them, the day of the feast of mother Berecyntia. I say, I saw not that day
so much cruelty in Rome, as we caused infamye through all the empire. Rome,
that never was overcome, by them that were valyant and virtuous, that day we
saw ouergone, and trodden under foot, by those foles. The walls of Rome, that
were never touched by the Poeniens, had that day their lowpes full of armed
trewandes: Rome that triumphed over al realms, was triumphed upon that day,
with tomblers and iuglers. I am so abashed in this case, that I wot not what to
say or to write. Yet one thing comforts me, that since Rome and the Romans
unjustly do rejoice with these fools: she and the famous wise men, justly
shall be chastised for these foles. And in this the goddis shall not be
displeased, that sithe Rome laugheth at these trewandies and mockeries, one day
she shall weep, with these tomblers and iuglers. I banysshe all these for ever
fro Rome, not for the bloudde that they have shed, but for the hearts, that
they have perverted: not for the occasion of any that be deed, but because they
were masters of folies. Without comparison it is greatter offense to the
goddis, and more damage to the common welthe, these trewandes to take away the
wits fro the wise folks, than the murderers to take away men's lives. If the
greattest gift, among all gifts of fortune, be, to keep a good wit, let no man presume, to be of a restfull understanding, that is an extreme friend to
these trewandes. Believe me one thing. As one bird loves an other, and one
best an other, and one wise man an other: so one fooole loves an other fool.

I remember, on a day, as I reuolued the regysters in the Capitol, I read a
right meruaylous thing of Oruetus a famous orator, which is buried in the isle
of Helespo^t, on the mount Adamantine, When great Scipio came fro the war of
the Poeniens, better accompanied with hunger storuen trewandes, than with
valyant capitaynes, he said to him: Of truth, it is great shame to the, and
a small honor to the senate, that thou, that haste overcome the wise Affres,
and being so wise thy self, and of the blood of the wise Romans, will be
accompanied with these trewandes and fools. In that unhappy realm, all the
wise men could not overcome one, that was thought so mighty, among so many
fools. I say to the, that thy wit is in more peril here in Rome, tha^ thy
life in Affrike. These were good words, and not of no worldely malice. And
within a short while after, and by diverse light persons, and for a small
occasion, this poor old orator, and rich philosopher, by the friends of
Scipio, was banyshed Rome, and sent into that isle.

Than behold Lambert, let us return to these iuglers, and trewandes. When they are landed in that isle, let them go frank and fre, so that they use not their
accustomed toys. Thou shall constrayne them to labor, and chastise them, if
they be ydell. For these miserable folk, fleing from just travail, take on
them unjust ydelnes, and convert mo men with their trewandyse, than if open
scooles of vacaboundes were kept. There is nothing that our forfathers did,
that displeases me so much, as the sufferaunce of these unthrifty trewandes.

In the year.CCxxvi. of the foundation of Rome, in the time of an horrible
pestilence in Italy, to rejoice the people, was first found out the invention
of Theaters, by the advice of the trewandes. It is a shameful thing to here,
that the pestylence duryd but two years, and the rage of these unthrifts,
dureth.iiii.C. years.

Lamberte, I believe well, that the complayntes, that these prisoners have begone
here, shall never have an end there. How be it, I care not: for the grudge of
them, that be ylle, justifies the justice and sentence of them, that be good.
As the master of Nero said: As much as the shame of sin ought to be
fled of them, that be good, so much praise, is the infamye of the ill. I
shall tell the one thing, to the intent, that the chastysement should not
seem cruel to the. Seeing the emperors of Rome are full of clemency to
strangers, it is no reason, that they should be to sharp to their own. Sithe
fatal destenyes has brought me into this world, I have seen nothing more
unprofitable to the common welthe, nor greatter folly in them, that be light of
conditions, nor a worse invention for vacabu^des, nor a more cold reuocation of
mortal folk, tha^ to learn of these gamners and trifelers, and such other
iuglers. What thing is more monstrous, tha^ to se wise men rejoice at the
pastime of these vain trifelers? what greatter mockery can be in the capitol,
tha^ the folyshe saying of a gestour, to be praised with great laughter of wise
me^? what greater sclaunders can be to princis houses, than to have their gates
always open, to receive in these foles, and never open to wise folks? what
gretter cruelty can there be in any person, than to give more in one day to a
fool, tha^ to his servants in a year, or to his kin, al his life? what gretter
inconsta^cie can there be, than to want men to furnishe the garrisons and
frontiers of Illirico, and these trewa^des to abide at Rome? what like shame
can there be to Rome, than yt the memory shall be left more in Italy, of these
tomblers, trewa^des, pypers, singers of gestes, tabourers, cruders, dca^ers,
mo^mers, gesters, and iuglers, than the renome of capitains, with their
triu^phes and arm.s And when these caitifes wa^dred al about in Rome in
sauetie, sowni^g their lewdenes, and gaderyng of money: the noble barons and
capitaynes, went fro realm to realm, wasting their money, aduenturinge their
lives, and shedynge their blood. In the uttermost part of Spain, when war
began between the Liberiens and Goditaynes, and they of Liberie laked money:
Two iuglers and tabourers, offered to maynteyne the war a hole year. And it
followed, that with the goods of two fools, many wise men were slain and
overcome.

In Ephese, a city of Asie, the famous temple of Dyana was edified with the
confiscatio^ of the goods, of such a trewande and fool.

When Cadmus edified the city of Thebes in Egipte, with.l. gates, the
mynstrelles gave him more toward it, than all his friends.

If the histories be true, when August edified the walls of Rome, he had
more of the trewandes, that were drowned in Tybre, than of the common
treasourie. The first king of Corinth arose by such villaynes, I saw his
sepulcher at Corynthie. And as I say of these small no^bre, I might say of many
other. Behold than La^bert, how littell care the goddis take, and how
variable the case of fortune is, and how the deeds of men fall. Some be had in
memory for their folly, and some for their wisdom. One thing is come to my
mind, of the chance of these trewandes, and that is: while they be in
presence, they make every man to laugh at the folyes, that they do and say: and
when they be gone, every man is sorry for his money, that they bare away. And of
truth, it is a just sentence of the goddis, that such as have taken vayn
pleasure together, when they are departed, to weep for their losses. I will
write no more unto the: but I do send the this letter in Greek, to the
entente that thou show it over all the isle. Send forth ewith the ships
again, for they must be sent forth with provisions into Illyryco. Peace be
with the Lamberte, health and good fortune be with me Marc. The senate saluteth
the. And thou on my behalf, shalt show to the I Will, the joyful happy
customs. My wife Faustine saluteth the, and sends a rich gyrdell to thy
daughter. And in recompense of the furs I send the rich iewelles.

A letter sent by Marc the emperor to Catulus his special friend, of the
novelties of Rome. The xlii. letter.
MArcus the new Censure, to the Catulus the old Censurine. It is.x. days
past, that in the temple of god Ianus, I received thy letter: and I take the
same god to witness, that I had rather have seen thy person. Thou wryteste,
how my writynge is long, but the shortness of time makes me to answer the
more brefely, far away more thanne I would. Thou desire me, to give the
knowledge of the news here. Thereto I answer, that it were better to demand,
if there be any thing abyden here in Rome or Italy, that is old. For now by
our heavy destenies, all that is good and old is ended, and new things, that
be ill and detestable, we may se daily. The Emperor, the Consule, the Trybune,
the Senators, the Ediles, the Flamynes, the Pretours, the Centurions, all
these things be new, but the vilanies, that been old, and al passes to make
new offices, and to ordeyne statutes and practykes, to come to the counceles,
and to reyse up subsidies. In such wise, yt there has been now mo novelties
within these.iiii. years, than in time passed in.iiii.C. years. We now
assemble together a. iii.C. to counsel in the capitol, and there we blason
and boste, swear, and promise, that some of us may subdue and put under other,
to favor one, and distroye an other, other to chastise the ill and reward the
good: To repair old, and edify new: to pluck vices up by the roots, and
to plant virtues: to amend the old, and follow the good: to reprove
tyrauntes, and assiste the poor: and whenne that we are goone from thens, they
that spoke best words, are often taken with the worste deeds. O heavy Rome,
that now adays has such Senators, that in saying, we shall do, we shall do,
passes their life: and than every man, sekyng for his own profit, forgets
the commonwealth. Oftentimes I am in the Senate, to behold other, as they
regard me: and I am abashed, to here the eloquence of their words, the zele of
Justice, and the justification of their persons: and after that I come thens,
I am ashamed, to se their secret extorcions, their damnable thoughts, and
their ill works, so plainly manyfeste. And yet there is an other thing of
more marvel, and not to be suffered, that such persons, as are most
defamed, and use most dyshonest vices, with their most damnable intentio^s,
make their auowes to do most cruel Justice. It is an ineffable rule, and of
humayn malice most used, that he that is most hardy, to commytte greattest
crimes, is most cruel, to give sentence against an other for the same offense.
Me think, that we regard our own crimes, as through small nets, that
causes things to seem the lesser. And we remember the fautes of other, in the
water, that causes things to seem greatter than they be. O how many have I
seen conde^pned to be hanged by the senate, for one small fault, done in all the
life, and yet they commytte the same fault every hour.

I have read, that in the time of Alexander the great, there was a renoumed
pirate or a rouer on the sea, which robbed and drowned all ships, that he
could get: and by commandment of this good king Alexander, there was an
army sent forth to take him. And when he was taken, and presented to
Alexander, the king said to him: Show me Dionides, why doste thou keep the sea
in danger, that no ship can sail out of the east into the weste, for the? The
Pyrate answered, and said: If I keep the sea in daungier, why doste thou
Alexander, keep all the sea and land as lost? O Alexander, because I fight
with one ship in the sea, I am called a thief, and because thou robbest
with.ii.C. ships on the sea, and troublest all the world with two.C.
thousand men, thou art called an emperor. I swear to the Alexander, if
fortune were as favorable to me, and the goddis as extreme against the: they
would give me thine empire, and give the my lyttel ship, and than
peradventure, I should be a better king than thou art, and thou a wors thief
than I am. These were high words, and well received of Alexander: and of
troth, to se if his words were correspondent to his promyses, he made him
from a pyrate to a great captain of an army: and he was more virtuous on
land, than he was cruel on the sea.

I promise the Catulus, Alexander did right well therein, and Dionides was to be
praised greatly, for that he had said. Now adays in Italy, they that rob
openly, are called lords: and they that rob privily, ar called thieves.

In the year books of Liuius, I have read, that in the second troublous war
punyke, between the Romans and Carthaginens, there camme an ambassadoure
Lusytayne, sent fro Spain, to treat for accord of peace. When he came to
Rome, he proved before the senate, that sithe he entered into Italye, he had been.x. times robbed of his goods, and whiles he was at Rome, he had seen one
of them that robbed him, hang up an other, that had defended him. He saying
so ylle a deed, and how the thief was saved without Justice, as a desperate
manne, took a cole, and wrote on the gybet as follows.

O gybet, thou art made among thieves, norished among thieves, cut of thieves,
wrought of thieves, made of thieves, set among thieves, and thou art peopled with
innocentis. And there as I red these wordis, was in the original of Lyuius, and
in his histories. I swear to the by the immortal goddis, that all the Decade
was written with black ynke, and these words with read vermylon. I can not
tell, what words I should send the, but that every thing is so new and so
tender, and is joined with so ill syment, that I fear me, all will fall
suddenly to the plain earth. I tell the, that some are suddenly risen within
Rome unto valor, to whom I will rather assure their fall, than their life. For
all building hastily made, can not be sure. The longer a tree is kept in his
kind, the longer it will be er it be old. The trees, whose fruit we eat in
summer, do warm us in winter. O how many have we seen, whereof we have
meruayled of their rysynge, and ben abashed of their falls. They have grown
as a hole piece, and suddenly wasted as a scomme. Their felicity has been but
a short point, and their infortune as a long life. Finally, they have are died
the myll, and armed it with stones of encreace. and after a little grindinge,
left it in vtyle all the hole year after. Thou know well, my friend Catulus,
that we have seen Cincius Fuluius in one year made Consule, and his children
tribunes, and his wife a matron for young maidens, and beside that, made keeper
of the capitol, and after that not in one year but the same day we saw Cincius
beheeded in the place, his chylderne drowned in Tybre, his wife banysshed froo
Rome, his house raced down to the ground, and all his good confysked to the
common treasourie. This rigorous example we have not read in any book to take
a copy of it, but we have seen it with our eyes to keep it in our minds. As
the nations of people ar variable, so are the conditions of men diverse, and
appetites of mortal folk: and me thinks this is true, seeing that some love,
some hate, and that that some seek, some escheweth: And that that some sets
little by, other make of. In such wise that al can not be content with one
thing, nor some with all things can not be satisfied. Let every man choose as
him list, and enbrace the world when he will, I had rather mount a soft pace
to the falling, and if I can not come thereto, I will abide by the way, rather
than with sweatte to mount hastily, and than to tumble down heedlyng. In this
case since men's hearts understand it, we need not to write further with pens.
And of this matter regard not the little that I do say, but the great deal
that I will say. And since I have begone, and art in strange lands, I will write
the all the news fro hens. This year the.xxv. day of May, there came an
ambassador out of Asie, saying he was of the isle of Cetyn, a barone right
elegant of body, ruddy of aspect, and right hardy of courage. He considered
being at Rome, though the summers days were long, yet winter would draw on,
and than would it be dangerous saylynge into his isle: and saw that his
besynes was not dispatched: On a day being at the gate of the senate, saying
all the Senators enter in to the Capitolle, without any armor upon them, he
as a man of good spirit, and zelatour of his countreye, in the presence of us
all, said these words:

O fathers conscripte, O happy people, I am come fro a strange countreye to
Rome, only to see Rome, and I have found Rome without Rome: The walls
wherewith it is enclosed, has not brought me hither, but the fame of them
that govern it. I am not come to se the tresourie, wherein is the treasure of
all realms: but I am come to se the sacred senate, out of the which issues
the counsel for all men. I came not to se you, because ye vanquishe all other,
but because I thought you more virtuous than all other. I dare well say one
thing, except the goddis make me blind, and trouble mine understanding, ye be
not Romans of Rome, nor this is not Rome of the Romans your predecessors. We
have hard in our isle, that diverse realms ben won by the valya^tnes of one,
and conserved by the wisdom of all the senate: and at this hour ye are more
like to be distroyed, than to win as your fathers did: all their exercise
was in goodness, and ye that are their children, pass all your time in
cerymonies. I say this ye Romans, because ye have almost kylde me with
laughinge at you, to se how ye do all as much your diligence to leave your
armure without the gate of the senate, as your predecessors did to take them
to defend the empire. What profit is it to you to leave your arms for the
sureties of your persons, and put them on, wherewith ye slay all the world?
What profits it to the thoughtfull suitor, that the senator enters unarmed
into the senate without sword or dagger: and his heart enters into the senate
armed with malice? O Romans, I will ye know, that in our isle we hold you not
as armed Capitayns, but as malicious senators: not with sharp grounden swerdes
and daggers, but with hard hartis and venomous tongues ye fear us. If ye should
in the senate put on harnes, and therewith take away your lives, it were but a
small loss, saying that ye susteyn not the innocents, nor dispatche not the
businesses of suitors, I can not suffer it. I can not tell in what state ye
stand here at Rome: for in our i will we take armor from foles, whether your
armours are take away as fro foles or mad folks, I wot not. If it be done
for ambitiousnes, it comes not of Romans, but of tyrants, that wranglers
and ireful folk should not be iuges over the peasible, and the ambicious over
the meke, and the malicious over the simple. If it be done because ye be foles,
it is not in the law of the goddis, that.iii.C. foles should govern.iii.C.M.
wise men. It is a long season that I have tarried for mine answer and license,
and by your madness I am now farther of, tha^ I was the first day. We bring
oil, honey, saffron, wood, and timber, salt, silver, and gold out of our isle
into Rome: and ye will that we go else where to seek justice. Ye will have one
law to gather your rentes, and an other to determyne our Justices. ye will that
we pay our tributes in one day, and ye will not discharge one of our errandes
in a hole year. I require you Romans determine your selfs to take away our
lives, and so we shall end: or else here our complayntes, to thentent that we
may serve you. For in an other manner it may be than ye know by heringe with
your ears, which peradventure ye would not se with your eien. And if ye think
my words be out of mesure: so that ye will remedy my country, I set not by my
life. And thus I make an end. Verily friend Catulo these be the words, that he
spoke to the senate, which I gat in writing. I say of troth, that the
hardines, that the Romans were wo^t to have in other countres, the same as
now strangers have in Rome. There were that said, that this ambassador
should be chastised, but the goddis forbid: that for saying troth in my
presence, he should have been correct. It is enough and to much to, to suffer
these euyls, though we slay nor persecute those that aduertyse and warn us of
them. The sheep are not in surety of the wolf, but if the shepard have his
dog with him. I mean, dogs ought not to leave barkynge for to awake the
shepardes. There is no god commands, nor law counsayleth, nor common welthe
suffers, that they which are committed to chastyse liars, should hang them
that say troth. And since the senators show them self men in their lyuinge,
and sometime more humayne than other that be slaves, who else should deliver
them fro chastisement? O Rome and no Rome, having nothing but the name of Rome,
where is now become the noblenes of thy triumphs, the glory of chy children,
the rectitude of thy Justice, and the honor of thy temples? for as now they
chastise him more that murmureth against one only Senator, than they do them
that blaspheme all the gods at ones. For it greueth me more to se a Senator
or censure to be worste of all other, than it displeases me, that it should be
said, that he is the best of all other. For a truth I say to the my friend
Catulus, that as now we need not to seek to the gods in the temples, for the
Senators are made gods in our hands. This is the difference between them
that been immortal, and they that be mortal. For the goddis never do thing
that is ill, and the Senators do never good thing: the gods never lie, and
they never say truth: the goddis pardon often, and they never forgive: the
goddis are content to be honored.v. times in the year, and the Senators would
be honored.x. times a day. What wylt thou that I should say more? but what so
ever the gods do, they ought to be praised: and the senators in all their
works deserve to be reproved. Finally I conclude, that the goddis assure and
affirm every thing, and they err and fail in nothing: and the senators
assure nothing, but err in all things: only for one thing the senators
are not of reasone to be chastysed: and that is, when they intend not to amend
their fautes, they will not suffer the orators to waste their time to show
them the troth. Be it as may be, I am of the opinion, that what man or woman,
withdraws their ears fro heryng of troth, impossible it is for them to
apply their hearts to love any virtues: Be it censure that iugeth, or senator
that ordeyneth, or emperor that commands, or consule that executethe, or
orator that precheth. No mortal man, take he never so good head to his
works, nor reason so well in his desires, but that he deserves some
chastisement for some cause or counsaylle in his doings. And since I have
written to the thus of other, I will somewhat speak of my self, because of the
words of thy letter. I have gathered, that thou desire to know of my
person. Know thou for certain, that in the kalendes of Ianuarye I was made
censure in the senate, the which office I desired not, nor I have not deserved
it. The opynion of all wise men is, that no manne, without he lack wit, or
surmounteth in folly, will gladdely take on him the burden and charges of other
men: A greatter case it is for a shamefaste man to take on him an office to
please every man, for he must show a countenance outward, contrary to
that he thinks inward. Thou will say, that the good are ordained to take
the charge of offices. O unhappy Rome, that has wylled to take me in such
wise, as to be the best in it. Grievous pestylence ought to come for them that
be good, since I am escaped as good among the ill. I have accepted this office,
not for that I had any need thereof, but to satisfy the desires of my wife
Faustine, and to fulfill the commandment of Anthonius my grauntfather. Have
no marvel of any thing that I do, but of that I leave to be done. For any
man that is wedded to Faustyne, there is no vylany but he shall do it. I swear
to the, that since the day we were wedded, me semethe that I have no wit. I
leave wedding for this time, and return to speak of offices. Surely a
peasible man ought to be in offices, though it be peynefull: for as the
offices are assured among them that be virtuous, so perillously gothe the
virtuous folk among offices. And for the truth hereof reckon what they
win, and than thou shall se what they lose. Say that is good, if thou
know it, and here the ill, if thou desire to know it. He that will take the
charge to govern other, he seeks thought and trouble for him self, envy for
his neighbors, spourres for his ennemies, poverty for his riches, awakynge of
thieves, peril for his body, an end of his days, and tourmente for his good
renoume. Finally he seeks away to reiecte his friends, and a repeal to
recover his ennemies. O an unhappy man is he, that takes on him the charge of
children of many mothers, for he shall be always charged with thoughts, how he
should content them all: full of sighs because one has to give him: fear that
one should take fro him, weeping if he lose, and suspection that they infame
him. He that knows this, without long tarienge ought to set a bridel at
his heed. But I say of one, as I say of an other. For I will swear, and thou
wylt not deny it, that we may find some now adays, that had rather be in the
park to fight against the bulls, tha^ be in surety upon the scaffold.
Oftentimes I have hard say: Go we to the Theaters to run at the bulls: go we
to chase the hearts and wild boores: and wha^ they come there, they run
away, not the bestes fro them, but they fro the beasts. In such wise as they
went runnyng, they return agein fleinge. I say these ambicious persons
procure to govern: and are governed: they command, and are commanded, they
rule and are ruled: and finally thinking to have diverse under their hands,
these wretches put them selves under every ma^s foot. For the remedy of all
these perils my thought is comforted with one thing, and that is without
procuryng or offering my self, the senate of their own will has commanded
me. In the.viii. table of our ancient laws be these words. We command that
in our sacred senate charge of justice be never given to him that wyllingly
offreth him self to it, but to such as by ripe deliberation be chosen. This is
certainly a just law. For men now be not so virtuous nor so louinge to the
common wealth, yt they will forget their own quietness and rest, doing damage to
them self, to procure an other man's profit. There is none so folyshe, that
will leave his wife, children, and his own sweet country, to go into strange
countries, but if he se him self among strange people, thinkyng under the
color of justice to seek for his own utility. I say not this without weeping,
that the princis with their small study and thought, and the iuges with their
couetyse, have undermined and shaken down the high walls of the policy of
Rome. O my friend Catulus, what will thou that I should say, but that our
crede^ce so minisheth, our couetise so largely stretches, our hardines so
boldeth, our shamfastnes so shameless, that we provide for iuges to go and rob
our neighbors as capytayns against our ennemies? I let the to wit, where as
Rome was beloved for chastising the ill, now it is as much hated for
dispoylyng of innocents. I do remember, yt I red, in the time of Denis
Syracusan, that ruled al Sicile, there came an ambassador fro Rhodes to Rome,
being of a good age, well learned, and valiant in arms, and right curious to
regard every thing. He came to Rome to se the majesty of the sacred senate:
the height of the high capitol enuironned with the Colliset: the multitude of
senators: the wisdom of the counsaylours, the glory of triumphs: the
correction of the ill, the peace of the inhabytauntes, the diversity of
nations: the haboundance of the mayntenaunce, the order of the offices, and
finally saying that Rome was Rome, he was demanded how he seemed thereby: He
answered and said, O Rome in this thy present world, thou art fulle of
virtues and wise men, hereafter thou shall be furnished with foles. Lo what
high and very high words were these? Rome was vi.C. years without nycetie of
howses of foles, and now it has been.iii.C. years without one wise or virtuous.
Look what I say, it is no mockery but of truth, If the pitiefull goddis now
adays did reyse our predecessors fro death to life, either they would not
know us for their chylderne, or else attache us for fools. These be things
used in Rome, but thou sendest no word of that is used in Agrippine. I will
write nothing to the, to put the to pain: write to me some thing to rejoice
me, if thy wife Dynsilla chanced well of the flote that came out of Cetin with
salt, oil, and honye, I caused hit to be well provided for her. Wit thou,
that Flodius our uncle was cast down by rage of his horse, and is deceassed.
Laertia and Collodius are friends together, by occasyon of a marriage. I do send
the a gown, I pray to the goddis to send the joy thereof. My wife Faustin
saluteth the. Reco^mende me to Iamyro thy son. The goddis have the in keeping:
and contrary fortune be fro me. Marcus thy friend to the Catulus his own.

A letter sent by Mark the emperor to the amorous ladies of Rome, because
they made a play of him. The.xiiii. letter.
Mark orator lerninge at Rodes the art of humanite, to you amorous ladies of
Rome salutation to your persons, and amendment of your desired life. It is
written to me* that at the feast of the mother of the gods Berecynthia, all
ye together there present played, and gested on me: wherein ye laid for an
example my life and my renoume. It is showed me, that Auilina composed it,
Lucia Fulua wrote it, and thy self Toringula did singe it, and ye all together
did present it to the Theater: ye have portrayed and painted me in diverse
manners, with a book in my hand, turned contrary, as a feigned philosopher:
with a tongue alonge, as a bold speker without measure: with a horn on my
heed, a common cuckolde: with a nettell in my hand, as a trembling lover: with
a baner fallen down, as a cowarde capitayn: with half a berde, as a femynate
man: with a clothe before mine eyes, as a condemned vacabound: and yet not
content with this, but the other day ye portrayed me in a new manner. Ye made my
figure with fete of straw, my legs of ambre, my knees of wod, the thyghes of
brass, the belie of horn, the arms of pytche, the hands of mace, the heed
of yesso, the ears of an ass, the eyes of a serpente, the hears as rotes
iagged, the tethe of a catte, the tongue of a scorpion, and the foreheed of
lead: wherein was written in two lines these letters, M, N, T, N, I, S, V, S,
the which meneth (as I do take it) The mortal man takes not the statute so
strange, as the doublenes of the life: and than ye went to the river, and
therein tied his heed dounwarde a hole day. And if the lady Messalyn had not
ben, I think it had been tied there till now. And now ye amorous ladies have
written to me a letter by Fuluius Fabritius, whereof I received no peyn, but as
an amorous man, from the hands of ladies I take it as a mockery. And to
thentente that I should have no time for to think thereon, ye send to wit a
question of me, that is: if I have found in my writings, whereof, by whom,
where, when, what, and how the first women were made. And because my
complexion is to take mockes for mockynges, and sith ye demand it, I shall
show it: you and your friends and mine, and specially Fuluius your messager
has desired me thereto. There is nothing whereof I complain, but I will hold
my peace, save to your letter and demand I will answer. And since there has been none for to ask the question, I protest that to none other, but to you
amorous women of Rome, I send mine answer. And if any other honest lady will
take the demand of you, it is a token that she has envy of the office that
ye be of. Certainly if any lady shows her self annoyed with your pain
openly, fro hensforthe I condemn her, that she keep no faut that she knows
in secret. They that be on the stage, fere not the roringe of the bulle: and
he that is in a dongeon, fears not the shot of artillery. I will say, a
woman of good life, fears no man with an ill tongue. The good Matrones may
keep me for their perpetual servant, and they that be ill for their chief
ennemie. Now to answer the question, to know werof the first women were
made: I say that according to the dyuersitie of nations, that be in the
world, diverse opynions I find in this case. The Egiptiens say, that when the
flode of Nyle ran abroad, and watered the earth, there abode certain pieces of
earth cleuynge to gether like grease, and thanne the heat coming in them
created many wyld beasts: and so among them was found the first woman. Note
ye ladies, that it was necessary, that the flode of Nyle should flow over his
brimmes, that the first woman might be made on the earth. All creatures are
bredde in the entrails of their mothers, except the woman that was bredde
without a mother. And this seems true, that without mothers ye were borne,
because without rule ye live, and without order ye dye. Verily he puts him
self to many trauayles, and has many wyles to find, and many times to
think, and to ask many succors, and to abide many years, and to choose among
many women, that will rule one only wife by reason. Be the beasts never so
cruelle and fierce, at the last the lion is led of his keeper without any
band: The bulle is closed in the park: the brydell rules the horse, a little
hook catches the fyshe, and the wolf suffers to be tied: only a woman is a
beast unable to be tamed, and never leseth her boldness for any thing that is
commanded her, nor the bridell, for not being commanded. The goddis have made
men as men, and beestis as beastis, and the humayne understanding very high,
and his strength of a great power: but yet is there no man, be he never so
high, that shall escape the woman lightly, nor defend him be he never so
strong. But I say to you my ladies: There is no spurs that can make you
goo, nor raynes that can hold you, nor brydelle that can refrain you, nor
angle or net that can take you: and finally there is no law can subdue you, nor
shame refrain you, nor fear abasshe you, nor chastysemente amend you. O to
what an ill adventure puts he him self, that thynkethe to rule and correct
you. For if ye take an opynion in hand, all the world shall not draw you
from it: if a man tell or warn you of any thing, ye will never believe him:
If one give you good counsel, ye will not take it: if one threaten you, anon
ye complain: if one flatter you, tha^ ye wax proud: if one rejoice not in
you, ye are spiteful: if one forbear you, it makes you bold: if ye be
chastysed, ye turn to serpents: Finally a woman will never forgive any
injury, nor give thank for any good deed. Now adays the most simple of all
women, I swear, will swear, that she knows less than she does: and of
truth the most wysest man's wit shall fail in their reasons: and yet the
wysest of them swarueth from all wysedom. Will ye know my ladies, how little
ye know, and how much ye be ignorant? That is, ye determyne suddenly in hard
things of gravity, as if ye had studied for it a. M. years: and if any
gaynesay you, ye take him as a mortal enmy. Hardy is that woman, that dare
give counsel to a man, but he is more hardier that takes it of a woman. But I
say he is a fool that takes it, and he more fool that asks it, and he is
much more folyshe that fulfylleth it. Mine opinion is, that he yt will not
fall among so many stones, nor prick him among so many thorns, nor blyster
him among so many nettyls, let him here what I will say, and do as ye
shall see: speak well and work ill: In promysinge promise much, In
fulfyllyng fulfill nothing, and fynallye allow your words, and condemn your
counselles. If one should demand now adays of diverse right renoumed
persons, that benne deed, how they did with the counselle of women when
they lived: I am sure they would not have risen than to believe them, nor at this
hour to be reuyued again to here them. How was king Philip of Macedon with
Olympias? Paris with Helayne? Alexander with Rosane? Eneas with Dydo? Hercules
with Deyanira? Hanyball with Thamyra? Nero with Agrippine? And if ye will not
believe what they suffered with them, demand of me how I do among other. O ye
women, I remembryng that I am borne of one of you, abhor my life: and I,
thinkyng that I live with you, desire death. For there is none other death as
to treat with you, and no better life than to flee fro you. It is a common
saying among women, that we men be unkind, because we being borne in your
entrayles, do entreat you as bond women and seruantis: and ye say, sith ye
bear us with peril, and nourisshe us with travail, that it were convenient
and just that we always should be occupied in your seruyces. Oftentimes I have
studied, why men desire women so much. There is no eyes, but they ought to
weep, no heart but it should break, no spirit but it should be sorrowful to
se a wise man lost by a foolyshe woman. The foolyshe lover passes the day to
satisfy his sight, the dark night to tomble with vain thoughts: one day
heryng tidings, an other day he offers service: one time loving darkness,
an other time he hates light: he dies with company, and lives solytarie: and
finally the poor foolyshe lover may that he will not, and wylleth that he may
not. More over the counsel of his friends profits him not, nor the shame of
his enmies, nor loss of his goods, nor the adventure of honor, nor loosynge
of his life, nor seeking of death, nor coming nere, nor goinge far, nor
saying with eyes, nor herynge with ears, nor tastyng with mouth, nor yet
feelynge of hand: and finally to attain vyctorie, he has always war
against him self. I would these lovers knew fro whens love proceeds, it is
this: The entrayles that we are bredde in, is of flesh: the breasts that we
suck, are of flesh: the arms that we are nourished in, be of flesh: the
works that we do, are of the flesh, by the which occasions comes the
repeal of our flesh to their flesh. Many free hearts fall into the snares
of love. It seems well my ladies, that ye are brought up in puddels, as the
Egiptie^s say: The puddels keep no clear water to drink, nor fruit to eat,
nor fyshe to be taken, nor vessel to sail with: I do say ye are foul in your
living, shameful in your persons, in aduersytie feeble and lethy, in
prosperity subtle and wyly: false in words, doubtful in your works: In
hatynge ye keep a disorder, extreme to love, auaricious to give, vnshamfaste to
take: and I say ye are a receite of fear, where as wise men find perille,
and simple men suffer. In you wise men hold their renomes disalowed, and the
simple men their life in penury. Let us leave the opinyon of the Egyptiens, and
come to the Greeks, which say, that in the deserts of Arabye the son
shyneth most hot: and they say, that at the beginning there appeared a woman
alone with a bird called Phenyx, the which bird they say, was created of the
water, and the woman of the great heat of the son, and of the corruption of
the powdre that falls fro the trees, which the worms do eat. In this wise
there was a tree soore eaten with worms, and it chanced by heat of the
son, and dryth of the powder, that a fire kendled, and so burnt it: and
than of the fire and powder of the said brent tree, the first woman was made.
And though I be a philosopher Romayne, I will not say, that the opinyon of the
philosopher greek was ill. For of truth ye ladies that be amorous, have your
tongues of the nature of fire, and your conditions of the rottennes of the
powder of wood. After the diversity of beestis, nature has put some strength
in diverse partis of their bodies, as the egle in the beak, the unicorn in the
horn, the serpent in the tail, the bull in the heed, the bear in the arms,
the horse in the breast, the dog in his tethe, the hog in the groyne, the wod
dove in her wings, and women in their tongues. Of troth the flyghte of the
wood dove is not so high as the fantasy of your folyes, nor the catte
scratcheth not so soore with her nails, as ye scratche foles with your
importunities: nor the dog hurts not them, that he renneth at, as ye do
the sorrowful lover that seruethe you: nor he is not in so greatte peril of
his life that catches the bulle by the horns, as the good fame of the lover
is that falls into your hands. And finally the serpent has not so much
poison in his tail, as ye have in your tongues. Set all the good Romayne
ladies apart: for there be many, of whom there is no complaynt of their
persons, nor suspection of their good names. Of all such my letter speaks
not, nor my pen writes not of them, but of other: I speak of women that be
such, that all venomous beasts have not so much poison in their bodies, as
they have in their tongues. And since that the goddis have commanded, and our
destenies do permyt, that the life of men can not pass without women: therefore
I aduertyse these young people, and pray them that be old, and awake wise men,
and tech the simple, to flee away from women of ill name, rather than from a
common pestilence.

Redynge the ancient laws of Plato, I find written thus: we command, yt al
women openly infamed, be openly put out of the city, to thente^t that other
seeing their sins not unpunished, may abhor the sin for fear to fall into
the same pain. Also the same law says: We command, that pardon be given to a
woman of all the fautes committed by her own body, if any amendment be seen
in her: but never to pardon them that have committed sin with their tongues.
For committing sin with an ill person, is of fragilitie, but with the tongue
it is of pure malice. O divine Plato, master and measure of al understanding,
and prince of all philosophers, when thou madeste that law in the golden
world, that there was never such scarcity of ill women, and so great
abundance of good women in Greece. What shall we do now in Rome, where there
be so many ylle openly, amd so few good in secret? Naturally they were wont
to be shamefaste in their vysages, temperate in words, wise of wit, sobre in
goinge, meke in conversation, pitiefull in correction, well regarding their
living, not keeping companies, steadfast in promise, and constant in love.
Finally let not the woman that will be good, trust in the wisdom of wise
men, nor in the flattery of light folks: But let her virtuously regard
her renoume, and beware always of any manne that makes her any promys. For
after that the flames of Venus be set on fire, and Cupide has shot his
arrows, the rich man offers all that he has, the poor man all that he
may, the wise man says he will be her great fre^d, and the simple always her
servant: the wise man will lose his life for her, and the fool will take his
death for her. The old man will say, he will be friend to her friends: and the
young man will say, he will be ennemie to her enemies. Some will promys to pay her
debtes, and other to revenge her injuries. Finally to hyde their poverty, and
to show their beauty, they leave these fools losing their persons and good
fames. I will leave to speak of good women, for it is not mine intent to lay
any thing to their charge, but to aduertyse them well. I demand of you
amorous ladies, if Platon was there, when ye made a play of my life, and drew
my figure about in Rome? No surely, in deed by that I se in you at this time,
it is suspecious that is said of other. For there is but a few in Rome, whom
Plato and his law does excuse. One thing ye can not deny, if I were the
worste of all men, at the last ye have found the end of my vilanies. And
ye can not deny me, but she that is least ill of you, in all my life I could
not show the malice of her life. It is greatte peril to wise women, to be
neighbors to fools: Great peril it is to them that be shamefast, to be with
them that be shameless: great peril it is to them that be of a meke and still
manner, to be with them that be bold and rude: great peril it is for them
that be chaste, to be with them that live in auoutrie: great peril it is for
the honorable, to be with them that be disfamed. For the women defamed, think
that all other be defamed, and desire that they should be defamed, and procure
to have them defamed: and say they be ill famed. And to thentent to cover their
own infamy, they infame all other that be good. O you ladies in amors, it is
long sith ye knew me and I you: and if ye speak, I speak, if ye know, I
know: if ye be still, I am still: if ye speak openly, I will not speak in
secret. Thou know well Auilina, that made the ieste, how Eumedes sold calves
deter in the boucherie, than thou soldest the innocent vyrgins in thy house.
Thou know well Turinga, that one day thou recknedst all thy lovers, but thou
coudest not reckon them on thy fyngers, but desyredst to have a bushel full of
peason. And thou Lucia Fuluia know well, when thou were, thou wotest where,
with Breto, and made peace with thy husband, thou tokest him a side, and
saydeste, but if thou myghtest lie out of thy house ones a week, he should not
lie in the house. And thou Retoria know well, that in thy young days, two
years thou were appointed on the sea with a Pyrate, so that he should take no
moo to satisfy a. C. men of war in the galey. Thou Egna Corcia know well,
that when the censure entered to take the, he found.v. men's gowns, in which
thou wentest ever by night: and thou had but one woman's gown, that thou
warest on by day. Thou know well Pesylane Fabrice, that Aluinus Metellus and
thou being married, before the Censure demanded openly his part, of that thou
gatest in thy house with thy secret lovers. And thou Camil know well, not
being content with thyn own nation, but by reason of the great hauntynge that
thou had with strangers, thou can speak all manner of languages. I will
mark them that have marked me, and hurt them that have hurt me, persecute
them that have persecuted me, and infame them that have infamed me: All other
my pen does pardon, because they have perdoned me in their play. And because my
letter has begone in that ye have done to my person, therefore I will end it in
that it feleth of your good names. And thus I conclude, that a man may escape
free fro all domages, with absteynynge fro them: But fro women there is no way,
but to fle fro them. Thus I end and demand of the goddis, that I may see of
you, as ye desire to se of me. And sithe ye be lovers, I counsel you as ye
have sent me your ieste for a mock, in likewise for a mock to receive the
answer. Mark Rodian to the amorous ladies of Rome.

A letter sent by Marc the emperor to Boemia a lover of his, that would have
gone with him to the wars. The.xv. letter.
MArc pretour Romayn sent to the wars of Dacy, se^deth salute to ye his lover
Boemia, which art in ye pleasures of Rome. I being escaped fro the cruel battle,
have red the few lines written with thy hand, and have hard of the a long
informatio^. I say to the, thou haste put me in a more great abashement, than
the fear of mine enmies. In taking thy letter into my hand, forthwith the
herb of malice entered into my heart. When I tempre my body with thy delytes, I
think my heart is fre fro the venym of thy amors. I of my will, and thou
because thou canste do no more, we have given us to be free of our pleasures, I
think as well as to make a deuorse of our enmies. But such as ye be, so ye do,
banyshementes of amors, and treasures of passions. The love of you al ought to
be digested with pylles: but the passion of one of you will not be oppressed
with all the Rubarbe in Alexandrie. Ye show your self cruel to pardon an
ennemy, and every day light to change lovers. Curiously I have kept you all the while that delytes ouerpressed my youth: yet I could never se in any woman
no certayntie, nor reason in love, but hate at the last. Thy present lightness
quarelleth with my youth past: and it is because thou see not in me the
ancient will toward the, nor the present service. And certainly herynge thyn
accusation, and not my justification, as justly thou paiest me with death, as I
pay the with forgetfulness: The which forgetting is as strange to be in him
that serves, as vngentilnes in the lady that is served. Think thou, that I
have forgotten the law of Venus, where as it commands, that the curious
lovers should exercise their stre^gthes in arms, and occupy their hearts in
love? and also that their apparel be very clenely, their fete well compassed,
their bodies steadfast and not waueryng, their voices low and soft, and sad
in countenance: their eyes open gasynge at wyndowes, and their hearts ready to
fle in the air. Of troth my love Boemia, he is but a gross lover, that
holdethe his will in captyuitie, and his understanding free. The
understanding ought to be lost, where as will is in prison. I say this to
thentent that though mine age have left the exercise, yet my spirit has
not forgotten the art. Thou complaynest, because I give my self to rest, and
that I have greatly forgotten the. I will not deny the truth: the day of
forgetting makes the muster of my thoughts, and reason which is prouisour
declares, that it is not to my grauite to permyt, that I should love, nor thy
age to suffer to be beloved. As now thou know, that diverse things, that
youth dissimuleth in young persons, in age meryteth grievous correction. The
deeds done in youth procedethe of ignorance: but the vilanies done in age
proceeds of malice. When I kept the Cautons, I ietted in the streets, I sange
balades, I gased to the wyndowes, I played on instruments, I scaled the
walls, I wakened light persons: think thou, that I wist what I did in my
youth? and now that I se my self promoted fro these pleasures, and decked
with so many white hears, and apparayled with so many dolours, I think
now, I was not than, or else I dream as now, not knowing the ways that I
have gone, not saying the ways full of stones, I have fallen ere I was ware, I
have fallen in snares: seking no guide, I was entered into the whirlepoole: and
by the grossenes of my boldness, I was lost, and therefore I have deserved
pardon. And now that I am out of the thorns and bushes, thou would have me
farther in than ever I was. And now that I can not take the purgations, thou
offereste to me syropes. I have watched all night, and touched newly the
alarm. For thy ancient amity I pray the, and conjure the in the name of the
goddis, sithe that my heart is rebel against thy will, which is right
doutfull: cause me to leave to desire the thus without doubt. And to thentent
that thou should not think any unkindness in my white hears, as I may argue
thy face of ydelnes, I will that we reckon what we have won, or hope to win. Show me what comes of these pleasures: the time ill spent, good name
in scaterynge to pardicion, the patrimony wasted, the credence lost, the
goddis annoyed, the virtues sclaundred, the name of brute beasts got, and
surnames of shame: such ye and we and other be. Thou wrytest in thy letter,
how thou will leave Rome, and come and se me in the wars of Dacy. Saying
thy folly I laugh, and knowledgynge thy boldness, I believe the. And when I
think thus, I take the letter again out of my bosom, and behold the seal,
doubting if it be thy letter or not. Thou alterest my pulces and felynges of
my heart, and the color of my face chau^geth, imageninge, that either shame
surmounteth in the, or else gravity fails in me. For such lyghtnes should
not be believed, but of like light persons. Thou know well, he that does
ill, meriteth peyn sooner than he that does infamy. I would wit: whither thou
wylt go? Thou have ben cut for vertinace, and now thou would be sold for
wine. Thou beganst first as cheries, and thou will be last as quynces: we
have eten the in blosomes, and thou wylt be like the fruit: the nuttes ar very
good, but the shales be hard, with straw and donge thou art made ripe, and
thou art rotten, and if thou be rotten, thou art to be lothed. Thou art not
content with.xl. years, that thou haste, of the which.xxv. years art passed in
taste as wine, that is to be sold: and as straweberies hyd under the leaves that
are corrupt and rotten. Art not thou Boemia, that lacks two tethe, the eyes
holowed, with white hears, and a riueled face, one hand lost with the gout,
and a rybbe marred with child beryng? whyther wylt thou go? put thy self tha^
in a barel, and cast the and it into the river, and thou shall come out al
weate. We have eaten the fresh fyshe, and now thou would bring hither ye
rusty old salt fish in sted thereof. O Boemia Boemia, now I know there is no
trust in youth, nor hope in age. Thou complayneste, that thou haste nothing.
That is an old quarrel of the amorous ladies of Rome, which taking all, say
they have nothing: and that ye lack of credence, ye do fulfylle with money.
Therefore believe me loving friend, the folyshe estate, that proceeds of
unlawful winning, gives small surety and less good name to the person. I
can not tell how thou haste spend so much. For if I drew of my rings with
one hand, thou dyddest open my purse with the other hand. I had greatter
wars with my coffres than, than I have now with mine ennemies. I could never
have jewel, but thou would dema^d it: nor I did never deny the. Now at this
hour I marvel, for in this mine age I find great hynderaunce by my youth.
Thou complaynest of travail and pouertye. I am he that has great need of that
medicine for this opilation, and a plaster for that soore, and to have sum
cold water for that hot fever. Art thou not advised, that I banyshed my
necessity in the land of forgetfulness, and did set up thy will for the
request of my service. In winter I went all bare, and in summer charged with
clothes, I went on foot in the mire, and rode in the fair way: wha^ I was
heavy, I laughed: and when I was merry, I wept. For dred I drew forth my
strengthes, and out of my strengthes cowardice. The nights to sigh, and on the
day to wait where thou wentest by. When thou had need of any thing, I was
feign to rob my father for it. Tell me Boemia, with whom fulfilledst thou thyn
open folies, but with the ill orders that I put my self to in secret? wot
ye what me seems by you amorous ladies of Rome? ye are in the court as the
little mothes eating old clothes, and a pastime for light folks, tresorers of
fools, and sepulchers of vices. This that seems me is, that if in thy youth
every man gave to the, because thou should give yt to every man, now thou
give thy self to every man, because every man should give him to the. Thou
tellest me, that thou haste ii. sons, and lackest help for them. Yield graces
to the goddis of the pity that they have used with the, they have given to.xv.
children of Fabricio my neighbor but one father, and to two of thy children
only, they have given.l. fathers. Therefore deuyde them among their fathers,
and every man shall not have one finger. Lucia thy daughter in deed, and mine
by suspecte, remember that I have done more in marienge of her, tha^ thou did
in her procreation. For to the gettyng of her, thou did call diverse, and to
mary her I did it alone. I write to the but lyttel, to the respect of that I
would write. Butrio Cornelio has spoken much on thy part, he him self shall
show the as much of my part. It is long ago sith I knew thyn impacience. I
know well thou wylt send me an other letter more malicious. I pray the since I
wrote to the secretly, defame me not openly. And when thou redest this letter,
remember what occasions thou give me to write, and though yt we be not
friends, yet will I not leave to send the silver. I send the a gown, and the
goddis be with ye, and bring me out of this war with peace. Mark pretour in
Dacie to his ancient lover Boemia.

The answer to the emperors letter sent by Boemia. The.xvi. letter.
BOemia thyn ancient lover, to the Marc of mount Celio her mortal enmy. I
desire ve^gea^ce of thy person, and ill fortune for all thy life. I have
received thy letter, and thereby perceive thy damnable inte^tes and thy cruel
malices. Such ill persons as thou art have this privilege, yt since one does
suffer your vilanies i^ secret, ye will hurt them openly, but thou shall not
do so with me Marc: for though I be not tresouresse of thy tresours, yet at
least I am treasouresse of thyn ylnesse: and where as I can not revenge me
with my person, I shall labor to do it with my tongue. And think, that
though we women be weak, and our bodies sone overcome, yet wit it for
certain, that our hearts are never vanquyshed. Thou say, that scapyng from
a battle thou dyddest receive my letter, whereof thou were soore abashed. It
is a very common thing to them that be weke and slack, to speak of love,
wanton fools to treat of books, and to cowardes to babble of arms: I say it,
because the answering to a letter was not of necessity to rehearse to a woman
as I am, whether it were before the battle or after. I know well, thou art
escaped fro it, for thou were not the first that fought, nor the last that
fled. When thou were young, I never saw the go to the war, that ever I
dredde or had suspecte of thy life: for knowing thy cowardyse, I never took
care for thine absence, for therein I was most sure of thy person. Than Marc
tell me now, what thou do in thyn age. I think thou bear thy spear not
for to just in the war, but for to lean on when the gowte greueth the. Thy
helmette I deem thou bear with the to drink within tauernes, and not to
defend the fro the strokes of swerdes: for I never saw the stryke man with
thy swerd, but I have known the slay a. M. women with thy tongue. O malicious
and unhappy Marc, if thou were as valiant as thou art malycious, thou
should be as greatly dredde of the barbarycke nations, as thou art hated, as
reasonne is, of the matrones of Rome. Tell me what thy list: at the least thou
canste not deny, but as thou haste ben a weak and slack lover, so thou art
now a weak and slack cowarde knight, an unknown friend, auaricious,
infamed, malicious, cruel, ennemy to every man, and friend to no body. And we
that have known the, yo^ge strong and lusty, condemn the for an old fool.
Thou say, that taking my letter into thy hands, thy heart took the poison
of malice. I believe it well without swearynge, for any thing being malicious
forthwith fyndeth lodging in thy house. Beasts, that be corrupt, lightly take
the poison, that they that been of good complexion cast away. Of one thing I am
in certain, thou shall not die of poison. For one venyme oftentimes dystroyeth
an other venym. O malycious Marc, if all they in Rome knew the, as well as
sorrowful Boemya does, they should soon se, what difference were between the
words that thou spekest, and the intention of thy heart. And if by the
writings that thou make, thou meritest to have the name of a philosopher, by
the ylnes that thou do inuente, thou doste merit to have the name of a
tyrant. Thou say, thou saw never certitude in the love of a woman, nor
end of her hate. I have great glory, that other ladies beside me have
knowledge of thy small wisdom. A se Marc, I will not mock the, thou art
such one, as never deserved that one should begin to love the, nor leave to
hate the. Will thou have certitude in love, and thou unfaithful of thy
service? Wylt thou serve with mockeries, and would be loved truly? Will
thou enjoy the person without spending of any of thy goods? Wylt thou have
no complayntes of the, and thou not ceassynge thy malyces? Thou say, thou
know the ylnes of women. I will thou know, we be not so folyshe, as thou
think, nor thou so wise, as thou weneste, to praise thy self* yet hitherto
has been seen mo men, to follow the appetyte of women, than there has been
women following the will of men. (...) none of both is great trust, and yet
we both practyse that one man has his heart so mighty, to be more wyser than
three wise women, and one woman thinks her so strong, to put under her feet,
and overcome.iii.C. such as be light. Thou say, thou art abashed of my
lyghtnes, to leave Rome, and come to the being in the wars. Great is the love
of the country, since that many leave diverse welthes that they have in strange
lands, and live straightly, for to live in their own land: but greatter is my
love, sith that I would leave Rome with all the pleasures, to go and search for
the in strange lands among the cruel battayles. O malicious Mark, O strange
lover, if I leave Rome, it were to go and seek my heart being in the battayles
with the. And certainly diverse times when I do think on thine absence, I
swowne and sorrow as my heart were not with me, and yet I find no perfyte
remedy. I think our love is not like these beasts, that joy of their
pleasures, without to will, and desire their wylles. I swear to the by the
goddess Vesta, and by the mother Berecinthia, that thou owe me more for one
day of love, that I have had to the, than for the seruyces that I have done to
the in.xxii. years. Behold unhappy Marc, how much in thy presence I have
always regarded the, and in thyn absence I have always thought on the, and
slepynge I have always dreamed of the, I have wept for thy travail, and
laughed at thy pleasure, and finally all my welthe I have wyshed the, and al
thyn ylles I have wyshed me. I ensure the one thing, that as now I feel not
so much the persecution that thou do to me, as I do the mysknowlege that
thou make to me. It is a great sorrow for an auaricious man to see his goods
lost, but without comparyson it is far greatter for the lover to se his love
ill bestowed. It is a hurt that is always soore, and a peyn always peynful, a
sorrow always sorrowful, and it is a death that never ends. O ye men, if ye knew
with what love women loves you in perfytenes when they love, and with what
heart they hate when they are set to hate: I swear to you, ye would never
company with the^ in love: or if ye do love them, ye would never leave the^ for
fear of their hate: and there is never great hate, but where as much love was
first. But thou shall never be greatly hatid, for thou were never truly loved of
ladies. The sorrowful Boemia has loved ye.xxii. year of her life, and now she
only hates ye till after her death. Thou say, I may be eaten for veriuyce,
and yet I would be sold for wine. I know well I have erred, as one that has been young and light, and when I perceived that I had lost my way, and that my
mysaduenture can find no way nor remedy: It is the greatest loss of al losses,
when there is no remedy. I have erred like a feeble and a weak woman, but thou
have erred as a strong man: I have erred by simple ignorance, but thou haste
erred of a prepensed and wilful malice: I have erred, not knowinge that I
should have erred, but thou knew what thou did: I have trusted to thy
words, as to a faithful gentylle man, and thou haste begyled me with a
thousand lesynges as a lier. Tell me, did thou not seek occasion to comme
into my mothers house Getulia, to allure me her daughter Boemia to thy mind?
Dyddeste thou not promise my father to teach me to read in one year? and thou
taughtehe me to read the book of Duidius, of the art of love? Did thou not
swear to be my husbaunde, and than withdrewest thy hand as a false
aduoultrer? Do thou not know, that thou never foundest villainy in my
person, nor I never found truth in thy mouth? At least thou can not
deny, but thou have offended the goddis, and art infamed of men, and odious
to the Romans, sclaundred of good folks, and example to the ill folks, and
finally a traitor to my father and mother, a breker of thy faith, and to me
sorowefull Boemia an unkind lover. O malycious Marc, have thou not cut me in
leaves, offrynge to my father to keep his vines surely? Ill may the chekyn
trust the kyte, or the lambs the wolves: and worse the to bring up the
daughters of the^ that be good. O cursed Mark, a domageable keeper of vines
has the matrones of Rome found the, in keeping their daughters: I swear,
that there was neither grape nor cluster, but it was eaten or cut by the. Thou
dydst eat me being grene. I promise the it has set thy tethe on an ill
edge. Thou sayeste, I ryped by power of heat and straw. It displeases me not
so much, that thou say, as thou gyuest me occasion to say to the. Thy shame
is so shameful, and thy malice so unshamefast, that I can not answer the to
the purpose, without hurtynge or touching the quycke. I would wit of the,
when thou maryedste Faustyn, whether thou foundest her grene or ripe? Thou
know well, and like wise so do I, that other beside the, gauged the vessel,
and thou drankest the lies: other gathered the grapes, and thou gleynedst the
vine: other did eat the grapes, and thou had the husks. O wicked Marc,
behold thine euylles, and how the goddis have given the just chastyseme^t,
that thou being young meritedst not to be desired of thy lovers, nor that thy
wives keep feithe to the in thine age. For to be aduenged of thy person, I
need none other thing, but to se the married to Faustyne. By the mother
Berecynthia I promise the, yt if thy small wisdom might atteyne to know
entierly, what is said of her and the in Rome, surely thou would weep night
and day for the life of Faustyn, and not leave the thoughtfull Boemia. O Marc,
little thought is taken for the, and how fer is our understanding uncoupled
fro thy thoughts: because that with thy great doctrine by day time thy house
is made a schole of philosophers, and the wantonness of thy wife Faustyne by
night, makes it a bordell of ruffiens. It is a just judgment of the goddis,
that since thyn only malice suffiseth to poison many that be good, that one
alone may suffice to unbend and lose thy renome. One difference there is
between the and me, and thy wife Faustine: for my deeds are but in suspecte,
and yours are openly known in deed: mine are secret, and yours are evident: I
have sto^bled, but ye have fallen. Of one thing alone I have merited to be
chastised, but ye have deserved no forgyuenes: My dishonor is deed with the
faut, and is buried with mine amendme^t, but your infamy is borne with your
desires, and is brought up with your wylles, and lives still with your
works: finally therefore your infamy shall never dye, for you lived never
well. O malicious Marcus, with all that thou know, wotest thou not, that
forlosynge of a good name, an ill fame is recovered: and in the end of a good
life, begynnethe a good faame? Thou ceassest not to say ylle only by
suspicion, the which thy false iugementes show the: and yet thou would we
should not speak that we se with our eyes. Of one thing be thou sure, that
neither of the, nor of thy wife Faustyne there is no false witness: for the
troth is so evident, that there needs not to invent any lies. Thou say,
that it is an old quarrel of amorous ladies of Rome, that in taking fro many
we are the pooreste of all other: because we fail in credence, we are honored
for silver. It is of certayntie, that we mystruste the hollie because of his
pricks, the acornes, for his husks, the roses among nettyls, and thy mouth
for thy malice. I have curiouslye taken head, that thou never saydest well by
women, nor I never coud find, that any would the good. What greatter
correction should I have of thy wickedness, or more vengeance for mine injuries,
but to be certain, that all the loving ladies of Rome are sorye of thy life,
and would be glad of thy death? The life of that man is wicked, that many
bewail, and in whose death every body reioyseth. It is the property of poor
unkind persons as thou art, to forgette the great goodness done to them, and
to be sorry for the little that they give. As much as noble hartis glorify
them in gyuinge to other, so much are they ashamed to receive services
unrewarded. For in giuinge they make them self lords, and in receyuyng they
are as sclaues. I would wit what thou haste given me, or what thou haste
received of me? I have adventured my good name, and given the, possession of my
person: I have made the lord and master of all my goods: I have banyshed
my self out of my country, and put my self in peril only for thy sake:
and in recompense of all this, thou reprochest me now of misery. Thou never
gave me any thing with thy good will, nor I never received it willingly, nor
it did me never profyt. Il things recover a name, not for the common warke
that we see, but for the secret intention with the which we work. And thou
unhappy man desiredst me, not to enjoy my person, but rather to have my
money. We ought not to call the a clear lover, but a thief, and a wyly see
rouer. I had a litel ringe of the, which I am determined to cast into the
river, and the clothing that I had of the I have burnt in the fire. And if
that my body were any thing amended with the bread that I have eaten of thyn,
I would cut my flesh, and let out the blood without any fear. O cursed
Mark, thy dark malice would not suffer the clearly to understand my letter:
for I intended not to ask money, to releue my poverty and solytarynesse, but
reknowlegynge and thinking to satisfy my wyllyng heart. Such vain and
covetous men as thou art thy self, are pleased with gifts, but the hartis
incarnate in love are little satisfied with silver. For love only is paid
with love again. The manne that loves not as a man of reasone, but as a
brute beast, and the woman that loves not but for the interest of her person:
such ought not to be trusted in their words, nor their persons desired. For
the love of her ends, when the goods fail: and the love of him, when her
beauty fails. If thy love proceeded only of the beauty of my face, and my
love only for the money of thy pours: it were no right, that we were called
wise lovers, but rather very nyce persons. O wicked Mark, I never loved the
for thy goods, though thou louedst me for my beauty: with all my heart I
loved the than, and with all my heart I hate the now. Thou say, the goddis
have showed me great pity, to give me few chylderne, and to them many
fathers. The greattest blame in women is to be unshamefast, and the most
vylanie in men is to be ill sayers. Diverse things ought to be suffered for the
fragilitie of women, which are not permitted in the wisdom of men. I say this
because I never saw temperaunce in the for to cover thine own malyces, nor
wisdom to excuse the debilities of other. Thou say, that my sons have
diverse fathers. I swear unto the, that though thou dye, the chylderne of
Faustine shall not be fatherless. And of truth if the goddis, as thou
say, have be pitiefull to my chyldern, no less art thou to strange
children. For Faustyne keeps the but to excuse her blame, and to be tutour of
her children. O cursed Marc, thou may well rejoice and take no thought, for
thyn own children have no need to be married. For oone thing we are bound,
that is for the example, the which thou doste give of thy pacyence: For sith
thou suffrest Faustine in so many infamies, it is no great need that we suffer
any secrets in the. I say no more at this time, making an end of my letter,
desyring the end of thy person.

A letter sent by Marcus the emperor to Matrine a young maiden of Rome, of
whom he was enamoured, saying her at a wyndowe. The.xvii. letter.
Mark the emperor, the very desirous, to the Matrine greatly desired. I wot
not if by good adventure of mine ill adventure, or by ill adventure of my good
adventure, I did see the of late at a wyndow, where as thou heldest thyn arms
as close as mine eien were spread abroad, that cursed be they for ever. For in
beholding thy face, my heart forthewith abode with the as prisoner. The
beginning of thy knowledge is the end of my reason, and feeling of flight. Of
one travail comes infinite trauayles to me^. I say it for this, if I had not
ben ydel, I had not gone out of my house, and if I had not gone out of my
house, I had not gone out into the streets, and if I had not passyd through
the street, I had not seen the at thy wyndowe, and if I had not seen the at
thy wyndowe, I had not desired thy person: and not desyring thy person, I had
not put thy name in so great peril, nor my life in travail, nor had given
none occasion in all Rome to speak of us. Of a troth lady Matrine in this case
I condemn my self, sith I would behold the. And thou would be saluted, sith
thou desyredst to be seen. And sith thou were set as a white mark, it was no
great meruaylle that I that with the arowes of mine eyes at the buttes of thy
beauty, with rollynge eyes, with brows bent, well colored face, incarnate
tethe, ruddy lyppes, cryspe hears, hands set with rings, clothed with a.
M. manner of clothynges, bearyng purses full of sweet smelles, and bracelettes
full of knackes, with perles and stones at the ears. Tell me what becomes of
a woman, with these things, that will show her self at a wyndowe? The most
cause is, that I can esteem or think therein, that since you do show your bodies
openly to us at the eye, that your will is, that we should know your desires
secretly. And if it be so, as I afferme, that it is so, it seems me madame
Matrine, thou should desire him that desires the, to inform him that
sercheth the, to answer him that calls the, and feel that he feleth: intend
to him that intends to the: and sithe I understand the, understand me, and
understand sithe thou do not understand. I am aduysed, as I went by the
street Falaria to se thieves put to Justice, mine eyes saw the at a wyndowe,
on whom depends all my desires. Thou do more Justice to me, then I to the
thieves: for I being at Justice, thou haste iusticied the Justice, and none
dare pain the. The gybet is not so cruel to them that never knew but il
doing, as thou art to me that never thought, but how I might do the service.
The thieves suffer but one death, and thou make me to suffer a. M. in a day:
In one hour the thieves lives are ended, and I dye every mynute: I draw
toward death wrongfully, and they suffer for their fautes: I suffer an
innocent, they openly, and I in secret. What shall I say more to the? of
truth they wept watery drops with their eyes, because they dye, and I weep
tears of blood in my heart, because I live. This is the difference, their
tourmentes spredeth abroad through all their bodies, and I keep mine together in
my heart. O cruel Matrine, I can not tell what justice it is to put men to
death that steal money, and suffer women to live that rob men's hearts: If
their ears be cut of, that pick men's pourses, why are women than pardoned,
that rob men's inward hearts and entrayles? By thy noblenes I pray the, and
by the goddess Venus I conjure the, either answer to my desire, or else
restore my heart again, which thou have robbed fro me. I would thou knew
the clear faith of my heart, rather than this letter written with my hand. If
mine adventure were so good, as to speak with the, and that thy love were not
ashamed thereof, I would hope with the sight and speech to win that which I
am in suspect to lose by my letter. The reason is, because thou herest my ylle
and rude reasons redynge my letter. And if thou saw me, thou should see
the cruelle tears that I offer to the by my life. I would my mouth could
publysshe mine enraged euylles, as my heart feleth, than I swear to the lady
Matrine, that my grievous dolor should awake thy small thought. And as thy
beauty and mine affection have made me thyn own, so the knowledge of my passion
should make the mine. I desire that thou should regard the beginning, and
therewith regard the end. Certainly the same day that thou enprisonedst my
heart at thy wyndowe, in the doungeon of my desires, I had no less weakness
to be overcome, thanne thou haddeste force to constrayne me. And more greatter
is thy power to put thy self from me, than my reason is to put me fro the. I
ask no mercy of the, but that we might declare our wylles together. But in
this case what will thou that I should say, but that thou have so much power
over me, and I so little of my liberty, that will I nyll I, my heart can not be
but thine? And hit being thine, thou may, and will not declare thy self
to be mine. And sith it may not be, but that my life must be condemned in thy
service, be thou as sure of my faith as I am doubtefull of thy hope: For I
shall have a greatter welthe to be lost for thy sake, thanne to win any
other thing. I will say no more at this time, but that thou account my
perdicion and death, and draw the life of my tears into open joy. And
because that I hold my faith in thy faith, and will never despair in thy
hope, I send to the.x. little rings of gold, with.x. stones of Alexandry:
And I conjure the* by the immortal goddis, that when thou do put them on
thy fyngers, thou set me in thyn heart and entrayles. Marcus amorous wrote
this with his own hand.

An other letter sent by Marc the emperor to the said gentle woman Matrine.
The.XVIII. letter.
Mark habitant at Rome, to the Matrine his right sweet ennemy. I call the
sweet, for it is just that I dye for the. And I call the enemy, because thou
make not an end to sle me. I can not tell wherein it is, but sith the feast of
Iano hitherto, I have written three letters to the. And to ye answer of them, I
would that I had seen two letters from the, if it were thy pleasure. If that I
serve the, thou would that I should not serve: if I speak, thou will not
speak to me, if I look at the, thou wylt not behold me: if I call the, thou will not answer: if I visit the, thou will not se me, if I write to the, thou
wylt give me none answer, and worst of all, if other do show the of my
dolours, thou make but a mock thereof. And if I had as much knowledge, where
to complain to the, as thou have power to remedy the plaintyfe, my wisdom
should no less be praised among wise men, than thy beauty is among fools.
I pray the heartily regard not the contrarieties of my reasons, but regard the
faith of my wepynges, the which in witness of my peynes I do give unto the.
I wot not what good may come to the of my harms: nor what winnynge of my
loss thou should hope to get: nor what surety of my peril thou should
attain unto: nor what pleasure of my displeasure thou may have. I have had
answer of my messanger, that without redynge of my letters, thou have with
thy hands toren them all to pieces. It ought to suffice the to think, that
my person were hewn in quarters, yet I would thou had read these small
lines lady Matrine: for by them thou should have seen, how my thoughts were
troubled. Ye women are so extreme, that for ye faut of one man, a woman will
complain of all other men in general, so that ye be cruel for one particular
cause. Openly ye pardone all men's lives, and in secret ye procure every man's
death. I esteem it nothing dame Matrine that thou haste done: but I lament me
of that thou demaundedst Valirius thy neighbor to say to me. One thing I
would thou had in memory and not forgot, and that is, since that my
liberty is so small, and thy power so great, because I being all holly mine
own, I am turned to be thyn, that thou should think, that when thou
would injury me, thou should do most injury to thy self, sithe that by
the I dye, as thou by me do live. In this ill purpose persevere not, for thou
do adventure the life of us both. Thou damnest thy condytion, and
distroyest my health, and finally thou must come to the medicine. Forgive me
dame Matrine, if I say any malice to the, that is, I know that ye women desire
one thing, and keep us in dread, that it should not come by her thought. Thou
were wont to be well conditioned, and at least though thou do not put it in
ure, yet thou have the fame thereof: and an ancient fame ought not be left for
a new unkindness. Thou know well, what contrarynesse does vngentylnesse to
the virtues in virtuous houses, and thou can not be called virtuous, but if
thou be gentyl and courteyse. There is no greatter unkindness than to love her
that loves not me: That I visit the, and thou vysitest not me, that I speak
to the, and thou speak not to me is nothing, that I knowledge ye, and thou
will not know me is nothing, though I weep and thou laugh is nothing, though
I demand, and thou denyeste is nothing: though thou owe me, and never pay,
yet it is nothing, but where as I love the, and thou not me, is a great thing.
That thing that can not be dissimuled with the eyes, nor the heart suffer, all the vices among mortal creatures, it is reason that they be forgyuen, because
they are committed by nature, save only the vnlouyng of women, and the
unkindness of men, which are vices committed of malice. After diverse seruyces
by me done to the, and much moore that I have to do hereafter, thou Matrine
may all only pay me with one thing, I pray the refuse not to give me
remedy, sith I have not offered me in the peril. If thou say, that Patroclus
thy spouse has the propretie over the, yet at least receive me to the proof,
and I shall pretend possessyon of the. And in this wise in the vayneglorie to
be thyn, shall cover the damage not to be mine. Thou make me to marvel sore,
how for so small a mercy and reward thou canste suffer such importunity so
long. For certain many things we grant to an importunate manne, the which
are not granted to a temperate man. If thou hopest to overcome me Matryne, I
hold my self vanquysshed: if thou will lose me, I hold me for lost: if
thou wylt sle me, I yield my self as dead. For by the gesture that I make before
thy gate, and the syghes that I make in mine own house, are greatly mine to
resyste, and the grievous assaut of the, be edifices more to sommon death,
thanne to defend the life: If thou will that I escape this danger, deny me
not the remedy, because it shall be a greatter vice in the to sle me, tha^ vilany
to give me remedy. And it were no just thing for so small a price to lose the
faith of so great service. I wot not what to do, to make the my debtour, and
thou to pay me. And yet worst of all, I wot not what to do, nor what to think
nor to say, nor to whom to determine me, because I can not assure any profit
in me, but to be certain in thy services. And because thou doste trust him
that has done this message, by him I do send this open letter, and my secret
answer. I do send the a jewel of perles, and a besant of gold. To the goddis
I do commend the. And I require the for to receive it with as good a will as I
do present it unto the. Marc the orator to the right honorable Matrine.

A letter sent by Marc the emperor to Lybia a fair lady Romayne. The.xix.
letter.
Mark full of sorrow and pensyfenes, to the Lybia taking but little thought
or care: if thy small thought passed any thing on me, and also if my troubles
and dolours were lodged and did rest in (...) thanne thou should perceive
and se how small the quarrel were, the which I make to the, in respect of
the tourment that I do suffer, if the blasinge flames issued out, as the fyred
brondes do brenne me within, the smoke would reach to the heuens, and make
ymbres of the earth: if thou do well remember the first time that I saw the
in the temple of the virgins vestales, thou being there praydste the goddis
for thy self, and I on my knees prayed the for my self. I know well thou
offredst honey and oil to the goddis, and I offered to the soore wepynges and
syghes. It is a just thing to give more to him that offreth his inward
entrayles, than to him that draws money out of his purse to offer. I have
determined, and disposed me, to write to the this letter, that thou should se
how thou art served with the arowes of mine eyes, that were shot at the
white of thy services. Alas, how sorrowful am I to think, least the calm time
now, does threten me with the tempest to come. I will say, that disloue in the,
causes the hope doubtful in me. Behold what mysadue^ture I had lost a
letter, and I as I returned to the temple to seek for it, I had nere lost my
self, in going thither so often, co^sydering my small merit. I se well, that
mine eyes the ladders of my hope, are set on so hie a wall, that no less is
the doubt of my fall, than the danger of the clymmynge up. Thou bowinge
down the leaves of thy high merits, haste brought me to the point of
continual service. Let me have the fruit, and give the leaves to whom thou
will. By the immortalle goddis, I have great marvel, for surely I thought
that in the temple of the virgins Vestales, no man should have had
temptations. But as now I do find by experience, that that woman is more
lyberall, and sooner overcome, that is fast and straytly kept and watched,
than other. All the corporal domages are first hard of, er they be known, and
known er they be seen, and seen er they be felt, and felt er they be tasted,
yet it is not so in love. For first they feel the stroke thereof, er they see
the way how it comes. The lyghtnynge is not so sodeyne, but it is seen before
the thonder clappe, nor the wall fallith not so sodeinly, but first some
stones break asonder, nor the cold comes not so fast on, but some small
sheuerynges comes before: but all only love is not felt till it be settled in
the entrayles. Let every man know it that know it not, and thou lady Libie if
thou wylt, know: Love slepeth when we wake, and waketh when we sleep, and
laugheth when we weep, and wepeth when we laugh: it assurethe in taking, and
takes in assuryng: And speaks when we be still, and is still when we speak:
And finally it is of that condition, that for to give us that we desire, it
causes us to live in pain. I swear to the, when my will becamme thy
servant, and thy beauty caused, that thou were my lady, when I was in the
temple and returned ageyn thither, not desiring the, thou beheldeste me, and I
as unhappy looked on the. But O what a thought came to me, that my heart being
hole, thou haste dyuyded, being in health thou haste hurt, being alive thou
haste slain, being mine thou haste stolen it, and that worst of all is, not
helping to my life, thou consentest that love assaylle me to the death. Many
times lady Libia considering that al my thoughts ben high, and my fortune
low, I would have separate my felfe fro the. But considering that my
trauayles are well applied in thy seruyces, I say though I might, I will not
be separate fro the. I will not deny one thing, and that is, that cursed love
takes away the taste of al things, and yet thereby alonly it gives us
appetite, the which gives us much ill proufyte. This is the proof of him
that loves heartily. For one disfavor of him that is beloved, is more than all
the favor of this life. I think lady Libia thou art greatly abashed to se me
outward as a philosopher, and to know me inward a secret lover. I pray the
Lybia discover me not: For if that the goddis give me long life, I am minded
for to amend. And though I be at this hour but a young fool in the art of
love, when I am old I shall be wise: the goddis know what I desire, and the
force that I do enforce me to: but as the flesh is weak, and the heart tender,
and has many occasions and few virtues, and the world subtle, and the
people malicious, I pass this beginning and spring of flowers with hope that
in harvest I shall have some fruit. Dame Libia do thou think, that
philosophers thought they were never so sage, be not stryken with the cruelties
of love? and that under their course clothes their flesh is not smoth?
Certainly among the hard bones soft flesh is bred, under the sharp husks
the chestnutte is nourysshed. I say that under course apparel, is true and
perfyte love. I deny not but that our slack nature resysteth not with virtues:
nor I deny not, but there be young wa^ton desires not repressed with virtuous
purposes: I deny not, but that the bytte of youth is not refreyned with the
brydell of reason: I deny not, but that that the flesh procures, is diverse
times withstand by wisdom. And also I knowledge well, that he that is not
amorous, is a fool. And thou knoweste, that though we be wise, we leave not
therefore to be men. All that ever we learn in all our lives suffiseth not to
know how to rule the flesh one hour. To wise men in this case has
fallen many errors: there be many masters in virtues, and many moo has been,
and yet they have been overcome with vices: wherefore than do thou marvel of
me alone? I confess of truth, that I had never mine understanding so clear,
as when Cupyde fanned wind on me with his wings. There was never none unto my
time, that ever was noted wise, but first he was a prisoner and bound with the
love of Cupide. Gratian was amorous on Tamyr: Solon Salaminus giver of the
laws, was amorous of Grecyane: Pytacus Mitelenus left his own wife, and was
enamoured of a bond woman that he brought from the wars: Cleobulus of Caria
when he was full.lxx. year old, and haddered philosophy xlv. year, scalynge the
house of his neighbor, fell of the ladder and dyed. Periander prince of
Acaye, and a great philosopher of Greece, at ye preier of one of his lovers
slew his wife. Anacharsis a philosopher a Scithian of his father side, and a
greek of his mother side, was so enamored of a woman of Thebes, that he taught
her al his cou^nynge: and when he was sick in his bed, she read in the
schole for him. Epimenides of Crete, that slepte.xv. years without waking, and
though he was.x. year a great worshypper of the goddis, yet he was banysshed
from Athenes for the love of women. Archyta Tarentyn, master of Plato, and
disciple of Pythagoras, occupied his mind more to inuente the kinds of love,
than his forces in doctrines of virtues. Gorgio Cleontino, borne in Sycyll,
kept rather concubines in his chamber, than books in the schools. All these
were wise men, and yet we may se, how at the last they were overcome with
the flesh. Than blame not me alone: for as I have told of so few in
noumbre, so I could recyte of other a holle army. Of troth he ought to have
many things, that will be taken as curious in love. He must have his eien
displayed on her that he loves, his understanding fore altered in that he
thinks, his tongue troubled in that he should say: So that in saying he be
blinded, in thoughts wandering, and in speaking troubled. O lady Libia, the
loving in mockery passes by mockery: but where as the true heart is, there
is the grefe and no mockery. Love shedeth her poysone, and cruel Cupydo
fyxeth his arowes up to the feathers. Than the eien weep, the heart syghethe,
the flesh trymbleth, the synewes shrynke, the understanding waxes gross,
reason fails, and so all falls to the earth, so that finally the heavy lover
abiding in him self, holds little or nothing of him self. All this I
say, because that knowledge to love fails in me: yet be ye sure, that the
works fail me not to work in thy service. And sith it was mine adventure to
see the, now it is my chance to know the, I demand nothing else of the,
but that thou will love me truly, sith I love the without feynynge. And if
thou haste hard, that I am sick at my heart, I desire the to do me some good:
for sithe it is all only in the, it is reason that thou all only seek for
remedy. I was greatly comforted, when Fabius Carlynus desired me in thy behalf
to be a prisoner, and I did incontinent all that thou dyddest desire, to
thentente that thou on some day should do that I desire. And behold lady
Lybia, the woman that is served with seruyces, it is reasonne that she receive
some prayers. And though my strengthes have no power to open the gates of thy
purpose, as not to agree to thy demand, yet all my labors be because of thy
renoume. I pray the discover not the one, nor begyle me not with the other.
For now thou see that in granting is remedy, and in trust is comfort, but
promise is deceyuable, the delayenge is peryllous, and the entreatynge
byndeth. I see very well, that the hasty demand deserves a long answer:
but I would not that thou should do so: but as I desire the, so desire me. I
say again, I am all thine, and not mine own. And as for my self in all
things I will serve the. And lady Libia regard, that it were as much honor
for the, as profitable for me, to turn thy disordinate desires and pourposes.
For thou see well it is much better to heal shortly than to late with
faylynge of thy purpose. All women keep one dangerous opinion, that is, they
will never receive counsel that is given them in a great cause: and if it be
so, as I think, sith thou art praised and esteemed of great beauty, than be
esteemed to receive good counsel. And in this manner in case that my damage be
very great, and thy patience very little, I shall be called wise to give the
such counsel, and thou right gracious to follow it. One thing I say, and
pardone me, though I show it to the, how that women be greatly infamed, that
will take no counsel, and such as will assure their renoume by the opinion
of other, as much as though they were determined so to do their self.
Wherefore I would ye should do one thing for an other, as I counsel you. And if
thou fyndest any ylle thereby, withdraw thy hand. I will say no more to the,
but that I do present to the al my unhappy troubles, my desperate syghes, and
my seruyces as thy servant: My troubled dolours, my words of philosophy, and
my amorous tears. Also I send the a gyrdelle of gold, and I give it the on
the condition, that thou set thyn eyes thereon, and apply thy heart to me. I
pray the goddis to give me to the, and the to me. Marcus Aurelius the
philosopher writes this in very great secret.

THVS ENDS THIS GOLDEN Book of the eloquent Marc Aurelie emperor: who so
ever be reder thereof may take it by reason for a rich and a new labor, and
specially pryncis and governors of the commonwealth, and mynisters of justice
with other. Also the common people each of them may find the labor
conueniente to their estate. And therein is contained certain right high and
profounde sentences, and holsom counselles, and meruaylous deuyses against
thencumbraunce of fortune: and right sweet co^solations for them that are
overthrown by fortune. Finally it is good to them that digeste it, and thank
god that has given such grace to a paynym, in gyuynge us exaumple of virtuous
living, with hye and salutary doctrines and meruaylous instructions of
perfectnes. Certainly as great praise as ought to be given to the auctour, is
to be given to the translatours, that have laboriously reduced this treatise
out of Greek into latin, and out of latin into Castilian, and out of Castilyan
into french, and out of french into english, written in high and sweet
styles. O right happy travail, sithe that such fruit is issued thereof. And
also blessed be the hands that have written hit. A right precious meat is
the sentences of this book: But finally the sauce of the said sweet style
moves the appetite. Many books there be of substancial meats, but they be so
rude and so unsavory, and the style of so small grace, that the first morsel
is lothesome and noyful: And of such books follows to lie hole and sound in
Lybraries, but I trust this will not. Of truth great praise is due to the
auctour of his travail. And sith there can be no grace equipolent in earth,
let us pray to god to give him grace and reward in heaven. Amen. Graces to
god.

FINIS.
Thus ends the volume of Mark Aurelie emperor, otherwise called the golden
book, translated out of French into english by John^ Bourchier knight lord
Barners, deputy general of the kings town of Caleis and marches of the
same, at the instant desire of his neuewe sir Francis Bryan knight, ended at
Caleys the tenth day of March, in the year of the Reygne of our souerayn lord
king HENRY the.VIII. the XXIII.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS. ANNO.M.D.XXXVII. CVM
PRIVILEGIO.

LUCRECIA ROMANA

THOMAS BETHELETVS




