TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Henry Brook Cobham Knight.
RIght Worshipful, forasmuch as the history of Guicchiardine has won
sufficient credit in men's opinions to countenance it self against the
envious: I hope my boldness may much the better be excused, presuming to
publish in print this treatise containing all the notable and material things
in that History: whosoever he was that has bestowed his travail to reduce
so great a volume into so small and necessary a Book (though his name be
suppressed) he may merit, no doubt, his due commendation: I thought it a
necessary office for me to make show of my good disposition, in due
consideration toward you whom I have known of along time to be exercised in
foreign affairs, and employed in matters of some weight for her Majesty's
service and the estate: Having thereon addicted my self to think you meet to
receive this little Book into your protection, which most affectionatly I
recommend unto you, with my prayers unto the eternal God for your worships
health and long life.

From my house in the new rents in Saint Nicholas shambles, this seventh of
December. 1591. Your Worships most humbly at command, T. P.

A brief collection or Epitomie of all the notable and material things
contained in the history of Guicchiardine: being very necessary for
Parliament, council, treatises, and negotiations.
LOdouike Sforce, tutor and uncle to John Galeas, duke of Millaine, fearing
least Ferdinand king of Naples should make war upon him, departed from the
league lately made between him, the king, and the Florentines against the
Venetians: and closely procures Charles the viii. king of France to come to
Italy to conquer the kingdom of Naples, as due to the house of Aniow: for
that Pope Vrbin the fourth, gave Naples and Cicill, being the old fee of the
Church, unto Charles Earl of Province, and Aniow, brother unto Saint Lewis.

Ferdinand was very secure, as commonly men are in their woorst destiny,
knowing his strength both by sea and land, and knowing withal that there was
no great matter in his enemy: but he remembered not the weakness and
parcialities in Italy, and that France was not since Charlemans time so great
in circuit, nor flourishing in soldiers. Howbeit he treated with Lodouike for
amity (who secretly promised him) meaning nothing less, and with Alexander
the sixth (lately chosen Pope by open symonie, and by the means of Cardinal
Ascanio Sforce, in despite of the Cardinal of Saint Peter's ad Vincula) who
before was secretly confederated with Lodouike, and yet promised Ferdinand that
he would defend Naples, and Ferdinand should defend the Church.

Ferdinand further made peace with Maximilian king of Romans, lately chosen
Emperor: Lodouike on the other side, to win the Emperor from him, gave in
marriage to the Emperor Marie Blanch sister of John Galeas, with promise of
four hundred thousand ducats, whereupon the Emperor more esteeming the money,
then his new brother in law, gave the inuestiture of ye duchy of Millain unto
Lodouike: pretending that since the death of Philip Viscont Mary there had been
no lawful duke thereof.

The French king hereupon sent Peron de la Bascha, ambassador to the Pope, the
Florentines, and the Venetians: where albeit he received only comforts in
generality, (for that the wars were put off till the next year) yet
Ferdinand seeing all things now like to come to naught, fell into pensiveness,
and so into an Apoplexy, and died, whose son Alfonso succeeded, and entered
league with Pope Alexander, as his father did. But discovering the trecheries
of Lodouike, he sent away his ambassador, he sequestered the revenues of the
duchy of Barrie, and by all means endeavored also to alienate from him the
city of Geane: yea (that which the devil himself would scarcely have done) he
sent to the Turk Bajazet Ottoman, assuring him that Charles the French king
after the conquest of Italy, had a meaning to set upon Greece, and therefore
he should help in this common case. He sent his nephew forthwith to surprise
Geane: but Lois duke of Orleance prevented him.

Now began Italy to think of her weakness, and the Pope commanded the king
not to enter: Peter de Medices and ye Florentines (who were ever French
heretofore) declared them selves against the king: the Venecians were content
to stand neuter. Lodouike upon better advice, began to fear that the
conquering Naples, would also swallow up Millaine, and therefore began now to
cast how to make an accord as soon as ye king were past the Alps: hoping to
make Alphonso tributarie to France, and thereby to assure his own estate. Now
began prodigious sights to be seen: as in Puglia, three Suns environed with
clouds, and horrible thundering. In Arezzo armies of men and horses, in the
air, with drums and trumpets, and diverse Images sweating.

The Colonoys join with the French, Lodouike accompanies them, Peter de
Medices becomes his friend, and the Pisans, the Pope, the Venecians, and
Lodouike in greater fear then ever tofore: for that Charles passed like a
thunder through Italy, with great success. Charles enters Rome, kisseth the
Popes feet, and joins with him in league defensive: the Cardinal of
Valence, son to the Pope, is appointed three months to follow the king
toward Naples.

The Neapolitans show that they neither loved Ferdinand the father, nor Alfonso
the son, which brought him in great perplexity, and so much the more, for
that the spirit of Ferdinand (as it was thought) appeared to his chief
surgeon, willing him to tell Alfonso, that it was in vain for him to resist the
French king, it was determined their race should fail in respect of diverse
their great sins, and especially for the thing that they resolved in Saint
Leonards Church in Chiaie, which was to put a number of the novilitie to death.
Hereupon Alfonso tormented in conscience, privily stole away into Sicilia, with
four galleys, whereby the French king with great ease got this noble kingdom:
as the Roman who said, Veni, vidi, vici. Howbeit, Ferdinand son of Alfonso
took on him the title of the king, and defense of the kingdom. But within
short space he was driven to fly into Iskia.

At this time the noble captain Iean Jacques de Trinulce of Capua. gave
himself to the king, and offered to bring Ferdinand to some good composition:
whereof the king willingly accepted: so that he would forgo Naples, in
respect whereof, he offered to give him other estates in France. This was the
fruit of discord and ambition in the many little estates of Italy, whereof
none was able to defend it self severally, and jointly might have done
greater things.

The second Book.
THe Pisans desire to cast off the yoke of the Florentines, and submit
themselves to the French: the Florentines prepare to war upon them, and in
the mean time fall at difference among them selves for the form of their own
government: touching the which Soderin and Vespucci made two excellent
Orations, one for Democratie, the other for Aristocratie, the which had
prevailed, had not the authority of Friar Sauinorola carried it away, who like
a Prophet in the midst of their quietness foretold them all the miseries of
Italy by strangers to come.

The Pope is suspected to have poisoned Gemin Ottoman, being corrupted
thereunto by the Turk, for fear he should aid the French king against him,
after his conquest of Italy, Lodouike Sforce and the Venetians, seeing the
incredible success of king Charles, feared now bondage to themselves, and
began to league together, bringing thereunto the Pope, the king of Romans, and
the king of Spain. The Florentines were also dealt withal, but what for
fear, and what for lothnesse to leese the traffike of France they held back.

Notwithstanding yt the king heard of this league, yet he caused himself to be
crowned before he would depart from Naples, and treated very earnest amity
with the Pope, who made to him fair semblant and promise, and yet he so little
trusted the king, that at his return from Naples by Rome, the Pope forsook
Rome, and went secretly to Orbieta, and from thence to Perugia, and so to
Ancona, to have commodity of the sea, if need should require. The king in
the mean time passed by Siena, and Pisa, and the confederates had a meaning to
stop his passage into France: but their hearts failed them at the first. After
assembling an army near the river Taro, under the conduct of the marquis of
Mantua, they fought a long battle, where the bastard of Burbon was slain, and
the king almost taken prisoner, had he not been well horsed: and yet in the
end the Frenchmen had the honor of the field, at which time it was noted that
the soldiers of Lodouike would not fight, as though he had been in as much
danger of the Venetians, as of the Frenchmens victory.

The insolent government of the Frenchmen (who can better win then keep)
became odious, and consequently Ferdinand in hope to recover Naples. But at the
first encounter, his horse was slain under him, and himself had been
undoubtedly slain, had not an old page of his, brother to the duke of
Termini, horsed him upon his own horse, and suffered himself to be slain for
him, a rare example in our time. Within a while after the Neapolitans of
themselves received Ferdinand, and the Frenchmen retire to the Castle.

Nouaria and other places are besieged by the king, and the Bailie of Diuion,
who being willed by the king to send for ten thousand Switchers, there came
twenty thousand at the composition of Nouaria: and a peace beginginneth to be
treated between the king and Lodouike: touching the which, Monsieur de la
Tremouille, and the prince of Orange, made two contrary Orations, and the duke
of Orleance gainesayd the peace so earnestly, that he gave the prince of Orange
the lie. Howbeit the king and the greater part being inclined to peace, and
desirous to return into France, the king departed suddenly to Thurin, for that
the Swissers murmured, threatening to take him prisoner for lack of pay: for
that Lewis the eleventh, was wont ever to pay them for three months:
whereunto the king was feign to yield, though he were escaped himself out of
their dangers, for that they had taken prisoners the Bailie of Diuion, and
other Captains. At the time that the Frenchmen held Naples, the horrible
disease of the pockes, a thing then incurable, began in most pitiful ulcers
and cankers.

The third Book.
THis unwise and sudden return of king Charles, put all Italy in hope to be
at rest from any more such plagues, and among the rest Lodouike thinking that
he had so far offended the king, as it was but folly to keep that peace,
which he never meant further then for the holding of Nouaria, and for his own
safety, searched forthwith some honest color to slip from the king, and to
set some other states at odds with him, which he did with such success, that
he termed himself, The son of Fortune. And yet within a while after, hearing
of the kings full resolution to return again into Italy, he was marueilously
perplexed, insomuch that once again he practiced capitulations with the king:
wherein he would have accorded every article, saving that they could never
trust one another by reason of the great injuries secretly passed and yet
certainly known.

Ferdinand in the mean time with all diligence bestirreth himself, takes
Nuceria, treats with the Venetians, who accept of his friendship (and take
Pisa into protection) joins with the Marquis of Mantua, and fought with Mont
Pensier, and his Switchers at Nuceria, and by reason of the slacknes of king
Charles, who neither kept appointment in coming himself, nor sending
succors, prevailed greatly in the kingdom of Naples. But alas so destiny
would, he died in the midst of his hope and glory without children
(according to the vision) being the first king of that Realm, within three
years: whom his uncle Don Frederick succeeded.

Lodouike seeing the French kings return into Italy begin to wax cold, he
became very iollie, and thinking to serve his turn with the king of Romans,
as he had done by the king of France, that is to say, to terrify the great
estates, and in the mean time to gain the smaller, he persuaded with six
hundred thousand ducats Maximilian to come into Italy. Maximilian on the other
side meant as subtly, as he secretly, purposing to win the kingdom of Naples
for John heir to the king of Spain, his son in law: which Lodouike
perceiving, was sore astonished, and yet in the end wan him to Frederick.

The Venetians became now jealous of Maximilian, and Lodouike, and therefore
sent Hannibal Bentiuole to Pisa, and so much the rather, for that they being
troubled by Peter of Medices, and otherwise, and forsaken in their need by the
Frenchmen, were dealt withal by Lodouike, to submit themselves to Maximilian.

The Pope thinking himself now to have opportunity to occupy the estates of
the Vrsins, the chief of them being detained at Naples, declared Virginio, and
the rest rebels, for taking sold of the French, and so joining with the
Colonoys, assailed them on all sides, to the displeasure of the Venetians, who
meant to gain that family: but that in these dangerous times, opportunity
served not to fall out with the Pope. Lodouike albeit that he professed
himself altogether to the Venetians, extolling John Galeas, the first duke of
Millaine, who made them executors of his testament, and acknowledging that to
their great charge they had defended his estate: yet his teeth so watered at
Pisa, which they had gotten, yt he caused the Pope and the Emperor to persuade,
that it was necessary to restore Pisa, to Florence, for fear of giving cause
of the French kings return: thinking upon the restitution to get it himself:
but the Venetian ambassador impugned it with greater reasons.

At this time Aluiano assisted by the Guelphes, sacked the houses of the
Gibellins, and slew Liii. of the chief in the Popes territory, who nothing
helped the matter: but see the plague of God, his younger son the Cardinal of
Valence slew his elder brother duke of Candie, as he rode alone one night in
the city of Rome, for that he thought him to have greater favor of their
sister Lucrece than himself: in whom as it is thought, the father had as good
part as either of them both.

The French king made peace with Spain and ye Switchers, and meant to return
into Italy: but pleasures, and the Cardinal of S. Malo detained him. In the
mean time he dies, and Lewis the xii. duke of Orleans succeeds. At the same
time Sauinorola was by the Pope put to death.

The fourth Book.
Jews the twelfth entitled himself king of Jerusalem, Naples, and Sicill,
and duke of Millaine, entending to conquer the dukedom. Lodouike Sforce being
yet more jealous of the Venetians, then of him, aydeth the Florentines to
recover Pisa: the Pope on the other side secretly bent to favor the French
king, thinking thereby unawares of the rest to gain many things, and in the
end the kingdom of Naples, practicing in the mean time with Frederick, to
marry his daughter to his son the Cardinal of Valence, wherein Lodouike also
played a part, showing him what a strengthening it should be to him, and what a
weakening to the French king: but Frederick trusting neither of both, utterly
refused, which bredde much trouble and practice.

The Florentines offer accord to the Venetians, but it will not be received:
For still they defend Pisa. The Cardinal of Valence before the Pope and his
Cardinals, renounceth his Cardinals hat: and prepares to go into France, where
he was from Cardinal of Valence made duke of Valence, a city in Daulphinoys by
the French king, for that the Pope had promised him to divorce the French
Queen for sterilitie, which he performed. Having this new soldier, the king
made peace with all his neighbors, and bends toward Italy, and requires
Pisa to be left in his hands. The Venetians are in great doubt, whether they
may join with the king, or no. Grimanni and Treuisan make excellent orations
to that purpose: in the end they join, and that in such a secret and
straight league, as Lodouike could not sound in a great while after: but when
he understood it, he was greatly astonished at it, and to draw the Venetians
again from the French, he practiced a reconcilement between the Flore^tines
and them. In the end neither they nor the Pope, nor the Swissers, nor
Maximilia^, (who he thought would never have joined league without
comprehending him) would succor him: but all failed him in the midst of his
coming. Then he bent himself to the fortifying of his own, but putting such
governors in trust, as had more favor then virtue (a common fault in princes)
he lost one town after another, and was driven to forsake Millaine himself,
and to fortify the castle: but the Town within yielded to the French, which
news being brought to the king at Lions, himself passed the mounts in person,
and came to Millaine, where he compounded with all the states of Italy, except
Frederick. In this mean space the new duke Valentinois, who troubled
Romagna, and the vicars thereof, joined with the French. And Bajazet Ottoman
assailed such places as the Venetians held in Greece, and with six hundred
horse pilled the country of Friuly. And after him the duke Valentinoys took
the Country, and a most valiant lady of the place prisoner, and fearing her
value, sent her prisoner to Rome. The French king after the taking of the
Duchy of Millaine, and that he had made truce with the king of Romans, he
returned into France, leaving sufficient force in Italy, making the cardinal
of Amboyse his lieutenant, and Monsieur Tremouille, Captain. Lodouike
immediately recovered Como, and the Gibellins thereupon in Millaine revolted
from the French (and Trinulcio and the Frenchmen secretly stole away) he
took also Vigenene and Nouaria, but there was he betrayed by the Swissers: and
yet were they contented that he and his brothers Galeas de S. Seuerin la
fracase, and Antonie Maria should steal away in the habit of Swissers: but
they were all discried, and he carried away into France, and the cardinal
Ascagnio who escaped, was delivered to the king by the Venetians, contrary to
the old dignity of that state. Lodouike was brought to Lions, whom the king
would not vouchsafe to fee, notwithstanding his late greatness and excellent
wit: but was committed there to close prison, where after ten years he
miserably ended his life. The Cardinal Ascagnio was imprisoned in the great
tower at Bordeaux, where the king himself that sent him thither, was himself
prisoner two years.

The fifth Book.
THis conquest of Millaine by the French, made Maximilian bethink himself
what a shame it was to him to leese such a fee of the Empire, and to suffer
Lodouike thus to be carried away, who had put himself into his protection,
whereupon he declared himself against the French king, and the Venetians,
persuading the electours and states of Germany in time to resist their
ambition and violence.

The French king proceeds further to succor the Florentines against Pisa,
takes Bolognia into his protection, and puts garrison into Pietre Sancte:
but finds such evil success in his forces against Pisa, that he greatly
stormeth at it, and offers further power, which the Florentines in despair
refuse: finally, though he were angry with the Pope, in that he failed him at
Millaine: yet by the working of the duke Valentinois, Caesar Borgeas, he now
accords with him.

The duke in the mean time takes Pesara and Rimini, and besieges Fauentia:
but was so mightily resisted by the inhabitants, not inured to war, that
considering his forces and excellent captains, he was almost mad, and swear
the next spring, either to win, or to die.

The French king by means of the Archduke (for whose young son Charles being
then but three years old, he offered his daughter Claude of the same age) made
a truce with Maximilian, who most dishonourably made no mention of the king of
Naples: notwithstanding that he had received forty thousand ducats, and a bond
for a pension to that end.

The French king thus being sure of the Germains, and making no doubt to
obtain the inuestiture of Millaine, by the help of the Archduke, turned all
his thoughts unto Naples, and fearing least the kings of Spain should oppose
themselves, and that the Pope and the Venetians should be jealous of his
greatness, he now began to think it the surest way to divide it with Ferdinand
king of Spain, who also pretended a certain right to it: so that the one not
to be hindered in the whole, the other to have part of that he had long
desired, they resolved at one time to set upon it. The French king having
Naples, Terra de lauaro, and Abruzzo, the Spanish king Puglia, and Calabria,
but this should be kept secret until such time as the French army were come
to Rome.

The duke Valentinoys besieges again Fauentia, and so forces it that they
yield upon condition that their young duke Astor, a fair prince of xviii.
years, might enjoy his liberty and revenue: but this incarnate devil sent him
to Rome, where after he had been abused by a worse devil then himself, in
such sort as may not be expressed, he and a bastard brother of his were
secretly murdered. The duke passes on and plagueth Florence, and from thence
to Bolognia: but there the French king commands him to stay, for that he
had taken the Bentiuols and that state into his protection. He then returns
to Florence, and there falls to capitulation, after surprising certain
places of the lord of Plombin, he returns to Rome, and joins with the
French king.

Frederick being thus assailed by these two mighty kings, being more inwardly
angry with the king of Spain his friend, then with the French king his enemy
capitulated with ye French, and went himself into France, where he had the
dukedom of Aniow, and thirty thousand ducats pension. At the same time
Gonsaluo for the Spanish king took Calabria, and Ferdinands eldest son by
composition: and contrary to his oath sent him into Spain.

The French king finding his prosperity to be envied of the Venetians, desired
to keep league with Maximilian, and to war upon them: but the disagreeing of
the French and Spanish captains in the kingdom of Naples, (for that the
borders were not well abutted in the division) diuerted the French king to the
Spanish wars: where finding himself the stronger, he protested war against
Gonsaluo, if forthwith he gave not up his Captainship, and to that end sent two
thousand Switzers, and entertained the princes of Salern, and Bisignan.

The duke Valentinois takes Vrbin and after Camerin, and repaireth to the
king, who was come to Vrbin, and so to Ast, where finding great grace, he put
all the states of Italy in great fear, insomuch that secretly diverse of them
were driven to confederate against him. In the which mean space Gindobaldo
duke of Vrbin, by a secret train of the inhabitants recovered his estate, and
yet within a while after is driven to fly to Venice.

The Pope and his son plagued the family of the Vrsins, the Pope poisoned
the Cardinal Vrsin, his son strangled Paul Vrsin.

The French prosperity began now to decline in Naples, as well by their
negligence and insolency, as by the war: wherein Mo^sieur de la Palisse, and
diverse others were taken prisoners. At the length certain bragges in words
falling out on both sides, it was agreed that there should be a combat of
thirteen Italians against thirteen Frenchmen, in which fight Albemount an
Italian being first overthrown, and after him Miale, with their swords they
killed the horses of the Frenchmen, and so took them all prisoners saving one:
who was slain after he had overthrown Albemount.

After this the Frenchmens hearts failed, and peace grew to be treated: which
not withstanding Gonsaluo made still war, taking no knowledge thereof, and
took prisoner Monsieur de Aubigny in the same place, wherewith in few years
before, he discomfited Gonsaluo, and the forces of Ferdinand, being a most
excellent captain, after that at Cirignole he gave the French an other
overthrow, where Monsieur de Nemours was slain: finally he passed through
Melfe, and took Naples.

The sixth Book.
LEwis the French king hearing of the loss of Naples, of his armies and
captains, when he least thought of war: complained himself highly to the
Archduke, thinking that whiles he treated peace with his father in law ye king
of Spain, to be revenged: the king and Queen of Spain on the other side
drew the treatise long, both to appoint themselves, and to disappoint the
French king: in the end being sore pressed by the Archduke, they began to
quarrel with the Archduke himself, saying that he passed both his
instructions and commission, in making such a dishonorable peace as they never
meant to make, and much less to keep: whereupon the French king prepares to
assail Naples both by sea and land. But in the mean time Gonsaluo takes the
castle of Naples, and besieges Caiette.

Even as fortune began to fail the Frenchmen, so did the Pope and his son,
gathering by his dealings with them of Bolognia and Tuscan, that there was no
farther good to be done by him. And therefore being required to declare
themselves for him, they answered in dark ambiguities like Apollos oracles, for
the father never did as he said, nor ye son never said that which he did. In
the end upon much treaty, the Pope was content the French army should pass
through the territories of the Church, and that he would not meddle with the
Florentines, Sienois, nor Bolognians, during the wars, which the French king
nothing believed, if fortune frowned. But see the end of this Pope, as he went
to suppe in a certain Vineyard near the Vatican, with Adrian, Cardinal of
Cornetta, he was suddenly brought forth dead, being all black blown, and
hideous to look on: his son also was brought forth for dead, who having
brought two flagons of impoisoned wine, to poison the poor cardinal, by gods
judgment poisoned his father, and himself, and yet using forthwith
counterpoisons, knowing the bait, he saved his life: but lay long sick, which
quayled all his devises, especially in choosing the Pope, which was Pius 3. too
good a man to live long in that place: so that he dying within a few months,
Julius the second was chosen.

In the mean time the duke Valentinois is coursed by the Vrsins, driven to
reconcile himself to the Colonois, constrained to fly into the castle saint
Angelo. Cesena and other places revolt from him to the Church again: the
Venetians are also in hope hereby to get Romagna, and soon after they take
Fauentia, whereof the Pope much complains. And in the mean time aresteth the
duke Valentinois, and imprisoneth him in the Vatican. Thus his power that
suddenly grew great by cruelty, deceyt, and the Church, came as suddenly to
nothing again.

The French king makes wars toward Spain with small profit, whereupon for
those parts a truce is taken, and all the bent is to Naples. Aluiano and
diverse Vrsins join with Gonsaluo, which greatly encourages him. The
Frenchmen are repulsed at Garillani, in some disorder, and return to Caiette,
which after Gonsaluo takes partly by force, partly by composition, and after
is called by no other name, but the great captain.

At this time was there a peace made between the Venetians, and Bajazet
Ottoman, who unlike to his father, was given to study and learning. At this
time also the Portingales did make their maruaylous navigations of East Indies,
passing the equinoctial, leasing the use of the Northwind and Loadsrone,
bringing great spiceries and other riches: but the navigations of Spaniards
under Christophoro Colombo a Geneuois, was far more maruaylous, who sailing
thirty days westwarde, discovered certain Isles never known before: and
after both he and Vespuccius passing further, found firm land, and diverse
civil nations, not having the use of arms, but much gold and silver. etc.

The duke Valentinoys about this time escaped out of prison to Naples, where
Gonsaluo takes him, and sends him captive into Spain, and a truce is taken
between the kings of France and Spain. Frederick being out of hope of
recovering his kingdom of Naples, died, and after him Queen Elizabeth of
Spain: whereupon some differences were like to arise between the Archduke and
the Spanish king, for the government of Castilia.

About this time it may not be forgotten, that Cardinal Hippolite of Esca,
being in love with a young damosel his kinswoman (who made more account of his
bastard brother) asked her what was ye cause why she so greatly loved a
bastard, and she answered his sweet and amiable eyes: whereupon one day as he
rid on hunting, he caused his brother to dismount, and commanded his footmen
in his presence to pluck out his eyes, saying he liked no such companions in
love.

The seventh Book.
PHillip the archduke began to entitle himself king of Castile, not being
content that his father in law should govern, having no better interest then
the appointment of his wife when she lay in extremity. And the king of Romans
being hartned with the greatness of his son, purposes to enter into Italy.
The French king having them al in ielousy (though he were very angry with the
Pope, for usurping upon the spiritual livings in Millaine) yet least he should
stand alone, he treats with the Pope, making quarrel to Venice, for that he
knew it a thing acceptable to him.

Phillip prepares by sea to invade Spain, and is by storm driven into
England, where he is honorably received by Henry the seventh, and newly
furnished for his voyage, upon condition that he should deliver the duke of
Suffolk whom he had prisoner in the castle of Namures. Phillip yields, and
requires that he might not be put to death, though he pretended right to the
crown, whereunto king Henry the seventh condiscended, but Henry the eight
afterward struck off his head. Phillip goes forward, and by capitulation
obtains the kingdom of Castile, but dies within a while after.

The French king is desirous to be revenged upon Venice: but first marries
his daughter Madame Claude unto Francis of Angolesme afterward king. The
Emperor treats with the Venetians to pass through their territories to be
crowned at Rome. The Pope enterprised the recovery of Bolognia under the
conduct of ye Marquis of Mantua, the Bolognians require aid of the French
king, according to their protection: but in fine the poor Bentiuoles in stead
of a protection had a fair safe conduct of Monsieur Chaumont, for which they
paid dearly, and lost the state to the Church.

The Geneuoys rebel against the French king, and fell also at civil discord,
the Gibelines favoring the Adornes, and the Guelphes the Fregoses, every man
desiring to bring the government to his friends, Monsieur de Chaumont sets
upon them, and makes them yield the town to the discretion of the king, who
there entered in person, and pardoned all, saving threescore.

Ferdinand king of Aragon, and the French king, appointed a meeting at Sauona,
and there they put themselves one in another power, as though there never had
been enmity between them. Where supping together, none but the two kings and
the Queen, the French king would needs have Gonsaluo make the fourth, being
in admiration of his fame, his person, his majesty in gesture and speech.
After this time this great Captain had never great occasion to exercise his
virtue. The end of their great conference was, that they two and the Emperor
should join against the Venetians.

The Emperor on the other side held a decree at Constance, for the
encountering of the French king in Italy, and to that end treated with the
Pope, professing himself a protector of the Church, and an enemy of the
French usurpation in Italy, who meaned (quoth he) to make the Cardinal of
Amboyse Pope, and himself Emperor.

This troubled the king, who was sure neither of the Pope, nor of the
Venetians: and the Venetians were much perplexed, whether they should join
with the king, or the Emperor: to which points Foskarin and Gritti made
excellent orations. In fine they answered the Ambassador of the Emperor who
demanded passage, that if he came armed, he should have no passage: if
otherwise they should do him all honor possible. He marches on
notwithstanding, and gains something: but for want of good resolution loses
again.

The eight Book.
NOw do the Emperor and the Venetians fall to treatise of league, which makes
all Italy more afraid then ever before, which had been already greatly
tormented by the ambition of princes: and specially by the Venetians, who made
their profit of every peace, and every war, and even in this league with
Caesar, they demeaned themselves so cunningly, that they now gave cause both
to the Emperor and the French king, to join together against them, whereupon
the Pope failed not to encourage them, insomuch that for the Emperor Madame
Marguiret his daughter, gouernesse of Flanders, for the French king, the
Cardinal of Amboyse, and for Spain. The Ambassador swear this league at
Cambray. The Venetians mistrusting false measure, had their ambassador there
also to awaite what was done, but the Cardinal swear so many oaths, that the
French king his master would keep his league with Venice, and that his
meeting was to make peace between the Archduke, and the duke of Guelders, that
he made him and the Venetians very secure.

This league was held very secret, but the Pope taking the advantage
thereof, demanded of them Rimini, and Fauentia, which they had taken from the
Church, uttering that whereas the greatest princes in Christendom were joined
against them, he would also join, if they denied him his demand. The Senate
was deeply amazed, and divided in opinion touching the restitution, and in
fine were resolved to restore, had not Treuisan, a man of high estate next the
duke, most earnestly dissuaded them, which they repented: for the Pope ratified
the treatise of Cambray, and so all Christendom in effect armed against them.
And besides that they had these evil signs and presages, a ship of theirs
was drowned with ten thousand ducats. The Castle of Bresse was stricken with
thunder, their tower of records suddenly fell down, their Arsenall was burnt,
twelve galleys, their salt peter, powder, and munition was consumed.

The French king accompanied with the duke of Loraine and nobility of France
passed the Alps, and sent Monsieur de Chaumont before to set upon them. The
Pope published a bull against them.

The French army overthrows their battle at Gniaradadde, takes prisoner
their chief Captain Bartholomeo Aluiano, who was wounded in the eye, as for
the other Captain, the County Petylian, he stirred not, nor would adventure
all upon one day, the which if he had done, it is thought he had overcome:
and yet his not venturing was not misliked.

These news astonished almost unto desperation the Venetians: and yet that
noble and grave state, neither fell to dissension among themselves, nor spoke
so much as a word of reproach one to another, touching their counsayles, that
caused this success: which was so much the more lamentable, for that all the
Countries subject unto them, in this their misery began to sorsake them, in
short, they thought it the only way to try by submission and entreaty, to
divide either the Pope or the Emperor from the French king, of whom they
dispaired. The Pope gave small comfort, and the Emperor less, without the
French kings consent.

Thus the one of them gained on the one side, and the other on the other side,
and the Venetians are driven to utter extremity: now the states of Italy, and
especially the Pope, seeing ye imminent dangers over their own heads, began
now to think what a fair thread they had spoonne, if the fall and ruin of
Venice did bring into Italy two such mighty princes on their necks: wherefore
he gives audience to their six Ambassadors that most heavily and woefully
demanded pardon: giving the Ambassadors of the confederates to understand,
that the Church ought not to shut her bosom to such as return. Now began
Treuisan to stand to them, and shortly after they recover Padua from the
Emperor, they take the Marquis of Mantua prisoner.

Shortly after the French king making a league defensive with the Pope,
returns into France. The Emperor bends all his forces to recover Padua:
the Venetians for the defense thereof, send all the young noble and gentlemen's
sons: with which policy the people took such comfort, that beyond
expectation they so defend them selves, that the siege is raised, and the
Emperor returns into Allemaigne, with little profit.

The Cardinal of Amboyse hoping thereby in time to be Pope, reconcileth the
Emperor and the catholic king, wherein he did his master small service. The
County Petilian dies: the Pope absolueth the Venetians.

The ninth Book.
The Pope not only absolueth the Venetians, but does as it were take them into
protection, intending to reconcile them to the Emperor, and to set him against
the French king, and finally to drive the Frenchmen out of Italy: but the
Emperor would not hear of it without Verona were yielded unto him,
whereupon the Pope practices with the Swissers by the means of the Bishop of
Sion, who now were very proud, for that they were so desired of all nations,
persuading themselves that all the victories of king Charles and king Lewis
came by them, and therefore picked quarrels with the king touching their
pensions. The Pope in like sort picked quarrel to the duke of Ferrara for his
dependancie on the French, being so much benefited and honored by him. The
Emperor and the French king on the other side smelling his drift, to touch as
well the interest of the one, as the other of them, knitte themselves again
fast against Venice. And Monsieur de Chaumont for the king, and the prince of
Henault for the Emperor joining together, drove back the Venetian army, and
approaching to Vincentia, the Vincentines being destitute of help, sent an
Ambassador to them, who made a very pitiful oration, the which the prince of
Henault answered with great vigor like a barbarous Dutchman. In fine they
yielded at their discretion, and Monsieur Chaumont treated for them, telling
the prince of Henault that he ought to have more regard to the greatness and
glory of Caesar, then to the fault of the poor miserable men, who depended on
others, greater then themselves.

After this were taken Legnague, Montsilice and other places, and Monsieur de
Chaumont was commanded to return to Millain, for certain broiles there
kindled closely by the Pope, at which time dies the Cardinal of Amboyse,
which greatly hindered ye french: for that ye king being apter to be directed,
then to direct, never had the like confidence in any man. After his death, the
Pope flatly requires the king to give over his protection of Ferrara, the king
answers yt he cannot do it with his honor, and so stomach grows between
them. The Pope in the mean time eggeth on the Swissers, who being angry that
the king would not increase their pensions, were ready enough and descended
toward Millain. The Venetians in ye mean time, while Mo^sieur de Chaumont was
there occupied, recovered most part of their towns, and besieged Verona: the
marquis of Ma^tua escaped out of prison at Venice by the secret means of
Bajazet the great Turk, who had before showed many friendly parts to the
Marquis.

The Pope purposes to set upon Geane, and many other things that took no
effect: the king on the other side, to anger him, means to defend the duke
of Ferrara, and still to continue friendship with the Emperor, so that the
Pope was driven to leave his thoughts of getting other men's, and to think upon
defending his own: for within a while after he was besieged by Monsieur de
Chaumont in Bolognia: but after a while he was content upon great occasions to
leave the siege, which done, the Pope complained himself to all princes
Christian of the French king.

The Pope cease not thus, but falls to wars still, besieges Mirandola,
is there present in person, no less busy in body then in mind, riding and
going to and fro like a captain, and in the end wins it: whereat the French
king is so angry, that he sends instructions to Monsieur de Chaumont, not
only to defend Ferrara: but also by all means to plague the territories of
the Church: the Pope in the mean time is content that Modena should be yielded
to the Imperial, for fear it should fall into the hands of the French. And the
noble captain Monsieur de Chaumont dies, and Trinulce is made a Marshall of
France, and Caesar contrary to his treatise with the French king, is content
to hearken to peace.

After the death of Monsieur de Chaumont, Gaston de Foix, a valiant young
Gentleman, and the kings sisters son began to have charge.

The Pope partly to gain the favor of princes, partly to be the stronger in
the council that was threatened, made eight Cardinals at a clap, and among the
rest, the Archbishop of York, thereby to gain the king of England, and the
Bishop of Sion, by him to gain the Swissers.

Now began a general peace to be treated at Venice by the Bishop of Gurce: but
the Pope brake it off, whereupon the French king commanded Trinulcio to march
on, who took Concordia, and after Castelfranco and drew toward Bolognia, they
falling in great fear, the cardinal of Pauia runs away. The Bentiuoles
return, the popes army flies, the Pope fretteth, the Cardinal of Pauia draws
toward Rauenna to the Pope, and the duke of Vrbin hating him deadly, by the way
drew his dagger, and in the midst of his guard slew him. After this the
Emperor and the French king do publish a council to be holden at Pisa: the
luck whereof the Pope liked not, for that Popes had been there deposed at
councels holden in former times.

The tenth Book.
ALl Christendom, and especially al Italy stood at the gaze, to see what the
French king would do after these victories: for now it lay in his power (as it
seemed) to take Rome, and all the states of the Church: but he moved either
with devotion or fear to bring all princes in his neck, commanded Trinulcio
to leave Bolognia to the Bentiuoles, and to restore the rest to the Church, and
so to retire to Millaine.

The Pope now to break the neck of the Pisan Council, summoned by the
Emperor and the French king, spoke his Cardinals fair, for that five of them
had given consent to Pisa, and winning back some of them by fair promises,
published an universal Council to be holden at Rome, and began to incline
to a peace with the French king: but the Emperor dealt with the French king on
the other side, to help him against the Pope, and the Venetians: but what for
his poverty and inconstancy, the French king had no great devotion thereunto:
the emperor notwithstanding aduentureth, and is foiled with his French succors
by the Venetians: and yet after he takes Friuly, and within short space
loses it again. The pope being newly recovered of a deadly sickness,
begins to think again of the chasing the French out of Italy: the French
king on the other side begins to be weary of fighting against the Church: the
Pope leagueth himself with the Venetians, and the Catholic king, to deliver
Italy of strangers, as he pretended.

The time of the Council of Pisa drawing on, and many French Cardinals and
captains being there, by chance there fell out such a fray among the
soldiers and servants, in parting whereof, Monsieur de Chastillian, and
Monsieur de Lautrech were wounded, that the Council was adiourned to Millaine,
where they found more difficulties: for all the Clergy abstained from divine
service, as though profane and execrable persons, and not Cardinals had entered.
This made ye French king suspect the Emperor, and cry out of the Catholic
king, who did all contrary to the league at Cambray: and therefore meaning to
deal as falsely as the best, he now resolved to set upon Romagna, but in great
doubt of the Swissers, who sent defiance by a trumpetter unto Gaston de Foix
his lieutenant in Millaine, the king sends great aid out of France, and
demands help of Florence, which is not answered to his expectation, by
reason of diversity of opinions. And that which was worse, knows they had
herein displeased the king, they sent Guicchiardine the writer of this history
Ambassador to the king of Arragon, who shortly after joined with the Pope
against Bolognia, but Monsieur de Foix came with succors, and caused the army
to retire, and after that he wanne Brescia from the Venetians, and sacked it.

In the midst of this good luck, the French king suddenly was appalled: for
that he heard that the king of England meant to war upon him, receiving some
ships out of Spain to that purpose. Nevertheless Monsieur de Foix goes on
valiantly to Rauenna, to fight with the confederates where was fought the
longest and noblest battle of all others, the Spaniards and Italians striving
against the Frenchmen and Almaines for the glory of their nation. And albeit in
opinion the French seemed to have the better: yet monsieur de Foix not abiding
that the Spanish footmen should retire in good order, set on them in great
fury, and was slain in the height of his glory. Peter of Navarre taken
prisoner, Monsieur de Viuarets slain before the eyes of his father, Monsieur
Allegre, and the father not long after the son. The army notwithstanding
enters and sacketh Rauenna: the Pope is afraid of the news, his Cardinals
persuade him to peace, but the king of Aragon to continue, the wars. Iulio de
Medici a knight of the Rhodes, afterward Pope, recomforteth him also in such
sort, that he resolves rather to forsake Rome, then to make peace, and so much
the rather, for that monsieur de la Palissie was departed out of Romagna.

The Swissers in the mean time pass the Alps by Trent, with leave of the
Emperor toward Millaine, and there joins with the Venetian army, Cremona
yields unto them, and Bergamo, and approaching to Millaine, Triuulcio having
no hope to defend it for want of succor, secretly stole away into Piemont.
Parma, Placentia, Bolognia, and almost all Romagna, return to the Pope, and
Geane reuolteth from the French, making Fregose the Captain of the Venetian
army their duke, which dignity his father once had before him.

The eleventh Book.
THe duke of Ferrara finding himself now every way so weak and hard beset
(upon assurance of safe conduct by the means of the ambassador of Arragon, and
Fabricio Colonna) came to Rome, and humbled himself to the Pope, as to remain
Fendatarie of the Church, the Pope would have the dukedom it self, or
nothing: the conditions being so hard, the duke craved pardon, and the benefit
of his safe conduct to return home: the Pope denied, and forged other by
matters to retain him prisoner: but the Arragon Ambassador, and Fabricio, for
that it stood them upon in honor, came suddenly well accompanied the next
morning to the gate of Latran, and delivered him in despite of the Popes guard.

The French king was driven to let the Swissers for a time take their pleasure
of Millaine: for that he was advertised that the king of England according to
a treatise before holden, had sent six thousand footmen to Fowntaraby, jointly
there to assail the duchy of Gwien, and to join with the Emperor, he had no
hope, for that the Bishop of Marseilles his Ambassador assured him it was in
vain. After this quayling of the French affairs, the Pope, the Emperor, the
king of Arragon, the Venetians and Swissers, though they were confedered, had
every one their die upon Millaine, but the Pope and the Swissers fearing the
great princes, dealt earnestly that it might be allotted to Mazimilian the young
son of Lodouike Sforce to bring it from the French.

The viceroy of Naples is sent with an army against Florence, the Florentines
receive again the Medici, Prato is taken by the Spaniars. The castle of Geane
is taken by the Geneuoys, the lantern of Geane still remains French: Bressia
yields to the Viceroy. Cremonia to the Venetians. The Bishop of Gurce at
Rome, treats for a common peace.

The fear of the Englishmen at Fowntaraby, and the negligence of the French
king in not succouring, caused the king of Navarre, to forsake Navarre and fly
to Bearn, among the mount Pyrenes, and without any charge or travail gat the
kingdom of Navarre to the king of Aragon, except certain fortresses: the King
of Aragon for want of title, pretending that the right thereof was given him by
the Pope, when he cursed the French King and his adherents. But the French King
endeavors to reconcile himself both to the King of England and the Swissers:
at the least he hops to win the Venetians from the league, and so with new
forces to recover Millaine. A better hope then all this was, that Pope Julius
the second now died in the midst of his prosperity, and Iean Cardinal de
Medici was chosen, named Leo the tenth: by which good accident he did the
easilier make peace with the Catholic King, and prepared for his purpose: for
albeit he could not well compass a peace with the King of England: yet for
that the English were not well provided of ready horsed, although their value
chiefly consisted in footmen (yet now by long peace and lack of use being
driven to hyre Almaines) he thought many things might be done before that
war came forward: wherefore he sent power to Triuulcio, who joining with
Aluiano, Captain of his new confederates the Venetians, he sets upon the
duchy of Millaine, and recouereth Geane: and after besieges Nouara, where
being resisted by the Swissers, they retired seven miles of: but the Swissers
to the end that no succors or Nation might take the glory from them, like
most valiant soldiers having neither horsemen nor artillarie, followed
Triuulcio, and Monsieur de la Tremouille, and fought a most brave battle with
them, gained their artillarie, slew their men with it, and put their
gendarmerie to flight, who beastly demeaned themselves that day:
notwithstanding it may not be forgotten, that Robert de la March having his
two sons most daungerously beset with Swissers, rushed like a Tiger into the
midst of them, and fought so terribly, that he amazed them, and delivered his
sons. Aluiano perceiving the discomfiture of the French, retired to Verona and
besieged it, but prevailed not. Padua is besieged by the Viceroy, and the young
duke of Millaine takes Pontuica, by the help of Antonie de Leua: and the
Viceroy finding that he could not take Padua, spoyleth the Country even almost
unto Venice, and within two miles of Vincentia, the Viceroy Prosper Celonna,
and the Marquis of Peskara gave a great overthrow to the Venetians, and Aluiano
by the cowardice of their footmen of Romaigna. At the length Caesar and the
Venetians compromitted their differences to the Pope: and the French king had
now nothing left in Italy but the Lantern of Geane, which also was battered
by sea, and defended with sacks of wool.

The twelfth Book.
THe king of England was now ready both by sea and land to war upon the
French king, and had also hired the Emperor Maximilian with six score thousand
ducats to enter al at one time into Burgundy, hoping also that his father in
law the Catholic king would join with him. The French king bestirred him to
resist these great dangers, and some what to appall the courage of the English
king, he allured into France the duke of Suffolk as a competitor of the
crown, but he being nothing dismayed therewith, in despite struck off the
dukes brothers head, whom he held before in prison by the king of Castiles
means, as you have heard. The French king farther to trouble him, set James
King of Scots the old enemy of England and confederate of France to war on
that side the seas upon him. The English King was long in preparing his
subjects being out of use, the manner of fight being changed, the use of their
bows being almost gone. Nevertheless in July being greatly furnished, his
army camped near Bullen, and from thence besieged Terwin: where at the first
they answered not the renown of their hardiness, in that they gave no hardy
assault: but within a while after, they overthrew three hundred men of arms.
The Marquis of Rotelin, called duke of Longuile, Captain Bayard, and Fayette
were taken prisoners, and monsieur de la Palisse escaped hardly, wherewith the
French king and all France were so amazed, that if the English King had
followed this good fortune, it is thought the gappe was now open to take all
France. Terwin was raised by the advice of the Emperor, for that the Archduke
Charles pretended right unto it, and the Emperor departed the camp for that
he thought the Englishmen to be rash, and without discipline. King Henry
nevertheless passed toward Tornay, and took it, whereof the French were full
glad, fearing his coming farther into France with his terrible army of
fourscore thousand, which perhaps he had done, if he had had experience, or
had been truly advertised of the disposition of France: but he returned into
England, assuring the French that he would return the next summer. At this
time by chance of fire, the richest part of all Venice was burnt, and the Pope
ends the differences between Caesar and them.

The league was renewed between the Spanish king and the French king, which
greatly displeased the king of England, who said that this was the third time
that his father in law had broken promise with him.

The French king practiced with the Pope, and the Pope with the Cardinal of
York to reconcile the French and English King, which took place, and the
French king marieth ye lady Mary, the king of Englands sister. This was
unpleasant both to the Emperor and the Spanish King, and not pleasant to the
Pope who was the procurer of it, who albeit he loved with such cunning to gain
princes: yet he liked not that this league should help the French King again
to Millaine.

At this time King Emanuel of Portingale presented the Pope with two monstrous
Elephants out of India, and Lewis the xii. dies, and Francis the first duke of
Angolesme succeeds, taking the title of the duke of Millaine, and making
peace with the King of England and the Archduke: he means to recover the
dukedom. The Emperor, the King of Aragon, the duke of Millaine, the Swissers
do league against him: the King of England sends him word to Lions, not to
pass into Italy to trouble Christendom: the Swissers guard the foot and
straights of the Alps against him. But he like an industrious prince, by the
counsel of Triuulcio, leaves the two ordinary ways of Mountsenis, and
Mount Genewre, and passes by extreme toil of Pioners nearer the sea by the
Cortian Alps, by the Marquisate of Saluzzo: and being passed before any man
thought of him, Monsieur de la Palisse took Colonna a noble Captain prisoner
at Villefrance as he sat at dinner, which greatly astonished all Italy,
insomuch that the Pope used the duke of Sauoy, to excuse him to the King
forthwith.

The King takes the Countries of Alexandria and Tortona. The Swissers are in
diversity of opinions, whether they shall hearken to any league with the
French, or farther withstand them. At length the Bishop of Sion with a very
perswasiue oration encouraged them to join in one opinion against the French,
and to fight with them near unto Marignian, where the first day both they and
the King fought so long, as they could hold weapon in hand, and departed on
both sides, as it were by agreement without sound of trumpet.

The next day they rashly and furiously set on the French, who kept them selves
in good order, and caused Aluiano with his light horsemen to set on their
backs, which greatly annoyed them. They fought notwithstanding most valiantly:
but yet dispairing of victory, for that the Venetian army approached, they
sounded the retraite: and albeit the artillarie beat them on the backs, yet
did they keep their array toward Millaine, to the wonder of the French, and
all that looked on: especially the King, who often escaped death and danger,
and Triuulcio, who said they were Giantes and not men, for that he never saw
the like battle.

After this victory all the duchy of Millaine returned to the King, except
the Castles of Cremona and Millaine, and the duke and the King fall to
composition, and Aluiano dies, and the Pope and the King in loving sort talk
together at Bolognia, and there renewing a league with the Swissers, he returned
into France.

Ferdinand king of Aragon, and king of Castile, in the right of his wife, the
winner of Granado, conqueror of Naples and Navarre, died without heir male,
and the great Captain Gonsaluo died one month before, absent from the Court,
in disgrace and malcontent.

The death of the king made the French king in hope to get Naples, thinking
that the young Archduke Charles should be too much busied to keep al his
estates, but he was distourned from that thought by the coming of the Emperor
into Lombardie against him and the Venetians, who summoned Millaine, but was
feign to recule, for that by delay he lost all opportunity.

The Venetians recover Brescia, the Pope makes his nephew Laurence de Medici
duke of Vrbin. The King of France and Spain make a peace at Noyan. The
Venetians recover Verona.

The xiii. Book.
BEsides ye peace of Noyon, the Kings of Spain and France, and the Emperor
treat a peace at Cambray, and now great quietness was hoped in all Italy,
saving that Francesco Maria de la Rouere being followed of many Spaniards, went
about to recover such his states as the Pope had taken from him, as Vrbin Fane,
and others: driving the Pope to complain to the French and Spanish Kings, and
enter league with ye French, for aid against all subjects and fendataries of
the Church.

The chief Captains of the Spaniards, that followed Francesco Maria, namely
Maldonat, and Swares, conspired after certain victories to betray Francesco
Maria, and to deliver him up alive to his enemy Laurence de Medices, which
treason Francesco Maria discovering, made such an excellent oration to the
Spaniards, that they judged their own Captains worthy to pass the pikes,
and so with their own hands slew them.

At this time Alfonso Cardinal of Siena, being the Popes creature, most
ungratefully notwithstanding conspired against him: and the Cardinals of
Cornette, and Volaterra, confessed on their knees that he had imparted it to
them. Alfonso the night following was secretly strangled in prison.

The Pope finding himself no more gracious among his college of Cardinals,
created thirty new Cardinals at a clappe, some for learning, some for
friendship, and some for money, which now went low with him: and after a few
conflicts with the duke of Vrbin at Ancona and Anguiare, he falls to
composition by means of Don Hugues de Moncada the Viceroy, to his great
charge, which the poor Florentines were driven to defray.

Italy now being at quiet, the Pope began to treat with Christen princes
against Selim the Turk: who seeing his father Baiazat to be old, partly by
Ianissaries, and partly by poison dispatched his elder brother Achomat, and
after his younger brother Corcut, and all their race, and as the world supposed,
had a meaning to do the like to his own son, the better to strengthen his own
dominion for his time, which by his desperate hardness was grown great, having
overthrown the mountains Aduliens, and ye Sophy of Persia, winning from him
his chief city Taurus: and then turned his wars upon the Sowdan of Soria
and Egypt, a most mighty prince of country, and by reason of the warlike
discipline of the Mamelukes, and yet never ouerthrown but by this Selim, who
highly disdaining that his victories should not be above Caesar, and Alexander,
now meant to bend toward Christendom, and first against Rhodes, and Hungary,
being very weak, for that the king was a child, and as some thought toward
Italy, but this consult took so small effect, yt if God had not soon after
taken away Selim, who left Soliman very young: all christendom no doubt had
smarted for this ungodly negligence. Now was peace awhile on every side, and
the French and the English so far leagued together, that the only daughter of
Henry is promised upon condition to the Dolphin of France. This peace which is
an enemy to great warriers, makes Triuulcio now in his old age to be in
jealousy with the French king for the Gwelphian faction, Monsieur de Lautreck
and other pursue him thoroughly, the king denies him his countenance: and he
dies for sorrow in disgrace, according as most great captains do.

The emperor Maximilian being now aged, treated with the electors and Pope, to
choose the king of Romans, Charles of Austrich, king of Spain: the French king
thinking him to be too great alredie, treated earnestly to the contrary, and
Maximilian dies before any thing is done, so that the French and Spanish kings
are now most earnest competitours and countersutours for it. The French King
spares neither speech, Ambassadors, persuasions, nor money, and is abused with
hope by some of the electours: but in fine Charles of Austrich is chosen, the
which kills the heart of the French king and his adherents in Italy, and now
the kingdom of Naples, the restitution of Navarre unto John, and the money
accorded at Nayon, begin for despite to come in question, and into demand.

At this time the Pope abusing all the world with his indulgences, and by the
Bishop of Arembald making a terrible exaction in diverse parts of Germany, to
the use of his sister Magdalen, gave occasion to Martin Luther to preach
against him, and to renew the doctrine of John Hus, and Jerome of Prage. The
which was very welcome to the wounded minds of all such as had felt the Popes
abuses, and so much the rather, as that the Pope took no good course to resist
it: but perseuered still in his enormities.

This year did Charles the Empeperor ariue in England, not as his father
Phillip did by necessity, but of friendship, and so passed into Flanders, and
to Aix, and there was crowned: in the mean time some broiles arose in Spain,
which were appeased by his officers.

The xiiii. Book.
Italy had at this time a little repose, but it could not long continue, by
reason of the emulation of these two great princes, Charles and Frauncis, who
could not endure the greatness the one of the other, and especially for that
pope Leo was horn mad to want Parma and Placentia, gotten by his predecessor
pope July, and to see that Ferrara should so long hold out against him, maugre
his head: in respect whereof he treated amity with the French King, and hired
six thousand Swissers, and in secret they concluded to divide the kingdom of
Naples. In the mean time the French king taking the opportunity of sturres in
Spain, sent Monsieur Asperrot with a power, and easily without resistance
recovered ye kingdom of Navarre. And the Swissers refusing the amity of
Caesar, joined with the French.

The Pope notwithstanding his league, contracted with ye French king, ioineth
also in league with the Emperor to defend Florence and the Medici, and to
recover Millaine to Sforce, and Parma and Placentia to the Church. At that very
instant on S. Peter's day at Millaine, there fell fire out of the air, which
took certain barrels of powder, which overthrew a fair Marble tower, and so
shook the castle and city of Millaine, as a greater portent never chanced
unto them.

The Pope had in sold the Marquis of Mantua, and Prospero Colonna, and the
king sent Monsieur Lautreck to defend Millaine by the help of the Venetians,
whose Captains were Theodore Triuulcio, and Andrew Gritti: who after they had
skirmished to and fro with the other side, about the river of Paw: in the end
the Swissers hired by the Pope, said that they were content to defend the
states of the Church, for which cause they were purposely hired: but against
the French King they would not march. On the other side, the Swissers that were
with the French king departed without any bidding farewell, or any word
speaking. The popes army and the Emperors marches on toward Millaine: and at
the first assault, the Marquis of Pescara Captain of the Spaniards makes the
Venetians to forsake the walls, and Triuulcio is taken and al Millaine, and al
Pauia and Lody, and diverse other places yield, crying out upon the French, and
rejoicing to become imperial.

Now died pope Leo the tenth (which no doubt much weakened the Emperor, for that
his money began and entertained the war) in whose place was chosen Adrian
the sixth a Flemming, by the favor of Caesar against all their minds, for that
they thought a stranger of that Country and education, not very fit for
Italy.

The duke of Vrbin recouereth his estate, and with the help of Baillous
asiegeth Siena. And ten thousand Swissers of Lucerne contrary to the minds of
Surick and Suith, come over the mount Godard and Bernard into Lombardie, to
help the French king to recover Millaine: Prospero Colonna is as busy on the
other side to defend it, and Antonio de Leua to defend Pauia. Mo^sieur de
Lautreck besieges it, which he hops in time to get by famine: but their
industry within deceyueth his hope. Whereupon Lautreck retireth toward
France, and three thousand of his Swissers were slain at Bicoque by the
imperial army. Lody also and Gene were taken by them.

At Lucques at this time Poggio, and Totty, two men of noble family, under
color of private enmity, in the open palace slew the Gonfalonier of that
city: but afterward were chased by the citizens. Sagusanac Malateste usurps
upon Rimini.

The xv. Book.
THe French King being every where at peace, his return into Italy is
suspected, and therefore Florence, Geane, Siena, and Luca, are taxed with great
sums for the maintenance of a continual army to defend Naples and Millaine,
and Don Charles de Lanoy is made Viceroy of Naples. The Pope takes his journey
toward Rome, and Charles the Emperor into Spain, and talks with king
Henry of England by the way, and they two jointly sent Ambassadors to Venice,
to persuade them to leave the amity of the French king, and to join with the
Emperor. The king of England moreover sent an Herault to the French king, to
protest war against him, in case he would not make truce with the Emperor
for three years, the which would not be granted: but the league between the
Emperor and the Venetians succeeded, and touching the same, two excellent
orations were made by Andrew Gritti, and George Cornare. While christian
princes were thus undermining and vexing one another, Soliman Ottoman the Turk
in person with infinite power besieged the Rhodes: the which though it were to
the uttermost defended by the grand master and the knights thereof, yet by the
negligence of the pope and christian princes, they were feign to yield, and on
Christmasse day the Turk in triumph entered, and dedicated all the Churches to
Mahomet.

The French kings army being now passing the Alps, and himself ready in
person to follow, he discovered that the discontented duke of Burbon, Constable
of France, was conspired with the Emperor and the King of England, and should
marry with Elenor the emperors sister, widow of Emanuel late king of
Portingale, and that as soon as he was over the Alps, the duke of Burbon, and
the King of England should set upon France, and the duke should be King of
Prouence, and the King of England should have the rest.

These news, though they appalled and stayed the Kings person, yet did it
break the attempt, and caused the duke to fly in a strange weed, first into
la Franche Conte, and after to Millaine. In the mean time, Pope Adrian dies,
and the Cardinal de Medices is chosen, calling himself Clement the seventh.

The French army being now passed the Alps, Monsieur de Boniuet a French
Captain takes Loda, the rest of the French power being under the conduct of
the Admiral before Millaine, were not in great hope to take it, but making
diverse skirmishes, still came by the worst. And shortly after retired from
thence, in which mean space the noble Captain Prospero Colonna died.

The Pope refused to be of either side, whereof the French King is glad, and
the Emperor very angry: for that he helped him to that dignity. The
Emperials pass the river of Thesin, and foil the French in diverse places,
insomuch that they begin to abandon the duchy of Millaine, but in warlike
array. The Marquis of Pescara follows with light horses, and Chabanes is
slain, and captain Bayard is taken prisoner, who died of his wounds: and the
Admiral returns into France. After which time the duke of Burbon counseled
the Emperor to turn the wars into France, alleging that the desire the
English king had to conquer that realm, would much help him. The King of
England also much encouraged the Emperor thereunto: but seeing the
difficulties and charge for himself, and being dissuaded by the ambitious
cardinal of York (who was secretly French) he moved little.

The Emperor upon this confidence makes war in Prouance: the duke of Burbon
and Marquis Pescara being Captains. The duke would have passed on into ye
bowels of France: but the Marquis and other captains would by no means from
the seas, but lay in siege before Marsiles forty days without profit. And
for that before their coming they hoped that the king of England would so have
fired ye French king on his side, yt all his forces should have bent that way,
and that they should have received money out of England, (which both they
failed of) they thought it folly to go any farther, or to abide til the king
with his whole power, and six thousand Swissers should come upon them, and
therefore with speed returned into Italy: wherewith the king being in heart,
followed as fast, and al in one day the king came to Verceil, and the Marquis
of Pescara: albeit forthwith it was agreed by the Viceroy, and the rest, that
Antonio de Leua, should defend Pauia, and the other Millaine, which was sore
infected with ye plague, that they durst scarcely furnish it, insomuch that the
maine army of France being at hand, ere they could well provide, the captain
Alarcon was feign to leave it: and the King took it, using al clemency,
notwithstanding he knew the French to be there hated. From thence he besieges
Pauia, but could not take it: and sends Stuart duke of Albany in Scotlant
with a power to Naples. The pope persuades them to peace.

The duke of Ferrara being come into the French kings protection, helps him
against Pauia, but it is succored by the Emperials. The pope and the French
captains persuade the king to desist, but he says he will either win or die.
At the length on S. Mathias day, on which ye Emperor was borne, the Viceroy and
the Marquis of Pescara in well ordered battle joined with the King, who fought
nobly, being hurt in the face, and in the hand, until his horse was slain
under him, and after was taken by five common soldiers, that knew him not,
but in the end he discovered himself to the Viceroy, who received him as
prisoner to the Emperor. Antonie de Leua in the mean time throwing down so
much of the wall of Pauia, as an hundredth horses abrest might come through,
issued out, and set on their back, spoiling and putting to flight all, saving
the rereward of the duke of Alanson, taking prisoner the king of Navarre, the
bastard of Sauoy, Montmorancie, and others, and many of the Nobles and best
captains were there slain.

The xvi. Book.
ALl the Potentates of Italy were now greatly dismayed with this taking of ye
king prisoner, fearing the greatness of the Emperor, sepecially the Pope: and
next him the Venetians, who treated a league with the Pope, offering to join
in these common dangers, and to leuy ten thousand Swissers, and a sufficient
band of Italians, not doubting the forwardness of my Lady Regent of France,
to send ye duke of Albany with sufficient succors, and making sure account of
ye duke of Ferrara. The viceroy on the other side was careful to convey the
kings person into some place of surety, and to make all sure, to join in
amity with the pope. The Pope bit at the bait immediately and was full glad,
and treated to bring in the Venetians also, but that would hardly be: for that
they would not drop so much money as the Viceroy demanded.

The Pope sends the Bishop of Pistoia to visit and comfort the French king.
The Emperor being in Spain receives the news of this victory, and his
confessor the Bishop of Oisme makes an eloquent oration, persuading him
franckly and freely to deliver the French king, and that to be the most
profitable, honorable, and sure way: Frederick duke of Alba spoke to the
contrary with great vehemency, saying, that to let him go were dangerous, and
to let him go most honorably, were nothing to the Frenchmen, who were insolent
and light, and made no regard of honor: and therefore to make profit of him
were the best way. In fine, the Emperor sent unto him his great chamberlain
Monsieur de Beaucain to Pisqueton to comfort him, and to tell him that these
were his conditions: he should depart with the sovereignty of the dukedom of
Burgundy to him: he should depart with Prouance to the duke of Burbon, with
many other great things, both for him, and for the king of England. The French
king answered constantly, that he would die in prison before he would diminish
the crown of France, for all other things, he would satisfy the Emperor
with reason.

In the mean time the Lady Regent of France employed all means possible,
and especially the Cardinal of York, to win the king of England, where all
the fear was.

The Emperor on the other side solicited the King of England to join with
him to conquer France: but the King demanded the whole kingdom in effect, if
it were conquered, and some other such conditions, as gave them cause to break
off.

The Imperials become insolent in Italy, the French king is conveyed into
Spain, and imprisoned at Madril, and the duke of Burbon is sent for (without
whom the Emperor will make no agreement) and being placed in the house of a
great barron at the Emperors request, he answered that he would obey, for that
he and all was at his commandment. But so soon as the duke were gone, he
would set it on fire with his own hands, least it should smell of the
infection of a traitor.

There is now a conspiracy against the Emperor in Italy, wherein the Marquis
of Pescara played a part at the first, and after accused the rest dishonourably,
and shortly after died. In the mean time the French king falls extremely
sick at Madril, insomuch that the Emperor in person would have visited him,
but his Chauncelor would not suffer him. Within a while after the Emperor
espouseth the infant of Portingale: the French king recouereth health, the Pope
treats for his deliverance, touching the which the great Chancellor and the
Viceroy make two excellent orations.

After this shortly ensues the treatise of Madril for the kings deliverance,
wherein was yielded Burgu^die, Charelois, and so many other Countries, as they
that heard it, did think it would never be kept: for assurance hereof the king
was affianced to the Emperors sister Elconor: and the Dolphin of France and
the duke of Orleans, were brought in a boat to the midst of the river that
deuideth Spain and France, and the king in another boat, and at one instant
they changed boats, and the king hasted to land, and had a Turkish horse
ready, with whom he rid in post to Bayon, and there met with a messenger from
the king of England, which greatly comforted him, unto whom he confessed, that
he acknowledged the greatest cause of his delivery to proceed from him, and
therefore he was for ever the English kings.

The xvii. Book.
ALthough both the Emperor and the King, had sworn to the conditions set
down between them for his delivery, and that the king farther swear to
ratify them, so soon as he came into a place of liberty, Nevertheless as
soon as he came to Bayon, he answered the messenger that attended the
ratification, that he durst not perform such things as were prejudicial to
the crown of France, until he had won the minds of his subjects unto it.
After that he highly complained himself to all princes and estates of the
Emperors severity, as well touching the hard conditions, as that he would
not once vouchsafe to see him during his imprisonment: that his ambition grew
so great, that he now meant to ruin the Pope, the Church, all Italy, and to
bring all Christian princes into subjection. With these persuasions he hoped to
bring al Italy and other princes to join with him, and consequently to bring
the Emperor to such dangerous war, as he should of necessity be driven to
release Burgundy, and other hard conditions for money.

The Imperial army on the other side waxing every day in Italy more and more
insolent, and being extremely chargeable to the Millanois, and Antonio de Leua
himself, having every day thirty ducats, the people in tumultuous sort took
weapon in hand, and had driven away both captains and soldiers, had not the
cunning of the captain, and their own disorder compounded the matter.

The Emperor sent the Viceroy of Naples into France, to accept the
perfourmance of the conditions: where he was greatly welcomed, but nothing was
performed. The Emperor was near mad for anger, and so much the more, as
that almost against all men's opinion, and contrary to the intelligence of ye
Lady Margueret Regent of Flaunders, he would needs insert the article of
Burgundy, which they assured him would never be performed: but happily breed
further broyle.

In the mean time at Coignac there is treated a league between the pope, the
French King, the Venetians, and the duke of Millaine, to be forthwith intimated
to the Emperor, who had liberty to enter into it within three months: so that
he delivered the French kings children at a reasonable ransom to be rated by
the King of England. After this treaty the Pope surpriseth ye letters of
Antonio de Leua, touching the hard estate of the duke of Millaine, and the duke
of Vrbin, general of the Venetians army, takes Loda, and so passes to
Millaine: where after long battery, they were feign to retire with some
altercation between the duke and the lieutenant.

The Spaniards in the mean time so plagued the Millanois, that one of them
made a very lamentable oration to the duke of Burbon (who was there arrived) and
yet finding no remedy, but a courteous answer: some hanged themselves, some
threw themselves out at their windows, and ended their miseries with other
deaths. The army of the confederates once again approaches toward Millaine,
but not only does any good, but also the Castle it self by the duke is upon
conference with the duke of Burbon, yielded to the Imperials.

While christen princes were thus tearing out the bowels one of another,
Soliman Ottoman Turk, enters into Hungary, and puts the whole Country,
and consequently all Christendom in danger, overthrowing Lewis the young
King, and gets a great part of that buckler of Christendom.

The Pope, notwithstanding encourages his confederates to set upon Naples,
and Peter of Navarre is made general: and all the confederates offer the
Emperor to enter into the league, perfourming the conditions: he answered, he
could not with his honor, being a league made against him especially, and yet
for a common quietness, he would do it presently, if the messengers had
sufficient commission: meaning in deed nothing less, but only to keep the
king of England from entering into it.

Rome is surprised by the Colonois, and the Pope driven to leave the Emperor,
and to deal with them: and the confederates by sea fight with the Emperials.

The xviii. Book.
THe French King and the Venetians had the Pope in great jealousy, that he
would forsake their league, in that he made many treatises with the Viceroy:
and ever cried out of the charges of the war, and yet would not make money by
creating of Cardinals, nor otherwise, as other Popes did: but to break ye
treatise (if there were any such) they urged him, and bent themselves with him
by sea against Naples. The popes Lieutenant was Monsieur Vaudemont, who
pretended right thereto by ancient title of king Rene: where after certain
exploites of no great weight, the Pope seeing no greater success, and that the
duke of Burbon by the persuasion of the duke of Ferrara, drew toward Rome, and
that the French promises were but wind, he fell to agree a truce for eight
months with the Viceroy. The duke of Burbon nevertheless would not accept of
it, but marched on. The Viceroy himself in person went from Rome, to make him
surcease, but all in vain: for the dukes case being now somewhat desperate, he
draws to Rome, and either means to get that noble booty or to die: and
therefore most valiantly gives the assault himself before all men, and was
slain with a harquebuze. His death enflameth the soldiers, and especially
the Lanceknights, who before were very cold: insomuch that within few hours
they take the town and sack it, where they had infinite treasure.

The palaces of the Cardinals were rifled, and the Cardinal of Siena, who
himself and all his ancestors were Imperial, was yet driven to compound with
the Spaniards: and yet after (as in all such broils no man is sure) he was
taken prisoner by the Launceknights, and carried bareheaded with many buffets to
Borgo, where he paid a new ransom of five thousand ducats. In like manner
were used all the Spanish and Dutch prelates: notwithstanding the hope of their
Countrey-mens favor.

The Pope driven to keep himself in the castle, until the plague wearied
his enemies, and composition made with the Imperials. The Emperor being
certified of the Popes distress, and that the plague was entered into his
castle of S. Angelo, made outward show of dislike, but inwardly was very glad,
and indeed he had caused him to be carried into Spain, had it not been for
fear of the king of England: as for the French king, he cared not if the Pope
had been hanged, and all Italy fiered, so that he had again his children.

The Cardinal of York is now sent into France, to make a league with the
French king more sure, and to offer the marriage of the Lady Marie either to the
king, if he went not on with the emperors sister, or otherwise to the duke of
Orleans. And for that the Cardinal was honorably accompanied with xii. hundred
horses, and had three C. thousand crowns to lend the king toward his wars
with the Emperor. The Cardinal of Loraine was first sent to receive him, and
after the king himself received him at Amiens. In fine, the king and he sent
Gambare to the Pope, to make the Cardinal of York his Vicar general in
France, England and Germany, during his imprisonment: but secretly the French
king withstood it by all means possible.

In this mean space, the French army under the conduct of Monsieur de
Lautreck take Bosco, and Genes by composition, after the Country of
Alexandria, and then Pauia, where the soldiers sacked and pilled, and used
cruelty eight days in memory of the battle of Pauia, where the king was
taken. The duke of Ferrara enters into the league with him, in respect
whereof, Madame Rence, daughter of king Lewis the xii. is promised to his son
Hercules, and after the Marquis of Mantua entered into the same league.

The treatise of peace seemed vain between the Emperor and the king: for the
Emperor said he could not trust the king that had once deceived him. The Kings
ambassadors replied, yt for as much as he took himself to be deceived, the
King might the less trust him. In the end the ambassadors of France and
England denounced war against him: and many hot speeches breeding hot choler,
the Emperor chalenging the combat of the French king said, he was a false
forsworn king. The French king on the other side gave him the lie.

The king of England embraces the religion of Luther, and by the persuasion of
the Cardinal of York, deuorceth his wife Katherin of Arragon. Monsieur de
Lautrech enters the kingdom of Naples, and Andro Door being at the sold of
the king with his galleys, returns to Geane, diverse places yield unto
Lautreck, and by him Naples it self is besieged.

The xix. Book.
MOnsieur de Lautreck finding the value of the defendants of Naples, to be
great, purposed to continue the siege, hoping that though virtue failed not,
yet want of money and victual would make virtue yield to necessity. In the
mean time Phillippin Door with his galleys and Geneuois, who were not able
seamen, did sink diverse ships Imperial upon the sea, sleaing ye viceroy
Don Hugues di Moncada, and Fieramosque, with diverse other, to the number of a
thousand, and taking prisoners ye Marquis of Guast, and Ascagnio Colo^na, the
prince of Salerne, and dives others.

This conquest of the sea would not make Naples yield, for Phillippin Door
took such direction of Andro Door to retire to Pozzouolo, that Naples was often
vittailed, and the Venetian fleet, after they had gotten Ottranto stayed in
hope to win the castle of Brundusium, so that ye defendants were encouraged,
and the assailants for lack of water and other necessaries fainted, and in the
mean time Antonio de Leua perceiving that Pauia was negligentlie kept,
assaulted it by night, and took it, and had the Captains prisoners before the
soldiers were awares.

The Pope continued his newtrality between the two princes, and so was neither
trusted of the French king, nor of the Emperor, who the more suspected him,
for that he had sent Cardinal Campeius into England to divorce his kinswoman
Queen Katherin, daughter of Aragon.

Now does Andro Door leave ye sold of the king, and enters sold with the
emperor, upon conditions: and the french army before Naples is full of
diseases, Monsieur de Vaudemont almost dead, Monsieur de Lautreck very sick,
and shortly after dies: so that the Marquis of Saluzzo is driven to capitulate
with the prince of Orange, who is now viceroy. Monsieur de S. Poll gained
certain towns in Lombardy for the French, and in ye mean time Andro Door
takes Geane for ye emperials, through the gross negligence of ye French king.

Monsieur de S. Poll marches on still through Lombardy, and coming within xii.
miles of Pauia: Antonio de Leua, who had been long sick, causes himself to
be carried in a chair, and all his men to put on white shirtes, and steals
without noise one night toward the French, within two miles of Ladriane, and
unawares sets on Monsieur de S. Poll, who albeit he fought valiantly,
trusting to his Lance-knights, yet they ran away, and he remained prisoner
with Castillon, Claude Rangin, and diverse others, to Antonio de Leua.

Now begins the Pope to treat a peace at Barcelone with the Emperor,
greatly to the Popes advantage, both for that he should forget injuries past,
and be no hinderance to the Emperor, who meant personally to make a voyage into
Italy. The like was treated between the French King and the Emperor at
Cambray, a place destinied to such great treatises, being there present the two
lady Regents, for the two princes, the Ambassadors of the confederates, and
the duke of Suffolk, and the Bishop of London for the King of England. The
French King being somewhat ashamed of this act, for certain days kept
himself close, and would not be seen of the ambassadors of his confederates:
in the end he gave them sweet words, comforts, and promises, excusing
himself, that otherwise he could not have his children.

The Emperor after this, commands the prince of Orange to assail the
Florentines, and himself in royal person comes to Geane, where the princes
of Italy do salute him by their Ambassadors.

The King and the Pope talked together at Bolognia, the pope entering first, as
the greater princes use. The Turk left off besieging Vienna: the Emperor is
inclined to capitulate with the Venetians, and Francis Sforce, to whom he
restored the dukedom of Millaine, and the Venetians to the Church that they
held in Romagnia, and to the Emperor that which they held in Puglia.

The xx. Book.
THese late leagues seemed now to establish peace each where, saving only to
the poor Florentines, who often had helped others to make their peace, and now
the peace of others drew them to a dangerous war with the Emperor, who now
sent against them four thousand Lanceknights, and three thousand Spaniards
and Italians under the prince of Orange: which makes Piscara and Prato yield
of themselves to the Pope, and the soldiers of France being well paid,
defended themselves valiantly.

In the mean time the Pope causes the French king to send Monsieur de
Cleremont to Florence, to excuse himself, for not comprehending them in the
league upon necessity of recovering his children, wishing them to take such
conditions as they could get in so hard a case, wherein himself would be a
dealer for them.

The Emperor meaning to go to Rome to be crowned, being let with certain
importunate affairs of Germany, and chiefly to elect his brother Ferdinand,
king of Romans, was feign to be crowned at Bolognia, Anno 1530, on his birth
day of S. Matthias, which was his fortunate day, and there the Pope and the
duke of Ferrara compromitted all their differences unto him.

The Florentines being often skirmished withal, and often battered, though
they valiantly defended (after the death of the prince of Orange, and departure
af the Marquis of Guast) were yet for very hunger and diversity of opinions,
driven to offer to Gonsague the Captain of the Imperials, that Caesar himself
and the Pope should determine their conditions and government, their life and
liberty saved.

Ferdinand is now chosen King of Romans at a decree in Ausbourge, and there is
treatise against the Lutherians, of whom the great princes began to be
afraid: and at the instant request of the Germans, the Emperor summoned the
Pope to call a Council: the Pope utterly misliked it, as prejudicial to his
Court, and abuses, and yet dissembled it cunningly.

The French would never be long quiet, but the King turns to his old
emulation of the greatness of the Emperor, and persuades with the Pope and
states of Italy to take heed of it. To the states of Germany, he affirms
that the Emperor meant to make it a Monarchy. The King of England he pricketh
forward, in recounting unto him how angry the Emperor was for the divorce of
his mothers sister: and last of all, that which evil beseemed the most
Christian King, he stirs up the Turk, who indeed was already jealous of
his greatness, and hated him also in respect of his brother, with whom he was
at odds for Hungary.

The Emperor still calls upon the Council, he desires now to renew the
league of Bolognia, and to comprehend in it all Italy, making contribution
for their common defense against the French. The Pope lyked not to be of any
side, remembering the dangers past so often as the sides were overthrown, but
being of that calling, he liked neutralitie better, as the surest way.

The Emperor returns into Spain, and the Pope and the French king talk at
Marseilles of great matters, under pretense of dealing against the Turk, and
the King of Englands divorce. To ratify their matters, Katherin of Medices the
Popes niece, was married to Henry the second son of France, whom now the
Pope would feign make duke of Millaine forthwith: for he foreknewe (as it
seemed) that he should shortly die, in that he made his Ring, and all other
habiliaments, and indeed died, in whose place was chosen Alexander Farnese,
called Paul the third.

The duke of Wittemberg, by aid of the Lantgraue of Hesse, and the French
Kings money, recovered the dukedom from Ferdinand, and great troubles were
toward: but the matter was compounded without the French kings consent, who in
the mean time hoped to get Millaine.

At this time also Barbarossa Bascha general by sea to Soliman, passing to the
conquest of Thunis, scoured the rivers of Calabria, and passed Caiette, and put
all Italy in such a fear, as he might easily have taken Rome, if he had come
forward.

FINIS.

