Balzacum hoc tandem dignemur honor.

Doctarum proemia frontium.

A NEW COLLECTION OF EPISTLES OF MONS: DE BALZAC.

BEING THE Fovrth and last Volume.

Newly Translated.

Non amet hanc Vitam, quisquis me et.

Mar: lib: 1 Ep: ^ -- Magnus es Ardalio

Mart. lib: 2 Ep: 7. OXFORD Printed for Francis Bowman Stationer. 1639.

W. Marshall sculps:



A COLLECTION OF SOME MODERN EPISTLES OF MONSIEUR DE BALZAC. CAREFVLLY
TRANSLATED OUT OF FRENCH.

Being the Fourth and last Volume.

Mart. L. 10. Ep. 4. Non hic Centauros, non Gorgonas, Harpyasque Invenies:
Hominem pagina nostra sapit.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD for FRANCIS BOWMAN. MD.C.XXXIX.

To the READER.
THe name of Balzac is not confined within the Orb of one Kingdom: his pen
has made him known unto all that pretend to Eloquence and politer Learning:
And had his language been more general, his worth had been more known. It is
then a duty we owe to Virtue to unfold it, when it is contracted within too
narrow limits, and to unlock the cabinet and make it communicable, when it is
restrained from that freedom which is part of its essence and nature.
Wherefore some of our own, finding that our Authors language was too narrow for
the merits of his works, have rendered some pieces of his in English. Nor did
their travailes fall short of their hopes, but success has crowned their
endeavors. By the encouragement of their auspicious flight abroad, I made
Augury touching the fortunes of this fresh piece, which I now expose to the
common light, without the countenance and patronage of any great Name, but
guarded only with its own fate: It has a Genius, and carries the name of
Balzac in every page, that is enough.

For know ( Reader) that he is Master of the pen in France, Pierre Math. Hist.
de Hen. 4. Live. 3.
L'Aigle de l'Eloquence Francoise, as one styles the great Chancellor Du Vair,
a touring Eagle, whose strength of wing bears him aloft above the tracts of
common flights. I may say of him, with some variation, what Pliny said of
Cicero, that of later times, and for his own language, L. 7. not. Hist. c. 30.
solus in toga triumphum meruit, linguaeque lauream, and if the Muses spoke
French, they would use no other Dialect, than that of Monsieur de Balzac.

Jf thou do not find the same thread run through all his Letters, think it
a piece of his Art, to vary the Idea, and character of his speech according to
the quality of his subject. Wherefore we find him sometimes lofty and
magnificent, and sometimes grave and moderate: now he is calm and smooth, and
anon he thunders and lightens: Here his words fall like hail, and there --
(...), Hom. (...).
like still and gentle snow, or the silent feet of time. And though they be but
(...), strictures, and excursions of his pen, yet upon due examination, thou
shall find they be decoctions of purest Rhetoric; and take away Monsieur, and
vostre tres-humble, they be so many quaint Orations, and discourses politic
and moral.

But never did any beauty gain all suffrages, nor any wit a general applause.
Our Author in his Hermitage, Mart. l. 4. Epig. 32.
like that Be, entombed in amber, -- Dum latuit, luxit: he shined through the
veil of obscurity, wherein he involved himself: but some owle-eyes could not
brook the splendour of his light, though at such a distance and declination; and
he had more Enemies in this solitude to molest him, then the Gout and Stone.
It was ever the fate of eminent persons to have Antagonists, and Envy, like
the Athenian Ostracisme, ever persecutes the best. A testy Friar, under the
name of Philarchus, comes out of his cloister, and raises the Hue and Cry
after him, as an errand Thief, and avoucheth that our Mounsieur here, is but a
Mountebanke, and a Plagiary, that strutts in borrowed plumes, and makes a great
show with the frippery and brokage of other Authors: -- pudet haec opprobria,
etc. But Balzac found a learned Apologist, to refute these imputations; so that
this single encounter grew up into a faction, and the Penmen came so fast into
the field, that the Philarkes, and Anti-philarkes divided all France.

There happened some disgusts between him and Father Garasse a Jesuit, and a man
of able parts: But the French King himself did so far tender the studious
Repose of Mons. de Balzac, (that by these altercations he might not be
discouraged or diverted from greater Designs) He interposed his Authority to
make a Reconciliation, and because it makes for the honor of the parties
litigant, I have prefixed here the Kings Act, and their mutual letters, as I
find them at the beginning of Garasse his Sum Theologique.

And now ( Judicious Reader) Balzac, stands at thy Tribunal, expecting thy
doom: He hopes to find more Candor, and better dealings in England, the
Region of peace, as he calls it, In the 13. letter of this.
than among his own: presuming upon the goodness of his cause, and thy
Justice, I have adventured something upon thy censure. If thou contractest thy
brow, it is no single fate, thou condemnest at once a multitude of Dependents,
and Admirers of his virtues, and among them, in an humble distance

F. B.

An advertisement of Mons. the KING.
Understanding of the bad intelligence, which by the unhappiness of the times
has grown between Monsieur de Balzac, and the Author of this book, we could
not but partake of the discontents of sundry honorable personages; and judging
it very reasonable, that men that continually do good services to the
Commonwealth, and from whom it should expect better yet hereafter, should be
divided in wills and affections. We have endeavored to dispell those clouds by
the evidence of truth; the business was not very difficult for Us, being we
were to deal on the one side, with a Religious man, who by the rule of his
profession, takes a glory in despoyling himself of all interests, and to
desire the love of all the world; on the other side, with a man of a frank and
noble Courage, whose discretion guided him to put a difference between the
faults of men, and the unhappiness of the age.

So that We thought fit, to tie again the knot of friendship, which (by
accident) had been untied. It is commonly an easier task to reconcile old
friends, than to make new ones. Having then happily effected that business, We
thought that good men, who are ever well affected to the sweetness of peace,
would gladly receive some authentic testimonies of their good intelligence,
and for this purpose, We have got interchangeable letters under their own
hands, that confirm the sincerity of their hearts, for to present them to the
public, which cannot be distasteful to any, but to those that are pleased with
nothing but disorders and contentions.

IOHANNI LUDOVICO BALZACO. V.C.S.P.
QVod ad te jam scribo, (V. C.) mirari desines, si me, ut Religiosum, and tui
amantem esse memineris: and animam, puto, (...) manum hanc facile agnoveris,
sin minus, saltem ignoveris, quod utrinque gestum est. Nonnihil inter nos longi
frigoris fuit, seculi potius vitio, quam nostro. Septennium est, fateor, ex quo
mutua inter nos Epistolarum missio interrupta cessavit; ex hoc silentio torpor,
ex torpore glacies exorta: vel patere suis, ut ad to verbis scribat
sapientissimus Hebraeorum Doctor dicatque: Eccles. 43.
Christallus gelavit ab aqua: sed nosti quid rei est Christallus, cui precium
facit ipsa fragilitas? vel frangatur, vel indomita glacies benigno tepore
solvatur: favent omnia, and tempus, and amicorum vota communium, and imprimis
desiderium meum. Nolo retegere quod o diosum est, rixarum inter nos argumenta
and fomites; fatalia ista sunt, and dissolvendis amicitiis nata* In litibus
nullus (ut nosti) finis est: dum*

-- Liticulas lis seminat unica plures. Versiculos ad te extemperaneos and
rudes mitto, sed scienti loquor and occupationes meas, and Epistolarem in versu
formam; nihil enim ab Heroico retinet preter pedes, quos habet formica etia cum
homine communes, sed quo plures eo pejores. Tibi uni prope datu^ est Heroicas
gravesque literas condere; soripsit Ovidius Heroidas, sed Balzacus Heroicas.
Pluribus abstineo, ne quod

(...) (...) and profess; Among these severe speculations, you shall see some
flashes of wit break forth, which will serve to entertain you with much
delight; I speak of the French Epistles, for as for his Latin, I reserve them
to the judgment of those that do better understand the beauty and delicacy of
that language* I am content to believe that Cicero never entertaind his friends
with better grace and contentment* nay, that the very close and compacted
style, and the strong and vigorous expressions which Brutus found wanting in
the writings of that great Orator, are here to be found; But I fear I should
detain you too long, from the pleasure of these novell Lectures, if in
commending rare Epistles, I should arrest you any longer, in reading this poor
one of mine. Indeed ( my Lord) for to speak nothing that were unworthy of you;
it were requisite, that Mons. de Balzac would lend me some of the graces of his
style; or, as he will be ravished with joy, that I have made choice of you to be
the Patron of his writings, he would come himself to make the Dedication; It
suffices me, if my design and undertaking for to perform something that
might be acceptable to your Greatness, do not give you any distaste, and that
you believe, that I am sincerely

My Lord Your most humble and most obliged servant JOHN CAMUSAT.

TO MY LORD the Chancellor.
My Lord,
I Have understood of your denial, for the publishing of a Libell, lately
framed against me. And though (perhaps) the harm that I should have received
thereby, would have been but small, yet my obligation unto you, never cease
to be great; and this argues a special care in you of my tranquillity, not to
suffer that any, the least noise should disquiet it. I know not ( my Lord) if
this be not to handle with too much niceness and tenderness, a man that makes
profession of Philosophy; it were enough that public Authority should shelter
me from the tempest, without exempting me from the wind and dust, and that it
would guard my Retrait from savage beasts, without frighting away the flies
also, and such importunate Insects. But ( my Lord) the goodness which you
reserve for me, extends farther then to ordinary justice. You take not only
care for my repose amidst the hurry and tumult of Europe, but you would have
the world also show a respect unto my retiredness, and that being sequestered
from men. J should be also placed beyond the level and reach of Detraction.
Yet this Fiend did pursue S. Hierome even unto the Grotts of Bethlehem, and to
the foot of our Saviors cradle, there she found him (as he relates himself)
although he had thought to hide himself. If this insolent Thing had no regard
of an admirable sanctity, and a place guarded with Angels, me thinks a vulgar
innocence, retired within an ill fortified village, must not expect any
favorable treaty. But to pass from common conditions to the learned Tribe; If
in all ages, there arose seditious spirits, that rebelled against the
Chieftaines of Arts and discipline, and if in the memory of our fathers, it was
spoken openly at Paris, that Aristotle was a simple Sophister, J think they
deal courteously with me in this Country, if they be contented to call me a
simple writer. That great blasphemer of the name of Aristotle (my Lord) was D.
Ramus, who afterward, though he was a Catholic, was taken for a Huguenot, at
the massacre; And indeed, some did believe that God permitted this to come to
pass by a just judgment; and that the Tutelar Angel of good Letters, took
the pretext of Religion, for to revenge the injuries that were done to Reason.
There is one this day alive in Germany, a petty Tyrant in Grammar, an enemy of
common and general verities, and an accuser of Cicero; who (not long since)
has put forth some observations, where he preferres a bill against his own
Judge, and questions the precedence ever allowed unto that Prince of Latin
Antiquity. So that ( my Lord) the universal consent of all the world,
strengthened by a prescription of 18. centuries of years, is not a sufficient
title for to warrant the reputation of that Roman, against the prevaricating
quirkes of this Barbarian. Indeed, this is a business of no good example, but
yet since it is so, and that it does little avail Virtue, to be consecrated by
time, and to be crowned by the people, for to make it inviolable against the
practices of some private Humors. There is no reason that I should complain
before so many Worthies, that have bin so ill entreated themselves, and that I
should be had in any consideration, where Aristotle and Cicero are not in
safety; an ordinary man should not make moan, for suffering the same destiny,
which extraordinary Personages have undergone; and I cannot with modesty,
desire or expect from you, that you should reform the world for the love of
me; nay, J know ( my Lord) that this little disorder, is of some good use in a
commonwealth; and it were to be wished, that malice would busy it self thus,
about things of small importance, that it might not think of businesses of
higher consequence. Those that have hitherto bestowed their pains, in depraving
the sense of my words, and in falsifying my works, had (perhaps) ere this time,
forged men's Testaments, and minted false coins; And he that now desires from
you a privilege, would have stood in need of a Pardon, it may be, if it had
not been for me. It is better by far, that injustice should exercise it self
upon my books, than that it should vex and implead against all that is good
and sacred in a civil society; that unjust men should rather toss and
transpose words, invert and pervert periods of speeches, than remove the bounds
of lands, or demolish their Neighbors houses; To say the truth, this is the
most innocent way that vice can employ it self in, and I believe I have not a
little deserved from the commonwealth, for keeping at work these ten years,
such an infinite number of idle companions, who (certainly) would have been
dangerous Commonwealths-men, if they had not chosen rather to have been
ridiculous Censors. It is well, that the heat of their brains, is exhaled out
this way, and that their intemperance takes this course; and that to prevent
their fury, men give some scope and liberty to their folly. Permit them
therefore this exercise ( my Lord) they cannot choose but make use of their
time, which they will employ far worse, if you do not permit them to employ
it thus. Permit giddy Youth to spend their heat and fury upon a senseless
subject, and a dead letter, which is not capeable either of joy or sorrow. As
long as these Pen-fencers only beg the Seal of your Authority, be no niggard
of the Prince his grace and favor, and abate something of your wonted severity
and rigor. If it were anew and unusual thing, it may be, I should be
contented to have the first Libell, which branded me with injuries be
suppressed, but since there is now a pretty Library of them, I am in a manner
well pleased it should swell and increase, and I take a delight to build me a
moniment with those stones, which Envy has hurled at me, without doing me
harm. I account it no disgrace to be censured by some men, because I account
it no credit to be favored by them: I intend not to canvasse for voices, nor
labor a mysterious secret, whereby I may gain the general applause of the
world. I have obtained what I desired, ( my Lord) if I have obtained your
approbation, as being derived from an un-erring principle, and from an
Jntelligence most perfectly illuminated. God has bestowed on you, a sovereign
judgment, before the King had committed to your hands, his sovereign Justice.
And you were most powerful in Reason, before you were so in Authority. J need
not have recourse to this, knowing that the other is no way against me, and I
estime it more glory to me, to have pleased you, than I would think it
satisfaction to have my enemies proscribed by you. Your speeches of me upon
every occasion so full of respect, your own pourtraiture that you bestowed upon
me a year ago, for a pledge of your Affection, your imparting to me the
riches of your writings, I mean those writings, that were animated with the
spirit of the State, and were full of the greatness of your Master, which
seemed to me so far to transcend the strength and vigor of this age, and so
nearly resembling the Roman Majesty. In a word ( my Lord) each moment of that
happy afternoon, which I had the honor to pass away within your closet, are
privileges, which I do value above that which you denied a Fantasme, or the
Successor of Philarchus. I dare not rehearse my other obligations, by which I
stand bound unto you. You have herein enjoined me silence, and believe, that
your favors would loose something of their purity, if my thanks should still
attend them. Nevertheless you must not stifle in me the intentions of an
honest man, or smother the conceptions of grateful thoughts; you have debarred
me from divulging my acknowledgements, but you shall not debar me from
acquitting that secret part of duty, and from being, (at least in my soul) and
that while I live

My Lord Your most humble, most obliged and most thankful servant BALZAC.
From Balzac the 1 of July 1637.
A COLLECTION OF SOME MODERN EPISTLES OF MONSIEUR DE BALZAC.
LETTER. I. To Monsieur CONRART.
SIR,
BEing arrived home but this morning, I could not before the evening frame an
answer to your Letter which you honored me with, and was delivered me at my
arrival; it is so full of baits to feed both the eyes and the understanding,
that it were impossible I could refrain from reading it more than once. It is
so judicious, and withal so passionate, that J cannot think of it without
congratulating with my Country that we have seen Philosophers even in our own
language, and those Philosophers such as profess goodness as well as wisdom;
the time, you see is now past for to satisfy your desire; but though the King
by the activity of his courage could not render those remedies unusefull, which
you expect from my idle meditations; yet J mean not to act the bold Empyrick
of Mountebanke in your presence. It would argue too much impudence to send any
drugs and receipts from a country village to Paris, and to undertake the cure
of afflicted minds in a country of good books and great Doctors. Nay I have
seen Sir in your own house* a Magazin of rare instructions and examples, both
printed, and in handwriting. And Justus Lipsius (had he been your Neighbor)
might have made a purchase of a Constantia of a stronger and better temper,
then her that he has bestowed among us. Since then the whole mass and mine is
in your own power, J cannot persuade my self that you could have desired those
few Grains that J could furnish you with, and that being so rich your self,
you were resolved to exhaust my poor stock too. Taking view from hence at so
far distance of the estate and affairs of our Frontiers, J cannot distinctly
and clearly bestow my judgment on them. J am content to carry about me the
thoughts of an honest man, and to remove from my mind the disgusts of ill
success with good hopes. J know Sir, that the fairest kingdoms have suffered
the vicissitudes of good and evil; and that the brightest fortune has some
spots and shadows; and knowing this, J cannot think strange of any disasters
that may happen, or be surprised with the news of a revolt, or be any thing
amazed with losses more than with gains. Flanders J confess is advanced
pretty far into Piccardy, and would have given the like alarm to France as
France had given it the year before. But it may be, they that plunder it
freely to day in the field will be to morrow blockt up in a siege* your good
Brothers J know will revenge the quarrel, and they that Pillage the Cities of
others, will be glad to get them home to save their own habitations against
their Ancient subjects. We must then confess that Antiquity has wisely termed
the God of war Communem Martem, that Homer never gave it a fitter Epithet
then that. It is certain that it never favors the same cause long. This is a
Fugitive in all Armies, and a starter from all parties, sometimes a Guelphe,
and sometimes a Gibellin, sometimes wearing the white scarf, and sometimes the
red. This is too much Sir concerning Public Affairs. Do me the favor as to
send to M: du Moulin the answer that J have made him, the later words thereof
will call to your mind those three verses of our Jerusalem.

Torq. Tasso la Gierusal. Liberata.
Amando in te cio, etc. By loving that in thee, which others fear does move
And envious hate, he seems thy virtues to approve:
And willingly with thee could make a league of love.
J beg of you the good favors of that grand Adversary of the Romanists, but
yours above all, since J am with all my soul

Balzac. 30. October. 1636. Sir Your, etc.

LET. II To Monsieur du MOULIN.
Sir,
Courtesy never denies respect to any man, and thinks no man's Presents mean
but her own. This was it (no doubt) that made You speak of me in such a high
strain and set so great a price upon my book, which (indeed) is but the worst
part of your Library. J see you will not alter your course, or forget your
ancient civility, for the which J am infinitely obliged unto you. And if some
men would needs persuade me that at other times you handle me something rudely,
yet I cannot believe you do it with a hostile hand; on the contrary, J suppose
that in your familiar letters you give a true coppie and character of your
self, but in actions of Ceremony, men require another countenance and more
studied gravity; otherwise Sir, my nature can bear with my friends, and J am
not of so delicate a sense as to complain of petty wrongs which J suffer.
Besides, that J do not at all meddle with that science of division which
teaches to rent our Saviors Coat into 1000 pieces, and to implead and cavil
against every word of his Testament. This commonly does rather exasperat men's
spirits, than compose affairs, and multiply doubts, instead of increasing
charity. If J were put to my choice, J would take a little less of that which
puffs up, and a little more of that which edifieth. Truth is not the purchase
of hot blood, or of incensed choler, or a disturbed imagination. The
Labyrinthes of Logic are not the easiest way to heaven, and oft-times God
hides himself from them that search him with overmuch curiosity. You will
avouch (J am sure) all that J say, and this too Sir, that the best quarrels
prove naught, and of bad consequence, and that the contentions of Doctors prove
the murders of their Brethrens souls, if they tend not to the peace of the
Church; for my part, J can with other vulgar Christians, but wish for it; but
you can with the Worthies of Christian Religion, contribute much toward it,
and whenever you shall preach and teach this, J shall ascribe unto you one of
the principal parts of that holy work: But while we expect that this peace be
advanced through the grace of God, and that we draw nearer every day one to
another, nothing hinders, but that we may maintain innocent commerce, and
traffic in things lawful. There is no law rightly interpreted that is
repugnant to that of Humanity, and does not accord with the law of Nations. If
our opinions differ, it is not necessary that our affections should disagree;
the head and the heart have their several motions, and actions distinct; and
moral virtue can reconcile and unite what the intellectual might separate.
Love me therefore still if you please, since you may do it lawfully, and J
believe also, that J may be without scruple, while J live

Sir Your; etc.
Balzac. March 30. 1636.
LET. III. To Monsieur L' HUILLIER Counselor to the King, and Ordinary Mr of
his Accounts.
Sir,
YOU can make men happy, and procure them Sunshine days, where, and when you
please. Let us speak no more of misfortunes: there is nothing here within but
prosperity, since the Ordinary has arrived: and J must recall a language which
J have forgotten, since you do restore a passion to me which J had lost. J
thought there was no disposition to any joy left in me, yet notwithstanding
from a little spark raked up in my bosom, you have kindled such an excess,
that J never felt the like; such inebriations of the spirit, and sober
transportments Philosophy has observed in extraordinary successes. There is no
way Sir to suppress or keep this joy concealed, and if it be lawful for me to
speak it, my heart is so full and* high that it mounts up to my face. J am
like to loose by it all the gravity and demurenes, which J have these many
years contracted by my melancholy life. And since there is no appare^t cause
that might stir such a passion in such a languishing spirit as mine, men may
imagine that I paid some Arreres, and that I have received an acquittance
patent, but that I call it your letter. They still deceive themselves and take
me for another man than I am: for my Interests touch me not so sensibly as my
passions do, and Fortune is not so rich as to present me with any thing that
might countervaile the least pledges of your Amity. The world and I, do not
agree in the rate of things that are bestowed and received. That does estimate
them by an Arithmeticall, and I by a Moral proportion, according to which,
Sir, all your words to me are weighty and precious, because all true; and
because Truth cannot be sufficiently estimated in a time when Oracles do
feign, when we have reason to mistrust even Faith it self, and when the great
Cato should not be taken without caution and security. I do infinitely cherish
those speeches of yours, so full of verity, and preserve them as the titles of
a possession, which I passionatly desired before J went to Paris, and which I
account for the greatest business that I did dureing my abode there. Jn lieu
of these, I will forgive Paris for all the unquiet nights, and other mischiefs
I suffered there. I complain no more of its impure air, or the jangling of
bells, or of the justling and dirt of the streets. And though I could not carry
away thence but the bare Idea of your entertainment, yet besides that you
defrayed the charges of my journey in it, J can live here (yet awhile) upon
your charges, and feed my thoughts a long time with what I have received from
your mouth. Yet J know not whether a provident managing of remnants, may make
them last always, or whether old Ideas, do not at the last fade and vanish
out of the memory, or whether an expired felicity may denominate a man still
happy. What ever joy your letter sprang in me, yet (being a mark of your
absence) it does but advertise me, that I am six-score leagues distant from the
Author of my welfare, and that therefore I can receive but imaginary painted
satisfaction, and enjoy but foreign pleasures. You cannot represente unto me
the happy houers that I have spent in the closet of Messieurs de Puy, and the
fine things that I have heard there, without tacitly upbraiding me with the
pensive hours of my solitude, and the gibbrish of my Neighborhood. In truth
Sir, if you know it not, J must tell you, that Balzac is the frontier of
Barbary. But one days journey from hence, ( Monsieur des Cords can tell you)
the honest Swains do not eat bread, or speak French but upon sundaies; The
most understanding men there, believe that Prester-Iohn says Mass; and that
the snow in the country of the Moors is black, the most gentle and affable
find in an innocent word, the tenth part of a lie; and are offended with the
very aspect and silence of a man that passes by. Are not these the right
Antipodes to the lodgings of Monsieur de Thou, and especially of the Gallery,
which is not only full of the noblest spoils of Antiquity, and and of Greek
and Roman Treasures, but which is (otherwise) inhabited by all the Graces of
the present Age, and all the sociable and civil Virtues. Yet notwithstanding
these, it might deserve the curiosity of the remotest Nations of the Earth, and
invite the inhabitants of Cadiz, and those beyond them, for to see there the
great President of Counsels and humane actions, and the grand Doctor of Kings
and Commonwealths. But although this famous and learned Head appears not there
but by the benefit of paint, yet his memory still keeps its place, and presides
in all the Assemblies that happen there. Me thinks, that of Master of the
house, He is become the Genius of the place, and inspires all those that speak
there, that so they might not speak any thing unworthy of his presence. Indeed
this is the cause of my happiness here, that my poor conceptions give you
some content, as you would make me believe; and that my adventures in print,
have the allowance and approbation of those excellent Brothers, my dear and
loving Friends. Now Sir, that I begin to grow sober again, and to recover my
self from that ecstasy, which you have cast me into; take good heed, that you
make no doubt of the seriousness of my speeches: assure them therefore, if you
please, that the favors that I have received from them, are not let fall, into
a barren and ungrateful soul, and that it is impossible to honor Them more
perfectly then I do. You shall do me the favor also; as to believe, that you
never loved a man that could set a higher rate upon your amity, or would be
more then I am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac Nov. 23. 1636.
LET. IV. To Monsieur the Abbat of BOIS-ROBERT.
Sir,
SInce my departure from Paris, I have received two Letters of yours, that is
to say, two singular Emblemes, or tokens of your goodness: for it is certain,
if you be not exposed to the danger of war, you are (at least wise) obnoxious
to the cumbrances and molestations of it: and in this plight to have found the
leisure to remember me, and to send from the farthest skirts of Piccardy, but a
thought as far as Guyen, is a thing that could not be expected, but from a
friend that is extremely sollicitous of those things that he loves. According
to your order, I communicated the news unto my Father, who does profess
himself much obliged unto you for it. We do daily groan for that of peace,
and if you send us intelligence of this before Easter, I will answer you with a
public thanksgiving, and with the benedictions of all our Arrierban. That
Virgin which your Authors call Astrea, was at other times, courted and adored
by them (only) of the long gown: now even Gladiators and Pirates think her
handsome and comely. J do not see any man of the sword, but does at some time
of the day mislike and beshrew his own trade. I do not know whether this be
either the Cowardice of the age, or the Impatience of the Nation, or the fear
of poverty and famine presented to their imagination; or (to speak more
favorably of the present occasions) a christian tenderness and common sense
of humanity; so vehemently does all the world desire peace, that I think Heaven
cannot send a better Present to the Earth. I think that -- should be employed
upon such a pious occasion, and chosen one of the Agents for Coloigue. If he
would bring us that excellent Donative of Heaven, he deserved to enter the
Academy in triumph, and that Monsieur the President should make the speech
himself: For my part, J should receive him after such a Negotiation with more
respect, then if he came from commanding an Army; And to tell you the truth,
the pacifique Angels do please me far better than the destroying Angels.
Think it not strange Sir, that the desire of glory is not the passion of
Villagers; and that dreaming (sometimes) of the Crabbats, I pitch upon the same
thought with the Poet: Impius haec tam culta novalia Miles habebit?
-- Barbarus has segetes?
These are thoughts which are bred in my rural walk, and which spring from
lowness of spirit; into which I am apt to fall, as soon as I have lost the
sight of you. Therefore be pleased to take the pains to fortify me from time
to time, and to send me some preservatives against the bad news which fly
about. These would help to entertain good thoughts, while we expect the
conclusion of the Treaty, and make my Neighbors know, that a man cannot be ill
informed that maintains intelligence with you, and make them believe, that J
am in deed what I profess my self to be, which is

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 17 Oct. 1616.
LET. V. To my Lord, the Earl of EXCESTER.
My Lord,
HAving not enjoyed my health, or at least having had no leisure at all, since
the time that your Letter was delivered me; I could not any sooner render you
thanks for the testimonies of your esteem and affection, which you vouchsafed
me therein. I will not any way seem to suspect or doubt of a news that makes
for me; and I do readily believe, that my works that were sent you from the
Queen your Mistress, have been your welcome-home among your friends. But
herein, I do acknowledge their good fortune, far beyond my deserts, and the
Influences that descend from the Court, beyond all the favors they can receive
from a cou^try-village. Those hands so great and powerful, that gave you this
small Present, do ennoble whatsoever they touch and are able to effect rarer
transmutations, than those which Alchymy boasts of; with their mark, a
trivial Fable may pass for* Authentic History, and the Nether-Britton should
surpass the native Frenchman. I have therefore my Lord, no thought of
deserving that Elogy, which I owe to so illustrious a circumstance nor do I
mean to glory in the travels, which my book (as you inform me) has made
beyond the Rhine. Your name (being one of its principal ornaments) is that to
which J must owe my fame in those climats, and it was upon your recommendation
and credit, that all the Courts in the North, and some of their Schools too,
have entertained my books. I do here solemnly promise you never to abuse this
favor, at least wise, never to write any thing of your Island, that might give
any distaste in the reading, and that will not testify particularly of you, that
I am most entirely

My Lord, Your etc.
Balzac. Sept. 20. 1636.
LET. VI. To my Lord the Duke de la VALLETTE, Governor and Lieutenant General
for the King in GUYEN.
My Lord,
I Do not mean to tempt your valor, it were precipitate rashness to dare it;
yet I shall make bold to tell you, that you have no less Art and dexterity in
conquering, than in winning men; and that in you, that which entreats and
persuades, has no less efficacy than that which commands and enforces. It
does nothing avail me to shun the world, the better to enjoy my self in the
desert. Three words from your mouth, make me loose all the freedom I enjoy
there; and J see my self surpised in that Sanctuary, in which J thought to
save my self. J must confess my Lord, that there is no such absolute
independence, over which you cannot claim some power; that there is none so
discontented and averse that you cannot allure, or so wild and disorderly that
you cannot tame. Since you have done me the honor as to write, that you have
sent me your heart, J should betray very little skill or judgment in rare and
excellent things, if J were not ravished with such a present, and if J did not
esteem it above all that ambition can desire, or fortune bestow. It may be,
the hearts of Giants were more vast, and less limited by reason, but the
hearts of the Heroes were not more noble, or of any other elevation than yours
is of; and he that speaks of this, speaks of a place hallowed, and purged from
all the vices of this age, and where all the ancient Virtues have taken
Sanctuary* Lo here, my Lord* what gift you have sent; after which, I have
nothing to wish for in this world, which J have abandoned, since this is the
most pure and refined part of it; in which, goodness cohabits with power, and
greatness combines with love* To which J must of necessity, stoop and yield;
and my heart were more vile, than yours is generous, if I were not

My Lord Your etc.
Balzac Ian. 10 1637.
LET. VII. To Monsieur Drouet, Doctor of Physic.
Sir,
YOur sorrow is too accurate, and studied, to be true; and an afflicted person
that writes such brave things, has no great need of any thing of mine to
solace him. J will therefore forbear a task* which I conceive to be so
nedlesse; and will be contented to tell you, that J know how to discover
counterfeit sorrows. No man could act a Desperato better than you. Panigarola
made not such exclamations when he preached, that there will be signs in the
Sun and in the Moon. And it is a pleasure to see you write of the end of the
world, of the falling of the stars, and the final ruin of Nature, and all
this, upon occasion of my Niece, laboring of a fever. This is to give Virgil
the lie, that calls your profession a dumb Science. For indeed, to find so
many ornaments and Tropes upon such a vulgar Theme, could not be without having
a treasury of words, and without teaching this Mute, Rhetoric. Yet me
thinks, you should husband and manage this treasure more thriftily, and have
more care, than you had, of the modesty of a poor Maid. Are you not afraid to
make her fall into vainglory, and mar all the pains of that good Father
that guides her conscience? If J did not furnish her with counter-poison, you
would infect her mind, and cast her into a worse malady than that you cured
her of. But J have taught her, that there are a sort of Enchanters that bewitch
by commending, and that the wanton Court-ship of Sirens has allured many to
their ruins, and filld the Seas with frequent shipwracks. She believes her
Glass, and me too, who are more true to her the^ you, and who (without much
difficulty) can rectify her opinion of herself, which you would have strained
too high. For my own particular, J cease not to be your debt or for the quaint
extravagances and hyperboles, wherein you express your Affection toward me;
and for her part, separating your commendations from her name, and considering
them asunder, by themselves, she esteems them as the wealth of a Jewellers
shop, which indeed may delight her eyes, but she finds nothing there that
belongs to her. Receive this complement as from her, if you please, J am
merely but her Secretary in this point, and J shall remain

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 12. October. 1636.
LET. VIII. To Monsieur DE-BONAIR.
Sir,
THE Honorable mention that you were pleased to make of me in your book, is a
most singular favor, and I cannot behold my self in so fair a seat without
some temptation of vain glory. J know not as yet, whether my testimony be to
be admitted or rejected; and whether J be an Apocryphal or Canonical Author;
but since you have cited me, it is not lawful for me to doubt any more of the
good success of my writings; and after this, J dare claim a place in the
noblest Libraries. It is true, I dare not own that Title you bestow on me, of
the Genius of Eloquence. Besides, that this would be a wrong to Mercury and
Pytho, who have for many ages possessed the Chair, and sweyed the Art of
Elocution; it were necessary also that J had the suffrages of all the Preachers
and Advocats of the Realm; and you know Sir, that there is none of them so
mean, that does not persuade himself that he is the God of Persuasion, and
would very hardly confess a superior. J must not therefore entertain an
Elogie which would be challenged from me by two so great Nations, equally
terrible and potent, and J am content to be less Prized by you, since J am
sure of the same affection; you shall preserve that for me, if you please,
since J am willing to give it its true estimation, and to be really

Sir Your etc.
Balzac: 20 Dec. 1635.
LET. IX. To Monsieur HUGGENS Counselor and Secretary of the Commands of my
Lord the Prince of Orange.
Sir,
I Have received with your Letter the Dissertation of Monsieur -- in Print; but
to write my opinion thereof, would be too dangerous an enterprise. J never mean
to doubt of the certainty of his doctrine; and too bad construction was made of
me at the beginning of our commerce for to adventure farther in that way. It
suffices me to confess that J was lost in all probability, had it not been
for your protection, since even under that, J could hardly be secure. This is a
Buckler that has been pierced in a thousand places, and (to speak freely) has
served me rather for a show, then defense. My great Adversary (as you call him)
would feign have made an example of your poor Suppliant, and showed that he
did not either believe that you did love me so dearly, or that he did not much
regard the persons whom you so loved. Nevertheless Sir, If J had been of a
quarrelsome humor, that matter (perhaps) would not have been so appeased; and
men would persuade me, that my person only was injured, my Assertions being as
firm and as sound as they were before the battery. But let the field be his,
seeing he cannot endure an encounter, that J say not a resistance; and J do
willingly yield him all the advantages of this action. He chose rather to take
me, then receive my submission, and preferred a trophey before an homage.
Nevertheless, J am resolved not to alter my condition or forget my wonted
civility. Yet J do make a stand at the very same bounds that he has leapt
over, and give respect to that Character, which he has violated; J speak of
your Love and good opinion, which are more precious to me then my writings or
my reputation, and which J cannot disesteem wheresoever J meet them. Sir; there
will be always in the world Oppressors and men oppressed, and J must be one
of the Innocents that must suffer the persecutions of a Herod. But there is
nothing so hard that love cannot digest. J pardon (for your sake) all my
injuries and sufferings, withal my heart, and am contented to be ill
entreated, as long as J give evidence that J am

Sir Your, etc.
Balzac. 10. Sept. 1636.
LET. X. To Monsieur de RACAN.
Sir,
I Render You thanks for your Shepherdess; with whom J enjoyed such ravishing
pleasures that the Voluptuous never enjoy the like, and yet so chaste and
honest, that J think not my self bound to make Confession, She has revived my
spirits that were rebated with eager study and tired with distinctions and
Syllogismes. J cannot dissemble, J have not this long time Sir, spent a day
more happily then when J entertained Her. And if J have thought Her so
beautiful in her own simple weeds, and natural habiliments, without the
addition of those helps which serve to embellish and adorn; what will it be,
when She will appear in the pomp and luster of the Theater? and when those
things that are of themselves so powerful, will be mended with the help of the
voice and the graces of pronunciation? If J thought She were to come forth
suddenly in that Equipage, J would straight begin my journey for to be
present at that joyful spectacle, and to give you the applause which you do
justly deserve. But since you have sent Her me, being yet, warm from the
birth, and that She must grow up a while and gather strength in your hands, J
hope J shall be time enough at Roche to behold her in her glory. J understand
Sir, in the mean while, that there is a great contention between the Ladies
about the names of Orante, and Oriana, and that they are more ambitious of the
scrip and shepherds hook then any thing. It lies in you to do them Justice
and satisfy their ambition: yet notwithstanding, if youl'e believe me, you
must casheere this rural Equipage, and adapte your self to Crowns and
Scepters. That active and strong Spirit which does sweye you, has too much
vigor for to dwell on weaker Themes; it would break all the furniture of
horne-pipes and hau-bois that you should fill it with; moreover, the country
and cabin is not the proper sphere of magnificence, and Shepheardesses must
not dance to the sound of a Trumpet. J have therefore chosen for you an heroic
subject indeed, and worthy the courage and majesty of your style; Which style
carries all the exactness of rules, and has been already used with good
approbation by the Masters of Antiquity. But the sport is, to see you dispute
and contend with them for their own vitory, and to challenge them at the same
carreeres and courses that they have gained their glory by. This kind of
Imitation is more noble and hardy then Invention it self, and which you are
very capable to undertake, How-ever, if you shall stand in need of some aid, I
am ready to do the office of a Grammarian, and to give you the literal
interpretation of the Texts of such Authors, which you mean to follow, with a
resolution to outgoe them. I know that herein I shall not betray any great care
of their reputation, nor do any good office to any of them. But Sir, there is
nothing that I would not do for you, to whom I confess infinite obligations,
and will be everlastingly

Sir, A most humble, etc.
Balzac. 3. Sept. 1633.
LET. XI. To Monsieur de St CHARTRES.
Sir,
THe disorders of a crazie, and ruinous body, and the pains I suffer by it,
are the eternal hindrances of my devoir: These also shall be (if you please)
the ordinary Apologies for my silence. You may believe, that J do not use to
make great preparatio^s for to treat with you, in respect of the familiarity we
profess each to other; and if I could have rendered you thanks sooner for your
courtesies, I would not have saved the expense of a few ragged lines, so long a
time. I have received the Translation of your friend, who does me more honor
then I can deserve. J cannot sufficiently acknowledge the pains that he was
pleased to take for me, being not ignorant how unpleasing a thing is
Dependence. J confess that it is more than a probable argument of a man's love,
to submit himself to the fancy of a man that holds no superiority over him.
This servitude is irksome, and so heavy a yoke to good wits, that they have
seldom borne it as they should; and Victorius observes a number of passages of
Aristotle, which Cicero did not understand in his translation. And yet to
understand an Author aright is not all: things rendered in another language,
must retain the same degree of goodness, (if it be possible) as was in the
Original: the strong must not be enfeebled, nor the well attired be divested
or clad in rags, nor those that are well mounted be unhorsed, and made to
serve on foot. Most Interpreters (indeed) deal with books in that manner, and
do violate the laws of sacred hospitality, toward the Persons of the noblest
strangers that they meet with. Commonly they write French after the Latin
mode, and Latin after the French; and J have seen more Authors stripped and
excoriated, than Authors translated. It is by your good favor, that J am not
of the number of those Martyrs; but on the contrary, your Friend has done me
many courtesies which J needed, and furnished me with a thousand ornaments which
J had not of my own. J am very much obliged unto him in this behalf, and J
owe you also much thanks, for the regard you showed to my counsels,
preferring them before your first inclinations. Accomplish Sir, that which you
have begun, and let us see a Senator worthy the ancient Republicke, and the age
of genuine and legitimate Romans. Jn our time, men do bear a great opinion of
their eloquence: and a certain Author (whose name J have forgot) talks of the
purple of their language, as well as of that of their gowns. I doubt not but
you will adorn them: both with the one and the other livery; And that you will
make the driest thorns of their pettifogging Dialect, look fresh and
flourishing again, if you will take the pains to dress and manure them.
Monsieur Chapelaine follows my counsel, and thanks me in all his Letters for
the friendship contracted between you. Preserve Sir for me that good which I
do for others, and think me not unworthy of it, since that I am withal my
soul

Sir. Your etc.
Balzac. 4. Nov. 1636.
LET. XII. To Monsieur BAUDOIN.
Sir,
I Received the alarm of your sickness: but your Letter did soon settle and
compose my mind; if it be as you write, but an attachme^t without grief, J
believe that J am not bound to keep much ado in bemoaning you; this necessary
rest and residence is good for something: it does (at least) privilege a
Philosopher from performing a thousand petty offices, which do distract a
Contemplative life, and which a Civil life does seem to exact from him, that
has the free use of his legs. So that in the state that you are in, you do
oblige the Public in despite of you; and doubt not, but diverse Nations do
bless your Gout, that is the cause of your leisure; since that indeed it does
not handle you rudely, and that I do (as others) reap much profit thereby; I
know not whether I ought to call it good or bad, except my own interest should
be more considerable, then the liberty of my Friend. Hereupon, J shall consult
with my Moral Philosophy, upon that part which treats of Duties, which you
(I am sure) will not have called Offices. You shall understand Sir, in the
mean while, that I have received the second impression of my Letters, and that
my eyes are not so bad, but that I could epsy at the first glance, that which
they owe unto your care. I should be uncivil (not to say unknowing) if I did
not render you thanks for this favor, and if that my book (having received
better order and Economy by your hands) J did not confess that it is you that
did bestow upon it its last graces. We must confess that you are an admirable
Chymick to refine that which is gross and drossy in my writings; and that you
are a great exterminator of our superfluous characters. But J should have been
yet more deeply engaged unto you, if that you had thoroughly played the
Aristarchus, and with that hatchet which is so formidable to SSs, which you
deem unusefull, you had hewne off my other faults, as well as that of
Orthography. This shall be reserved for another time, and for a work of greater
consequence, whereof you shall be the Judge, upon condition Sir, that you show
no pity or favor in your censures, and that my style undergo all the rigor
of your laws, as long as my person be had in consideration, and that J be still

Your etc.
Balzac. 25. Oct. 1636.
LET. XIII. To Monsieur de COIGNET Gentleman in Ordinary to the most
Illustrious Queen of great Britain.
Sir,
I Was much discontented that J parted from Paris, without having the honor to
bid you Adieu: But it is very difficult to live regularly amidst such
confusions, and to be punctual in a time when all things are out of order. I
thought I had done much, that I had not forgot my self, being in the place
where I was; and that I did put six score leagues of land between Me and John
de Werth. Being able to make but a sorry soldier, I thought that no body had
any thing to say to me in Picardy, and that the Kings Army, would not be the
less complete for my absence. Lo now Sir, J am arrived here, this side of the
Loire, busy in fortifying, as well as J may, my village with Philosophy; and
intrenching my self against the Enemies with good books. If the tempests which
threaten the Frontiers of Bayon arrive at us, we must think of another way of
safety, and resolve (in any case) to pass the Sea, and go and dwell in that
Region of Peace, and that happy climate where your divine Princess reigns. But
the good conduct and leading of the King her Brother, and the good Fate of
France forbid us to harbor any thoughts of despair; and the opinions of
Sages, that expect a calm and serenity after a storm, are far different
from the Dialect of the vulgar, that think that all storms are everlasting. It
shall be then a visit of complement (in despite of John de Werth) that J
shall perform, and not a voyage of necessity which J must make; and I hope my
words shall find no evasion, and that I shall tell you in London that which I
say here, that I am entirely

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 20. Sep. 1636.
LET. XIV. To Madam DESLOGES.
Madam,
TAke it not amiss, that I do much rejoice at your removal from Paris, since
that thereby I do regaine the glorious beatitude of your neighborhood, and
that I am now but fifteen leagues distant from Virtue retired: Monsieur
d'Auvila did confirm this news, whereof I had otherwise an intimation
formerly; and he has farther assured me ( Madam) of the good success of your
journey, and of your victory in the Chamber of the Edict. Since the guerdon of
this conquest lies in Aunix, I believe it will repent you to have offended the
Angoulmois some five years agone. J say it is some pleasure to me to think that
you will not digress anymore out of the road in contempt of us; and now
shortly will be the time when you will dignify those men with your presence,
which do so passionatly desire to see you. J am not so presumptuous as to
allege here my own wishes. But me thinks ( Madam) that the Duke of
Rochefoucaut deserves one of your stages; and if it be so, I have reason to
hope to be happy in some hours of the two or three days, which you cannot
deny to afford Him. J was about to send to you -- to learn some news of you:
But this excellent Bearer, has promised me to relate some at his return; and
you need not be troubled, in that he did forbear that crude Oration that was
provided for you. This is a man ( Madame) in whose mouth are Temples and Altars
erected for you, and who adores you in every word he speaks; He has no vulgar
conceit of your virtues, and he being also a man of parts, is worthy of that
regard you bear to him. I hope he will love me a little for love of you, and
that you will do so likewise; and add this favor to the infinite number that
I owe you, and which oblige me to be more then any man in the world,

Madam Your etc.
Balzac. 7. Oct. 1636. J send you ( Madam) the complement which you desire to
see; It was sent ere this, but was not received, because my packet was lost.
Since that time, J have never thought of it; but your curiosity finds out
things that are lost, and J am so good a Courtier, that none should have seen
it besides your self.



LET. XV. To my Lord Keeper of the Seals Seguier, since Chancellor of France.
My Lord,
IF I had not been advertised that it was my bounden duty to write unto you, J
should not have thought it needful so to do. And though J have ruminated as
much as any other, upon the choice that the King has made of your person, I
considered it, as one of the felicities of his reign, and as a general
influence of favor upon all the world. Calling to mind the definition of
Aristotle, that calls Justice the good of another, I thought it not so
congruous to congratulate with him that must be the Guardian of the laws,
touching a preferment that will put him to a perpetual care and vigilance. But
rather to partake in silence of the common felicity of those people that shall
wholly rely upon his watchfulness. But my Lord, since custom commands it, and
that congratulations from the remotest parts of the Kingdom do poast toward
you, J should be thought unwotthy of that rank which J hold among your humble
servants, if I did not sequester my self from the Crowde to deliver you
(apart) some testimony of my joy, and to make you see, that in places of
silence and solitude there be not wanting acclamations for you and affections
for the Country. I shall therefore make bold to tell you that the joy which
seiseth me at this time, is mingled with a kind of vanity; and having
accompanied you with my thoughts and eyes even unto the place of your
Advancement, I do imagine I have (in some sort) conducted you, whether the
judgment of the Prince has advanced you. Wherefore my Lord in your Promotion,
I do rejoice for the good success of my Imagination, and take no small
pleasure to see my own Divinations verified. Certainly it is a matter of
delight to see a Virtue so laborious and active as yours, brought into the most
wide and spacious Carreere that Fortune could make choice of; and this is a
spectacle worthy the sight of Heaven, and of the blessed soul of the late
Cato of your race. The importance is, my Lord, that you begin in a very good
season, for to continue long; and that you are in the verdure and vigor of your
age for to uphold the crazy and decrepit weakness of our State. In this
Elevation both of Merit and Dignity, each man will be your Adorer and Votary:
But you will give me leave to assure you that none will approach unto you with
a purer and more dis-interessed Devotion then mine, and that I am without much
pomp and flourish, yet in much sincerity

My Lord, Your etc.
Balzac. 1. April 1636.
LET. XVI. To Monsieur de Morins, Counselor of the King in the Court of the
Edict, at Again.
My Lord,
YOu are noble enough to love a man without any merits, but I were too loose
and forlorn if I were so loved, and yet had no sense or regard of it; and yet
you have some cause to call me by that bad title; and if Monsieur Girard has
not had a care of his friend's reputation, all circumstances condemn me. It is
true that my fault was but the omission of a Complement, which had slipped out of
my memory; and yet I avow to you, that this omission is such a sin that has (a
long time) burdened my conscience, and causes such gripes and remorse Sir,
that except the same goodness that has showed me favor do grant me a pardon,
I cannot make atonement with my self. But I am apt to believe that for the
appeasing of my thoughts you will not run the hazard of your former benefits,
and that you will by your perseverance add to my obligations. Knowing this
moreover, that you are a right Honest man; I must necessarily conclude that you
are no Formalist or a man of Ceremony, and that you do not tie your self to
those petty observances and Rites which make the friendship of this Age more
perplexed and difficult then sincere. If Yours may be gained or merited by a
true and perfect valuation of your worth, I will not be an unfaithful
Depositary, beseeching you to believe that I am already as much as any man in
the world

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac Feb. 20. 1636.
LET. XVII. To Monsieur de-Vaugelas Gentleman in Ordinary to Monsieur the Kings
only Brother.
Sir,
I Did read my own thoughts in your Letter; I subscribe unto all that you have
writ unto me, and confess that in the Elogie of Monsieur Arnold the Abbat, you
do (indeed) but give your friend his due, and lend him never a grain. This is
(in truth) a most accomplished man, and who at the age of 22 years, was
reputed wise even by the Italians, that lately thought wisdom was their own
freehold. He has with his great knowledge mingled much goodness: the
sharpness of his understanding is tempered and allaied by the sweetness of
his behavior, and his modesty does repress and conceal much of his
abilities. He never pardons himself, though he does bear with all humane
infirmities in others; and that Piety which he does practice, gives respect
unto all, but strikes a terror in none. Lo Sir, the testimony which I add
unto yours: which I would bestow upon an enemy that deserved it, but would not
upon a friend that wanted merit. His knowledge is attended on by other virtues,
and it has furnished him with excellent morality: for without this, it should
be solitary and of little use. I tell you nothing of the late experiment I have
found of it in your Letter which he wrote unto you: Besides that my best
language would be far below my apprehension of if; I know withal too well
the power of his Rhetoric to contest with it; since he has got so many
advantages over me, he must needs have that of civility and complements too;
and my silence must not be accounted any more the effect of modesty but of the
Eloquence of his Letter. I send it you back because you would have it so, and
because you may make some use of it in your Cabinet; but I shall reserve a
copy of it under your favor, that it may afford some comfort and relief to
my discontents. I have seen the siedge of Tire, the Death of Darius, the Voyage
of the Jndians, and I have read them with wonder. All these seem to me so good
French and so natural, that it is impossible to pick out any line there, that
does savor of, or show any affinity with Latin, or wherein the original
Author has any advantage above the second. What would you have more Sir, or
what sentence can you crave of me? I have but one word to add in commendation
of your Travels. The Alexander of Philip was invincible, and that of Vaugelas
is inimitable. It is that (to say no more) that will deserve the affection of
your incomparable Marchioness, and the fair Beavy or Troop that do often
assemble at her House. Monsieur -- calls Her a choice and resplendent Court,
and the great World refined, and reformed: and says, that there is no
Tribunal so sovereign that we may not appeal from, unto the Mansion of
Rambouillet. Since I cannot know what kind of work it is that my Stationer
shall give you, until this divine Roman Dame shall pass her censure upon it;
I dare not as yet, declare my self for a Book which I must not acknowledge,
although I have composed it. It suffices to tell you, that I had an aim to
speak French, and to write some Letters which should not put Her to the
trouble of deciphering. I did heartily desire that my Design might take
effect; and I should believe I had not gained a little, by the commerce of many
years, if what you shall present her with, in my name, may entertain her
thoughts for a few hours; the noblest labors of the understanding cannot
aspire to a higher bliss than that; Philosophy her self should betray too
much presumption to think to take them up wholly and employ them; she cannot
claim to be any more than her diversion and by-thought. I shall be very well
contented Sir, if I might serve for that purpose handsomely; and I should
boast, after this, that I were (though in my absence) very good company. That
timorousness that did ever possess me that I could not be so, any other way,
and the fear of troubling the serenitie of another man's visage by the sullen
cloudinesse of mine, have made me to refrain from all Feasts and Assemblies,
and hindered me from bringing heavy looks to those places which I esteem
sacred, and before those eyes which I do revere. So that it is a pure
reverence in me, that I abstain from acceptable and delightful conversation,
and from the pleasures of those Cabinets that appertain to them only that be
happier than I. And I do choose rather to adore a far off with awful
regard, than be importunately, and saucily familiar. I leave it to you to
excuse and justify this timorousness which proceeds from respect, not from a
Stoicall ferocity. And you will do me a favor, if that while you represente
the best part of your friend, you will take the pains to excuse the worst.
Whereunto, J do earnestly conjure you, and to believe firmly, that I am

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 26. Feb. 1636.
LET. XVIII. To Monsieur de la Motte-Aigron.
Sir,
THe Jndian Canes which you sent me were pretty, but you have so embellisht
them at Rochell, that I doubt me they are not for my turn. They are not made
for a private man's use: They are Emblemes of sovereign command; and a bolder
Orator then I, would render you thanks rather for your Scepters then your
Canes. By what name soever we call them, they are the more precious to me
because they came from You, more then for any other consideration; and though
you have not made me rich, yet you have made me very glorious. It is a Maxim
in Aristotle that Ambition is no more satisfied with benefits received, then
Covetousness. But me thinks, he should have added, when it receives from him,
from whom it desired to receive: For all sorts of Benefactors do not far
oblige those that are ambitious of the better sort only. For my part, I should
believe that the Presents of Monsieur -- would pollute me, and I would be as
much ashamed of his favors as I glory in yours. In truth Sir, I have quitted
the Country and am come purposely to the Town to show them. With them, I do
sustain my old age with credit, and look as trim as upon solemn days of
Ceremony. They serve me both for to support and to adorn* for movables of
necessity, and ostentation too. But the worst is, that I have nothing here for
to requite so rare a Present, but the shape and lineaments of a vulgar man,
and the sad representation of my own visage. As it were very unjust that I
should pretend to beauty: so it is a very solecisme that Philarchus calls me a
Narcissus. But there are always foolish passions, and idle curiosities in the
world. My friends at Paris would needs urge me to have my Picture drawn, and I
to give them contentment, did yield my self for one halfe-houre to be
transcribed, and granted them this meager delight. Some Coppies were sent me:
one whereof I bestow upon You, supposing that it will not scare you; and
knowing that Affection is a better flatterer yet, than the Painter. This is it
that will bear false witness for me to prove me fair, and which will allow
me a place in the Class of your Illustrious men. Such a place in your Cabinet,
is indeed a high advancement, and which I cannot obtain but by mere favor;
But that which you have given me in your heart is no less precious to me, and
I think I have good right to the possession, since I am really

Sir, Your etc.
Angoulesme 15. Ian. 1637.
LET. XIX. To Monsieur de BORSTELL.
Sir,
I Durst not undertake the great and hazardous voyage, which I did impose upon
my self some four years past, without taking leave from our noble Lady. J
have therefore sent unto her to beg it, by the man that shall deliver you this
Letter; and that shall bring me back (if you please) some directions for my
journey, which I beg of you. Being provided of such ammunition, I shall not
fear the rigor of February, nor the unconstancy of March, nor the inundations
of the Loire, nor the ways of Beausse. I am sure to arrive happily at Paris:
where Sir, if you have any business, J can furnish you with a Solicitor, who
(though but a sorry one) is very ambitious to do you service. Alte non temo,
and humili nonsdegno: I neither fear the high nor disdain the low. You cannot
think of any employment that shall not be very welcome to me; and though I love
sloth and make a profession of Idleness, yet I will change my inclination,
and of a sedentary man become a Currier; Except this, I am commonly desirous of
privacy, and never bring into the Assemblyes of men but my eyes, and my
testimony. There must be Spectators at such times as well as Poets and Actors;
and some that must do nothing for the interest and honor of those that act.
But to the purpose, Sir; what are become of your Actors of the Low-countreyes.
I do verily think that there is no more Holland in the world, and that the sea
has drowned the famousest part of the Earth. There was never such a dearth of
news; And the Carthusian Monks do not meditate with more silence, than they
do wage war in that Country. Jf you are more learned than the Gazettes, J
pray impart your knowledge by this Bearer, who has a chardge to give you an
account of many things, and will acquaint you particularly how far I am

Sir Your etc.
Balzac: 18. Feb. 1636.
LET. XX. To Monsieur -- the Chief Advocate.
Sir,
I Am impatient until I can hear of the estate of your health, and learn by
the return of my Lacquay, whether your legs be better then they were wont.
It is no wonder if they bend under the burden of so many brave things which
they sustain; and being to carry the counsels of a whole Province, if they
be somewhat incommodated with such a weight. Yet I do hope well of the
wholesomnesse of that Air which you breath; and that, being out of the reach
of that malignant Jupiter, (that noisome mildew, J would have said) which
over-runnes the hills of Angoulesme, you will have the leisure to travel to
your breaches, and fortify your self against winter. This is a neighbor that
does threaten us upon the Frontiers, and if I can, I will fly from him, as far
as Africa. But this remedy is something too far. Without undertaking so great
a voyage, we will endeavor to make resistance as well as we may; and I am
already resolved to use all humane industry, to barricadoe my chamber, and to
block up all approaches toward it. If I can maintain it bravely against so
terrible an Enemy; I shall account my self no mean Engineer, and shall think
my Sconces and Fortifications as regular as those of the Hollanders. After
this, this shall be, if you please, the Camp of our riotous discourses and
extravagances; of our peaceful disputations, and all other exercises that an
honest man may perform in a chair; I do therefore design you for it about
mid-November, and remain

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 18. Oct. 1636.
LET. XXI. To Monsieur De MAURY.
Sir,
YOu have sent me a Present which was extremely dear and welcome to me, and
which J must highly prize, both for the manner of sending, and the matter sent;
the Affliction which you paint out and emblazon, is so Christian, that all the
Joy in the world is not able to countervaile it; and you complain in such a
learned form, that we must forbid men to comfort you, least you should cease
complaining. J am, you know, but a simple French Doctor; yet J do now and
then, make excursion into the Latin Country, and take a view of the
Frontiers. But this is too little for to know the just value of your Muse, and
to give you the commendation that you deserve. You have an ancient Roman near
you, that can distinguish between the Native, and the Forrainer; and makes it
Religion to confound the modesty of the age of Augustus, with the intemperance
of succeeding times. He has a smack of the primitive Poetry, which the
Spaniards had not yet vitiated, and made immodest; and of that pure Latin,
which the Declamators had not yet corrupted with nice subtilities. He it is,
that can give you ample and just commendation, and can make a just estimate of
the riches of your style: For my part, J can but testify unto you my deep
apprehension of your courtesies in this behalf, and assure you that J will be
while I live

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 23. Oct. 1636.
LET. XXII. To Monsieur De MONDORY.
Sir,
YOur Letter was to me an old novelty, and J received it but in the beginning of
December, though it had been at my house since August: To unfold this ridle, J
must tell you, I am newly returned from a long voyage, and that I found your
Letter here at my arrival. You may believe, that the name of a man that is
dear unto me, did, at first encounter of my eye affect me with joy; and that
it is no small satisfaction and contentment to me, to see that I hold a place
in a memory, that is so occupied and fully fraught as yours. This is to lie
down among a bed of Roses, when I lie among so many brave Poems, and rare
discourses which you contain, is a walking Library. And if it be lawful to
tell out the rest; to be the friend of Monsieur de Mondory, is to be a Favorite
of a thousand Kings; for indeed you do so lively represent unto us the majesty
and magnificence of former ages, that we must confess that your
representations, are the glorious Resurrections of those Princes, which you do
personate. And things being thus, take it not amiss that in my answer I must
contradict you. You cannot compare the bonnet of Herod with that of Mons. the
Advocate -- without doing some injury to Royal dignity, and avileing their
Purple and Diamonds; without doing your self a bad office, in lessening, and
obscuring in me thereby (if you could) the great Idea which I conceived of you,
the day that I saw you with that Bonnet. But you may be pleased to humble your
self; you cannot deface or blotte out of my memory that first impression and
Image of majesty which you there left; and J cannot figure you in my thoughts,
but with a commanding accent, and the eloquence of a Master, far transcending
that inferior Rhetoric, which works but by entreaties and remonstrances. Yet J
speak not this, as though J would always consider you under the name and shape
of another; or that I believe, if that you should quit the Theater, you would
be out of all employment in the world. The Letter which you were pleased to
write unto me, does sufficiently witness, that Eloquence is your natural
endowment, and that without borrowing from any, you can traffic in very good
things of your own. Suspect not then that I should recant to your prejudice,
after this new occasion of extolling you. On the contrary, J am ready (if need
be) to add something to my former testimony. I have many reasons to respect
you, and J think I may do it with the license of our severest Schools. Since
that having reformed the stage, and purged it from all obscenity, you may glory
in this, that you have reco^cild Comedy with -- Pleasure with Virtue. And
though for my part I stand in need of recreations, yet since I desire not to
enjoy but those that are cleanly and which do not violate honesty, I do (with
the common voice) give you thanks for the care you have taken, to provide fit
remedies, and Antidotes against Melancholy, and other untoward passions. But
farther, calling to mind that you proposed my contentation sometimes, for the
end of your action, and that you aimed oftentimes at me alone, I were
ungrateful if I did not confess that I am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac 15. Dec. 1636.
LET. XXIII. To Monsieur LE. GVAY.
Sir,
YOu had an intention to perform an act of Humility, when you did dedicate
your Poem to me; for to expect protection from a man that is not reckoned of
the world, and light from a name so obscure as mine, you could not (sure)
forget your self in this sort. The same virtue which obliges the Saints to
acknowledge Superiors where ever there are men, has carried you to this depth
of lowliness, and you have chosen an unhappy man, for to bestow honor upon,
that you might loose that, which you would feign bestow. I must confess, that
no man ever commended his neighbor more Christian-like, and does more decline
the trade of those Mercenaries, who sell their testimonies and credit to any,
that have wherewith to requite them. These are Hucksters of Poetry and
Rhetoric; that prostitute to the first comers, even those who^ you style the
Kindred of the Gods and Daughters of Jupiter; and make Pegasus a very hackney
of commendation, (as I may so say) for all the world. You have a heart of a
far better mould then theirs; and though men consider not as they ought, the
graces ces and elegancies of your Muse, we must notwithstanding infinitely
commend their nobleness and generosity. I confess for my part, that J am a
debtor to them as far as any, and that J know not how to requite in any
measure, the favors that I have received from them. Yet notwithstanding, J
forbear not to load my Porter with a pretty gross* bundle; not pretending
thus to acquit my self, or thinking that I am hereby less then before

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 1. April 1636.
LET. XXIV. To Monsieur De SILHON, Musqueteer of the Kings Company.
Sir,
HAving your person in great admiration, I cannot misprize or undervalue your
friendship. The fair tokens whereof, which I have received in the Letter, that
you were pleased to write unto me, have obliged me so far, that I confess
that I owe you already that which you are pleased now to promise me. I will
tell you but this, that if Princes could bestow health and virtue, I should be
a more sedulous Courtier then I am, and should stand in more need of your
testimony and the recommendation of your friend. But truly in the case that I
am, my desires are so feeble, and my passions so cold and languid, that I could
hardly be persuaded to take up a Crosier, if I found it on the earth. Though
Philosophy does not teach, that we must seek for happiness out of the
wheeling Orb of the Court; my own laziness would cause me to apprehend it as
a fortune, under whose weight J should perpetually groan and not a place of
any ease; and J do less esteem of a place of Government that might cumber
me, then a field of liberty that may solace me. Jf you go any time into
Gascony, and do me the honor to take my house in the way, you will verify
what J say to you; and avouch, that if J were as well cured of all maladies as
that of Ambition, I had not many wishes to commence. It is true that some
company (like that of Monsieur your Brother) is wanting unto me; and if this
were added to my Hermitage, J durst contend with Jupiter for happiness. This
is a speech of Epicurus which Seneca does allege, but which I do mean to
apply better then it was by the Author; since Bread and Bear (which this
Philosopher made the two Elements of sovereign Good) are not so rare or so
good, as those excellent Instructions and perfect honesty, which I should find
and enjoy in the person of my friend. I do charge you to assure him, that I
do ever honor and esteem him infinitely, and for your particular, you may
believe, that you cannot affect a man that could be more sincerely then I am,

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 19. Dec. 1635.
LET. XXV. To Monsieur De la Fosse.
Sir,
YOu judge too seriously of my Recreations and bear too high an opinion of my
Essays. It is no Roman Citizen that you thus respect, it is a Barbarian
disguised. I have drawn some rude lineaments and misshapen figures, and you
would allow them for just works and exact Pieces. Your Eloquence herein does
favor me, but alters me not a whit. You are powerful in language, but I am
hard of persuasion; and I have learnt from a mous Author, that to give things
honorable appellations does cost us nothing: And I see well that Illustrious
and Excellent which you grace me with, do signify (except by way of Civility)
but things vulgar and mean. It is true Sir, that J do adventure sometimes to
copy out good Originalls. J have an eye as much as possibly I may, to ancient
examples, and I do scarce seek the^ beyond Terence or this side Livy. But
these are but idle Speculations (perhaps) and impotent desires which leave an
infinite space between my abilities and my Idea; if it be so, as I fear it
is, Monsieur de Priesac does heedfully observe this distance and pittieth in
his soul the vain attempts and rashness of my pen. Yet he is so good and
loveing, that he will not, I should learn this distasteful truth from him; and
loves rather to commend a fault, then discover it, in a man that is dear to
him. He has written such polite things to me, and in such abundance, that I
dare not send forth any reply after his answer, least I should be undone by so
unequal a comparison. I must not attempt this great Design, for the success
thereof must needs be unlucky, though I should make use of Auxiliaries and
demand succors of all the Latinists of our Province. You shall tell him then,
if you please, that I do acknowledge the advantage his style has over mine,
and I think it no disparagement that I must still owe him what I shall never be
able to pay him. You are kind enough yet Sir, to assure Monsieur Habert the
Abbat, and Monsieur de la Chamber, of the constancy of my service; and how
impatient I am, that the world does not yet know, in what regard J hold their
virtues. It suffices me that they accept and allow of my affection, and that
they testify it unto you with a nod. For to desire Letters and not tickets
from them, were to be ignorant of the present condition of their life, and the
homage that they perform to our Monarch, who best deserves it. J have received
some Verses from Monsieur D' Espesses, and you send me some more of other men's,
together with a Letter, which my Servant left to grow stale upon the Table in
my chamber. You will do me the favor as to deliver him my Packet, and readily
take so much pains for my sake: who will account my self happy to be made
your Agent in these parts, and be able to express that none is more entirely

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 3. Ian. 1637.
LET. XXVI. To Monsieur D' Espesses Counselor of the King in his Counsel of
State.
Sir,
YOU make me (truly) to languish, and it is more then four months, since J
have expected our Translation: J call it ours, because you made it in my
Chamber, and on my paper; and J might call it mine too, by a rule in the Law,
which does adjudge the surface to go along with the profunditie; but that J
remembered the exception of the Emperor which he adds in favor of excellent
Artizans. Nobis contra videtur, melius esse Tabulam* cedere Picturae: Ridiculum
enim est picturam Apelli^ vel Parrhasii in accessionem vilissimae picturae
cedere. We must not urge a man that is intent upon more important affairs. Yet
when your leisure serves, be pleased to perfect that same Translation, and try
if our language can express Terence in that nobleness of style, and the
Character of Scipio and Laelius, which the Roman Nation observe to be in it. Jn
the mean time Sir, to have the more color to demand of you, I send you here a
small gift; some Verses which I received lately from one of my friends in
England, who does chardge the Muses of the Low-Countreyes with the making. You
are in some sort interessed in it, seeing they question the credit and truth of
an Author who among you, is cried for Indubitable; and seem to thwart your
judgment of him, as concerning the certainty of his Testimony. But (in good
sooth) the Flemmings have reason to require such a scrupulous and punctual
truth in our news: They who are the most fabulous Historians of this Age, and
for the most part, truck away nothing but Apocryphal Relations. By changing
the proper names only in their Verses, we might retort all their Sarcasmes upon
them-selves; we could speak truly of their Gazet, what they have falsely
written of ours; and tell them farther, that that which they deride so, is well
esteemed all over by the most ingenious Nation of the world; It is certain
that the fine wits of Rome do admire the acuteness and apposite expressions
therein; and Monsieur the Abbat of -- upon his return from Italy did assure me,
that it was pronounced in the Academy of the Humorists, that each section of
the Parisian Gazet was worth a Chapter in Florus, or Valerius Maximus. They are
Sir, as you know, Epigrams in prose: and the determination of so famous a
Tribunal, is a sufficient Countermure against the assaults of this new Poem. I
would desire you to impart it to Monsieur Gaulmim, and some other grave Judges
of Latin learning. That we may know the gust of your great world, and what we
are to believe in the Provinces. The Description of the Bureau d' Adresse, The
Custom House in Paris. Lib. 12. M^ta.
seems to me to have been drawn upon the plain, or model, of that Palace
which Ovid has erected to Fame. But you will make us upon this, and all the
rest most large and learned Observations; and I do promise my self to receive
from you at once, both a Translation and a Commentary. I am perfectly

Sir Your, etc.
Balzac. 25. Nov. 1636.
LET. XXVII. To the same.
Sir,
Since I wrote my Letter, it comes to my head that for a Counter-cuffe to the
Gazeta Parisiensis, we might send to the Low-Countrey-men, Historia Hispana,
and fill it with Comicall sport enough. First we must make it to be the
incestuous Offspring of the Giants, begotten upon their own sister Fame, for
the high and mighty lies wherewith it does abuse the credulity of the simple;
and (in truth) the natural pride of that Nation which appears, even in the
wandering Beggar in extremest misery; and those Rhodomontades which to them are
so proper and usual, that their very complements retain a smack of them, are
worthy of so Illustrious an Extraction, and to descend in a direct Line from
Enceladus and Mimas, and Briareus. This premised Sir, and enricht with your
art, I would have this monstrous Issue gain upon the belief of the Jndians
and the Cockneyes of Europe, that the beginning of the universal Monarchy
promised to Spain will betide just the next year, which is the climactericall
year of all other States; that God's will is, that there should be but one
Monarch upon earth; and that the Pope himself for his better accommodation,
does mean to resign Rome to him, and exchange it for the Archbishopric of
Toledo. That the Battle where the King of Sueden was slain, was the last sigh
of dying liberty; that this Prince was no such thing as we took him to be; and
for those achievements of his, which we entertained with such wonder, nothing
was performed without the help of Magic, by virtue only of some charms, and
characters, and the assistance of the Powers of Hell, which at last were found
too weak against the House of Austria. That to the end that second causes and
humane means might concur with the Design of Providence, foreign affairs
do seem to comply of them-selves to this great change. That the King of
England is not so brave, but that he would be contented to be a Feudatary of
the King of Spain; and if it goes to the worst, that there will not be wanting
some Gun-powdermen to make him caper in the air with his whole Realm. That
the cinders of the Holy-League, and the remainder of the Huguenot Party begin
to flame a new in France by the bellows and Libells of St Germains; that they
have bargained with some secret Engineers, who have undertaken to fortify
Rochell in one night. That Duke Charles must be revenged upon Nancy, and that
he does hold Paris already in extremity; that if there be not a Spanish
Garrison already in Turin and Casall, there will be one, when it shall seem
good to his Catholic Majesty, and when the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua, shall be
received into his favor. That he will none of Venice or Amsterdam, because
that an Illuminatee of Madrid, and a Sybille of Naples have assured him that
the Sea will one day swallow up these two great Cities; and the loss of his
Spaniards that should be their Commanders, would be a cause of great grief
unto him. That he had long since chastis'd the Rebels of Holland, if some
considerations of state had not hindered him from it. But let him preserve that
land of contradiction, for a Fencing-schoole for his own Subjects, to keep
them from idleness, and to breathe them by continual exercise. That for the
rest, if the world will not be so easily conquered, he has in his coffers
wherewith to buy it. And hereabouts, this Daughter of Fame and Enceladus her
Brother, must raise her tone higher, and out-bid her first figure or number;
she must with one dash of the pen make more gold, then the Sun can make in a
thousand years; she must make the winds labor, and force the Ocean to groan
under the new Fleet, which according to her computation, must arrive every
month punctually at Lisbon and Sivill; she must make a discovery (if needs be)
of the third Indies, and find out all the hidden mines there; not those within
the Demaines of Antichrist excepted, and cause them to be guarded by those
evil Spirits, which S. Augustine calls (for this reason) Incubones Thesaurorum,
etc. Behold Sir, a rude draught of a work which expects from you its
consummation and perfection, which you might soon finish, if your Poetical
fancy should once seize you. Here is matter (you see) for an excellent Irony,
and wherewith to continue it to a hundred verses and more, though the Comoedy
did affect you never so little, especially when you shall add form and fashion
to the stuff which I present you with, who am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 27. Nov. 1637.
LET. XXVIII. To Monsieur de Couurelles.
Sir,
I Cannot write unto you but tumultuarily* my hands and head are so full of
business, that being to take a journey to Paris, I am bound to bid farewell to
the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons. It is now four years that I have
deliberated upon this voyage, and being at last resolved, I am like by your
favor to be better accompanied then I did expect, Comes facundus in via, etc.
I think I may give this attribute to your Book, after the Elogy which you
vouchsafe me therein: and if I had not already taken part and declared my self
for the Author of the Flandrian History (who is one of my good Lords and
friends) J should have entered blindly into a new faction, which (as it seems)
you do abette and patronize; But Sir, you will not take it amiss that I
profess constancy, and that this second Author, has not won my first
affection. This evening I shall begin to entertain him, and to taste of those
delicacies whereof you were pleased to make an Essay. These will not be painted
Cates, I am sure, nor Pageants of good; no nimble juglings and impostures
practiced upon the eye and imagination, as most part of those things are, that
come from that Country. There is no imposture so finely contrived, as to be
able to cheat so cautious a judgment as yours. And I will follow you, whether
soever you shall please to lead me, (I mean still to except matters of faith)
and J believe you will not be offended with such an exception, since the laws
of friendship will allow it me, and since I never cease to be most affectionatly

Sir Your etc.
Angoulesme March. 8. 1636.
LET. XXIX. To --
Sir,
MY willingness to relieve afflicted men, deserves not the thanks which J have
reapt thereby. This is a passion which on my part does but produce fruitless
desires, and which cannot by you be had in any estimation, but out of a
superlative nobleness in you. In that J have given harbor to a man that was
persecuted, J did but that which the Law of Nations required of me, and what I
would not have denied to the misfortunes of an -- or a Spaniard. If you take
this to mind, and become my debtor, you do assume the interest of all mankind,
and acquit the honor of the whole world; for my part, J am twice rewarded for
an act, which J thought was sufficiently rewarded in the doing, and for which I
expected neither honor nor acknowledgeme^t. You see Sir, that I am not privy to
your secrets, and if you were obliged hereby, it was by an innocent and blindly
ignorant man. For the Cavalier, touching whom you ask some news; I believe
that he has prevented me, as being unwilling that any other then himself
should be the Historian of his adventures. He will (no question) write unto
you, what has happened unto him in the Refectory of the -- Fathers, and the
notable advantages he has gotten over a Gladiator of the long gown. J am not
troubled a whit that he has got him some credit in so good a place, and gained
the reputation of a man of valor. Yet, J must tell you, that his credit is
dearer unto me then my own interest; and that if he have not the mind to
dispute, it is not my desire he should turn for my sake. He may be my friend
at a cheaper rate* and I can content my self with the calmness and
tranquillity of his passion, not needing that it should break forth and appear
through noise and jangling. Many men (you know) never do a good turn, but
that they may have occasion of upbraiding. Poverty is more tolerable then such
Creditors; and there are some Patrons of such harsh dispositions, that I would
choose persecution before their succors. Upon our first meeting, I will declare
my self more particularly to you, and in the mean while, rest

Sir Your etc.
Paris May 3. 1631.
LET. XXX. To my Lord the Bishop of ANGOULESME, chief Almoner to the
Illustrious Queen of great Britain.
My Lord,
I Have seen in a Letter that you have written to Monsieur -- that my name is
not unknown unto you, and that J have some share in your good Graces; this is a
favor which I owe to your courtesy only, and I dare not believe, that my more
then small deserts, could have acquired me such an inestimable good as that. I
cannot justly enjoy it, if you would not admit of that perfect devotion and
reverence which J offer you, and which I were bound to pay to your Virtue,
though I should never reflect upon your Dignity. You have at first boording,
engaged my observance. It will be ( my Lord) an incredible contentment unto me,
to enjoy that happy entertainment and discourse which you have done me the
honor to promise me. And J am confident, that I shall still depart thence a
better man, and more learned, though my inclination be never so untoward, and
unapt for good purposes, and my memory never so slippery to retain the
impressio^ of fair Ideas. But I begin to fear that your Flock should in the
mean while languish for you, and that the interests of France, will cross and
oppose themselves against the wishes of our Province. The fear of that was it,
that caused me to send to England a Book, which I did heartily desire, I could
have presented to you there, together with the Author. He is one of the great
Votaries of that great Cardinal Perron your Uncle: He does celebrate his
memory without intermission, and adores his learned Relics. He does glory in
being his ghostly son; and, you will not (I am sure) make any difficulty, to
avow this spiritual alliance that is between you and him, being joynd with the
condition, that he desires to live in all his lifetime; which is to be

My Lord, Your etc.
Balzac. 20. Dec. 1636.
LET. XXXI. To Monsieur De --
Sir,
I Write unto you with a heart wounded with sorrow, and make my moan to you,
for the sinister opinion, that you have conceived of me, upon the first evil
report that was suggested to you concerning me. J thought I had given you a
sufficient assurance of the smoothness and plainness of my soul, that you
should not have so easily doubted of it, and entertain a belief so injurious
to amity, before you had communicated your jealousies to your friends, and made
them clear enough. You know Sir, more then any other, that my passions are not
close and reserved, but I carry my soul still in my forehead. When I was not
as yet, so far your servant as now I am, I did not use much Artifice, and
dissimulation to persuade the contrary; and thence you might have deduced an
infallible conclusion, that if J had changed my inclination, J would not have
deceived you with new protestations of fidelity. I do therefore religiously
protest unto you, that honoring you with that zeal as I do, you could not
inflict a greater punishment upon me, then the forfeiture of your favors. But
moreover, I do swear to you by all that is sacred in the world, that I have
committed nothing that might deserve such a cruel punishment. After this me
thinks you might be confirmed in the truth, but pardon me if I tell you, you
should have been so before; and that I do extremely wonder, that a weak and
gross calumny, should quite ruin and deface in your thoughts, the good
impressions, which J thought I had left there. J cannot hinder men's
mis-constructions of me, or bind Interpreters from doing violence, and putting
my words upon the rack, to make them depose things which were far from my
intentions. Sophisters make use of a true proposition to infer an erroneous
conclusion; and Pettifoggers still cite the Law, to authorize their injustice,
and yet none will tax Truth to be the cause of Error, or Law the mother of
injustice. I cannot warrant, but my own thoughts (which are sound and innocent)
not those of my adversaries, which are full of malice and rancor. J am
responsable for the things that J have written, and ready withal to maintain
them. But all the visions and fancies of men are not in my power. Every man can
make a nimble and subtle decipherer of another man's intentions. The same
picture, according to several lights and postures, may have several
representations; and oftentimes there is a great difference between a Text and
the Commentaries, the meaning of the Author and the Criticismes of Grammarians.
I said that I knew some strange insufferable humors, and no way fit to possess
and sway freeborn men. Therefore I said, that a man, whom J do infinitely
esteem and honor was of that humor. Lo here Sir, (not to say half of what I
think of it) a conclusion very unworthy a Logician, and which is as far from
common, as from my particular sense. Indeed it was not you, that deduced it,
yet you should not have entertained it at second hand; and if it did not seem
to you to be palpably false, yet you might have demurred a while, and suspected
it; you have done your self wrong and me too, in conceiving so bad a thought
of your own merit and my fidelity; in expressing that you have some distrust of
your self, who are of no mean value, and but very little confidence in me, whose
freeness is something worth. I have but little skill in fallacies, and a mean
Jugler may sometimes gain credit with me* nevertheless, I should never have
been thus surprised and deluded, and when you have wrote to me in a dozen
Letters at least, that you knew some men that wrote pernicious Books, and
maintained Heretical Propositions* I did not yield to such an imagination that
this did reflect upon me; and when you sent a Lackey into this Province, I did
not forbear to send you commendations by him. You see that I am stung, and
therefore am sensible. If your love were not dear unto me, I could well-enough
bear your neglect of me; and if my zeal to you were not strong, I should
endeavor to solace my self, after your ill entreating of me. But because I
love, I would be requited with love; and I cannot brook to be taxt with a
fault, which I thought did not deserve so much as suspicion. Sir, I am upon the
point to publish a new Volume of Letters, where there be some which I have
written unto you, and others, where I make mention of you, as your virtues did
oblige me; and where will be one also, wherein (as some would persuade you) I
am injurious to you. How I pray, can all these agree? can I be both your friend
and your foe at once? can I blow with the same mouth, both hot and cold? can
the literal sense favor you, and the allegorical injure you? can I do you
wrong, when J must needs wrong my self? shall I give an occasion of distaste by
ambiguous terms, where I must make my self ridiculous by apparent
contradictions? This was it Sir, that was suggested to your credulity, and
which you did not reject at first acquaintance, as J had reason to expect from
your good discretion. These were the false surmises which were brought before
you, wherein you found more semblance of truth, then in the sincere
protestations which J made to you. I cannot conceive (knowing that you have
continued your friendship toward me, and that I too have not lost my reason)
how you could imagine, that I intended in a bravery to disingage you, and by
those aukeward spirits which I had known, I aimed directly at you, and might
not design some other as well. J know a great many of the Gascons, and as
there be some of them very moderate, so also there be others that are not so. I
know some of Provence and Corsica, and J am not ignorant of their natural
gentleness; I know some Spaniards, and I know how agreeable is their Yoke
with that which they call Castiga-vellacos.

Lastly you may believe that I have not traveled blindfold, and I had in vain
conversed with men, if I had not endeavored to know them; and yet in this
particular, men would feign make all my acquaintance to be terminated in you,
and that I have pardoned a thousand Humorists in the world (to whom my
proposition might be applied) for to violate you. They surmise, that having an
aim to wound some body, I made choice of one of my chiefest friends for my
mark; and that I have murmured closely and in dark language, that He is rough
and violent, whom J proclaim every where, and with loud accent, so completely
wise and noble. I will not cite unto you mean testimonies, for the confirmation
of this truth. I can allege My Lord, the Duke of -- and My Lord the Count of
-- of whom is here question made. They know both of them, how far J am your
servant, and with what fervency J did maintain your honor, and interests, on
a time when occasion was presented. J am willing to believe that your other
friends, might serve you in some steed in some other encounters, but in this
here, all the whole company (J except no man) was mute. There was not any
there, but my self that spoke strenuously in your behalf, concerning those
things that did reflect upon you; and the boldness of my affection carried me
so far, that the Lords, whom J now named unto you, did give me a public
testimony, and professed, (though with a little disgust) that I was too good a
friend to make a Courtier of I am therefore something aggrieved at this time,
to be requited thus with obloquie, where I thought I had deserved thanks; to
have preserved my fidelity inviolable toward you, and now to be accused of
treachery; to be the only man in your defense on that occasion, whereof you
have cause to boast, and now to be the only man of whom you complain. I do
not use to value my services which I perform to my friends, and I am content
to stand up for them manfully, without making unto them an account of my
prowess. Moreover Sir, this betraies grief, more then presumption, and may
be termed defending, rather then upbraiding; These are resentments which
accompany innocence that is offended; and which your facility (abused by the
malice of another) does force from my heart against my will. I will not
conceal it from you, you have made a deep wound in it, it makes me think in
all my dreams of the injustice which I suffer at your hand, and you had
utterly lost any friend, that had been less firm then my self, by putting
him to such a hazard. Wherefore Sir, for all the revenge that I desire for the
injury which I have received, take it not amiss, that I give you this Advice,
that you give less credit hereafter to another, and more to your self; that
you would be more jealous of those opinions that you have conceived upon your
first acquaintance of a business, and less affected to the rumors of the
City, which are not grounded upon any solid foundation. You should consider
the place from whence these quaint News have traveled; weigh the
circumstances of the thing, examine by what spirit the accuser was led
thereunto: and not examine His person only, and passion, and interests, but
also the deservings of the party accused, his manner and behavior of life, and
his former actions: suspend your judgment at leastwise, until time shall give
you a more exact and particular information of businesses; otherwise you shall
never want disquiet and vexation, and you should thus but feed upon suspicion
and distrust, which are very unwholesome viands. Men must not send you relations
of whatsoever an undiscreet friend or some rude sturdy servant, or such and
such a neighbor shall report unto -- they must have more care of the
tranquillity of your mind; and likewise for your part, you must not swear
unto the testimonies of all the Informers, that have a plot upon your
credulity, and take pleasure in the pain and exercise which they put you unto.
If you allow an open gate for all tales and suggestions to enter in, they will
throng into your house apace, and first come, first heard. To day, they will
inform you (and perhaps with specious colors too) that your Privado's do
divulge your secrets; and to morrow that your Domestics do rob and rifle you;
and at last that all the world is your enemy, and all private conferences are
but conspiracies against you. I conjure you Sir, for your own peace, not to
give so much credit to those things which do no way concern Religion, nor to
abandon your self to those Relators, who pretend to dispell melancholy, when
they are fit for nothing but to whisper follies into your ears, and to
calumniate with a good grace: make a distinction betwixt the fraudulent Arts of
Parasites and the freedom of ingenious men; between those that adore Fortune,
and those that regard nothing but Virtue. For my part, I declare freely unto
you that if Monsieur the -- were raised again, and would commit his
omnipotency to your hands, I should not do that to regaine your favor. what I
do now perform in regard of our friendship. At leastwise I should be more
stern and stubborn (then I am) in my displeasure, and more obstinate in seeking
to you, and less sollicitous of the event of my seeking. But I have not yet
the skill to complie with the times, and to be still on Fortunes side; I
profess such an austere honesty and goodness that is not of the present times.
I would take a pleasure to be a companion of my friend in exile, and be his
fellow-prisoner, I would run under his Ruin to bear it off, when I could
not help him to stand fast and subsist. Your Fortune being so well established
as it is, does not require any such proof and trial of fidelity. But it is
certain that you cannot desire of me any experiments of love so hazardous, but
I would willingly undergo them with pleasure, for your sake, and testify unto
you that I am (beyond comparison) more then all my Informers

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 7. June 1633.
LET. XXXII. To Monsieur de Serizay.
Sir,
THere is no way to bear any longer with the contumacy of your silence. I have
sent this messenger of purpose to make you speak, and to tell you (though with
some distaste to you) that you have lost your memory; and that is no less then
the third part of your soul. So that there remain but the Understanding and
the Will, wherein I have (perhaps) some nook and seat. You have promised me
wonders and performed just nothing; you did owe me a visit immediately after
your voyage to Saints, and since that, you might have gone to Rome and come
back again. You see here great cause of discontent; nevertheless I am so
facile, that if you would but bereave your self of the pleasures of the Court
for three or four days, I would seal you a general Pardon for all that is
past, and account you as honest a man as ever I did before. While I expect this
reasonable satisfaction which you cannot deny me, be pleased to acquaint my
Lord the Duke of Rochefoucaut that Monsieur de Nantes is extremely troubled,
that he cannot receive the honor which he would willingly pay him by coming to
visit him in these parts. He expects this morning some tidings from my Lord the
Duke of Espernon for to render himself where he shall appoint him to find
him; and I look upon him as upon a blessing which I expect to loose every
moment. If he were not preparing to Mass he would signify unto him his
discontents himself, and the earnest desire he has to make his Son one of
the Luminaries of our Church. He finds the business so far advanced, that
there will be no great difficulty to effect the rest, and that his Extraction
is so happy, that a little cultivation will produce rare and excellent fruits.
Do me the favor as to deliver to Monsieur his eldest Son the Panegyricke
framed for the King of Sueden, together with the Letter which I wrote the last
summer to poor --. This is not to recommend unto him the memory of her: I know
that She is infinitely dear unto him: nor to put him into any affright; for
men of his sort do apprehend nothing but dishonor. I desire only that he
should see that my poor judgment does sometimes jump with good
understandings, and that J had the honor to be his Rival in one passion that
he has harbored. If you do not send me by my Man the Discourse of --
garnished with Notes and Commentaries, I shall have a new cause of quarrel;
and do not you think that I betake my self to Monsieur -- for them, this is
an Oracle (indeed) that is always ready to answer, but I fear me, that you
have not always devotion enough to consult with him. Adieu Sir, I am absolutely

Balzac: 30. May. 1633. Your etc.

LET. XXXIII. To Monsieur Habert, Abbat of Cerizy.
Sir,
I Believe that you will not be offended with a petition that this Bearer shall
commence unto you in my behalf. Your goodness carries you so far as to
love your Persecutors; and you have entertained so favorably my first
importunities that I stand not now in fear of making motions. If you had give^
me the repulse at first, you had taught me the Virtue of discretion, and
provided better for your own quietness. But the force of example is dangerous:
the evil does suddenly insinuate and grow familiar, and treads often that way,
which it was wont to measure. So that I think that I have now some color of
justice to torment you; and it is habitual unto me to abuse a thing, when I
have not found difficulty enough to make me use it with moderation. I shall
continue Sir, an importunate Beggar till you forget to be generous: and do
not doubt, but I know how to make use of a good so diffusive, and beneficial,
as is your Amity. You shall travel to day for the good of my estate, because
there is a Council; and to morrow for the good of my soul, because there is a
Sermon; that I may acknowledge you my friend, for my spiritual as well as
temporal good, and that you may receive my thanks, both in this and the other
world. That which you are to pronounce with gracefulness of Action, and cannot
well be communicated in writing, has notwithstanding already given me infinite
delight upon paper. I have never seen our Mysteries illustrated with so much
light of eloquence, nor Reason so successefully employed in the service of
Faith, nor Christian Morality better seasoned, to make it relish well in
profane palates. But in this particular, J would feign be less beholding to
you, that J might have the more freedom, and be able to assure you (without
any supposition of engagement, or sign of acknowledgement) that I admire all
your Muses universally, both the politer and the severer ones; both those that
can compose Hymns and Anthems, and sing the praises of our Savior Christ: and
those that can resolve Problems, and deal in Christian learning. J bid you
good day, and remain with all my soul

Sir, Your etc.
Paris 29. Apr. 1636.
LET. XXXIV. To Monsieur De GAILLARD.
Sir,
BE of good courage, and start not at the opening of my packet; I do assure
you beforehand, that it is not my Ghost that talks to you, and that the Letter
that I write unto you, does not come from the other world. The rumor which was
scattered concerning my death, has not killed me; and I am yet, (since it is
the pleasure of God) a witness of his works, and an Adorer of his power. I
have ere this, received the alarm of the like news; but J am no longer
credulous to dreams and presages; my soul does not labor with those popular
infirmities: and I do consent with that Grecian, that all the wishes of
enemies, all the imprecations of Poets, and all the false bruits of Fame, are
not able to bring on our destiny one hour the sooner. There is a Gentleman in
Gascogne, who is Chronicled to have been slain in the Battle of Yury; and he
is yet very well notwithstanding, and means to live long. J am Sir, of the same
humor too, and confess to you, that J do not much hate my life, though J have
little cause to love it. Your Stationers indeed, did not believe this: they have
handled me as though I had been dead indeed, and have imagined withal, that
they be my rightful Heirs ex ass, having seized upon the first papers of
mine that they could meet with. J am something apprehensive of this injury, and
it should grieve me if Monsieur -- should be the Author of it; because J should
then endure it with more impatience yet. To say truth, if this be not to wound
and violate (downeright) the law of Nations, it is (at least) to deflowre and
taint it: and you will confess with me, that it could not be pleasing unto
me, that the -- should be published without asking my consent thereunto. Had it
been so, J should not have been (perhaps) very averse, and J should have
desired him only to alter something for my sake, and something for his own.
For though his understanding be passing good, yet you know well, that our
Grammarians do not allow his style for regular; and though their scruples be
ill grounded, yet they must be considered. That which I would feign have
changed, and where I thought I had some small interest, was one word, which my
ancient Enemy had already miserably mangled; and which, (not wanting spirit and
life in its natural place) does resemble those delicate plants, which dye as
soon as they be transplanted from their own banks. But remedies come now too
tardy. J must comfort my self against this, as well as other injuries. This is
but dallying to former wrongs; and such pinches should well be borne with, by a
man that never uses to complain of Treasons and Assassinates. For your
satisfaction Sir, let it suffice that I have a perfect knowledge of your
wisdom and Honesty, and that I would trust you with my life, my honor, and my
fortunes. If J had had so base a thought as to suspect you in this dealing, J
should believe that J were bound to do penance for my suspicion. J know that
you are every way virtuous, and my firm friend, as I am very really

Sir Your etc.
Balzac 10. Jan. 1634.
LET. XXXV. To the same --
Sir,
I Have received your incomparable Book: in the which (after a long and tedious
perusal) my Grammar could find no construction, nor my Logic common sense.
This is not the first time that that poor Wit has strayed so. He has been,
this long time ridiculous without being facetious, and has been a
laughing stock to the vulgar, and an object of pity to the wise. The late
Monsieur -- did use to call him the greatest enemy that ever Reason had,
between Cales and Bayonne; and said, he was a fool in two sciences, and in
four languages. Nevertheless if our friend shall think him worthy of some
traces of his pen, let us indulge him that exercise, with this proviso, that he
be not violent, and that he put not himself to a heat; that (if it please him)
he do not deal seriously with him, or arm himself at all points, against an
Adversary that deserves not any encounter but with pinnes. As for the -- you
wrong your self, for to mistrust the moderation of my spirit. Jn the estate
that J have ordered and settled it in, I have less passion then the King of the
Stoics; and J must be excited for eight days together, to the cruelty of
hateing any man whatsoever, for one half an hour. It is not my intention to
write against Monsieur -- but to discourse with him; and I have not so little
wit, but that J can distinguish his person from his cause. He has obliged me
with so good grade, and spoken of me in such high language and sumptuous
terms, that I cannot doubt of his respect, or his affection toward me. And he
shall likewise see my resentment of it, through the whole file of my Discourse;
wherein I am resolved to temper my self so discreetly, that if I persuade him
not to my opinion, I shall not make my proceedings odious; and if I do not
rest satisfied with what he says, I shall contradict him but obliquely, and
with a kind of Biasse, which shall not be distasteful unto him. This will be
(perhaps) the first example of modesty, that has been heard of among the
Disputants of this age; and we will demonstrate to those of that side, who
talk outragiously in Problems of small importance; that the altercations of
honest men are without choler, and that generous enemies live better together
then malicious Burghers. For the rest Sir, I desire you to continue the pains
that you have begun, and to send me wherewith J may fortify all the Approaches
that are liable to assault and battery. I shall fear nothing being strengthened
with so powerful succors; and you will justify my cause if it be good, or give
it a color of justice, if it be not so. See what an enterprise it was in you
to love me: You could never have conceived a more pernicious design for your
self. It will repent you more then once, and you will renounce at any time (I
am sure) the sorry purchase which you have made in the acquaintance of a
troublesome man. Nevertheless he is one that is most affectionately

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 20. March. 1634.
LET. XXXVI. To Madam DESLOGES.
Madam,
IT is now three Months that I have expected Monsieur d' Auvila, that I might
be informed of the state of your health: But having lately understood that it
is not so current as I could wish it, and mine being not so firm, that J could
adventure upon a journey, J have dispatched one toward you to learn the truth
thereof. It will be an incredible ease to my mind, if I find that it was but a
false alarm, or that your sickness by this time be over-past. J do hope for
one of the two ( Madame,) because J do passionatly desire it; but J beseech
you to believe that it is long of my crazie body that J am no sooner cleared of
my fear, and rid of the pain it put me to; and that you do not see me in
person in steed of the Messenger that I have sent. He has in charge to
present you with my fine Cuts or small Ingravery, which J have newly received
from Paris; J thought meet to send you this dumb visit that it might not
oblige you to any compliment that might put you to trouble; you do receive
(indeed) more troublesome ones, sometimes; And if the sullenness of my
countenance, be an object of bad presage, you will confess that the perpetual
silence that does accompany it, is a great commodity: at leastwise it can never
be offensive to you, since it leaves you still at quiet, and demanding no
ceremony from you, it must perplexe you less then the Antiquities and
Originals of La March, and Limousin. Finally Madame, it lies in you to
preserve your bounties for me* and maintain me in my possession. I know that
Monsieur d' Aille is of infinite value, and I believe I cannot loose him, since
it was you that gave him me; you have too good a hand to do any thing that
should not last, and there is no accident that can menace and shake that
friendship, whereof virtue is the cause, and you the Mediatrix. I esteem that
of this rare Personage as a treasure, and J would be well pleased that he
should know by your means, that J admire the Eloquence of his Dogmaticall and
peaceable Divinity, though J do not subscribe unto the Doctrine of his
polemicall writings. J most humbly kiss your hand, and remain

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 16. Ian. 1637.
LET. XXXVII. To Monsieur de --
Sir,
TAke pity on a man that has not the leisure to live, that is always busy
and always sickly, whom a thousand griefs seize upon in his chamber, and a
thousand persecutions throng upon, from without. Monsieur de -- knows it well
that I am no dissembler, and will testify unto you (I assure my self) that in
the state that I am in, I can but admire those letters, to the which I should
frame an answer. I avow unto you Sir, that it cost me some pains to decipher
them: But yet I do not complain of my travel, which found most happy
success. J have discovered infinite rarities under the riddles of your Scribe,
and I did not mistake the Graces, though He had begrimed them all over. I send
them back to you, since it is your request* and yet notwithstanding I cease not
to deteine them; my memory is not so unfaithful, but it preserves the better
part of your fair compositions, as well as of your excellent conversation. It
is certain that this gave me some gusts and appetites, which I never had,
before you came hither. I am not good, Sir, but by your goodness, and if I
have any degree of holy heat in me, it is neither proper nor natural unto me,
J have it from your communication. You are at this day one of those Authors
whom I cite still with a grace and an Emphasis: I do arm my self with your
reasons against the enemies of Truth, and you are all my French Divinity. What
a harvest might be reapt (think you) of devout meditations, and Spiritual
Treatises from less seed the^ are your Discourses and Letters? A man might
extract from them more sapp and juice then from many Quadragesimall Sermons of
Spanish Postillers; and were they but a little amplified, they might serve for
complete Apologies of Christian doctrine, and solid refutations of unsound
Philosophy. Your acquaintance then, is no small purchase, and J owe you more
the^ vulgar thanks for it. But since you desire none other but my edification:
instead of minting fastidious complements for you, J will labor to put your
wholesome counsels in practice. J will become a good man if J can, that you
may be celebrated in my works, being not contented with words. The curing of a
disease does sufficiently proclaim the sovereignty of the remedy; and it is a
far better way to magnify your style by performing actions of virtue, which
it does propose as its end, then to cry out Euge at every period. There is no
hopes to go beyond this. Remember me if you please in your Sacrifices, that
is, love me effectually, after your way, since J am after mine, and that very
sincerely

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 30. December. 1636.
LET. XXXVIII. To Monsieur Girard, Official of the Church of Angoulesme.
Sir,
YOur favors have exhausted my thanks. I cannot choose but acquaint you that I
do repossesse my old pieces again, and that your Love is still ingenious in
obliging those whom you affect. I doubt not but that that Courtesies that I
have received from Monsieur de -- are the effects of your testimonies of me;
and I must ascribe all the contentment that I have received thereby to your
preparation and induction. There is no subject so vile and mean but gains
price by your estimation. You have found the trick or secret to make objects
swell beyond their proportion ad infinitum; and to stamp a man Illustrious,
though of a very abject condition. I came to know him by the civilities of --,
which are far different from the bravado's of --. Are not these the most
tyrannical Spirits in the world? that should say that I could hinder, that any
Books should be written or published, at a hundred leagues distance? that is,
that I should maintain an Agent in all the Printing-houses of France, that
should prevent the publication of Antiphilarkes. These Messieurs that have
handled me in such a sort, that fire and poison would seem to an Italian too
gentle tortures to revenge their cruelty, are, at this time, offended
(forsooth) that I should be furnished with so much as a buckler, and that I
should be offered a Sanctuary. They demand a reason of me why a man, whom I
never knew, should take compassion on Innocence oppressed, and could not endure
the noise and insolence of their false triumphs. which J should not do
neither, dear Friend, if I would give vent and liberty to my grief, and that
Nature suffered not in the suppression of so just complaint. And yet J must
continue to do her violence and deserve the approbatio^ of Monsieur our
Prelate. J beg from you his good favors, and desire you both to believe that J
am affectionately

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 20. March 1633.
LET. XXXIX. To the same: --
Sir,
IT is not your Will that I solicit, but your Memory. For amidst the press
of business of the whole Province, which you do willingly take the charge of,
mine happily may slip out of your memory without your fault. The importance is,
to commence it with an opinion that it is feasible, and with a resolution to
carry it; for if reason be urged timorously, and if a man do not descend
straight from generalities to particulars, a thousand journeies unto the --
will not be worth one; and we should but take much pains to little purpose.
Monsieur de -- shall pardon me, if J do not find my self either hardy, or
strong enough to undertake the work which he has done me the honor to
design me for; and for such a task, a more peaceable and happy retreat, and
a more practiced and expert quill then mine, are requisite. J have used my hand
and mind to write but toys, and things un-necessary. For the future, I
purpose not to write any works of supererogation, but what the Church
prescribes, and God does reckon as meritorious. I am extremely troubled at my
Cousins mischance, and the burning of his Study. He cannot choose but be very
sensible of this loss* since it was the chiefest part of his wealth, and
thereby saw the Issues of his brain perish before his face, without being able
to redress it. This must be his comfort, that he is young and laborious, and
that Fortune cannot ravish from him those true goods which he is Master of. The
loss of a vessel is not valued, if the Pilot be saved; and Captains have
been seen to triumph after the loss of many Armies. Miser and nudus Imperator
invenit exercitum* Our Advocate is more cruel then the War, and more severe
then Justice: He has slain in his Letters my Lord the Marshall of -- and my
Lord the Duke of --, who are yet alive to pardon him. Tell him (if you please)
that he do not traffic any more in such news, for he will be reckoned among
the fabulous Authors else, and men will tax me for bad intelligence. I know
well that he is not surety for the news that flies abroad, but he is
answerable for the asseveration wherewith he does recommende them unto me; and
he must talk of something that is not known, or at leastwise with the
cautious form of the Poets, when they say, ut fama est, ut perhibent, si
credere dignum est. I bid you good even, and remain perfectly

Sir Your, etc.
Balzac. 4. Feb. 1634.
LET. XL. To the same --
Sir,
YOur friend does not well to take the Alarm, since it is not J that gave it
him. I was never used to promise but with an intention to perform; and those
that have sovereign power over me, have not power enough to make me falsify my
word. As for those idle Co^templators that talk according to their fancy,
concerning the occasion of my Voyage; I do not think it any part of their
office to render an account of my actions; I ever thought that the liberty of
going and coming was tolerated as lawful in this Kingdom; and when a man
departed out of Paris, he was not bound to publish a Manifesto, to make it
known to all the world. It is not without reason that Monsieur de Silhon does
much esteem the eloquence of Maffaeus. The late Monsieur Scaliger, who was
none of the best friends the Jesuits had, did so before him; and see here one
trace of his pen concerning it, in one of his Letters. Maffaeus ille quisquis
est vir eloquentissimus est, ambitiosae tamen magis quam castigatae facundiae.
He commends him (you see) though not without exception, yet in my judgment
without envy; since in this particular the most Intelligent of the Society
concur with him in the same opinion, and namely the Historiographer of the
Low-countrey-warres, who in his Dialogues, speaks of him thus; though it be in
the person of another: Miratus sum florem and numeros Orationis. Dixi
Scriptorem mihi videri non huius aevi, sed e veteri illo Ordine and quidem
Patricio Historicorum. Nihil uspiam incultum neglectumque; concinna perfectaque
omnia; nisi forte eo peccat, quod nihil peccat, nam and ingenium Scriptoris
anxium apparet interdum, and dictio videtur exquisita adsonum, eumque simili
modulatione crebro fusum. Quare monui ut orationis culturam saepius
libentiusque dissimularet, nec verba ita trajiceret quasi complementa
numerorum. I am yet in the same state, that you left me in at parting, but that
I have still the same malady though not the same consolation. My Ague visits me
every night, though (indeed) not in the same pomp and ceremony as it used,
when its accesses were regular. But yet, it does still handle me rudely, and J
do much fear the consequence of this custom. Come Sir, and exorcise this
evil spirit out of my body, by the infusion of some mirth into my mind, and
think not that I can receive any true joy, being so far distant from you. I am

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 7. Apr. 1634.
LET. XLI. To the same --
Sir,
SInce it is impossible to withstand it, I have sent you the Letter, that you
desired to see. But you shall read it (if you please) to your own ears only,
that it may not awake Envy. And that some Philarchus do not over-heare you.
Lo here withal, the three lines of Cardinal Bentivolio's Letter, which you
did so often demand of me, and which J can no longer deny you without
incivility. Di nuovo prego V. Sria a 'ringratiar, etc. I do again entreat you
to thank Monsieur Balzac in my name, and by the same opportunity to make him
an ample testimony of my great affection toward his deserts; and tell him
this withal, that no pen does more discourage me then his, for J see too well
how far it does surpass mine. I must confess that in this particular, to
do me grace he has been unjust to himself, and that the same motion of
humility that prompts Princes of his rank and parentage to wash poor men's
feet, has moved him to use me so respectfully* Neither do J pretend to take a
pride in it; but yet I think, it will not be denied, but that I may derive some
comfort from it. And (indeed) it seems that the goodness of this brave
Worthy, would needs make me amends for the malice of my Adversaries. These few
lines do weigh down the swelling Volumes of my Opponents, and I shall use no
other refutation of all that has, or shall be written against me. For the
present Sir, I am not of that man's opinion who censures that passage, La noire
mere des estoiles; the Poet that so styles the Night, is not so bold and rash
as the Grammarian supposes, that reprehends him. And if this be as he says, a
A Dialect spoken in Gascoigne different from the French and of near affinity
with the Baskish language which is spoken in Biscay.
Gasconisme, Tibullus was a Gascon when he said, Ludite, jam Nox jungit equos:
currumque sequuntur
Matris lascivo sydera fulvachoro.
The Night there is mother of the stars; as in another Poet the Nurse of
them. (...).
Nox, aureorum furva nutrix syderum.
Our Man writes to me often enough, but he puts me to hereafter in all his
Letters; and does ever promise what he never performs. Nevertheless I do
believe, that He will certify me by the first Post touching the event of
that business which makes you so anxious, and I will not fail to impart unto
you the news, as soon as ever the Carrier brings them. I am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac: 20. July. 1632.
LET. XLII. To Madamoisell de CAMPAGNOLE.
My dear Niece,
YOu did not well, that you did not keep that floury Chaplet, which J had the
favor to receive from your Lackey; the winter would not have budded but for
you, and by consequence you should have better valued this favor, and managed
your Roses more sparingly. They should have been bestowed about your temples,
for an honor to its pregnancy, and not have been bestowed on an Hermit: for
this were to hide a miracle. J see well your drift herein, you would needs be
liberal in a time of scarcity; and loose your own right, that you might
please my passion with something; which is so much affected with true and
lively flowers: Which J do term so, because the other, which men do so much
esteem, having not any odor which animates, are in my judgment but fair
pictures, or specious carcasses. But J beseech you to resolve me one scruple
that does trouble me; and ease me of my perplexity. Tell me, was this because
there be some already, or because there be some yet left? are these remainders,
or forerunners? was it the last spring that was tardy, or the new that is
hasty and forward? lo here a Problem worthy to be discussed by the
Philosophers of your Sex, and it would not be amiss to propose it to Her whom
you speak of, for to have her resolution. I profess, that if she be very
expert, she is a very dissembler, for I could never discover her to this hour.
She has such a heavy dull apprehension, that a man had need interpret twice
or thrice over what ever he speaks to her. It were easier to converse with a
deaf woman, and I would choose rather to make my self understood by a Cornet,
then to be my own Interpreter. Yet if this stupidity be without malice, it is
more tolerable then malicious cunning God permits himself to be entreated,
(sometimes) by a simple thumping of the breast, and often rejects eloquent and
loud prayers. It is a miserable light, that, whose glory and luster flows from
vice only, and yet is not offensive to great men. A good Beast is of more worth
the^ a bad Angel. This is the upshot of all ( my dear Niece) that you must
lay a foundation of Bounty, upon which it is allowed you to raise a Structure
of other virtues, that are more high, and more glorious. You did not stand in
need of this lesson, but I would needs fill up my paper, before I would put a
period, and tell you that J am

Balzac. 15. Dec. 1637. Your etc.

LET. XLIII. To Monsieur the Abbat of Bois-Robert.
Sir,
THe world is full of darstardly friends, but you are none of this world. You
can love dareingly and resolutely; and J see that my injuries are (commonly)
more apprehended by you, then by my self; nevertheless I am much vexed with
the language which you received from Messieurs the -- These are men, that do
understand too well the points of honor, for to give me any satisfaction; and
for my part, I carry so much goodness about me, as to demand nothing from them
but my life. J never believed that their Superior had promised me nothing. Jf
he has left them no other debts to pay but this, they have great cause to
commend him for his good providence and thrift. Jn the mean while, J cannot
dissemble my sorrow to you for his death, nor forget to tell you, that in all
his ill carriages toward me, he has never done me a greater affront then
this, to dye. If J had had some particular Revelation concerning it, or if he
had advertised me thereof by the Spirit of Prophecy, which is spoken of in his
Elogy, he should have seen his prating long since condemned, and should not
have carried away into the other world, that great opinion of sufficiency,
which his Fraternity did sooth him with. For the other extravagant Doctor,
which you mention, it would not be acceptable to God almighty, that J should
undertake his reformation; it were needful to create him anew, for to amend
him* It were no mean enterprise but to examine his book, and to make a breviary
of all the absurd things therein contained. J would choose as soon to be
condemned to be a Scavenger for the streets of Paris, and to carry away all the
dirt out of that little world. His impertinencies are infinite, and would puzzle
a better Arithmetician then I am to calculate them, and he that would go about
to count them, Contera ancora in sul'ombroso dosso etc.
Will count the Trees on top of shady Appennine
As Soon: or waves, when winds do chafe the curling Brine.


Jf this Bearer shall stand in need of recommendation to the Council, J doubt
not, but knowing his name, and what a share J bear in his interests, you will
effectually assist him for love of me, who am more then any man in the world;

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 30. Ian. 1629.
LET. XLIV. To the same --
Sir,
I Am (ever this Month) confined to my bed, where I received your Letter
directed from Roan. To read there the continuation of your sickness, could not
(you must think) be any assuagement of mine. J bestow a thousand curses upon
the waters of Forges, for impairing your health. Propertius has not been more
liberal, or bestowed more upon the Baiae that killed Augustus his Nephew. But
a maine difference is, that this man was a Poet, and did but act grief: but I
am truly afflicted; and true friendship does really suffer more, then flattery
can personate. J am very sorry that -- has not demeaned himself toward you
so well as he should have done; and if you have resolved upon his ruin, I do
not mean to step in between him and it, and undertake his protection. I do
ever side with all your passions without premeditation; and that man that does
not please you, has no allurements so powerful, as can render him pleasing to
me: nevertheless if this man's offense were venial, and your justice could be
satisfied; J would adventure to beg his pardon, and would become his surety,
that he should willingly undergo all the punishments that you would inflict
upon him, to regaine your favor. There are some businesses between us, that
force me to dissemble a little, and do not permit an apparent rupture, if there
come not from you an express order to the contrary. But being once freed out
of this turmoile, if he be so unlucky as to offend you again, I declare unto
you that I do even now renounce him; and J had rather forget my obligations to
him, then to carry affections repugnant to yours. Your Cosen is too generous
to oblige (so nobly) a man whom he never knew; and J had rather believe, that
his esteem of me, is but the consequence of your love, then to imagine it to
be an apprehension of any merit in me. J do purpose a voyage beyond the seas
the next year; If J take ship at Diepe, as J hope to do, J shall not fail to
go and kiss His hands at Roan; and to make him see that the Monster, that
Father Goulu speaks of, is a tame Beast, (at least) and capable of knowledge.
If J did exceedingly rejoice at the news, when a Canonship was bestowed upon
you, J forgot how far this Dignity was below your deserts. It suffices me,
that I give you some testimony that I am not sorry for it; and that J consider
it (as in the croude) among other Benefices that shall fall upon you; knowing
that some few men's lives (that be not yet dead) are the only obstacles to your
Virtues. J expect by the first Post, some better news concerning your health,
and ever remain with all my soul

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 10. May 1634.
LET. XLV. To the same.
Sir,
YOur last message did give me exceeding content, and though I am well assured
of your affection toward me, yet I take a singular delight to read in your
Letters that you love me. These be words, whose fragrancy time cannot wear
away; and which will be as pleasant to me many years hence* as when they were
first spoken. I am (indeed) ravished with your last protestations: But I
rejoice with you the rather, for the felicity of this new age, since you are in
part the cause of it, and that by your suggestions, Monsieur -- does purpose to
allot a considerable Tenement of lands for the relief of poor and
disconsolate Muses. We shall see this year Sonnets, and Odes, and Elegies
enough. The Almanac does promise wonderful plenty, and Parnassus must not
yield less then it did under the Pontificate of Leo the Tenth. For you Sir, if
you believe me, you shall never take pen in hand again, but in case of
necessity, and only that commerce may not decay. Hitherto you have been a
Horace, now you are a Mecenas; and if we do not celebrate you (every Scribler
of us) and address our Works, both in prose and verse to you, you have just
cause to indict us of ingratitude. For my part, I would willingly both live and
dye under your patronage; and I do provide an Oration for you in genere
demonstrativo; wherein (at first salute) J shall astonish the world with this
great prodigy. That you are both a complete Courtier, and a perfect Friend.
Since you would absolutely have it so, that J come to Paris, it is to you, that
J shall make my most frequent resorts to do my respects; and it is in your
Cabinet that I shall (by your good leave) redeem the time, which J have lost
in the Country, but we must give place (a while) to the anger of stormeing
Jove; or to speak the language of men, we must permit it to rain and freeze in
Beausse; and not go to out-brave the month of February. J have no great need
to dye out of too much dareing. My health is still very infirm and unconstant;
and if J did not take incredible care, (I say not to preserve my person, but
only to continue my sleeps) you had lost me a great while since. Since J am
wholly yours, you will allow me the use of this word, and take it not ill, that
J reckon my self in the number of those things, that are not to you
indifferent. You have infinitely obliged me in assuring Monsieur the Count of
-- of the continuance of my zeal and fidelity. J have made him so eminent and
public a mark, that as J can never recant it, so can he never suspect it. I
omit a thousand things that I should tell you of: but this will be imploiment
for the next week: and I am forced to conclude that I am

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 10. Feb. 1632.
LET. XLVI. To Monsieur de Savignac.
Sir,
EIther I have not well interpreted my self or Monsieur de -- has not well
understood me. I do ever value the merits of Madame d' Anguitar, and if it
must be, that I must (by a second act) confirm that testimony which I have
given of Her, I am ready to declare my self a new, and to commend once more a
Lady that is so praiseworthy. It is true, that for the interest of her Honor,
it will be some thing material, to understand the cause that made my
intentions to be mis-construed, and that I lead you to the very source of this
jealousy; Whereas, it seemed to certain Cavaliers, my friends, that I did too
much approve of her singular humor, and frequent retirings, one of the most
eloquent of them took a fancy to publish his dislike in this point; and to
write a reproachful Letter unto me in the name (as he says) of the whole
Corporation of Honest men. Wherein he proclaims open war against me in their
name, as though I had conspired against fair Society; and calls me the Common
enemy; the universally jealous man, the Tyrant to both sexes. He does imagine
that it is my intent to shut up in Prison all fair and delectable things, for
to punish curious eyes. He cries out, that I would feign abrogate the sweetest
laws of this Realm, and bring in the cruelty of that custom in Spain, where
honest women are mewd up in cages, and honest men adore but doors and
windows. From Madrid, he passes to Constantinople, and tells me in a great
rage, that I am good nothing but to be a Counselor of the great Turk, for to
advise him to raise the walls of the Seraglio higher, and to double the Guard
of the Sultana; Then he does accuse me for a thousand mischiefs and takes me
for Him that invented the iron grates, the locks, the vailes and maskes: and
for the Author of all those things that oppose his intrusion and saucy
curiosity. Insomuch that he imagines that I must render him a reason of the
secrets and difficulties of all riddles, of the darkness of all ancient
Oracles; of the Allegories of Poets; and of the Mysteries of all Religions. To
make answer to far less then this, it behooved me to study a long Apology;
and (as ill luck was) when I received his Letter, I was not in the humor of
making Books. Wherefore Sir, I profess to you truly, I chose rather to yield
the^ defend my self; and abandon my Maxims to the verbosity of my good friend,
rather then maintain them with the expense of so many words as he did plye
them with: But if I be not deceaved, there is a good deal of difference
between my Maxims and the praises of Madame d' Anguitar; and he must take
heed of confounding in the design that I have, that which I distinguished in
the Sea this Letter in the supply to the second part of his Letters. Let. XVIII
Letter which I wrote unto Her. To say that She is one of the Perfections of
the world, is an immovable truth, for which I would fight all my life time:
But to say that such Perfections must be sequestered from the eyes of men, is (I
suppose) a problematicall opinion, which I may revoke without prejudice to my
own constancy, or to the worth of these Perfections. But on the contrary, most
will be apt to believe, that this will be sufficient amends, and just
satisfaction for the injury I did them, in condemning them to Solitude and
Retiredness; and will call it their revoking from exile, and releasing out of
bondage. Thus Sir, I preserve still my first Design; and my commendations
remain whole and entire among the ruins of my Maxims. Nay out of their
demolitions, Trophies might be erected to the honor of Madame d' Anguitar, and
a Theater built, where She might be gazed upon, by those that can but divine
and guess at Her; and that the Desert might no longer have such advantage over
the City. This is not then to rebel against her Virtues, but to wish Her a
more spacious Empire, and a greater number of Subjects then She has had; nor
to go about to eclipse her light, but to adjudge, that She should issue forth
out of the clouds, for the benefit and comfort of the Universe. I pity those
Critics that take it otherwise; and am sorry that Monsieur -- is fallen upon a
thought so far distant from mine. He might have understood me well enough,
without putting me to the pains of interpreting my self; and might have seen
(moreover) that though in this occasion I would not at all consider the
interests of another, yet I should have considered my own at least. Does he
imagine that I could have been persuaded to spoil at one dash, one of the
dearest Issues of my Brain? and to bereave my self of the acknowledgements of
one of the greatest Personages of the world, who thinks Herself in some
measure beholding unto me? I am no such Enemy to my self, or so prodigal of
the good that I have acquired. I do not mean to throw dirt upon that piece,
where I have bestowed so many and so rich Colors; and believe not you, that I
would have razed out (being thereunto entreated by none) those words that did
no way dislike me; you that know how Heliodorus denied to do the like, though
earnestly solicited thereunto, by a whole Council. If you do me the honor
as to make a journey to morrow to Balzac, I will tell you more; though
negociating with an understanding so serene as yours, I think I have spoken
enough already concerning it. This is

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac 26. March 1637.
LET. XLVII. To Monsieur Chapelain.
Sir,
I Am newly out of a fit of an Ague; and though the shaking and tossing be
past, yet it is not yet calm. My head is so numbed, and deafned with
yester-daies tempest, that I am for no reasonable use; and in the estate that J
am, I am not fit for any Society. Nevertheless there is no way to put off so
just an office as this to another time, and (though with hazard of
incongruities, and offending against Grammar rules) you must receive from me
these three or four ragged lines. You have obligations upon me, both new and
old, which cannot by me be sufficiently acknowledged. I am ashamed to be
beloved so much and deserve it so little; and if you be not contented with an
honest Heart, I can offer you nothing worthy so noble and pure affection as
yours. The last Letter which you did me the honor to write unto me, has given
proof thereof beyond all question; and J have kissed each line thereof as so
many traces or footsteps of the golden Age, and so many pictures of the
sincerity of the old World. Your cou^sells are most wise and loyal, and I
would most punctually render them obedience, if J were in case to do it. But
besides that it is impossible to appease and conjure down Envy, and that I am
too weak to grapple with it: Physicians do prohibit all study and labor of
the spirits; and tell me, that I cannot meditate one half an hour, without
running the hazard of never meditating more. So that Sir, it is more expedient
that my cause should perish then J; and that I should be beaten at Paris in my
absence, then that I should die here in person. You will (no doubt) be of my
opinion, and since the occasion (which is presented) of dying, is none of the
most glorious: you will not take it amiss if I make some more use yet of my
life, to be

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 30. Ian. 1632.
LET. XLVIII. To the same --
Sir,
YOU do wrong to that Passion or regard which I bear toward you, to call it
Civility. It deserves a better name then that; and we are not acquainted in the
country with those virtues, countenance and Show. I deal very seriously with
my friends, and I speak nothing but what I mean to make good; and by the
principles of ancient Philosophy, I do think that a Complement does as much
oblige me as a Contract. Think not then that I deal with you out of Common
places: they are the true motions of my soul, which I show you, and if I could
exhibit my very soul, you would confess, that the expressions of my tongue
are far inferior to the Idea by the which they were framed. It is you alone
Sir, that can content those that demand satisfaction, and make my interests
even what please you. J have neither liberty nor election when J see the bent
of your desire. Tear, burn, scatter the ashes of my Books in the wind; I do
submit them to all the rigor of your justice; Tibi in me, meaque aeterna
authoritas esto. You are no more my Counselor but my Sovereign, and by
consequence, deal not with me by Arguments and Remonstrances, but impose Laws
upon me and prescribe Commands. You shall never find a more docile and supple
nature then mine, no not if you went to seek in Asia, that country of perfect
Slaves. Nevertheless, I think that my Humility will not take off the edge of
persecution, but on the contrary, it will make my Adversaries to swell and grow
insolent: But I have comforts ready at hand against all the ill fortunes which
I expect. In this, I desire only the glory of obeying you. It is enough for me
that I have showed that friend-ship can do more with me, then Tyranny, and I
would acknowledge your Jurisdiction, when I might decline all Other. J am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac* 20. July. 1632.
LET. XLIX. To the same --
Sir,
HItherto I have beheld (without disturbance) all the assaults of my enemies;
and they have but scratcht some lines of my Books, and at most have called to
question some things of small consequence. But now that they wound me in the
tenderest part of my heart, I profess to you, J begin to have some resentment*
I cannot forgive them the injury they have done me, to raise jealousies and
make a breach between us Two. And I have conceived such indignation against
this imposture, that it is impossible I should write unto you soberly and
moderately. If J do not exercise vindicative justice, there is no reason J
should desire it. That which does most of all trouble me is, that I do run
after a Fantasme, and that I know not whom to lay hold upon. And truly, if
there were any means to discover this honest Secretary that was bestowed on me
without my knowledge, I think it were very just to pay him his wages. How ever,
here is a man that would gain a name by such an occasion; and does pronounce
against him that terrible Arrest. Ligno pereat qui fumum vendidit. These men
should be made an example; and whereof a civil Society ought to be quickly
purged. They are the most dangerous Thieves of all, that rob us of our friends:
which be goods, that should remain ours, after the loss of all other. J
confess, that J have many infirmities, and am subject to err a thousand
ways, but J am not capable of an offense of that high nature that J am charged
with; and the goodly Letter, which you sent me a copy of, carries neither my
style nor my Genius; nevertheless, your faith has betrayed a weakness, and
you have staggerd a little upon the opening of this false packet. Assure your
self Sir, if J have forfeited your good Opinion and favor, that J would not
outlive so smart an Affliction; and you may believe, that J do not rashly
hazard a thing so precious as that. J make not only Sincerity and Zeal the
companions of my Friendship* but Discretion also and Respect. The Persons whom
J love, are to me almost in the same degree of veneration, as those things
which J adore: I approach them not but with awe, which accompanies Religion;
and it is certain, that I am so fearful to offend them, that (least J should
distaste them with my sullenness) J do force and feign smiles when I am most
sad. You shall know more of this in the progress of my life; and avouch, that
I know how to practice those maxims, which J hold, and approve my self, with
courage and constancy

Sir Your, etc.
Balzac. 1. March 1632.
LET. L. To the same --
Sir,
SInce I have arrived here, I have received the Letter, which you did me the
honor to write unto me; which is, a continuation of your courtesies and
bounty, and an entrance upon a commerce, where I must take all, and you give
all. While I expect to make benefit of your Prose, I feast upon your verses,
which have disrelisht all that I took for excellent before. I never saw
boldness more discreet, courage better maintained, or sweetness less
effeminate. These are Sir, worthy Harbingers of your Damsel. But you do her
wrong to seem to doubt of her good Fate, and do not believe the auspicious
omens that appeared at her Nativity, which promise long life. If you have
patience enough to consummate this work, all the rest is sufficient: your
natural wit is strong and pregnant; you have the perfection of Arts; your
Cabinet is a Magazin of ornaments and riches, to adorn the Subject. What more
is wanting to you? Be not nice any longer: you are condemned to go forward
with it; except you mean to quit one passion for another, and abandon Poetry
for the Politics: wherein (to tell you the truth) J believe you will prove
admirable. I am of your opinion, that fifteen hundred verses at one breath, go
far; and that it would not be amiss, to set more reasonable bounds to every
Book. But touching all this, you may consult with Vida and Fracastorius; and if
they be not of the same opinion, Scaliger may be the super-numerary. Our Doctor
says, that he has not so much need of counsel as of aid, and since things
past, fall not under deliberation, it is no time now, to know whether he has
erred; he desires you only to teach him how to deny it with some fair
probability; to persuade the people that Pericles is not fallen, though the
people saw it. For my part, J am confident of the good success of all your
enterprises. Having found the bell motivo in favor of the Poet Marini, there
is no such Monster which you cannot shape and make handsome; and without doubt,
you have such precious Oil, that one drop thereof is sufficient to blanch a
Moore. It is

Sir Your etc.
Balzac 1. Aug. 1632.
LET. LI. To the same --
Sir,
MY silence is not the effect of Sloth; and you may believe that it is against
my will that J deprive my self of the contentment that J took in entertaining
you. The reasons that obliged me to silence, were more just then J wished they
had been; and a troublesome Defluxion which fell upon my eyes has failed to
charge you with a blind friend: For in that case, I think you could not have
chosen but to have been my Guide; and I did already make account to learn to
sing, that J might chante your Poem. But (by the great mercy of God) J
recovered my eyesight yesterday; and you are freed from the sad office, which
my distressed Fortune might have required from your good nature. Now that I do
speak, and do not rattle in the throat; J must give you an account of the
voyage that J made; and I must tell you with as much ceremony and eloquence as
heretofore, that I have been to meet the Court as far as Cadilliac. I had the
honor there, to do my respects to my Lord --. But His sickness, that took
him the very day that he arrived thither, and mine, which would wait no longer
to attach me, did force me to take my way back to my Village; where I found
your messages, and my coffers. I render you once more, most humble thanks, for
the care you took to keep them for me; and since you are pleased that J make
use of you, with such familiarity, you must permit my thankful acknowledgement
thereof. The news you wrote unto me, concerning the sickness of -- was told
me at Bordeaux, when I was there; and J swear unto you, J have not slept a
good sleep since. This is as good a man as ever I was acquainted with, and I
do mainely esteem him; because I know him to the very heart: where (without
faineing) I have found nothing, but what was noble, and (I dare speak it)
magnanimous. J know that his ou side has been displeasing to many; But men
must not always, be judged by the lineaments of the face, and that aversation
is unjust, which springs only out of deformity. J do much wonder that two
words which I have written to my Stationer, being half a sleep, are floune
out of his shop already. I assure you I am no -- nor do not use to put on
severity in reading these kinds of Relations. But (in-truth) this here, did
give me much content; and though I meet with some passages that might be
altered without any harm, and where a decorum was not so exactly observed as
it might have been; nevertheless (to speak in the general) the invention, to
my thinking, was handsome, the narration neat and smooth, and the style all
savouring of the Court and Cabinet. When you have read it, I will think of it,
as you shall pronounce the sentence; in the mean while, J use the liberty
allowed in points not yet decided; and the interim, that you are too good to
agree with me, until you have made the truth manifest unto me. For the Dutch
Orator, remember (at least wise) that J spoke nothing but touching his phrase,
for J do infinitely esteem his learning and judgment. Be pleased therefore
to manage this petty secret according to your ordinary prudence* since J am so
unfortunate, that I cannot utter one word, but it will straight find strange
Glosses and Commentaries, and that there be people so charitable, as to stir
up war against me, and create me enemies in all parts of the world. J have
never received the Letter of Monsieur de -- neither did I need them to assure
me of his love. I know that he is good and noble; wherefore relying hereupon,
it suffices me to understand that he is well; and it is not material to me,
whether J learn this from him or from you. J forgot to tell you that J
received from Monsieur the Duke of -- many caresses and favors; he has used
me like some great Personage, or mighty Signor; and I have been his Favorite
the space of four days. I desire no more, nor do I labor to promote my good
fortune any farther. I am content to bound it Sir, with the fruition of your
good favor, and J am most affectionately

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac 1. Dec. 1632.
LET. LII. To the same --
Sir,
I Have returned no answer to your Letter, in regard J have been cumbred
(lately) with some domestic affairs, which would allow me no leisure to
write; it is your Prerogative, to be able to intend several things at once:
you enjoy a spirit so calm, that you can read a Dialogue in Plato, and
dispatch a dozen businesses too at once, with a resolve to dye an hour after.
For my part, one object is enough to employ me, and it is impossible for me to
reconcile Recreation and Business. That which you tell me of Monsieur -- is
true. The Letter which he wrote unto me is an abridgement of all his Books; and
J cannot return answer to it, though J would, but by the messenger that goes
the next year from Angoulesme. But though it has been told you, yet be pleased
not to believe it, that this Letter offends me, or that mine has given any
offense. Only upon occasion of one little word, he took a hint to sport it after
his ordinary manner, and to make a new show of his old manner of boording. We
must be indulgent to our friends mirth, and give way (a little) to their jolly
humor. Nay, a man ought not to do his enemy all the discourtesies he can; and
to be very sensible of a wrong, is to add weight and measure to it. Satisfy
your self, J pray, touching my spirit by these maxims of peace* and fear not
that any man can raise my passions to an humor of contention. A thousand
Chartells cannot tempt me to one Duel, and J can be more coward, then the
Hott-spurres of the times are quarrelsome. J fear not their strength, nor
subtlety, but J fear my own trouble, and I do infinitely love my Rest:
Honor it self would seem unmanerly to me, if it came to disquiet it. And I
would feign pass for an Jncognito even in my own Province, and my own
Village. You cannot believe how much J am fallen out with the world, and how
distasteful J am to my self. What was wont to tickle and please me, hurts me.
An Almanac and an History I esteem alike. Those simple terms of style,
phrase, and period, are so harsh to my ears, that they make my head ache. If it
were Gods will, that I should be sentenced to loose my good or bad Reputation,
J would resign it (with all my heart) to any that would desire it; and J have
a desire to change my name, that J might not any more share in any thing that
is spoken of Balzac, nor interesse my self either in the praises or dispraises
that are bestowed on Him. Js not this Sir, a pretty resolution? and which J
should long since have undertaken. This is almost the panoplie of that
Philosopher, that patiently took a box on the ear in a public place at
Corinth. He professed he had a helmet to ward future blows, that if any should
chance to give him another box, it might fall on an iron face and not his.
Apply this how you please; As for my part, I do but laugh at Rhetoric, and
all its Tropes; and have nothing to do with that Art, which has created me so
many vexations. J am with all my soul

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 10. Ian* 1632.
LET. LIII. To the same.
Sir,
GOd does beset me on all sides; and sends me afflictions by troops: To
comfort me for the decease of Monsieur de -- news is brought me of that of
Monsieur de -- So that J begin to make a conscience to love you, since my
Friendship is (in a manner) fatal to whomsoever J give it; and that I possess
nothing but I loose it in a moment. But there is no need of doing bad offices
about you, or to affright you with any Planet, whose malignity (J hope) you are
able to correct. I pass it over therefore, to tell you, that as long as
Monsieur de -- was here, I performed my part with wonderful assiduity, so that
I was astonished at it my self. We have had long and particular discourses upon
all good subjects, and by consequence, you may believe that You have not been
forgotten. J never preach well, but when you are my Text. As J prize nothing
more justly then your love so I praise nothing more willingly then your virtue;
and this subject pleases me so well that I never want words, if I do not want
Auditors. Yet I do not pretend to engage you hereby. To reck on you in the
number of Illustrious men, is only to leave you in your own seat; and and to
say that the Damsel will be your work, is to say, that Pallas will issue out
of the head of Jove. She is at this time the sweetest hope and expectation of
honest leisure; She is the desire of the Cabinet and will be the great labor
of the French Muses. I have threatened (this long while) a voyage to Paris;
which I intended of purpose to see it; and I hope to surprise you both
together, one day when you expect me not. But remember Sir, that even your
Purpose is a vow; and that you can have no such Dispensation, that can take
away all scruple, if you have a tender conscience and will believe some Divines
(that I can name) concerning it. I cannot conclude my Letter before J acquaint
you, that J am ravished with the good opinion you bear toward my Nephew. J
ascribe more to your predictions then to them that make Horoscopes and
calculate nativities; and the conjectures which your good judgment does
suggest, are more certain then those which They derive out of their Art. My
Sister is so proud of the testimony you gave her, that she would have returned
you a Complement, if she durst adventure to speak to you. But her respect did
check her desire, and I have promised to excuse her silence; which (I know) you
will pardon, because it will save you the pains to reply. we desire Sir, the
continuation of your good admonitions to this gallant man; and doubt not, but a
glance or cast of your eye now and then, will edify him much. I think you
should consider him as something that concerns you. For my part, I make no
difference between your affection and mine; and I am without all reservation

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 25. May 1633.
LET. LIVE. To the same --
Sir,
I Know not how to present my self before you: though my conscience does
acquit me, some appearances condemn me; and you see my fault, but know not my
affairs; I have had variety of them ever these three months which have
strangely exercised me; and whereof I am yet so weary that I must have a great
while to recover my self. All that I can, is to use my Idleness well, and to
make something of my Leisure. Now that I have got it in possession again, I
mean not to be disseised of it: If it be possible, I bid eternal farewell to
all contracts, transactions, and Aquittances. These are ornaments of our
language which must not (in my opinion) enter into your Poems. You have more
care of the chastity of your Damsel then to violate her with these villainous
terms; and this were of a Virgin to make a Strumpet of her. But I can never
obtain that small favor of you, or prevail so much as to see here (at least)
the first hundred verses that do concern her. I do preserve carefully all
those things that you have sent, and never produce them out of my Treasury, but
to impart them to choice Wits. The invention of your first Metamorphosis is
ingenious. Ovid had swelled up and dilated that subject which you have
contracted and pressed together. But the importance is, that in this little, you
appear great; and I behold you entire in every parcel. The second part does
please me no less yet then the first, and I hold that Lioness happy that
has heaven for an Amphitheater, and has been placed there by such a hand as
yours. You make her jarre so well and tunably; and her roaring is so sweet and
melodious in your Verses, that there is no Music comparable. Those of -- do
not flow in such numbers. Longeque pulchrius spectaculum est, and dignius
oculis eruditi, videre nobilem illam feram, quam miserum and febriculosum
Annaei Lucani Simium With the last Letter I received Bembus which you sent me.
In truth he is not so well polished and digested as those Authors in the
Library of Monsieur --. But all tattered and confused as it is, I can assure
you, it likes me infinitely. J never love luxury, and am nothing curious for
gay clothes. The beauty of Chariclea did shine through her rags; and your
Marini has made a Sonnet, wherein he tells us, how he fell in love with a
canting Doxie. J thank you therefore for Venus and the Graces (though ill
attired) which J met with, in your Books, and remain

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 3. July. 1633.
LET. LV. To the same --
Sir,
I Entertain your commendations like ill gotten goods; the fruition whereof is
sweet, although unjust. It is some honor to me to have so excellent a
Flatterer as you are; and I suffer my self willingly, and take a pleasure to
be deceived by a man that can do it so neatly. J think (indeed) that the
Verses which you have seen, are not bad in their kind; but J think withal,
that this is the shortest of all kinds. I durst not engage my self in a wider
carreere; my strength serves but for a short tugg; and I walk at the foot of
your Parnassus; but I should want breath, if J should attempt to mount the top.
You do (indeed) Sir, bear the name of a great Poet, and succeed equally in all
sorts of Verses; and though you speak with extreme modesty of the last work,
which you sent me: I do not find that it owes any thing to the fairest Pieces
that you have showed us. There is no stanza that has not its particular value;
nor no Piece but is remarkable for some beauty. But that which did chiefly
relish with me was the Prayer which you direct to Apollo; and that admirable
Music, (which proceeding out of the clouds) heals your malady in a trice. This
is not the effect of ordinary Poetry; it is a fit of that divine rapture and
fury, which Plato has acknowledged; and which the first Poets were sometimes
possessed with. Send me such Presents often, if you would have me rich in my
Poverty; and have good company in my solitude. But above all, love me well, if
you would have me happy; and assure your self, that no man in the world is
more then I am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 9. Aug. 1634.
LET. LVI. To the same --
Sir,
I Know that you love me, and I know that you are in health, but this is not
enough; I must learn something more concerning it; and you must tell me some
news of your brave Meditations. Does the Girl wage war, or does she keep at
home in the country with her Father? Does Charles grow soft in the embraces of
the fair Agnes, or does he quit Love for honor? In what state are the
affairs of England? How does Hire and Potho? What do your Achilles and Ajax?
are you for a battle or for a siedge? Jam nunc minaci murmr cornuum
Perstringis aures, jam litui strepu^t:
Audire magnos jam videor duces*
Non indecoro pulvere sordidos, etc.
See questions enough at once; but you are not bound to answer to them
punctually, and provided, that you satisfy me in one Article, you have to
deal with a man of a facile disposition, who will not be rigorous for the rest
I am now more a Hermit then ever; and for having here a little Court but two
days only, I had the Megrim by it for three weeks. Tranquillity and silence
Sir, is a precious thing; and if Epicurus had some reason to complain of his
very friends that they did break his head with their applause and acclamations:
what must be said of the bawlings and exclamations, of a man's enemies, of the
first and second part of Philarkes of their times. Those that write, are
subject both to the one and the other persecution. But for my part, I avow to
you, that hitherto Complements have done me more harm then injuries. I use
none toward you Sir, for fear you should complain of me in the same manner;
and J am content to tell you, that I am without complement, that is, entirely

Angoulesme 1. Sept. 1634. Your, etc.

LET. LVII. To Monsieur de Sithon.
Sir,
YOU show a sort of humility that is not sufferable; and though it be the
proper style of Saints to talk of their vileness, and their nothingnesse; yet
to reject all testimonies indifferently, that come from another, is in my
opinion rather a contempt of our neighbor the^ a modest conceit of our selves.
I am no flatterer, but J praise or dispraise, according as J am persuaded of
the merit of things, or their default; and if I talk often of the great lights
that you have, whither in sacred or profane Learning, it is because I have
been dazzled therewith. Your three Discourses do please me infinite; ly and I
am very well pleased that mine did not displease you: But I am the more glad
that you are of my opinion touching the putting down quite of all Answers,
Replies, Defenses, Apologies, and the like. Since I have but laughed at the
attempts of a Legion. I do not mean to complain of the insolence of a
Carbine; A man were better to pick out an enemy; and this here, may fight all
alone, if it please him: It is not fit to show anger against a man that
deserves pity, nor to loose patience upon an occasion so obscure, that it were
hard to make it appear. You send me no news concerning the affairs of Italy,
and I am very desirous to hear some. It has been told me that Monsieur
Maynard has not appeared in Paris, though Monsieur de Mailles be arrived
thither. He will (perhaps) be stayed a longer time. If it be so, my Affection
is so far ingenious as to torment my spirit. I stand in fear (for his sake)
of all the dangers both of sea and land. I do apprehend at once that he is
fallen sick by the way, and that he is lead captive into Barbary, and that the
Spaniards have surprised him. That which must comfort me in this distraction
is, that a good spirit does pass undauntedly through all; and that they were
the Poets his Predecessors that made wings for Daedalus. How ever you will
confess, that if Epigrams be current among the Millamois, and that he wants
but 2000 of them for his ransom, he has wherewith to satisfy them without
damage to himself. In truth, I am sollicitous touching this my dear friend;
and you will oblige me, if you will be pleased to send me a relation of his
Adventures, when you shall come to know them. I am

Sir Your etc.
Balzac. 30. Dec. 1636.
LET. LVIII. To Monsieur GERARD Secretary to my Lord the Duke of Espernon.
Sir,
HAppy are those actions that fall under your Pen and History. Since you do
extol one man's idleness even to the envy of the world, and so far, as to
propose it for an example, what Will you talk of the life of the Suedish King,
and other Miracles of our age; if you will take them in hand? The mischief is,
that those, that have heard you, shall see me; and you have set me at so high a
rate, that J cannot hold after it, but upon your credit, and by my own absence.
If Monsieur the Duke of -- passes by Balzack, the legend that you have framed
of me, will at first dash loose that probability that it carried; and I shall
be no more that famous Hermit, that has been related and described unto him by
an officious Impostor. Jn vain will he seek among my papers the fine things
that you have promised him; and it will repent him (perhaps) that he turned out
of the rode, for such a sad spectacle that J shall exhibit him. In any case
Sir, I will present my self; and if hitherto you have deceived him, yet you
shall acquit your self of the name of Cozner, when you shall assure him on my
behalf of an inviolable fidelity, and hearty acknowledgement. These are
qualities which I possess in a sovereign degree* and which I preserve for him
in the bottom of my soul. But the passion which I bear to his Honor, must
not be still kept as a secret; and, J will at length profess, what I have this
long while adored in particular manner. Do me the favor, as to tell him thus
much, and believe withal, if you please, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 30. May 1635.
LET. LIX. To the same --
Sir,
I Love no kind of quarrelling, much less with my friends. But it is a thing
worthy pity, that a man should receive continual wrong, and yet must not open
his mouth to complain, but he shall be censured for a troublesome and untoward
fellow. I know the eager spirit of that man that speaks so loud, when my
interests are in agitation. I know he is carried with the hot vapors that
exhale from that sulfury vein, which (you say) lies about his heart. But you
will confess notwithstanding, that the bottom of this heart is not bad. His
lavishnesse proceeds from a fair spring, and in acts of friendship an
inundation is better then drouth. J forgive the intricated zeal, incident
goodness, and impetuousnesse of a man that cannot love with moderation. We
must do him some right, and not hate his passion, though we approve it not;
for my part, I do permit it, but not employ it; and though he tells me, that
he has a fierce Satyr to come forth to kill our messer, if he do not save
himself in the little Cottage; J give him thanks for his good will, but J
desire him to deliver the Satyr into my hands, and for this purpose only, that
none might see it. You shall find in my packet some latin compositions that
were sent me, and particularly, the later Tears of S. Peter, which have been
commended unto you. In my judgment, (and I think you will subscribe to it) he
is too subtle, and shows too much punctuality in delineting a true Penitent.
Nature does not speak thus, nor its passions either, which are the daughters of
nature, as subtleties are the wantons of Art. S. Peter's sorrow is admirably
well expressed by Grotius; and these four verses of his, which I remember, do
weigh down the four hundred that J have sent you. Quae me recondet Regio? qua
maestu^ diem
Fallam latebra? quaero nigrantem specum
Qua me sepeliam vivus; ubi nullu^ videns,
Nulli videndus, lachrymas foveam meas.
Are not these worthy of the Heroicke times and purest Antiquity? the rest of
the Discourse is animated with the same Genius; and is a lesson for Orators,
that sorrow must not be elaborate, or at leastwise must not betray any studied
care. I leave your Brother to relate news; he has in charge to inform you of
all occurrences, and therefore I have nothing to say, but that I am

Sir Your etc.
Balzac 15. Iun. 1636.
LET. LX. To Monsieur De la Mothe Le Vayer.
Sir,
MY spirits have been so dull and heavy these three days, that it is beyond
imagination. Never did any man loose the relish of all Books and Arts as I did;
and hence you may gather that that which you sent me, was very delicate, when
it procured an appetite to a languishing man. You have strangely altered me in
a moment: my soul is touched to the quick; and you have made it so hungry
after knowledge, that I have no mind to any thing but to your Philosophy. If
you will set up a Sect, J am ready to enrole my self, at least wise I will
subscribe willingly to that frank doctrine, which maintains its liberty
against the usurpations of Aristotle; and is contented to acknoledge lawful
power, but not to be slave to the Tyranny of one particular man. I speak Sir,
as J believe: Doubtless your work will last, and to give you your full due, J
must give it in your own language: noble an act of the Soul, is not the
weakest argument we have of its immortality; and if any shall hereafter take in
hand this subject, he will be beholding to you for this new argument, which
your modesty would not permit you to make use of. Certainly there were no
reason nor color, that the offspring should be of a better condition then the
mother, and that those productions which must encounter Time, and conquer Fate,
should flow from a corruptible principle. But since J have sped so well in my
first solicitations, J desire not to stop there. This good success does
encourage me to redouble them, and in the name of all the Learned to beg yet
more work of the same vigor. Though J should perform no other office in the
commonwealth of Learning then this, J were not an unusefull member; and this
will be (one day) honor enough for me, when it will be said, that I gave the
counsel for those labors which you have undertaken. Acquire for me Sir, this
reputation, that J may add it to that which I would gladly deserve all my life
time, which is to be

Balzac. 29. March 1637. Your etc.

LET. LXI. To Monsieur de --
Sir,
THe Discourse which you did me the honor to send me, is full of an infinite
number of good things; and none can deny but your friend is both learned and
judicious. Nevertheless I do not think that he will find in that place
whither he goes, that approbation which he promises to himself: I think that
(for his speaking Latin after the French manner) his meaning is better then
his expression* He is not always so regular as I would desire; and his words
do sometimes do wrong to his thoughts. True it is, that in these times we are
very nice and delicate in the purity of expressions. We can brook no style
that is licentious be it never so little; and whatsoever is not after the garb
of the Court is accounted barbarous. This is not, that I am of the opinion of
Monsieur de -- that said that the good man Judgment could never pass beyond
the Garond; and that He was put into such a fright at Blaye, that he durst not
adventure any farther. When he spoke this, he forgot (sure) that Monsieur de
Pibrac, Monsieur de Montagne, and the Cardinal d' Ossat were Gascons; and
their solid judgments which are admired to this day over all Europe, do
sufficiently refute that poor jest which passes among some for excellent. It
is certain that Reason is common to all Countries, and consequently is of that,
where they say Adieu-sias, as well as when they say Dieu vous conduisse. It is
confined to no place, and we may find subtlety among the Switzers, and
stupidity among the Florentines; but indeed, for the language, it is not all
alike: without question in some places, they speak better then elsewhere, and
whereas a Courtier of Rome did taste some thing of Padua in the Histories of
Titus Livius, it is not impossible to observe in the writings and conversations
of your men some tincture of their Province. Ever and anon, you shall observe
them to let slip vousist for voulust, fausist for falust, cousin mien, and ie
suis este a Thoulouze, which mar all good speech: and their allarent,
donuarent armarent, have run over their banks, and come as far as our
country. The late Monsieur de Mal herb has told me often that he did what
possibly he could for to correct the dialect of Monsieur de -- and purge it of
Gasconisme, but could never bring it about: so difficult is it, to wipe off our
natural stains, and utterly to wear out the badge of our Country.
Nevertheless for all this, neither the Patavinity of Titus Livius, nor the
Gasconisme of some of our times, do hinder them from being reputed Eloquent*
And for one petty fault, either of use or of Grammar, I condemn not those
works which in all other respects, are excellent. To satisfy your desire, I
have sent by Monsieur de -- the Letters of Monsieur Heinsius, one whereof
preceded my Dissertation, the other followed his answer. Now that I have
furnished you with these two Letters, to entertain you a while; be pleased not
to take it amiss that I take leave of you, and all the world for two years. I
am forbid to write any thing for so long a time, and this is an oath that J
have taken by the order of my Confessor; and upon good and weighty
considerations. I hope God will give me the grace to observe it: Nec mihi
scribendi veniet ta^ dira cupido; And you will not (J am sure) tempt me to
sin, and provoke me to break that silence which J have sworn to. But though
you should solicit me a thousand times, and assault me every day in two or
three languages, I am resolved to be inexorable, and not to be moved with that
happy abundance of your words. Jf you term me uncivil, and expostulate with
me in the words of your Poet, Vnde istam meruit non faelix charta repulsam?
Hostis ab Host tame^ per barbara a verba salute^
Accipit, and Salve modiis intervenit armis;
Respondent and saxa homini.
J will make answer with an audible voice both to your Poet and You, that
Religion must sway Civility, and that a lesser duty must yield to a greater.
Finally if there be an absolute necessity, that we have some commerce with each
other: in this case, I will choose rather to make a journey then write a
letter, and expose my self to the hazard of shipwreck by going to see you,
then violate my Faith by writing to you. Adieu then until the year of 1639,
which we will begin (by Gods grace) by the renewing of our ancient Trafick. Is
is

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac: --
FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE LETters (as they lie in order) which are contained in this
Volume.
TO Monsieur Conrart Let. 1. Page 1. To Mons. du Moulin. let. 2. p 7. To Mons.
L'Huillier. let. 3. p. 11: To Mons. the Abbat of Bois-Robert. Let. 4. p. 19. To
my Lord the Earl of Excester. Let. 5. p. 23. To my Lord the Duke De la
Valette. Let. 6. p. 26. To Mons. Drovet; let. 7. p. 29. Te Mons. De-Bonair.
let. 8. p. 33. To Mons. Huggens let. 9. p. 35. To Mons. de Racan. let. 10. p
38. To Mons. De St Chartres let. 11. p. 43. To Mons. Baudoin let. 12. p. 47. To
Mons. De Coignet. let. 33. p. 51. To Madam Desloges. let. 14. p. 54. To my Lord
Keeper of the Seals Seguier etc. let. 15. p. 57. To Mos. De Morins. let. 16.
p. 61. To Mons. De Vaugelas. let. 17. p. 63. To Mons. De la Motte Aigron. l.
18. p. 70. To Mons. De Borstell. let. 19. p. 74. To Mons. the chief Advocate.
let. 20. p. 77. To Mons. De Maury. let. 21. p 79. To Mons. de Mondory. let. 22.
p 82. To Mons. Le Guay. let. 23. p. 87. To Mons. de Silhon. let. 24. p. 89. To
Mons. De la Fosse. let. 25. p. 93. To Mons. D'Espesses. let. 26. p. 97. To the
same: let. 27. p. 101. To Mons. de Couurelles. l. 28. p. 108. To -- let. 29. p.
111. To my Lord the Bishop of Angoulesme Let. 30. p. 114. To Mons. de -- let.
31. p. 117. To Mons. De Serizay. let. 32. p. 133. To Mons. Habert Abbat of
Cerizy. let. 33. p. 137. To Mons. De Gaillard. let. 34. p. 141. To the same.
let. 35. p. 145. To Madam Desloges. let. 36. p. 150. To Mons. de -- let. 37. p.
153. To Mons. Girard. let. 38. p. 157. To the same. let. 39. p. 160. To the
same let. 40. p. 164. To the same let. 41. p. 167. To Madamoisell de
Campagnole. let. 42. p. 17^. To Mons. the Abbat of Bois-Robert. let. 43. p.
174. To the same. let. 44. p. 178. To the same. let. 45. p. 182. To Mons. de
Savignac. let. 46. p 186 To Mons. Chapelain. let. 47. p. 194. To the same. let.
48. p. 197. To the same. let. 49. p. 200. To the same. let. 50. p. 204. To the
same. let 51. p. 207. To the same. let. 52. p. 213. To the same. let. 53. p.
217. To the same. let. 54. p. 221. To the same. let. 55. p. 225. To the same.
let. 56. p 228. To Mons. de Silhon let. 57. p. 230. To Mons. Gerard Secretary
to the D. of Espernon. let. 58. p. 234. To the same. let. 59. p. 240. To Mons.
de la Mothe le Vayer. let. 60. p. 240. To Mons. de -- let. 61. p. 243.

