THE Description of the Low countries and of the Provinces thereof, gathered
into an Epitome out of the History of Lodouico Guicchardini.

Imprinted at London by Peter Short for Thomas Chard. 1593.



Siciliam membrant Romanae antiquitus vrbis,
Fruge laborantem restituisse penum
Sic iam Cecilij merges foecunda Britann^s
Vbere consilij dexterioris alit
Sic vigeat viuax, seros videatque nepotes
Siciliam superans Ceciliana seges.
To the Right Honorable my especial good Lord the Lord Burghley, high
Treasorer of England. Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and Master
of her Majesty's Court of Wards and Liucri^s.
IF the Poet Horace (Right Honorable) found fault^ with the multitude of
Pamphletes published in his time, when he said, Scribimus indocti doctique
poemata passim: how much more would he have reproved the vain glory of these
days, of the which we may justly say as the learned Petrach writes of his
age. Omnes assidue libros (...) neque vlla aetat^ tanta (...) and disserentiu^
copia, tanta scientium atque eloquentiu^ fuit in opia. The authority of which
two grave authors together with mine own opinion co^curring with their
judgment in this point, caused me a long time to forbear the publishing of
this Epitome of mine. But on the other side when I considered, first that the
subject of this book contains matter of state and government, which as says
Aristotle Eth. 2. Principatum tenet in omnibus artibus. Secondarilie, that I
should but fight under the shield of another man as Homer writes of Teucer,
Iliad. 8. And thirdly; that the original published by the author himself, is
by the judgment of all the Politiques of this age esteemed as a pearl of
pe^reles price. I began to conceive well of my travail, and to hope that the
wise and learned allowing so well of the book at large, would not disallow of
my pains in the abbreuiation thereof. At the least thus much I am well assured
of, that if I have failed in the publishing: yet have I not erred in the apt
adressing and dedication thereof, having (with all humility) presented it to
the protection of your most Honorable name, being as all foreign nations
confess the greatest politic of this age, and as all England with great joy
acknowledges, the sole pillar and only Atlas as it were under her most
excellent Majesty of this most flourishing common wealth, and lastly in regard
of mine own particular the only patron to whom I owe even by descent a
peculiar hand of all dewty and devotion. Wherefore as I hope that the world will
pardon the former fault (if it be any) in consideration of the amends that is
made thereof by the later fact: so doubt I not but that your Honorable L.
according to your accustomed clemency will accept of this my poor endeavor and
protect this my attempt, with the shield of your honorable authority and
judgment: whereby your L. shall not only stop the mouths of barking
Mastifes, who think other men's reprofes their own praise, but also thereby
greatly increase the private band of my dewtie and service. And thus no whit
doubting but that your L. will pardon my brevity, which I have the rather used
to the end my Epistle may be answerable as well to your L. leisure as to the
work it self being but an Epitome, most humbly I take my leave, beseeching
the Almighty to the great good of this land and the advancement of her
Majesty's affairs, that as he has endued you with Nestors wisdom and
eloquence, so also that he will continue the course of your life til you have
attained to Nestors years, and after this life to receive you into the
eternal joys of his celestial Paradise.

Your Honors most humble and obedient, Tho. Danett.

A Table how to find readily all the Provinces of these low Countries, in the
same order that they be described in this Book.
All these five are in truth comprehended within the precincts of Brabant. 1
Lothier. fol. 22 2 Brabant fol. 22 3 Marquisat of the sacred Empire, fol. 42 4
Lembourg, fol. 48 5 Malines, fol. 50
6 Guelders, fol. 52 7 Zutphen, 54 8 Ouerissel, 56 9 Frise, 57 10 Groeninghen,
59 11 Holland, 60 12 Vtrecht, fol. 71. By some mistaking of the printer Vtrecht
is not set under the Title of a Province as in truth it ought to be, whereof I
thought good to admonish the Reader in this place. 13 Zelande, 73 14 Flaunders,
78 15 Artoys, 96 16 Haynault, 101 17 Luxembourg, 109 18 Namur, 112 The
Bishopric of Liege, 114. Though this be none of the Provinces of the Low
countries, yet because Guicciardin describes it and Aquisgrane (for the
reasons alleged by himself) among them, I have thought it meet to place them
and quote them in order as they stand.
An Epitome of Lodouico Guicciardinis description of the Low Countries.
THe Author describes first in general the qualities of the Country, and of
the inhabitants thereof, comprehending also there in the general government of
the prince.

Secondarilie in particular, the division of each province, and of every thing
worthy of memory contained therein.

These Low countries are comprehended within the ancient Gaul, the which is
divided by Caesar into three parts: namely, Belgica, (the which is contained
within the Rivers of Marne, Seine, Rhine, and the occean Sea) Celtica and
Aquitanica.

Farther in that part called Belgique, are these Territories subject to K.
Philip (which we now purpose to describe) comprehended, and embrace the one
half thereof: yea the best, the Noblest, (...) number of goodly villages (all
exceeding well peopled) contained therein in such ^ort, that it may be
compared with the greatest and mightiest kingdom of Christendom. The other
half is subject to the King of France: namely, Picardie, Champaigne, and
Normandy (though these two last provinces be not wholly in B^lgica) to the Dukes
of ^^^raine, Cleues and Iulliers: to the Archbishops of Tr^ues, Mentz, and
C^lin, and to the bishops of Cambray and Liege.

Of al these three parts of Gaul, the Noblest ^ Belgique, and that for three
reasons. First, by the authority of Caesar, Strabo, and other approved Authors.

Secondarilie, for the nobility and excellency of the people of the Country.
Thirdly, for the greatness and worthiness of those things that have been
invented there, and the accidents that there have happened.

The principal of the noble inventions of the Belgeoys are these. Printing,
first invented at Mentz, or as some write at Harlem in Holland 2. The restoring
of Music and the invention of diverse musical instruments. 3. The invention
of the Chariot used in the wars, called in (...) Essedum: whereof all our
Coaches and Wagons took their first pattern. 4. The layeng of painting with
oil, first devised at Bruges 5. The working of glass in colors. 6. The
making of Tapistrie, Says, Searges, Wusteds, Russels, Friezeadoes, and diverse
sorts of linen cloth, and diverse other small trifles. 7. The names of the
Winds. 8. All sorts of clocks and Dials, used in these parts, and the Maryners
Compass, (as some write) 9. Diverse sorts of Household stuff, and of
instruments fit to make any thing fine and handsome.

In Belgica are 320. Walled Towns, diverse of the which are very statelye and
magnificent: Namely, Bruxelles, Andwerp, Boysleduc, Gant, Bruges, Ipre,
Malines, Cambray, Arras, Tournay, Mons, Maestricht, Luxembourg, Valenciennes,
Lasle, Calais, Bouloyn, Amiens, S. Quentin, Liege, Namur, Reins, Treues, Metz,
Nancy, Toul, Verdun, Strausbourg, Metz, Aix, Couloyn, Cleues, Iulliers,
Niemeghe, Vtrecht, Amsterda^, Middlebourg, Leewaerden, Groinenghen, all the
which are famous and goodly Cities. The greatest part of Paris is also in
Belgique: namely, all that is on this side the river of Seyne.

All Tytles of Honor, are in Belgica: namely, Emperor, King, Duke,
Archbishop, Marquis, etc.

Farther, in Belgica are 230. Towns, having privilege of walled Towns. And
12000. villages with Parish Churches.

The principal Rivers of Belgica are the Rhin the Mense, Seyne, Schelde.

The principal forests are, The forest of Ardenne, Charbonniere, Nonneu,
Ea^gne, Sonien.

Many mines are also in the Country and Quarreis of excellent good stone.

In Belgica also, are three of the seven Electors of the Empire: namely, the
Archbyshoppes of Treues, Mentz, and Coloyn, and a good part of the Country of
the Count Palatin. And likewise, seven of the twelve peers of France: namlie,
Normandy, Flaunders, Champaigne, Reins, Laon, Beauuois in Picardy, and Noion.

At Aix is the Emperor sacred, and at Reins the king of France.

The Emperor Charles had an intention, to erect the Low Countries into a
Kingdom, but the difficulty consisted herein, that every of these Provinces
being governed by proper Laws, prerogatives, and peculiar ancient privileges,
would never have yielded to one Royal Law common to al, especially those that
had the largest privileges, for the which cause he gave over his enterprise.

The Situation of the Low Countries is such as here follows.
North. Holland and Friseland have the Ocean sea.

South. Luxembourg and Ha^^ault are bounded with Lorraine, Champaigne and
Picardy.

East Gu^lderland is bounded with the Rhi^e, and Brabant with the Meuse.

West. Flanders is bounded with the Sea, and with that part of Artoys, that
bordereth upon Picardy.

The whole country is contained almost in one Climat and a half, namely, from
the half of the 7. called Diaboristhenes, unto the 8. (esteemed inhabitable by
Ptolome) named by the Modern Cosmographers Diaripheos.

The Low Countries have of Longitude 7. degrees and a half: namely, from 22.
and a half, to 30. And of Latitude, just 4. degrees: namely, from 50. to 54.
the which space, allowing half an hour for a Clymat, makes the artificial
day to differ about three quarters of an hour.

The middle of the Country is Andwerp, which stands in the Longitude of 26.
degrees, and 42 minutes, and in the Latitude of 51. degrees and a half, so that
the highest that the Sun mou^teth above the Orizon the longest day of the year
as for example, The 12. day of June is about 63. degrees and a half, and that
day it shows it self above the Orizon, or near about it 16. hours and a
half. But because the Sun entering in the morning into our Hemisphere, and at
night passing into the other, abides long (as the Sphere plainly shows)
about the said Orizon, and gives great light to us, though we see it not. We
may say truly that the day on the said xii. of June is xx. hours long, in such
sort that a man may easily read a letter all that space. On the other side, the
lowe^^ that the (...) ^^ounteth above the Orizon, being the 10. day of
December, is about 26. degrees and a half, and is seen that day above the
Orizon, or about it 7. hours and a half, giving small light to us, either in
the morning before it enter into our Hemisphere; or in the Euenyng when it
enters into the other, because it rises and sets very perpendicularly.

The Country is seated very commodiouslie for all the Provinces of Europe: for
Northwarde it is but (...) or (...) days journey by Sea from Denmark.
Southward, it confineth with France and Lorraine. Eastward, with Almayne.
Westward, with England, Scotland, and Ireland. It is also commodious for Norway
and Sweden: for a Ship that depar^^d out of Holland, arrived in Norway in (...)
and two nights. Likewise from (...) journey is made in 10. days and less, and
out of Spain in eight, ten, twelve, or fifteen, according to the Haven where
you embarke.

The circuit of the Country is about the fifte part of Italy, and somewhat
more: namelye, about a thousand Italian miles, or 340 Flemishe leagues.

The Leagues of the Country are of two ^orts, the one Flemish, the other
French. The Flemish leagues are also of diverse sorts: for in some countries they
contain three Italian miles: namely, almost throughout all Brabant, in a part
of Holland, In Flanders Flamengante, in Zeeland, Liege Namurs. But in the Duchy
of Luxembourg they are greater, and yet greater in a great part of
Guelderland, and in Frisland they are as great as the Almayne leagues: namely,
five or six Italian miles long and better. The French leagues contain two
Italian miles, and these are used all over Flanders, Gallicante, Artoys, and
the greatest part of Haynault.

In that part of Belgique that obeys K. Philip, there are walled Towns, 208.

Towns privileged as walled towns 150.

Villages with Parish churches, above 6300.

Besides a great number of other villages, and hamlets, and Seniories infinite.
Farther, there are 60. strong places with garrisons and particular Governors.

The Air within these 25. or 30. years is become much more wholesome and
temperate then it was in times past: whether it be by reason of the great
increase of the Inhabitants, or of the industry of the people, who purge it
sundry ways, or of some other superior cause, I know not.

The Country though it be not very propitious for the produsing of simples,
yet by industry is it made commodious enough for them, considering that near
to Andwerpe, at the village of Bourguerhaut. Peter de Couberg apothecary has a
garden, wherein are growing above four hundredth sorts of strange simples.
Likewise, about a League and a half from Bruges, in the Seniorye of
Moerkercke, Charles of S. Omer a Gentleman singularly well qualified, has a
wonderful rare Garden.

The Beeues of Friseland and Holland are very great, and weigh some of them
1600 pound, of xvi. ounces the pound, which are more than 2000 pounds Italian.
Yea one was given (being an Ox of Friseland) to the Earl of Hochstraet, at
Malines, which waighed 2528. pounds, of the Country weight.

The Ewes in Holland, Friseland, and some part of Flanders, bring forth three
and four lambs at a time, and the Kyne often two Calves at once, and give
commonly in Summer viii. or x. Lots of milk in a day. A Lot is a measure
somewhat greater than the half Quart or Flacon of Florence.

The Country brings forth great quantity of Mather, wherewith a great part
of Europe is furnished. It produces also very perfect woad but no great store:
but of Flax and Hemp great abundance. But the commodities that the country
yields, together with the fruitfulnes of the So^le, is here omitted of
purpose: because it is largely mentioned in the particular description of every
Province.

Five principal Rivers there are in the Country, the which discharge
themselves into the Sea: namely, the Rhine, the Meuse, the Schelde Ha, Ems,
besides diverse other, which shall be described hereafter in order.

The Rhine rises out of the Mount Adula, (commonly called the Mountain of S.
Gedart,) with two fountains. And out of the same mountain rise also, the
Rivers of Rosne, Tesin, and Rus. So that within the Compass of less than ten
Italian miles, you shall see (not without great admiration) four famous Rivers
to arise, the which in the form of a Cross, take their ways and course
diversely, toward the four parts of the world.

The two Fountains of the Rhine, unite them selves together, four leagues
above the Cyttye of Cur in Swisserland. But at Lobie in Guelderland, the Rhine
parts it self again into two streams, the greater of the which, namely,
the left stream, takes his course to the West, and from thenceforth is called
Wael. With the which at Heruerden meets the Meuse, and suddenly they part
again, neither river losing his name: and in this sort take their course
apart, till they come to Louuestain, where again they join, and there the Wael
loses his name, as in the description of the Meuse shall be declared more at
large.

The lesser branch of the Rhine: namely the right, near to Arnem in
Guelderland, divides it self again in twain. The one of the which namely,
that on the right hand, runs a small space toward the East, and after
toward the North, and is called of the Latins Fossa drusiana, but of the
common sort New Ysel, because Drusus Nero, seeing no great distance to be
between this right branch of the Rhine and the River Yssel, which arises in
Westphalia, cut a large Fosse near to Arnem, all the way between Arnem and
Daesburg, into the which he received part of the water of this right branch of
the Rhine, the which conueying by this Fosse to Doesburg, he there joined with
the River Ysel, to convey there by the easlier the Romain army out of the Rhin,
into the Septentrionall Sea. This Fosse being joined with Ysel, at Campen
enters into the Gulf of Zuiderzee: And you shall understand that the said
River Ysel, before it meets with these waters of the Rhine, is called old
Yssel, but after their meeting, they are both named New Yssel: because of the
great increase of their waters. And thus the Rhine, which before that time had
but two branches, is now divided into three namely, the Wael, which we have
already described: this here now described called Yssel, and the third which
now shall be described called Leck.

The right branch of the River of Rhine: after the great loss of his waters
received into Fossa Drusiana, as before is declared, pursues his course
Westward from Arnem, till it come unto wick: where about the year of our Lord
860. or as others write 1170. it brake into the little River Leck, and leaving
his old course which was by Vtrecht, Voerden and Leyden, into the Ocean Sea,
by reason that extreme tempests had stopped up that course with sands, and
also loosing ever sithence his own proper name; it has born the name of the
little river that it brake into, and is called Leck and near to Grimpen
enters into the Merwe, which is a name common to the Meuse and the Wael after
their second conjunction, namelye, after they have made the little I Will of
Bom^lerwert. But you shall understand that notwithstanding that the Rhine have
left his old course, yet have the Inhabitants, with di^ches and channels drawn
waters into that old course, the which retains the ancient name of Rhine,
and passing by Vtrecht, Voerden, and Leyden, enters into the Sea near to
Catwick, or rather is swallowed up of the Sands, near to the said Catwick,
and the Fort Britannique, where was in times past the ancient mouth of the
River of Rhine.

The Meuse rises in the mount Vogesus, not far from the fountains of the
twoe noble Rivers, Seine and Marne. At Heruerden, it meets with the Wael, and
suddenly they disioyne again, neither river losing his name, and so apart each
takes his course to Louuestaine, where (having first made the little Isle of
Bomler^^^,) they ioyn together again, and so jointly taking the name of Merwe,
they come to Dordrecht, where (having made the I Will of Iselmont) the Meuse
resumeth his name, and with such a fury enters the Sea, that it maintains
his course and keeps his water fresh a great space, not without great
commodity and profit to the country, for by that means it opens the way to
diverse fishes, especially to sturgeons, the which findinge in the Sea this
sweet water, and being beyond measure desirous thereof, enter so far there
into, that in the end coming into the shallowe waters, they become a pray to
those that lie in weight for them. The like effect work also the rivers, of
Pau, Tibre, Rosne, Garonne, and every other River that enters the Sea with a
violent course But the Seine, Hebre, and the Thamis, entering gently into the
Sea, soon lose both their course and their fresh water, and therefore work no
such effect as the Meuse and the other Rivers above mentioned do.

The Sturgeous of Meuse are so great, that some of them weigh four hundred,
and some four hundred and twenty pound, and are twelve foot long of Andwerp
measure, which is as much as six brasses of Florence.

The time that the Sturgeon is in season, begins in April, and endures
more than three months, these sturgeons are sent into diverse Provinces,
especially into England.

Besides sturgeons the Meuse veeldeth also great store of Salmons and Salmon
trowts, Lamprayes, Shads, Viua draco marinus.
Congers, Mulets, Viues and diverse other sorts of Fishes, all the which are
lean in the Sea, but after they are entered into the fresh water, they become
fat and excellent good.

The Schelde ^iseth in Picardy, out of the selfsame mountain that the Rivers
of Sum and Sombre, four leagues beneath Andwerp, the Schelde deuideth
himself into two branches, the one of the which turns Westward and is called
Hont, and having run about xii. leagues, between Scluse and the I Will of
Valachry enters in to the Sea. The other turns toward the north, and
enuironeth the North part of Zeland, and having received at Berghen the little
river of Zoom again, he parts himself in twain, one of the which called
Vosmeer, passes by Tolen, and about a league from thense, discharges it self
unto the Merwe, and this seems to have been the ancient mouth of the River
of Schelde. The other branch separateth the Isles of Zealand with diverse
streams, but principally where the course of the River is largest and deepest:
It deuydeth these Isles into two principal parts: namely, East and West Zeland,
through the which conueying it self into the Sea, it ends his course and
loses his name, between Scowe and Valachry, receiving flood and Ebb as
far as Gant, which is above 30. leagues from the mouth of the River.

Into this River, by reason of the vicinity that it has with the mouth of the
Meuse, come out of the Sea diverse sorts of fishes: namlye, Sturgeons, Salmons,
and Salmon-trouts, Lamprayes, Turbots, Congers, Shads, Mulets. Viues, Soles,
etc. Besides a number of other sorts of fishes that run into this River out of
the Sea, as well to feed as to spawne (so commodious is the water for that
purpose) in such sort, that by the space of two or three months in the Spring
and in Summer (besides the great fish) such a deal of young fry is taken in
this River, that an infinite number of people relieve themselves therewith.

Into this River run also out of the Sea, the dog fish or Sea-calfe, and the
excellent Porpeses, called in Latin Tursii, which two kinds of Fish spawne
not, but engender as land Beasts, and bring forth their young perfect and
accomplished. And the Dog-fish not only brings forth her young upon the
land, but also there suckleth them with her own milk, till they be grown to
some reasonable greatness, twelve days as Pliny writes. They have hear
like a Dog, and engender as dogs, they have a horrible voice and their blood
is hot, and all these fishes run out of the Sea.

But the Fish that the River it self breeds, are Pikes, Barbels, Tench,
Carpe, some waighyng twenty pound, Gugins, Eeles, Crabs, Creuises, and diverse
other small fish excellent good, and some oysters also (though in truth they
com out of the Sea) whereof in times past great store were taken in this River,
but within this 25. or thirty years, the extreme colds and Frosts, have
caused them to retire into the deapth of the Sea, possibly they may return
again, but in the mean time, every month that has R. in it, Oysters are
brought out of England.

Haa, near to Terrouanne, has his fountain, and taking his course toward
the North, passes by S. Omer, and at Grauellinghe enters into the Sea.

Ems in Latin Amasius, rises in Westphalia, and at Emden enters the Sea.

Moselle rises in Lorraine and at Confluens enters the Rhine. From this
River of Moselle in the time of Nero the Emperor, Lucius vetus a Roman
Captain determined to have cut a large Channel, which at ten leagues end
should have entered the River of Soane, by means whereof he would have conveyed
the Romain Army from the Leuant Seas into the Rhosne, thense into the Soane,
and so through this Channel into the Moselle, and from thense by the Rhine
into the Ocean Sea. But Helius Gracilis envying this noble invention, overthrew
his enterprise.

La Lise rises by Lisburg in Artoys, whereof it takes the name. At Gant it
enters into the Schelde.

The Sambre in Latin Sabis, rises by Nou^^ in Hainault, and not far from
Namurs enters into the Meuse.

Dele rises in Brabant, near to Tile, it passes by Louuaine, and Malines,
and a great league from thense, it meets with the river Kethe, at a village
caled Rumpst, where both of them losing their own names, and taking the name of
Rup^le, two leagues thense: nan^y, at Rupelmonde, they enter jointly into the
Schelde.

Seine or Sine, rises by Soigny in Haynault, and a little from Malines
enters into Dele.

Dieze rises by Per, in the Country of Liege, a League from Bolduc, it enters
into the Meuse.

Demere rises by Tongres, in the Country of Liege, not far from Arschot, it
enters Dele.

Neth rises by Rethi, At Rumst it ioineth with Dele, and both losing their
names are called Rupel, and at Rupelmonde enter into the Schelde.

Rueur, rises by Bulinghe in Liegeland, and at Ruermonde enters Meuse.

Berkel, rises by Coes felt in Westphalia, and at Zutphen enters Issel.

Niers, rises near to S. Anthonies in Lieg^land, and a little from Genappe,
enters the Meuse.

Vidre, rises in Westphalia, and enters Zuiderzee. In Dutch it is called
Veghte.

Scarpe has two fountains in Artoys, one rises out of Mont S. Eloy, and the
other not far off. But being joined together near to Mortaigne in enters the
Schelde.

Denre, in Latin Teuera, rises by Conde in Haynault, and Denremonde enters
the Schelde.

Hayne, gives the name to the Country of Haynault. It rises by Hanuiere in
Haynault, and near to Conde enters Schelde.

Chiers, rises in Lorraine, a league beneath Iuoy, it enters Meuse.

Besides these Rivers, diverse Channelles there are in the Country, cut out and
made nauigable by man's hand, the principal whereof, are at Bruxelles, at Gant,
at Bruges, at Middlebourg.

The Country has not many fountains of running water, save in the mountain
Contreyes: but Lakes, Pooles, and Marshes many, which both fortify the
Country, and furnish it of Fish.

A Discourse of the Sea.
THe Sea may well be termed, not only a neighbor but also a member of these low
Co^treys, as well for ye great benefit that it brings to them: as also for
the harm that it does the^ when it rages. Wherefore a word or two must be
spoken thereof.

The Sea in his fury upon the coast of Holla^^ and Zeeland, casts up great
mountains of sa^^, very dangerous for Ships. The like danger also, and for
the like cause, is at the mouth of the havens, especially from the mouth of
the Scheld to Andwerpe. But Pilots are appointed by every Town, to accompany
the Ships and to set marks in every dangerous place.

The winds that most vex and trouble the sea are the North-west, west,
South-west.

As touching the order of the Tide this it is. At full and new moon the spring
tides are highest and the sea most furious. Farther, as soon as the Moon
comes forth from under our Orizon the sea begins to swel, and flows
toward ye east (as it were to bear the Moon company) till she come to the
line Meridian, but after she is past the line Meridian, till she come to the
west, the sea abateth. Again when the moon leaving us enters under the
Orizon of the Antipodes, the sea begins again to swell, till she come to
the line of the midnight; from the which the Moon returning toward our
Hemisphere the sea as though the Moon released her, returns to her place
again: so that in the space of 25 hours we have twice flood and ebb. At the
new Moon, it is full sea, at three of the clock in the morning, and three at
afternoon, and low water at nine in the morning, and nine at night.

From the new moon till the first quarter, the tide decreaseth, from the
first quarter till the full Moon it springs, from the full Moon till the
last quarter it nepeth, and from the last quarter till the new Moon it
springs again.

Farther the Tide because of the natural and accidental course of the Moon
changes every day one hour, and 10. minutes, as if to day it be at 7.
tomorrow it will be at 8. and 10. minutes.

The Sea rises at Calais in Flaunders, Zeeland and Holland, eighteen foot,
but where it is pressed into a straight as at Bristow, it rises 66. scot. At
S. Malo and Mont S. Michaell in Normandy 80. foot.

The deapth of the Sea is between Calais and Dover, 24. fathom, Every fathom
of six foot. Between Zeeland and England 23 Between Wight and Normandy. 28.
And so through all the channel of England. Near to the Isles Sorlingues or
Sylly of England, 60 And so the nearer the maine Sea the deeper.
Commodities of Fish, namely of Herryngs, Cod, and Salmon, that the Sea
yields to the Low Contreys. And first of Herrings.
HErrings are only in these Septentrionall Seas, but neither in any River, nor
in the Meridionall Sea, nor in the Spanish Seas.

They come out of the extremest parts of the Septentrionall Sea, and
approaching near to the land in marvelous and incredible multitudes, they
show themselves in these our Seas about Autumn (viz) in August, September,
October, and mid-Nouember. But the best are taken, from mid-September, till the
end of October. And note, that the sooner the cold begins, the sooner come
they into our Seas, and in the greater numbers. Whereby it is coniectured, that
they come hither, to eschew the cold of the Glaciale Sea. They spawne in these
Seas, and tarry here till the end of December.

Their course is, to compass once the I Will of Brettaine, and so to pass into
the maine Occean.

It seems that they be sent of God for man's sustenance, for their course is
hard by the Sea shore, and they swim gazing where they see any light, fire,
or humane Creatures: as it were saying; Come take me.

They have Kings among them as Bees have, marked with a sign on their head like
a Crown, and are somewhat ruddie, especially on the head.

Their kings going before them, are followed with an infinite multitude, which
seem like lightning a far off in the night, by reason that their eyes are
bright like fire.

The Herring feeds (contrary to the Nature of all other Fish) of water only,
and as soon as he is out of the water and feels the air, immediately he
dies.

The best Herrings are taken, from mid-September till the end of October, at
the which time, upon the Coast of Scotland is the best Fishyng.

The nearer the Herrings approach to the south, be it by reason of weariness,
or of the nature of the water, or of the bottom of the Sea, the leaner they be
and the less fauourous.

Frieseland, Holland, Zeeland, and Flaunders, send Fisher-boats to the Sea in
the Herring time, commonly called Busces, to the number of 700. These boats
go thrice yearly to the Hering fishing, and bring one with another, at one
time and other, every one Lasts. 70. Which amounts in the whole, to lasts,
49000. One Last conteyneth Barrels, 12. Every barrel contains herrings 900.
or 1000. every last is worth French Crowns, So that the whole amounts to,
490000 pound Flemisn. 1470000. crowns French. 441000. pound starling,
reckoning the French Crown at vi. s. and the Flemishe pound at xviii.
shillings.
The second principal Fish commodious to the Low Countries is God, in Flemish
Cabiliau, in French Morue, in Latin Asellus Mayor, differing from Merlus
called Asellus Minor.
THis Fish is so great, that some of the^ have been found of more than 50.
pound weight.

It is good as well fresh as salt.

It is taken in the same months that the Herrings are, but most abundantly
in the Seas near unto us, and principally in the Seas of Friesland, in the
three Winter months.

It is salted at al times in such abundance, that it yields yearly to the
Country, more than of French Crowns, 500000. Which is of starling money,
150000 li.
The third principal Fish of commoditieto the Low Country is Salmon.
SAlmon is excellent good both fresh and salt. It is taken at al times of the
year in Holland and Zeeland, but principally in April, May and June. So great
plenty of it is salted, that it yields yeerelie to the Country much more
than to the value of 200000. Crowns. which is of Starling money. 60000. li.

These three kinds of Fish only yields yeerlie to the Country (the Salt
deducted) more tha^ 2000000. crowns, which is 600000 li. starling.

The continual riches then that grows to the Country of other sorts of Fish
taken all the year is infinite, so that it were but time lost to go about to
value it.

The Forests and Woods of the Country, are these following.
FIrst the Forest of Ardenne which in Caesar's time, reached from the Banks of
the Rhine to the country of Tournesey one way, and to Champaigne another
way, and contained in length above 500. miles. It is still the greatest of all
Gaul, yet now it extends it self but from Theo^uille to Liege, which is
xxx. leagues, though not all wood, because of great tillage in many places. The
town of S. Hubert, is in the just midst thereof.

Normault, is a Forest in Haynault, beginning near to Quesnoy, in the which
are many Coals made, for the which cause, some have held it for part of the
ancient Forest, called La Charbonniere. But others hold, that the Forest
called de Harchie, with a village and Castle of the same name (which is the
place of residence of the Lords of Barlaymont) is a part of the ancient
Charbonniere.

Le Boys S. Aman, is likewise in Haynault, and is also called the Forest of
Rayme. It begineth in Flanders Gallicant, near to the village of S. Aman,
whereof it bears name, and reaches to Valenciennes. This Forest of Rayme,
apperteyneth to Monsieur d'Emery, by means whereof he is Grand veneur of
Haynault, which office is annexed to this Forest, and is the same yt the
Justice of Van air (which were more properly termed Justice of Vennerye) is
in England.

Le Boys de Faigne, begins by Auenner in Haynault, and extends to Meziers
in France more than xvi. Leagues.

Somen in Brabant, reaches from Bruxels to Breine, Aleud, and Breine le
Chasteau, three Leagues in length. It is full of Towns, Abbeys Villages and
Monasteries, whither in Summer many Gentlemen and Burgesses resort, to disport
themselves. This Forest is in circuit more than seven leagues, and contains
8000. Arpents of ground: every Arpent containing 400. measures, and every
measure xx. feet. Every year a 100. Arpents of this Wood is cut, which
yields to the king 25000. Crowns French.

Meerdael, is a pleasant Forest near to Louuaine, full of game to hunt, and
free for all men.

Sauenterloo, is between Louuame Brux^lles, and Viluorden, not far from the
village Zauenther.

Grotenhout is in Brabant, a little above Turnboult, (the Queen of Hungaries
place of pleasure) in the which Wood arises the little River Ade, which
runs into the river Nethe.

Marlaigne, begins by Namur, and reaches to Philippeville.

Niepe, is the principal Wood of Flaunders, standing near to the River Liz,
and within two leagues of Cassels and Bailleu, in it is a Castle very strongly
seated.

Nonnen, is also in Flaunders near to Ypre: it is full of villages, and some
Abbeys.

Poodsberg, is in the Confines between Flaunders and Haynault, near to
Montgerard: This Wood is great and of figure round.

Boys Guillaume is in Artoys, near to Renty, where half a Battle was fought,
between the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Henry the second King of France,
An. 1554.

Echterwalt, is in Guelderland near to Arnem. Septforrez is in Friselande,
nere to Ouer-yssel, and are seven great woods nere together, giving the name
to one of the four estats of Friseland, which thereof is called Seuenwolden.
These woods are full of diverse sorts of beasts namely, Heart, Fallowe-deere,
Goat, Wilde-boare, Hare, Conie, Gray or Badger, Brock, Field-rats and mice,
Hedghogges, Woolues, Foxes, Faines. In these woods are also excellent good
Dogs to hunt these wild Beasts withal, but the English dogs are the best.

Farther in these Low countries, are also some Martres, Otters many, and store
of feschaux or putoys, the furre whereof is sent all over Europe.

In these Low countries are also a kind of Dogs named Bracques whereof Silius
Italicus makes mention, very excellent both in following and recovering game
being hurt. And an other excellent kind of water Spaniels is in Holland.

The foul of the country is, Partridge, Fesant Turtle-doue, Quail great
plenty, Black-byrd, Thrush, Ousell, Lark, and to conclude all kind of foul
that is in England both Land foul and Water foul, especially Water foul in
Holland. In these countries breed also Pecocks, Swans, Herons, storkes, Geese,
Ducks, Poulets of Inde, Pigeons, etc.

The Hawks that breed in the country are Eagles, Gos-haukes, Faulkon,
Sparow-haukes, Merlianes, but the best come out of Norway, from whence comes
also the noble Gerfalcon the which notwithstanding some write to come only
out of Candia.

The Customs and manner of living of the People of these Low countries, are
these that follow.
FIrst, as touching the stature both of men and Women it is very beautiful,
their personage very tall, and all their members in very good proportion,
especially their legs, but their stature is not so tall as in Caesar's time,
either because of their mixture with strangers, or of the quality of their
meats and manner of living altered from that age.

They were the first people in France or Germany, that received Christ.

They are valiant as writes Caesar in these words Horum omnium fortissimi sunt
Belgae.

They are very skilful mariners and their Hoies are excellent good to brook
the Seas, by reason whereof they dispatch their voyages sooner than any other
nation.

They all have some smackering of their Gra^mer, and every one, yea every
husbandman can write and read.

An infinite number yea of those that never were out of the Countreye, besides
their own language, speak French, and many Allemaine, Italian, English,
Spanish.

They are skillful in Merchandise, and excel in all Arts, namely, making of
Woollen, Tapistrey, Bays, Wusteds, Russels, Linen, Fustian, and other
Merchandises and small Mercery wares of all sorts and prises, which are sent
into the whole World: Now also they make Silks and wrought V^^^^ts, after the
manner of the people of the Leuant.

They invented the Art of painting, and the making of Linen and Woollen Cloth:
yea they taught the Englishmen the Art of making Woollen clothes and of Diyng,
about the year of our Lord 1404. who till that time were utterly ignorant
thereof, and came into Flaunders where they learned it.

They are naturally Musicions, and restored Music to her perfection.

They are not ambitious, but they are great builders, and great Iesters: They
are covetous, credulous, and easy to be abused, Beneficiorum simul and
iniuriarum immemores.

The Women govern all, both within the doors and without, and make all
bargains, which joined with the natural desire that Women have to bear rule,
makes them too too imperious and troublesome.

The eldest Daughter is of the greatest reputation, yet has no larger portion
than the rest.

They marry their children into strange towns, yea and Foreign Countries, and
marry Noble with ignoble, young with old, master and servant, which is not
commendable.

The Government of the Prince, and first of the Regent.
THere is one Regent who is also Governor of the County of Burgundy, and has
his Council continually attending upon him.

Under the Emperor Maximilian and Philip his Son, Georg Duke of Saxony was
Regent.

Under Charles the fifth, first Margaret his aunt, after Mary Queen of Hungary
his Sister, from the year 1531. till the year 1555. wha^ Charles resigned his
crown and Empire.

Than his son Philip, now king of Spain gave the government with title of
Lieutenant General, to Emanuel Philibert Duke of Sauoy his coosin German,
both borne of the daughters of Emanuel King of Portugale. But in the year
1559. the Duke returning into his own Country of Sauoye than restored to him:
King Philip gave the government to his sister Margaret, wife to Octauian
Farnese, Duke of Parma and Plaisance, with Provision of 36000. crowns a year
and other duties. Bu^ ^n the year 1567 was the Duke of Alua made governor.
And in the year 1573. Don Louis de Requezens who died Anno 1576. To him
succeeded Don John base son to the Emperor Charles the 5. who died An. 1578.
and to him succeeded the Prince of Parma, Governor at this present.

The Regents authority is in generality as great as the Princes, save that all
matters of moment pass under the Princes name, and all officers to whom is
committed the general Government, govern in the Princes name, and are placed
by the Prince alone: namely, the Chauncellor, Presedents, Cou^celors of the
state, Abbats etc. Likewise all Laws, Decrees, Sentences and Negotiations, are
dispatched in the Princes name.

As touching the Councels it is to be understood, that the Council of estate
not long agon, was all one with the Privy Council, but now because of the great
abundance of businesses and affairs, the burden is committed to two Councels
which before was sustained by one so that the Counsel is now divided into the
Council of Estate, and the Privy Counsel.

The Council of State is ever resident with the Governor, the number of these
Counselors is uncertain, They have a president among them. With this Council
the Governor consulteth of matters appartaining to the state of the Prince and
commonwealth: namely of peace and war, and of the general government of the
Country, of aduertisements that come from all places of ^ntelligences with
foreign Princes and neighbors, of cassing of Colonels and Captains,
offortifications, munitions, and provisions of Armor, and of sending and
receiving of Ambassadors. Farther, to this Council all matters of great
difficulty are referred by the other inferior councels. To conclude, this
Council has the charge and superintendance of all things, concerning the
government and defense of the Country as well at home as abroad.
Notwithstanding if extraordirie matters of importance happen, the knights of
the order, and sometime some other governors and officers of the K. are called
to assist this council. And there are four Secretaries attending on it.

The privy or secret Council is also assistant to the Regent. It consists
ordinarily of x. or xii. Counselors being Doctors and licenciat, and
Gentlemen elected for their service to the prince to that place. It has a
President, who is also keeper of the great Seal. It has the charge of
Justice, Laws, and the policy of the Country. It ouerlooketh the other
provincial Counselles, whereof we will speak hereafter. It has authority
to give privileges, pardons, graunts to make laws, ordinances, statutes and
edicts: for the which cause the Counselors of this Co^^cell are also called
masters of the Requests. This Council judges and determines controversies
of bounds, limits, and Confines of Countries, and likewise of the superiority,
authority, and sovereignty of the Prince, and of the Noble men and others
that follow the Court. To conclude, this Council is the rampire of Justice,
judging of all matters without appeal. Notwithstanding matters of great
moment, it communicates with the Prince, or his Lieutenant in his absence, and
likewise sometime with the Counsel of Estate, if the matters of state and
matters of Justice concur together in one.

The Counsel of finances resideth at the Court, their number are these. First,
three sage Seniors of the Country called Chiefs or Surm^end^us des Finances,
Then a Treasurer, a Receiver General, and three other men of quality and
acquainted with matters of the receipt, called Con^is: Besides Scribes and
other officers. This Council has the charge of the Princes patrimony and
reuenews, of aids and Subsidies ordinary and extraordinary. Of receivers and
other officers dealing with the Princes Treasure. It leuieth Imposts and
taxations, gives order for assuing forth of mines that serve for payment of al
^^^^tters, concerning as well peace as war: namely ^^^^cifications, Munitions,
Provisions, expe^ses ordinary and extraordinary, concerning the maintenance
of the Common wealth. It lets to farm the Princes lands, commands
moderations and restraints contained in their ordinances. To conclude, it has
the government of all the Princes money, goods, and revenues, for the which
cause it may justly be called the Princes Bank or Treasur.

These Counsels above rehearsed always follow the Court.

There is also the Provost of the Court, who always follows the Co^^t to do
justice upon offenders. He has born before him a long ragged red rod, and is
therefore called Vergerouge. This Officer may enter into any Province in the
absence of the Provost Martial, or of the Drossart in Brabant, and do justice
upon offenders without appeal, but not without form of judgment, yea and
where the Martial can not come out of his own Province, nor the Drossart out
of Brabant, this Vergerouge goes over all the Provinces as occasion of service
does require.

The Council of the Chamber of Accounts resideth at Bruxels, and is a member
of the Council of Finances. The number is one President and vii. Masters of
accounts: to this Court all Treasurers, Receivers, and other Officers that
manage the Kings Treasure in Brabant, and the Countries of the contribution of
Brabant, and likewise in the Duchy of Luxembourg come and yield their
accounts, and from this Court receive their acquittances.

There are besides this, three other Chambers of Accounts, one in Flaunders,
one in Guelderland, and one in Holland, which all yield their accounts to the
Council of Finances, as superintendent over them.

All these four Councels above rehearsed are ordinarily resident with the
Regent in the name of the Prince.

But besides these, there is a particular Governor in every Province, to whom
also as to the kings Lieutenant all the affairs of that Province espicially
matters of war are referred, and he for his part is obedient to the general
Regent.

Likewise in most of the kings Provinces is a particular Council held in the
kings name commonly called Parliament, and in Brabant and some other places
Chau^cerie, ye which consists of vi. x. xii. or xviii. Counselors, Doctors
of the Law, or Licentiate with a President or Chauncellor for their head, where
also the kings Advocate and his Procurer general are resident with
Secretaries, Registers, and other officers accordingly; all chosen by the
Regent, and all in manner receiving pension of the Prince.

This Court deals in all causes civil and criminal within that Province
save in Mortmaines which are referred to the Court Ecclesiastical.

To these Courts of Parliament resort for justice not only the subjects but
also the prince himself, for whom his Advocate and Procurer make answer, and
all men have right there, even against the prince, as of late it happened in
Guelderland, that the king having lost a suit of great importance against the
Lord of A^holt, and no Officer being found that would excecute ye sentence, the
king himself gave commandment that it should effectually be executed, which
was done accordinglye.

To these provincial Courts are brought all the appeals of all other inferior
Courts in that Province. The provincial Courts of Malines, Haynalt, Guelders,
Brabant, and Friesland, judge dif^natiuely without appeal. But they have a for
me of Reuision in Civil causes, which is a new examination of the process by
other Judges, but of the same Province, being half the number of those that
pronounced the sentence: but seldom does the party any good that demaundet^^
this Reuision. Farther in this Reuision they judge by Suffrages.

They use in all these Cou^^es and through all the Country both the Civil
Cannon and common laws, but without prejudice of the Municipall Laws and
particular Constitutions of priueleged places which are many, and also without
prejudice of the Princes Decrees called Mandemens, the which (the privileges
not prejudiced) are preferred before all other Law. But these Mandemens are
deliberatly advised off by the said Courts before they be published or receive
any authority, who first consider of them whether they be agreeable to the
reason of the common Law, that is to say the Civil Law.

Besides these Courts above mentioned, the Regent yearly sends out
Commissioners in the kings name to receive the accounts of the receipts and
expenses in all matters that concern the prince, of all the principal towns
through the whole Country (which is called Fair la Seigneurie, or la nouuelle
loy) and in Brabant the accounts also of Churches, Monasteries, and Hospitals:
For the ye prince has a peculiar authority over the Clergy to visit them,
and to see whether they be well governed or not, and if they be not, to reform
ye abuses. And note that all officers from the highest to the lowest, as well of
the long as short robe, swear fealty to the prince.

As touching provision for the wars, the prince entertaineth no bands of
footmen after the Italian guise, but garrisons of footmen, and of some
horsemen only in 26. places.

Notwithstanding the Emperor Charles the v. in the year 1547. appointed 600.
ordinary Lances, every lance having for his retinue one man of arms, and
four light horsemen as in France he has five, which amount in the whole to
3000. horse.

These are divided into 14. companies called Les bands de ordonnance, ye
greatest is of 50. lances, ye least of 30. They are delivered to ye government
of the noblest men of the Country with good proui^sio^ and goodly order, so
that these companies never die but are continuallye supplied with a number of
valiant gentlemen, and soldiers ready at all times to do any exployt they
shall be called unto.

Those that governed these Companies in the year 1566. were these following.

1. The D. of Arschot. 2. The Prince of Orange 3. The Counted Eguemont. 4. The
Marquis of Bergues. 5. Conte de Horn. 6. The Conte de Azenberghe. 7. The Conte
de Mansfelt. 8. The Conte de Meghem. 9. The Conte de Reux. 10. The Conte de
Bossur. 11. The Conte de Hochstrat. 12. The S r. de Brederode. 13. The S r. de
Montignie. 14. The Baron of Barlaymont.
All these Captains have their several officers.

There is also a Treasurer of the wars that pays these bands, he is always a
man of reputation, and is called Art Molckman.

The king has no army upon the Sea, for that were needles considering that at
all times he take^h up both of his own subjects, and of strange nations what
ships soever he finds in his por^^ when he has need, notwithstanding an
Admiral there is with a small number of ships, and those very evil
appointed: but when the king takes any strange ships he furnishes the^ with
his own munitio^s, and paieth the^ honorably for their service.

The Admiral is judge of all Sea causes, Captain of the Sea armies, Governor
of all Sea charges, and has his part in all prizes taken on the Sea in time of
war.

He has a Custom called Dache of every tun of Marchandice that by the kings
safe conduct comes from, or goes into the enemies Country by Sea, to the
which safe conduits of the kings, the Admiral must also give his consent by
writing, the which writing is called Attache, because it is anexed to the kings
safe conduct, and without that all marchandises by Sea are confiscate, as also
without the Attaches of the Governors of the Countries or Towns through the
which any merchandise passes by land into, or out of the enemies Country,
the said merchandise is also confiscate notwithstanding the kings safe
conduct, if the governors safe conduct be wan^ing to it, which privilege the
king has granted them to the end himself be not deceived.

The king has great provision for the wars of all sorts of furniture, all
the which lies at Mali^es, save that which is abroad for the furniture of the
stronger places and the Frontiers. Of this furniture is Captain the great
master of the Artillirie. Farther there is almost no good town nor Castle in
the Country, but that the towns men besides the kings furniture have of their
own, great provision of Artillery and munition necessary for the wars.

Certain statutes made by the prince for the preservation of the State.
NO Subject of the Low Countries may go to serve in the wars any foreign
prince whosoever without ye expres license of ye king.

No man in time of war may trafique with the enemy without the prin^cs
license.

No horse above vii. foot high may be conuayed out of the Country, nor no Mare
at all without license of the prince.

No grain may be conuaied out of the country. No provision of war, no armor,
no gold, nor silver may be carried out of the Country coined nor uncoined,
whole nor broken, save only for necessary iourneing expenses.

No quick silver, no copper, no brass may be carried forth, but money and
favor do all things every where.

All merchandises are suffered to be brought into the Country, and all coin
is current there according to the value thereof.

The Sea is free for all men to fish in, Hauking, Hunting, and fishing in
rivers and fresh waters appertains to ye prince and to noble me^ and
gentlemen in their several jurisdictions and territories, but in Braba^t the
king has reserved to him self only these v. woods wherein none other may
hunt: namely Sonien, Sauenterloo, Groetenhout, Grootenheist, and Meeredale. The
rest are free for every man to hunt in, save with nets and cords.

The revenues of ye prince consist in demaines, wood-sale, imposts upon
merchandise going and coming by land and by Sea, certain rents in diverse
towns, as for example in Andwerpe ye prince has part of all co^fiscations, he
has the mint, the public prisons, ye waighing of merchandise, al yt which
be ever let to farm. The prince has likewise ye measuring of grain which is
farmed in Andwerp for 100000. crowns in ready coin.

The princes revenues are equal with ye king of Englands, setting aside that
which the Crown of England receives of the Church.

The manner of assembling the states of of the Low Countries is this.
THe states at ye day appointed are sommoned by ye princes letters to appear
ordenarily at Bruxels, partly, because ye Court ordinarily resideth there, and
partly because ye Brabanco^s consult of no matter out of the precincts of their
own Country.

These Contreys send Deputies, namely, Brabant, Flandres, Artoys, Hainault,
Valenciennes, L'Isle Douay, Orchies, Holland, Vtrecht, Zeeland, Namurs,
Tournay, Tournesis, Malines.

The other contreys, namely, Guelders, Ouerissel, Frise, Luxembourg, assemble
each in their own country under the Governor thereof for the Prince, and
cannot be called to the general assembly such are their privileges.

The States of each Province are these.
First, the Clergy. Secondly, the Nobility. Thirdly, the people and the
principal towns.

The States assemble not altogether, but one province after another, to whom
the President or one of the Counsel of State proposes in the princes name
that which he demands, for without their consent the Prince can obtain
nothing that is propounded.

If but one town oppose it self when all the rest have consented, all that the
others have done is of no effect, because nothing is granted by the deputies
but conditionally (viz) of all the States Vnanimi consensu do agree thereunto.

There is also an agreement between the Pope and the Prince, which stands
upon these conditions following.

The Prince gives the Clergy livings, and the Pope confirms them.

No prelate or Lay person may be adiourned out of the country, but the Pope
must send his commissioners into the country.

The pope cannot give a benefice, not a pardon, nor send a bull into the
country without the Princes Placet.

The Clergy can buy no lands or immouable goods, without the express
permission of the Prince.

The Particular Description of every Province of the Low countries.
THere are in the Low contreys xviii. titles that the Prince bears, and xvii.
Provinces (viz) Lothier, which is a bare title of a Duchy without land.
Brabant, Le^burg, Luxemburg, Guelders, which are provinces and dutchies.
Flaunders, Artoys, Hainault, Holland, Zeeland. Namur, Zutphen, which are
Provinces and Earldo^s. The Marquisat of the sacred Empire Frisland, Malines,
Vtrecht, Ouer-issel, Greningha^, which are Provinces and Seniories.

Note that the County of Burgundy, is not described in this discourse, belike
because it (...) so far up in the high countries, near to Suitx^rland and
Sauioe.

Now follows the particular description of every one of these Provinces, and
first of Lothier or Lothrie.
THis is a bare Title, for the land remains in Lorraine: yet the Duke of
Brabant yetayneth the name also, because Barbant was a part of the ancient
Lorrame, and was called base Lorraine. And yet at this day, there is a court of
causes civil and criminal, at Genappe in Brabant Wallon, called La Court de
Lorraine. But all the Country at this day is comprehended in Brabant Wallon.

Brabant.
Brabant is bounded North with the Meuse, which seuereth it from Guelderland
and Holland, South, with Haynault, Namurs, Liege. East, with the Meuse, which
seuereth it from another part of Guelderland. West, with the Schelde, which
seuereth it from Flaunders and the principality of Alost.

The air is very wholesome and good, through all the country, and the soil
fruitful, save in Ke^pland, which being naturally unfruitful, is made
fruitful by keeping of Cattle and soiling the ground.

The length of Brabant from South to North, (viz.) from Gemblours to S.
Ghertrudenberg, is 22 Leagues.

The breadth from East to West, (viz) from Helmont to Berghes, 20 Leagues.

The circuit 80. Leagues.

Note here, that when you read of any leagues, you must account the length of
them according to the use of the country that is described.

The principal Rivers of Brabant, are ye Meus^ and the Schelde.

The principal Forests of the country, are Sonien, Zauenterloo, Grotenhout,
Grotenheist, Meerdale.

Towns walled there, are 26. whereof Louuain, Bruxelles, Andwerpe, Bosleduc,
are the 4. principal, and being joined together make one of the three Estates
of Brabant. Farther, Tilmo^d, Leeuwe and Niuelle, are named among the Capital
towns, notwithstanding that they be but small. The rest of the walled towns
are Arshcot, Berghe, Meghen, Breda, Die, Maestricht, which are all beautified
with Titles of Honor. After follow, Steenberg, Lire, Viluorden, Gemblours,
Ioudoigne, Hannut, La^den, Hau or Hale^ Sichenen, Here^tales, Eindouen,
Helmont, Grave.

The dignities in Brabant are these: The Marquisat of the Empire, The Duchy
of Arschot, The Marquisat of Berghen, The Counties of Hochstraet and of Meghen,
The Seniories of Breda, Die, Grimberghen. The state of M^^stricht and the
Seniory of Rauastain ( though this be a member apart) besides Baronies xix.
comprehending Grimberghen for two.

Small towns in Brabant though unwalled, yet market towns, fair built, and
inioying the privileges of walled towns, and some of them adorned with titles
of Honor are xviii. described hereafter by them selves.

Villages with parish churches (diverse of them having also titles of Honor)
there are 700. the principal whereof are hereafter described.

Farther the Duchy of Lembourg, the State of Walkenburg, the Earldom of
Dalem and the state of Rode-le-duc with all their appendances, lands and
jurisdictions, resort to the Chancery of Brabant.

The three estates of Brabant consist of the clergy, the Nobility, and the
four capital towns.

The Duke of Brabant is ancient protector and advocate of the country of
Liege, and was wont to be so also (as it is said) of the noble City of Aix or
Aquisgrane, which is now under the tutele of the Duke of Cleues and Iulliers.
Now follows the description of the four capital towns, namly, Louuain,
Bruxelles, Andwerp and Bosleduc.

Louuain.
Louuain, is so called of Louen which is a dutch word, and signifies to
praise or Honor, because the Idol Mars was there honored. It stands by the
river of Dele, the air there is so temperate, that Vines grow both within and
without the town.

The greatness of Louuain is four miles compass within the walls and six
without. The buildings are beautiful, The Temples, Monasteries, the church of
S. Peter, and the public Palace are very sumptuously built. The figure of
Louuain is round.

The town is nothing close built, by means whereof, there are within it many
goodly Gardens, valleis, mou^tains, medows, vines and springs Louuain is one
of the four towns of the Marquesate of the sacred Empire.

The University was founded by John the iiii. of that name, Duke of Brabant, in
the year 1426 In it are above xx. colleges, the principal whereof are five,
Lilium, Castrum, Porcus, Falco, ^^rilingue.

Louuain is the principal and mother of all the towns of Brabant, and makes
the first member of the third estate of that Province.

Louuain is the first town that receives and gives Oath to the Prince. It
was sometime an Earldom, and commanded over the greatest part of Brabant.

Under the jurisdiction of Louuain are these: towns following: Tilmont,
Leeuwe, Gemblours, Die, Halen, Sichenen Ioudoigne, Hanut, Landen, etc.

In the Low contreys are only two Vniue^^^ties, one here at Louuain, and the
other at Do^ay, lately erected by king Philip.

Bruxelles.
Bruxelles, stands upon the little River Sin, ^ouuain and it are of one
greatness. There are two walls about Bruxelles, between the which toward the
East, the court is resident.

It is seated for all commodities, both of pleasure and profit, no town in the
world better.

There is a goodly channel made by Art from Bruxelles into the River of Dele,
and thence into the Schelde. There are also five notable scluses for the
backwater. The charge of this channel and seluses amounted to 500000 crowns.

In Bruxelles are seven gates, seven churches, seven noble houses, and seven
esche^ins of the Town.

Bruxelles is also one of the four towns of the Marquesat of the sacred Empire.

The buildings of Bruxelles are very sumptuous.

There are in Bruxelles 52. Occupations divided into nine members, called the
nine nations.

In Bruxelles is made great store of Armor, and excellent Arras clothes of all
sorts, both of silk and also of gold and silver.

Under the jurisdiction of Bruxelles, are Niuelle and Viluorden.

Bruxelles is not a Vicountie (though it be so taken) but there is a certain
dignity in (...) of that name, as is also in Andwerp, (...) and other Towns,
having only belonging (...) certain ancient preheminences, (...) and
prerogatives but no land, and he that now is Viscou^t of Bruxelles, is Charles
Hannart Sr of Liod^ kerke, who has only certain preheminences in the town,
but no other jurisdiction: such as the Boregraue has in Andwerp, who is the
self same officer there, that the Viscount is at Bruxelles. This office
seems to be much like the office of our Sherifs in England, who are also
called Vicicomites.

The Chancerie of Brabant is ordinarily resident at Bruxelles, to the which
resort the Duchy of Lembourg, the states of Walkenbourg, Dalem and other
Seniories beyond the Meuse.

At Bruelles is also resident, the Court Feudale of Brabant.

There is also held the spiritual court of the Bishop of Cambray, because the
Brabancons may not be called out of their own country, to answer any matter
whatsoever.

The Bishop of Liege has also a court there, because part of Brabant is in his
dioces.

Bruxelles, is also the ordinary place of reside^ce of the kings court.

This town is the second capital town of Brabant, and makes the second
member of the third estate thereof. Their principal we^lth consists in their
lands and revenues.

Three leagues from Bruxelles is the Abbey of Afflighem, the Abbat whereof is
the first, and has the first suffrage of all the twelve abbeyes of the States
of Brabant.

In this Abbey is one of the principal Libraries of Brabant, whereof there are
4. more, namely, at Tongherloo, Gemblours, Grunendale, and at the priory of the
seven fountains.

Andwerp.
Andwerp stands in a goodly plain, the River of Schelde parting it from
Flandres. The River before the town is broad 600. Flemish else and better,
deep 22. else, the tide rises ordinarily xii. foot. Note that every
Flemish elle makes three quarters of an English yard.

Andwerp has been thrice walled.

The Sea is by land xiii. leagues from the town, by water xvii. leagues.

There are about it ten bulwarks, and 7. gates built of goodly stone.

The walls are fortified with large ditches, which with engines that they have,
may be filled with water at all times.

The circuit of Andwerp is about four Italian miles.

There are eight principal channels within the town, the greatest whereof
joining to the Palace of the Easterlings, is of receipt for 100. great ships,
all these channels are cut out of the River.

There are in the town of Briges (...) above 74.

Streets 212. the greatest part being (...) large, and very even and straight
built.

The Burse of Andwerp took the name of the Burse of Bruges, which was so
called because it was near to the house of the family of la (...) as appears
by their arms yet remaining upon the said house, being three purses. This name
of Burse has gained so great credit in the world, that all places where
Merchants are to assemble together, are called Burse: yea the Exchange in
England retains yet that name, notwithst^^ the alteration made by the Queen.

There are in Andwerp but five parish churches, the principal whereof is our
Lady church, being a very goodly one. The rest of the Authors discourse in this
place, is only of orders and societies belonging to ye church, a matter
unnecessary for us to rehearse.

Here also the Author runs out into a long discourse of the order of the
golden fleese, rehersing all the knights that have bin of that order, a thing
not necessary for us to spend time in: notwithstanding we will here for the
better satisfaction of the Readers, rehearse all the principal orders of
Knighthood in Christendom.

1. The Annunciade, which is the most ancient, was instituted by Ame the xi.
Earl of Sauoy about the year of our Lord. 1342.

2. The garter by K. Edward the iii, An. 1350.

3. The golden fleese, by Philip Duke of Burgundy, Anno. 1429.

4. S. Michaell by Lewis the xi. An. 1470.

5. S. Stephen by Cosmus Duke of Florence. Anno 1561.

6. The Holy ghost, by Henry the third king of France, Anno.

There are in Andwerp 13500 houses, and place appointed for 1500 more.

Houses are deerer let in Andwerp than in any other place in Christendom,
Lisbonne in Portugale excepted.

It is forbidden to build or repair any house of wood, or to make any wall
less than a foot thick above the ground.

Many goodly buildings there are in Andwerp, as well private as public, but
the public especially are very sumptuous, namely, the place where Arras is
sold, the Butchery, the Waigh-house, the English house, many sumptuous ware
houses built for the English men, the new lodging for the discharging of
Merchandise that comes to the town by land, but the Esterlings lodging
passes all these in greatness and magnificense, yet is that as far
surmounted by the towne-house, the building whereof, costalmost 100000. crowns.

Andwerp is an imperial town, and Metropolitan of the Marquisat of the
Empire, yet paie^^ nothing to the Emperor. It is marvelously well furnished
both out of their own country and out of foreign countries, of all kind of
victual^ and dainties, both for the necessary use of man, and also for
wantonness.

In Andwerp is such a dignity as is above mentioned in Bruxelles, which in
dutch is called Bore grave, and in other languages Viscount. This dignity is
now in the Prince of Orange, by exchange made by his auncetors of Nassau with
the Duke of Cleues, who held it as lord of Die: It is an office of honor but
of small commodity.

Andwerp is the third capital town of Brabant, and makes the third member of
the third estate thereof.

Under the Jurisdiction thereof are comprehended, Berghen, Breda, Lire,
Herentals, Steenberghen, and diverse other towns and villages, part of the
which in civil causes, resort rather to Andwerp than to the Chancerie of
Brabant.

The causes of the great wealth that Andwerp is grown to, are three.
THe first the two Martes that are in Andwerp, the one whereof, begins 15.
days before Whitsontide, and is thereof called La foire de P^^tecoste, The
other is called La foire de S. (...). or de S. Bauon, because it begins the
Second sunday after our Lady day in August, which is of equal distance from
either of the said Feasts. Each of these Martes endure six weeks, all the
which time, no man is subject to any arrest for debt: the paiments of these
Marts are the 10. of August and the 10 of November. The paime^ts also of the
two faires that were wont to be made at Berghes, namely, of the cold fair, and
of Easter fair, are now made at Andwerp, the one on the x. of February, and
the other the x. of May.

There are also at Andwerp besides these Marts, two great Horse faires: the one
at Whitsontide, the other at our Lady day in September, and likewise two of
Leather and skins of all sorts, which follow immediately after the horse faires.

The second cause of the wealth of Andwerp is this. In the year 1503. the
Portugales began to bring spices out of their Indias, and from Calicut into
Portugale, and from thence to Andwerp, which before that time were wont to be
brought by the ^ed sea to Barnt and thense to Alexandria, and so to Venice,
which (before the Portugals voyage into the Indias) furnished all Christendom
ofspices. But the king of Portugale, having partly by love, partly by force,
drawn all the traffic of spices in Calicut and the Isles adjacent thereunto
into his own hands, and having brought them to Lisbonne, sent his factor with
spice to Andwerp, by which means it drew all Nations thither to buy spices of
the said Factor. Thus (...) by this occasion beginning to be greatly
freque^^ted: Afterward in the year 1516. diverse Merchants strangers, Spaniards
and Italians, depa^^ted from Bruges to go and dwell at Andwerp, and after them
others, and so by little and little all strangers (a few excepted) left Bruges
and went to Andwerp, with no less commodity to this dittie, than discommodity
to that.

The third cause of the wealth of Andwerp, was the course that Monsieur de
Longueuale and Martin van Rossem made with a mighty army, An. 1542. into the
Low countries, meaning inde^ed to have spoiled Andwerp: by occasion whereof the
Citizens of Audwerp to avoid the like peril herafter, have since ye time
maruelously fortified their town, for the safety both of it and of al
Merchants traffiking to it: so that it is now free from al danger and thought
impregnable. By mean^^ whereof, a great multitude of Noblemen and Gentlemen
come to dwell in the town. Farther because the Suburbs were at that time
(...), and that restraint has been made since, (...) to build within 3500.
feet of the town wall; a great number of wealthy men that before dwelt without
the town, have been since and daily are constrained to build and dwell within
the town, by means whereof since that time (...) is increased by 3000 houses.

The charge of the Citizens of (...) the strangers in the town, at the entry
of K. Philip as prince, amou^ted to above 130000. crowns

The provision for the poor in Andwerp, amounts yearly to more than 30000.
ducats, by means whereof, none beg in the town, save at certain feasts, and
certain hours.

Besides this provision above rehearsed, they nourish in the town to a certain
age 8000, poor children of both sexes, and teach them good occupations.

The Reuenews of Andwerp are these.
THe assise of wine yearly 60000 Ducats.

The assise of beer yearly 80000 Ducats.

They receive also an impost of corn, and of all cloven footed beasts, serving
for man's sustenance, the which is paid by the poule.

Likewise the reuenew of the town consists in the sale of certain small
offices, and of letters of freedom: for you shall understand that who so will
exercise any occupation in the town, must have letters from the towne-house to
license him so to do.

Lastly the town receives a good reuenew of houses and lands, which they let
to farm, so that the whole revenues of the town with the imposts of wine and
beer are esteemed 250000. Crowns.

The town paieth nothing to the (...) ordinary, but sometime aideth him with
money and sometime grants him imposts extraord^rie to gratify him with.

The Princes revenues in Andwerp.
THough the town of Andwerp it self pay nothing to the prince: yet has the
king an impost upon wine, bee^e, and beasts sold there for man's sustenance,
besides the above mentioned impost of the town upon these things.

Farther the K. as Duke of Brabant, has an impost levied upon such
marchandizes as go and (...) by Sea to the town, the which is called the (...)
of Brabant, farmed yearly for 20000 ducats.

Again the king as earl of Zeeland, has the like impost upon all
Marchandizes going and coming by Sea to Andwerp, called the toule of Zeeland,
farmed likewise yearly at 20000. ducats or better.

This toule was wont to be paid in Zeeland, but now for ease of the Merchants,
this and al other levied upon any Marchandizes going and coming by sea to the
town, is paid in Andwerp. Notwithstanding the toule levied by the prince upon
any Marchandizes going and coming by and is still paid in Zeeland and not in
Andwerp.

More than these small toules neither Prince, nor town can levy any thing
upon any marchandizes coming to the haven by Sea, or going out of the town by
Land.

The prince receives farther in Andwerpe part of all confiscations, he has
also by inheritance the profit of the Mint, and of the common Gaile, which he
lets to farm both in Andwerpe and through the whole Country of Brabant.

The policy of Andwerpe in the administration of Justice Criminal.
IN causes Criminal the prisoner is allowed his Advocate whom himself will
make choice off, yeathough he lack money. If ye case be not heinous, ye
prisoner is bailed, and if there be no ground of the accusation, the Officer
that follows the process answers ye charges.

If ye case be heinous the Mark grave desirerh to have the prisoner put on the
Rack, whereto though ye Judges agree, yet can nothing be done before ye
Bourgeoisie being informed of the fact agree also thereto, and the^ is the
party disfranchised before he be put to the Rack, otherwise he cannot be
racked.

The Mark grave cannot Rack him but in the presence of two of the Escheuins
not (...) him longer thereon than pleases them.

After the prisoner has sentence passed upon him (which cannot be done before
the Judges be all agreed) he must within 24. hours be executed at the Princes
charge.

But here is to be noted, that before the Sentence be pronounced, the
Marckgraue may compound with the Prisoner (if the case be no^ heinous) for
money, of the which, two parts come to the Prince, and the third to the
Marckgraite.

The bodies of those that be executed are not buried unless it be obtained by
special grace, or for money.

All their goods are confiscated.

Churches and Cloisters are Sanctuaries for prisoners, except the case be
heinous.

Policy in justice Civil.
NO Citizen nor stranger dwellinge in Andwerpe may be arested for debt, nor his
goods seized before he have bin conuented before the magistrate.

The order of co^uenting them before the magistrate is this. The debtor is
warned by a Serieant to come before the Magistrate, and there he is examined of
the debt. If the Creditor prove the debt, the debtor has a short day given
him to pay it, and in the mean time men are appointed to look to his house
that nothing be conuayed away. After x. or xii. days expired and the debt not
paid, an Inventory is taken of the goods, which are forthwith sold, and if
they will not answer the debt, the debtors lands are sold, and if they all
suffice not, then his body is apprehended, but till it be found that he has
no means to pay the debt, the body of a Citizen may not be seized on. The
like order is used to a stranger dwelling in Andwerpe, but if he have no
dwelling there he may be arested at all times, notwithstanding at three days
end he may be bailed.

Likewise a Citizen or Inhabita^t of Andwerpe can not arest the body or goods
of an other Citizen, unless he be a Vagabond, or a Spendthrift.

Ifa Citizen of Andwerpe be bankerout, the wife is first answered her Dowry,
and if she be dead, then is it answered to her children, who represent the
place of their mother, next to her is ye Prince answered, then the Town, and
lastly the Creditors equally.

The Sons and Daughters inherit after their Father equally, save in Lands
of noble Tenure, called Fiefs, of the which the principal house together with
two parts of the land descends to the eldest Son, the other third part is
equally divided among the other sons, but the (...) have nothing to do with
the Fiefs.

A Bastard legittimated by the Prince may dispose of all that he has, and if
he make no will his next of kin succeed him, otherwise if he be not
legittimated, all that he has comes to the prince by the Law de Aubeine.

Yet a Bastard legittimated shall have no partage with his brethren and
sisters, but that only which his Father gives him.

A Bastard of a woman, maid, or widow, not being begootten by a married man,
nor a religious man shall have his Partage, and inherit from his mother with
his brethren and sisters as fully as if he had bin borne in lawful matrimony.

No Land may be bought or morgaged, but by writings made before one of the
Escheuins at the least, and one Secretary of the town, who enroule it in the
public Registers, where all men may see it. And after fiften or sixten
months expired, no man may quarrel it.

Their Marriages.
WHen a man marieth his daughter and gives her money to her dower, that
barreth her not from her Fathers Inheritance. But when the Lands and goods
(the (...) where with the Daughters meddle not excepted) are divided equally
among the children the sum given in marriage is abated.

In all towns save Andwerpe the Husband ^s bound to his Wives debt, and the
Women to their Husbands. But in Andwerpe except the Woman trade Merchandise
she is not bound to the Husbands debtes, but the man is bound to the Wives
debtes, whether they were due before the Marriage or after: And the reason is
because noe Woman after she is Married (settinge those aside that trade
Merchandise) can bind her self, but by her Husbands leave.

If a Citizen marry out of Andwerpe without leave of the Bourgue-mayster he
loses his freedom.

If a man and his wife continue together 50. years, at the end of 50. years
they celebrate with great joy their marriage a new: so do the Priests also if
they live 50. years after they have song their first Mass.

A Citizen married, if he bid^ out of the Banlieu of Andwerpe but six Weeks
without leave of the Bourgue-mayster loses his freedom, but a Citizen
unmarried may go whither him lists, and tarry as long as pleases him
without any leave asking.

If a Citizen go to dwell out of the town of Andwerp with his wife and
children he loses his freedom unless he declare himself to be of the
Citizens without, for you must understand that there are two sorts of
Citizens, those within, and those without, the which all enjoy the self same
privileges. But he that declares himself a Burgess without (so that he
dwell not out of the quarter of Andwerpe, or the Marquisate of the Empire) is
bound to take his oath to ye town once a year, and to pay half a Crown to
the public Treasury, and so he may enjoy his freedom and privileges without
any prejudice.

A Citizen or one borne in the Country (this reaches not to strangers which
are made free) yt has remained one year out of Andwerp, if he depart to go
to dwell in any other Town of Brahant must pay to the public Treasury 5.
in the hundredth of al his immovable goods, and if he go to dwell out of
Brahant he pays 10. in ye hundred, unless he go to dwell in some place
priuileged from these pains, as Lire, Bergh, Breda, Middlebourg in Zelande,
and such other Towns.

No stranger may exercise any Art in Andwerpe before he be made free.

There are not in Andwerp above 15000. able men for the wars, reckening
between the age of 18. and 60. because the number of Women, Churchmen, and
Children is exceeding great there.

A brief rehearsal of all the notable things in Andwerpe.
1. THe Town walls and Bulwarks with diverse secret Issues in and out of the
town.

2. The Gates of the town being seven.

3. The Bridges, which are six.

4. The Castle a rare piece of work, but now rased.

5. The new town.

6. The Haven.

7. The tower of our Lady Church.

8. The new Burse.

9. The Mint.

10. The Haules of occupations.

11. The Bucherie and Fish-market.

12. The townhouse.

13. The Esterlings-house.

14. The English and Portugal houses.

15. The Glas-house.

16. Plantine the Printers shop, where there is daily spent in printing 150.
Crowns.

The noble houses in Andwerp.
FIrst you must understand that the Nobility here cannot exercise
marchaundise, as in Italy they do, for that the Nobility here dwell in
Castles ^^oade and but few in the towns, n^^withstanding in Andwerpe are as
many nob^^ houses resident as suffice for the government of the Town. The
names of the which here follows.

1. Lyre. 2. Berchem. 3. Imerfell, which is issued out of the house of Lyre.

4. Vrsel. 5. Schoonhouen descended of the house of Arschot. 6. Werne. 7. Halm
(...). 8. Roccox. 9. Sterck. 10. Stralen. 11. Schetz. 12. Vander-heyden.

A notable discourse of the trafique and Commerce of Andwerpe with strange and
foreign Nations.
IN Andwerpe are 7. strange nations that trafique there. French who in time of
peace only come thither. Alema^s, Danes, and Ost^rlings together, Itali^^s
Spaniardes, English, Portugales. Of the which these 6. Nations last rehearsed
make above the number of 1000. Marchantes.

There are more Spaniards in Andwerpe tha^ of any other Nation, because diverse
of them (...) married and dwell there.

Anthony one of the Fouguers of Ausburge died not long sithence, and left by
his testament to his Heirs above 6. millions of Crowns.

A discourse of the Exchange.
THe places where the Exchange runs are for Italy, Room, Venis, Milan,
Florence, Genes. For Allemaine, Ausbourg, Norenberg, Franck forde. For Spain,
Medinadel Campo at 2. Faires, Villano at 1. Fair, Medina de Rio Secco at one
Fair, Borgos, Calice, Seuille, Lisbonne. For France, Lions, Paris, Rouen. For
England, London. For Burgundy, Besanzon.

The Exchange consists in giving or receiving in one place, as for example
in Andwerp, as much money as amounts to a Crown, a Ducat, or an Angel, to
receive or deliver in Italy, or in an other Province as much in valewe, which
is a goodly commodity for traffic.

But rich Merchants moved with desire of insatiable gain, having gathered
together great Masses of money, do either by giving forth to interest when
there is need of money, or taking up when there is no need, make money either
scarce or plentiful at there own pleasure and to their own gain particular,
but to the (...) pre^^idice of the commonwealth.

A rehearsal of such Marchandice as comes out of diverse Countries to
Andwerpe and is sent into those Countries from Andwerp, and first of Italy.
Room.
NO thing is brought from Room to Andwerpe (...) there is sent from Andwerpe
thither Cloth of diverse sorts, Sarges or Says, Wosteds; Demiwosteds or
Russels, Li^en cloth, Arras and Tapistrie.

Ancona.
From Ancona come Chamlets watered and vnwatred, Grograins, Spice, Druggs,
Silks, Co^ton, Felts, Tapistrie, Spanish leather, Indian color, Wrought
Veluets and Satin of diverse sorts.

To Ancona are sent store of English Clothes and Carisies, Flemish clothes
especially clothes of Armentiers, being mingled of 4. colors, Sarges, Wosteds,
Linen cloth, Arras clothes, but not great store, and of Cuchenille (which
comme^^ out of Spain) great quantity.

Bouloigne.
From Bouloigne come Sattins and Veluets, Silk twisted and raw, Cloth of Gold
and Silver, Caps, Gold, Purle, Cipres for bands

To Bouloigne are sent Sarges, Russels, Tapistrie, Linen, Small Mercerie wares,
and some cloth.

Venis.
From Venis come Spices, as Cloves, Sinamon, Nutmegs, Ginger, Drugs also, as
Rubarbe, Aloe, Cassia, Agaric, Dragons blood, Momie, Seeneleaues,
Coliquintida, Scamonee, Tutie, Methredat, Triakle. From Venis come also
excellent Satins, Silk raw and wrought, Chamlets, Grograines, Wrought
Veluets, Tapistrie of Turkey, Samis excellent good which is a kind of silk
like to Satin, excellent Scarlets, Cotto^, Comin, Ebenus, mercerie wares of
silk, India^ color called Azure and diverse other colors to paint and to die
withal.

To Venis are sent Jewels, pearls, English cloth and woll, Low country cloths
of diverse sorts, Says, Wosteds, Russels, Linen cloth, Tapistrie, Cuchenille
great quantity, diverse small wares, furniture for houses, Sugars, and sometime
some Peper.

Naples.
From the Realm of Naples come Satins, Silk wrought and raw, fine Furs,
Saffron of Aquila, Manna excellent good.

Thither are sent Cloths of the Low countries, and english clothes, infinite
linen cloth, Says, wosteds, Russels, Arras, and many works of metal.

Sicile.
Out of Sicile come Galls, Commin, Oringes, Cotton, Silks, Wines, namely
Malmsey and such like.

Thither are sent clothes both woollen and linen, Says; Arras, many works of
metal.

Milan
Thence comes gould and silver thread, Satins, cloth of gould of diverse
sorts, Fustia^, Skarletts, stamels and other fine clothes, rise, armors
excellent good, diverse sorts of small wares, Parmesan cheese.

Thither is sent peper, jewels, sugar, musk and other odors, English and
Flemish clothes, Says of all sorts, wosteds, Russels, infinite quantity of
Linen cloth, Tapistrie, Cochenelle, English and Spanish wolles.

Florence.
Thence comes cloth of gold and silver frized and vnfrized, Satins wrought
with gold called Brocatz, and other Satins rich and good, gold and silver
thread, Rashes very good and durable, Satin^ called Capitons, fine Furs of
Marterns and Faines and diverse other fine and curious works.

Thither go Sales, Russels, Linen clothes and Flax, English rugges, Frizes
and wolles, notwithstanding that the greatest part come by Sea out of England
itself.

Genes,
Thence come Veluets and Satins, the best that are made, and diverse other
kinds of silks, Coral, Mithridate, Triakle, all very excellent good.

Thither go English and Flemish clothes, Says, Russels, Linen cloth, Arras,
diverse small wares, all kind of household stuff.

Mantoua.
Thence come Satins, silk wrought and raw, Caps great store, and diverse other
marchandizes.

Thither are sent such wares of these Countries as before are rehearsed.

Luques.
Thence come clothes of gold and silver sometime, but of silks of diverse
forts great quantity though very thin and selender.

Thither is sent as before is rehearsed.

The like and diverse other sorts of marchandizes also come out of diverse other
towns of Italy, namely Cremona, Vero^na, Bressa, Vicenza, Modena.

Farther out Italy are brought by Sea, diverse other marchandizes, as Alums of
Ciuita Vecchia, Oils of Pouille, Genes, and Pisa, Gauls, diverse sorts of
Gu^mes, Cotton, Commin, Seen leaves, Irias called of the Florentines
Diaggiuolo, Brimstone, Orpigment.

And thither is carried by Sea, Tin, Lead, Madder, Brasill, wax, Leather,
Flax, Soap, poudered (...), and diverse sorts of fine and very beautiful wood
to work in, and sometime corn, as wheat, Rye, Beans, and other Lenton corn
called of the Italian Legummi. And thus much of Italy.

Allmaigne.
Thence comes Silver in Bullion or Lingots, quicksilver, Copper fined and
vnfined an infinite quatitie, wolles of Hassia very fine, and good glass
Fustians great store, Oade, Madder, Saffron, and diverse things for Diers,
Saltpeter, small wares great quantity, household stuff of all forts excellent
fair and finely wrought, of all sorts of metals and Armor a wonderful
quantity, and likewise Rhenish wines to a great value.

Thither are s^t Jewels, pre^ious stones, Pearls, Spice, Drugs, Saff^on,
Sugars, English and Flemish clothes great store, Says, Wosteds, Russels,
Tapist^ie, great quantity of Linen cloth and other Merchandise of all sorts.

Denmarcke, Osterland, Liuonie, Norwaie, Sweden, Poland, and other
Septe^trionall provinces.
Thence comes Wheat, Rye, Copper, Latin, Brass, Saltpeter, Oade, Vitriol,
Copresse, Madder, excellent Wolles of Austria, Flax, Home, Wax, Brimstone,
pich Soap ashes, excellent fine Fu^res of all forts, Leather and Skins of all
sorts of Beasts, especially Buffe and Bear Skins to be used in ye wars,
yea diverse sorts of Fish Skins, ^ikewise Timber for ships, wood excellent
fair and ^fit for all kind of works, Waineschot, Dealebord, Beer, poudered
flesh, fish poudered and dried with the smoke, the sun, the wind, yea and
with the cold, besides diverse other marchandizes too long to rehearse, but
especially great quantity of yelow Amber and to great value.

Thither are sent Spices, Drugs, Saffron, Sugar, Salt, great store of English
and Flemish clothes, Says, Wosteds, Russels, Fustians, Linen cloth, Precious
stones, Silks, Cloth of gold, Chamlets, Grograins, Tapistrie, Sacks of Spain,
and other wines, Alume, Brasill, small wares, and all moueables of household

A discourse of Amber which comes out of the Septentrionall Provinces above
rehearsed.
Amber is a joyce not of a tree, but of a stone which grows like Coral in a
Mountain in the North Sea clean covered with water and shunned by all
Mariners at the least three Leagues for fear of wrack. The mountain is
reasonable large, and about 50. English yardes high, and when any tempest
arises in the North sea especially in September and December this Liquour by
ye violence of the Sea is rent from (...) rock and cast into diverse Havens,
and upon diverse Sea coasts both near and far from this rich rock where the
people gather it, to the great commodity of diverse princes, namely the king of
Swede^, the Duke of Pomerania, but especially the Duke of Prussia in whose
Country the most of it is taken up. The people of the Country when the Sea
rages most, all naked leap into the Sea, vpony which first appears great
store of weed, and after ye Amber, which being taken out of ye water hardens
like to Coral, neither is this Amber found else where, but in those Seas
only.

Besides the beauty thereof it has many Virtues, it burns like Piche, it
draws to it not only Strawes and such light things, but also Iron like to
the Adamant. It is excellent good against all Agewes, especially the
quarterne, to stop blood both above and beneath, against the plague and all
kind of poison, the dropsy, falling-sicknes, stone, cholique, headache, weakness
of the stomach, and the yellow iaundies. And thus much of this precious Gomm^
or stone.

France by Sea.
Thence is brought salt of Brouages, Oade of Tolouse, Canuas and such like
Clothes of Br^^taigne and Normandy, wines white and claret, oils, saffron
grains of Province Melage^. or Melassi, Turpentine, Pitch, writing paper,
Glasses, Prunes, Brasill,

France by land.
Thence are brought diverse works finely gilded, fine woollen clothes of Paris
and Rouen, stamels of Touars, Bourats of Champaigne, Thread, yarne and hemp of
Lions, Verdegris of Montpellier, and diverse other Marchandizes being small
wares.

Thither are sent Jewels, precious stones, pearls, silver in bullion or mass,
quicksilver, Lead, Tin, Vermilion, Copper, Brass, Lattin wrought and
unwrought, Azure to dye with, Cuchenille, Brimstone, Saltpeter, Vitriol and
Coperes, Chamblets, Grograines, Turky-works, English clothes, Frises, Cottons,
great store of Flemish clothes frised and vnfrised, fine linen cloth, Says
and Sarges of all sorts, Wosteds, Russels, Tapistrie, wools of Austrich,
Leather, Furs, wax, Mader, Hops, Soap, poudred flesh and poudred fish great
plenty.

England.
Thence come Clothes and carsayes of all sorts, and of them great abundance,
both fine and course, Frises, fine wool, excellent Saffron, but no great
quantity, Tin, Lead, Sheep skins, Cony skins, and diverse sorts offine furs,
lether, Beer, Cheese and other victuals, and Malmesie brought out of Candia
into England.

Thither are sent Jewels, Pearls and pretiou^ stones, silver unwrought,
Quicksilver, Clothes of gold and silver, Silks, gold and silver thread,
Chamlets, Grograines, Turky-workes, Spices, Drugs, Sugar, Cotton, Comin,
Gauls, Linen clothes of all sorts fine and course, Says, Russels,
Tapistrie, Madder, Hops, Glass, poudered fish, all sorts of small wares, as
well of metal as of other stuff, Armor, all kind of munition for the
wars, and implements of house.

Scotland.
Thence are brought Sheep skins, Cony skins, diverse other fine furs of diverse
small beasts, especially martres, the best that may be found, Leather, wool,
clothes but evil wrought, pearl fair and great, but not comparable neither in
beauty nor price to the Oriental pearl.

Thither are sent Spices, Madder, Sugar, some Silks, Chamlets of all sorts,
Sarges of all kinds, linen, and some small wares. But the things sent thither
are to no great value: partly because the Scots are poor, and partly because
they furnish themselves out of England and France.

Ireland.
Thence are brought raw and dry hides, diverse sorts of Beasts namely, Oxen,
Kyne, sheep, fine Furs, some clothes but of small value, and certain other
gross wares, but of small prise.

Thither are sent such wares as are carried into Scotland, but for the most part
they are furnished out of England.

Spain.
Thence come precious stones, Pearls very good, but inferior to the
Oriental Pearls and stones, gold, silver, Cuchenille, Salsaparille, guaiacum
wood, Saffron, Drugs, Grains, Scarlet, raw silk, Silks of all sorts,
especially Velue^^ and Ta^fitaes of Toledo, Salt, Aluin of Mazzeron, Or^ille of
Canaria, which is an herb to die with, cal^ed of the Florentines Raspe, fine
wool, Iron, Leather, wines of diverse sorts, Oiles of all sorts, both for
meat and for draperie, Vinegar, Honey. Melassi, gummes of Arabia, Soap, Fruits
of all sorts, both fresh and dried, as Orenges, Limons, cit^ ^ons, pomgrannets,
Olives, Melons, Capers, Dates, Figs, Raisons, Almondes, etc, Ca^^arie wines,
Canarie Sugars.

Thither are sent, Quicksilver, copper, brass, and Lattin wrought and
unwrought, Tin, Lead, ^loathes both Flemish and English, Says, Wusteds,
Russels, Grogranes, Tapistrie, linen cloth of all sorts, chamlets, Flax,
Thread, wax, pitch, Mader, Soap, Brimstone, and sometime wheat and Rye,
poudered flesh and fish, butter, cheese, all wares made of metal, silks,
silver plate, things wrought and siluerd over, Armor, all mu^ition for the
wars, all kind of household stuff, all things made with hand of Artificers, for
the SpaSpaniards even of base condition hate to^ to the death.

Portugale.
Thence come precious stones and pearls Oriental perfect good, fine gold
beaten in mass, Spices, drugs, amber, musk, Cyuet, Elephantes tooth, Rubarb,
Aloes, Azure or India^ color called of the Portugales Anil, Cotton, the root
of China, Sugars of S. Thomas I Will, Brasill, Maleguette and other drugs that
come out of Quyne, sugars and wines of Madera, salt, wine, Oade, oil, grain,
being the grain of the herb wherewith they dye skarlet, called thereof Crimosin
in grain, Orcil-le called Raspe, being an herb to die with and diverse other
simples, and good fruits green, dry and preserved.

Thither is sent silver in mass, quicksilver, vermillion, copper, brass,
Lattin wrought and unwrought, Lead, Tin, Armor, Artillery and al munition
for the wars, gold and silver thread, and such other Marchandises as are sent
into Spain.

Barbary.
Thence are brought sugers, Anil, Azur, otherwise called Indian color to dye
with, gums, Colloquintida, leather, furs, feathers of all sorts.

Thither are sent cloth, both woollen and linen, says, small wares both of
metal and of al other things.

A brief abstract of the value of the principal Marchandi^es brought yearly
to Andwerp and the Low countries, out of each of these Provinces above
rehearsed.
Italy, ^000000 Crowns. The cloth of gold, Silks, gold and silver thread or
wier, Chamlets, Grograines, silk wrought and unwrought setting aside the other
merchandise brought out of Italy to Andwerpe, amount yearly to 3. millions of
Crowns
Alemain 2100000 Crowns. Fustians, 600000, Crowns. Renish wine 40000, tons
of six Alms of Andwerp to the tu^ne, every Alme containing 3. barrels of
Florence, and every tun prised at 36. Crowns amounts to 1. Millian and a
half of Crowns.
Denmark. Osterlande. Liuonie, Norway. Sweden. Poland, and the other (...)
prouin^^ 1680000. Crowns. Send yearly into Holland, 60000. Lasts of grain,
especially Rye: every last prised at 40. florens, every floren at 56. gross,
which amounts to 560000 pounds Flemish, which each pound esteemed at 3. Crow^
amount to 1. million and six hundred and four score thousand Crowns.
France 1480000 Crowns. Sends yearly 40000 tuns of wine, of the above
mentioned measure, each tun valewed at 25. Crowns, which amounts to 1.
Million of Crowns. Oade or pastell for Diars 40000. bales, which esteemed at
vii. crowns and a half the bale, amount to 300000. Crowns. Salt of Brouages
six thousand hundreds, every hundred containing a hundred tun, prised
between 225. and 230. Livers of the country for the tun more or less,
according to the cleanness or foulness of the salt, which six thousand
hundreds prised at 30. Crowns the hundred amount to 180000. crowns.
Spain, 625000. Crowns. Was wont to send yearly to Bruges 40000 sacks of
wool, but because the Spaniards themselves, of late make great store of
clothes at home, they send not so much now, so that in the year 1560. they
sent but 25000 sacks, which at 25. crowns the sack, amount to 625000. Crowns.
But the wines yt come out of Spain are of much greater prise than the Wools.
England, 5^50000 Crowns. Sends yearelye 1200. Sarplers of wools which
amounts to more than 250000. Crowns. Clothes, Carseys, and other small
clothes reduced to whole clothes, amount yearly to more tha^ 200000 clothes,
which esteemed one cloth with another, at the least at twenty and five
Crowns the cloth, amounts to 5. Millions of Crowns.

Which treasure of cloth and wool together with that that the English men
receive besides for a number of other good things that they bring out of
England, they employ here in the Low countries upon such Merchandise as I
have before rehearsed which they carry home with the into England.

So that the traffic between England and the Low countries, of that which is
reciproq^ly bought and sold between these two Nations, amounts yearly to
above twelve Millions of crowns, in such sort that hardlye can they live the
one nation without the other.

Of Scotland, Ireland, and Barbary, no mention is made, because that which they
bring or carry away is of no great moment.

Here is to be noted, that Merchants to auo^d the hazard of too great loss,
assure one another at a certain price (whereof they agree among themselves) of
a good part of their Marchandizes that pass by Sea, to the end that if they
miscarrie, all the loss fall not upon one man, which is both a wise and an
honest course.

Here is also to be noted, that the whole gross sum of all the merchandise
brought into the Low countries by all the Nations here above rehearsed,
amounts to xiiii. millions, one hundred and thirty five thousand crowns.

Whereof England alone brings to the value of five millions and two hundred
and fifty thousand crowns, which is more than a third part of the whole by
807500. crowns.

Bolduc.
Bolduc signifies as much as Bois-le-duc, be^^se in times past, there was a
pleasant Wood in that place, appertaining to the Duke of Bra^^ant.

The Town stands upon the little river of D^ese but 2. leagues from ye
Meuse. It is a great town, strong, well peopled, rich and well built. The
Cathedral Church is dedicated to S. John, which is a very goodly one, and has
the goodliest Dial that may be seen.

The people are very war^ike.

There are made yearly in the town, above twenty thousand clothes, worth
two hundred thousand crowns.

The water there is excellent good to white l^nnen cloth, excellent good knives
and pins are made there.

This is the fourth principal town of Br^bant, and makes the fourth member or
quarter in the assembly of the states.

Under the jurisdiction thereof a^e four count^eys, called the four members,
namely.

Kempenlande. Peelande. Maeslande. The straight of Osterwick In the which
Contreys are contained these towns. Helmont. Emdouen. Meghen. Rauestein.
Grave, and diverse other villages.
Now follow the three small capital town^^ of Braban^, and first

Tilmont stands upon the little River (...), the town is decayed, for before
the decay thereof, it was the fourth town of Brabant, but now Bolduc is come in
place thereof.

Leewe stands upon the little brook Cheaf. It is strong and well furnished
of all things necessary for the wars, because it serves for ^^ frontier
town against the country of Liege. In this town is the goodly priorie of S.
Augustine, the prior whereof is one of the twelve prel^s of Brabant. Farther in
this town is excellent good beer brewed.

Niuelle. In this town are excellent fine li^nen clothes made. The soil
about it is very fruitful and full of quarreyes of excellent good stone. This
is one of the four towns of ye marquisat of the sacred Empire. In this Town
is buried Pepin the first son of Carloman.

In this town also is the famous nunrie consisting of 42. Nuns all of noble
race, the which Nuns in the morning are apparelled in (...) religious attire,
and at after dinner in their secular garments like Ladies. They may go abroa^
to feasts and banquets, and may marry if they think good. They have an
Abbess over them who has jurisdiction spiritual and temporal over the town
and country about it. Th^^e three towns last described, are the three small
capital Towns of Brabant. Now follow the ^cignities that are in Brabant and
first.

The Marquisat of the sacred Empire.
SOme write this Marquisat to have been erected by Justinian, some by the
children of Constantinus Magnus. But Paulus Aemilius most truly writes, that
it was erected by the Emperor Ottho the second, Anno. 973. for the dowry of
his Aunt Gerberge mother to Lothaire king of France, and that it comprehe^deth
these four Towns, Niuelle, Louuain, Bruxelles and Andwerp, which last is the
Metropolitan town of this Marquisat.

The Duchy of Arschot.
THe town of Arschot stands upon the little river Demere. It was first a
baronie, then a Marquisat, and lastly the Emperor Charles erected it into a
Duchy. It appertains to the house of Croy, which came out of France into
these countries.

The gentlemen and nobles of Brabant are tied to the king and the K. to them
reciproquely as the lord and tenant holding in Fief, with the which conditions
they are under his protection and serve him in his wars. But other wise they
live in freedom, and govern their territories according to the laws and
Customs thereof, which they cannot alter though the prince would permit them,
without the consent of their Vassales and subjects.

The Marquisat of Bergh^.
BErghe commonly called Ber^hen up Loom, (...) erected (...) the Emperor (...)
1533. It is seated upon (...) and upon the little river of Loom, the which
a^s^^g not far off passes through the town, and but half a league thence
runeth into the Scheld, The town is hard by the Sea in the extreme well part of
Brabant. It has a reasonable good (...).

The Marquis is of great revenues, he is governor of Haynault and Grandveneur
of Brabant, his brother is Bishop of Liege, and (...) milian his coosin Bishop
and Duke (...) of

The County of Hoochstrat*
HOochstrat was erected into (...) Earldom by Charles the (...) It is not
environed with any wall. The Earl thereof has a goodly Castle upon the
(...) the River of Mercke, where he is ordinarily resident. He has under him
many Villages, and a large Seniorie, and a goodly state. He is of the Noble
house of Lalain. He has also a very goodly library.

A League from Hoochstrat is the goodlye Village of Loenhont, where the great
Mathemat^^ian Johannes studius was borne.

The County of Meghen.
MEghen stands upon the River of Meuze. It is an ancient Earldome, and has
Seniorie and Jurisdiction. The Earls name is Charles of Bri^^eu Governor of
Guelderland.

The Baronie of Breda.
THis Town stands upon the River Mercke, three leagues from Hoochstrat.

It is a good and a pleasant town, and in it is a sumptuous Castle with a
double Ditch full of water.

The Reuene was thereof are very great, for it has under it many great Bourgs
and rich Villages, and to it are annexed the town and territory of
Steenbergh, the Franchise of Rosondale and the Seniorie of Osterhout. This
town is the place of residence of the Prince of Orange Earl of Nassau.

How the principaut of Orange came to the house of Nassau, a discourse somewhat
out of the Description of the Low countries.
THE principality of Ore^ge lies between Province and Daulphine. The chief
Town is named Orange, seven leagues from Auignion the Popes town.

This prince-dome is so noble and ancient that it acknowledges no other
sovereign but God alone.

The said prince-dome was long in the noble house of Chalons one of the four
principal houses of the French County, and came to the house of Nassau by the
marriage of Henry of Nassau, (uncle to William late prince of Orange) with the
heir of Chalons.

The Petegree of the Prince of Orange, showing how Orange came to the house of
Nassau.
Orange John prince of Orange of the house of Chalons.
John Englebert of Nassau did great services to the Emperor Maximilian.
Nassau. John of Nassau brother and heir of Englebert.

Philibert of Chalons prince of Orange slain before Florence 1530. Sister and
heir of Philibert. Henry of Nassau married the heir of Orange. William of
Nassau.
Rene succeeded his uncle Philibert in the principaute of Orange by his last
testament, who dying gave Orange to William of Nassau his cosine ge^maine.
Lodonic of Nassau. William late prince of Orange by his cosine Renes testament.
Slain suddenly with a pistol 1584.
The revenues of William late Prince of Orange.
FIrst he held the principaultie of Orange, many Seniories in Burgundy, many
Seniories in France, The County of Nassau in Allemaine, In the Low countries,
the Baronies of Breda and Deist, together with the towns of Sichenen, Steen
berghe and Grave. Farther he was governor of Holland, (...), and Zeeland.

The Baronie of Die.
Die stands upon the river D^mere. It is a good town and has a large
territory and jurisdiction. Many clothes are made in it. Farther in the town
are two colleges of Canons, and this was the birth place of Nicholas Cleonard.

Die is an ancient baronie, and the lord thereof by an ancient privilege and
custom, is Borkgrau^ of Andwerpe.

This baronie is now the Prince of Orenges whose ancestors of Nassau had it
in exchange for Hensberg, of the Duke of Cleues.

Near to this town is the commaunderie of Bechenmort, which appertains to
the crossed knights Teutons. Farther in this country grows reasonable good
wine.

The Baronie of Grimberghen.
This is an ancient Baronie, and has a large territory and Jurisdiction, and
many villages under it. This baronie descends ever to the youngest son, as
do also all the lands in the Territory thereof.

This Baronie is now divided into twain, one part being the prince of
Orenges, the other appertaining to the house of Glimes, which bears the Title
of Grimberghen, notwithstanding since this partage, it is accounted two
Baronies.

Mastricht
Is in Latin called Traiectum Mosae or Traiectum superius, for a difference of
Virecht in Holland, called Traiectum inferius.

The town stands upon the Meuze. It has a goodlye Bridge of stone built
over the River. It is a goodly town and a fair, four Leagues from Liege.

There are in it twoe Colleges of Cannons, in one of the which the Duke of
Brabant is a Cannon.

This town was sometime a bishoppricke, but after the Sea was translated to
Liege, for what cause is set down in the Description of Liege.

In this town is also a goodly house, appertaining to the commanders Teutons.

This town has twoe Lords, namely (...) Duke of Brahant and the Bishopp of
Liege their Seniorie not being destinguished but only in this sort. The
children are always subject to y Prince that their mother was subject to,
without any regard of the fathers subjection. And if a strasnger come into the
town he must declare which of the Princes subjects he will be. And he shall be
received and maintained accordyngly. Yet is (...) Duke of Brahant Sovereign of
the Town^, so^^ only coyneth money and graunt^^^ p^^dons ^o offenders.

Half a league from Mastricht is a hill the upper part whereof abounds with
all sorts of grain and fruits: yet within it is a quarrey of very good
though soft stone.

Now follow the walled Towns in Br^bant that have no title of honor, and
first.

Steenberghe.
Steenberghe is now decayed but was sometime a town of great power and
importance with a goodly haven. It stands upon the S^a and belongs to the
Prince of Orange.

Lire.
Standethe upon the little river Nethe. It very strongue town both by
nature and by art.

In this town is a fayer of Oxen every week from Midsommer till Saint
Martins day in November, there are now many clothes, and diverse small wares
made in the Town.

viluorden.
Stands upon the river Sin upon the which river Bruxelles also stands.
The town is strong by nature: And in it is a Castle being agaile of
prisoners whom only the Prince and his Council may judge.

In this Castle are also kept the privileges given to the people by their
Prince, and to the Prince by the Popes, Emperors, and other great Princes, and
likewise the contracts and transactions passed between the Duke and other Lords
and potentats.

Gemblours.
The Abbot hereof has the first place in the general estats of the country
among the nobles, and the last place among the prelates, because Gemblours was
sometime a County, and the Abbot is both temporal and spiritual lord of the
Town.

In this Abbye is a famous library of books never printed as yet.

Ioudoigne
Here they say the Dukes of Brabant wear wont to bring up their children.

Hannut.
Was sometime a County called Dabor whereof a measure in the town yet bears
the name.

Landen.
This is the auncientest town of Brabant. It appealeth to Bolduc, from whence
notwithstanding it is much farther distant than from Louam or Tilmont.

Near to this town is the village of Hougard^^ where excellent good Beer is
made.

Halen.
Stands upon the little river of Geete near to Liege.

Sichenen.
Stands upon the river Demere. It is the prince of Oringes town.

Herentals.
Stands upon the river Nethe.

Eindouen.
Stands upon the brook Dommele. It is the principal Town of the Country
called Campigne or Kempenlande. It is the County of Burens town.

Helmont.
Stands upon the river Ade, in this town is a fair Castle, the Lord
whereof, and also of the Town is of the noble house of Cortenback, who is also
Borgraue or Viscounte of Weren and Duisbourg.

Grave.
Stands on the Meuze. It is now the prince of Oringes Town boughte of the
kings Demaines, but with consent of the states, otherwise the sale were void,
because the Duke of Brabant without his estates can alien none of his Demaines.

Market towns called fra^ke, though not walled, yet enjoying the privilege of
walled towns are these 18. following.
OSterwick where very many Clothes are made, Oirschot Tournhout, a place of
pleasure and hunting where the queen of Hungary used much to solace her
self, and here also many Clothes are made. Hochstraet which is described
before among ye dignities of Brabant. Duffele which is a baronie of great
revenues and jurisdiction. Walem where is a fair bridge and many Clothes
made. Merchten, Asche, Weren which is a Viscountie and a place where the Dukes
of Brabant used much to solace themselves, and at this place are three Dukes of
Brabant buried, and here also are Games held every year between Louuain and
Bruxelles. Duisbourg, which is a Viscountie. Ouerische, Hulpenwdure, where is a
rich Priorie and yearelye a solemn Procession. Briene Alleu which took the
name of Brennus, one League from this Brienne nere to the Lordship of Clabeck
are found Diamants called Diamants of Clabeck, of color and figure so like a
Diamant that they are forbidden to be set in gold, but so wonderful soft,
the they serve only to deceive the world with the outward show,
notwithstanding of late, better are found not far from the village called H^ng^
Genappe, where in an ancient castle is kept the court called Lothier, which in
some cases judges without appeal. Here resided Lewy^ the eleventh king of
France during the time of his fathers displeasure which continued^^ (...) death.

Ghele, Arendonc, Dormal.

Diverse Villages of name in Brabant.
SAint oidenroy, the Dean whereof is one of tho richest Prelates in Brabant.
Bochstell is a Baronie. Roosendale a goodly village. Huckele, Heer^ was
sometime a court of Justice, which notwithstanding that it be translated to
Bruxelles is yet called Banc de Huckele. Lillo is a goodlye Seniorie
appertaining to the Lord Paul Van dale, a man of great wealth. Grimberghen is
described before among the dignities of Brabant. Gaesb^ck is a noble (...) r^e
and has under it 17. Villages. R^ue ^ also a ba^onie. Leefdale is the
ancientest bar^^^e of Brabant. Wesemale is the Baronie of Gasper Schetz thereby
Marshall of Brabant. Perues ^s a great baronie, so mighty that in times past
the Baron thereof alone has maintained war against the Bishop of Liege. It
apperteineth now to the Lord of Merode, who is also Baron of Duffele and lord
of Walom, etc. Waelhein is a village as great as a Town, with a Castle and so
large a Territory that it bears the Title of a County. Cantecroy has a
fair and a strong Castle and great Jurisdiction, and commands over eight
villages, King Philip has erected it into an Earldom, and it appertains to
the Cardinal of Granuelle. Rosselar is a baronie of such reputation, that the
Baron thereof is great Chamberlain of Brabant. Mol is a fair village.
Santhouen is one of the ancientest courts of Justice in Brabant. Put, here is
held another court of Justice called the Court of Beffere. Rumpst is an
ancient and noble Seniorie and of goodly jurisdiction. Bierbeeck, Crane^donc,
Cuick, Boutersem, Iauce, Sombref, are all goodly baronies. Goseli^ is a fair
village like a town. Hiluerenbeeck is also a fair Village. Welwick is tied
with a long streate to Besoien in Holland, so that these twoe Villages seem a
great Town, Here twice every year are excellent faiers of horses, Postell
stands in the midst of the Desert Countreye of Kempenlande, Here is a rich
and sumptuous Hospital bound to receive all passengers and wayfare^ cording to
their degree.

The Seniorie of Rauestein.
THe Seniorie of Rauestein is comprehended in Brabat but is: ^^ber separated
from it, and is therefore here described particularlye by it self. The town of
Rauestein stands upon the left side of the river of Maze. It is a good little
town, and has high and mean jurisdiction. In it is a good Castle, but the
walls of the Town are ruinous, for they were beaten down by composition when
the wars ended between the Emperor Charles the 5. and the Duke of Cleues.
The Town is the Duke of Cleues, who houldeth it of the Duke of Brabant.

The Duchy of Lembourg.
LEmbourg stands upon the (...) of Wester beyond the Meuin^ Leagues from
A^xla Chappell^, and of it the whole Do hie bears name, half a League from
Lembourg is a mine of the stone called of Plin. lib. 34 Cap. 10. Lapis aerosus
or Cadmia in english Copres, which being incorporated with brass makes Latin,
and increases the brass by one (...) part, Pliny writes thus of it: Lapit
^rosus id (...) m^^lu^m aeris habens and ex quo fuso fit ^^.

In this country is also much iron and some Lead. It was erected into a Duchy
by the Emperor Frederic barbarossa, An. 1172. and was annexed to the Duchy of
Lorraine. But after the death of Henry the last Duke of Lembourgh, who died
without heirs males: John the first of that name Duke of Brabant succeeded
him. Anno, 1293. having both bought Lembourg, and also conquered it from the
Earl of Guelders, who had usurped it: since the which time it has remained
under the Duke of Brabant. Of the Dukes of Lembourg and Lorraine are the kings
of Portugale descended.

Walckembourg, Dalem, Rhodele-Duc and Carpen.
WAlkembourg, called in French Fauquemont, is a reasonable town, having a
large territory and Jurisdiction. It is two little leagues from Maestricht. It
was conquered by John the third, Duke of Brabant, from Rainot lord of
Walekembourg.

Dalem is a little town with a Castle. It is erected into an Earldom, and
has territory and jurisdiction beyond the river of Maze. It was conquered by
Henry the second of that name Duke of Brabant.

Rhode-le-duck, is a little ancient town with an old castle half a league
from Walkembourg, This is the fourth Seniorie beyond the Maze, that has
sovereign jurisdiction, but yet subject to the appeal of the Chancerie of
Brabant.

Carpen, is between Gulic and Colyn. It is a village as great as a little
town, with a collegiall church, and has market and fair, and near unto it
is a strong castle, so that altogether make a good Seniorie. It has a
governor apart with a good garrison for defense of the place.

As well the Duchy of Lembourg as the other States above mentioned, beyond
the River of Maze, consist of three members (viz) 1. Prelates. 2. Nobles and
Gentlemen. 3. High Justices and seats of judgment.

In Brabant is a grand veneur, who has charge of the kings game of hunting,
and a Gruyer, who has charge of Hawking and fishing, and of waters and
forests for the king.

The most important privileges of Brabant.
THe Emperor Charles the fourth, Anno. 1349. granted that no Brabander or any
borne in any of the Countries above described being members of Brabant, should
be arrested in person in any part of the Empire, or his goods seized.

Seven principal privileges granted to the Brabanders by their own Princes.
1.THat the Prince may give nothing to the Clergy, without the consent of the
capital towns of that quarter where the goods or lands lie.

2. The prince can pursue none of his Subjects nor strangers inhabiting in this
country, in any cause civil or criminal, but by ordinary course of Justice
frank and free, where the defendant may have his advocate, and opeulie before
all the people, justify and defend his cause.

3 The Prince can levy no subsides nor make any innovation, without the
consent of the states of the Country.

4 The Prince may place no stranger in any office, save in the Chancerie of
Brabant he may place two strangers, being of the Flemish language: also the
Chancellor may be a stranger if he be of the Flemishe language, and have
sometime held Seniorie, Domaine, or Baronie i^ Brabant.

5 Every Brabander or subject to the Duke of Brabant, may dispose of his lands
or goods at his own pleasure, without license of the prince, and has power to
hunt or hawk at his pleasure, save in the five royal woods before mentioned.

6. When the Prince will assemble the Estates he must come into Brabant, for
the Brabanters are forbidden by their Laws, to deliberate out of their own
country of any matter.

7. If the Prince by violence and wrong break any of these graces and
priuilege^, the Brabanters after their due protestations and (...) ations made,
are absolved from their oath of obedience, and may choose a new Duke where they
think good.

The Seniorie of Malines.
MAlines, stands upon the River of Dele, which ebbeth and flows to ye town
and a league above it. The river passes through the Town, and makes a number
of small Islands in the town, both to the great ornament and commodity
thereof.

It stands in the heart of Brabant, equally distant four leagues space from
Louuain, Bruxelles and Andwerp,. But it is a Segniorie apart, for the which
cause many Women at the time of their childbirth leave Malines, and go to be
deliuerred in Brabant, to the end their children may enjoy the privileges of
Brabant.

It is a goodly strong town, the rather because i^ may be drowned almost on
all sides.

There are in it seven parish churches.

At Malines are a great number of Coryers, there are also many excellent good
clothes made, excellent good Linen, painted works excellent good, Artillery
of Brass great plenty, Bells and many other things of metal, Barks and ships
of all sorts.

At Malines is the storehouse of all the Princes ^munition and furniture for
the wars.

At Malines also resideth the kings great counsel, instituted by Charles the
last Duke of Burgundy, who above all his subjects loved them of Malines.

To the great council of Malines resort the appeals of all the country of
Malines, of Flanders, Artoys, Holland, Middlebourg in Zeeland, Namur,
Luzembourg, Valenciennes, and diverse others little towns besides west
Fricsland, and the seniory of Vtrecht.

At Malines is a Monastery of Nuns, like to that of Niuelle, in the which
are 1500. and sometime 1600. Nuns, the which are governed by four chosen
among themselves, and pass the time in honest exercises, and may at their
pleasure leave their Cloister and marrye husbands.

Malines, was first belonging to the Noble family of the Bertholds, which
failing, it fell one half to the Bishop of Liege, the other to the Earl of
Guelders, who in the year 1333, sold it to Lewis of Neuers Earl of Flaunders.

Two Leagues from Malines, and in the Seniorie thereof, is the Village called
Heyst, set on a high hill, and having seven boroughs about and at the foot of
the Hill, all appertaining to the said Village, which is a goodly Seniorie, and
enjoys the same customs, rights and Privileges, that the town of Malines
does.

The County of Horn.
Horn, is Fief Imperial (that is to say a noble tenure of the Empire) but
mediate not immediate, for it is held of the ancient Countye of Lotz in the
territory of Liege: Notwithstanding because it is so near adjoining to
Brabant, and because the Earl thereof for other Seniories which he holds is
king Philips subject, and has put himself under his safeguarde and
protection: I have thought good here to describe it.

Horn is a Castle near to the Meuse, not far from Ruermonde, the which is
erected into a county, and has under it a goodlye Seniorie and jurisdiction,
whereunto the Castle gives name.

In this Seniorie is Wiert, a town beautified with a goodly castle and a
Seniorie apart, where the Earl of Horn keeps his residence.

The Earls of Horn are descended of the house of Mommorencie in France.

GVELDRES.
GVeldres is bounded North with Frieseland, and the Zuiderzee, South with ye
Meuse (which seuereth it from Brabant) and with Guelder land, East with the
Rhine and Cleueland, the Rhine dividing the country into two parts (though
unequal.) West, with Holland, and the bishop-rick of Vtrecht.

The country is flat, having few hills in it, but many pleasant and
commodious woods, especially that called Echterwalt.

Likewise both of corn and cattle it is very fruitful.

Gueldres comprehends under it the countye of Zutphen and other Seniories.

It has 22. walled towns, whereof the Capital namly, those which make the 4.
quarters of ye country, are Nimegue. Ruermonde. Zutphen. Arnem. The which 4.
Towns are situate upon four diverse rivers, and are in four diverse Dyoceses.
The other walled towns are these: Hatten, Elburch. Harderwick, Wagheninghen,
Tiel, Bomel, Bronchorst, Doesburg, Doetecum Tsheerenberg, Lochem, Grol,
Brederuoerde, Ghelder, which gives the name to the whole country, Stralen,
Venloo, Wachtendonck, Erkelens.

Towns unwalled in part or altogether, yet inioyeng the privileges of walled
towns, are Keppel. Burg, Ghent, Batemburg, Montfort, Echt, with diverse others
that hereafter shall be described as occasion serves.

There are in it above 300. villages having parish churches.

The Estates of this Duchy consist of three members, (viz) Barons, Nobles,
and the four Capital towns, without any mention of the Clergy, who
notwithstanding in most Provinces of these Low countries, have their place
allowed them among the States.

Nimegue bears the title of a kingdom and is called the foot of the Empire,
because Charles the great made it one of the three sieges of the Empire in
those Countries. The 2. and most respected he established at Aix la Chapelle,
and the 3. at Theonuile.

It stands upon that branch of ye Rhine that is called Whael, where it is
large and deep.

It is a fair town strong mighty, rich and well peopled, given now to
marchaundize and study, but heretofore only to arms. It has a very fair
and an ancient Castle with so goodly a prospect, that from it you may behold
all the Country round about it.

It is a Viscountie, and Fief of the Empire, and a free town, and stampeth
money as other Imperial towns do, and the appeals of this town go not to ye
Chauncerie of Guelders, but straight ^o Aix la Chapelle.

The subjection and service that it owes to ye Empire is only this, that once
in a year ye town must send to Aix la Chapelle a man of purpose with a glove
full of peper, which is there only Tenure. King Philip as Duke of Gueldres
has his jurisdiction and sovereignty in the town, and stampeth money there
with his own arms, as in the other towns under his obedience.

The town is in the Dioces of Colyn, it is the first Capital town of the
whole Duchy, and chief of the first quarter under the (...) thereof are Tiel,
which is a strong town, Bo^^ also a strong place, and Ghent, to it resort
besides ^^ towns above mentioned, ye viscountie of Nie^^hen, Bomelwert, the
Towns of high and love Batauie, (commonly called Betenue) and all the
Country yt lies between the two Rivers of Whael and Meuze.

It was a concluded about the time of the second Printing of this Book, that
a Channel should be cut from Niemeghen, to, within a quarter of a League of
Arnem, that is from to one stream of the river Rhine to the other, which will
be two Leagues long, and to the great benefit of both these Towns, and of
all the Country adjacent.

Ruermonde.
Ruermonde stands upon the very poi^e of the River Ruer, where it and Maze
meet, it is called Ruermonde of the said River Ruer, and Monde which
signifies the mouth of any thing.

It is a beautiful, well peopled, and a strong City, both by nature and art,
the Country about it is very fruitful, the Town is lately erected into a
Bishopric.

It is the second Capital town of Guelderland, and chief of the second
quarter.

Under the jurisdiction thereof are these towne^ following, Venloo which is a
strong Town Guelder, Stralen, Wachtendonck, and Erkelens which are all walled
towns, Montfort, Echt, and Niewerstat which are Boroughs builte like Towns,
and farther Kessell, Midler, and Crie^^beeck. Both it and all the Quarter
belonging (...) it, is under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Liege.

A League from Ruer-monde is the goodlye Village Kessel with a strong Castle
in it, of the which Village the country about bears name, and is called the
Country of Kessel, and is of the kings demaines.

Zutphen.
^s so named, because it is low and stands in a Fen, it is situate upon that
branch of the Rhine, that is called Issel, and through it runs the River
Berkel, which there discharges it self into Issel.

The Town is well builte as well for private houses, as public places.

Zutphen is a County, and the King among his other Titles bears the name of
Earl of Zutphen.

It is the third principal town of Guelderland, and chief of the third
quarter.

Under the Jurisdiction thereof are Doesbourg, Doetecum, Lochem, Grol,
Brederuoerde, and Bronkhurst, al walled Towns (notwithstanding Bronkhorst
houldeth it self for a County apart) under the Jurisdiction of Zutphen is
also comprehended the Town and County of Tsheerenbergus.

Zutphen is under the Dioces of Munster.

Arnem.
Stands upon the Rhine half a League beneath ye place where it deuideth it
self into two streams, the one whereof is called Leck, and the other Issell.

The town is well built, fair and large, it is the chief town of the fourth
quarter of ye Duchy of Guelders, and likewise of the state and Seniorie of
Veluwe.

This Country of Veluwe is little, but exceeding fruitful, and especially
abounding with Fish, because it is compassed about with Zuiderze^, Rhine, and
Isell. It abounds also with all kind of Veneson.

Under the jurisdiction of Arnem are Wageninghen, Hattem which is a strong
town, Harderwikce and Elbourg all towns walled, with diverse Villages.

Arnem is of the Dioces of Vtricht, in this Town is resident the Governor of
the Country of Guelders, the Chauncerie and Counsel of Guelders, and Zutphen,
and also the Chamber of Accounts, and it was wont to be the Ancient residence
of the Dukes of Guelders.

The other walled towns are these following, first

Hattem.
Which stands upon Isell, and is a great and a strong town.

Elbourg.
Stands upon Zuiderzee.

Harderwick.
Stands also upon Zuiderzee, this town An. 1^03. was burned to the ground,
but since has been reedefied, and is now very strong and fair.

Wagheninghen.
Stands upon the Rhine.

Tiell.
Stands upon Whaal, it is a strong town and ^ath jurisdiction over the
Country called Tiel^rwerdt.

Bomell.
Stands upon Whaal, it is a fair and a strong place, and the principal
town of the Isle Bomne^wert (now called the estate of Bommelwert) ^n the which
are many fair villages, and among the rest Rossem, the Country of the
valiant Captain Martin Van Rossem.

Brouchorst.
Stands upon Issell: it is a County, and has a particular Governor that
commands over it.

Do^sbourg.
Stands at the entry of Fossa Brus^^a into the River Issel, it is a good
Town and well peopled.

Doetecum.
Stands upon the old Issel.

Iserenberghe.
It is a County, and a good town, having justice and Seniorie.

Locchem.
Stands upon Berkel.

Groel, Bredernoerde,
Guelder. gives ye name to the whole Cour^^ of Guelder.

Straelem,
Verloo stands upon ye Meuze, it is a good and (...) strong town, and in it
the Duke of Cleues yielded (...) himself to the Emperor Charles ye 5. An. 1543.

Wachtendonck.
Stands upon the River Niers.

Erkelens.
Is a reasonable good town, and these abo^^ mentioned are al ye walled towns
in Guelderl^^d.

The Towns unwalled, first.

Keppel and Bourke.
Stand both upon the old Issel.

Ghendt.
Stands near to the Whaal.

Battembourg.
Stands upon ye Meuze, this is a place of (...) antiquity, for the people of
the Country affi^^^ that this was the first Castle that was built by Batton,
of whom Holland was in times past called Battauia, this place appertains to
Wi^am of Bronkhorst, a Lord of great Nobility.

Montfort.
Is a strong Castle and a place of some importance.

Echt of this Village the pleasant wood Echter^^lt bears name.

Culembourg.
Is a good Town standing upon the Leck, and a Fief of Guelders, yet is it
doubted whether it be within the Country of Guelders, or not, it was erected
into a Cou^tie by king Philip because i^ has a great jurisdiction and Seniorie.

Buren.
Is neither Fief nor within the Country of Guelders, but a Country apart,
though environed round about with Guelderland. It is an Earldome, and has in
it a strong castle, and under ye jurisdiction thereof is a great country, and
many villages, it stands near to the ri^er Linghe, it apper^aineth to ye
prince of Orange in ye right of his first wife, being daughter and heir to ye
valliant Maximilian de Eghmont Earl of Buren, who died in ye year 1549. The
heir of this place is Philip William ye princ of Orenges son by ye Lady above
mentioned, who is now prisoner in Spain.

Ouerissel.
Is bounded on the north with West Frise, and Groninghe^. South with the
Country of Zu^phen, East with Westphalia, West, with the Zuiderzee, and the
River Issel.

It is divided into three jurisdictions, namelye Isselandt, Drent, and Tuent*

The country is very plain and without hills, very fruitful and abounding
with grain.

The river Vidre called in Duch Vecht Passes through it.

It has 8. walled towns namely, (...) Swol, Ca^pen, Vellenhoue, Steenwick,
Hasselt, ^^marse, Oldezeel.

It has of other Towns of importance (...) though unwalled, yet enjoying
goodly privilege* namely, Meppel, Theelmuyden, Coeuorden, H^demberghe, Omme,
Almeloe, Goer, Diepneh^^, Delden, and Euscede.

There are in it above 100. Villages.

The states of this Country consist of two members, the first the officers of
the prince and the Nobility, and the second the three Capital tow^^, but
because Deuenter is the chief of the whole Province, we will first speak
thereof.

Deuenter.
Stands upon the River Issel, it is a ve^^e strong and a well fortified
place, large, fair, (...) built, and well peopled. It is chief and
Metropolitan of the whole Country.

Swol.
Stands upon a little River that runs (...) the Vidre, it is a very strong
town fortefied (...) a double dich and strong rampers, so that if an^ fear of
war or other accident happen in the Country, the Governor and the Counsel
residing ordinarilye in Vullenhoue, retire themselue^ to Swol.

Campen.
Stands at the entrance of Issel into the Zuiderzee, and is comprehended in
the country of Ouerissel, though in truth it stand on the other side of the
river, it is a very fair and a large town, and in it Albertus Pighius was
borne.

Volle^houe stands upon ye Zuiderzee, it is a good town and very well
served with all sorts of victuals, for the which cause the counsel and
parliament of the country, and likewise the Governor reside ordinarilye there,
and if any fear of danger arise, then they all retire to Swol.

The other Towns and Villages are not worthy the mentioning, save only
Ghelmuyde^ which stands upon the very mouth of the Vidre, and has in it a
strong Castle wherein there is always a good Garrison for the King.

This Country of Ouerissil appertayned in times past to the Bishop of Vtrecht,
but in the year 1527. Henry of Bauiere Bishop of Vtrecht yielded it up into
the hands of the Emperor Charles* for the same reasons that moved him to
yield up his temporal Seniorie of Vtrecht, and in the year 1549. king Philip
was received as their future prince, and bears the Title of Ouerissel.

FRISE.
FRise was sometime a kingdom and reached from the mouth of the Rhine to
Denmark, but that part which we here describe is West- Frise being in
subjection to king Philip, the ^^ther toward the river Visurgis is called
East- Frise, which we purpose not to describe, because it is not subject to the
king, notwitstanding (...) possesses also therein beyond the River of (...)
the town of Linghen, and certain other (...) as hereafter shall be declared.

West- Frise has North and West the (...) Sea, South- Zuiderzee and the
Country of O^issel, East East- Friseland.

Under the Seniorie thereof are many Isles nee^ adjoining unto it, the
principal whereof, ^e Schelinck, and Ameland, in the which are diverse Villages.

Rivers there are none in the Country, save only Ems and Lauwers, but Issel
and Vidre are very near adjoining to it.

Farther, there are great Channels, and of them ^ great number throughout the
Country, which are made as well for transportatio^, as also to dreyn and void
the waters, (...) otherwise would be too too abundant, and (...) ^ow all the
Land.

This is a marish (...) ^^at, and full of waters, the River of Ems (...) from
Westphalia.

Small store of (...) ^^it, for all the World (...) is like our Fen^^ (...),
for they have great numbers of Cattle in the Country, and Turfe^ their Fuel
which is dug in the Fennes, a^ which they call Veen^n as we in England
(...) them Fenns.

Wines there are none of the country grouth, the greatest part also of the
country wants wood, but in steed thereof they burn Turfe, which they call
Torf or Turf as we do, whereof they digg so great abundance, that they serve
not only for ye provision of their own country, but also are sold abroad
into other Countries to a great sum of money.

The poor people of Frise burn for their fuel Cow dounge dried with the
sun.

There is a place in Friselande along by Zuiderzee called Io^kermeer which is
now a Lake, but was sometime a place of Turfe, but sire by chance taking into
the Turfe consumed all the earth apt for Turfe, and the water then entering
into the empty place has ever since made a Lake thereof.

In this Country of Frise is great plenty of Beeues both great and excellent
sweet, yea the best in Europe, setting the English Beeues aside.

Many of their Keen bring two Calves at a caluing, and their sheep two or
three Lambs at a fall, yea sometime four.

There is also great plenty of good horses in this Country apt for the wars.

This Country is divided into three principal Estats or Counties, viz. the
County of Ostergoe, the County of Westergoe, and the County of the seven
Forrestes, so named, because there are in this Country so many Forests near
adioy^^^^ together.

Groeninghen is a member a part, severed from the rest of the body of
Friseland, and therefo^^ shall be described by it self.

All these three Estates or Counties above ^^^^tioned being joined together,
contain walle^ towns, and other enjoying ye privileges of w^ll^^ towns being
rampared with trenches and (...) to the number of eleven, namely Leeward^^
Doccum, Franicker, Bolswaerde, Sneck* Ilst, Slot^, Harlinghen, where is a
Castle, and therein a Garrison, Workum, Hindelopen, Staueren.

There are in this Country of west Friseland^ comprehending Groeninghen in
Friseland villages 490. diverse of the which because of their wealth and
greatness have obtained goodly privileges of the prince.

The States of Friselande consist of Prelat^^^ Nobles, and Adherents.

Leewarden is seated two Leagues from Do^^cum, it is a good and a great Town,
and a strong Castle is in it.

It is the Capital town of the whole Count^^^ viz. of all the three Counties
above mentioned.

In it are resident the Counsel and Chaunc^^^e of Friselande, from the which
no appeal lies.

Doccum was the Country of Gem^^-fr^^s^^t*

Francker is a good town where many ^^^^emen make there abode, the other
towns ^^e no^ greatly worthy the writing of.

The Isle of Schellinck.
THis is an Island in the which are some villages abounding with excellent good
pastures, great plenty of Cattle and excellent good fish, especialle
Dog-fish, the taking whereof is very strange and ridiculous, for you shall
understand that the Island men disguise themselves like Beasts, and in that
attire go to the Sea side at such times as they know that these fishes will
come forth of the Sea to take the air for their recreation upon the shore,
then these disguised men fall a dancing and leaping, with the which sport the
fishes being greatly delighted are by that means drawn far from the Sea,
while in the mean time nets are pitched between the Sea and them, which being
done, the dauncers throw off there disguised apparel and discover themselves,
wherewith the fishes being astonished, fly toward the Sea and are taken in
the nets.

GROENINGHEN.
GRoeninghe^ is a state apart, but so anexed to Friseland that some houlde it
as a member thereof.

The City is very rich, Great, and very fair built, it is under the Dioces
of the Bishop of Munster.

It has a great and a large jurisdiction both within the town and without,
it judges without appeal in causes both Civil and criminal. In causes
Civil the king has his Lieuetenant there, but in causes oriminall the Town
is Sovereign, and grants pardons as Sovereigns do* all that the Town
pays to the Prince for all duties is but 12000. Floreins Carolus, that is
6000. Crowns.

Through this Town pass diverse Riuer^, and in it are also diverse Channels,
some made by nature and some by Art which makes the town very strong.

This town with the Magistrates thereof, is the principal town of the first
member of the state of Groeninghen.

The second member is the Regio^ called Omme Lands, which consists of
Prelates, Nobles, and Confederats.

In Groeninghe^, Rodolphus^Agricola was borne.

The king has of Groeninghe^ a title apart. The Country was sometime under the
Bishops of Vtrecht, by whose negligence in defending them they submitted
themselves to the Dukes of Guelders, and after in the year 153^* to the
Emperor Charles the 5. but with reservation of all their privileges and
liberties.

The king has besides this Country of West- Friseland which is altogether
under his subjection, in East Friseland a quarter of a League beyond the River
of Ems the town of Linghen above mentioned, where there is a great Fortress
and a strong Garrison, he has also Soueraintie over diverse Fiefs beyond the
Rivers of Ems and Visurgis, namely the States of Ieuerem, Essens, Vittemont,
and diverse others.

He has also some pre-eminence over the County of Emden, which is a good
little Town standing upon the sea, and one of the goodliest havens in Europe.

Also the king as Lord of the Low Countries is Viceregent and Vicar of the
Empire over all the Country of Friseland even to Dietmarshe, which is in the
Confines of Denmark, the which dignity Maximilian the Emperor bought of his
Father the Emperor Frederic for him and his heirs for ever.

The Frisons hate no vice more than adultery, which was the cause that their
priests had ^cence to marry.

The Frisons have in times past been great Soldiers, but now are become
Marchantes, Mariners, and Fishers, whereby they gain ordinalie great sums of
money.

They are also great defenders of their liberty, they were first brought under
ye subjection of ye Romans by Drusus Germanicus, the^ they lived under ye
French, whose yoke after they had shaked off, they created a magistrate among
themselves, so^time (...) the ^^^le of Duke, and (...) they were subdued by
(...) than Carolus Cal^us erecting Holl^^^ (...) Earldom, gave this country
or the greatest part thereof to the Earl of Holland, against, wh^ the Frisons
often rebelled, but in the end they fell with the said county of Holland to
the house of Burgundy, and so to the house of Austrich.

HOLLAND.
HOlland is as much to say, as a hollow land, (...) the very foundation of it
stands upon water, so that if you go or ride, the ground will tremble
underneath you.

Holland is bounded North and west with the Sea, South with Meuse and Brabant,
East with Zu^derzee and Guelderland.

Through it run many arms of the Rhine and Meuse, besides a number of
channels made by Art, almost between every village of moment.

It has in it a number of Isles made by the Sea, the Rhine and the Meuse, and
those of diverse names, yet al comprehended under the name of Holland.

The ground lies so low, that they are forced to fense it with dikes and
rampars, as well against the Sea, as against all the rivers almost and (...)
where the Sea^ebbes and f^owes, so that i^^^^ny places you shall see the Sea
far above the land, ^et repulsed by these banks.

The country has in it few trees, because the ground is so waterish and soft,
that it is not able to bear the weight of a tree, and yet less quantity of
fruit and grain for the same reason is growing in it. But they are furnished
with wonderful plenty of grain, as well from the Easterlings, as also out of
Denmark, in such sort, that they have not only sufficient for their own
provision, but also to impart liberally to other countries.

Wine they have none of their own growth, and yet receive such plenty of
Rhenish wine out of Allemaine, that they consume more than is drunk in the
country where it grows.

Likewise Flax there is none growing in the country: yet is more linen cloth
made there, than in any other country of the world. Their Flax is brought them
out of Flaunders, Liege and Osterland.

Woll likewise, they have none of their own breed, yet make infinite numbers
of clothes. Their wool comes to them out of England, Scotland and Spain.

Lastly, they have no timber at all growing, and yet spend more timber in
building of ships and fensing their dikes and rampires, than any other country
does. Their timber comes to them out of Osterland.

Their principal home commodities consist in breeding and feeding of horses,
beeues and (...) in their fat pastures and meadows, and likew^^^ in turfs,
whereof they sell an infinite quantity into other countries.

Their horses are very strong but heavy, notwithstanding now their race is much
amended, partly by Genets that they get out of Spain, and partly by breeding
their colts in Friseland, because the Friseland pastures make them stronger,
fairer and lighter than their own, notwithstanding that the Friseland horse be
in none of these respects comparable to the Hollander, which is a strange
wonder.

The butter and cheese made in a year in Holland, amounts to as much as the
spice that is yearly brought into the Low countries out of Portugale, which is
above a million of crowns.

Five villages in Holland, namely, Assendel^t, Oostsane, Westsane, Cromeine and
Cromenierd^^^k* yield as much butter and cheese yearly, as amounts to the
value of the Rhenish wine that is yearly brought to Dordrecht, which is a
marvelous quantity, for there is the Staple of the Rhenish wine.

The turfe growing in Holland that is yearly sold out of the Country,
amounts to a marvelous mass of money: for the kings custom thereof that
is received in Goude only, arises yearly to three thousand ducats,
notwithstanding that the custom of every measure of tu^^e be very small,
consider than what it grows to that passes elsewhere out of the country,
and is consumed in the country.

But of all other commodities that they have, their fishing together with their
Navigations, yields them a marvelous gain, for they have above eight
hundredth good ships, between two hundredth and seven hundredth tun, and
above 600. boats called Busts to Fish with, be^ing between 100. and 200. Tun
and upwards.

Holland is not above 60. Leagues in circuit, and where it is broadest a man
may ride over it in six hours, yet are there in it xxix. Walled towns,
namely, Dordrecht. Haerlem, Delft, Leyden, Goude, Amsterdam, (which are the
six Capital towns of the Province) Einchusen, Horn, Alkemar, Purmerenden,
Eedam, Monichedam, Wesp, Naerden, Woerden, Oudewater, Schoonhouen, Helstein,
Vianen, Leerdam, Asperen, Hueckelem, Gorichom, Workum, Huesden, Rotterdam,
Schiedam, S. Gertrudenberg, Seuenberghen.

Over and above these, there are diverse little towns, (viz.) Medemblick,
Beuerwick* Muiden. Niuport, Vlaerdinghen, Grauisande, which in times past were
all walled, and enjoy yet the privileges of walled towns, notwithstanding that
now they be unwalled.

There are besides in Holland above 400. villages, some of the which setting
walls aside, may be accounted fair towns, and enjoy the priuile^^ges of walled
towns, namely, the Bourg la H^y, etc.

Holland has under the jurisdiction thereof diverse Isles: the principal
whereof are V^eland^, Texele, W^ringham so named of an herb called Wir, where
with they maintain their dikes, Vr^^ and Ens, wherein are some villages, and
farther the Isles of Voorn, Goerode, Somersdick, called also Vooru, Corendick,
Pierschille.

The states of Holland are compounded of the body of the Nobility and the six
capital towns* but we will now come to the particular description of all the
towns, etc.

Dordrecht stands on the Merune, which is a river compounded of the Rhine,
the M^use, and the Linge.

Dordrecht before the year 1421. was firm^ land and joined to Brabant, but
that year the Sea drowned 72. good villages, and rent, Do^^^drecht from the
firm land and made it an I Will, ^o^ four ways there are how new Isles are
mad^^ 1. An earthquake in the Sea, often casts up much ground, which in
time becomes habitable. 2. Great rivers at their entry into the Sea, often
train with them great quantity of sand, which in time becomes an I Will. 3.
Sometime the Sea leaves a place which grows to an Island, and is made
habitable. 4. Sometime by force of the Sea, a piece of ground is rent from the
continent, and is made an Island, as Sicile from Italy, Cyprus from Syria,
Euboea from Boeotia, and this town of Dordrecht from the firm land of
Br^bant.

Dordrecht is the Staple of Rhenish wine, and likewise of grain which comes
thither out of Guelderland, Cleues, and Iulliers.

It is a great, rich, mighty, fair, and a well peopled town.

A Staple is a French word, derived of Stabulu^, and is a place appointed for
Merchants to bring their goods unto, and there to stay with them a certain
space, before they may carry them to any other place, which time being
expired, and the goods there unbought, they may then carry them whether they
think good.

Arras is the Staple of wines brought out of France into the Low countries by
land.

Middlebourg in Zeeland, is the Staple of French, Spanish, Portugalysh, and
wines of other Provinces brought into the Low countries by Sea, in such sort,
that all merchants and mariners bringing any of those wines, must of necessity
come to Middlebourg, and there discharge their wines and pay all duties, before
they can pass with their wines to any other place.

At Dordrecht, all merchants coming down the Rhine or Meuse with any
merchandise whatsoever, must land and there discharge their merchandise into
the town ships, or compou^d with the town for it, and pay all other (...)
before they can depart.

Haerlem. In Haerlem are yearly made above 12000. clothes.

Haerlem is a town very well built, and beautified with goodly meadows both
w^thin and without, but especially with a most pleasant ^orrest, and environed
with many goodly villages, castles and fortresses, and is seated in a most
(...) some air. It is the greatest town in all Holland, and second in dignity
among the 6 capital towns.

At Haerlem printing was first invented, and after brought to perfection at
Mentz, for the which cause, some attribute the first invention thereof to that
town and not to this.

Here the Author enters into a discourse of Seamen and Sea-women being
fishes, yet proportioned in all parts like man and wom^^, whereof one being a
female, was taken up at Haerlem, An. 1403. and the other being a ma^^, in
Friesland, but within this 50. years, both the which lived many years, and
fell to eat as w^e do, and were brought to ^iuilitie, and taught to do many
works and services: as for example the woman to spin, but they remained
alwa^^^ dumb. Which strange accidents, though impertinent to our discourse of
the Low (...) yet thought I goo^ briefly to touch, (...) cause Gui^ci^rdin^
himself discourse (...) as also because the like is written by (...) approved
authors.

Delft, is a goodly large town well built thrugho^t, with broad and pleasant
streets, and beautified with sumptuous and stately churches.

At Delft are made great quantity of Clothes, and excellent good beer is
there brewed.

About this town and in the town, are great ^umbers of Storks, the which in a
fire that happened in the town 1536. showed a wonderful affection to their
young ones: first in seeking to save them from the fire, and afterward in
dieng with them when they perceived that they could not save them.

This is one of the six capital towns of Holland.

In this town was borne that monstrous here^ike, David George.

Near to Delft is a noble monasterye of ladies called Conincksfeelde, who
before they be entered into profession may marry at their pleasure. The monastery
has jurisdiction both temporal and spiritual.

Leyden is one of the six capital towns of Holland* and chief of Rhineland.
It has under it 49. borougs and villages, the most part whereof once a week,
bring all their good victuals to sell in the town, which causes it to abound
with all things arising of the earth. It has also great plenty of fish, both
sea fish and fresh water fish, and of water foul, beyond all measure.

In Leyden is a castle said to be built by Hengist, returning from the
conquest of (...) and therein is a notable well, whereof the ancient family of
Wa^senar takes name.

This town is situate in a flat and low country full of ditches and channels,
and is beawtified with pleasant meadows, gardeines, arbors and walks round
about it.

Within it are enclosed 31. Islands, from one of the which to the other, men go
by boats, and over and above these, there are nine or ten other Islands, from
the one of the which to the other, bridges are built to pass over, so that in
this town are 145. briges, whereof 104. are of stone and the rest of wood.

In this town are yearly made above 12000. clothes.

The women are excellent fair, and the air passing wholesome.

But a little league from Leyden, is the famous Abbey of Reinsbourg, consisting
of Nuns al of Noble houses, the Abbess whereof has jurisdiction spiritual
and temporal, and the Abbey is endowed with so great revenues, that every
day above two thousand persons come thither to receive relief.

Another such like Abbey of Ladies is also near to Leyden called Terlee.

In all these Monasteries of Ladies and gentlewomen, they may till they be
entered into profession, come forth and marry, and (...) they live there many
years before they profess themselves, observing notwithstanding in the mean
time their rules and orders very dewlie, soberly and religiously.

Goude, is also one of the six capital towns of Holland. It stands upon the
river Issel, not the Issel above described* but another different from that:
for this Issel arises at Isselstein in Holland, and passing by Montfort,
Oudewater, and Goude at Isselmonde enters into the Leck, holding his course
continually from his rising to his fall, between the old Rhine that comes
from Vtrecht and the said river of Leck, and being as it were hemmed in
between these two rivers.

Goude is a strong, rich, and a well fortified town.

Amsterdam, stands upon the goulph The.

It is one of the goodliest havens in the world, for you shall have sometimes
at one instant 500. sail of ships riding in the port.

The town is so rich, that though a fleet of 300. sail, laden with all
kind of Merchandise ariue there, the Citizens within five of six days will
buy up all their wares, so that the ^leete may return home.

In this town are built yearly many ships, and above 12000. clothes made.

Amsterdam is built upon piles under the ground as Venice is, so that the
buildinges of the towns are more chargeable under the ground than above,
notwithstanding that the houses above the ground be very sumptuous and fair.

This town is very strong and held imprenable, by reason that it may be
environed at pleasure with water, and is almost in all points like unto
Venice, and little inferior to it in any, and may justly be called the Venice
of these parts.

This is the sixth Capital town of Holland, but in wealth the first: for next
to Andwerp, it is the greatest town of traffic in all these parts.

Einchuysen stands upon the very point of ye gulf Zuiderzee that fronteth
Friseland, from whence it is distant not above two leagues. It is a good town,
and in it are many ships built.

Hoorn stands also upon the Zuiderzee. It is a fair, rich, and a reasonable
great town, and has a good haven, and is of so great strength by reason of
the multitude of channels round about it, that it seems almost imprenable.

In this town there is kept year lie in May, a mart of butter and Cheese,
whereof there is so great quantity brought unto this fair, that it is almost
incredible, for it furnishes not only the Countries, but also Spain and
Portugale.

Alcmair is a very rich town, by reason that the country round about it,
yields more ple^tie of butter and cheese, than any other place in Holland
whatsoever.

Purmerenden, is a town with a good Castle appertaining to the Count de
Eghemont.

Edam stands near the Zuiderzee. This town is famous for the great number
of ships of all burdens that are builte in it, and the inaumerable multitude
of excellent good cheefes that are made in the country round about it.

Monickedam, Wesp, These are two good little towns, with great store of good
meadows and pastures about them for feeding of cattle, and likewise great
abundance of fish.

Naerden.
Woerden has a strong castle, this town apperteineth to the Duke of Brumswick.

Owdewater stands upon the Issel. Near to this town and Woerden, is great
plenty of hemp growing, of the which almost all the Cables, cords and nets,
that the Fishermen and Mariners of Holland and Zeeland use are made, by the
which merchandise, many both of this Town and of Woerden, grow very rich.

Schoonhouen stands upon the Leck. It is a fair Town and a commodious
Haven, and here is so great abundance and plenty of Salmons taken, that the
Staple of Salmons is kept here.

Iselstein appertains to Philip son to the prince of Orange, as heir to
Maximilian Earl of Buren, about this town is great controversy whether it
appertain to Hollande or to the Seniorie of Ver^cht.

Vianen. Though Vianen be said to be a Seniorie apart, yet is it enclosed
within Hollande. It stands upon the River Leck. It apperteineth to the Lord
of Brederoede, who pretends that it owes no Superiority to the king.

Leardam stands upon the River Linge. It apperteineth to the Count de Buren.

Asperen stands also upon the river Linge, which passes through it with a
pleasant murmuring course. This town was sacked by Charles Duke of Gueldres,
An. 1516.

Hueclelen stands likewise upon the Linge, here is an ancient Castle, said
to be built by Hercules the Germane.

Gorichom stands upon the Whaal, where it meets with the Linge, It is a
good town and has in it a strong Castle. From the church steeple of this
town, you may behold xxii. Walled Towns under the kings subjection, and an
infinite number of villages, which is a most pleasant sight to behold. Every
day there is a Market in this town of butter, cheese, and other victuals, of
an incredible quantity brought into this haven, and from thense transported to
Andwerp and to other places, which causes the Inhabitants of this town to
become very rich, the rather, for that they themselves are Merchants, Mariners
and Pilottes, for the conueighing of their Marchandizes to other places. Near
to Gorichom, is the place where men hold opinion that Hercules the Germane
planted his camp, for the which cause all the country thereabout, is called
Hercules country, in Dutch Dat landt van Arckell.

Workum stands upon the Waal. It apperteineth to the Count de Horn.

Huesden. In this town is a fair Castle, and many villages are under the
jurisdiction thereof.

In this Country is dug great plenty of Turfs.

Roterdam stands upon the Channel Rotter, near to the Meuse. It is a
strong, a fair, and a populous town. This was the place of Nativity, of the
renowned Erasmus Roterodamus. In this town were burnt above nine hundred
houses at the time that the Auther was writing this book, but all repaired and
new built again in one year.

S. Gertruidenberghe stands upon the Meruue, it is the prince of Orenges
town. The Hollanders and Brabanders are in controversy, to whither country
this town belongs. In this town are taken great store of shads, sometime
18000. in a day, which are sent abroad into diverse parts of the world in great
numbers, both fresh and salt. Here are also taken great plenty of Sturgeons
and Salmons. As far as this town the Hollanders used to atted upon their
prince going into Haynault as Earl thereof, and here they were accustomed to
receive him when he came out of Haynault into Holland.

Seuenberghen stands upon the Meruu^. It is a good town and appertains to
the Earl of Aremberg.

Towns unwalled in Holland, yet enioving the privileges of walled towns.
MEdemblick stands upon the North sea of Holland, and in the best country of
Holland for feeding of cattle. It has in it a good and a strong castle.

Beuerwick.
Muyden stands by the gulf of Zuiderzee, upon the little river of Weight. It
is a good town, with a strong castle on the contrary side of the river and a
bridge to pass over the river from the castle to the town.

Nieuport.
Vlaerdinghen stands near to the mouth of the Meus^. It is one of the
ancientest towns in Holland.

Grauesande stands also upon the mouth of the Meus^. It is an ancient town,
and was sometime not only walled, but also a stately town and the place of
residence of the ordinary counsel of Holland, till William king of Romans
removed it to Haghen. About this town is the best corn country in Holland,
and here also be the excellent brave sand cheeses made.

The principal villages of Holland.
HAghon or la Hay, stands near to the west sea. It is the fairest, the
richest and the greatest village of Europe, containing twoe thousand houses,
and among them diverse very sumptuous, especially the beautiful and large
royal palace, built like a castle, and environed with strong and large
ditches, founded by William king of Romans, who here also caused the counsel
to reside, which before was resident at Grauesand. This counsel has appeal to
Maliues.

In this palace is also a college of Cannons, with a very beautiful chapel
in it.

At Haghen is also resident the kings chamber of accounts for Holland, Vtrecht,
Zeeland, Frise and Ouer-issel.

Farther in the Palace above mentioned, is the kings library, being a very
goodly one, gathered by John Harie Cannon of Haghon, and given by him to the
emperor Charles the fifth.

The Inhabitants of Haghen, will by no means wall their village, accounting it
more honor to inhabit the fairest and mightiest village of Europe, than a
city which being walled should be surpassed of many. But this their glory
cost them full dear: for by reason that Haghen was unwalled, Martin van Roseeth
miserably spoiled and sacked the town.

At La Haie is a goodlye wood, replenished with all kind of Venison, and
beautified with many antiquities and medals graven in fine marble, and worthy
to be remembered.

Half a league from Haghen, is the Abbey of Losdune, in the which is the toomb
of Margaret Countess of H^nnenberg, and sister to William king of Romans,
with an Epitaph thereon, wherein is mentioned, that the said Countess brought
forth as many children at one burden, as there be days in the year.

Schaghen, is situate in the uttermost North part of Holland. It is a fair
and a large village with a goodly Castle.

Iselmont stands upon the mouth of ye Mor^^^. It apperteineth to the lord of
Merode, it is a good village with a fair Castle.

Eghemont stands near the west Sea. It is a brave village with a goodly
monastery, and appertains to the Earl of Eghemont, who hereof bears his
title.

Brederode is a castle, whereof the noble family of Brederode bears name.
Three noble houses there are in Holland most famous. Wassenar the ancient,
Brederode the Noble, Eghemo^t the rich.

Walckembourg is a small borough, yet an earldome. Here every September is a
notable fair of horses. This place appertains to the Earl of Linge as Lord
of Wassenar.

Catwiick stands on the Sea, where the ancient mouth of the Rhine that came
from Vtrecht was wont to enter into the Sea. It was built by the Catti a people
of Allemaine, and has been in times past a stately town, but now hardly the
relics thereof remain.

The fort called Britannia was built by the Romans, namely, by the Emperor
Caligula, to pass from thence their forces into England. But after the ruin
of the Roman Empire, it was swallowed up by the sea, and so remained covered
with water many years, in such sort, that no memorial remained thereof.
Notwithstanding by the departing of the Sea, in the years 1520. 1552. and
1562. It was discovered many days together, and many goodly stones taken up
out of the ruins thereof, and carried to la Hay to the lord of Wassenars
house: there was also bricks taken up, as fair and as sound as when the
foundation was first laid.

Petten stands in the extremity of the North part of Holland upon the downs,
which are hills of sand that defend Holland on that side from the Sea, and
near to this villige where the down^^ fall is begun a rampar upon the charge
of the Country to defend it from the rage thereof, on that coast, which
rampar is called Hontbosc, and is daily very painefully wrought upon because
if the Sea should pierce the said rampar, it is f^^red that the greatest part
of Holland should be swallowed up, notwithstanding Nicholas Nicholai having
recovered a great Country upon that Coast from the Sea, and fortified it with
wonderful strong rampars and dikes: the said rampar Houtbose is now not
thought so necessary, neither is so chargeable as before: it was, besides that,
the Country that the said Nicholas has recovered is, so fruitful that for
one quarter of grain sowed there they reap a hundred, which so much the more
recommendeth the fayde Nicholas invention and industry.

The Isles that be of the Jurisdiction of Holland.
Voorn.
IN the Isle Voorn is the Briel which is a good (...) strong town, and the
first that reuoulted from the Spaniard in ye year 1572 and after it
Vlissinghe^ and Einchusen.

In the Isle of Voorn is also the town called Gerulit, which has diverse
villages under the Jurisdiction there of, though the town it self be but
small. The Soil of this Island is very fat and frutfull, and brings forth
great abundance of diverse sorts of grain, and likewise of the herb called
Hellem like to broom, the great roots whereof is ye principal strength of the
Sea banks and dikes of Holland, and Zeland, which otherwise being very sandy
would easily be borne away with ye wind.

Goerede the 2. Island, In it is a town of ye same name, being reasonable fair
and great.

Somersdeiick the 3. Island called also Voorn, because it lies directly
against Holland, for Voorn signifies as much as before, or in old English
beuorne.

In it are diverse villages, but the principal is Somersdiick whereof the whole
Island takes name, the which was sometime a Town of great account, and this
only village among all the rest of the I Will is under ye jurisdiction of Zeland.

Gorendiick the 4. and Pierschelle the 5. Isle.

The Soil of these two Islandes is excellent good, and diverse villages are in
them, but no other thing worthy of memory.

All these Isles are called Voorn, and be in deed Zeelandish Islells, and were
in times past under the jurisdiction of Zeland, but about 50. years passed for
a certain su^me of money yt was to be divided between the Earls of Hollande
and Zelande, the Inhabitants of these Isles by accord^ submitted themselves to
the jurisdiction of Holland, and have so remained ever since.

This Country of Holland is wonderfully peopled, and the people are tall, well
proportioned, cheerful and valiant, and very courteous and evil, their towns
are well built, their houses wonderfully well furnished, and their furniture
exceeding fine and neete above all Countries in the world.

Their shops, buildings, ships, dikes, rampars, channels, devises to maintain
their banks, and to preserve the meadows and pastures by passing the water
from one channel into another, and so into the Sea, and all other works that
they take in hand are so exquisitely and skilfully done that it is wonderful
to behold them, yea a man may there learn a thousand things very worthy to be
known, that he shall not see all his life time in any other place.

The women of Holland are very fair, wise, paynfull, and so practiced in
affairs of the world, that they occupy themselves in most part of men's
excercises, especially in merchandise.

The Gentlemen of the Country being nothing so many now as under their
natural Earls they were (because since that time they have given themselves
to trafique) live upon their revenues, and diverse of them profess Letters,
the rest of the common people live by merchandise, by nourishing sheep and
cattle, by shipping, and fishing, out of the which they draw great wealth, so
that this little province is wonderful rich, and no one foot of it but
brings forth something, insomuch that even the very Downs being nothing but
sand hills, breed great abundance of Conies, and the very sea rocks great
store of eggs and infinite numbers of foul, the which are soulde into diverse
Countries, but especially to Andwerpe both raw and baked, fresh and salt, yea
and that with so great commodity to the sellers, that diverse Gentlemen have
established the greatest part of there revenues in ye gain that arises of
the sale of these fowls.

To conclude, considering the great wealth that grows to this Country by
cheese, butter, flesh, fish, foul, chickens, eggs, cattle, linen cloth,
woollen cloth, turfe, and shipping, it may be called the Treasure house of all
good things.

The prince of Orange William of Nassau was in his life time Governor and
Lieuetenant of Holland, Zeland, and Vtrecht, for the king.

Vtrecht has North, West, and South Holland, East, Guelderland, this Country
is a neighbor near adjoining to Holland, yet a state apart, co^tayning ye
Vtrecht City it self and 4. other walled towns namly Wick at Duerstede,
Rhenen, Amersfort, and Montfort.

Under the jurisdiction thereof are above 70. Villages.

The Country is very fruitful and much (...) than Holland, and therefore
better for grain.

This Town was first called Antonina of one of the Anthonies of Room, but
Dagobert King of France gave it the name of Traiectum, because there was at
that time the common Fe^^e over the Rhine.

It stands upon the ancient stream of the Rhine, which before it brake into
the River of Leck had his course this way into the Sea.

This town is seated in a country so miraculously well inhabited, that in one
day you may go from Vtrecht to 50. walled towns standing from thence in
equal distaunce, and all under the King of Spaines obedience. Farther, you may
depart out of Vtrecht in the morning and dine at whether you will of 26.
walled towns, and return again to supper at Vtrecht in your own house.

In this Town the Emperor Charles built a goodly and a strong Castle called
Vredenbourg, (that is to say) the Castle of peace.

The Town is large, mighty and very statelye and sumptuously Built, and full
of goodly cellars and Caves, vaulted with wonderful art and skill.

There are in it many goodly Churches, of the which 5. are the principal,
being all Colleg^^ Churches of Cannons.

In Vtrecht are also two Commaunderies. (...) Churches, and houses very
stately and magnificent and goodly possessions in diverse parts of these Low
countries, wherewith they entertain a great and honorable estate.

In Vtrecht also are two famous Monasteries of Noble women and Ladies called
Damoyselles, such as before in diverse places we have described and without the
town are three other Monasteries of the same nature, besides many Abbeys, and
houses of Religion of sundry professions.

In Vtrecht is likewise a court iuridicial whither all the appeals of this
Country are brought.

In this Town is an Episcopal Sea founded by Dagobert king of France, yt
which also was once in Archchiepiscopall Sea, but the town being ruinated by
the Norma^s the Archiepiscopallyte was translated to Colin.

The state of this City consists of ye 5. Collegial churches, of ye Nobles
who are chosen by the Prince, and of the Syndiques, and Deputies of the 5.
towns of this Province.

Towns of the jurisdiction of Vtrecht, whereof the first is Weck at Duersteede

Which is a town well built standing upon the Leck with a good Castle in it.

Rhenen stands also upon ye Leck, about this town is excellent good ground
for turfe, and near to it is a village called Vene^dale, built within these
25. years for the commodity of making turfe the which village daily greatly
increases.

Amesfort stands upon the little river of (...) In the year 1534. this Town
was taken by Martin van Rossem, it is a fair town and well peopled.

Montfort stands upon ye Issel, it is apleasant place and a strong, having
been in times past a Frontier town against the Hollanders.

Vtrecht was not long since as well an Earldom, as a Bishopric, so that
the Bishopp had as well the temporal as the spiritual sword, which was often
cause of great wars between the Bishops of the place, and the Earls of
Holland. Farther, in times past ye state of Vtrecht was so mighty that it was
able to put 40000. men into the feelde, and it was thus governed by the Bishops
of the place 900. years and better, but of late years Henry of Bauiere
Bishop of Vtrecht being extremely distressed with wars both by the Gueldroys
and by the rebellion of his ow^ people, who received Martin Van Rossem (...) to
the town, alienated all the temporalties of his Bishopric to the Emperor
Charles the 5. in the year 1527. and in the year 1528. the Imperialists by
one of the factions of Vtre^h were received into the Town, and the (...) year
all the states of the Country confirmed the Bishops alienatio^ madeto the
Emperor, as did also afterward Pope Clement the 7.

Vtrecht with the Country is a Fief of the ^^^pire, for the which cause the
Emper^^^ Charles was also invested into this country by ye Empire.

ZELAND.
Is as much to say, as a Land won out of the Sea, under the which name are
contained 15. or 16. Islandes, the which being united together make one body,
and have ye title of a County*

Zeland is severed southward from Flanders with the left arm of the Schelde
called Hont, Eastwarde from Brabant with the right arm of the said river,
which retayneth the ancient name of Schelde, North it is severed from Holland
with the Goulph of the Sea called Flacke, West it has the Sea toward England.

The principal Isles of Zelande are 7. which are divided by an Arm of the
Schelde near to the entrance thereof into the Sea into two parts (viz.)
Oriental and Occidentall. The Oriental Isles are Schouwe, Duelandt and Tolen.
The Occidentall are Walkeren, Zuidbeuelandt, Northeuelandt, Wolfersduck.

Toward the Sea these Isles are defended with hills of sand called the
Downs thrown up by the surges of the Sea.

Toward the the South they be defended with rampars and banks made and
painefully and chargeablie maintained by the country to the height of ten
flemish else, and large at the bottom 25. flemish else, these rampars are made
of the hardest clay that may be gotten, within they are thick built with wood
and stone, and covered without (...) wrought.

Zeland is a very fru^efull Country, and (...) pure and bright co^^e, (...)
Coriander, and the Baie tree with the (...), which grows not in any other
(...) the Low Countries. I^ brings forth (...) dance of excellent good
Madd^^ where (...) great part of Europe is furnishes and (...) more than (...)
other province of (...) Countries, by reason that the sea water (...) both the
coldness of the air and of the (...) the Winter, and the heat thereof in the
(...).

In Zelande is also great store of ^arfe, but forbidden to be dug near the
Sea Coast, because the ^ou^hnes of that kind of earth is a great strength to
the Sea banks against the rage thereof.

In Zeland is also great abundance of excelle^^ good pasturage for cattle,
and no less plenty (...) of fi^^.

Farther in this Country are 8. walled tow^^ (viz) Middlebourg, Siri^^ce,
Canfere Vlissing^^ Tolle^ S. Martins ducke, Romer suale, (...) are also diverse
other small places of (...) not walled, and 102. villages.

The states of this (...) consist^^ of (...) and one (...), the (...) Towns.

The Description of the Isles, and first of Schouwe, the principal of the
Oriental Isles, called in Latin S^aldia.
THis I Will is much diminished by the violence of the Sea, yet has it at this
present 7. Leagues in circuit. It was in times past so near adjoining to
Northeuela^dt, that ye Inahbitants might common together from the one shore to
ye other, but now they are greatly distant a sunder.

This I Will contains these towns following:

Sirixzee this is the ancient town of all Zeland. It had sometime a very
commodious Haven and well freque^ted with merchants though now choked up with
beach thrown in by the sea to the great decaie of the town, yet
notwithstanding ye town is walled and reasonable fair, and is ye second in
degree among the towns of Zeland.

The whole Trafique of the town is now salt and mather, whereof there is
great abundance in this I Will of Schouwe.

Near to this town a few years past were taker certain monstrous fishes
like wild boares, but twice as great and more horrible to behold, part of ye
which fishes were carried to Andwerp and there soulde and found very good
meat. (...) such like Monstrous Fishes are often taken (...) the Coast of
Hollande and Zelande, but they are co^monlie better for Oil, tha^ for any
other use, notwithstanding how profitable soever they be that way: yet do
they the Country much more harm than good, because they chase, devour, and
fraie away with their horrible and hideous shape the other ordinary fishes of
the sSeas.

In this town was borne the famous physician and philosopher Leuinus Le^nius,
who has written diverse learned works.

Browershaue^ is but a fisher town, notwithstanding in this Isle of Schouwe
are diverse Castles and villages appertaining to diverse gentlemen.

The second Oriental Isle.
Duuelandt has the name of the great about dance of Doves that breed therein,
this Isle has 4. Leagues of circuit, but because it is subject to the
innundations of the sea, there is never a good town in it, butmany villages and
gentleme^s farms.

This Isle was surrounded by the Sea in the year 1530. with great loss both
of Ca^tell and men, but by the diligence and industry of (...) of Burgundy
father to Maximilian Lord of Beueres in Flaunders it was recovered ^g^ine
though with excessive charge.

The third Oriental Isle.
Tolen the which is now joined with that part of this Isle that S. Martins
Diick stands in, ^^is severed from it only by a little channel half full of
water. In times past it is thought they were 2. Isles though now they be but
one. In this Isle are these 2. little walled towns following, the first:

Tolen which gives ye name to the whole Isle, and is so called beause the
Earls Towle was wont to bepayde there.

The secondwalled Town of this Isle is,
S. Martins Diick which is a very little town, notwithstanding in this I Will are
many good y villages.

The other small Islands lying toward the East, are not worth the mentioning
being in a manner all disinhabited.

The Occidentall Isles whereof the first is Walckeren called in Latin
Valachria.
THis is the principal of all the Isles of Zelande not for the greatness thereof
(for it is but 10. Leagues in circuit) but for the strength, surety of seat,
frutefulnes of soil, number of people and great wealth that it possesses.

In this Island are these towns following.
Middlebourg so named, because it stands in the midst of the Isle, it is a
very strong town well fortified and well walled and (...) the streets
large, and the houses, churches, and monasteries very fair built.

In the goodly Abbie of S. Nicholas in this town lies buried William king of
Romans; Earl of Holland and Zeland with Isabellee his wife.

In this Abbie is also a goodly Library.

The Abbot of this place is the only prelate that alone at the Assembly of the
States represents all the Clergy of Zeland.

The Staple of French, Spanish, and Portugale ^ines coming by Sea into the low
Countries is held at Middlebourg, besides that, it is a (...) great Town of
trafique of all kind of March^^dize. And it is the principal Town of all
Z^lande.

This town stands not upon the Sea, but upon two channels which discharge
themselves into the sea near to Ramue, one of ye which viz. ye old channel
because of ye narrownes and crookednes (...) of serves to no great use, but
the new one (...) lately cut, is straighte a line, large and dee^ (...) such
sort that a ship of a 100. tun may (...) from the port of Rami^e even up to
the (...) of Middelbourg by this new channel.

V^^r^ or Ca^fer is the set (...) this Isle of Waloker^^ standing upon the
(...) coast. To this town repair all the (...) chants. It is a Marquisa^e,
and the Marq^^ (...) alone represents in the assembly of the states all the
Nobility of Zeland.

In this town is a goodly Arsenale, where the kings artilerie, and al other
furniture for his wars by sea is kept.

Vlussinghe^ is ye third walled town of Walckeren. It was walled 40. years
agone by the above named Adolphus de Burgundy.

It is the key of the sea of these Low countries, because all ships that go up
to Andwerp must of necessity pass by this town.

The villages of Walkeren Sautland,
Westcapelle this village enjoys the privileges of a walled town, because in
times past it was a good town, and the best haven of Walkeren but about 100.
years past it was drowned by the sea.

Do^bourg near to it is ye royal palace of Westhoue^ with a garden therein
belonging to the Abbot of Middlebourg. All these 3. villages stand upon ye
sandhils of ye west and northwest sea toward Ca^fer

Rameken between Vlissinghe^ and Ramue is the point called Rameken toward
the southwest, upon the which stands the forte of Zeerbourg built by Charles
the Emperor to assure the enteraunce into the river on that side.

Ramue or Armuyden, this is the last town of the State of the Isle of
Walkeren. It is a Village unwalled, but the goodlyest Haven not of the Low
Countries only but of all Christendom: For all ships yt come into Flanders
repair to this port in such sort that you shall sometime see there 400 or 500.
fail of ship^ (...) (...) all parts of ye world, (...) built there.

Sudbourg is a village between (...) and Vlussi^he^ where (...) Emperor (...)
stayed a long time for ^^inde to carry him his (...) journey into Spain^. A
great number also of (...) goodly villages are in this (...) of Walc^^^n,
which for ^reuitie (...).

The second Occident all Isle.
Zuidbeueland^ so named, because before it was rampared with banks and dikes
it tre^ if the fo^ndation thereof had not be one (...).

It is the greatest of all the Isls of Zeland. It (...) in times past 20.
Leagues in circuit, but now^ by the inundations of the Sea and of the river it
is diminished by the half.

In times past there were in this Isle (...) towns, the principal whereof was
Borsul^.

But this town withal the country about (...) led the Seniorie of Borsule,
was swallowed up by the sea in the year 153^.

The second walled Town^.
Romersual is now the principal of all ye (...) of (...), it is seated upon
the (...) toward (...): but in the same year^ (...) the in^^^^d (...) severed
it from (...) made it an Islande by it self, so that it is now forced to
defend it self both (...) extreme dilig^^^^^ and ch^^ge from the (...) all
rage of the Sea. In this town the Earl of Zeeland takes his oath at his
entrance into the state. The third walled town of this I Will is

Goes or Tergoes.
This town stands upon the North coast. It is the only town of all the
three walled towns of Zuidebeuelandt, that is remained whole and safe from the
inundations of the Sea. It is a good little town and enjoys very good
privileges profitable for it self.

In this Island are also many good villages and Seniories, and among the rest
Barland, which is the country of Adriane surnamed Barlandus, that has written
the History of Bra^ant, and diverse other small volumes.

In this I Will are many goodly woods and pleasant thickets, full of foul and
wild beasts, to hawk and hunt.

The third occident all I Will is Northeueland.
THis I Will in times paste was the paradise of Zeeland, but the Sea Anno. 1532.
in the general deluge (as it were) of this country of Zeeland, swallowed it
clean up, so that now nothing of the town named Chortcheen (which was a
proper walled town in this Island) remains, but only the church steeple
which is yet to be seen, as are also the speeres of the churches of diverse
other vill^^^ the rabouts swallowed up (...) by the Sea. True it is that in
diverse parts of (...) I Will, the earth cast up by the sea rises above the water,
so that there is good hope in time to recover the whole or the greatest part
thereof again.

The fourth and last occidentall I Will is.
^Wolfer^iick, which is the smallest of all the occidentall Isles, having only
two villages in it, but great abundance of pasture for cattle.

The government of Zeeland.
ZEeland is governed by (...) governors, named R^^^maisters, who be the ki^^
lieutenants in these Islands and have all the authority under him. One resideth
in Middle^^^ for ye (...) Ila^ds, and the other in Sirix^^^ for the (...)
Islands.

The Zeelanders trade is fishing* (...), grasing and Tillage. They also refine
(...) salt, (...) only refine it making it white as snow, but with sea water
and (...) of fire gr^^tly increase it, (...) the Spanish salt forty (...) in a
hundr^th, The Portugale salt thirty five, and the French (...) t^enty five. In
the which trade of life (...) thousand persons employ their times, because of
the great commodity arising thereof. And it is above 400 years past, since
this Art began first to be practiced there.

Thus much of Zeeland. And now we will enter into the description of the noble
province of Flanders.

FLANDERS.
IT is very uncertain whereof Flanders first took that name. Flanders in
Caesar's time at ye least the greatest part thereof was inhabited by the people
called Morini (which name the Romans gave the^, because they dwelt in moors
or low grounds) and it was almost nothing but Forest, woods and bushes.

It was erected into a county by Charles, surnamed Le Chauue, who gave it to
Baldouin bras de fer together with his daughter Judith, in the year of our
Lord 877. It is held of the Crown of France.

Flanders in times past was bounded with the Sea, and the rivers of Sum and
Schelde, and comprehended 7. principal towns, namelye: Arras, Gaunt, Bruges,
Ypre, S. Omer, Lisle, Douay, but by marriages often made between the houses of
France and Flanders, the bounds are altered, and diverse Seniories dismembered
from it, whereof the Earldom of Artoys was first erected. So that it is now
bounded North with the occean Sea, and that branche of ye Schelde that is
called Hont. South with Artoys, Hainault and Vermandols. East with the ancient
Shield and a piece of Hainault. West, partly with the occean Sea toward
England, and partly with the river Aa, and that part of Artoys that bordereth
upon Calais and Boloigne.

The length of Flanders from Andwerp to the new Fosse is 33. leagues, the
breadth from N^ to Grauelinghe 30 leagues.

The air is very wholesome, especially Southward, the country flat, the (...)
fruitful, but especially toward the Sea and toward France.

The country breeds great store of cattle, especially goodly horses and
mares, very apt for the wars, and of as great agilitie (though of much
greater bone) as the bastard Gennet of Spain.

Flanders has diverse Rivers running through it, namely, Schelde, Lis, Tender,
and many other small streams, the rest is supplied by Channels made by hand to
receive in the Sea.

In this country are also many forrestes, the principal whereof are N^^pe and
Nonnen.

Mountain of moment there is none in the cooutrey, but pleasant hills many,
especially in Flanders Gallicane.

In Flanders are 28. walled towns, whereof the three Capital are Gaunt,
Bruges, Hypre, the rest are Lisle, Douay, Tournay, Courtray, Oudenaade, Alost,
Hulst, Taermonde, Bieruliet, Nieuport, Scluse, Dunckerck, Grauelinge,
Bourbourg, Damme, Dixmude, Vuerne, Ardembourg, Ninoue, Berghe de S. Winoc,
Montgerarde or Gra^mont, Cassel, Deinse, Orchies, Lannoy: all the which are
fair towns and of good importance.

Towns unwalled though in times paste walled, and even at this present rich,
well peopled, fair built, and therefore enjoying the privileges of walled
towns, there are above thirty: the principal whereof, are Ostende (though this
town since the beginning of the present troubles, be fortified with rampars
and diches) Oudembourg, Messine, Belle, Poperinghe, Toroue, Ostbourg, Axsele,
Middlebourg, Loo, Weruick, Blanchberghe, Houcke, Rossellar, Tielt, Ghistelle,
Eeclo, Lombartzide, Steechen, Honscot, Munchereede, Mardycke, Meenen, Hallewin,
Wastene, Steeghers, Merghen, Haesbrouck, Armentiers.

Farther in Flanders are 1154. villages, many of the which are as great, rich,
and populous, as any in all Europe, and some of them honored with titles of
dignity.

There are farther in it many Castles, fortresses, Seniories, and noble men's
and gentlemen's houses, very beautiful to behold.

There are 48. Abbeys and Nun^i^s, and an (...) finite number of pri^^^^^,
Ca^onit all coll^ged, and (...) dispersed through the whole (...) ^ince in such
sort, that the Spaniards at their first coming into the country, seeing such
a multitude of towns, villages, monasteries and buildings, said that all
Flanders was but one City.

There be five ancient Viscounties, namelye, G^^nt, Hypre, Werne, Bergh de S.
Winoc, and Haerlebeck.

There are also in this Province three principalities, Steenhuise, Gaure,
Espinoy.

In it are also four principal ports of the Sea, Scl^se, Nieuport, Duncerck,
Ostende.

In times past there were in it 31. courts of Justice, having pre-eminence of
Bailiwickes o^ Prouos^ships, called in French Chastelenies, the which are as it
were principal courts, having authority every one apart by it self over ye
whole country of Fla^ders.

There are likewise in it four principal Baronies, bearing their name of
four of the anci^^test Seniories in the country, which all give the (...) for
their Arms, but with diverse banne^, namely Pamele, Cisoin, Heine, Boulaer.

There be now 18. other Baronies, but (...) erected than the other four: yet
neither the^ no^ the other 4. are very ^ncient as it shoul^^ (...) ^^^^ise not
many years since (as (...) Flemings themselves affirm) there was no Baron in
Flanders, but the Earl himself alone.

In this country are also xii. Peers, after the imitation of the Crown of
France.

Officers of Honor under the Earl of Flanders are these following: one
Constable, twoe Marshals, a great Veneur, a Chancellor, a chamberlain, four
Receivers, besides diverse other ministers and officers of the Prince, who all
by reason of their degrees and offices, have Seniories of inheritance in
Flanders annexed to those estates and offices.

The States of Flanders consist of 4. members: (viz) Prelates, Nobles, Towns
and Chasteleines. But the Cities of Ga^nt, Bruges, Hypre and L^ Franc, are
called the four members of the body of estate, because they have the principal
authority, and because very seldom all the 4. estates above mentioned, meet
at the public assemblies, because the rest have no voice there.

This country is divided into 3. parts though of quantity unequal, namely,
Flanders Flama^d^ or Flamingante, so named because in it the Flemish language
is used, and this is the principal part of the country and the most
respected. The second is Flanders Gallicane, so called, because the wallon
language which is a bastard French is their mothertoong. And the third is
Flanders Imperial, so named because many years it was under the obedience of
the Empire.

Flandres Flamingant.
THis country is bou^ded North with the Sea, South with the River Li^ and
Flanders Gallicane, East with Schelde and Flanders Imperial, well with the new
Fosse and with Artoys.

The Soil of this country is all sand and ^^ught for wheat, but brings
forth plenty ^^^rie, Oats, beans, peason, fiches, boucoy, and of Flax and
hemp great abundance, and ve^ie good fruit and of diverse sorts.

In this part of Flanders are the three Capital towns (viz) Gaunt, Bruges,
Hypre, and likewise the 4* members of Flanders (viz) these 3. town^ last
mentioned, and le Franc, which being ioy^^^d with them makes the fourth.

In it are also the 4. ports of the Sea, the Senior^^ of B^rghe de S. Winoc,
and many towns walled and unwalled, but let us begin with the principal
town, which is:

GAVNT.
THe founder of this City, is said to be Julius Caes^r, not only by the voice
of the people, but also by the Historiographers, ye write thereof.

It is built about 4. leagues from the Sea upon three rivers. Schelde, Lis and
Lieue, besides the which, there are a number of brooks and fine springs and
fountains that come into the City, some by natural course, some by Art, all
the which at their issue out of the town being received into great ditches
made by hand pass into the sea through the Nieuvaert, to the great commodity
of navigations. This Nieuvaert is a great channel lately repaired anew and
augmented and carried with infinite pains and charges by the space of 4. great
leagues into the sea of Zeeland, near to the goulph called Sasse.

Farther, of late they have opened a certain little Island which before stopped
the course of their ships, so that through this channel called Nieuvart, not
only the waters above mentioned have passage, but also a reasonable boat may
pass from the Sea even to Gaunt with inestimable profit to the town and
country adjoining to it.

Gaunt is very strong both by Nature and Art, and very beautiful, and one of
the greatest Cities in christendom. It has marvelous great suburbs, the
walls within are seven miles in Circuit, and without more than x miles, but it
has many wast places within it.

There is a citadelle builte by the Emperou^ Charles, where the abbey of S.
Ba^on was.

The buildings of Gaunt are very statelye and magnificall.

Within the walls of Gaunt are 26. (...) by the rivers and channels above
mentioned (...) pass through the town.

There are 98. great bridges, and an inf^^^^ number of small, under the which
great boats pass laden with victuals and merchandise.

There are six principal water milles, and about 100. wind milles, and of hand
and horse milles a^ infinite number.

Churches great and small, monasteries, hospitals, and other places of Devotion
there are in Gaunt 55. among the which are the houses of the four orders of
Friars.

In Gaunt are many goodly libraries, and it is divided into seven parishes.

Gaunt is a Viscountie, and it is the first member of Flanders.

In Gaunt are diverse schools for the bringing up of poor children upon the
towns charge.

There is in Gaunt an ordinary Count of (...) governed by the gentlemen and
the great Baylife of the town.

Gaunt was the place of the Natiui^^^ of the Emperor Charles the fifth.

In Gaunt are 52. mysteries or (...) occupations, and over and above these
(...) of Weauers containing 27. (...) g^^es, so that it is not only one of the
(...) of the town, but for their great number and (...) one of the three
estates thereof, the greatest thing yt they weaue being Linen cloth fine and
course, whereof as well in this Town as in diverse other places of Flanders, so
great abundance is made that it is accounted among the principal riches of
the Country, the rather because the Stuff whereof they make their linen
grows in the Country it self. Farther, this mystery of Weauers not only in
this town but also throughout the whole Country of Flanders, has the
greatest estimation above all other occupations, by reason of the linen and
woollen clothes, Sarges, Tapistrie, Fustian, Bucheram, wosted, and such other
stuff made in this Province.

At Gaunt resideth the ordinary Council and Court of Flanders, established
there Ann. 1409 by John Duke of Burgundy and Earl of Flanders, but appeals
lie from this Court to Malines.

In Gaunt is also residente the Chamber of the Fiefs of Flanders called La
Court Legitime.

Four Leagues from Gaunt are now in our time, discovered ancient ruins of
walls, Cellers, and deep Wells, with many medailes of ancient Emperors,
and idols of brass found there, where should seem to have been in times past
some ancient town or fortress of the Romans.

BRVGES.
BRuges is so named of the multitude of goodly bridges about the town as some
write, or rather of a bridge called Brugstock, which stood near to this place
between G^denbourg* and Ardembourg, which were towns of great traffic
standing upon the Sea, but destroyed by the Darles and Normans, of the ruin^^
whereof about 800. years sithence, the castle of Bruges was built.

Bruges stands in a goodly plain ^^leagues from the Sea.

There is no river that naturally comes to it, but a great channel there is
made by Art called Reye, so large and deep, and such plenty of waters drawn
out of the bowels of the earth, and brooks about the town by ditches derived
together into it, that it seems a great, large, deep and natural river. It
is divided into (...) ^^ches, which being ^^^^lgable pass through (...) parts
of the town, and at their issue (...) town being al united together, pass to
(...) and from thence to Scluse, where this (...) waters discharges it self
into the Sea.

But because this river could not be mainta^ned in deapth sufficient to bear
ships of great burden which was the thing that the city principally
desired, they have not long since with infinite charge and marvelous
industry begun another channel near to the former, but in place more
convenient, and so deep and large, that at full Sea a ship of four hundred
muids that is one hundred Tun, may pass from the Sea up to the very town.
At the mouth of the which channel, they have made an engine like that at
Damme, to stay the fresh water from passing into the Sea, and to hold out the
sea from passing any more water into the channel than is convenient. At full
Sea, when the sea is as high without this engine (made to open and shut like a
gate) as the fresh water is within, than open they the gate with instruments
made for that purpose and receive the ships into the channel, and when they
be entered, shut out the sea again. Neither can the rage of the sea hurt this
gate, because the height of the fresh water within backeth it, and so
fortifieth it, that no force can move it or shake it.

Bruges is a rich, fair, and a mighty town, the circuit of the Walls within
is four Italian miles and a quarter. The town is wonderfully peopled, and
the buildings passing sumptuous, the streets large and straight, and it has
in it many goodlye places, especially the market place, from the which the
six principal streets pass straight to the six principal gates of the
town, which is a very pleasant and delightful sight to behold.

Bruges was first walled by Baldwin surnamed Le Chauue An. 890.

In this town are above threescore churches, the principal whereof is 8.
Donat, where there is a College of Canons, the head whereof is called the Provost
of S. Donat, whose charge is to assemble the Clergy of the College, he is
also president of the spiritual court, and chauncellor by inheritance of
Flanders.

In this Church of S. Donat is buried Lodouicus Viues.

Bruges is divided into six quarters, and nine parishes, comprehending in the
number S. Croix and S. Katherines, which are without the town but yet part of
their parish within the town.

In one place in Bruges, namely in the Castle, is Justice done upon
malefactors in the name of six Lords, and sentence pronounced by six diverse
magistrates, and sometime execution done in one day in diverse parts of the
Castle in the name of every one of these Lords. The Lords are these: 1. The
body of the town. 2. The Franc. 3. The court Feudale. 4. The Prouest of S.
Donat. 5. The Lord of Ziszeel^. 6. The Lord of Mandaesche.

At Bruges is a goodly place called the lodging of the water, wherein is a
wonderful engine turned with a horse, drawing up water and dispersing it by
pipes into the town, a wonderful and a pleasant thing to behold.

Bruges is the second member of Flanders, and in times past had the same
course of traffic that Andwerpe has now, which it lost Anno. 1516. as in
the description of Andwerp is already showed.

Notwithstanding the staple of Spanish wools is still at Bruges, and after the
loss of Calais An. 1558. the staple of English wools was also translated
thither.

Besides the traffic of merchandise, there are in Bruges a great number of
Artisans of diverse occupations, especially such as make Fustians, Sarges,
sargets or Says, Boucherams, Woollen cloth, Tapistrie, and now also they begin
to work great abundance of silks there.

There are in Bruges 68. mysteries or companies of occupations, the principal
and most ancient of the which are, the Butchers, Fishmongers, Brokers, and
mariners.

In Bruges An. 1478. was borne Philip son to Maximilian the Emperor, and
father to the Emperor Charles the fifth.

The Citizens of Bruges are courteous, civil, and great politikes in all
matters, but especially in the due administration of Justice. The women are
fair, gracious, very civil, and no less sober in their behavior.

In Bruges most commonly is (...) ^ailife of Flaunders, who exercises the same
office there, that the Drossart does in Brab^^, but his dignity, power, and
authority, far surmounteth the Drossarts.

In Bruges resideth also the magnificall co^^, called du Frano which we will
now describe.

The Chamber or court called du Franc.
THe Court called le Fran^ is so named, because (...) freed it self from the
seniorie of Bruges.

This magistrate, Court, and Seniorie is of such power and authority, that it
makes the fourth member of Flaunders.

It was instituted upon this occasi^^ In tim^ past ^^^nt, Bruges, and Hypre,
made the (...) estate of Flaunders. But because Bruges ^^^ming of their great
power, pre^^^^inence (...) wealth, grew so proud and insolent, that (...) made
head not only against Gaunt and Hyp^^ but also against all the States yea even
against^ the prince himself. Upon a time when ^^ctuals were very scarce and
dear in the town, the villages subject to the town (being almost infinite in
number) relieved the City both with victuals and money, but with this
condition that in causes of justice they should appear from thencefoorth
before the Chastelaine who then in name of the Earl resided within the
Castle of Bruges, and not before the Senate and ordinary Justice of the town.

The villages having obtained this privilege, and their heads that had the
administration of justice, increasing daily for their due administering of
justice, in number, credit, and reputation, they obtained of Philip of Elsace
Earl of Flaunders Jurisdiction and a Court of Justice apart by themselves and
to be held in their own name, which the Earl the rather granted thereby to
abate the Brugians insolency and pride.

This privilege being obtained, these Villages forthwith by permission of the
prince, erected a Court of justice of great authority, contayninge 27.
Escheuins chosen out of the body of their own Nobility, and who hold their
offices during life. Farther, they established yearelye four Bourguemaysters,
three chosen out of the 27. Escheuins, and the 4. of the people of their own
jurisdiction, and with the^ a Baylife as a Provost of justice, and this Court
the said Philip of Elsace ordained to be held in the Castle of Bruges (though
now they may hold it where they think good themselves within the precincts of
their own iurisdictio) and that the (...) Governor of the Castle for the
prince should (...) president for the fayed Court.

But in the year 1224. I^ne Countess of Fla^ders (having bought of John Lord
of Ne^ke the dignity of Chastelaine of Bruges, and presidenc^e of this Court)
set the Franconats in absolute libe^tie, and gave to their Escheuins the whole
gouer^ meant of the Seniori^ without Bruges, leaving to the town of Bruges the
administration of justice only within the Town.

Again An. 1436. the good Duke philipp made them the 4. member of Flaunders,
save that in time of war they march under the Banner of Bruges.

These Franconats command over a great Country 7. Leagues round about
Bruges, and over an infinite number of Vassals and villages, but as well they
as the City of Bruges appeal to the provincial Counsel resident in Gaunt.

Hipre.
Takes name of the brook Hipre running through the midst of the town.

It is strongly seated and hardly may be be seiged: it is also greatly
fortefied by art, and made almost inexpugnable.

It is a fair and a reasonable rich town and well built, notwithstanding that
most of the houses be of timber and of small appearance without.

In this town are such a multitude of leaden pipes to conuaie the water from
the river, and the Channels in the Town almost into every private house of the
town, that it is commonly said in Flaunders that the foundation of Hipre is
all Lead.

The Hall appointed for the sale of Clothes in Hipre is a building very
ancient and worthy of as great admiration as any is in all ye Low Countries.

This is a reasonable town of trafique, because of the great quantity of
Clothes, Sarges, Says, and such like stuff made there, the Mart whereof in
the town is in Lent.

Besides the ordinary Justice of the town house of Hipre, there is a Court
called the Hall of Hipre under the jurisdiction whereof are 7. Chastellenies,
one of the which alone namely Cassell has under it 24. Virescales, that is
Courts of justice depending of it.

Hipre is the third member of Flaunders and has the title of a Viscountie, and
the Lord of Ogines is now Viscountie thereof.

The Jurisdiction and Seniorie of this town is very great, and extends over
the Country round about it, which is the best and the frutfullest part of all
Flaunders Flamingante. The people of this town are of very civil and quiet
conversation:

The 4. principal Ports of (...) whereof the first is
SCluse which was (...) a rich Town, but the ^^^tentio^ that it had with (...)
undid it, so that (...) end it became subject (...) Bruges who bought (...)
the prince, and now (...) it and favor it greatly, because it is one of the
goodlyest Havens in Europe, and is of receipt (...) 500. ships.

The Town is strong being double (...) and may be made a place impre^^ble. It
has to it a strong Castle but severed from the Town, which was the prison of
the Duke of Buillon, (...) the Admiral of France Chastillon taken (...) in
the wars, and in this Castle is a garrison for the king.

Over against Scluse is the little I Will called (...) where many a battle in
times past has been fought, and which sometime was as great (...) as now it
is, and had in it a fair town and (...) Borowes and Villages very rich,
(...) has but one village of the same (...) the I Will it self is.

This was the birth place of George Cassa^der. ^ostende, this town is not
walled (but since these last troubles diched and trenched) yet is it reasonable
great and populous and the port reasonable good.

Near to this town sometime are Whales taken, as for example 8. An. 1404. but
not so great as those that are taken in the spanish Seas or in the North Sea
toward Moscouia, yet were some of th^se 74. foot of length.

In this haven was also taken An. 1426. a Seahogge twice as great as a land
hogg, but of shape body and taste, so like ^o a Land hogg that he was sold
for flesh to the Buchers of Tournay.

Nieuport, this is a good little town with a Castle of reasonable force, the
Haven is good and well frequented. A League and a half from this Town is the
fair and famous Abbie of S. Bernard built upon the Downs, which has an
excellent Library in it of all sorts of Books, and of all Languages.

The 4. principal port of Flaunders is
Dunckercke, this town was sacked and burnt by Mounsiour de Terms An. 1558.
but is now repaired again and well forrefied.

It is the inheritance of the Duke of Vendosme now king of France and Navarre,
as are also Grauelinghe, Bourbourg, and diverse other places in Flaunders, and
Enghien in Haynault, all the which are come to the house of Bourbon by (...),
and the which the (...) of peace enjoys, but in time of (...) King of Spain
(who is Lord (...) those places) (...) the fruits (...) compence the Lords of
the Low (...) whose Lands during the wars are (...) France namely ye
prince of Orange the (...) Arshcott, the Earl of Eghemont, and (...).

In this Country of Flaunders Flaming^^^ (...) also Bieruliet, which is a
Town and an (...) where salting of Herrings was first invented and where also
the inuentor thereof named Willi^^ (...) in the year 1397. died, the (...) of
this town is reasonable good and commodi^^^

The Seniorie and Viscountie of Berghe of S. Winoc.
THis Town is so named of (...) goodly rich Abbie (...) upon a Hill together
(...) the town, to the (...) S. Winoc an english (...) holy life. The (...)
Viscountie and (...) with a number of good villages under it. (...) about it is
very fruteful, in this town (...) clothes and (...) number of Sarges the
(...) finest in all Flanders. This Town was also ^acked and destroyed by the
French An. 1558. but is now reedefied much fairer and gallanter than before,
but I will proceed in the description of ye residew of the walled towns of
Flanders flamnigante, and will first begin with Damme.

By this Town passes the ancient chanel that comes from Bruges, and here
discharges it self into the Sea. Damme was sometime a haven town by reason
that the sea flowed hard to the walls thereof and made it mighty and rich,
but sithence that having been often destroyed by the Normans and also by the^
of Bruges it is at this present in very poor estate, and is exposed to the
discretion and will of them of Bruges. Here in May is yearelye a goodly Fayer
of horses kept.

Dixmude is a pretty fine little town, in ye which every year in Iulie is a
goodly Fair of horses, as also of all other sorts of merchandise.

Werne is a good fair town and has the title of a Viscountie.

Bourbourg is a fine and a strong little town appertaining to Henry of Bourbon
king of France, and Navarre.

Grauelinghe stands upon the river of Aa nere to the Sea. In times past it
was a place famous because of the commodious haven thereof, but the Norma^s
often destroy it.

Notwithstanding since ye recovery of Calais by the French it is made the
strongest forte of the low (...) are made and (...) by the (...) and the fifth
(...) and by the prince the other part.

This town appertains also to the (...) of France.

Near to (...) was the (...) between the French and the (...) 1558. in the
which the Earl of (...) the French, and took Prisoner (...) de Terms their
leader.

Cassel was sometime a mighty and (...) town. It is now in reasonable good
estate, and has d^^^ts marks of great antiquity, but (...) very small town*
I^ this town is yearly a (...) fair, in the months of January and August.

(...) stands upon the Lis. It is a strong^ (...) ancient little Town.

Courtray stands also upon the Lis, when passes through the midst thereof.
It is one of the ancientest towns in Flanders; and is now a good town and
well built, and has a (...) Castle.

It is also now fortified and made (...). In this town is made great (...) and
of (...) clothes, napkins, and such like (...) stuff. Near to this to (...)
were the (...) and the Earl of (...) the year 1301. for the which (...) was
called the sepulcher of the French.

Oudenarde stands upon the Schelde, it is a fair town, of good trafique
and strong. In it is made great store of Tapistrie, and infinite quantity of
Linen. In this town was Margaret Duchess of Parma base sister to the king of
Spain borne. Oudenarde is joined by a bridge to Pamele a little town, but one
of the 4. ancient Baronies of the Bears of Flaunders, the Baron whereof is
Philip of Locquinghen by the title of his mother Anne Vander Gracht Heir of
the Noble House of Ioigny.

Ardembourg called in times past Rodembourg, was sometime the principal Town
of that part of this province that is properly called Flaunders. It is now a
good little Town, the Church is one of ye fairest in Flaunders, every year in
June here is a Mart of horses held. These be all the walled towns that were
in Flanders flamingante in the year 1560. Now we come to those unwalled.

Oestbourg.
Middlebourg was sometime walled, as ye ruins of ye walls yet declare and it
is yet environed with trenches, banks, and rampars. This place appertains in
the right of his wife to Mounsir de Ognies Viscount of Hipre, and great Baylife
of Bruges and du Franc.

Muncherede, Blancheberghe, Honcke,
Oudembourg. At Oudembourg yearly in January is a mart of horses and of other
marchandizes.

Ghistelle is a good little town and a noble (...) for Ghistelle and Hallewine
are twoe of the most auncientest Houses in Flaunders. In this Town are made
Clothes, Sarges and such like things.

Lombartzide.
Torout. At Torout yearelye in June and Iulie is a Horse mart. The Town now
appertains to the Duke of Cleues.

Loo was sometime a walled town and famous. It has yet one gate and a pane of
a wall very ancient. It is reasonably well inhabited and builte, though a
very small town.

Honschot is a good and a fine little town, in it are many Sarges made and
those excellent good, the which are sold abroad into all parts of ye world to
the number yearly of 100000. pieces.

Mardicke was sometime a rich and famous town but now on lie a few scattered
houses.

Poperinghe is a little but a very good Town with excellent fair Churches,
and a mart of all marchandizes in April. In this town are clothes and other
marchandizes of diverse sorts made. The town was burnt by casualtie of fire An.
1563. and the like fire happened there the self same day 50. years before.

Belle in French Bailleul is a very fine little town where a great number of
clothes are made, and every year in September there is a Fair held he^^of
Clothes and other merchandise. This was (...) native Country of Iacobus Meyer
the Historiographer of Flaunders.

Messine is a little town, yet many clothes are made in it. The Town is
rich, and in it is a Nunrie very fair and rich, the Abbess whereof has
Jurisdiction both temporal and spiritual, as have the Ladies of Mouth and of
Niuelle, and therefore she is called the Lady of Messine, but the Nuns
being entered into Religion here cannot come out and marry as may the Nuns
of Niuelle.

Comines stands upon the river of Lis, where is a fair Castle and a goodlye
and a rare Library gathered by George Lord of Hallewyn and Comines. This was
the Country, race and Family of Philip de Comines Lord of Arg^nton who wrote
the story of his time with great judgment wisdom and sincerity, for the
which cause great account is made of his work, and the Authoures of this age
do often aledge him with great honor.

Wervick stands upon the Lis, it is now a thing of small moment, save that
there is a goodlye fair Church in it. In this place was borne Martin
Chastelin, who notwithstanding that he were borne blind, yet makes all
sorts of Tools and instruments of Music, and plays well on them, and all
this of himself without any Master or Instructor, a thing very miraculous.

Merim stands upon the Lis. It is a good town well diched, and with a draw
bridge, and is now of late made a very strong* Fort and well furnished of all
provisions belonging to a Town of war. In this town are made a great number
of Clothes soulde into diverse parts of Europe, but especially into Spain.
Excellent good Beer is also brued here which is soulde almost into all parts
of Flaunders. The Capons of this Town are far greater and fatter than those
of Bruges, that is to say twice as great as common Capons.

Hallewin is a little town but very ancient, and where great store of cloth
is also made.

Wasten in French Warnetton stands upon the Lis here are also many clothes
made, this town is a Chastelenie, and has jurisdiction over a large Country,
and many goodly villages.

Steeghers, Marghem.
Haesbrouck is a reasonable good little town where Linen cloth is sold by
retaile at the market, for great quantity of linen is made thereabouts.

Roussellar in French Roullers the town is reasonable good, and in it is a
weeklye market where are soulde by retaile all sorts of merchandise, but
especially Linen cloth. This town appertains to the Duke of Cleues, as does
also Torout and the noble village of Winendale, and diverse other lande^
whereunto he has succeeded as heir to Philip Lord of Rauestein.

Tiel is a proper little town where is made woollen and Linen cloth, and
Buckeram.

Eeclo is a little, but a fine and a rich town with a weeklye Market, whither
repair great store of Marchanchts as well to buie as to sell Linen Clothes.

Steken is a good town and a great through Fair, necre to this Town is the
rich Abbie of Baudelo.

Harlebeeck stands upon the Lis. It is a goodly and a pleasant place, and
the ancientest town of all Flaunders. The town is a Viscountie and in it is a
College of Cannons. This was the place of Nativity of Lideric of Engheram etc.
Andacker of Harlebeeck the first Lords, Governors, and Forresters of
Flaunders, for so were they called before this Country was erected into a
County by the king of France.

FLANDERS GALLICANT.
Has on the north Flaunders Flamingante, on the south ye country of Cambresy,
east ye Schelde, west Lis and the Earldome of Artoys.

This Country is very small but the soil thereof very good, fatt, and
fruitful of all things especially of wheat, it produces also mather and
excellent good oade, though no great quantity, but of goodly pastures for
Cattle great plenty are in it.

The states of this Country consist of 4. members which they call high
Iusticers.

In this part of Flanders are contained the fair Towns of Le Isle, Douay,
and Orchies. The mighty Seniorie of Tournay, and the country of Tournesy,
with diverse other places worthy of memory. We will first describe the
principal Towns, and than of the rest that which is worthiest to be observed.

L' Isle in latin Insula.
Is so called, because in times past the country about it was nothing but
pondes, pooles, and Marshes, though now by industry dried up and made firm
Land.

Round about the walls of the Town and of the Castle passes a small brook,
which rises at Lens, and at the village of Deullesmont enters into the Lis.

In this town was borne the Earl of Flaunders called Baldouin de l' Isle,
whose father Baldouin le Barbu built the town An. 1007. and the Son walled
it An. 1066.

In this town the said Baldouin de l' Isle builte the Church of S. Peter, and
gave it Lands to maintain a certain number of Canons, of ye which number he
appointed the Bishops of Ca^^ray and Terouenne to be.

There is now at L' Isle a good strong Castle and the ruins are yet there to
be seen of the ancient Castle called Bucq, which was the manor and first
place where the ancient Gardians of this Country for the king of France
called Forestiers, used to reside.

It is a very good and a rich town, well builte and well inhabited by many
Gentlemen, but in greater number by merchants of great trade, and by very
cunning artificers the which work diverse sorts of merchandise, especially
Sarges, woasteds and Grograines after the manner of the East Countries in such
sort that it is accounted the best town of trafique next to Andwerp and
Amsterdam in all the Low Countries.

At l' Isle resideth the chamber of Accounts of Flaunders being like to that of
Bruxelles, but this of l' Isle has far greater authority and pre-eminence,
for to it resort not only Flaunders, but also Artoys, Haynault, Valenciennes,
Tournay, Tournesis, Namur and the Seniorie of Malines, so did also the French
County till a Chamber of Accounts was erected there. In this Chamber of
Accounts are kept the Records and Privileges granted to the Country by the
Prince.

L' Isle is a Chastelaine and has under it a goodly jurisdiction and
Seniorie, and it is the principal town of Flaunders Gallicane.

Douay.
The second town of this country is Douay which stands upon the river
Scarpe. It is a good and a strong town having many fountains, and fair
(though ancient) buildings, and a great number of churches.

Gaguin that wrote the French historye was borne in this town.

At Douay is a staple of corn, brought thither out of diverse countries,
whereof as also of diverse other marchandizes there is great Traffic in this
town.

Douay is a Chastelenie, having jurisdiction over a good Country, and a great
number of villages.

At Douay was an University erected, like to that of Louuain, at the same time
that the author was writing this description of the Low countries.

Orchies is a good pleasant town, in the which many Sarges and such like stuff
is made.

This is the third town that makes the estate of Flanders Gallicant.

Lannoy is a strong place where are made many pieces of Linen and Velvet.

Of this town the Noble house of Lannoy takes name, to the which ye town
together with the whole jurisdiction was wont to appertain, but by marriages
this inheritance is now fallen to the Lord of Buren, the prince of Orenges
son. Of this house was Charles of Lannoy, General of the Arm^ Imperial at the
battle of Pa^^y where the French king was taken.

Espinoy is a fair and famous village, having the title of a Principaute, the
prince whereof is at this present, Charles of Melun Connestable of Flanders.

Armentiers. This is so mighty and rich a village and so well peopled, that it
is privileged as a walled town.

In this town are made yearelye in time of peace, above 25000 pieces of cloth,
especially of mingled clothes of sovvre colors, which are sent into Italy
and from thence to Constantinople.

In this town is also fair yearly of excellent good Cheeses, by reason that
the Staple of cheeses is held here. The town appertains to the Earl of
Eghemont.

Between Armentiers and Steegheers is the excellent, fruitful, and pleasant
little Country called La Love, having in it four great villages, the chief
whereof is Leuentis, being privileged as a vvalled town. This country of Love
is also a Prouostship, exempted from all subsidies and paiments to the Prince
whatsoever. It was once granted by the Earl of Flanders to the Pope, but since
I know not how, it is returned to the Earl again.

Tournay stands upon the Shield which runs through it. It is a fair,
great, rich, mighty, and a strong town with a strong fort. The houses are
fine and comely built, the monasteryes, churches and Conuents, very statelye
and magnificent.

It is a great town of traffic and replenished with an infinite number of
Artisans, makers of Sarges and other Mercerie stuff, so that in all there are
72. companies.

Tournay is a very ancient Bishopric. In the wars that happened An. 1213.
between Ferdinand Earl of Flanders, and Philip August K. of France, the Earl
reconquered the town from the French, and they again from him. But in the
year 1513. it was taken by Henry the eighth K. of England, to whom they paid
100000 Ducats for their ransom. King Henry builte the Castle and Fort that is
now in the Town. But in the year 1518. the said king delivered the Town
over again to the French for money* from whom afterward the Emperor Charles
conquered it and restored it to the body of Flanders, in such estate as it was
before the wars. Yet notwithstanding it is a member apart, and is called the
state and Seniorie of Tournesis, having a goodlye jurisdiction over the
Country round about it. Their states consist of three members (viz) the
Clergy, the Nobility, and four high Iusticers. They swear fidelity to the
king of Spain, and he to them. In the year 1549. His oath is to maintain all
their privileges and immunities, laws, Franchises, liberties, rightes, and
customs, etc.

Mortaigne stands in the Country of Tournesis, and upon the river of Schelde.
It was once a town of great importance, but ruinated by the wars. Now it is
a village, and not long since had a fort for the defense thereof, but the
Emperor Charles when he recovered the town of Tournay razed the Fort. The
Town appertains to Philip Vander Gracht lord of Messine, here also the
Schelde and also the Scarpe meet.

S. Amond is also in the country of Tournesis. It is a goodly village standing
upon the Scarpe with gates and ditches like a town. In this village is one of
the richest Abbeyes in Flanders, the Abbot whereof is lord both spiritual and
temporal of the town and of the country round about it.

Flanders Imperial.
FLanders Imperial is so named, because it was long under the obedience of
the Empire. The country is very small, being contained between the Rivers of
Schelde and Dender, all along upon the frontiers of Brabant.

This little province was sometime called Braca^t of a castle of that name
destroyed by Baldouin le Debonnaire. It is now called the County of Alost of
the principal town thereof, It is also called Seigneurie, because all
Flanders was in times past divided into Comte, Seigneurie, and Domaine or
Propre. The Comte was subject to the Crown of France and is already described:
The Seigneurie was under the obedience of the Empire, and the Domaine or Propre
appertained to the Earl of Flaunders, and was held in sovereignty of him alone.

To the Seigneurie besides the county of Alost appertained the four offices,
the countreye of Waes, and a certain Territory and some villages beyond the
Schelde, called Oucrschelde. But we will first describe the Seigneurie and the
principal town thereof named Alost.

Alost stands upon the Dender or Denre. It is a good and a very strong town,
and there is yearly in it a great fair of hops, to the great benefit of the
whole country.

Under the Seigneurie or county of Alost is also contained the good town of
Ninoue, which notwithstanding has jurisdiction apart.

Alost has under it 170 villages, and the Jurisdiction and bounds thereof
extend to the walls of Gaunt, to the gates of Oudenarde, and within a league of
Tenremonde.

To this County of Alost is also annexed the little country of Waes, and
diverse villages together with the four offices, which are four towns so
termed, one of the which is walled and three unwalled, the names whereof here
follow:

Hulst which is walled, and is the principal of the four,

Axsele which is not walled altogether.

Bouchout.

Assenede. The which four towns have diverse villages under their
jurisdiction, and because they are near the Sea, re^ine bay salt as they do in
Zeeland.

Under this country of Alost are also two principautes, namelye Steenhuyse,
which is a very good village having a particular lord by it self, and the
great Bourg of Gaure with a strong castle in it, whereof the Earl of Eghemont
takes his first title of Prince of Gaure. Farther under the County of Alost
are diverse baronies, namely Lickercke, Sotteghem, and many other.

This state of Alost and the four offices was conquered by Baldouin le
Debonnaire in ye reign of the Emperor Henry the fourth.

The propre or Domaine of the county of Flanders.
THe propre or Domaine of Flaunders, contains the Towns of Tenremonde,
Montgherard and Bornhem, with many villages.

Tenremonde stands upon the mouth of the river Denre, where it enters into
the Schelde. The town is very rich and strong both by nature and by Art.

In this town is made great plenty of Fustian and weekly a great market is
here of Flax, whither infinite numbers of people resort.

A like market of Flax is also weekelye held in the Country of Waes, at the
good village of S. Nicholas. And in troth almost through all the Low Countries
there is a market granted to every Town for the benefit thereof, to some of
one particular merchandise, and to some of al in general.

Tenremonde with the jurisdiction thereof is a Seniorie apart, but incorporated
into the Earldom of Flanders, by the marriage of Lewis of Malain with
Margaret of Brabant.

Montgherard in French Grandmont stands upon the Denre. It is a pretty,
fine, and a pleasant town.

Bornhem is a good village with a good Castle, and a pretty countreye and
diverse bourgs subject to it, in such sort that the country about it is
entitled the country of Bornhem.

Rupelmonde stands upon the mouth of the river Rupel, where it enters into
the Schelde. It is an ancient Castle often mentioned in the hystories of
Flanders, because in times paste it was a place of great importance, but now
known only because in it are kept for the Prince, the originalls of the
privileges of the Earldom of Flanders, and because it is a Gayle for
certain Prisoners. Besides the Castle there is a fair and a great village,
which was the place of the Nativity of Gerardus Mercator the excellent
Cosmographer.

Through all Flanders save in the Gallicant, the Flemish tongue is their mother
language.

The soil through all Flanders Imperial is excellent good and fruitful, but
especially it produces great plenty of excellent good madder.

Flanders is the mightiest County in Christendom, as Milan is the mightiest
Dutchye, and France the mightiest realm.

ARTOYS.
IN Caesar's time the people of this country were named Atrebates, of the prin
cipall town Atrabatum, now called Arras.

Artoys is bordered North, with the river Lis, and the new Fosse, which
separateth it from Flanders. South with Dourlans, which is the frontier of
Picardie. East with Flaunders Gallicante, and the country of Cambresis, West
toward Monstrueil upon the Sea, it bordereth again upon Picardie.

The soil of A^toys is (...) wholesome, the country (...) but only (...)
rather (...) of industry in the people, who fort^ (...) plant Vines, because
their country front (...) France, and by that means is subicet to the spoil
of the wars, th^^ through the (...) either of the air or of the ground.

The corn of this country furnishes a great part of Flanders Flan^ngente, a
part of (...) especially the City of Andwerpe, (the country about the which
bears no corn but Ri^) and the country of Ma^^es.

In Artoys are twolue walled towns, comp^ehending therein Renty, which in
truth is rather a Fort than a town. There are also in it 854. villages, but
some of them ruinated by the wars.

Artoys has likewise in (...) with diverse Abbeyes, (...) and (...).

The principal towns are these, (...) Betune, Air, Bapaumas. The lesser town
(...) Hedinsfort, Renty, S. Pol, Perus, (...) Basset, Lens. Be sides these are
to be (...) of the strong Fortes of Hesdin and (...).

The States of Artoys consist of (...) ^^mely Prelat^, Chapters of (...) and
the (...) hunder (...) the particular description of the (...), begning with
Arras.

Arras stands within a bow shot of the Scarp It is a very great town, but
deuied into twoe parts, each part having a several wall, the one named the
city and appertains to the Bishop, the other the town and appertains to
ye prince.

The City is very little, but fair and marvelous strongly fortified. In it
is the sumptuous cathedral church of the virgin Mary, in the which is a goodly
and a rare library.

The Bishop of Arras is Lord spiritual and temporal thereof, and gives
Laws and Judges to the people of the City, but yet ever acknowledging the
Earl for his Sovereign, for the Earl names the Bishop, and the Pope
confirms him.

The reuenew of the Bishopric of Arras is four, five or six, thousand
Crowns, according as the year is plentiful or scarce of ^raine.

The town is very large, and so wonderful strong both by nature and Art,
that it is accounted imprenable. The streets are fair and broad, and the
market place the goodliest that may be seen.

In the town is also the Abbey of S. Vast, the revenues whereof are to the
yearly value of 20000. Ducats.

Farther in the town, are a great number of goodly Cellers and Vautes, very
artificially vauted and paued, to withdraw their families into, if a siege
happen to come before the town.

In Arras resideth the chamber of the Council of Artoys, which appealeth to
Malines.

In Arras are made diverse sorts of Marchandice, especially sarges excellent
good and famous through all Europe.

Arras was the metropolitan town of all Flanders, but after Artoys was
erected into a county and severed from the rest of Flaunders, it remained
chief of Artoys as now it is, ha^ing under it many Fiefs, and a great
jurisdiction.

S. Omer is so named of S. Omer, who first built the church in the Town of
that name, and through his holy life drew so many people thither, that the
town was built by them.

One of his companions was S. Bertin, who built the excellent beautiful
church in S. Omer of that name, and the Abbey which is a ve^ye goodly building,
and of as great revenues as any Abbey in all Flaunders,

S. Omer is a frontier town against France, and stands upon the river Aa. It
is a very strong Town and well peopled, and has the Title of a ^hastelenie,
and a Countreye of very great importance under it, and jurisdiction over many
Villages.

Near to S. Omer is a goodly lake of Fresh water, in the which are many
little ^andes (yet not so little but that you may put a good number of Cattle
to feed in many of them) the which are moveable, and may be drawn with a
coard fastened to the bushes that grow in them which way you will, and under
them greater abundance of Fishes harbor both Winter and Summer, to defend
themselves from the Weather, a thing which is no less true, than it is
wonderful.

Upon this lake besides diverse other goodlye buildings, stands the Abbey of
Clermaretz, being a very large and an excellent fair house.

Betune Is a good and a strong town, where is made great plenty of excellent
good cheese, sold both in the Low countries and in other regions abroad.

This town with the Seniorie and jurisdiction thereof, together with Tenremond
above described, fell to Guy of Dampiere Earl of Flanders, by the right of his
wife Mawd, daughter and heir to Daniell Lord of these places.

Air stands upon the Lis. It is a good and a strong town, with a Castle of
great antiquity. The houses in this town are very well and orderly built.

Bapaulme is a little but a strong town, because it cannot be besieged for
want of fresh wa ter, which is not to be had within three Leagues thereof. It
has also a very strong Castle, and a large country and a goodly jurisdiction
under it.

Renty is but a castle with a good village standing upon a little brook. It is
a very strong place, in the rescue whereof, the Emperor and the (...) fought a
battle An. 1554. and the French were forced to levy their siege. Renty is a
Marquisat, and the Marquis thereof is William of Crony brother to the Duke of
Arschot.

Hesdinfert is builte of the ruins of Hesdin which stood upon the river Canche
four leagues from S. Pol. Hesdin was a good town with a strong castle, and a
large territory and jurisdiction, and it was the place of residence of the
ancient Earls of Flanders and Artoys, but it was not fortified after the
manner of these days, and therefore unable to abide a battery, so that it was
often taken in these late wars, now by the Imperials, now by the French. But
in the year 1553. the Duke of Sauoy general of the Emperors Army took it,
and by the Emperors commandment razed it, and withal the village adjoining to
it, and in place thereof built this town of Hesdinfert, which is maruelously
well (...) upon the Ca^ehe a little league farther into France then Hesdin
was, for to the town of Hisdinfert comes also another little river called
Blangis, of a Village thereby of that name, where it arises, and which there
runs into ye Ca^th. So that Hesdinfert is one of the strongest^^ most
defenceable places of all the Love (...) treys, and having succeeded into the
Seniori^ privileges, and Franchises of old Hesdin, and farther having
obtained diverse other of the Prince, it is now become a very fair town and
well peopled, and leaving the new name of Hesdinfert retains and holds the
ancient name of Hesdin.

S. Pol has of long time been honored with the title of an Earldom, and
has a goodlye Seniorie and jurisdiction over a large Country and a great
reuenew. This place appertains to Madame de Touteuille, but both the kings of
France and Spain pretend title of sovereignty to it.

Perne is under the jurisdiction of the Earldom of S. Pol, and is a place of
good importance. Lilliers is a reasonable passable town.

Bassee.
Lens is but a little town, yet has a large territory and jurisdiction. It
was destroyed by the French An. 1557. but is now built and repaired again.

Terrouenne is now destroyed, but was sometime the principal town of the
people called by Caesar Morini. It was held for a fort imprenable,
notwithstanding the Imperials took it by force from the French An. 1553. and
razed it by the Emperors commandment. But by the treaty of peace concluded
between France and Spain, An. 1558. it was being thus destroyed, restored to
the French again, but with condition no more to wall it nor fortifieit. The
Bishopric of T^^rouanne was divided into three parts, one half went to
Boloin, the other half was divided between two new Bishops erected in
Flaunders, one at Hypre for the Flemings Flamingants, and the other at S. Omer,
for the Gallicants.

Nearer to Terouenne, Air, and S. Omer, is a great channel called the new
Fosse or dike, made as some hold opinion by men's hands, in the time of Baldouin
le Debonnaire, to stop the courses of the Enemies. Others say that it was made
for a boundarie between Flanders and Artoys. But in truth this channel being
of a great length though narrow, seems rather to have been an arm or gulf
of the Sea, though now it be almost landed up with earth thrughout. And some
are of opinion, that in times paste the Sea came thither, though now it be 8.
leagues from it, for ankers and cables are many times taken up there, which
makes their opinion the more probable.

The Description of the villages of Artoys.
THe villages of Artoys that be of any importance are those that have privilege
of market and fair, which are these following. Auennes le Comte, Aschicourt,
S. Venant, Courriers, Blangys, Ligny, Auchy, Pas, all the which stand upon the
Frontier of France.

The Artessans speak gross French, but of all other people most hate the
French, they are now altogether become soldiers of Merchants, and are valiant
men both on horsseback and on foot.

Artoys was in the first beginning incorporated with the body of Flanders as a
member thereof, and so continued till the time of Philip of Elsace, who marriyng
his niece Isabelle with Philip youngest son of Lewis the seuen^h king of
France: gave with hic in marriage all west Flanders (viz) from the new Fosse
(where is the first entrance into Artoys) even to Picardie. Which grant made by
the Earl alone without his Estates, bred many bloody wars between the
Flemings and the French. But Anno. 1198. Philip August king of France, gave
all this country of Artoys to Louis his son, Father to K. saint Louis, and
erected it into an Earldom. And Anno 1382. it was again united to the body
of Flanders, by the succession of Louis of Malain to his mother Margaret of
France after it had de been severed from it 184. years. But Anno. 1477. Lewis
the eleventh king of France seized this Country into his hands, after the
death of Charles duke of Burgundy: yet notwithstanding it was restored again
to duke Philip, son to the Emperor Maximilian by king Charles the 8. An.
1493. ever since the which time in (...) remained under the obedience of the
house of Anstrich.

Cambray.
Stands upon the Schelde, which runs through the midst thereof.

It is a great, a goodly, and a mighty Town, having in it a fair and a
strong castle, builte by Charles the fifth. The private buildinges of this
town are very fuire, but the public much sayrer, namely the churches and
monasteries, but especially our Lady church is a most ancient and a most
wonderful sumptuous temple, being the cathedral and Episcopal church of the
town.

The Dioces and jurisdiction of the Bishop is very great, and extends it
self over many countries.

The town is rich, full of people, and of good Merchants and Artisans, which
work diverse good marcha^dises, especially great quantity of excellent fine
linen cloth, commonly called Cambrick.

Cambray is a Chastelenie and has under it a goodly Seniorie and jurisdiction
called Cambresis, in the which are diverse villages and places of importance,
and among the rest the castle of Cambresy six leagues from the city, in the
which the peace between the chief princes of Christendom was concluded An.
1559.

The bishop of Cambray is Lord both spiritual and temporal, and has the title
of a Duke and is a Prince of the Empire.

This City was first comprehended in Hainault, but afterward the Emperors
of Allemaine made it a free Imperial city, and lastly the Emperor Henry
the 5. ordained the Earl of Flanders to be protector of Cambray, ye which
pre-eminence was after confirmed to all the Earls of Flanders, by the Emperor
Frederick An. 1164. yet notwithstanding the French pretend title to it, and
often have held it and valiantly defended it. But in the time of Maximilia^,
the Citizens being evil entreated by the French, chased them out of the town.
Lewis the xi. the^ reigning in France, and received in the Imperials, yet
notwithstanding the town is Neuter and lives according to their own laws.

This town is a place destinated as it were, because it is neutrall to
treaties of peace.

In this town Charles the fifth An. 1543. built a citadelle, pretending that he
did it for the defense of the town against the enemy, but in truth it was for
the assurance of his own estate. Yet notwithstanding this citadelle, he left
the Citizens in their ancient estate, liberty and freedom.

HAYNAVLT.
HAynault is so named of the river Hayne, which runs through the country.

It is bordered North with Brabant and Flanders. South with Champaigne and
Fiea^die, East with the (...) of Namur, and part of the country of Liege, west
with ye S^^alde and part of Flanders Gallica^e.

It is 20. Leagues long and 16. broad, (...) air is wholesome and the soil
excellent good by reason that the Country is watered with many rivers, namely
the Schelde, the Sambre, the Te^ der, and many other small streams. There are
also in it many lakes, marshes, pondes, pooles, clear fountaies and goodly
woods and pleasant Forests, the principal whereof are the Forests of
Normault and S. Amande which already are described.

Haynault abounds with sweet meadows and pastures for all kind of cattle,
with good fruits and profitable trees, but especially with great plenty of
good Corn. In diverse parts also thereof are many Mines of good iron, and of
reasonable good lead, and excellent quarries of stone for all kind of
building, yea of touchestone. Great store there is also of excellent white
Lime to furnish not only themselves, but also many of their Neighbors about
them, and likewise of Seacoale, but the Coal is not so sweet as that of Liege.

In Haynault are 24. walled towns, namelye Montz, Valenciennes (though this be
accounted a Seniorie apart) Bouchain, Quesnoy, Connat, Landresy, Anesnes,
Chimay, Mariembourg, Phillipps, Ville, Bea^^ount, Ma^berge, Bou^^s, (...)
Segny, Brain le comte, Eughien, Halle, Lessme, Cheure, Ath, S. Guislein, Leuze.

Farther, there are in it better tha^ 950. villages with many Castles and
Seniories, among the which villages a good number are great and fair, having
honorable titles annexed to them, namely Pequicourt, Fontayne, Laling,
Montigny, Antoing, Bies, Brifueil, Ligne, Bossu, Barlomont, Telaio^,
Eschochinne, Trelon, Sorlechasteau, Barbanzon, Aimeries, and diverse other, so
many in number that it were too long to rehease them all.

In Haynault are also many goodlye dignities, namelye one Principaute, 10.
Earledomes, 12. Pecredomes, 22. Baronies, 26. Abbeys, one Lord Marshall, one
Lord Steward, one Granduenuer, one Lord Chamberlain, and other officers of
the prince, which descend by inheritance to diverse principal Lords of the
province.

The States of Haynault consist of five members, namely the 12. Peers, the
Prelates, Colleges, or Chapters of the Clergy, the Nobility, the ordinary
Officers of the Country, and the Commonaltie of the towns. But now let us
proceed to ye description of the towns, and first of Montz.

Montz.
Has the little river Trulle running through it, the which at the issue thereof
our of Montz falls into the river Hayne.

This is a very strong town both by nature and Art, and may be environed
with water at pleasure. The w^ll thereof is very strong, besides that it is
fortefied with 3. large and deep (...) and with an ancient Castle.

The town is great and fair, and beautified with sumptuous buildings both
private and public, and with goodly fountains clear as Cristal. It is a
rich town and replenished with merchants, and artisans that exercise diverse
arts, especially making of Sarges of diverse sorts.

Montz, is a Chastelenie, and ye Chastelaine thereof is Charles Philip of
Crouy, Marquis of Hauretz, Brother to the Duke of Arschot.

In Montz resideth the Counsel royal of all the Country (save of ye Seniorie
of Valenciennes) from the which no appeal lies.

The Baylife of Haynault is the princes Lieuteuant both in causes civil and
criminal, and without his preasence no definatiue sentence may be given.

In this town is the noble order or chapter of Canonesses of the Abbie of S.
Waltrude being in all respects like to that of Niuelle, for they must be
Gentle women of Noble houses, in the morning they are apparalled in white like
Nuns, but at after dinner they are attayred like Gentlewomen, they may
marry if it please them, their Abbess has spiritual and temporal
jurisdiction both within Montz and in the Country round about it, and puts
with herowne hands the Earl of Haynault in possession of the Country and
receaueth his oath at his enteraunce into the state, for the Earl is secular
Abbot, protector, and defender of this noble order, and of all that
appertains unto it, and houldeth diverse Lands in Fief of the Abbess.

Montz is the principal town of Haynault and was erected by Charlemaine into
an Earldom apart in such sort that the Earls of H^ynault were long time
called Earls of Montz, but in the end they returned again to the ancient
title of Earls of Haynault.

Valenciennes.
Stands upon the Schelde and the little river Rouelle, the which besides that
they make many goodly and strong Isles in the town, pass almost under every
particular man's house to the great beauty and commodity of the town.

The seat of this town is so strong (besides the fortification by art) that
it may at pleasure be drowned with water on one side, and is so defended by
hills on the other side that it can hardly be beseaged without two Camps, and
is therefore held for a town imprenable, especially by a stranger. In the
town there is a storehouse where great provision of munition and Artillery
for the defense of the town is kept.

It is a very goodly, large, and a beautiful town as well in private
buildings as in public, namely Churches, Monasteries, etc. especially our
Lady Church is passing fair being builte after the (...) with three (...)
(...) Arches, and with goodlye Fil^^ers of marble and Porphyre. S. John's Church
is also a very go^dly building.

The Convent of S. Frauncis in Valenciennes (...) the Sepulcher of the Earls
of Haynault.

At the Iacobins is the Tomb of John of (...) nephew to Baldouin Earl of
Flaunders and Emperor of Constantinople, being a rare piece of work.

In this town is also a Palace sometime called the Imperial Hall, and now
the Earls Hal, being a building of great antiquity and of excellent work
manship, here the Earls of Haynault and Lords of Valencien^es were wont to
reside, but this palace with some part of the town next adjoining to it is
exempted from the jurisdiction of the town, and appertains to ye rest of
Haynault as a member thereof.

But the towne-house called La Halle far passes all these buildings above
mentioned in statelines and magnificencie, being all of square stone curiously
wrought, and of such greatness and representation of antiquititie, that it alone
were a sufficient (...) to the whole town.

But for a farther beauty to this place, on the left side their of (...)
excellent building and of a great height in the which there is a clock and
(...) dial showing not only the hours of the day^ and night, but also the
course of the (...) and of all (...) planets, and likewise of the months and
seasons of the year, and diverse other conclusions worthy to be understood.

Under this Clocke-house and so under covert is the corn market being great
and large, and above in the hall is a place to sell woll, and another to sell
cloth. There are besides in it sense schools, and places for all ye public
courts, magistrates and officers of the town, and the gaile and common prison,
so yt in one building you may see as it were compact together all offices
secuing for the commodity and necessary use of a town.

In this town are also diverse Monasteries, hospitals and other places of
Religion endewed with goodly revenues. There is also in it a goodlye College,
and many schools to bring up youth in good learning, and houses for the
education of Orphelins and poor children, where they be taught diverse arts
and occupations.

This town was the place of nativity of Henry ye 7. Emperor, and D. of
Luxe^bourg of Marie heir of these low Countries, wife to the Emperor
Maximilian, and of Froisart the great Historiographer.

In this town are made clothes, wosteds, linen as fine as any Cambrick,
changeable taffitas and almost all sorts of mercerie ware, and all other
things necessary for a town.

Valenciennes is a Chastelenie of a great jurisdiction, and with larger
privileges and Franchises (...) any (...) of the Low (...)

Here is the stapl^ of French Wines hold that be brought out of France into
(...) H^ynault.

The states of this town and Seniorie consist of the Prelates, Nobility, and
Commonalties of the towns.

This town also was wont to have a particular Earl apart by it self, and
even now it is, and of long time has been a Seniorie apart, and is governed by
Laws different from all the rest of Haynault, as are also all the towns
thereunto bel^^gn^g, namely (...), Quesn^y, Coud^, besides 132. villages, and
all their appeals go strait to the great Counsel of Mal^nes, but in matters
(...) this town^ and Country are subiecte^ to the Bishop of C^mbray.

A League from Valenci^nnes is the fair and rich Abbie of (...) where is a
rare and exquis^^ Library of all Sciences and faculties, betwee^ (...) and
(...) is ye village called (...) about ye which is dug excellent whit ston^
(...) for building, called white stone of Auesnes, the which is as fair as
white marbell, and (...) to be wrought, for the which cause many goodly (...)
are made thereof both plain and g^auen, but because it is (...) harm by
rain, wind, and froste, the (...) have found a wa^e to fortefie it and (...)
(...) all such violences with (...) other mixtio^s which make it very hard,
durable, and strong.

Bouchain stands upon the Schelde, the Town is strong and the Castle
almost imprenable. It is the principal town of the County of Osternand, so
named of the Ostrogoths to whom the said County was assigned for an
habitation, and the which was wont to be the state of ye Earl of Haynaults
eldest son.

Quesnoy is a strong town, in the which are made Wosteds, and great store of
linen, by means whereof there is good trafique of merchandise in the Town.
This place was wont to be the dower of the Earl of Haynaults wife, as Bins was
after this country fell to the Dukes of Burgundy.

Conde stands upon the Schelde. It is a good little town, the one half
sometimes appertayning to the Earl of Rockendorf, and the other half to the
Duke of Mont pensier, who soulde both this and Leuze for his ransom, being
taken prisoner at the battle of S. Quentins.

The town now appertains to the Earl of Lalaings widow wife to the Earl
of Ma^sfeld and shall descend to her son Hughe of Lalaing.

Landrecy stands upon the Sambre, the place is little, but strong, and the
more famous for the resistance that it made A. 1543. to the siege of the
Emperor Charles, the next year after the which by the treaty of Crespy it was
delivered by the French to the Duke of Arschot who was owner of it, and who
afterward exchaunged it with the Emperor for other lands.

Auesnes stands upon the river Hipre. It is a good and a strong town having
the title of an Earldom, this place also king philip had by exchange of the
Duke of Arschot.

Chimay stands in a Forest upon the little river Blanch. It is well builte
with a fair palace for ye prince, a goodly garden and a Labyrinthe. It has
the Title of a principallitie, and the Duke of Arschot is Prince thereof, this
town was often afflicted and razed in these late wars, but now is fayrer and
stronger than ever before.

Mariembourg was built by Marie Queen of Hungary sister to the Emperor
Charles An. 1542. soon after Longueual and Martin Van Rossem were passed with
the French army toward the town of Luxembourg.

This town stands between the rivers of Blanch and Nere or Noire. It is a
very strong town with 4. strong bulwarks, it was yielded to the French
through cowardice or treason of ye Captain An. 1554. but restored to king
Philip by the last treaty of peace An. 1559.

Philippeuille was builded by king Philip An. 1555. to bridle Mariembourg held
then by the French, and so fortefied that it is held now for a place
imprenable.

Beaumont is a fine little Town standing upon the knappe of a goodly hill
whereof it bears name. It appertains to the Duke of Arschot, and was wont to
be the partage of the second son of Haynault, wherefore it was erected into an
Earldom, and of late the Duke of Arschot has ordinarily resided here.

Maubeuge stands upon the Sambre which passes through it. It is a good
Town of merchandise, and in it is held a market every Saterdaie of woollen
yarne whereof Sarges and Demiwosteds are made, which is there a merchandise of
great trafique and importance.

In this town is a noble house of Nuns, such as are described before to be
at Niuelle and Mo^tz, the Abbess whereof has the government both spiritual
and temporal, civil and criminal as well of the town as of ye country about
it.

This Nunrie has a privilege yearly to coin a certain sum of small money
called Mites, made of Lead with the image of S. Algond (the Foundresse of this
Nunrie) stamped upon them, 12. of the which make a flemish denier or groat, and
this money is current through Haynault even to Bruxels, and no man may refuse
to take it.

Bauays Vallone is a very small town. It is said by some to be the Town
that Caesar named Belgium, which Guicciardin by reasons proves to have been
the name of a particular town as well as of the whole Country, but Beauuays in
Piccardie called by name of Bellouacum to have been Belgiu^ and not this
Bauais. This town was often destroyed in the late wars, but is now repaired
fayrer than ever it was before. This name of Vallone is added to it for a
difference from the other Bauuays that is in Picardie.

Bins commonly called Binche stands upon a Branch of the River Hayne. It
was the Paradise of the Lady Marie queen of Hungary, to whom it was given by
her brother the Emperor Charles, but in the year 1554. the French king burned
the town, and utterly destroyed all the Queen of Hungaries pleasures therein,
in despite of Solembray a place of pleasure of the said Kings and other places
in Picardie which most cruellye she had burned before. The said King burned
likewise another place of pleasure thereby called Marimont built also by the
said Queen of Hungary like a Castle with exquisite delights and excessive
charges. Notwithstanding Bins as touching the particular buildings of the same
Town is now likewise reedefied again.

Reux was erected into a County by the Emperor Charles. It is a little town
but a very pleasant one, and has a good jurisdiction, and many villages
under it, and stands in a fruitful soil. The Earl thereof is of the house
of Crouy.

Soigny stands upon the little River Seine, nere to this town is the Forest
of Soigny before described. The town and confines thereof are subject to the
jurisdiction of the College of S. Vincent being a College of Cannons within the
town, this place is particularly destinated to the breeding of excellent good
Musitions.

Breine le Comte was built by the ancient Captain Brennus, as appears by an
old Tower yet remaining of the buildings of the said Brennus, as the people of
the Country report.

Enghien is a good little town wherein great store of Tapistrie of all sorts
and prises is made. Here was the Constable of France Mommorency held prisoner
a certain space. The town appertains to Henry the 4. now king of France
and Navarre, and Duke of Vendosme.

Halle stands upon the Seine which runs through it. This is a place of
great pilgremage, and here died An. 1404. Philip the hardy Duke of Burg undie.

Lessnie, through (...) passes the Denre and here is great plenty of linen
made.

Cheure stands upon the little river named Hunell. It is a pleasant little
town belonging to William of Crouy marquis of Renty.

Ath, through it runs the Denre. It is a little but a very fair, pleasant,
and a rich Town by reason that great plenty of Linen is made in it, and
because the Staple of Linen made in all the Country round about it is held
here, so that yearelye there is soulde in this Town Linen Cloth to the vale
we of better than 200000^ Crowns, by means whereof all the clothes made
thereaboutes are called the Clothes of Ath.

S. Guislem takes ye name of the Abbie within the town, the Abbot whereof is
Lord spiritual and ^emporall of the town, and this is the chief and
principal Abbie of all Haynault, through this town runs the river Hayne.

Leuse, This town was burnt a few years past in the last wars, but it is
now repaired again. It was sometime the town of Gerarde of Roussillon so
famous in the Histories. It now app^rtayneth to Florent of Mommorency Lord of
Montigny in Osteruant, by purchase from the Duke of Montpensier.

The description of the principal villages of Haynault.
PEquicourt is parcel of the possessions of the Abbie of Anchim. It was before
the wars a walled town but is now unwalled and in poor estate, yet enjoys
the privileges of a walled town.

Fontaine, It is doubtful whether this town be in Haynault or of the
bishopric of Liege. It is a little town within a little League of the Sambray.

Lalaing stands upon the Scarpe. It is a goodly village with a castle and a
large Jurisdiction, and has ye title of an Earldome whereof the Earls of
Lalaing and Hocstrat, bear their name.

Montigny Is a fine Village with a castle and a Seniorie and is erected into a
Baronie, and appertains to Florent of Mommorency, Brother to the Countye of
Horn.

Antoin stands upon the Schelde. It is a fair borough with a goodly and a
stately castle, here the Princes of Espinoy ordinarlye reside. It is said to
have been builte by M. Antonius Triumuir.

Bie appertains to the Seneschal of Haynault. It has a marvelous strong
castle, it now appertains to Hughe of Melun by marriage with one of the
daughters of Peter of Werehin, to who^ this town is descended with ye said
seneschalship, the other daughter married the Earl of Bossut.

Briffeul has a great and an ancient Castle, the Country houldeth opinion
that it is thus named of Ianus bifrons, though the name be here corrupted and
altered. Near to the town is a great valley with many villages called the
vale of Briffeul, this place appertains to the Lord of Moreaulme who
ordinarily resideth at a goodly large Castle that he has at the village of
Hasurheure between the Sambray and the Muze.

Lign^s is a goodly, Village and in (...) with a fair Castle, appertaining to
Philip ^arl^ of Fauckenbergh and lord of Wassenar in Holland.

B^ssu is a good village with the goodliest Castle in all the Low countries.
It has also the ^^tle of an Earldom, given it by Charles the Emperor. The
Earl thereof is named Maximilia^^ of Henninlietart.

Barlemont is a great village upon the Sanbr^, having a Castle, and the title
first of a barony, and than erected into an Earldom by king Philip.

Glaion is a goodly village with a strong Castle. It has the title of a
baronie and appertaine^h to Philip Stauele.

Trasegnie is a good village with a goodly castle, very famous for the
antiquity of the lords thereof, whose race has commanded and continued there
above 600. years.

Escochinne is a great village with two castles, one appertaining to the Earl
of Lalaing, the other to Monsieur de Bioures, descended of the noble family of
Rubempre, about this village is dug a goodly gray stone to build with, where
with the whole country is furnished.

Terlon is a fair village, with a goodly Castall and a strong, newly ree
dified and fortified since the last wars, wherein it was often destroyed. It
appertains to Lewys of Bloys master of the Artilery to the king.

Sorle Chasteau is the most important Village in Haynault, with a marvelous
strong and an ancient castle. It now appertains to the Marquis of Berghe, by
marriage with the daughter and heir of Monsieur de Molembais.

Barbanzon stands near a wood full of yughe trees. It is a rich village with
a goodly Castle and the title of a baronie. In this town (as also in diverse
places of Haynault) are many Glasses made, much fairer than those of Rouen,
Lorrain, or Hesse. This place now appertains in ye right of his wife, to John
de Lignes Earl of Are^bergh.

Aimeries stands upon the Sambre. It is a great village with a goodly
castle, and an ancient and a noble Seniorie. It was sometime parcel of the
possessions of the Earl of Flaunders, but was given in marriage with Iolande
daughter of Robert Earl of Flanders, to Rene Earl of Bar, of whom descended
Rene of Aniou, who gave it to his Chancellor Roulin, whose race yet possesses
it, and is lord also of Raime and graund Veneur of Haynault.

Touin and Couines, These twoe towns are in Haynault, but because they
appertain to the Bishopric of Liege, no mention is made of them here.

Valencourt is also in Haynault, but under the Seniorie of the Countye of
Namur, wherefore mention is made of it there.

Haynault abounds in Nobility and good (...) both (...) and footmen, they
(...) corrupt French named wallon.

LVXEMBOVRG.
LVxembourg was erected into a Duchy as it is thought by the Emperor Henry
the feuenth Earl of Luxembourg.

It bears the name of the principal town thereof. It is bounded North with
the Country of Liege and Namur. South with Lorraine. East with the Moselle and
the Bishopric of Treues. West with part of the Moselle, and part of ye forest
of Ardenne.

This country is repleuished with mountains and forests, and embraces the
greatest part of the forest of Ardenne.

It is divided into two parts, the one called fam^^ne, which is fruitful of
corn and of all good things, and has in it Rome Mines, and diverse sorts of
goodlye stone, among the which are those whereof excellent good lime is made.
It yields also some wine. The other part of the country is called Ardenne
which is barren, and produces no corn save a little Rye and Lent come, but of
al sorts of venison, as Heart, Hind, Goat, Hare, Cony, and also foul
wonderful (...) especially one kind of foul called (...) to our Quails but
much sweeter. This foul is of diverse colors, and has red eyes and feet, the
flesh passing white and delicate. There are also in this part of the country
wild hens of two sorts, one as great as Turkey cocks, called Limoges, the other
of the greatness of our common hens called Bruiers, of both the which sorts
is wonderful abundance wild in the woods and feelds.

This country being a frontier against France, has often been miserably
afflicted in the wars, and diverse towns yea the principal it self often
sacked and destroyed. By this Countreye run many rivers especially the
Moselle.

This Duchy contains in circuit about 70. leagues, and in it are 20 walled
towns, namely, Luxembourg, the principal of the whole country, Arlon,
Rodemarck, Theonuille, Grauemakre, Coningmakre, Dickrich, Vireton, Esteruerck,
Va^dalen, Bastonae, Mommedi, Neufchasteau, Danuillers, Maruil, Laroche en
Ardenne, Durby. S. Vite, March Salme.

Other towns there are sometime Walled, but now unwalled, either by the fury
of the wars, or by treaty of peace, as Iuois, Chini, Laferte. Also diverse
castles there are very ancient and noble, like to little towns, as S. John and
Mandreschet, having both of them the title of Earldoms. Likewise Bidburg,
Sauuachi, Pambrug, Clearueau, and Hoffalis, are al very good castles.

There are likewise in this duchy 1169. villages, diverse of the which are fair
and great, namely, La Roch^tte, Auio, and S. (...) town of debate, because
many times (...) with the Liegeoys has been about it.

In this Duchy are vii. Earledomes, many b^mnies, and other Seniories
infinite.

The states of this country consist of 3. members (viz) Prelates, Nobles and
Towns.

The City of Luxembourg.
THrough it passes the river Elz^. It is called Luxembourg because it was de
dicated to the sun as it were Lucis Burgum. So Arlon was dedicated to the
Moon and is so called Quasi ara Lunae, because Diana was worshipped there.
Iuois one letter being ^ansposed, bears the name of Jupiter. Mars in famenne
of the god Mars, and Merourt (a good village standing between Chasteau de soy
and Bastoigne) of Mercury. So Theonuille is as it were Pantheon, because it was
dedicated to all the Gods, a word compounded of Greek and French. Besides
diverse other places in this country bea^ing their names though very
corruptly of the Pagan gods or planets.

Luxembourg is large and very strongly seated yet but reasonably built, because
in the (...) it has often been destroyed, in such sort (...) citizens being
very poor by reason of the wa^^ have not only been careless in repairing it,
but many of them have also clean abandoned it.

In the convent of the order of S. Frauncis in this town, lies buried John
King of Boheme, (son to the Emperor Henry the 7. and father to Charles the
fourth, slain at the battle of Crecy by the English. An. 1348.

In Luxembourg vesideth the council of the whole province, which appealeth to
Malines.

In the said council they plead both in dutch and French, because some of the
country use the Dutch tongue, as Luxembourg it self, Arlon, Rodemarck,
Theonuille, and diverse other towns, and some the French, as Iuois, Monmedi,
Maruil, Danuilliers, but let us proceed to the other towns.

Ar^n is desolated by the wars, but now they begin to repair it again.

Rodemarck is a good little town with a strong Castle.

Theonuille stands upon the Moselle, having a goodly bridge over the river.
The common opinion is that Charles the great established this town for one of
the three seats of the Empire in these parts. This town is marvelous strong,
yet was it taken by the French, under the leading of Francis Duke of Guyze An.
1558. and at the assault thereof was Peter Strozzi, one of the four Marshals of
France slain, but it was by the last treaty restored to king Philip again.

(...) and Conink (...) both upon the Moselle.

Dickrick, Vierton, Echternach, Nihil. Vandalen or Vlanden, has the title of
an Earldom.

Bastonack is a good little town and is commonly called Paris en Ardenne,
because in it is held a market of cattle and grain and all other victuals,
whither all the country resorteth, which greatly enricheth this place. In
diverse villages about this town, is the blasphemous Spanish, or rather he
athonish custom of women, in be wailing their dead husbands used, who follow
them to the church with miserable cries, howlings, and lamentations, beating,
tormenting, tearing and scratching themselves, by the way as they go most
shamefully with their (...). True it is that the women here are much more
modest than the Spanish women, for these are silent when they come into the
church, but the Spanish women are most out of order in the church, to the great
trouble of the whole company.

Mommed^ stands upon a high hill, at the foot where of runs the river
Chiers. It is ^ strong town yet often taken in the last wars by the French,
but by the last treaty restored again to the king of Spain.

Neufchastel is a strong town now, but neither so strong nor so great as in
times past.

Danuilliers. This town was sacked by the Duke of Orleans, Anno. 1542. and
again by Henry the second king of France An. 1552. but it was restored to king
Philip by the last treaty, and is now fairer and stronger than ever before.

Maruil stands upon the Chiers, the one half of this town is king
Philippes, and the other half the Duke of Lorraines, for the which cause it is
called Ville commune.

La Roche en Ardenne and Durby are both erected into Earledomes.

S. Vite is a little but a very pleasant and a fine town.

Salme is a proper rich town, erected also into an Earldom.

March, Marses or Mars, was heretofore dedicated to Mars. But now let us
speak a word or two of these towns that are destroyed or disfigured by the
wars, whereof the pryncipall is Iuoy.

Iuoy which stands upon the Chiers. It was sometime a good town and a
strong, but has often been sacked in these last wars, especially by Henry
king of France An. 1552. It was restored to king Philip An. 1558. by the last
treatye, but with condition that it should no more be walled nor fortified.

Chiny has been so often spoiled in the wars that it remains yet unwalled,
notwithstanding now they begin to repair it again. It is an Earldome and has
large Seniorie and jurisdiction over diverse towns.

Laferte stands upon the Chiers. It is also unwalled and part of the castle
ruinated.

No province in all the Low countries is so replenished with Nobility as this
duchy of Luxembourg, who also govern their subjects and Tenants like Pesants
of France, or rather like slaves, contrary to the liberty of the rest of the
Provinces of these low countries. Otherwise the Nobility of this duchy are
full of all virtue, truth, faith to their prince, constancy, courtesy,
hospitality and love one to another, and often frequent together and very
frankly and liberally entertain one another in their Castles and houses of
pleasure. And above all other people hate law and lawyers, and end their
controversies among the^ s^lues without process. The chief exercise of the
Nobility is Arms and hunting. This was the first title that the Emperor
Charles bare at his christening.

The Earldom of Namur.
NAmur is bounded with Brahant, Haynault, Luxembourg and Liege. The country is
very small yet abounding with all graces and riches, it is replenished with
people, and those very industrious, true, and faithful to their prince. The
Nobility is valiant, flourishes in all military discipline, and is given to
all exercises fit for their degree. The air is very wholesome, and the country
is watered with many Rivers and brooks especially the Meuse and the Sambre,
which besides the commodity of portage, furnish the country with great plenty
of excellent good fish.

Namur is a country replenished with woods and Forests, the greatest whereof
is called Marlaigne, abounding ye a crawling as it were with all kind of
Venison and soul.

The Valleys are very fruitful of all sorts of corn and grain, the hills
full of goodly woods, excellent clear fountains, rich mines of Iron, and some
of Lead, quarreyes of fine stone to build with, and of Marble of all sorts and
colors, as black, Tawnye, porphire or Jasper, which is red straked with white,
blew marble but myngled with white which perfecteth the beawtye. Besides diverse
other sorts of fine stone to build with, and lime to make cement, and seacoale
to burn as in Haynault, and in Liege, whereunto I add great quantity of
Saltpeter made in this country of Namur, but especially the forges of Iron in
this little Province are so innumerable, that the whole country seems to be
Vulcans forge, all the which things put together, do not only keep the people
from idleness by their continual travel and exercise, but also more enrich
them than the best tilled and fruitfullest feelds that may be found.

In the country of Namur at this day are four walled towns (viz) Namur the
principal town, and which gives name to the whole country, Bouines,
Charlemont and Valencourt.

There are farther in it 182. Villages, and many goodly and rich Abbeyes.

The states of this country are compounded of the clergy, the nobility, and
the heads of the good towns, but now we will come to the particular
description of the places of this Seniorie.

The City of Namur
Stands between two hills upon the Meuse, and through it passes the Sambre
which there enters into the Meuse.

It is a fair and a rich town with a strong castle, and about it are 7.
hermitages.

It has been an Earldom with a goodlye seniorie and a large jurisdiction of
long time.

Here resideth the council of the Country which appealeth to Malines, and of
late Namur has obtained a bishop, whose cathedral church is the church of S.
Albin.

The N^cians are very good soldiers, and very affectionate to their prince,
they speak French which is their mother tongue. In ye town are some artificers
but not many, and likewise few merchants, but great store of nobility, some
descended of great princes though the most part by bastardie.

Between Namur and Ho^y is the rich village of Audenne, in the which is a
nunrie of ladies like to that of Niuelle. Such another like Nunrie is also but
two leag^es from Namur, at a village called Monstier upon the Sambre, at both
the which Nunries are daily great alms bestowed upon the poor.

Bouines stands upon the Meuse, this has been heretofore a town of good
importance, but it has often been sacked, and lastly by Henry the second
king of France, An. 1554. but is now repaired again and fortified.

Charlemont is a Town of wonderful force, and of exquisite fortification
though but small. It was built by Charles the fifth to make head against the
French, after they had taken Mariem bourg which was in the year 1555.

Valencourt stands in a goodly fruitful country, and is a good little
town, the principal villages of this country are,

Daue which is a goodly village with a strong Castle standing upon the Meuse.
It has also a great jurisdiction and is honored with the title of a
Viscountie. Farther among the villages of this country are diverse because of
their beauty and greatness, worthy to be mentioned, namely Floren, Vascie,
and Sanson.

These before described are all the low country Provinces subject to the king
of Spain. Notwithstanding because the bishoppricke of Liege and the town of
Aquisgrane, are not only neighbors and friends, but also (...) co^^tinual and
indissolubleamitie with these fe Low countries, we will speak a wor^^ or
(...) them.

The Bishopric of Liege.
THis Country is bordered North and west with Brabant, East with the Mouse and
Namur, south with Luxembourg.

The air is very wholesome, the country pleasant, and abounding with all kind
of grain and fruits, in such sort, that through the whole country wine
grows, though small and of no great quantity. But as touching flesh, fish,
(...) and foul of all sorts there is great abundance and that of cast
excellent good.

Mines there are also of iron reasonable store and some of lead and veins of
Br^^nstone, ye^ and a few of Gold and that excellent good, quarreyes also
there are of excellent ston^ (...) Alblaster mingled with black, and of all
(...) of Marble as before is described in (...) sides wonderful great plenty
of (...) Seacole dug wonderful deep, (...) time even underneath the very
(...) the Mouze, and that in such abundance, that the country within the
compass of a league about Liege, not only furnishes the Town, but sells
also forth abroad yearly though at very small prices, to the valewe of
100000. ducats. The coal of this country is much sweeter and casts a far
greater heat than the coal of Hay nault or Namur, as does also the Turffe of
this Country (which is used in some places thereof) far surmount the turfe of
Flanders and Brabant. For the which cause the Liegeoys vaunt and that most
truly, that they have in their country 3. things passing all other countries
(viz) bread better than bread, iron harder than iron, and fire hotter than
fire. This coal is kindled with water and quenched with oil, and the strong
savor thereof is taken away by casting salt into the fire.

In this Country is also made great abundance of Saltpeter. To conclude this
country is so pleasantly seated, the air so wholesome, the soil so fruitful
of all things serving for the use and delight of man, whereunto also may be
added the great liberty that the people live in there, that it is called the
Paradise of preests. In such sort that John Mandeuille an English ge^tleman and
a famous Doctor of Physic, after his long travail round about the world,
chose this for the Paradise of all the world, where he would both live and end
his life, as also he did in the year 1372.

Under the Bishopric of Lieg^ is contained a goodly and large estate, seniorie
and jurisdiction, of Towns, castelles, bourgs and villages, namely the Duchy
of Buillon, the Marquisate of Francymont, and the counties of Lotz and Hasbain,
There are also under it many baronies, the principal whereof are 52. and
many rich Abbyes

To conclude, there are under the jurisdiction of the Bishop (besides the half
of Maestricht) 24. walled towns, namely Liege the principal and metropolitan
town, Buillon, Francimont, Lootz, Borckworm, Tongres, Hoey, Asselt, Dinant,
Masetck, Stochem, Bilsen, S. Truiden, Tuin, Viset, Varem, Beringhe, Herck,
Bree, Per, Hamont, Siney, Fosse, Couines.

There are moreover under the Bishop, 1800. Villages with parish churches,
besides Hamlets, baronies and castles of noble men a great number. But now to
the particular description, and first of the Metropolitan City it self, and
than of the rest.

The City of Liege.
LIege stands in a pleasant Valley upon the Meuse, being environed with
hills on all sides, the M^us^ enters into it with two branches, and makes
many pleasant Isles within the town all the which are inhabited.

The ^iuers that pass through this City, are first the Meuse, than the
little river called Liege or Liege, whereof it is thought the town takes
name, and lastly three little brooks, Vte, Vese, and Ambluar, all 3. abounding
with excellent good fish, but especially Vte has one sort of excellent
delicate fish above all the rest, called Vtins

Farther in this town are many clear springs and fountains, and that in such
abundance that some houses are furnished with two or three.

This city is very great and large, comprehending hills, valleys, rivers, and
many vine grounds, so that the Lord of Argenton compares it in greatness to
Rouen, accounting it to comprehend in circuit four Italian miles.

The buildinges of this town are very fair, being all of stone, but above
all the rest the Bishops palace is very stately and sumptuous, though
unfinished as yet.

But in number of churches, and beauty and riches of those churches, in
monasteries and conuents this town passes all the towns, either of France or
of high and low Allemaine. For there are in it 8. collegial churches of canons,
yt which canons are very rich and of great reputation, especially those of S.
Lambert the patron of ye town, who join with the Bishop in the government of
the state, and in the which church none can be admitted a canon, except he be a
gentleman or a doctor or licenciate, and the canons of this church may give
over their place and go furthe and marry till they have taken the order of
Pries^ hood.

In this church of S. Lambert, among diuc^^ other rich Jewels and relics, is
to be seen a great image of S. George on horse back all of pure gold, which
Charles Duke of Burgundy gave for amends of his hard handeling of this
City, when he took it by force.

There are in this town four rich Abbeyes, having every one a goodly
library, the principal whereof is the Abbey of S. Laurence. There are three
Nu^ries, and all the four orders of Fri^^, some of the which have two
Conuente^. There are 32. parish churches, and so many other churches,
monasteries and hospitals, within and without the town that the churches are
accounted in all above 100.

Farther, there are 32. companies in this City which have so great authority
in the government of the state, that without their consent, nothing can be
concluded nor agreed on.

The city is replenished with people, but those very idle, yet fierce and
naturally inclined to arms.

This town has also produced many learned men.

The Liegeoys language is French, but very corrupt.

This city is Imperial, but their tenure is only (...) furnish the Emperor
of a few men in his wars against the Turk.

The Bishop is lord spiritual and temporal both of the town and country,
but the people have so large privileges, that they live almost in perfect
liberty and freedom.

Their appeals spiritual go to Colin, who is their primate, and from thence
to Rome. Their temporal appeals to the Imperial chamber at Spire.

This city flourished more in times past than now it does, for Hubert Thomas
writes that at one time were students here, nine kings children, 24 Dukes
children, 29 Earls children, besides a number of Barons and Gentlemen's
children: the greatest part of the which wear Cannons of the rich College of
S. Lambert above mentioned.

This city was first destroyed by the Danes and Normans, and lastly by
Charles Duke of Burgundy, An. 1468. yet now it is reedified again and much
enlarged.

Buillon is a good castle standing wonderful artificially upon the point of
a hill, with a great bourg under it, which sometime was a fair town. The castle
is large and well fortified, and so strong both by art and nature, that it was
held for imprenable: notwithstanding it has been taken four times, and
lastly by the French, An. 1552.

This castle has the title of a Duchy, and has under it a great country
and a large jurisdiction. It was the inheritance of the valiant Godfrey, who
did so many worthy exploites against the Turks, and was the first Christian
king of Jerusalem, after the Christians last conquest thereof. He sold this
duchy to the bishop of Liege, to furnish him when he took his journey into
the holy land, so that the duchy is now the bishop of Lieges, yet the Lord
of Sedan as heir of the house of La March pretends Title to it, but by the
last treaty, Anno 1559. it was restored to the bishop of Liege, but without
prejudice of the said Lord of Sedans claim thereunto.

Francimont is a Marquisat, having Justice and Seniorie. It was sometime a
walled town, now but a Village, yet has it a strong fort, bu^lte by Erard
Cardinal and Bishop of Liege. Near to this place is a Village called Thou,
where are many leaden mines of very good metal, and quarries of excellent
black marbell, such as is described in Namur.

Lootz in Dutch Borchloon, is a county with a large territory and
jurisdiction under it, and was a county in Charlemaines time, bearing the
title of the County of Diostein, of some earl that had possessed it being of
that name. It was given to Oger the Dane so famous in Ariosto. It is now but a
pretty little town.

Borckworm stands upon the Iecker. It is a pretty town well peopled, and
the pryncipall town of the County of Hasbain.

Tongres stands also upon the Iecker which at Maestricht enters into the
Mauze. Out of this town issued the ancestors of Charlemain It was the first
town that received Christian religion 101. years after Christ's death. This
town was sometime great and mighty, and the Metropolitan of all the towns
that the people of Germany called Tongres conquered in these parts. It was
also an Episcopal sea, but the sea was first transported to Maestricht and
after to Liege. This city was destroyed by Attila K. of the Huns, who also
destroyed in it 100. churches, so large and fair was the city than: but now
it is a very small town not worthy to be mentioned, save only for the
ruins, which make show of the ancient magnificence thereof.

At Tongres is a marvelous causie, heretofore all paued with goodly stone, as
also yet it is in many places, and raised up of wonderful heighte between two
walls, and reaches from this town to Paris, which is above 200. Italian miles.
The thing is so wonderful and seems so far above the power of man, that the
people of the country have devised that the Devil built it in three days and
three nights, but in truth it was some ancient work of the Romans, who
throughout their empire employed their subjects in such buil dings, to keep
them from idleness which is the mother of sedition and civil war.

At Tongres is also a church sometime dedicated to Hercules where his statue is
yet to see, which is (...) argument of the great antiquity of this town.

In this town is also weekly a goodly (...) market, whither many horses come
to be sold, (...) well out of All^^ai^^ as out of these low con^eyes.

Hubert Thomas w^^teth that the Sea came sometime to this tow^^, but Guicciardin
by many strong reasons disproueth his opinion as impossible to be true.

Eight Leagues from Tongres and five from L^ege, is the village of Spa, within
half a league where of is the fountain, so famous through the world for the
vor^ues that it has to (...) the tertion ague, the dropsy, the stone, the
exulceration of the longues, the Sciatique, and all diseases of the stomach and
liver. Pliny. lib. 31. cap. 2. writes this fountain to have been at Tongres
belike because the magnificence of Tongres being than a statelye town and the
head of that quarter, gave the name to the whole country that was subject to
it: for Tungriciuitas as Pli^i^ terms it, is the name as well of the whole
country as of the town. This village of Spa is in a fair wood, being part of
the Forest of Ardannes. The fou^^taine most commended (for there are diverse in
the country of Lieg^ and the Marquisat of Francim^nt, of diverse properties) is
called La fo^taine d^ Saueni^^, ye water whereof tastes of iron, belike because
all the earth through the which the water p^sseth, i^ full o^ Iron mines. In
July the water is of most virtue, because that is the hottest time of the
year, and in the greatest heat the water is of most effica^ye.

Hoey was sometime a famous city. It bears the name of a surious river that
here runs into the Meuse. The Meuse passes thorough the midst of the
town, and parts it in twain, having built over it a wonderful goodly
bridge. The town is now in reasonable good estate, having a strong fortress
built in it, by the above named Erarde Cardinal of Liege. The country about
it abounds with iron myne^ and cattle.

Hasselt stands upon the river Demere. It is a reasonable good town and well
built. Near to this is the fair Village of Curi^ghen, where the above named
Cardinal has built a stately palace, whither the Bishop with his train
goes often to solace and refresh himself, so pleasant and delectable is the
place.

Dinan stands upon the Meuze. It was once a famo^s town and of good
traffic, but Charles the last Duke of Burgundy utterly destroyed it, and
being repaired again, Henry the second king of France, An. 1554. took it
again, and sacked it and destroyed the Castle. Yet now it is reedified and the
Castle also, for it is seated in a very good country, abounding with black
Marble and mines of iron, and quarreyes of other goodly stone to build with,
so that the Merchants of the town are veryrich and trade abroad in the world
even into England.

Maeseick is a reasonable good town standing upon the Meuze. A league from
this town is the fair place and Nunrie of Thoren, into the which none can be
received but noble men's daughters and gentlemen's of noble and ancient
houses, like to the Nunrie of Montz. These Nuns may marry al save the Abbess,
who has jurisdiction both spiritual and temporal over a great country and is
under the protection of the Empire. This monastery has a goodly reuenew, and
such pre-eminence that it coyneth money both of silver and gold.

Stockem is a proper little town standing upon the Meuse, repaired by the
foresaid Cardinal De la March Bishop of Liege.

Bilsen Is a very little town, a quarter of a league from the which is a
village in the Territory of Liege, standing upon the Demer called Munster
Bilsen, where is such a num^ic of Gentlewomen that may marry, as has often
been described before, and the Abbess thereof having such jurisdiction, as is
before said of the abbess of Thoren. This monastery is very fair and large,
and the church of wonderful architecture. In this convent is a whole Unicorns
horn, said to be brought thither by a Nun of the place, daughter to a Duke
of Britain. The horn is 6. foot and a half long.

Near to this place is lately marked out a chanel, to join the Demere and the
Meuze together at a place called Smermase, somewhat beneath Maestricht. This
channel shallbee twoe leagues in length, by the which with singular ease and
commodity botes may pass from the Meuze into the Demer, from thence into the
Dele, and so into the Rupel, than into the Scheld and so into the sea.

S. Truden or Centron is a fair town, their language is Flemish though they
be subject to the bishop of Liege. In this town is the abbey of S. Truden,
whereof the town takes name, which is a very rich abbey, the Abbot being
Lord of one half of the town, and the Bishop of the other. Near to this
town is also the noble and rich commanderie of Bernsem.

Tuin or Touin stands in Haynault, but is subject to the bishop of Liege. It
is a reasonable good town, near to the which in the jurisdiction of Liege,
are two goodly and rich abbeys, namely Asue and Lobbe.

Viset, Varem, Beringhem, Herck, Bree, Per, Hamont, Siney, Fosse, Couines, are
all reasonable towns and of some account.

Description of the Villages.
Florene was sometime a pretty town but destroyed by the French in the last
wars, and remains still in that estate.

Cerey is now a goodly for^^esse, (...) by the said Cardinal de la M^^che.

(...) is thought to haut been the principal town in (...) paste of the
people (...), though now but a village. In this place are (...) of very good
b^^msto^e.

H^^stal or Heristel. Of this village Pepin the (...) took his surname, and in
this place and (...) another here to it called I^pili^, are goodly stateli^
palaces to be seen, whither th^s princ^^ (...) and Charles the great often
resorted to solace themselves, because the Countreye (...) out is the
hol^^m^st, the fruitst^^est and the pleasantest, for air, rivers, wood^, hills,
vall^yes, Vines, Fruite^^, Ve^ison, Fish, Foul, and all kind of princely
sports that may be seen.

This Bishopric of L^ege was first erected by Hubert son to Be^t^^nde Duke
of Aquicain^, who being at Rome was made by the Pope bishop of M^estrich^ in
place of saint Lambert, whom his people of Maestricht had ma^tyred (...). 710.
But he being come to M^^stricht so much detested the people for the foresaid
murder, that he transported his Episcopal^ Sea to L^^ge, and there built the
church of S. L^mbert and the College before mentioned, an^ all this with the
Pope Constantins consent, Anno. 713. and here at Liege he died and was (...) a
(...) numbered 57. Bishop^ of Liege.

The Bishop is chosen by the chapter of saint Lambert, confirmed by the people,
and lastly approved by the Pope. He is not only a bishop, but also a prince of
the Empire. Duke of Buillon Marquis of Francimont, and earl of Lootz and
Hasbain.

The revenues of this Bishopric are above 30000. ducats, besides the
benevolence of his subjects (which is a great matter if he use them well) and
his spiritual jurisdiction and an infinite number of Prebends, benifices and
offices which he bestows at his pleasure.

A Discourse of the great difference between the Country and people of Liege,
and the Country and Citizens of Aix, notwithstanding that they be but six
Leagues distant, and both under one climat.
LIege is subject, Aix lives in liberty, but both under the protection of the
Empire. At Liege they speak French, at Aix dutch. The Liegeois are pleasant
and companable, they of Aix melancholy and unsociable. To conclude they differ
in every point as much as the French and the Dutch which is very much. Yea
the very air and soil (...) the same difference though they be both under
one climat. For it is summer at Liege when it is Winter at Aix, fruits and
corn are ripe at Liege when they be very unripe at Aix: yea oftentimes such
difference there is of the season and disposition of the air that it is Ice
and snow at Aix when no such thing is seen at Liege.

Description of Aix in Latin Aquisgranum.
AIx is situated between the Dutchies of Brabant, Limbourg, Iulliers, and the
bishopric of Liege.

The Citizens of Aix hold Charlemaine for their founder. The said Charlemaine
ordained Aix to be the chief seat of the Empire and realm of France on this
side the mountains, and that the king of Romans should receive the ^^on
crown at Aix, of the Archbishop of Colin who is metropolitan thereof, the
silver Crown at Millan, and the Imp^riall crown of Gold at Rome.

At this town of Aix died Charlemaine, an. 813. and lies buried in our Lady
church.

Ai^ is a good town and the country about (...) very f^uitfull and pleasant,
but the buildinges of the town are nothing answereable to the fame of the
place, save the hot bathes which are very fair built, and very wholesome for
many diseases.

Aix is an imperial town, but paieth small tribute to the Empire, otherwise
lives in freedom and has the Duke of Cleues for protector, next neighbor
and perpetual confederate.

All the rest of the Authors discourse of Aix concerns the translation of the
Empire to the Germans, and the form of the election and coronation of the
Emperor, which because it is impertinent to this discourse of the Low contreys
and may be read more at large in other good Authors, I pass over in silence.

FINIS.
Corrections of Faults escaped. in the printing.
Read

(...) fol. 6, pa. 1, lin. 14. come. fol. 7. pa. 2. li, 8. 16. 27. and (...).
1. li. 4. Mormault, fol. 12. pa. 2. li, 1. rampar. so. 16 (...) moneys. fol.
16, pa. 2. li. 27. Aremberghe. fol. 19 pa. 1. li. ^5. Lieu^^nant^ and other
officers. fol. 19. pa. ^. li. 24. use. fol. 25. pa. 2. li. 11. Baru^. fo. 27.
pa. 1. li. 22. also. fol. 30. pa. 1. line. 8. our of* fol. 35. page. 1. li^.
22. Guyne, fo. 38. pa. 2. li. 10. Hulpen. (...), fol. 47. page 1. li^e. 21.
Gheelmuyden. fol. 56. page 2. li. 7. Iselstein, so. 64. pa. 1. line. 19.
Grauesand, fo. 68. pa. 1. li. 5. (...). fo. 69. pa. 1. li. 15. wear, fol. 69,
pa, 1. li. 26, Vtrecht the fol. ^1. pa, 1. li, 26. Du^^lande. fo. 73, pa. 1.
li. 18. auncientest. fo. 74, pa. 1. li. 14. of, fo. 95, pa, 2. li. 3. Ne^le,
fo. 95, pa, 2. li. 5. many clothes. fol, 87. pa. 2. vlt. Montz, fol. 90. pa,
1. li. 7. Menin. fol. (...). page ^. li. 1. A^rebat^m. fo. 96. pa. 1. li, 19.
Artesians, fol. 100 pa. 1. li. 4. Mormault. fo, 101. pa. 2. li. 12. Conde, fol.
10^. page 2. li. 28. Maubeuge, fo. 101. pa. 2. li. 30. Bauais, fo. 101, page.
2, vlt S^igny, fo, 102, pa. 1. li. 1. Lalaign, fo. 102, pa, 1. li. 7. Glaion,
fol* 1^2. pa. 1. li. 8. and immediately after that read Trasegnie, quit^ left
out. many reasons, fol. 106. (...) 1, 27, Fole^mbray, fol. 106. pa, 2, li, 14.
Lassine, fo. 107, p. 1. li. 20. Mommedy, fo. 111. p, 1. l. 14*


