A MYRROVRE For Magistrates. Wherein may be seen by example of other, with how
grievous plages vices are punished: and how frail and unstable worldly
prosperity is found, even of those, whom Fortune seems most highly to
favor.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum,
Anno. 1559. LONDINI, In aedibus Thomae Marshe.

Love and Lyve. To the nobilitye and all other in office, God grant wisdom
and all things nedeful for the preseruacion of their Estates. Amen.
PLATO Among many other of his notable sentences concerning the government of a
common weal, has this: Well is that realm governed, in which the ambicious
desyer not to bear office. Whereby you may perceive (right honorable) what
offices are, where they be duly executed: not gaynful spoils for the gredy to
hunt for, but payneful toils for the heedy to be charged with. You may
perceyve also by this sentence, that there is nothing more necessary in a
common weal, than that officers be diligent and trusty in their charges. And
sure in whatsoever realm such provision is made, that officers be forced to do
their duties, there is it as hard a matter to get an officer, as it is in
other places to shift of, and put by those, that with flattery, br^bes, and
other shifts, sue and preace for offices. For the ambicious (that is to say
prollers for power or gain) seek not for offices to help other, for which
cause offices are ordained, but with the undoing of other, to pranke up them
selves. And therefore bar them once of this bayre, and force them to do their
duties, and they will geve more to be rid fro their charges, than they did at
the first to bye them: For they seek only their commodity and ^ase. And
therefore, where the ambicious seek no office, there no doubt, offices are duly
ministered: and where offices are duly ministered, it ca^ not be chosen, but the
people are good, whereof must needs follow a good common weal. For if the
officers be good, the people can not be ill. Thus the goodness or badnes of any
realm lies in the goodness or badnes of the rulers. And therefore not without
great cause do the holy Apostels so earnestly charge us to pray for the
magistrates: For in deed the wealth and quiet of everye common weal, the
disorder also and miseries of the same, cum specicially through them. I need
not go either to the Romans or Greeks for proof hereof, neither yet to the
Jews, or other na^ions: whose commonweals have always flourished while their
officers were good, and decayed and ran to ruin, when noughty men had the
regiment, Our own country stories (if we read and mark them) will show us
examples ynow, would God we had not seen more then ynowe. I purpose not to stand
here upon the particulers, because they be in part set forth in the tragedyes.
Yet by the way this I note (wishing all other to do the like) namely, that as
good governers have never lacked their deserved renown, fo have not the bad
escaped infamy, besides such plages as are horrible to hear of

For God (the ordeyner of Offices) although he suffer them* punishment of the
people to be often occupied of such, as are rather spoilers and Iudasses, than
toylers or Justices (whom the scripture therefore calls Hipacrites) yet
suff^eth he them not to skape vnpu^ished, because they dishonor him. For it is
Gods own office, yea his chief office, which they bear and abuse. For as
Justice is the chief virtue, so is the ministracion thereof, the chiefest
office: and therefore has God established it with the chiefest name, hon^ring
and calling Kings, and all officers under the^ by his own name, Gods. Ye be
all Gods, as many as have in your charge any ministracion of Justice. What a
foul shame were it for any now to take upon them the name and office of God,
and in their doings to show them selves divyls? God can not of Justice, but
plage such shameless presumption and hipocrisy, and that with shameful death,
diseases, or infamy. How he has plaged evil rulers from time to time, in
other nations, you may see gathered in Boccas book entitled the fall of
Princes, translated into English by Lydgate: How he has dealt with sum of our
countrymen your ancestors, for sundry vices not yet left, this book named A
Myrrour for Magistrates, can show: which therefore I humbly offer unto your
honors, beseching you to accept it favorably. For here as in a loking glass, you
shall see (if any vice be in you) how the like has been punished in other
heretofore, whereby admonished, I trust it will be a good occasion to move you
to the sooner amendment. This is the chiefest end, why it is set f^rth, which
God grant it may attain.

The wurke was begun, and part of it (...).iiii. year ago, but hyndred by the
lord Chancellor that then was, nevertheles, through ye means of my lord
Stafford, lately perused and licenced. When I first took it in hand, I had the
help of many granted, and offered of sum, but of few performed, s^arce of
any: So that where I intended to have continued it to Queen Mary's time, I have been ^ame to end it much sooner: yet so, that it may stand for a patarne, till
the rest be ready: which with Gods grace (if I may have any help) shall be
shortly. In the mean while my lords and gods (for so I may call you) I most
humbly beseech you, favorably to accept this rude myrrour, and diligently to
read and consider it. And although you shall find in it, that sum have for
their virtue been envied and murdered, yet cease not you to be virtuous, but do
your offices to the uttermost: punish sin boldly, both in your selves and
other, so shall God (whose lieutenauntes you are) either so maintain you, that
no malice shall prevail, or if it do, it shall be for your good, and to your
eternal glory both here and in heaven, which I beseech God you may covet and
attain. Amen.

Yours most humble, William Baldvvin.

A Brief Memorial of sundry Unfortunate English men. William Baldwin to the
Reader.
When the Printer had purposed with him self to printe L^dgates book of the
fall of Princes, and had made priuye thereto, many both honorable and
worshipful, he was counseled by diverse of them, to procure to have the
storye contynewed from where as Bochas left, unto this present time, chiefly
of such as Fortune had dalyed with here in this ylande: which might be as a
myrrour for all men as well noble as others, to show the slyppery deceytes of
the waueryng lady, and the due reward of all kind of vices. Which advise
lyked him so well, that he required me to take pains therein: but because it
was a matter passing my wit and skyll, and more thankles than gaineful to
meddle in, I refused utterly to undertake it, except I might have the help of
such, as in wit were apt, in learning allowed, and in judgment and
estymacion able to wield and furnysh so weighty an enterprise, thinkyng even so
to shut my hands. But he earnest and diligent in his affairs, pr^^iued A^hles
^o set under his shoulder: for shortly after, diverse learned men whose many
gifts need few praises, consented to take upon them part of the travail.
And when certain of them to the number of seven, were through a gene^all
ass^nt at a^ appointed time and place gathered together to deuyse thereupon, I
resorted unto them, bering with me the book of Bochas, translated by Dan
Lidgate, for the better obseruacion of his order: which although we lyked
well, yet would it not cu^n^^ly serve, seeing that both Bochas and Lidgate
were dead, neither were there any alive that meddled with like arg^ment, to
whom the unfortunate might make their move.

To make therefore a state mete for the matter, they al agreed that I should
usurp Bochas rowme, and the wretched princes complain unto me: and took upon
themselves every man for his part to be sundry personages, and in their
behalfes to bewail unto me their grievous chances, heavy destunes, and woeful
misfortunes.

This done, we opened such books of Cronicles as we had there present, and
master Ferrers, after he had found where Bochas left, which was about the
end of king Edward the thirdes reign, to begin the matter, said thus.

I marvel what Bochas means to forget among his miserable princes, such as
were of our nation, whose number is as great, as their adventures wunderful: For
to let pass all, both Britons, Danes, and Saxons, and to cum to the last
Conquest, what a sort are they, and sum even in his own time? As for example,
king Richard the first, slain with a quarlle in his chief prosperity, also
king John his brother as sum say, poisoned: are not their histories rufull and
of rare example? But as it should appear, he being an Italien, minded most
the Roman and Italike story, orels perhaps he wanted our country chronicles.
It were therefore a goodlye and a notable matter to search and dyscourse our
whole storye from the first beginning of the inhabitynge of the isle. But ^e^nge
the printers mind is to have us follow where Lidgate left, we will leave that
great labor to other that may intend it, and (as blind bayarde is always
boldest) I will begin at the time of Richard the second, a time as unfortunate
as the ruler therein. And forasmuch friend Baldvvin, as it shall be your charge
to note, and pen orderly the whole process, I will so far as my memory and
judgment serves, sumwhat further you in the truth of the story. And therefore
omytting the ru^^le made by Jack Straw and his meyny, and the mourder of many
notable men which thereby happened, for Jack (as ye know) was but a poor
prince: I will begin with a notable example which within a while after ensued.
And although he be no great prince, yet sythens he had a princelye office, I
will take upon me the miserable person of sir Robert Tresilian chief Justice
of England, and of other which suffered with him: thereby to warn all of his
authorytie and profession, to take heed of wrong Judgments, mysconstruyng of
laws, or wrestyng the same to serve the princes tu^nes, which ryghtfullye
brought them to a miserable end, which they may justly lament in manner
ensuyng.

The fall of Robert Tresilian chief Justice of England, and other his
fellows, for misconstruyng the laws* and expounding them to serve the
Princes affections.
IN the rufull Register of mischief and mishap,
Baldwin we beseech thee with our names to begin,
Whom unfriendly Fortune did train unto a trap,
When we thought our state most stable to have bin,
So lightly leese they all which all do ween to win:
Learn by us ye Lawyers and Judges of the land
Incorrupt and vpryght in doom always to stand.
And print it for a president to remain for ever,
Enroll and record it in tables made of brass,
Engraue it in marble that may be razed never,
Where Judges and Iusticers may see, as in a glass,
What fee is for falshode, and what our wages was
Who for our princes pleasure corrupt with meed and awe
wittyngly and wretchedly did wrest the sense of law.
A change more new or strange seldom has he seen
Then from the benche above to cum down to the bar:
was never state so turned in no time as I wee^,
As they to becum clye^tes that counsaylours erst were,
But such is Fortunes play, which featly can prefer
The judge that sat above, full low beneth to stand,
At the bar a prisoner holding up his hand.
Which in others cause could stoutly speak and plead,
Both in court and country, careless of the trial,
Stand m^^t like mummers without advise or read,
Unable to utter a true plea of denial:
Which have seen the day when that for half a ^yall,
We could by very art have made the black seem white,
And matters of most wrong, to have appeared most right.
Behold me unfortunate forman of this flock,
Tresilian sumtime chief Justice of this land,
By descent a gentleman, no stain was in my stock,
Loketon, Holt, and Belknap, with other of my bands
Which the law and justice had wholly in our hands
Under the second Richard a prince of great estate,
To whom froward fortune gave a foul checkmate.
In the common laws our skill was so profounde,
Our credit and authority such and so esteemed,
That what so we concluded was taken for a ground,
Allowed was for law, what so to us best seemed:
Lyle, death, lands, goods, and all by us was demed,
Whereby with easy pain, so great gain we did get,
That every thing was fish that came unto our net.
At sessions and at syses we bare the stroke and swey,
In patentes and commissions of Quorum, always chiefe^
So that to whether side so ever we did wey,
Were it right or wrong it past without repriefe,
We let hang the true man somwhiles to save a thief
Of gold and of silver our hands were never emptye,
Offices, terms, and fees, tell to us in great plentye.
But what thing may suffyse unto the gredye man^
The more he has in hold, the more he does desire,
Happy and twice happy is he that wisely can
Content him self with that which reason does require,
And moyleth for no more then for his needful hyre:
But gredynes of mind does never keep the syse,
Which though it have enough yet does it not suffyse.
For like as dropsye pacientes drink, and still be dry,
Whose v^staunched thyrst no lyquor can allaye.
And drink they never so much yet still for more they cry:
So covetous catchers toil both night and day,
Gredy and ever nedy prollyng for their pray.
O endless thyrst of gold corrupter of all laws,
What mischief is on molde whereof thou art not cause?
Thou modest us forget the faith of our profession,
When sergeantes we were sworn to serve the common law.
Which was that in no point we should make digression
From approved principles in sentens nor in saw:
But we unhappy wretches without all dread and awe
Of the Judge eternal, for worlds vain promocion,
More to man than God did bear our hole devotion.
The laws we interpreted and statutes of the land,
Not truly by the text, but nuly by a gloss:
And w^rds that were most plain when they by us were s^and^
We turned by construction like a welchmans hose,
Whereby many one both life and land did lose:
Yet this we made a mean to mount aloft on mules.
To serve kings in all p^intes men must sumwhile break rules.
Thus clymyng and contendyng always to the top
From hye unto higher, and than to be most hye,
The hunny dew of Fortune so fast on us did drop
That of king Richards counsel we came to be full nigh:
To crepe into whose favor we were ^^ll fine and slye
Always to his pro^i^e where any wurde might sound
That way (all were it wrong) the sens we did expounnde.
So wurkyng law like ware, the subject was not sure
Of life, land, nor goods, but at the princes will:
Which caused his kingdom the shorter time to dure,
For clayming power absolute both to save and spyll,
The prince thereby presumed his people for to pyll:
And set his lusts for law, and will had reasons place,
No more but hang and draw, there was no better grace.
The king thus transcending the lymittes of his law,
Not raygning but raging by youthful insolence,
Wise and wurthy persons, did fro the court withdraw,
There was no grace n^ place for ancient prudence.
Presumcion and pride with excess of expense
Possessed the palace, and pillage the country:
Thus all went to wrack, unlike of remedy.
The Baronye of England not bearyng this abuse,
Conspyring with the commons assembled by assent,
And seeing neither reason, nor ^reaty, could induce
The king in any thing his Rygor to relent,
Mawgree all his might they called a parlyament
Francke and free for all men without check to debate
As well for weal publyke, as for the princes stare.
In which parlyament much things was proponed
Concerning the regaly and ryghtes of the crown,
By reason king Richard, which was to be moned,
Full little regarding his honor and renown,
By synister advise, had turned all vpsodowne.
For suerty of whose state, them thought it did behooue
His corrupt counsaylours, from him to remove.
Among whom, Robert Uere, called duke of Irelande
with Myghell Delapole of Suffolk new made earl,
Of York also the Archebysshop, dyspatcht were out of hand,
with Brembre of London Mayor* a full discourteous churl,
Sum learned in the law in exyle they did hurl:
But I poor Tresilian because I was the chief
was dampened to the gallows most vyly as a chief.
Lo the fine of falshode, the stypende of corruption,
Fie on stynkyng lucre, of all unright the lure:
Ye Judges and ye Iusticers let my most just punycion,
Teach you to shake of bribes and keep your hands pure.
Riches and promocion be vain things and unsure,
The favor of a prince is an vntrusly stay,
But Justice has a see that shall remain always.
what glory can be greater before god or man,
Then by the paths of equity in judgment to proceed,
So d^l^e and so truly the laws always to skan,
That right may take his place without reward or mede,
Set aparte all flattery and vain worldly dread:
Take god before your eyes (...) just judge supreme,
Remember well your reckeni^g at the day extreme.
Abandon all aff^ay, be soothfast in your sawes,
Be cons^an^ and c^reles of mortal men's dyspleasure,
With eyes sh^^ and hands close you should pronounce the laws
Esteem not worldly ^yre, think there is a treasure
More worth then gold or stone a thousand rymes in valor,
Reposed for all such as righteousness ensue,
Whereof you cannot fail, the promys made is true.
If sum in latter days, had called unto mind
The fatal fall of us for wrestyng of the right,
The statutes of this land they should not have defynde
So wylfully and wyttingly against the sentence quyte:
But though they skaped pain, the falte was nothing light:
Let them that cum hereafter both that and this compare,
And waying well the end, they will I trust beware.
When master Ferrers had finished this tragedye, which seemed not unfit for
the persons touched in the same An other which in the mean time had stayed
upon sir Roger Mortimer, whose miserable end as it should appear, was sumwhat
before the others, said as follows. Although it be not greatly appertinent to
our purpose, yet in my judgment I think it would do well to observe the times
of men, and as they be more aunciente* so to place them* for I find that
before these, of whom master Ferrers here has spoken, there were two
Mortimers, the one hanged in Edward the thirdes time out of our date, another
slain in Irelande in Richard the secondes time, a year before the fall of
these Justices: whose historye sith it is notable and the example fruitful, it
were pity to ouerpasse it. And therefore by your license and agreement, I will
take upon me the personage of the last, who full of wounds, miserably mangled,
with a pale countenance, and grisly look, may make his moan to Baldvvin as
follows.

How the two Rogers, surnamed Mortimers, for their sundry vices ended their
lives vnfortunatelye.
AMong the ryders of the rollyng wheels,
That lost their holds, Baldwin forget not me,
whose fatal threede false Fortune needs would reele,
Ere it were twysted by the systers three.
All folk be frail, their blysses brittle be:
For proof whereof although none other mer,
Suffyse may I, sir Roger Mortimer.
Not he that was in Edwardes days the third,
Whom Fortune brought to boot and efte to bale,
With love of whom the king so much she sturde,
That none but he was heard in any tale:
And whiles she smooth, blewe on this merye gale,
He was created earl of March, alas,
Whence envy sprang which his destruction was.
For wealth bredeth wrath, in such as wealth do want,
And pride with folly in such as it possess,
Among a thousand shall you find him skant,
That can in wealth his loftye heart repress,
Which in this Earl due proof did plain express,
For where he sumwhat hauty was before,
His high degree has made him now much more.
For now alone he rules as him lust,
N^ recketh for read, save of king Edwardes mother:
Which forced envy soulder out the rust,
That in men's hearts before did lie and smother.
The Piers, the people, as well the one as the other,
Against (...) so heinous a complaynt,
That for a traitor he was taken and attaynt.
Then all such faults as were forgot before,
The shower afresh, and samwhat to them ad:
For cruel envy has eloquence in store,
when Fortune byds, to warsse things meanly bad.
Five heinous crimes against him soon were had,
First, that he causde the king to yield the Skot,
To make a peace, towns that were from him got:
And therewithal the charter ^^lled R^gman.
That of the Skots he bribed pryuy gain,
That through his means sir Edward of Carnaruan
In Barkley castle traitorously was slain:
That with his princes mother he had layne.
And finally with pollyng at his pleasure,
Had robde the king and commons of their treasure.
For these things lo which erst were out of mind
He was condemned, and hanged at the last,
In whom dame Fortune fully showed her kind,
For whom she heaves, she hurleth down as fast:
If men to cum would learn by other past,
This cosen of mine might cause them set aside,
High clymyng, brybyng, murdring, lust, and pride.
The fynall cause why I this process tell,
Is that I may be known from this other,
My like in name, unlike me though he fell,
Which was I think my graund sier or his brother:
To count my kyn, dame Philip was my mother,
Dear daughter and heir of douty Lyonell,
The second son of a king that did excel.
My father hight sir Edmunde Mortimer,
True earl of March, whence I was after earl
By just descent, these two my parents were,
Of which the one of knighthoode bare the ferle,
Of womanhoode the other was the perle:
Through their deserte so called of every wight,
Till death them took, and left in me their right.
For why the attaynder of my elder Roger,
(whose shameful death I told you but of late)
was found to be unjust, and passed over
Against the law, by those that bare him hate.
For where by law the lowest of free estate
Should personally be heard ere judgment pass,
They barred him this, where through distroyed he was.
wherefore by doom of court in parlyament,
when we had proved our cosen ordered thus,
The King, the Lords, and Commens of assent,
His lawles death unlawful did discus:
And both to blood and good restored us.
A Presydent most worthy, showed, and left
Lords lives to save that lawles might be rest.
while Fortune thus did further me amayne
King Rychardes grace the second of the name
(whose dissolute life did soon abridge his rain)
Made me his mate in earnest and in game:
The Lords them selves so well allowed the same,
That throw my tytles duly cummyng down,
I was made heir apparaunt to the crown.
who then but I was every where esteemed?
well was the man that might with me acquaynte,
whom I allowed, as Lords the people demed.
To what so ever folly had me bente,
To like it well the people did assente:
To me as prince, attended great and small,
In hope a day would cum to pay for all.
But seldom joy continues trouble void,
In greatest charge cares greatest do ensue,
The most possessed are ever most anoyed,
In largest seas sore tempests lightly brue,
The fresshest colors soonest fade the hue,
In thyckest place is made the depest wound,
True proof whereof my self to soon have found.
For whiles that Fortune lulde me in her lap,
And gave me gifts mo than I did require,
The sub^yll qucan behind me set a trap,
whereby to dashe and lay all in the mire:
The Iryshe men against me did conspyre,
My lands of Ulster fro me to have reft,
which heritage my mother had me left.
And whiles I there, to set all things in stay,
(Omyt my toils and troubles thitherwarde)
Among mine own with my retinue lay,
The wylder men whom little I did regard,
And had therefore the recheles man's reward:
When least I thought set on me in such number,
That fro my corpse my life they rent a sunder.
Naught might avail my courage nor my force,
Nor strength of men which were alas to sewe:
The cruel folk assaulted so my horse,
That all my helps in pieces they to hew,
Our blood distayned the ground as drops of dew,
Naught might prevail to flee nor yet to yield,
For whom they take they murdre in the fyelde.
They know no law of arms nor none will learn:
They make not war (as other do) a play,
The lord, the boy, the Calloglas, the kerne,
Yield or not yield, whom so they take they slay,
They save no prisoners, for raunsom nor for pay:
Their chiefest boot they count their bodohs head,
Their end of war to see their enmye dead.
Amongst these men or rather savage beasts,
I lost my life, by cruel murder slame.
And therefore Baldwin note thou well my geastes,
And warn all princes rashness to refrain:
Bid them beware their enmies when they saine,
Nor yet presume unequally to strive,
Had I thus done, I had been man alive.
But I dispysed the naked Iryshmen.
And for they flewe, I feared them the less:
I thought one man enough to match with ten,
And through this careless vnadvisednesse,
I was destroyed, and all my men I guess,
At unawares assaulted by our foen,
Which were in number forty to us one.
Se here the stay of fortunate estate,
The vain assurance of this britell life,
For I but young, proclaimed prince of late,
Right fortunate in children and in wife,
Lost all at once by stroke of bloody knife:
Whereby assurde let men them selves assure,
That wealth and life are doubtful to endure.
AFter that this Tragedy was ended, master Ferrers said: seeing it is best to
place each person in his order, Baldvvin take you the Chronicles and mark them
as they cum: for there are many wurthy to be noted, though not to be treated
of. First the lord Morif a Scotishman, who took his deaths wound through a
stroke lent him by the earl of Notingham whom he challenged at the tilte. But to
omit him, and also the fat Prior of Tiptre, preaced to death with throng of
people upon London bridge at the Queen's entry, I will cum to the duke of
Glocestre the kings uncle, a man much mynding the common weal, and yet at
length miserably made away, In whose person if ye will give ear, ye shall
hear what I think mete to be said.

How sir Thomas of VVudstocke Duke of Gloucester, uncle to king Richard the
second, was vnlavvfully murdered.
WHose state is stalysht in semyng most sure,
And so far from danger of Fortunes blast,
As by the compass of man's conjecture,
No brazen pyller may be fyxte more fast:
Yet wantyng the stay of prudent forecast,
When froward Fortune list for to frown,
May in a moment turn vpsyde down.
In proof whereof, O Baldwin, take pain
To hearken awhyle to Thomas of Wudstocke,
Addressed in presence his fate to complain,
In the forlorn hope of the Englysh flock:
Extracte by descent from the royal stock,
Son to king Edward third of that name,
And second to none in glory and fame.
This noble father to maynteyne my state,
With Buckyngham Erldom did me indowe,
Both Nature and Fortune to me were grate,
Denyeng nothing which they might allow:
Their sundry graces in me did so flow,
As bewty, strength, high favor and fame.
Who may of God more wysh than the same?
Brothers we were to the number of seven,
I being the syxt, and youngest but one^
A more royal race was not under heaven,
More stowte or more stately of stomach and person,
Princes all pereles in each condition:
Namely sir Edward called the black prince,
When had England the like before either since?
But what of all this, any man to assure,
In state vncarefull of Fortunes varyaunce?
Sith daily and hourly we see it in ure,
That where most cause is of affyaunce,
Even there is found most weak assurance*
Let none trust Fortune, but follow Reason:
For often we see in trust is treason.
This proverb in proof over true I tried,
Finding high treason in place of high trust.
And most fault of faith where I most affyed:
Being by them, that should have been just,
Traitorously entrapt, ere I could mystrust.
Ah wretched world what it is to trust thee,
Let them that will learn now hearken unto me.
After king Edward the thyrdes decease,
Succeeded my Nephewe Richard to reyne,
Who for his glory and honors increase,
With princely wagies did me enterteyne,
Against the Frenchmen to be his Chyefreyne:
So passing the seas with royal puissaunce,
With God and S. George I invaded France.
Wasting the country with swurde and with fire,
Ouerturning towns, high castles and towers,
Like Mars God of war enflamed with ire,
I forced the Frenchmen tabaddon their bowers:
Where ever we matched I wan at all hours,
In such wise visyting both City and village,
That always my soldiers were laden with pillage.
With honor and triumph was my return,
Was none more joyous than young king Richard:
Who minding more highly my state to adourne,
with Gloucester Dukedom did me reward:
And after in marriage I was prefarde,
To a daughter of Bohan an earl honorable,
By whom I was of England high Constable.
Thus hoysted so high on Fortunes wheel,
As one on a stage attendyng a play,
Sees not on which side the scaffolde does reele,
Till timber and poales, and all flee away:
So fared it by me, for day by day,
As honor increased I looked still hyer,
Not seeing the danger of my fond desyer.
For when Fortunes slud ran with full stream,
I being a Duke descended of Kings,
Constable of England, chief officer in the realm,
Abused with esperaunce in these vain things,
I went without feet, and flewe without wings:
Presumyng so far upon my high state
That dread set aparte, my prince I would mate.
For where as al kings have counsel of their choice
To whom they refer the rule of their land,
With certain famyliers in whom to rejoice,
For pleasure or profyt, as the case shall stand,
I not bearyng this, would needs take in hand,
Maulgree his will those persons to dysgrace,
And such as I thought fyt to appoint in their place.
But as an old book says, who so will assaye,
About the Cats neck to hang on a bell,
Had first need to cut the Cats claws away,
Least if the Cat be cursed, or not tamed well,
She happily with her nails may clawe him to the fell:
For doing on the bell about the cats neck,
By being to busy I caught a sore check.
Read well the sentence of the Rat of renoune,
Which Pierce the plowman discribes in his dream,
And who so has wit the sense to expoune,
Shall find that to bridle the prince of a realm,
Is even (as who says) to strive with the stream:
Note this all subjects, and construe it well,
And busy not your brain about the cats bell.
But in that ye be Lyeges learn to obaye,
Submytting your wylles to your princes laws,
It sytteth not a subject to have his own way,
Remember this bywurde of the Cats claws:
For princes like Lions have long and large paws
That reach at raundon, and whom they once twitch,
They clawe to the bone before the skyn itch.
But to my purpose, I being once bent,
Toward the atchiuyng of my attemptate,
Four bold Barrons were of mine assent,
By oath and allyaunce fastly confederate:
First Henry of Derby, an Earl of estate,
Richard of Arundell, and Thomas of Warwick,
With Mowbray earl Marshall a man most warlicke.
At Ratcote bridge assembled our band,
The Commons in clusters came to us that day,
To dance Robert Uere, then Duke of Irelande,
By whom king Richard was ruled always:
We put him to flight, and brake his array,
Then maulgree the king, his leave or assent,
By Constables power we called a parlyament.
Where not in roabes, but with bastardes bright,
We came for to parle of the Publyke weal,
Confyrming our quarrel, with maine and with might
With swurdes and no wurdes we tried our appeal,
Instead of Reason declaryng our Zeal,
And whom so we knew with the king in good grace
Plainly we deprived him of power and of place.
Sum with short process were banyshe the land,
Sum executed with capytall pain,
Whereof who so list, the whole to understand,
In the parlyament roll it appears plain,
And further how stoutly we did the king strain,
The Rule of his realm wholly to resygne,
To the order of those, whom we did assygne.
But note the sequel of such presumption,
After we had these miracles wrought,
The king enflamed with indignacion,
That to such bondage he should be brought,
Suppressyng the ire of his inward thought:
Studied naught else but how that he might
Be highly revenged of his high dispight.
Aggreued was also this latter offense,
with former matter his ire to renew:
For once at wyndsore I brought to his presence,
The Mayor of London with all his retinue,
To are a reckening of the Realms revenue:
And the soldiers of Breast were by me made bold,
To claim entertainment the town being sold.
These griefs remembered, with all the remnaunt,
Of hate in his heart hourded a treasure,
Yet openly in show made he no semblaunt,
By wurde nor by deed to bear displeasure:
But love days dissembled do never endure,
And who so trusts a foe reconcylde,
Is for the most part always begilde.
For as fire ill quenched will up at a starte,
And sores not well salued do break out of new,
So hatred hydden in an yrefull heart,
Where it has had long season to brewe,
Upon every occasion does easily renew:
Not failing at last, if it be not let.
To pay large usury besides the due det.
Euin so it fared by this friendship fained,
Outwardly sound, and inwardly rotten:
For when the kings favor in semyng was gained,
All old dyspleasures forgyuen and forgotten,
Euin than at a sudden the shaft was shotten,
Which pierced my heart void of mistrust,
Alas that a prince should be so unjust.
For lying at Plasshey my self to repose,
By reason of syckenes which held me full sore:
The king espying me aparte from those,
with whom I confedered in band before,
Thought it not meet, to tract the time more,
But glad to take me at such advantage,
Came to salute me with friendly vysage.
Who having a band bound to his bent,
By color of kyndenes to byset his Eame,
Took time to accomplysh his cruel intent:
And in a small vessel down by the stream,
Conveyed me to Calays out of the realm,
where without process or doom of my years,
Not nature but murder abridged my years.
This act was odious to God and to man,
Yet rygour to cloak in habyte of reason,
By crafty compass devise they can,
Articles nine of right heinous treason:
But doom after death is sure out of season,
For who ever saw so strange a presydent,
As execucion done before judgment.
Thus hate harbored in depth of mind,
By sought occasyon burst out of new,
And cruelty abused the law of kind,
when that the Nephewe the Uncle slew,
Alas king Richard sore may thou rewe:
which by this fact preparedst the way,
Of thy hard destynie to hasten the day.
For blood axeth blood as guerdon dew,
And vengeance for vengeance is just reward,
O ryghteous God thy judgments are true,
For look what measure we other (...),
The same for us again is prepard^:
Take heed ye princes by examples past,
Blood will have blood, either first or last.
When master Ferrers had ended this fruytfull tragedye, because no man was
ready with another, I, having perused the story which came next, said: Because
you shall not say my masters but that I will in sumwhat do my part, I will
under your correction declare the tragedy of the Lord Mowbray, the chief
wurker of the Dukes destruction: who to admonysh all Counsaylers to beware of
flattering princes, or falsely envying or accusyng their Peregalles, may lament
his vices in manner following.

How the Lord Movvbray promoted by King Richard the second, was by him
banyshed the Realm* and dyed miserably in exyle.
THough sorrow and shame abash me to reherc^
My lothsum life and death of due deserved,
Yet that the pains thereof may other perce,
To leave the like, least they be lykely served,
Ah Baldwin mark, I will show thee how I swarued:
Dyssemblyng, Envy, and Flattery, bane that ^e
Of all their hosts, have showed their power on me.
I blame not Fortune though she did her part,
And true it is she can do little harm,
She gydeth goods, she hampreth not the heart,
A virtuous mind is safe from every charm:
Uyce, only vice, with her stout strengthles arm,
Does cause the heart to evil to enclyne,
Which I alas, do find to true by mine,
For where by birth I came of noble kind,
The Mowbrayes heir, a famous house and old,
Fortune I thank her, was to me so kind,
That of my prince I had what so I would:
Yet neither of us was much to other hold,
For I through flattery abused his wanton youth,
And his fond trust augmented my untruth.
He made me first the earl of Notyngham,
And Marshall of the realm, in which estate,
The P^e^s and people sayntly to me came,
with sore complaynt against them that of late
Made officers, had brought the king in hate
By making sale of Justice, right and law,
And living naught, without all dreede or awe.
I gave them aid these euyls to redress,
And went to London with an army strong,
And caused the king against his will oppress
By cruel death, all such ^^led him wrong:
The lord chief Justice suffered these among,
So did the Stuarde of his household head,
The Chauncelour scapte, for he aforehande fled.
These wicked men thus from the king removed,
who best us pleased, succeeded in their place.
For which both king and commons much us loved
But chiefly I with all stood high in grace,
The king ensued my read in every case,
whence self love bred: for glory makes proud,
And pride aye looks alone to be allowde.
wherefore to the end I might alone enioy^
The kings good will I made his lust my law:
And where of late I labored to destroy,
Such flatryng folk as thereto stood in awe,
Now learned I among the rest to clawe*
For pride is such, if it be kindly caught,
As stroyeth good, and styrreth up every naught.
Pride pricketh men to flatter for the pray,
To oppress and pol for mayntenaunce of the same,
To malice such as match vn^thes it may:
And to be brief, pride does the heart inflame,
To fire what myschief any fraud may frame,
And ever at length the euyls by it wrought
Confound the wurker, and bring him unto naught.
Behold in me due proof of every part:
For pride first forced me my prince to flatter
So much, that what so ever pleased his heart,
Were it never so evyll, I thought a lawful matter,
W^^che caused the lords afresh against him clatter,
Because he had his holds beyond sea ^olde,
And seen his soldiers of their wages polde.
Though all these yls were done by my assent,
Yet such was luck, that each man deemed no:
For see the duke of Gloucester for me sent,
With other lords, whose hearts did blede for woe,
To see the Realm so fast to ruin go.
In fault whereof, they said the two dukes were,
The one of York, the other of Lancaster.
On whose remove fro being about the king
We all agreed, and swear a solemn oath,
And while the rest provided for this thing,
I flatter I, to win the praise of troth,
Wretch that I was brake faith and promise both:
For I bewrayed the king their whole intent,
For which unawares they all were taken and shent.
Thus was the warder of the common weal,
The Duke of Gloucester gyltles made away,
With other moo, more wretch I so to deal,
Who through untruth their trust did ill betraye:
Yet by this means obtained I my pray,
Of king and Dukes I found for this such favor
As made me Duke of Norfolk, for my labor.
But see how pride and envy jointly run,
Because my prince did more than me, prefer
Sir Henry Bolenbroke, the eldest sun
Of John of Gaunte, the Duke of Lancaster,
Proud I that would alone be blasyng sterre,
Envyed this Earl, for naught save that the shine,
Of his deserts did glyster more then mine.
To the end therefore his light should be the less,
I slyly sought all shyftes to put it out:
But as the pryze that would the palm tree press,
Does cause the bows sprede larger round about,
So spyte and envy causes glory sprout.
And aye the more the top is ouertrode,
The deper does the sound root sprede abroad.
For when this Henry Earl of Harforde saw,
What spoil the king made of the noble blood,
And that without all Justice, cause, or law:
To suffer him so he thought not sure nor good.
Wherefore to me two faced in a hood,
As touching this, he fully brake his mind,
As to his friend that should remedy find.
But I, although I knew my prince did ill,
So that my heart abhorred sore the same,
Yet myschief so through malice led my will,
To bring this Earl from honor unto shame,
And toward my self, my sovereign to inflame:
That I bewrayed his wurdes unto the king,
Not as a read, but as a most heinous thing.
Thus where my duty bound me to have told,
My prince his fault, and wild him ^o refrain,
Through flattery lo, I did his ill uphold,
which turnde at length both him and me to pain:
Woe, woe, to kings whose counsaylours do feign,
Woe, woe to realms where such are put in trust,
As leave the law, to serve the princes lust.
And woe to him that by his flatteryng read,
Maynteyneth a prince in any kind of vice:
woe wurth him eke for envy, pride, or mede,
That mysreportes any honest enterprise,
Because I beast in all these points was nyce,
The plages of all together on me light,
And due, for ill ylldoers does acquit.
For when the Earl was charged with my playnt,
He flat denied that any part was true,
And claymde by arms to answer his attaynt,
And I by use that warly feats well knew,
To his desire incontinently drew:
wherewith the king did seem right well content,
As one that past not much with whom it went.
At time and place appointed we apearde,
At all points armde to prove our quarrels just,
And when our friends on each part had us chearde,
And that the Haroldes had us do our lust,
with spear in rest we took a course to just;
But ere our horses had run half their way,
A shoute was made, the king did bid us stay.
And for to avoyde the sheddyng of our blood,
with shame and death, which one must needs have had
The king through counsel of the lords thought good
To banysh both, which judgment strayt was rad:
No maruayle than though both were wroth and sad,
But chiefly I that was exylde for aye*
My enmy straunged but for a ten years day.
The date expirde, when by this doulfull doom
I should depart to lyve in banysht hand,
On pain of death, to England not to coome,
I went my way: the king seasde in his hand,
My offices, my honors goods and land,
To pay the due, as openly he told,
Of mighty sums, which I had from him polde.
See Baldwin see, the salarye of sin,
Mark with what meede vile vices are rewarded.
Through pride and envy I lose both kyth and kynne,
And for my flattring playnte so well regarded,
Exyle and slander are justly me awarded:
My wife and heir lack lands and lawful right
And me their lord made dame Dianaes knight.
If these mishaps at home be not enough,
Adioyne to them my sorrows in exyle:
I went to Almayne first, a land right rough,
In which I found such churlysh folk and vile,
As made me loath my life each other while:
There lo, I learned what it is to be a gest
Abroad, and what to lyve at home in rest.
For they esteem no one man more than each,
They use as well the Lackey as the Lord,
And like their manners churlysh is their speech,
Their lodging hard, their bourd to be abhord:
Their pleyted garments herewith well accord,
All ^agde and frounst, with diverse colors dekt,
They swear, they curse, and drink till they be ^l^kt.
They hate all such as these their manners hate,
Which reason would no wise man should allow:
With these I dwelt, lamenting mine estate
Till at the length they had got knowledge, how
I was exilde because I did auow
A false complaynt against my trusty friend:
For which they named me traitor still vnende,
That what for shame, and what for werynes
I stale fro thence, and went to Uenise town,
Where as I found more ease and frendlynes,
But greater gryefe: for now the great renown
Of Bolenbroke whom I would have put down
Was war^ so great in Britain and in France,
That Uenise: through each man did him auaunce.
Thus lo his glory grew through great despyte
And I thereby increased in defame:
Thus envy ever does her host acquyte
With trouble, anguysh, sorrow, smart and shame,
But sets the virtues of her foe in flame:
To water like, which makes clear the stone,
And soyles it self by running thereupon.
Or ere I had soiurned there a year
Strange tidinges came he was to England goen,
Had taken the king, and that which touched him nere
Enprisoned him, with other of his foen,
And made him yield him up his crown and throne:
When I these things for true by search had tried;
Grief griped me so I pined away and dyed.
Note here the end of pride, so Flateries fine,
Mark the reward of envy and false complaint,
And warn all princes from them to declyne
Lest likely fault do find tho like attaynt.
Let this my life be to them a restraynt,
By others harms who lysteth take no head
Shall by his own learn other better read.
THis tragical example was of all the cumpany well liked, how be it a doubt
was found therein, and that by means of the diversity of the Chronicles* for
where as master Hall whom in this storye we chiefly followed, makes Mowbray
accuser, and Boleynbroke appellant, master Fabian reports the matter quite
contrary, and that by the report of good authors, making Bokynbroke the
accuser, and Mowbray the appeliant, Which matter since it is more hard to
desise, than needful to our purpose, which mind only to diswade from vices
and exalte virtue, we refer to the determinacion of the Haroldes, or such as
may cum by the records and registers of these doings, contented in the mean
while with the best allowed judgment, and which makes most for our forshewed
purpose. This doubt thus let pass, I would quod one of the cu^pany^ gladly say
sumwhat for king Richard. But his personage is so sore entangled as I think
few bene^ices be at this day: for after his imprisonment, his brother and
diverse other made a mask, minding by Henry's destruction to have restored him,
which maskers matter so runs in this, that I doubt which ought to go before.
But seeing no man is ready to say ought in their behalf, I will give who so
lists leisure to think thervppon, and in the mean time to further your
enterprise, I will in the kings behalf recount such part of his story as I
think most necessary. And therefore imagine Baldvvin that you see him al to be
ma^gled, with blew wounds, lying pale and wanne al naked upon the cold stones
in Paul's church* the people standing round about him, and making his move in
this sort.

How king Richard the second was for his evil governance deposed from
his seat, and miserably murdered in prison.
HAppy is the prince that has in wealth the grace
To follow virtue, keeping vices under,
But woe to him whose will has wisdoms place:
For who so renteth right and law a sunder
On him at length lo, all the world shall wunder,
High birth, choice fortune, force, nor Princely mace
Can warrant King or Keysar fro the case,
Shame sueth sin, as rain drops do the thunder.
Let Princes therefore virtuous life embrace
That wilful pleasures cause them not to blunder.
Behold my hay, see how the sely route
Do gase upon me, and each to other say:
Se where he lies for whom none late might route,
Lo how the power, the pride, and rich array
Of mighty rulers lightly fade away.
The King which erst kept all the realm in doubt,
The veryest rascal now dare check and low^e:
What moulde be Kings made of, but carayn clay?
Behold his wounds, how blew they be about,
Which while he lived, thought never to decay.
Me think I hear the people thus devise:
And therefore Baldwin since thou will declare
How princes fell, to make the living wise,
My vicious story in no point see thou spare,
But paynt it out, that rulers may beware
Good counsel, law, or virtue to despise.
For realms have rules, and rulers have a syse,
Which if they keep not, doubtless say I dare
That eythers gryefes the other shall agrise
Till the one be lost, the other brought to care.
I am a King that ruled all by lust,
That forced not of virtue, right, or law,
But always put false Flatterers most in trust,
Ensuing such as could my vices clawe:
By faithful counsel passing not a straw.
What pleasure pryckt, that thought I to be just.
I set my mind, to feed, to spoil, to just,
Three meals a day could skarce content my mawe,
And all to augment my lecherous mind that must
To Uenus pleasures always be in awe.
For mayntenannce whereof, my realm I polde
Through Subsidies, sore fines, loanes, many a pressed,
Blanke charters, oaths, and shifts not known of old,
For which my Subjects did me sore detest.
I also made away the town of Breast.
My fault wherein because mine uncle told
(For Princes vices may not be controlde)
I found the means his bowels to vnbrest.
The Piers and Lords that did his cause uphold,
With death, exile, or grievous sines oppressed.
Neither lakt I aid in any wicked deed,
For gaping Gulles whom I promoted had
Would further all in hope of higher mede.
A king can never imagine ought so bad
But most about him will perform it glad
For sickness seldom does so swiftely bread
As vicious humors grow the grief to feed.
Thus kings estates of all be wurst bastad,
Abusde in wealth, abandoned at need,
And nerest harm when they be least adrad.
My life and death the truth of this can try:
For while I fought in Ireland with my foes,
Mine uncle Edmunde whom I left to gide
My realm at heme, right trayteously arose
To help the Percies plying my depose,
And called fro France Earl Bolenbroke, whom I
Condemned ten years in eryle to lie:
Who cruelly did put to death all those
That in mine aid durst look but once awry,
Whose number was but slender I suppose.
For when I was cum back this stur to stay,
The Earl of Worcester whom I trusted most
(Whiles we in Wales at Flint our castle lay
Both to refresh and multiply mine oste)
Did in my hall in ^ight of least and most
Be break his staff, my household office stay,
Bad each man shi^te, and rode him self away.
See princes, see the power whereof we boste,
Whom most we trust, at need do us betray,
Through whose false faith my land and life I lost.
For when my traiterous Stuard thus was goen,
My servants shranke away on every side,
That caught I was, and carried to my foen:
Who for their prince a prison did provide,
And therein kept me, til duke Henryes pride
Did cause me yield him up my crown and throne.
Which shortly made my friendly foes to grene:
For Henry seeing in me their falshode tryde
Abhorde them all, and would be ruled by none,
For which they sought to stop him strayt a tide.
The chief conspirde by death to drive him down,
For which exployte, a solemn oath they swore
To render me my liberty and crown,
Whereof them selves deprived me before.
But salues help seeld an overlong suffered sore.
To stop the brech no boot to run or rowne
When swelling fluds have overflowen the town:
Til sails be spread the ship may keep the shore.
The Ankers wayed, though all the frayte do frown,
With stream and steer perforce it shall be bore.
For though the piers set Henry in his state,
Yet could they not displace him thence again:
And where they easily put me down of late,
They could restore me by no manner pain:
Things hardly mende, but may be mard amayne.
And when a man is fallen in froward fate
Still mischeves light one in another pate:
And well meant means his mishaps to restrain
Ware wretched moves, whereby his joys abate.
Due proof whereof in me appears plain.
For when king Henry knew that for my cause
His lords in mask would kill him if they might,
To dash all dowtes, he took no farther pause
But sent sir Pierce of Erton a traytrous knight
To Pomfret Castle, with other armed light,
Who causeles killed me there against all laws.
Thus lawles life, to lawles death ey draws.
Wherefore bid Kings be ruled and rule by right,
Who wurketh his will, and shunneth wisdoms sawes
In flateries claws, and shames foul paws shall light.
When he had ended this so woeful a tragedy, and to all Princes a right wurthy
instruction, we paused: having passed through a miserable time full of piteous
tragedyes. And seeing the reyne of Henry the fourth ensued, a man more ware and
prosperous in his doings although not untroubled with wars both of outforth
and inward enemies, we began to search what Piers were fallen therein, whereof the
number was not small: and yet because their examples were not much to be noted
for our purpose, we passed over all the Maskers (of whom King Richardes brother
was chief) which were all slain and put to death for their traiterous
attempt. And finding Owen Glendour next, one of fortunes own whelps, and the
Percyes his confederates, I thought them unmeet to be over passed, and therefore
said thus to the silent cumpany: what my masters is every man at once in a
brown study, has no man affeccion to any of these stories? you mind so much
sum other belyke, that these do not move you: And to say the troth there is no
special cause why they should. Howbeit Owen Glendour because he was one of
fortunes darlinges, rather than he should be forgotten, I will tell his tale for
him under the privilege of Martine Hundred: which Owen cumming out of the wild
mountains like the Image of death in all points (his dart only excepted) so
sore has famine and hunger consumed him, may lament his folly after this manner.

How Own Glendour seduced by false prophesies took upon him to be prince
of Wales, and was by Henry then prince thereof, chased to the mountains,
where he miserably dyed for lack of food.
I Pray the Baldwin since thou do entend
To show the fall of such as clymbe to hye,
Remember me, whose miserable end
May teach a man his vicious life to fly:
Oh Fortune, Fortune, out on her I cry,
My body and fame she has made lean and slender
For I poor wretch am steruen Owen Glendour.
A Welshman borne, and of a gentle blud,
But ill brought up, whereby full well I find,
That neither birth nor lineage make us good
Though it be true that Cat will after kind:
Flesh gendreth flesh, so does not soul or mind,
They gender not, but fowly do degender,
When men to vice from virtue them do surrender.
Each thing by nature tends to the same
Whereof it came, and is disposed like:
Down sinkes the mold, by mountes the fiery flame,
With horn the heart, with hoof the horse does strike:
The Wulfe does spoil, the subtle For does pyke,
And generally no fish, flesh, foul, or plant
Does any property that their dame had, want.
But as for men, since severally they have
A mind whose manners are by learning made,
Good bringing up alonly does them save
In virtuous deeds, which with their parents fade.
So that true gentry stands in the trade
Of virtuous life, not in the fleshly line:
For blud is Brute, but Gentry is divine.
Experience does cause me thus to say,
And that the rather for my countrymen,
Which vaunt and boast their selves above the day
If they may strain their stock for wurthy men:
Which let be true, are they the better than?
Nay far the wurse if so they be not good,
For why they steyne the bewty of their blood.
How would we mock the burden bearing mule
If he would brag he were an horses sun,
To press his pride (might nothing else him rule,)
His boast to prove, no more but bid him run:
The horse for swiftenes has his glory wunne,
To which the mule could never the more aspier
Though he should prove that Pegas was his sier.
Each man may crake of that which is his own,
Our parents virtues theirs are and not ours:
Who therefore will of noble kind be known
Ought shine in virtue like his ancestors,
Gentry consists not in lands and towers:
He is a Churl though all the world be his,
He Arthurs heir if that he live amys.
For virtuous life does make a gentleman
Of her possessour, all be he poor as Job,
Yea though no name of elders show he can:
For proof take Merlyn fathered by an Hob.
But who so settes his mind to spoil and rob,
Although he cum by due descent fro Brute,
He is a Chorle, ungentle, vile, and brute.
Well thus did I for want of better wit,
Because my parents noughtly brought me up:
For gentle men (they said) was naught so sy:
As to attaste by bold attemptes the cup
Of conquestes wine, whereof I thought to sup:
And therefore bent my self to rob and ryue,
And whom I could of lands and goods depryue.
For Henry the fourth did then usurp the crown,
Despoyled the king, with Mortimer the heir:
For which his subjects sought to put him down.
And I, while Fortune offered me so fair,
Did what I might his honor to appeyre:
And took on me to be the prince of Wales,
Entiste thereto by many of Merlines tales.
For which, such Idle as wait upon the spoil,
From every part of Wales unto me drew:
For loytring youth untaught in any toil
Are ready aye all mischief to ensue.
Through help of these so great my glory grew,
That I defied my King through lofty heart,
And made sharp war on all that took his part.
See luck, I took lord Reynolde Gray of Rythen,
And him enforst my daughter to espouse,
And so vnraunsomed held him still: and sithen
In Wygmore land through battle rygorous
I caught the right heir of the crowned house
The Earl of March sir Edmund Mortymer,
And in a dungeon kept him prisoner,
Then all the marches longyng unto Wales
By Syverne west I did invade and burn:
Destroyed the towns in mountains and in vales,
And rich in spoils did homward safe return:
Was none so bold durst once against me spurn.
Thus prosperously does Fortune forward call
Those whom she minds to give the forest fall.
When fame had brought these tidinges to the king
(Although the Skots than vexed him right sore)
A mighty army against me he did bring:
Whereof the French King being warned before,
Who mortal hate against king Henry bore,
To greve our foe he quyckely to me sent
Twelve thousand Frenchmen armed to war, and bent.
A part of them led by the Earl of March
Lord James of Burbon, a valiant tried knight
Withheld by winds to Wales ward sorth to march,
Took land at Plymmouth pryuily on a night:
And when he had done al he durst or might,
After that a mayny of his men were slain
He stole to ship, and sailed home again.
Twelve thousand more in Mylford did aryue,
And came to me, then lying at Denbygh
With armed Welshmen thousands double five:
With whom we went to wurcester well nigh,
And there encampte us on a mount on high,
To abide the king, who shortly after came
And pitched his field, on a Hill hard by the same.
There eight days long, our hosts lay face to face,
And neither durst the others power assail:
But they so stopped the passages the space
That vitayles could not cum to our avail,
Wherthrough constrained our hearts began to fail
So that the Frenchmen shrancke away by night,
And I with mine to the mountains took our flight:
The king pursued us, greatly to his cost,
From Hyls to wuds, fro wuds to valeyes plain:
And by the way his men and stuf he lost.
And when he see he gained naught save pain,
He blewe retreat, and got him home again:
Then with my power I boldly came abroad
Taken in my country for a very God.
Immediately after fell a Ioly Jar
Between the king, and Percies worthy bluds,
Which grew at last unto a deadly war:
For like as drops engendre mighty fluds,
And little seeds sprut forth great leaves and buds,
Even so small strifes, if they be suffered ^un
Bread wrath and war, and death or they be don.
The king would have the raunsum of such Scots
As these the Percyes had ^ane in the feeld:
But see how strongly Luker knits her knottes,
The king will have, the Percies will not yield,
Desire of goods soon craves, but grants seeld:
Oh cursed goods desire of you has wrought
All wyckednes, that has or can be thought.
The Percies deemed it meter for the king
To have redeemed their cousin Mortymer,
Who in his quarrel all his power did bring
To fight with me, that took him prisoner
Than of their pray to rob his Soldier:
And therefore willed him see sum mean were found,
To quit forth him whom I kept vily bound.
Because the king misliked their request,
They came them selves and did accord with me,
Complaining how the kingdom was oppressed,
By Henry's rule, wherefore we did agree
To put him down, and part the realm in three:
The North part theirs, Wales wholly to be mine
The rest to rest to therle of Marches line.
And for to set us hereon more agog
A prophet came (a vengeance take them all)
Affirming Henry to be Gogmagog
Whom Merlyn does a Mouldwarp ever call,
Accursed of god, that must be brought in thrall
By a wulf, a Dragon, and a Lion strong,
Which should divide his kingdom them among.
This crafty dreamer made us three such beasts
To think we were these foresaid beasts in deed:
And for that cause our badges and our creastes
We searched out, which scarcely well agreed:
Howbeit the Haroldes ready at such a need,
Drew down such issues from old ancestors,
As proved these ensigns to be surely ours.
Ye crafty Welshemen, wherefore do you mock
The noble men thus with your feigned rymes?
Ye noble men why fly you not the flock
Of such as have seduced so many times?
False Prophesies are plages for diverse crimes
Which god does let the divilish sort devise
To trouble such as are not godly wise.
And that appeared by us three beasts in deed,
Through false persuasion highly borne in hand
That in our feat we could not choose but speed
To kill the king, and to enjoy his land:
For which exployt we bound our selves in band
To stand contented each man with his part,
So fully folly assured our folysh heart.
But such they say as fysh before the net
Shall seldom surfyt of the pray they take,
Of things to cum the haps be so unset
That none but fools may warrant of them make:
The full assured, succes does often forsake.
For Fortune finds none so fyt to flout,
As suresby sots which cast no kind of doubt.
How say thou Henry Hotspur, do I lie?
For thou right manly gave the king a feeld,
And there was slain because thou would not ^y:
Sir Thomas Percie thine uncle (forced to yield)
Did cast his head (a wunder seen but ^e^ld)
From Shrewsbury town to the top of London bridge.
Lo thus fond hope did their both lives abridge.
When Henry king this victory had wunne,
Destroyed the Percies, put their power to flight,
He did appoint prince Henry his eldest sun
With all his power to meet me if he might:
But I discumfit through my partners fight
Had not the heart to mete him face to face,
But fled away, and he pursued the chase.
Now Baldwin mark, for I called prince of Wales,
And made beleve I should be he in deed,
Was made to fly among the hills and dales,
Where al my men forsook me at my need.
Who trusts loyterers seeld has lucky speed:
And when the captains courage does him fail
His soldiers hearts a little thing may quayle.
And so Prince Henry chased me, that lo
I found no place wherein I might abide:
For as the dogs pursue the selly do^,
The brach behind the hounds on every side,
So traste they me among the mountains wide:
Whereby I found I was the hartles hare
And not the beast Colprophete did declare.
And at the last: like as the little roche,
Must either be eat, or leap upon the shore
When as the hungry pickrel does approach,
And there find death which it eskapte before:
So double death assaulted me so sore
That either I must unto my enmy yield,
Or statue for hunger in the barayn^ feeld.
Here shame and pain a while were at a strife,
Pain prayed me yield, shame bad me rather fast:
The one had spare, the other spend my life,
But shame (shame have it) ouercam at last.
Than hunger gnew, that does the stone wall brast
And made me eat both gravel, dirt and mud,
And last of all, my dung, my flesh, and blud.
This was mine end to horrible to hear,
Yet good enough for a life that was so ill.
Whereby (O Baldwin) warn all men to bear
Their youth such love, to bring them up in skill.
Bid Princes fly Colprophetes lying byll:
And not presume to clime above their states,
For they be faults that foil men, not their fates.
When starued Owen had ended his hungry exhortacion, it was well enough liked.
Howbeit one found a dout wurth the moving, and that concerning this title, earl
of March: for as it appears, there were.iii. men of.iii diverse nations together
in one time entitled by that honor: First sir Edmund Mortimer, whom Owen kept
in prison, an Englishma^: the second the lord George of Dunbar a valiante Scot.
banished out of his country, and well esteemed of Henry the fowerth: the third
lord James of Burbon a frenchman, sent by the french king to help Owen
Glendour. These three men had this title all at once, which caused him to ask
how it was true that every one of these could be Earl of March? Whereto was
answered, that every country has Marches belonging unto them, and those so
large, that they were Earledomes, and the lords thereof entitled thereby, so
that Lord Edmund Mortimer was Earl of March in England, lord James of Burbon
of the marches of France, and Lord George of Dunbar earl of the marches in
Scotland. For otherwise nether could have interest in others title. This doubt
thus dissolved master Ferrers said: If no man have affeccion to the Percies,
let us pas the times both of Henry the fowerth and the fifte, and cum to Henrye
the syxte: in whose time fortune (as she does in the minority of princes) bare
a great stroke among the nobles. And yet in Henry the fourths time are examples
which I would wish Baldvvin that you should not forget, as the conspiracy made
by the bishop of York, and the lord Mowbray* son of him whom you late
treated of: prycked forward by the earl of Northumberland, father to sir Henry
Hotspur, who fled himself, but his partners were apprehended and put to death,
with Baynton and Blinkinsops, which could not see their duty to their King, but
took part with Percy that banished Rebel. As he was proceeding, he was desired
to stay by one which had pondered the story of the Percies, who briefly said.
To the end Baldvvin that you may know what to say of the Percyes, whose story is
not all out of my memory, (and it is a notable story) I will take upon me the
person of lord Henry earl of Northumberland, father of Henrye Hotspur, in
whose behalf this may be said.

How Henry Percy Earl of Northhumberland, was for his covetous and
traiterous attempt put to death at York.
O Moral Senec true find I thy saying,
That neither kinsfolk, riches, strength, or favor
Are free from Fortune, but are ay decaying:
No worldly wealth is ought save doubtful labor,
Man's life in earth is like unto a tabour:
Which now to mirth does mildly men provoke
And strayt to war, with a more sturdy stroke.
All this full true I Percy find by proof,
Which whilom was earl of Northumberland:
And therefore Baldwin for my Piers behoof
To note men's falls since thou have taken in hand,
I would thou should my state well understand:
For few kings were more then I redouted,
Through double Fortune lyfted up and louted.
As for my kin their noblenes is known,
My valiauntise were folly for to praise,
Wherthrough the Scortes so often were overthrown
That who but I was doubted in my days:
And that king Rychard found at all assayes,
For never Scotts rebelled in his rain
But through my force were either caught or slain.
A brother I had was Earl of Worcester
Always in favor and office with the king,
And by my wife Dame Elinor Mortimer,
I had a son which so the Scotts did sting,
That being young, and but a very spring
Sir Henry Hotspur they gave him to name,
And though I say it, he did deserve the same.
We three tryumphed in king Richards time,
Til Fortune ought both him and us a spite:
But chiefly me, whom clear from any crime,
My king did banish from his favor quite,
And openly proclaimed traiterous knight:
Wherethrough false slander forced me to be
That which before I did most deadly flee.
Let men beware how they true folk defame,
Or threaten on them the blame of vices naught,
For infamy bredeth wrath, wreke follows shames
Eke open slander, oftentimes has brought
That to effect, that erst was never thought:
To be misdemed men suffer in a sort,
But none can bear the grief of misreport.
Because my king did shame me wrongfully,
I hated him, and in deed became his foe:
And while he did at war in Ireland lie,
I did conspire to turn his weal to woe:
And through the duke of York and other more,
All royal power from him we quickly took
And gave the same to Henry Boleynbroke.
Neither did we this alonely for this cause,
But to say truth, force drove us to the same:
For he dispising god and all good laws
Slew whom he would, made sin a very game.
And seeing neither age nor counsel could him tame,
We thought it well done for the kingdoms sake,
To leave his rule that did al rule forsake.
But when sir Henry had attaynde his place,
He strayt becam in all points wurse than he:
Destroyed the piers, and slew king Rychards grace,
Against his oath made to the lords and me:
And seking quarelles how to disagre,
He shamelesly required me and my son
To yield him Scotts which we in field had wun.
My Nephew also Edmund Mortymer
The very heir apparaunt to the Crown,
Whom Owen Glendour held as prisoner,
Uilely bound, in dungeon deep cast down,
He would not raunsum: but did felly frown
Against my brother and me that for him spoke,
And him proclaimed traitor for our sake.
This soul despite did cause us to conspire
To put him down as we did Richard erst,
And that we might this matter set on fire
From Owens ^ayle, our cousin we remerst,
And unto Glendour all our griefs reherst,
Who made a bond with Mortymer and me,
To pryue the king, and part the realm in three..
But when king Henry heard of this devise
Toward Owen Gleudour he sped him very quyck
Mynding by force to stop our enterprise:
And as the deuell would, then fell I sick,
Howbeit my brother, and son, more politic
Than prosperous, with an oast fro Scotland brought,
Encountered him at Shrewsbury, where they fought.
The one was taken and killed, the other slain,
And shortly after was Owen put to flight:
By means whereof I forced was to feign,
That I knew nothing of the former fight.
Fraud often avayles more than does sturdy might:
For by my fayning I brought him in belief
I knew not that wherein my part was chief.
And while the king thus took me for his friend
I sought all means my former wrong to wreake,
Which that I might bring to the sooner end
To the bishop of York I did the matter break,
And to Therle Marshall likewise did I speak,
Whose father was through Henry's cause exyled
The bishops brother with traiterous death defiled.
These strayt assented to do what they could,
So did lord Hastinges and lord Fauconbridge:
Which altogether promised ^hey would
Set all their power the kings days to abridge.
But se the spite, before the birds were flidge
The king had word, and seysoned on the nest
Whereby alas my friends were al oppressed.
The bluddy tyrant ^^ought them all to end
Excepted me, which into Scotland skapte
To George of Dunbar therle of March, my friend,
Who in my cause all that he could ey skrapte:
And when I had for greater succor gapte
Both at the Frenchman and the Flemminges hand,
And could get none, I took such as I sand.
And with the help of George my very friend,
I did invade Northumberlande full bold,
Whereas the folk drew to me still vnend,
Bent to the death my party to uphold:
Through help of these full many a fort and hold.
The which the king right manfully had man^,
I easily wunne, and seysed in my hand
Not so content (for vengeance drove me on)
I entered Yorkshire there to waste and spoil,
But ere I had far in the country gone
The shirif thereof, Rafe Rekesby did assoyle
My troubled host of much part of our toil,
For he assauting freshly, took through power
Me and lord Bardolph both at Bramham more.
And thence conveyed us to the town of York
Until he knew, what was the kings intent:
There lo Lord Bardolf kinder than the Storke,
Did lose his head, which was to London sent,
With whom for frendshippe urine in like case went.
This was my hap, my for^une, or my fawte,
This life I led, and thus I came to naught.
Wherefore good Baldwin will the pyers take heed
Of slander, malice, and conspiracy,
Of couetise, whence all the rest proceed:
For couetise joint with contumacy,
Does cause all mischief in men's hearts to bread.
Ad therefore this to Esperance, my wurd.
Who causes bludshed shall not skape the swurd.
BY that this was ended, I had found out the story of Richard earl of
Cambridge: and because it contained matter in it, though not very notable, yet
for the better understanding of the rest, I thought it mete to touch it, and
therefore said as follows. You have said well of the Percies and favorably. For
in deed as it should appear, the chyefe cause of their conspiracy against king
Henry, was for Edmund Mortimer their cosins sake, whom the king very
maliciously proclaimed to have yielded him self to Owen colourably, when as in
deed he was taken forcibly against his will, and very cruelly ordered in
prison. And seeing we are in hand with Mortimers matter, I will take upon me
the person of Richard Plantagenet Earl of Cambridge, who for his sake likewise
died. And therefore I let pass Edmund Holland earl of Kent, whom Henry the
fowerth made Admiral to skoure the Seas, because the Buttons were abroad:
which Earl (as many things happen in war) was slain with an arrowe at the
assault of Briake: shortly after whose death this king dyed, and his son
Henry, the fyft of that name, succeeded in his place. In the beginning of this
Henry the fyfts rain, dyed this Rychard, and with him Henry the lord Scrope
and others, in whose behalf this may be said.

How Richard earl of Cambridge entending the kings destruction was put to
death at Southhampton.
Have makes wast, has commonly ben said,
And secret mischief seeld has lucky speed:
A murdering mind with proper pryze is wayd,
All this is true. I find it in my Creed.
And therefore Baldwin warn all states take heed,
How they conspire any other to betrappe,
Least mischief meant light in the miners lap.
For I lord Richard, heir Plan^agenet
Was Earl of Cambridge, and right fortunate,
If I had had the grace my wit to set
To have content me with mine own estate:
But o false honors, broders of debate,
The love of you our lewd hearts does allure
To lose our s^lues by seking you unsure.
Because my bro^her Edmund Mortimer,
Whose eldest sister was my wedded wife,
I mean that Edmund that was prisoner
In Wales so long, through Owens busy strife,
Because I say, that after Edmundes life,
His rightes and titles must by law be mine,
(For he ne had, nor could increase his line)
Because the right of realm and crown was ours,
I serched means to help him thereunto.
And where the Henry's held it by their powers
I sought a shift their tenures to undo,
Which being force, since force or sleyt must do,
I void of might, because their power was strong
Set privy sleyte against their open wrong.
But since the deaths of most part of my k^^ne
Did dash my hope, throughout the fathers days
I let it slip, and thought it best begin
When as the s^nne should dred lest such assayes:
For force through speed, sleyght spedeth through delays
And seeld does treason time so fitly find
As when al dangers most be out of mind.
Wherefore while Henry of that name the fifte,
Prepared his army to go conquer France,
Lord Skrope and I thought to attempt a drifte
To put him down my brother to avaunce:
But were it gods will, my luck, or his good chance,
The king wist wholly wherabout we went,
The night before the king to sh^pward bent.
Then were we strayt as traitors apprehended,
Our purpose spied, the cause thereof was hid,
And therefore lo a false cause we pretended
Wherthrough my brother was fro danger ryd:
We said for hier of the French kings coin, we did
Behight to kill the king: and thus with shame
We stained our selves, to save our friend fro blame.
When we had thus confessed so foul a treason,
That we deserved, we suffered by the law.
Se Baldwin see, and note (as it is reason)
How wicked deeds to woeful ends do draw.
All force does fail, no craft is wurth a stra'^,
To attain things lost, and therefore let them go,
For might rules right, and will though God say no.
When stout Richard had stoutly said his mind, belike quod one, this Rychard
was but a little man, or else little favored of writers, for our Cronicles speak
very little of him. But seeing we be cum now to king Henry's viage into France,
we can not lack valyant men to speak of: for among so many as were led and
sent by the King out of this realm thither, it can not be chosen but sum, and
that a great sum, were ^layne among them: wherefore to speak of them all, I
think not needful. And therefore to let pass Edward Duke of York, and the
Earl of Suffolk slain both at the battle of Agine court, as were also
many other, Let us end the time of Henry the fyfth, and cum to his sun Henry
the syxt: whose nonage brought France and Normandy out of bondage, and was
cause that few of our noble men died aged. Of whom to let pass the number, I
will take upon me the person of Thomas Mountague earl of Salysburye, whose
name was not so good at home (and yet he was called the good earl) as it was
dreadful abroad: who exclaming upon the mutability of fortune, justly may say
thus.

How Thomas Montague the earl of Salysbury in the mids of his glory, was
chaunceably slain with a piece of ordinance.
WHat fools be we to trust unto our strength,
Our wit, our courage, or our noble fame,
Which time it self must needs devour at length
Though froward Fortune could not foil the same.
But seeing this Gods gideth all the game,
Which still to change does set her only lust,
Why toil we so for things so hard to trust.
A goodly thing is surely good report,
Which noble hearts, do seek by course of kind,
But seen the date so doubtful and so short,
The ways so rough whereby we do it find:
I can not choose but praise the princely mind
That preaseth for it, though we find oppressed
By soul defame those that deserve it best.
Concerning whom mark Baldwin what I say,
I mean the virtuous hindered of their brute,
Among which number reken well I may
My valiant father John lord Montacute,
Who lost his life (I judge) in just pursuit:
I say the cause and not the casual speed,
Is to be wayed in every kind of deed.
This rule observed, how many shall we find
For virtues sake with infamy oppressed?
How many again through help of fortune blind,
For ill attemptes atchiued, with honor blessed?
Succes is wurst ofttimes when cause is best,
Therefore say I: god send them sorry happes,
That judge the causes by their after clappes.
The end in deed, is judge of every thing,
Which is the cause, or latter point of time:
The first true verdyct at the first may bring,
The last is slow, or slipper as the slime,
Often changing names of innocence and crime.
Duke Thomas death was Justice two years long,
And ever sense sore tyranny and wrong.
Wherefore I pray the Baldwin way the cause,
And praise my father as he does deserve:
Because earl Henry, king against all laws,
Endeavored king Richard for to starve
In iayle, whereby the regal crown might swarve
Out of the line to which it than was due,
(Whereby God knows what evil might ensue)
My lord John Holland duke of Excester,
Which was dear cousin to this wretched king,
Did move my father, and the earl of Gloucester,
With other lords to ponder well the thing:
Who seeing the mischief that began to spring,
Did all consent, this Henry to depose,
And to restore king Richard to the rose.
And while they did devise a pretty trappe
Whereby to bring their purpose bettre about,
Which was in mask, this Henry to have slain:
The duke of Awmerle blew their counsay^e out,
Yet was their purpose good there is no doubt.
What cause can be more wurthy for a knight,
Than save his king, and help true heirs to right?
For this with them my father was destroyed,
And buried in the doung^^l of defame.
Thus evil chance their glory did avoid,
Whereas their cause does claim eternal (...).
When deeds therefore vnluckely do frame,
Men ought not judge the authors to (...) naught,
For right through might is often overraught.
And God does suffer that it should be so,
But why, my wit is feeble to decise,
Except it be to heap up wrath and woe
Upon their heads that injuries devise.
The cause why mischiefs many times arise,
And light on them that would men's wrongs redress,
Is for the rancour that they bear, I guess.
God hates rigor though it further right,
For sin is sin, how ever it be used:
And therefore suffers shame and death to light,
To punish vice, though it be well abused.
Who furdereth right is not thereby excused,
If through the same he do sum other wrong:
To every vice due guerdon does belong.
What preach I now, I am a man of war,
And that my body (I dare say) does profess,
Of cured wounds beset with many a skarre,
My broken Iaw vnheald can say no less.
O Fortune, Fortune, cause of all distress
My father had great cause thy fraud to curse.
But much more I, abused ten times wursse.
Thou never flatteredst him in all his life,
But me thou dandledst like thy darling dear:
Thy gifts I found in every corner rife,
Where ever I went, I met thy smyling cheer:
Which was not for a day, or for a year,
But through the rain of three right worthy kings,
I found the forward in all kind of things.
The while king Henry conquered in France
I sued the wars, and still found victory.
In all assaults so happy was my chance,
Holds yield or wunne did make my enmies sorry:
Dame Prudence eke augmented so my glory,
That in all treaties ever I was one
When weyghty matters were agreed upon.
But when this king this mighty conqueror,
Through death unripe, was both his realms bereft,
His sely infant did receive his power,
Pore little babe full young in cradell left,
Where crown and Scepter hurt him with the hef^:
Whose wurthy uncles had the governaunce,
The one at home, the other abroad in France.
And I which was in peace and war well skilled,
With both these rulers greatly was esteemed:
Bare rule at home as often as they willed,
And fought in France when they it nedeful demed.
And every where so good my service seemed,
That Englishmen to me great love did bear,
Our foes the French, my force fulfilled with fear.
I always thought it fitly for a prince,
And such as have the regiment of realms,
His subjects hearts with mildnes to convince,
With justice myxt, avoiding all extremes.
For like as Phoebus with his cheerful beams,
Does freshly force the fragrant flowers to flourish,
So rulers mildnes subjects love does norish.
This found I true: for through my mild behauour
Their hearts I had with me to live and dye:
And in their speech for to declare their favor,
They called me still good earl of Salisbury,
The lords confessed the commons did not lie.
For virtuous life, fre heart, and lowly mind,
With high and low shall always favor find.
Which virtues chief becum a man of war,
W^erof in France I found experyence,
For in assaults due mildnes passes far
Al rigor, force, and sturdy violence:
For men will stoutly stick to their defense
When cruel captains covet them to spoil,
And so enforst, often give their foes the foil.
But when they know they shall be friendly used,
They hazard not their heads, but rather yield,
For this, my offers never were refused
Of any town, or surely very seelde:
But force and furies fyt be for the feelde.
And there in deed I used so the same,
My foes would fly if they had heard my name.
For when lord Steward and earl Uantadore,
Had cruelly besieged Crauant town,
Which we had wunne, and kept long time before,
Which lies in Awxer on the river Youne,
To raise the siege the Regent sent me down:
Where as I used all rigor that I might,
I killed all, that were not saved by flight.
When the earl of Bedford then in France lord regent,
Knew in what sort I had removed the syege,
In Brye and Champayne he made me vice gerent,
And Lieutenaunt for him and for my Lyege:
Which caused me go to Bry, and there besyege
Mountaguillon, with twenty wekes assant,
Which at the last was yielded me for naught.
And for the duke of Britayns brother, Arthur,
Both earl of Richmonde and of Yvery,
Against his oath from us had made departure,
To Charles the Dolphin, our chief enemy,
I with the regent went to Normandy,
To take his town of Yvery, which of spite
Did to us daily all the harm they might.
They at the first compounded by a day
To yield, if rescues did not cum before.
And whiles in hope to fight, we at it lay,
The Dolphin gathered men two thousand skore,
With earls, lords, and captains ioly store:
Of which the duke of Alanson was gide,
And sent them down to see if we would bide.
But they left us and down to Uernoile went,
And made their vaunt they had our army slain,
And through that lie, that town from us they hent,
Which shortly after turned to their pain:
For there both armies met upon the plain,
And we.viii.M. whom they flew, not slew before,
Did kill of them, ten thousand men and more.
When we had taken Uernoile thus again,
To drive the Dolphin utterly out of France,
The Regent sent me to Aniowe and to Main,
Where I besieged the warlik town of Mawns:
There lord of Toysers Baldwins valiaunce
Did well appear, which would not yield the town,
Till all the towers and walls were battred down.
But here now Baldwin take it in good part,
Though that I brought this Baldwin there to yield:
The Lion searce for all his noble heart,
Being overmatched, is forced to fly the feeld*
If Mars him self had there ben with his sheeld,
And in my s^ormes had stoutly me withstoode,
He should have yield, or else have shed my blood.
Th^s wurthy knight both hardy, stout, and wise,
Wrought well his feate: as time and place require,
When fortune fayles, it is the best advice
To strike the sail, least al lie in the mire.
This have I said to thend thou take no ire,
For though no cause be found, so nature frames,
Men have a zeal to such as bear their names.
But to return, in Main wan I at length,
Such towns and fortes as might either help or hurt,
I mann^d Mayon and Suzans towns of strength,
Fort Barnarde, Thanceaux, and S. Eales the curt,
With Lile sues Bolton, standing in the dirt:
Eke Gwerland, Sus^e, Loupeland and Mountsure,
With Malicorne, these wan I and kept full sure.
Besides all this, I took nere forty holds,
But those I razed even with the ground.
And for these deeds, as sely sheep in foldes
Do shrink for fear at every little sound,
So fled my foes before my face full round:
Was none so hardy durst abide the fight,
So Mars and Fortune furdered me their knight.
I tell no lie, so gastful grew my name,
That it alone discomfited an host:
The Scots and Frenchmen will confess the same,
Else will the town which they like cowardes lost.
For when they sieged Bewron with great bost,
Being forty.M. Britayns, French, and Scotts,
Five hundred men did vanquish them like sottes.
For while the Frenchmen did assault them still,
Our Englishmen came boldly forth at night,
Criyng saint George, Salisbury, kill, kill, kill,
And offered freshly with their foes to fight,
And they as frenchly took them selves to flight,
Supposing surely that I had been there.
Se how my name did put them all in fear.
Thus was the Dolphins power discomfited,
Four.M. slain, their camp taken as it stood,
Whereby our town and soldiers profited,
For there were vitayles plentiful and good:
This while was I in England by the rood
To appeace a strife that was right foul befall,
Between Duke Humfrey and the Cardinal.
The Duke of Exceter shortly after died,
Which of the king at home had governance,
Whose room the earl of Warwike then supplied,
And I took his, and sped me into France.
And having a zeal to conquer Orlyaunce,
With much a do I gat the regentes aid,
And marched thither and siege about it laid.
But in the way I took the town of Yayn,
Where murdered were for stoutnes many a man:
But Baugency I took with little pain,
For which to show them favor I began:
This caused the towns of Mewne and Iargeman,
That stood on Loyer, to profer me the keys,
Ere I came nere them, welny by two days.
See here how Fortune forward can allure,
What baytes she lays to bring men to their ends.
Who having hap like this, but would hope sure
To bring to bale what ever he entendes?
But soon is sour the sweet that Fortune sendes:
When hope and hap, when health and wealth is highest,
Than woe and wrack, desease, and need be nyest.
For while I, suing this so good success,
Laid siege to Orlyaunce on the river side,
The Bastard (Cuckold Cawnyes son I guess,
Tho thought the dukes) who had the town in gide.
Came fearcely forth, when he his time espide,
To raise the siege, but was beat back again,
And hard pursued both to his loss and pain.
For there we wan the bulwark on the bridge
With a mighty tower standing fast thereby.
Ah cursed tower that did my days abridge,
Would god thou had been further, either I.
For in this tower a chamber stands on hie,
From which a man may view through all the town
By certain windows iron grated down.
Where on a day (now Baldwin note mine end)
I stood in vewing where the town was weak,
And as I busily talked with my friend,
Shot fro the town, which all the grate did break,
A pellet came, and drove a mighty fleake,
Against my face, and tare away my check,
For pain whereof I dyed within a wecke.
See Baldwin see the uncertainty of glory,
How sudden mischief dasheth all to dust.
And warn all princes by my broken story,
The happiest Fortune chiefly to mistrust.
Was never man that always had his lust.
Than such be fools, in fancy more then mad,
Which hope to have that never any had.
THis strange adventure of the good earl drove us al into a dumpne, inwardly
lamenting his woeful destynye, out of which we were awaked, after this sort.

To what end (quod one) muse we so much on this matter. This Earl is neither
the first nor the last whom Fortune has foundered in the heyth of their
prosperitye. For all through the rain of this unfortunate king Henry, we shall
find many which have been likewise served, whose chances since they be mar^^^l,
and therefore honorable, may the better be omitted: And therefore we will let go
the lords M^rlmes and Poyninges, slain both at the siege of Orleans shortly
after the death of this earl. Also the valiant earl of Arundle destroyed
with a bowlet at the assault of Gerbory, whose stories nevertheles are wurth
the hearing. And to quicken up your spirits, I will take upon me a tragical
person in deed, I mean king Iamy slain by his servants in his pryvy
chamber, who although he be a Skot, yet seeing he was brought up in England
where he learned the language, his example also so notable, it were not meet
he should be forgotten.

And therefore mark Baldwin what I think he may say.

How king James the first for breaking his oaths and bonds, was by gods
suffrauns miserably murdered of his own subjects.
IF for examples sake thou write thy book,
I charge the Baldwin thou forget me not:
Whom Fortune always frowardly forsook,
Such wa^ my luck, my merit, or my lot.
I am that James king Roberts son the Skot,
That was in England prisoner all his youth,
Through mine uncle Walters traiterous untruth.
For when my father through disease and age,
Unwieldy was to govern well his land,
Because his brother Walter seemed sage,
He put the rule thereof into his hand.
Than had my father you shall understand
Of lawful barnes, me, and one only other,
Nempt Dauy Rothsay, who was mine elder brother
This Dauy was prince of Scotland, and so take,
Till his aduoutry caused men complain:
Which that he might by monyshment forsake,
My father prayed mine uncle take the pain
To threaten him, his vices to refrain.
But be false traitor, butcherly murdring wretch,
To get the crown, began to fetch a fetch.
And finding now a proffer to his pray,
Devised means my brother to deuower,
And for that cause convayed him day by day*
From place to place, from castle unto tower,
To Faulkland fort, where like a tormentour
He starmd him, and put to death a wife
Whom through a reed he sukt to save his life.
O wretched death* fie cruel tyranny,
A prince in prison lost for fault of food:
Was ^^nce enmy wrought such villainy.
A trusted brother stroye his brothers blood
Woe wurth foe friendly, fie on double hood.
Ah wretched father, see thy son is lost,
Sterved by thy brother, whom thou trustedst most.
Of whom when sum began to find the fraud,
And yet the traitor made him self so clear,
That he should seem to have deserved laud,
So woeful did he for his death appear,
My doubtful father loving me full dear
To avoid all danger that might after chance,
Sent me away, but nine years old, to France.
But winds and wether were so contrary,
That we were driven to the English coast,
Which realm with Skotland at that time did vary
So that they took me prisoner, not as oste:
For which my father fearing I were lost,
Conceived shortly such an inward thought
As to the grave immediately him brought.
Than had mine uncle all the regiment
At home, and I in England prisoner lay,
For to him self he thought it detryment,
For my releace any raunsum for to pay,
For (as he thought) he had possessed his pray:
And therefore wished I might in durauns dure
Till I had dyed, so should his rain be sure.
But good king Henry seeing I was a child,
And heir by right unto a realm and crown,
Did bring me up, not like my brother, wild
But virtuously in feats of high renown:
In libe^all arts in isntrumental sown:
By mean whereof when I was after king,
I did my realm to civil order bring.
For ere I had been prisoner eyghtene year,
In which short space two noble princes dyed,
Whereof the first in prudence had no peer
The other in war most valyant throwly tried,
Whose rowme his son babe Henry eke supplied
The pyers of England which did govern all,
Did of their goodness help me out of thrall.
They married me to a cousin of their king
The Duke of Somersets daughter rich and fair.
Releast my ransom save a trifling thing:
And after I had done homage to the hayer,
And sworn my friendship never should appayre,
They brought me kingly furnished to my land,
Which I rec^yued at mine uncles hand.
Whereof my lords and commons were full glad,
So was mine uncle chiefly (as he said)
Who in his mouth no other matter had,
Save punish such as had my brother trayed.
The faut whereof epparantly he laid,
To good duke Murdo, his elder brothers son,
Whose father dyed long ere this deed was done.
My cursed uncle ^lyer than the snake
Which would by craft unto the crown aspier,
Because he saw this Murdo was a stake
That stayed up the stop of his desire,
(For his elder brother was Duke Murdoes fire)
He thought it best to have him made away,
So was he suer (I goen) to have his pray.
And by his crafts the traitor brought to pass
That I destroyed Duke Murdo, and his kin
Poor innocents, my loving friends, alas.
O kings and Princes what plight stand we in,
A trusted traitor shall you quickly win
To put to death your kin and friends most just:
Take heed therefore, take heed whose read ye trust.
And at the last to bring me hole in hate
With god and man, at home and eke abroad,
He counsayled me for surance of my state:
To help the Frenchmen, then nigh overtrode
By Englishmen, and more to lay on lode,
With power and force al England to invade,
Against the oath and homage that I made.
And though at first my conscience did grudge
To break the bonds of friendship knit by oath,
Yet after proof (see m^schiefe) I did judge
It madness for a king to keep his troth.
And semblably with all the world it goth.
Sins often assayed are thought to be no sin,
So sin does soil, the soul it sinketh in.
But as diseases common cause of death,
Bring danger most, when least they prick and smart
Which is a sign they have expulst the breath
Of lively heat which does defend the heart:
Even so such sins as felt are on no part
Have conquered grace, and by their wicked ure,
So killed the soul that it can have no cure.
And grace agate, vice still suceedeth vice,
And all to haste the vengeance for the furst.
I arede therefore all people to be wise,
And stop the bracke when it begins to burst.
At taste no poison (vice is venim wurst,
It mates the mind) beware eke of to much,
All kill through muchnes, sum with only touch.
When I had learned to set my oath at naught,
And through much use the sense of sin exyled,
Against king Henry, what I could I wrought,
My faith, my oath, unjustly foul defiled.
And while sly Fortune at my doings smiled,
The wrath of God which I had well deserved,
Fell on my neck, for thus lo was I served.
Ere I had raygned fully fiftene year,
While time I lay at Pertho at my place.
With the Queen my wife and children me to chere,
My murdring uncle with the double face,
That longed for my kingdom and my mace,
To s^ay me there suborned Robert Gram,
With whom his nephew Robert Stuart came.
And when they time fit for their purpose found,
Into my privy chaumber they a^^art,
Where with their sweardes they gave me many a wound,
And slew al such as stuck unto my part:
There lo my wife did show her loving heart,
Who to defend me, felled one or twain,
And was sore wounded ere I could be slain.
See Baldwin Baldwin, the unhappy ends,
Of such as pass not for their lawful oath:
Of those that caus^les leave their faith or friends,
And murdre kynsfolke through their foes untroth,
Warn, warn all princes, all like sins to loath,
And chiefly such as in my Realm be borne,
For God hates hyghly such as are forsworn.
When this was said, let King Iamy go quod master Ferrers, and return we to
our own story, and se what broyls were among the nobility in ye kings
minority. How ye cardinal Bewford maligneth the estate of good duke Hu^frey the
kings uncle and protector of ye realm, and by what driftes he first banisheth
his wife from him. And lastly how the good duke is murderously made away
through conspiracy of Queen Margaret and other: both whose tragedies I entend
at leisure to declare, for they be notable. Do so I pray you (quod another) But
take heed ye demurre not upon them. And I to be occupied the mean time, will
show what I have noted in the duke of Suffolkes doings, one of the chiefest
of duke Humfreyes destroyers, who by the prouidens of God, came shortly after
in such hatred of the people, that the King him self could not save him from
astraunge and notable death, which he may lament after this manner.

How Lord William Delapole Duke of Suffolk was vvorthily punyshed for
abusing his King and causing the destruction of good Duke Humfrey.
Heavy is the hap whereto all men be bound,
I mean the death, which no estate may fly:
But to be banished, headed so, and drowned,
In sink of shame from top of honors hye,
Was never man so served I think but I:
And therefore Baldwin fro thy grave of grief
Reject me not, of wretched princes chief.
My only life in all points may suffice
To show how base all baytes of Fortune be,
Which thaw like yse, through heat of enuies eyes:
Or vicious deeds which much possessed me.
Good hap with vices can not long agree,
Which bring best fortunes to the basest fall,
And happiest hap to envy to be thrall.
I am the prince duke William De la Poole
That was so famous in Queen Margets days.
That found the mean Duke Humfreyes blud to cool
whose virtuous pains deserve eternal praise
Whereby I note that Fortune can not raise,
Any one aloft without sum others wrack:
Fluds drown no fields before they find a bracke.
But as the waters which do break their walls
Do loose the course they had within the shore,
And daily rotting stink within their stalles
For fault of moving which they found before:
Even so the state that over high is bore
Does loose the life of peoples love it had,
And rots it self until it fall to bad.
For while I was but Earl, each man was glad
To say and do the best by me they might:
And Fortune ever since I was a lad
Did smile upon me with a chereful sight,
For when my King had doubed me a Knight
And sent me forth to serve at war in France,
My lucky speed mine honor did enhaunce.
Where to omit the many feit^s I wrought
Under others gyde, I do remember one
Which with my souldyers valiantly was fought
None other captain save my self alone,
I mean not now the apprinze of Pucel Ione
In which attempt my travayle was not small,
Though the Duke of Burgoyn had the praise of al.
But the siege of Awmarle is the ^eate I praise
A strong built town, with castes, walls, and vaultes,
With men and weapon armed at al assayes:
To which I gave n^^ five times five assaults,
Till at the last they yielded it for naughtes.
Yet Lord Rambures like a valiant Knight
Defended it as long as ever he might.
But what prevayled it these towns to win
Which shortly after must be lost again,
Whereby I see there is more glory in
The keeping things than is in their attain:
To get and keep not is but loss of pain.
Therefore ought men provide to save their winnings
In all attemptes, else lose they their beginninges.
Because we could not keep the towns we wunne
(For they were more then we might ^asely wyelde)
One year vndyd what we in ten had done:
For envy at home, and treason abroad, did yield
King Charles his Realm of France, made barain field,
For bluddy wars had wasted al encreace,
Which causde the Pope help poverty sue for peace,
So that it Tourayne at the town of Toures
Duke Charles and other for their Prince appeared,
So did Lord Rosse, and I than Earl, for ours:
And when we showed wherein each other dered,
We sought out means all quarrels to have clered,
Wherein the Lords of Germany, of Spain,
Of Hungary and (...) pain.
But since we could no final pea^e (...)
For neither would the others covenants hear,
For eightene months we did conclude a truce:
And while as friends we lay together there
Because my warrant did me therein bear,
To make a perfect peace, and through accord,
I sought a marriage for my soberaine Lord.
And for the French kings daughters were to small
I fancied most dame Margarete his niece,
A lovely lady, beautiful and tall,
Fair spoken* pleasant, a very princely piece,
In wit and learning matcheles hence to Greece,
Duke Rayners daughter of Aniow, king by style,
Of Naples, Jerusalem, and of Scicil isle.
But ere I could the grant of her attain,
All that our king had of her fathers lands,
As Mauntes the city, the county whole of Main,
And most of Aniow duchy in our hands,
I did release him by assured bands.
And as for dowry with her none I sought,
I thought no peace could be to derely bought.
But when this marriage throwly was agreed
Although my king were glad of such a make,
His uncle Humfrey abhorred it in deed,
Because thereby his precontract he brake,
Made with the heir of the earl of Arminake,
A noble maid with store of goods endowed,
Which more than this with loss, the duke allowed.
But love and beauty in the king so wrought
That neither profit or promise he regarded,
But set his uncles counsel still at naught:
And for my pains I highly was rewarded.
Thus virtue starves, but lust food must be larded.
For I made Marquise went to France again,
And brought this Bride unto my soverayne.
At whom because Duke Humfrey aye repined,
Calling their marriage aduowtry (as it was)
The Queen did move me, erst thereto inclined,
To help to bring him to his Requiem mass.
Which since it could for no crime cum to pass
His life and doings were so right and clear,
Through privy murder we brought him to his beer
Thus righteousness brought Humfrey to rebuke
Because he would no wickedness allow,
But for my doings I was made a duke
So Fortune can both bend and smothe her browe
On whom she list, not passing why nor how.
O lord how high, how soon she did me raise,
How fast she filde me both with prays and praise.
The Lords and Commons both of like assent,
Besought my soverayne, kneling on their knees,
To record my doings in the parliament,
As deeds deserving everlasting foes.
In which attempt they did no labor leese,
For they set not my praise so fast in flame,
As he was ready to reward the same.
But note the end, my deeds so wurthy demed
Of King, of Lords, and Commons altogether,
Were shortly after treasons false esteemed,
And al men cursed Queen Margets cumming hither,
For Charles the french king, in his fea^es not lither
When he had rendered Rayner Mauntes and Main,
Found mean to win all Normandy again.
This made the people curse the marriage
Esteming it the cause of every loss:
Wherefore at me with open mouth they rage,
Affirming me to have brought the realm to moss:
When king and Queen saw things thus go a cross,
To quiet all a parliament they called,
And caused me in prison to be thralled,
And shortly after brought me forth abroad.
Which made the Commons more than double wood:
And sum with weapons would have laid on lode,
If their graund captain Blewberd, in his mood,
Had not in time with wisdom been withstoode*
But though that he and mo were executed
The people still their wurst against me bruted.
And so applied the Parliament with bills,
Of heinous wrongs, and open traytrous crimes,
That king and queen were forced against their wills
Fro place to place to adiourne it diverse times.
For princes power is like the sandy slymes,
Which must perforce geve place unto the wave,
Or sue the windy sourges when they rave.
Their life was not more dear to them than I,
Which made them search all shifts to save me still,
But aye my foes such faults did on me try
That to preserve me from a wurser ill,
The king was feign, full sore against his will,
For five years space to send me in exile,
In hope to have restored me in a while.
But mark how vengeance wayteth upon vice.
As I was sailing toward the coast of France,
The Earl of Deuonshires bark, of little price,
Encountered me upon the seas by chance,
Whose captain took me by his valiaunce,
Let pass my ships, with all the frayt and load,
But led me with him into Dover road.
Where when he had recounted me my faults,
As murdring of Duke Humfrey in his bed,
And how I had brought all the realm to naughtes
In causing the King unlawfully to wed,
There was no grace, but I must loose my head.
Wherefore he made me shrive me in his boat,
On the edge whereof my neck in two he smoat.
A piteous end, and therefore Baldwin warn,
All pyers and princes to abhor untroth,
For vicious grain must cum to fowlendes barn:
Who brueth breach of lawful bond or oath,
God will ere long, cause all the world to loath.
Was never prince that other did oppress
Unrighteously, but died in distress.
When this was said: Every man rejoiced to hear of a wicked man so
maruaylously well punished: For though Fortune in many points be iniurius to
Princes, yet in this and such like she is most righteous: And only deserves
the name of a Gods, when she provides means to punish and distroye
Tyrants. And when we had a while considered the driftes of the King and Queen
to have saved this Duke, and yet they could not: It is wurth the labor (said
one) to way the works and judgments of God: which seeing they are known most
evidently by comparyng contraryes, I will touch the story of Jack Kade in
order next following. Whom King Henrye with all his puissauns was no more
able for a while to destroy (yet was he his rebellious enemy) than he was to
preserve the Duke of Suffolk his derest friend: by which two examples does
appear how notably God dysposeth all things, and that no force stretches
farther, than it pleases him to suffer. For this Cade being but base borne,
of no abilitye, and less power, accompanied with a few naked Kentyshmen,
caused the King with his army at all points appointed, to leave the fyelde,
and to suffer him to do what so ever he lusted: In whose behalf, seeing he is
one of Fortunes whelps, I will trouble you a while to hear the process of his
enterprise, Which he may declare in manner following.

How Jack Cade traitorously rebelling against his King, was for his treasons
and cruel doings vvurthely punyshed.
Shall I call it Fortune or my froward folly
That lifted me, and laid me down below
Or was it courage that we made so Ioly,
Which of the stars and bodies grement grow?
What ever it were this one point sure I know,
Which shall be mete for every man to mark:
Our lust and wills our evils chefely warke.
It may be well that planetes do enclyne,
And our complexions move our minds to ill,
But such is Reason, that they bring to fine
No work, vnayded of our lust and will:
For heaven and earth are subject both to skyl.
The skyl of God rules al, it is so strong,
Man may by skyl gyde things that to him long.
Though lust be sturdy and will inclined to naught,
This forced by mixture, that by heavens course,
Yet through the skyl God has in Reason wrought
And given man, no lust nor will so course
But may be stayed or swaged of the sourse,
So that it shall in nothing force the mind
To work our woe, or leave the proper kind.
But though this skill be geven every man
To rule the will, and keep the mind aloft,
For lack of grace full few use it can,
These worldly pleasures tickle us so often:
Skyl is not weak, but will strong, flesh is soft
And yeldes it self to pleasure that it loves,
And hales the mind to that it most reproves.
Now if this hap whereby we yield our mind
To lust and will, be fortune, as we name her,
Than is she justly called false and blind,
And no reproach can be to much to blame her:
Yet is the shame our own when so we shame her,
For sure this hap if it be rightly known,
Cummeth of our selves, and so the blame our own.
For who so lyveth in the skole of skyll
And medleth not with any worlds af^aires,
Forsakes pompes and honors that do spyl
The minds recourse to Graces quiet stayers,
His state no Fortune by no mean appayers:
For Fortune is the folly and plage of those
Which to the world their wretched wills dispose.
Among which Fools (Mark Baldwyn) I am one
That would not stay my self in mine estate.
I thought to rule, but to obey to none,
And therefore fell I with my King at bate.
And to the end I might him better mate,
John Mortimer I caused my self be called,
Whose Kingly blood the Henry's nigh had thralled.
This shift I used the people to persuade
To leave their Prince, on my side more to stick,
Whereas in deed my fathers name was Kade
Whose noble stock was never wurth a stick.
But touching wit I was both ripe and quick,
Had strength of lims, large stature, cumly face,
Which made men wene my lynage were not base.
And seeing stoutnes stuck by men in Kent
Whose Ualiaunt hearts refuse none enterprise,
With false persuasions strait to them I went,
And said they suffered to great iniuryes:
By mean whereof I caused them to rise,
And battle wise to cum to black heth plain
And thence their grefes unto the King complain.
Who being deaf (as men say) on that ear,
For we desired releace of subsidies,
Refused roughly our requests to hear
And came against us as his enemies.
But we to trap him, sought out subtiltyes,
Removed our camp, and ^acke to Senocke went,
After whom the Staffordes with their power were sent.
Se here how Fortune setting us a flote
Brought to our nets a portion of our pray.
For why the Staffordes with their army hot
Assailed us at Senocke, where we lay:
From whence alive they parted not away,
Which when the Kings retinew understood
They all affirmed my quarrel to be good
Which caused the king, and queen whom al did hate,
To raise their camp, and suddenly depart:
And that they might the peoples grudge abate,
To imprison sum full sore against their heart.
Lord Says was one, whom I made after smart*
For after the Staffordes and their ^ast was slain,
To Blackheath fyelde I marched back again.
And where the king would nothing hear before,
Now was he glad to send to know my mind:
And I thereby enflamed much the more,
Refused his grauntes, so folly made me blind.
For this he flewe and left lord Skales behind,
Mo help the town, and strengthen London tower,
Toward which I marched forward with my power.
And found there all things after my desire,
I entered London, did there what I list,
The Treasurer, lord Says, I did conspier
To have condemned: whereof when I mist,
(For he by law my malice did resist)
By force I took him in Guyld hall fro the heap,
And headed him before the cross in cheap.
His son in law, James Cromer shrive of Kent,
I caught at Mile end, where as than he lay:
Beheaded him, and on a poale I sent
His head to London, where his fathers lay.
With these two heads I made a pretty play,
For pight on poales I bare them through the street,
And for my sport made each kiss other sweet.
Than brake I prisons, let forth whom I would,
And used the city as it had be mine:
Took fram the marchanntes, money, ware, and gold:
From sum by force, from other sum by fine.
This at the length did cause them to repine,
So that lord Skales consenting with the mayre,
Forbad us to their city to repair.
For all this while mine host in Southwarke lay*
Who when they knew our passage was denied,
Came boldly to the bridge and made a fraye,
For in we would, the towns men us defied:
But when with strokes we had the matter tried,
We wan the bridge and set much part on fire,
This done, to Southwarke back we did retier.
The morrow after came the Chancellor
With general pardon for my men half gone,
Which heard and read, the rest within an hour
Shranke all away, each man to shift for one.
And when I saw they left me post alone,
I did disguise me like a knight of the post,
And into Sussex road away in post.
And there I lurked, till that cursed coin
That restles begle sought and found me out.
For strayt the king by promise did enjoin
A thousand mark, to whosoever might
Apprend my corse: which made men seek about.
Among the which one Alexander Iden,
Found out the hole wherein the fox was hidden.
But ere he took me, I put him to his trumpes,
For yield I would not while my hands would hold
But hope of money made him stur his stumpes,
And to assaul^ me valiauntly and bold.
Two hours and more our cumbate was not cold,
Til at the last he lent me such a stroke,
That down I fell, and never after spoke.
Than was my carkas carried like a hog,
To Southwarke borow where it lay a night,
The next day drawn to Newgate like a dog,
All men rejoicing at the rufull sight:
Than were on poales my parboylde quarters pight,
And set aloft for vermin to deuower,
Meet grave for rebels that resist the power.
Full litell know we wretches what we do,
When we presume our princes to resist.
We war with God, against his glory to,
That places in his office whom he list,
Therefore was never traitor yet but mist
The mark he shot, and came to shameful end
Nor never shall til God be forced to bend.
God has ordained the power, all princes be
His Lieutenauntes, or debities in realms,
Against their foes still therefore fights he,
And as his enmies drives them to extremes,
Their wise devises prove but doltish dreams.
No subject ought for any kind of cause,
To force the lord, but yield him to the laws.
And therefore Baldwin warn men follow reason
Subdue their wylles, and be not Fortunes slaves,
A troublous end does ever follow treason,
There is no trust in rebels, rascal knaves,
In Fortune less, which wurketh as the waves:
From whose assautes who list to stand at large,
Must follow skyll, and fly all worldly charge.
BY saint mary (quod one) if Jack were as well learned, as you have made his
oracion, What so ever he was by birth, I warraunt him a gentylman by his
learning. How notably and Philosopher like has he discrybed Fortune and the
causes of worldly cumbraunce? how vpryghtly also and how like a divine has
he determined the states both of officers and Rebels. For in deed officers be
gods deputies, and it is gods office which they bear, and it is he which
ordeyneth thereto such as himself lysteth, good when he favors the people,
and evyll when he will punysh them. And therefore whosoever rebelleth against
any ruler either good or bad, rebelleth against GOD, and shall be sure of a
wretched end: For God can not but maintein his deputy. Yet this I note by the
way concerning rebels and rebellions. Although the devil raise them, yet
God always uses them to his glory, as a part of his Justice. For when Kings
and chief rulers, suffer their under officers to mysuse their subjects, and
will not hear nor remedy their peoples wrongs when they complain, than (...)
GOD the Rebel to rage, and to execute that part of his Justice, which the
parcyall prince would not. For the Lord Says a very corrupt officer, and one
whom notwithstanding the king always main temed, was destroyed by this Jack,
as was also the bishop of Salysbury (a proud and coueitous prelate) by other
of the rebels. And therefore what soever prince desires to live quyatlye
without rebellion, must do his subjects right in all things, and punyshe
such officers as grieve or oppress them, thus shall they be sure from all
rebellion. And for the clerer opening hereof, it were well done to set forth
this Lord Says Tragedy. What need that (quod another) seeing the like example
is seen in the duke of Suffolk, whose doings are declared sufficiently
already. Nay rather let us go forward, for we have a great mayny behind that
may not be omytted, and the time as you see, passes away. As for this Lord
Says whom Cade so cruelly killed and spytefully used after his death (I dare
say) shall be known thereby what he was to all that read or hear this story.
For God would never have suffered him to have been so used, except he had first
deserved it. Therefore let him go, and with him the Bushop, and all other
slain in that rebellion: which was raised as it may be thought, through sum
dry^t of the duke of York, who shortly after began to endeavor all means to
attain the Crown, and ^^^refore gathered an army in Wales, and marched
toward London: but the king which his power tarried and met him at S. Albones.
Where while the king and he were about a treatye, therle of Warwyke set upon the
kings army, and uewe the duke of Somerset, the Earl of Northumberlande, the
Lord Clyfforde, and other, and in conclusion got the victory, and the duke
was made Lord Protector. Which so greved the Queen and her accomplices, that
pryvy grutches and open dissemblyng never ceased till the duke and his allies
were glad to fly the field and Realm, he into Irelande, they to Calayes,
whence they came again, with an army, whereof the Earl of Salisburye was
leader, and marched toward Coventry where ye king than was, and had gathered an
army to subdue them, and encountered them at Northhampton, and fought and lost
the fyelde and was taken him self, the duke of Buckingham, the earl of
Shrewesbury, the vicounte Beaumount, the Lord Egermount, and many other of his
retinue slain. If no man have any mind to any of these noble personages
because they were honorably slain in battay^e, let sum man else take the
Book, for I mind to say sumwhat of this duke of Somerset.

While he was deuisyng thereon, and every man seking farther notes, I looked on
the Cronicles, and fynding still fyelde upon fyelde, and many noble men slain,
I purposed to have ouerpassed all, for I was so wearye that I waxed drowsye,
and began in deed to slumber: but my imaginacion still prosecutyng this
ragicall matter, brought me such a fantasy. me thought there stood before us,
a tall man's body full of fresshe wounds, but lackyng a head, holdyng by the
hand a goodlye child, whose breast was so wounded yt his heart might be seen,
his lovely face and eyes disfigured with dropping tears, his hear through
horror standing vpryght, his mercy cravyng hands all to bemangled, and all
his body embrued with his own blood. And when through the gastfulnes of this
pyteous spectacle, I wared afeard, and turned away my face, me thought there
came a shrekyng voice out of the weasande pipe of the headles body, saying as
follows.

How Richard Plantagenet duke of York was slain through his over rash
boldness, and his son the earl of Rutland for his lack of valiauns.
TRust Fortune (quod he) in who^ was never trust,
O folly of men that have no better grace,
All rest, renown, and deeds lie in the dust
Of all the sort that sue her slipper trace.
What meanest thou Baldwin for to hide thy face?
Thou nedest not fear although I miss my head:
Nor yet to mourn, for this my son is dead.
The cause why thus I lead him in my hand,
His skin with blud and tears so sore bestaynd.
Is that thou may the better understand
How hardly Fortune has for us ordaynde:
In whom her love and hate be hole contaynde.
For I am Richard prince Plantagenet,
The duke of York in royal raze beget.
For Richard earl of Cambridge, eldest son
Of Edmund Langley, third son of king Edward,
Engendered me of Anne, whose course did run
Of Mortimers to be the issue guard:
For when her brother Edmund died a ward,
She was sole hayer by due descent of line,
Whereby her rightes and titles al were mine,
But mark me now I pray thee Baldwin mark,
And see how force often overbeareth right:
Way how usurpers tyrannously warke,
To keep by murder that they get by might,
And note what troublous dangers do alight
On such as seek to reposses their own,
And how through rigor right is overthrowen.
The earl of Herford, Henry Bolenbrooke,
Of whom duke Mowbray told thee now of late,
When void of cause he had king Richard took:
He murdered him, usurped his estate,
Without all right or title, saving hate
Of others rule, or love to rule alone:
These two excepted, title had he none.
The realm and crown was Edmund Mortimers
Whose father Roger, was king Richardes hair,
Which caused Henry and the Lancasters
To seek all shifts, our housholdes to appayre,
For sure he was to sit beside the chair
Were we of power to claim our lawful right,
Wherefore to stroye us he did all he might.
His cursed sun ensued his cruel path.
And kept my giltles cousin strayt in duraunce:
For whom my father hard entreated has.
But living hopeles of his lives assurance
He thought it best by politik procuraunce,
To prive the king, and so restore his friend:
Which brought him self to an infamous end.
For when king Henry of that name the fifth,
Had taken my father in this conspiracy,
He from Sir Edmund all the blame to shift,
Was feign to say the French king, his ally,
Had hired him this traiterous act to try,
For which condemned, shortly he was slain.
In helping right this was my fathers gain.
Thus when the lineage of the Mortimers
Were made away by this usurping line,
Sum hanged, sum slain, sum pined prisoners:
Because the crown by right of law was mine,
They began as fast against me to repine:
In fear always least I should stir them strife.
For gilty hearts have never quiet life.
Yet at the last in Henryes days the sixth,
I was restored to my fathers lands,
Made duke of York. wherthrough my mind I firt,
To get the crown and kingdom in my hands.
For aid wherein I knit assured bands
With Nevels stock, whose daughter was my make
Who for no woe would ever me forsake.
O lord what hap had I through marriage,
Four goodly boys in youth my wife she boore.
Right valiant men, and prudent for their age.
Such brethren she had and nephews still in store,
As none had erst, nor any shall have more:
The earl of Salisbury, and his son of Warwike,
Were matchles men from Barbary to Barwike.
Through help of whom and Fortunes lovely look
I undertook to claim my lawful right,
And to abash such as against me took,
I raised power at all points pressed to fight:
Of whom the chief that chiefly bare me spite,
Was Somerset the Duke, whom to annoy
I always sought, through spite, spite to vistroy.
And maugre him, so choice lo was my chance,
Yea though the queen that all ruled took his part,
I twice bare stroke in Normandy and France,
And last liuetenant in Ireland, where my heart
Found remedy for every kind of smart.
For through the love my doings there did bread,
I had their help at all times in my need.
This spiteful duke, his silly king and queen.
With armed hosts I thrice met in the ^ield,
The first unfought through treaty made between,
The second ioynde, wherein the king did yield,
The duke was slain, the queen enforst to shylde
Her self by flight. The third the queen did fight,
Where I was slain being overmacht by might.
Before this last were other battayles three,
The first the earl of Salisbury led alone,
And fought on Bloreheth, and got the victory:
In the next was I and my kinsfolk euerythone.
But seeing our soldiers stale unto our foen,
We warely brake our cumpany on a night,
Dissolved our hoaste, and took our selves to flight.
This boy and I in Ireland did us save,
Mine eldest son with Warwick and his father,
To Caleys got, whence by the read I gave
They came again to London, and did gather
An other host, whereof I spoke not rather:
And met our foes, slew many a lord and knight,
And took the King, and drove the Queen to flight.
This done came I to England all in haste.
To make my claim unto the realm and crown:
And in the house while parliament did last,
I in the kings seat boldly sat me down,
And claymed it: whereat the lords did frown,
But what for that, I did so well proceed,
That al at last confessed it mine in deed.
But since the king had rayned now so long,
They would he should continue til he died,
And to the end that than none did me wrong,
Protect^ur and heir apparent they me cried:
But since the Queen and others this denied,
I sped me toward the North, where than she lay,
In mind by force to cause her to obey.
Whereof she warnde prepared a mighty power,
And ere that mine were altogether ready,
Came bold to Boswurth, and besieged my bower.
Where like a beast I was so rash and heady,
That out I would, there could be no remedy,
With skant five thousand soldiers, to assail
Four times so many, encampt to most avayle.
And so was slain at first: and while my child
Skarce twelve year old, sought secretly to part,
That cruel Clifford, lord, nay Lorell wild,
While the infant wept, and prayed him rue his smart
Knowing what he was, with his dagger cla^e, his heart:
This done he came ^o the camp where I lay dead,
Dispoylde my corpse, and cut away my head.
And when he had put a paper crown thereon,
As a gawring stock he sent it to the Queen,
And she for spite, commanded it anon
To be had to York: where that it might be seen,
They placed it where other traitors been.
This mischief Fortune did me after death,
Such was my life, and such my loss of breath.
Wherefore see Baldwin that thou set it forth
To the end the fraud of Fortune may be known,
That eke all princes well may way the wurth:
Of things, for which the seeds of war be sown:
No state so sure but soon is overthrowen.
No worldly good can counterpeyze the prise,
Of half the pains that may thereof arise.
Far better it were to loose a piece of right,
Than limbs and life in sousing for the same.
It is not force of friendship nor of might,
But god that causes things to fro or frame.
Not wit, but luck, does wield the winners game.
Wherefore if we our follies would refrain,
Time would redres all wrongs, we void of pain.
Wherefore warue princes not to wade in war,
For any cause, except the realms defense:
Their troublous titles are vnwurthy far,
The blud, the life, the spoil of innocence.
Of friends and foes behold my foul expense,
And never the nere: best therefore tarry time,
So right shall reign, and quiet calm each crime.
WIth this, master Ferrers shook me by the sleve, saying: why how now man, do
you forget your self? belike you mind our matters very much: So I do in deed
(quod I) For I dream of them. And when I had rehearced my dream, we had long
talk concerning the natures of dreams, which to stint and to bring us to our
matter again, thus said one of them: I am glad it was your chance to dream
of Duke Richard, for it had been pity to have overpassed him. And as concerning
this lord Clyfford which so cruelly killed his son, I purpose to geve you
notes: who (as he welde served) came shortly after to a sudden death, and yet
to good for so cruel a tiraunt. Wherefore as you thought you saw and heard the
headles duke speak through his neck, so suppose you see this lord Clifford all
armed save his head, with his breast plate all gore blood running from his
throat, wherein an hedles arrow sticks, through which wound he says thus:

How the lord Clyfford for his strange and abominable cruelty, came to as
strange and sudden a death.
OPen confession areth open penance,
And wisdom would a man his shame to hide:
Yet since forgeuenes cummeth through repentance
I think it best that men their crimes ascried,
For naught so secret but at length is spied:
For cover fire, and it will never linne
Til it break forth, in like case shame and sin.
As for my self my faults be out so plain
And published so broad in every place,
That though I would I can not hide a grain.
All care is bootles in a cureles case,
To learn by others grief sum have the grace,
And therefore Baldwin write my wretched fall,
The brief whereof I briefly utter shall.
I am the same that slew duke Richardes child
The lovely babe that begged life with tears.
Whereby my honor fowly I defilde.
Poor selly lambs the Lion never tears:
The feeble mouse may lie among the bears:
But wrath of man his rancour to requite,
Forgets all reason, ruth, and virtue quite.
I mean by rancour the parentall wreke
Surnamde a virtue (as the vicious say)
But little know the wicked what they speak,
In boldning us our enmyes kin to slay,
To punish sin, is good, it is no nay.
They wreke not sin, but merit wreke for sin,
That wreke the fathers faults upon his kyn.
Because my father lord John Clifford died
Slain at S. Albons, in his princes aid.
Against the duke my heart for malice fried,
So that I could from wreke no way be stayed.
But to avenge my fathers death, assayde
All means I might the duke of York to annoy.
And all his kin and friends to kill and stroy.
This made me with my bluddy daggar wound.
His giltles sun that never against me sturde:
His fathers body lying dead on ground,
To pearce with spear, eke with my cruel swurd
To part his neck, and with his head to bourd,
Envested with a paper royal crown,
From place to place to bear it up and down.
But cruelty can never skape the skourge
Of shame, of horror, and of sudden death.
Repentance self that other sins may pourge,
Does fly sc^o^^ this, so sore the soul it slays,
Despair dissolves the tirauntes bitter breath*
For sudden vengeance suddenly alightes
On cruel heads, to quite their cruel spightes.
(...) The infamous end of Lord John Tiptoft Earl of VVurcester, for cruelly
executing his princes butcherly commandments.
THe glorious man is not so loath to lurk,
As the infamous glad to lie unknown:
Which makes me Baldwin disalow thy wurke,
Where princes faults so openly be blown.
I speak not this alonely for mine own
Which were my princes (if that they were any)
But for my Pyers, in number very many.
Or might report uprightly use her tongue,
It would less greve us to augment thy matter.
But suer I am thou shall be forced among,
To frayne the truth, the living for to ^atter:
And otherwhiles in points unknown to smatter.
For time never was, nor ever I think shall be,
That truth vnshent should speak in all things fre.
This does appear (I dare say) by my story,
Which diverse writers diversely declare,
But story writers ought for neither glory,
Fear, nor favor, truth of things to spare.
But still it fares as always it did fare,
Affection, fear, or doubts that daily brue,
Do cause that stories never can be true.
Unfruytfull Fabyan folewed the face
Of time and d^des, but let the causes ^ip:
Which Hall has added, but with double grace,
For fear I think least trouble might him trip:
For this or that (says he) he felt the whip.
Thus story writers leave the causes out,
Or so rehears them, as they were in dout.
But seeing causes are the chiefest things
That should be noted of the story writers,
That men may learn what ends al causes bringes
They be vnwurthy the name of Croniclers,
That leave them clean out of their registers,
Or doubtfully report them: for the fruit
Of reading stories, stand^th in the suite.
And therefore Baldwin either speak upright
Of our affairs, or touch them not at all:
As for my self I way al things so light,
That naught I pass how men report my fall.
The truth whereof yet plainly show I shall,
That thou may write, and other thereby read,
What things I did, whereof they should take heed.
Thou have heard of Tiptoftes erfes of Wurcester
I am that John that lived in Edwardes days
The fourth, and was his friend and counsayler,
And Butcher to, as common rumor says.
But peoples voice is neither shame nor praise:
For whom they would alive devour to day,
To morrow dead, they will wurship what they may.
But though the peoples ^erdit go by chaune^,
Yet was there cause to call me as they did.
For I enforst by mean of governance,
Did execute what ever my king did bid.
From blame herein my self I can not ryd,
But fie upon the wretched state, that must
Defaine it self, to serve the princes lust.
The chiefest crime wherewith men do me charge,
Is death of the Earl of Desmundes noble sons.
Of which the kings charge does me clear discharge,
By strayt commandment and Injunctions:
Theffect whereof so rigorously runs,
That either I must procure to se them dead,
Or for contempt as a traitor lose my head.
What would mine enemies do in such a case,
Obey the king, or proper death procure?
They may well say their fancy for a face,
But life is sweet, and love hard to recure.
They would have done as I did I am sure:
For seldom will a welthy man at ease
For others cause his prince in ought displease.
How much less I, which was lieutenant than
In the Irishe isle, preferred by the king:
But who for love or dread of any man,
Consentes to accomplish any wicked thing,
Although chief fault thereof from other spring,
Shall not eskape Gods vengeance for his deed,
Who sauseth none that dare do ill for dread.
This in my king and me may well appear,
Which for our faults did not eskape the scourge:
For when we thought our states most sure and clear
The wind of Warwick blew up such a sourge
As from the realm and crown the king did pourge,
And me both from mine office, friends, and wife,
From good report, from honest death, and life.
For Therle of Warwick through a cancard grudge,
Which to king Edward causeles he did bear,
Out of his realm by force did make him trudge,
And set king Henry again upon his chair.
And then all such as Edwardes lovers were
As traitors taken, were grievously oppressed,
But chiefly I, because I loved him best.
And for my goods and livinges were not small,
The gapers for them bare the world in hand
For ten years space, that I was cause of all
The exeen^ions done within the land.
For this did such as did not understand
My enmies drift, think all reports were true:
And so to hate me wurse than any Jew.
For seeldome shall a ruler lose his life,
Before false rumors openly be spread:
Whereby this proverb is as true as rise,
That rulers rumors hunt about a head.
Frown Fortune once all good report is fled:
For present show does make the mayny blind,
And such as see, dare not disclose their mind.
Through this was I king Edwardes butcher named,
And bare the shame of all his cruel deeds:
I clear me not, I wurthely was blamed,
Though force was such I must obey him needs.
With highest rulers seldom well it spedes,
For they ve ever nearest to the nip,
And fault who shall, for all feel they the whip.
For when I was by parliament attaynted,
King Edwardes evilles all were counted mine.
No truth avaylde, so lies were fast and painted,
Which made the people at my life repine,
Crying: Crucifige, kill that butchers line:
That when I should have gone to Blockaut feast,
I could not pass so sore they on me preast.
And had not been the officers so strong
I think they would have eaten me alive,
Howbeit hardly haled from the throng,
I was in the Fleet fast shrouded by the shrive.
These one days life their malice did me give:
Which when they knew, for spite the next day after,
They kept them calm, so suffeed I the slaughter.
Now tell me Baldwin, what fault do thou find,
In me, that lustly should such death deserve?
None sure, except desire of honor blind,
Which made me seek in offices to serve.
What mind so good, that honors make not swerve?
So may thou see, it only was my state
That caused my death, and brought me so in hate.
Warn therefore all men, wisely to beware,
What offices they enterprise to bear:
The highest always most maligned are,
Of peoples grudge, and princes hate in fear.
For princes faults his faultors all men tear.
Which to avoid, let none such office take,
Save he that can for right his prince forsake.
THis Earls tragedy was not so soon finished, but one of the cumpany had
provided for an other, of a notable person, lord Tiptoftes chief enemy:
concerning whom he said: Lord god, what trust is there in worldly chau^ces?
what stay in any prosperity? for see, the Earl of Warwick which caused the
earl of Wurcester to be apprehended, attaynted, and put to death, triumphing
with his old imprisoned, and new vnprisoned prince king Henry, was by and by
after (and his brother with him) flayne at Barnet field by king Edward, who^ he
had before time damaged diverse ways. As first by his friends at Banbury field,
where to revenge the death of his Cousin Harry Nevel, Sir John Conyers and John
Clappain his servants slew five thousand Welshemen, and beheaded their
captains, the earl of Pen broke, and sir Rychard Harbert his brother after
they were yielded prisoners: of whom sir Rychard Harbert was ^he tallest
gentleman both of his person and hands that ever I read or heard of. At which
time also, Robyn of Ridsdale, a rebel of the earl of Warwyks raising, took
the earl Rivers king Edwardes wifes father, and his son John, at his manor
of Grafion, and carried them to Northhampton, and there without cause or process
beheaded them. Which spites to requite, king Edward caused the lord Stafford of
Southwike one of Warwikes chyefe friends to be taken at Brent march, and headed
at Budgewater. This caused the Earl shortly after to raise his power, to
encounter the king which came against him with an army beside Warwike, at
Wouluey where he wan the field, took the king prisoner, and kept him a while at
Yorkshire in Middleham castle: whence (as sum say) he released him again, but
other think he corrupted his kepers, and so escaped. Then through the lords
the matter was taken up between them, and they brought to talk together: but
because they could not agree, the earl raised a new army, whereof he made
captain the lord Wells son which broyle king Edward minding to appeace by
policy, fowly distayned his honor committing peruiry. For he sent for the lord
Wells and his brother sir Thomas Dunocke, under safeconduyte promising the^
upon his faith to keep the^ harmles: But after, because the Lord Walls son
would not dissolve his army, beheded the^ both, and went with his power down
into Lincolnshire, and there fought with sir Robert Welless, and slew ten
thousand of his soldiers yet ran they away so fast, that the casting of of
their clothes for the more speed, caused it to be called loose-coate fyeld) and
took sir Robert and other, and put them to death in the same place. This
misfortune forced the earl of Warwike to sail into France where he was well
entertained of yt king a while, and at last with such poor help as he
procured there of duke Rayner and other he came unto England again, and
increased such a power in King Henry's name yt as the lord Tiptoft, said in his
tragedy, king Edward unable to abide him, was feign to fly over the washes in
Lincolnshire to get a ship to sail out of his kingdom to ^is brother in law
the duke of Burgoyne: So was king Henry restored again to the kingdom. Al
these despites and troubles the Earl w^ought against king Edward, but Henry
was so ^nfortunate that ere half a year was exp^red, king Edward came back
again, and imprisoned him, and gave the earl a sielde, wherein (...) s^w both
him and his brother. I have recounted thus much before hand for the better
ope^ing of the story, which if it should have been spoken in his traged^ would
rather have mad^ a volume tha^ a Pamphlete. For I ente^de only to say in the
tragedy, what I have (...) the Earl of Warwycke person (...) other noble m^n,
wham I have by the way touched, should not be forgotten.

And therefore imagine that you see this Earl lying with his brother in Paul's
church in his coat armure, with such a face and countenance as he bears in
portrayture over the door in Poules, at the going down to Jesus Chapel fro
the south end of the quier stayres, and saying as follows.

How sir Richard Nevell Earl of VVarvvike, and his brother John Lord Marquise
Mountacute through their to much boldness were slain at Barnet field.
AMong the he any heap of happy knights,
Whom Fortune stalde upon her stayles stage,
Often hoyst on hye, often pight in wretched plightes,
Behold me Baldwin, a per se of my age,
Lord Richard Nevell, Earl by marriage
Of Warwike duchy, of Sarum by descent,
Which erst my father through his marriage hent.
Would thou behold false Fortune in her kind
Note well my life so shall thou see her naked:
Full fair before, but toto foul behind,
Most drowsy still when most she semes awaked:
My fame and shame her shift full often has shaked,
By enterchaunge, allow and up alofte,
The Luysard like that changes hew full often.
For while the Duke of York in life remained
Mine uncle dear, I was his happy hand:
In all attemptes my purpose I attained,
Though King and Queen and most Lords of the land
With all their power did often me withstand,
For god gave Fortune, and my good behavior,
Did from their prince steal me the peoples favor,
So that through me in feldes right manly fought,
By force mine uncle took king Harry twice:
And for my cousin Edward so I wrought,
When both our syers were slain through rash advice:
That he achieved his fathers enterprise:
For into Scotland King and Queen we chased,
By mean whereof the kingdom he embraced.
Which after he had enioyde in quiet peace,
(For shortly after was king Henry take,
And put in prison) his power to encreace,
I went to France, and matched him with a make,
The French kings daughter, whom he did forsake:
For while with pain I brought his suit to pass,
He to a widow rashly wedded was.
This made the French king shrewdly to suspecte,
That all my treaties had but ill pretense,
And when I saw my king so bent to lust,
That with his faith he past not to dispense,
Which is a princes honors chief defense,
I could not rest (...) I had found a mean.
To mend his miss, or else to mar him clean.
Wherefore I allied me with his brother George,
Encensing him his brother to malign
Through many a tale I did against him forge:
So that through power we did from Calays bring
And found at home, we frayed so the king,
That he to go to Freseland ward amayne,
Whereby king Henry had the crown again.
Then put we the earl of Wurcester to death
King Edwardes friend, a man to foul defamed:
And in the while came Edward into breath,
For with the duke of Burgoyne so he framed.
That with the power that he to him had named,
Unlooked for he came to England strayt,
And got to York, and took the town by sleyte.
And after through the sufferans of my brother,
Which like a beast occasion fowly lost,
He came to London safe with many other,
And took the town to good king Harries cost,
Which was through him from post to pillar tossed,
Til therle of Oxeford, I, and other more,
Assembled power his fredome to restore.
Whereof king Edward warned came with speed,
And camped with his oste at Barnet town,
Where we right fierce encountered him in deed
On Easter day, right early on the down,
There many a man was slain and stricken down
On either side, and neither part did gain
Til I and my brother both at length were slain.
For we to harten our overmatched men,
Forsook our stedes, and in the thickest throng,
Ran preacing forth on foot, and fought so then,
That down we drove them were they never so strong.
But ere this inche had lasted very long:
With number and force we were so fowlye cloyed
And rescue failed, that quite we were destroyed.
Now tell me Baldwin have thou heard or read,
Of any man that did as I have done?
That in his time so many armies led,
And victory at every vyage wunne?
Have thou ever heard of subject under son,
That plaaste and baaste his soveraynes so often,
By enterchaunge, now low, and than alost?
Perchance thou think my doings were not such
As I and other do affirm they were.
And in thy mind I see thou musest much
What means I used, that should me so prefer:
Wherein because I will thou shall not err,
The truth of all I will at large recite,
The short is this: I was no hippocrite.
I never did nor said, save what I mente,
The common weal was still my chiefest care,
To private gain or glory I was not bent,
I never passed upon delicious fare.
Of nedeful food my bourde was never bare.
No creditour did curs me day by day.
I used playnnes, ever pitch and pay.
I heard old soldiers, and poor wurkemen whine
Because their duties were not duly paid.
Again I saw how people did repine,
At those through whom their paimentes were delayed:
And proof (...) often assure (as scripture said)
That god does wreke the wretched peoples griefs,
I saw the polles cut of fro polling thev^s.
This made me always justly for to deal.
Which when the people plainly understood,
Because they saw me mind the common weal
They still endeavored how to do me good,
Ready to spend their substance, life, and blud,
In any cause whereto I did them move
For suer they were it was for their behove.
And so it was. For when the realm decade,
By such as good king Henry sore abused,
To mende the state I gave his enmies aid:
But when king Edward sinful pranl^es still used,
And would not mend, I l^kewise him refused:
And help up Henry the better of the twain,
And in his quarrel (just I think) was slain.
And therefore Baldwin teach by proof of me,
That such as covet peoples love to get,
Must see their wurkes and wurdes in all agree:
Live liberally, and keep them out of det,
On common weal let al their care be set,
For upright dealing, dets paid, poor sustained,
Is mean whereby all hearts are throwly gained,
As Soon as the Earl had ended his admonicion, sure (quod one) I think the
Earl of Warwike although he were a glorious man, has said no more of him self
than what is true. For if he had not had notable good virtues, or virtuous
qualities, and used lawdable means in his trade of life, the people would
never have loved him as they did: But god be with him, and send his soul rest,
for sure his body never had any. And although he dyed, yet civil wars ceased
not. For immediatlye after his death, came Queen Margarete with a power out of
France, bringing with her her yo^g son prince Edward, and with such friends
as she found here, gave king Edward a battle at Tewrbury, where both she and
her son were taken prisoners, with Edmund duke of Somerset her chief
captain: whose son lord John, and the earl of Devonshire, were slain in
the fight, and the duke him self with diverse other immediatlye beheaded: whose
infortunes are wurthy to be remembered, chiefly Prince Edwardes, whom the king
for speaking truth, cruelly stroke with his gauntlet, and his brethren
tirannously murdered. But saying the time so far spente, I will pass them
over, and with them Fawconbridge that ioly rover, beheaded at Southhampton:
whose commocion made in Kent, was cause of sely Henry's destruction. And seeing
king Henrye him self was cause of the destruction of many noble princes, being
of all other most unfortunate him self, I will declare what I have noted in
his unlucky life: who wounded in prison with a dagger, may lament his
wretchedues in manner falowing.

How king Henry the syxt a virtuous prince, was after many other miseries
cruelly murdered in the Tovver of London.
IF ever woeful wight had cause to rue his state,
Or by his rufull plight to move men moan his fate,
My piteous playnt may preace my mishaps to rehearce,
whereof the least most lightly heard, the hardest heart may pearce
What heart so hard can hear, of innocens oppressed
By fraud in worldly goods, but melts in the breast
When giltles men be spoylde, imprisoned for their own,
who wayleth not their wretched case to who^ the cause is known
The Lion licketh the sores of selly wounded sheep,
The deadmans corse may cause the Crocodile to weep,
The waves that waste the rocks, refresh the rotten redes,
Such ruth the wrack of innocens in cruel creature bredes.
What heart is than so hard, but will for pitye blede,
To hear so cruel luck so clear a life succeed?
To see a silly soul with woe and sorrow souste,
A king deprived, in prison pente, to death with daggars doust.
Would god the day of birth had brought me to my beer,
Than had I never felt the change of Fortunes cheer.
Would god the grave had gript me in her gredy woumbe,
When crown in cradle made m^king, with (...)
Would god the rufull toumbe had been my royal trone,
So should no kingly charge have made me make my moan:
O that my soul had flowen to heaven with the joy,
When one sort cried: God save the king, another, Vive le roy.
So had I not been washed in waves of worldly woe,
My mind to quiet bent, had not been tossed so:
My friends had been alyve, my subjects vnopprest:
But death or cruel destiny, denied me this rest.
Alas what should we count the cause of wretches cares,
The stars do stir them up, Astronomy declares:
Or humors says the leache, the double true divines,
To the will of god, or ill of man, the doubtful cause assigns.
Such doltish heads as dream that all things drive by haps,
Count lack of former care for cause of afterclaps.
Astributing to man a power fro God bereft,
Abusing us, and robbing him, through their most wicked theft.
But god does gide the world, and every hap by skyll,
Our wit and willing power are paysed by his will:
What wit most wisely wards, and will most deadly vrkes,
Though al our power would press it down, does dash our warest wurkes.
Than destiny, our sin, Gods will, or else his wreake,
Do wurke our wrethed woes, for humors b^ to weak:
Except we take them so, as they provoke to sin,
For through our lust by humors fed, al vicious deeds begin
So sin and they be one, both wurking like effect,
And cause the wrath of God to wreake the soul infect,
Thus wrath and wreake divine, man's sins and humors ill,
Concur in one, though in a sort, each does a course fulfill.
If likewise such as say the welken fortune warkes,
Take Fortune for our fate, and sterres thereof the marks,
Then destiny with fate, and Gods will al be one:
But if they mean it otherwise, skath causers skies be none.
Thus of our heavy happes, chief causes be but twain,
Whereon the rest depend, and vnderput remain.
The chief the will divine, called destiny and fate,
The other sin, through humors help, which god does highly hate,
The first appoynteth pain for good men's exercise,
The second does deserve due punishment for vice:
This witnesses the wrath, and that the love of God,
The good for love, the bad for sin, God beats with his rod.
Although my sundry sins do place me with the wurst,
My happes yet cause me hope to be among the furst:
The eye that searches all, and sees every thought.
Does know how sore I hated sin, and after virtue sought.
The solace of the soul my chiefest pleasure was,
Of wordly pomp, of fame, or game, I did not pas:
My kingdoms nor my crown I prised not a crum:
In heaven were my rytches heapt, to which I sought to cum.
Yet were my sorrows such as never man had like,
So diverse storms at once, so often did me strike:
But why, God knows, not I, except it were for this
To show by patarne of a prince, how britle honor is.
Our kingdoms are but cares, our state deuoyde of stay,
Our riches ready snares, to hasten our decay:
Our pleasures privy pricks our vices to provoke,
Our po^pe a pumpe, our fame a flame, our power a smouldring smoke.
I speak not but by proof, and that may many rue.
My life does cry it out, my death does try it true:
Whereof I will in brief, rehearce my heavy hap,
That Baldwin in his woeful warpe, my wretch dues may wrap.
In Windsore borne I was* and bare my fathers name,
Who wanne by war all France to his eternal fame:
And left to me the crown, to be received in peace,
Through marriage made with Charles his hair, upon his life's decease.
Which shortly did ensue, yet died my father furst,
And both their realms were mine, ere I a year were nursed:
Which as they fell to soon, so faded they as fast,
For Charles and Edward got them both, or fortye years were past
Thi^ Charles was eldest son of Charles my father in law,
To whom as heir of France, the Frenchmen did them draw.
But Edward was the heir of Richard duke of York.
The hayer of Roger Mortimer, slain by the kerne of Korke,
Before I came to age Charles had recovered France,
And kilde my men of war, so lucky was his chance:
And through a mad contract I made with Rayners daughter,
I gave and lost all Normandy, the cause of many a slaughter.
First of mine uncle Humfrey, abhorring sore this act,
Because I thereby brake a better precontracte:
Tha^ of the flattring duke that first the marriage made,
The just reward of such as dare their princes ill persuade.
And I poor sely wretch abode the brunt of all:
My marriage just so sweet was (...)
My wife was wise and good had (...)
^
Wherefore warn men beware how they just promise break
Least proof of paynful plagues do cause them wail the wreke:
Advise well ere they grant, but what they grant, perform.
For god will plage all doublenes, although we feel no wourme
I falsely borne in hand beleved I did well,
But al things be not true that learned men do tell:
My clergy said a prince was to no promis bound,
Whose words to be no gospel tho, I to my grief have found.
For after marriage ioynde Queen Margarete and me,
For one mishap before, I daily met with three:
Of Normandy and France Charles got away my crown,
The Duke of York and other sought at home to put me down.
Bellona rang the bell at home and all abroad,
With whose mishaps amayne fell Fortune did me lode:
In France I lost my fortes, at home the soughten field,
My kindred slain, my friends oppressed, my self enforste to yield
Duke Richard took me twice, and forced me to resign,
My crown, and titles, due unto my fathers ligne:
And kept me as a ward, did all things as him list,
Til time my wife through bluddy sword had ^ane me from his fyst.
But though she slew the duke, my sorrows did not slake,
But like to hiders head, still more and more awake:
For Edward through the aid of Warwick and his brother,
From one field drove me to the Skots, and took me in another.
Then went my fre^des to wrack, for Edward ware the crown
For which for nine years space his prison held me down:
Yet thence through Warwikes wurke I was again releast,
And Edward driven fro the realm, to seek his friends by East.
But what prevayleth pain, or prouidens of man
To help him to good hap, whom destiny does ban?
Who moyleth to remove the rock out of the mud,
Shall myer him self, and hardly skape the swelling of the flud.
This al my friends have found and I have felt it so.
Ordained to be the touch of wretchedness and woe,
For ere I had a year possessed my seat again,
I lost both it and liberty, my helpers all were slain.
For Edward first by stelth, and since by gadered strength,
Arrived and got to York and London at the length:
Took me and tied me up, yet Warwike was so stout,
He came with power to Barnet fyelde, in hope to help me out.
And there alas was slain, with many a wurthy knight.
O Lord that ever such luck should hap in helping right:
Last came my wife and son, that long lay in exyle,
Defied the King, and fought a fyelde, I may bewalle the whsle.
For there mine only son, not thirtene year of age,
Was taken and murdered strayte, by Edward in his rage:
And shortly I my self to stynt al further strife
Stabbed with his brothers bluddy blade in prison lost my life.
Lo here the heavy happes which happened me by heap,
See here the pleasant fruytes that many princes reap,
The payneful plagues of those that break their lawful bands,
Their mede which may and will not save their friends fro bluddy hands.
God grant my woeful haps to grievous to rehearce,
May teach all states to know how depely dangers pearce:
How frail al honors are, how brittle worldly bliss,
That warned through my fearful fate, they fear to do amys.
THis tragedy ended, an other said: either you or king Henry are a good
philosopher, so narowly to argue the causes of misfortunes: but there is nothing
to experience, which taught, or might teach ye king this lesson. but to proceed
in our matter, I find mention here shortly after ye death of this king, of a
duke of Excester found dead in the sea between Dover and Calays, but what he
was, or by what adventure he died, master Fabian has not showed, and master
Hall has overskipped him: so that except we be frendlier unto him, he is
like to be double drowned, both in the sea, and in the gulf of forgetfulness.
About this matter was much talk, but because one took upon him to seek out
that story, that charge was committed to him. And to be occupied the mean
while, I found the storye of one drowned likewise, and that so notably, though
privily that all the world knew of it: wherefore I said: because night
approaches, and that we will lose no time, ye shall hear what I have noted
concerning the duke of Clarens, king Edwardes brother, who al to be washed in
wine, may bewail his infortune after this manner.

How George Plantagenet third son of the Duke of York, was by his brother
King Edward wrongfully imprisoned, and by his brother Richard miserably
murdered.
THe foul is foul men say, that files the nest.
which makes me loath to speak now, might I choose,
But seeing time unburdened has her breast,
And fame blown up the blast of all abuse,
My silence rather might my life accuse
Than shroud our shame, though feign I would it so:
For truth will out, though all the world say no.
And therefore Baldwin heartily I the beseech.
To pause awhile upon my heavy playnt,
And though uneath I utter spedy spech,
No fault of wit, or folly makes me saint:
No heady drinks have geven my tongue attayn^e
Through quaffing craft, yet wine my wits confou^d
Not which I drank of, but wherein I dround.
What prince I am although I need not show.
Because my wine bewrayes me by the smell,
For never was creature sowst in Bacchus dew^
To death but I, through Fortunes rigor fell:
Yet that thou may my story better tell,
I will declare as briefly as I may,
My wealth, my woe, and causers of decay.
The famous house sournamed Plantagenet,
Whereat dame Fortune frowardly did frown,
White Bolenbroke unjustly sought to set
His lord king Richard quite beside the crown,
Though many a day it wanted due renown,
God so preserved by prouidens and grace,
That lawful heirs did never fail the race.
For Lionell king Edwardes elder child,
Both uncle and hair to Richard yssulesse,
Begot a daughter Philip, whom vnfilde
The earl of March espousde, and god did bless
With fruit assinde the kingdom to possess:
I mean sir Roger Mortimer, whose hayer
The earl of Cambridge married Anne the fayer.
This earl of Cambridge Richard clept by name,
Was son to Edmund Langley duke of York:
Which Edmund was fifth brother to the same
Duke Lyonel, that all this line does korke:
Of which two houses joined in a forke,
My father Richard prince Plantagenet
True duke of York, was lawful heir beget.
Who took to wife as you shall understand
A maiden of a noble house and old,
Raulfe Nebels daughter Earl of Westmerland:
Whose son Earl Richard was a baron bold,
And had the right of Salysbury in bold,
Through marriage made with good Earl Thomas hayer,
Whose earned praises never shall appaire.
The duke my father had by this his wife,
Four sons, of whom the eldest Edward hight,
The second John, who lost in youth his life,
At wakefield slain by Clifford cruel knight.
I George am third of Clarence duke by right.
The fowerth borne to the mischief of us all,
Was duke of Gloucester, whom men Richard call.
When as our syer in suit of right was slain,
(Whose life and death him self declared cursed,)
My brother Edward plied his cause amayne,
And got the crown, as Warwick has rehearst:
The pride whereof so deep his stomach pearst,
That he forgot his friends, dispisde his kin,
Of oath or office passing not a pin.
Which made the earl of Warwike to malign.
My brothers state, and to attempt a way,
To bring from prison Henry selly king,
To help him to the kingdom if he may.
And knowing me to be the chiefest stay,
My brother had, he did me undermine
To cause me to his treasons to incline.
Whereto I was prepared long before,
My brother had been to me so unkind:
For sure no cankar fretteth flesh so sore,
As unkind dealing does a loving mind.
Loves strongest bands unkindness does unbind,
It moves love to malice, zele to hate,
Chief friends to foes, and brethren to debate.
And though the Earl of Warwike subtle syer,
Perceyved I bare a grudge against my brother,
Yet toward his feat to set me more on fire,
He kindeled by one firebrand with another:
For knowing fancy was the forcing rother,
Which stiereth youth to any kind of strite,
He off^red me his daughter to my wife.
Wherthrough and with his crafty filed tongue,
He stale my heart, that erst vnstedy was:
For I was witl^s, wanton, fond, and young,
Whole bent to pleasure, brittle as the glass:
I can not lie, In vino veritas.
I did esteem the beawty of my bryde,
Above my self and all the world beside.
These fond affeccions joint with lack of skyll,
(Which trap the heart, and blind the iyes of youth,
And prick the mind to practice any ill)
So tickled me, that void of kindly truth:
(Which where it wantes, all wickedness ensues)
I stinted not to persecute my brother,
Till time he left his kingdom to an other.
Thus karnall love did quench the love of kind,
Til lust were lost through fansy fully fed.
But when at length I came unto my mind,
I saw how lewdly lightness had me led,
To seek with pain the peril of my head:
For had king Henry once been settled sure,
I was assured my days could not endure.
And therefore though I bound my self by oath
To help king Henry all that ever I might,
Yet at the treaty of my brethren both.
Which reason granted to require but right,
I left his part, whereby he perished quite:
And reconsilde me to my brethren twain,
And so came Edward to the crown again.
This made my father in law to fret and fume,
To stamp and stare, and call me false forsworn,
And at the length with all his power, presume
To help king Henry utterly forlorn.
Our friendly profers still he took in skorne,
Refused peace, and came to Barnet field,
And there was kilde, because he would not yield:
His brother also there with him was slain,
Whereby decayed the kayes of chivalry.
For never lived the matches of them twain,
In manhood, power, and marciall policy,
In virtuous thewes, and friendly constancy,
That would to god, if it had been his will
They might have turnde to us, and lived still.
But what shall be, shall be: there is no choice,
Things needs must drive as destiny decrees:
For which we ought in all our haps rejoice,
Because the eye eterne all thing forseeth,
Which to no ill at any time agrees,
For yl^ to ill to us, be good to it,
So far his skilles excede our reach of wi^.
The wounded man which must abide the smart,
Of stitching up, or ^earing of his sore,
As thing to bad, reproves the Surgeons art,
Which notwithstanding does his health restore.
The child likewise to science plied sore,
Countes knowledge ill, his teacher to be wood,
Yet Surgery and sciences be good.
But as the pacientes grief and Scholars pain,
Cause them deem bad such things as sure be best,
So want of wisdom causes us complain
Of every hap, whereby we seem oppressed:
The poor do pine for pelf, the rich for rest,
And when as loss or sickness us assail:
We curse our fate, our Fortune we bewail.
Yet for our good, god wurketh every thing.
For through the death of those two noble peers
My brother lived and raignde a quiet king,
Who had they lived perchance in course of years.
Would have delivered Henry from the breres,
Or help his son to enjoy the careful crown,
Whereby our line should have be quite put down.
A careful crown it may be justly named,
Not only for the cares thereto annexed,
To see the subject well and duly framed,
With which good care few kings are greatly vexed
But for the dread wherewith they are perplexed,
Of losing lordship, liberty, or life:
Which woeful wrackes in kingdoms happen rife.
The which to shun while sum to sore have sough^
They have not spared all persons to suspect:
And to destroy such as they gilty thought:
Though no apparaunce proved them infact.
Take me for one of this wrong punished sect,
Imprisoned first, accused without cause,
And done to death, no process had by laws.
Wherein I note how vengeance does acquit
Like ill for ill how vices virtue quell:
For as my marriage love did me excite
Against the king my brother to rebel,
So love to have his children prosper well,
Provoked him against both law and right,
To murder me, his brother, and his knight.
For by his queen two goodly sons he had.
Borne to be punished for their paren^es sin:
Whose fortunes kalked made their father sad,
Such woeful haps were found to be therein:
Which to avouch, writ in a rotten skin
A prophecy was found, which said a G,
Of Edwardes children should destruction be.
Me to be G, because my name was George
My brother thought, and therefore did me hate.
But woe be to the wicked heads that forge
Such doubtful dreams to bread unkind debate:
For God, a gleve, a gibet, grate or gate,
A Graye, a Griffeth or a Gregory,
As well as George are written with a G.
Such doubtful riddles are no prophecies.
For prophecies, in writing though obscure,
Are plain in sense, the dark be very lies:
What god forsheweth is evident and pure.
Truth is no Harold nor no Sophist sure:
She notes not men's names, their shildes nor creastes,
Though she compare them unto birds and beasts.
But whom she does forshewe shall rule by force,
She terms a W^lfe, a Dragon or a Bear:
A wilful Prince, a raynles ranging horse.
A bold, a Lion: a coward much in fear,
A hare or heart: a crafty, pricked ear:
A lecherous, a Bull, a Goote, a Foale:
An underminer, a Moldwarp, or a mole.
By known beasts thus truth does plain declare
What men they be, of whom she speaks before,
And who so can men's properties compare
And mark what beast they do resemble more,
Shall soon discern who is the griefly bore.
For God by beasts expresses men's conditions,
And not their badges, haroldes supersticions.
And learned Merline whom God gave the sprite,
To know, and utter princes acts to cum,
Like to the Jewish prophets, did recite
In shade of beasts, their doings all and sum:
Expressing plain by manners of the dum,
That kings and lords such properties should have
As had the beasts whose name he to them gave.
Which while the folish did not well consider,
And seeing princes gave, for difference
And knowledge of their issues myxt together,
All manner beasts, for badges of pretense,
They took those badges to expres the sense
Of Merlines mind, and those that gave the same,
To be the princes noted by their name.
And hereof sprang the false namde prophecies,
That go by letters, siphers, arms, or signs:
Which all be foolish, false and crafty lies,
Devised by guess, or Guiles untrue divines:
For when they saw that many of many lines
Gave arms alike, they wist not which was he,
Whom Merline meant the noted beast to be.
For all the brood of Warwickes geve the Bear,
The Buckinghames do likewise geve the swan:
But which Bear bearer should the lion tear
They were as wise as Goose the ^ery man:
Yet in their skill they ceased not to skan:
And to be demed of the people wise,
Set forth their gloses upon prophecies.
And whom they doubted openly to name
They darkly termed, or by sum letter meant:
For so they might how ever the world did frame,
Preserve them selves from shame or being shent.
For howsoever contrary it went,
They might expound their meaning otherwise,
As haps in things should newly still arise.
And thus there grew of a mistaken truth,
An art so false, as made the true suspect:
Whereof has cum much mischief, more the ruth,
That errors should our minds so much infect.
True prophecies have fowly been reject:
The false which bread both murder, war and strife,
Belyved to the loss of many a goodmans life.
And therefore Baldwin teach men to discern,
Which prophecies be false and which be true:
And for a ground this lesson let them learn,
That all be false which are devised new:
The age of things is judged by the hue.
All Riddels made by letters, names or arms,
Are young and false, for wurse than witches charms.
I know thou musest at this lord of mine,
How I no student, should have learned it:
And do impure it to the fume of wine
That styrs the tongue, and sharpeneth up the wit,
But hark, a friend did teach me every whit.
A man of mine, in all good knowledge rife,
For which he giltles, lost his learned life.
This man abode my servaunt many a day,
And still in study set his hole delight:
Which taught me more than I could bear away
Of every art: and by his searching sight
Of things to cum he could forshew as right,
As I rehearce the pageantes that were past:
Such perfectnes god gave him at the last.
He knew my brother Richard was the Bore,
Whose tuskes should tears my brothers boys and me,
And gave me warning thereof long before.
But wit nor warning can in no degree
Let things to hap, which are ordaynde to be,
Witness the painted Lioness, which slew
A prince imprisoned, Lions to eschu^.
He told me to, my youkefelow should dye,
(Wherein would God he had been no divine)
And after her death, I should woe earnestly
A spouse, where at my brother should repine:
And find the means she should be none of mine.
For which such malice, should among us rise,
As save my death no treaty should decise.
And as he said, so all things came to pass:
For when King Henry and his son were slain,
And every broyle so thoroughly quenched was,
That the King my brother quietly did rain,
I, reconsiled to his love again,
In prosperous health did lead a quiet life,
For five years space with honors laden rise.
And to augment the fulness of my bliss,
Two lovely children by my wife I had:
But froward hap, whose manner ever is,
In chiefest joy to make the happy sad,
Bemixt my sweet with bitterness to bad:
For while I swam in joys on every side,
My loving wife, my chiefest jewel died.
Who s^ lacks when f^l^ I had bewaylde a year,
The Duke of Burgoyues wise dame Margarete
My loving sister, willing me to chear^,
To mary again did kindly (...) entreat:
And wished me matched with a maiden nete
A stepdaughter of hers, duke Charles, his hapee,
A noble damesell, young, discrete and fayer.
To whose desper, because I did incline,
The King my brother doubting my degree,
Through prophecies, against us did repine:
And at no hand, would to our wills agree.
For which such rancor pearst both him and me
That face to face we fell to flat defiaunce,
But were appeased by friends of our aliaunce.
Howbeit my marriage utterly was dashed:
Wherein because my servaunt said his mind,
A mean was sought whereby he might be lasht.
And for they could no crime against him find,
They forged a fault the peoples lyts to blind,
And told he should by sorceries pretend,
To bring the King unto a spedy end.
Of all which points he was as innocent,
As is the babe that lacks kindly breath:
And yet condemned by the Kings assent,
Most cruelly put to a shameful death.
This fierd my heart, as soulder does the heath:
So that I could not but exclame and cry,
Against so great and open an injury.
For this I was commanded to the tower,
The king my brother was so cruel hearted:
And when my brother Richard saw the hour
Was cum, for which his heart so sore had smarted,
He thought best take the time before it parted.
For he endeavored to attain the crown,
From which my life must needs have held him down.
For though the king within a while had died,
As needs he must, he surfayted so often,
I must have had his children in my gyde
So Richard should beside the crown have cost:
This made him plye the while the wax was sof^*
To find a mean to bring me to an end,
For realm rape spares neither kin nor friend.
And when he saw how reason can assuage
Through length of time, my brother Edwardes yre^
With forged tales he set him new in rage,
Til at the last they did my death conspire.
And though my truth sore troubled their desire,
For all the world did know mine innocence,
Yet they agreed to charge me with offense.
And covertly within the tower they called,
A quest to geve such verdite as they should:
Who what with fear, and what with favor thraide,
Durst naught pronounce but as my brethern would
And though my false accusers never could
Prove ought they said, I giltles was condemned:
Such verdites pass where justice is contemned.
This seat achieved, yet could they not for shame
Cause me be kilde by any common way,
But like a wulfe the tirant Richard came,
(My brother, nay my butcher I may say)
Unto the tower, when all men were away,
Save such as were provided for the ^eate:
Who in this wise did straungely me entreat.
His purpose was, with a prepared string
To strangle me. but I bestird me so,
That by no force they could me thereto bring,
Which caused him that purpose to forge.
Howbeit they bound me whether I would or no.
And in a bu^^e of Malmesey standing by,
New Christened me, because I should not cry.
Thus drounde I was, yet for no due desert,
Except the zeal of Justice be a crime:
False prophecies bewitched king Edwardes heart.
My brother Richard to the crown would clime.
Note these three causes in thy ruful ryme:
And boldly say they did procure my fall,
And death, of deaths most strange and hard of al.
And warn all princes prophecies to eschew
That are to dark or doubtful to be known:
What God has said, that can not but ensue,
Though all the world would have it overthrowen.
When men suppose by fetches of their own
To fly their fate, they further on the same.
Like quenching blastes, which often reuive the flame.
Will princes therefore not to think by murder
They may avoid what prophecies behight,
But by their means their mischiefs they may further,
And cause gods vengeance heavier to alight:
Woe wurth the wretch yt strives with gods forsights.
They are not wise, but wickedly do ar^e,
Which think ill deeds, due destinies may bar.
For if we think that prophecies be true,
We must beleve it can not but beride
Which God in them forsheweth shall ensue:
For his decrees unchanged do abide.
Which to be true my brethren both have tried.
Whose wicked warkes warn princes to detest,
That others harms may keep them better blessed.
BY that this tragedy was ended, night was so nere cum that we could not
conveniently tarry together any longer: and therefore said master Ferrers: It is
best my masters to stay here. For we be cum now to the end of Edward the
fowerth his raygne. For the last whom we find unfortunate therein, was this
Duke of Clarens: In whose behalf I commend much that which has be noted. Let
us therefore for thi^ ^ime leave with him. And this day seven nights hence, if
your business will so suffer, let us all mete here together again And you shall
se that in the mean season I will not only devise upon this my self, but but
cause diverse other of my acquayntauns, which can do very well, to help us
forward with the rest. To this every man gladly agreed. howbeit (quod an
other) seeing we shall end at Edward the fowerthes end, let him self make an
end of our days labor with the same ^racion which master Skeleton made in
his name, the tenor whereof so far as I remember, is this.

How king Edward through his surfeting and intemperate life, suddenly died in
the mids of his prosperity.
MIseremini mei ye that be my friends,
This world has formed me down to fall:
How may I endure when that every thing ends?
What creature is borne to be eternal,
Now there is no more but pray for me all.
Thus say I Edward that late was your King,
And.xxiii. years ruled this imperial:
Sum unto pleasure and sum to no liking:
Mercy I ask of my misdoing,
What avails it friends to be my foe?
Since I can not resist, nor amend your complaining,
Quia ecce nunc in pulvere dormio.
I sleep now in molde as it is natural,
As earth unto earth has his reverture:
What ordained God to be terrestrial,
Without recourse to the earth by nature?
Who to live ever may him self assure?
What is it to trust on mutability?
Since that in this world nothing may endure?
For now am I gone that was late in prosperity.
To presume thereupon it is but a vanitye,
Not certain, but as a chery fair full of woe.
Rayned not I of late in great prosperitye?
Et ecce nunc in pulvere dormio.
Where was in my life such an one as I.
While Lady Fortune with me had continuance?
Granted not she me to have victory,
In England to rain, and to contribute France?
She took me by the hand and led me a dance,
And with her sugared lyppes on me she smyled.
But what for her dissembled countenance,
I could not be ware till I was begiled.
Now from this world she has me exiled,
When I was lothest hence for to go,
And am in age as who says but a child.
Et ecce nunc in pulvere dormio.
I had enough I held me not content,
Without remembrance that I should dye:
And moreover to encroch ready was I bent,
I knew not how long I should it occupy,
I made the tower strong I wist not why.
I knew not to whom I purchased Tattersall.
I amended Dover on the mountain hye,
And London I provoked to fortify the wall.
I made Notingham a place full royal.
Windsore, Eltam, and many other mo.
Yet at the last I went from them all,
Et ecce nunc in pulvere dormio.
Where is now my conquest and victory?
Where is my riches, and royal array?
Where be my coursers and my horses hye^
Where is my mirth, my solas, and play?
As vanity to naught all is wyddred away:
O Lady Bes* long for me may you call,
For I am departed until doomes day:
But love you that lord that is sovereign of all,
Where be my castles and buyldinges royal*
But Windsore alone now have I no more.
And of Eton the prayers perpetual,
Et ecce nunc in pulvere dormio.
Why should a man be proud or presume hye?
Saint Barnard thereof nobly does treat,
Saying a man is but a sack of ster^ory.
And shall return unto wurmes meal:
Why what became of Alexander the great?
Or else of strong Sampson, who can tell?
Were not wurmes ordained their flesh to freate?
And of Solomon that was of wit the well
Absolon proffered his h^^re for to sell,
Yet for all his beauty, wurmes eat him also.
And I but late in honor did excel,
Et ecce nunc in pulvere dormio.
I have played my pageaunt now am I past,
Ye wore well all I was of no great elde.
This all thing concluded shall be at the last,
When death approaches, than lost is the field:
Than seeing this world me no longer vphelde,
For naught would conserve me here in my place,
In manus tuas domine my spirit up I yield,
Humby beseching the o God, of thy grace.
O you courteous commons your hearts enbrace,
Beningly now to pray for me also,
For right well you know your king I was.
Et ecce nunc in pulvere dormio.
When this was said, every man took his leave of other and departed: And I
the better to acquyte my charge, recorded and noted all such matters as they
had wylled me.

FINIS.
The Contents and Table of the book.
The Epistle dedicatory. A prose to the Reader, continued between the tragedies
from the beginning of the book to the end. Tragedies beginning. Tresilian and
his fellows hanged. folio. i. Mortimer slain. folio. iiii. Thomas of Wodstocke
murdered. fol. viii. Mowbray lord Marshall banished. fol. xii. King Richard the
second murdered. fol. xvi. Owen Glendour starved. fol. xix. Percy earl of
Northumberland beheaded. fo. xxv. Richard earl of Cambridge beheaded. fo.
xxviii. Thomas Montague earl of Salisbury slain. fo. xxx. King James the
first murdered. fo. xxxvi. Good duke Humfrey murdered, and Elianor Cobham his
wife banished. fol. xl. William de la Poole duke of Southfolke banished and
beheaded. Jack Cade calling him self Mortimer slain and beheaded. Richard
Plantagence duke of York slain. fo. lix. Lord Clifford slain. fol. lxii.
John Tiptoft earl of Wurcester beheaded. fol. lxiiii. Richard Nevell earl of
Warwike slain. fol. lxix. King Henry the sixth murdered fol. lxxii. George duke
of Clarence drowned. fol. lxxv. King Edward the fowerth surfeted. fol. lxxxiii.

Finis.
Fautes escaped in the printing.
Leaf 1. line 20. read, has be seen, Leaf 8. line 5. read, whoss state is
stablisht. Second side line 21. read, hearken to me. Leaf 9. line 4. read,
frenchmen to abandon. Leaf 19. B. line 13. read, am sterved Owen, Leaf 69.
line 7, read, upon her strailesse stage, Leaf 82. B. line 15. read,
attributing to man. Leaf 84. line 26. read, fro which for. etc. Leaf 81.
line 1. read, whose lack,
The same leaf line 26. read, as foulder does.

B. Signyfieth the second side of the Leaf*

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to Saynct Dunstones Church by Thomas
Marshe.


