The Contre-Guyse: Wherein is deciphered the pretended ti tle of the Guyses,
and the first entry of the said Family into France, with their ambitious
aspiring and pernicious practices for the obtaining of the French Crown.

LONDON, Imprinted by John Woolfe, 1589.

The Contre-Guyse: CONTAINING the entry of the said Family into France, with
their ambitious aspirings, and pernicious practices for the obtaining of the
crown thereof.
THings natural, says Plutarch, are subject to a continual flux of
generation and corruption, and he only immutable, who never had beginning,
neither shall have ending. Man, as touching his body, has certain periodes,
wherein he evidently admits alteration, and according to the same does
increase and decrease, as the flower of age is swallowed up in old age; youth,
in the flower of age, infancy in youth, and childhood in infancy. Herein
does nature resemble the image of man, and man the figure of every
commonwealth, which how excellent and beautiful soever, does by degrees wax
old, as matter subject to the brook of liquide nature. Antiquity has known
some well grounded in mightines, and triumphing in glory, but any that have
withstoode the course of time, has no man seen, or ever shall: For as our
bodies do come to be dissolved, either through outward bruises, proceeding of
extreme violence of stripes, or bad proportion of humors, or finally by being
broken and worn with old age: even so likewise do commonwealthes and public
affairs grow to their last periode, and decay through diverse accidents: Some
are overwhelmed and drowned in desolations, which ouerflow all: some kindled
with fire of civil dissension: and other some undermined by time, do so grow
to the last periode of continuance, and as a person worn with age do take
end. To endeavor therefore to settle the course of worldly affairs, were, with
the Giants to seek to skale the heavens. But to take such order, that the
alteration of the commonwealth may gently and naturally take effect: to seek
all means to yield it sure footing: to spread the sails to all winds, for
the bringing of it to the harbor of safeguard: If it be sick, to play the
physician: if it stumble, to lend it a hand: if the sight of it fail, to
reach it spectacles: and finally, if it be stricken in years, to become the
staff of the old age thereof: all these are the parts of a good and loving
nature, yea, of such a nature, as is utterly free from all Cinicall
currishnesse; and to say the truth, is no more but the discharge of our duties
unto our country.

This is the reason, O ye Frenchmen, why now that some for the patching up of
the old broken walls of their ancestors ambition, do go about to choke up
our quietness, in trayning forward their cursed and execrable purposes, with
the expenses of our goods, blood, and lives. I cannot, as one standing upon
the firm land, gaze upon the shipwreck of my country, but seeing it tossed,
and floting in danger, must needs cast forth the last sacred ancker of my
self, which is, a boldness of free speech: and because in humane accidents
the discourse must be derived from the original, mark now the spring of our
miserable calamity.

In the time of Lewis the 12. surnamed the father of the people, Claude of
Lorrayne, or rather of Vaudemont, set foot in France, where he straightwaies
began to remove every stone for the laying of the foundation of that
mightines, whereunto we now see his successors ascended, and did so dazzle the
eyes of the French with a false show of his wealth, that in the year 1512
about the feast of God at Paris, in the hostel of Estampes, he married
Anthoinel of Bourbon, daughter to Frauncis of Bourbon, and Mary of Luxembourg.
But Frauncis Duke of Valois, and Earl of Angolesme, by the decease of the
said Lewis coming to the crown, and beginning to smell out the humor of
this stranger, held him short, and dividing the chiefest offices of his Du
Bellay. lib. 1.
house, then void, ouerslipped him. The Duke of Bourbon was made Constable, the
Earl of Vandosme Governor of the I Will of France, the L. of Lautrec Governor
of Guyen, the L. of Palisse Marshall of France, the L. of Boissy great
Master, Anne L. of Montmorency, and Philip Chabot the Kings two favorites: Of
Claude of Lorraine there was no speech, his wings were yet too short to soar
to such highness, under the shadow whereof he lay a while hidden, which no
whit diminished his hope of happy success. But Ambition, which (as says
Thucidides) Plutarch in his treatise, whether an old man, etc.
never dies in man, causing him stiffly to withstand fortune, taught him so
slily to blot out whatsoever sinister opinion the king had conceived of him,
that after many turnings and tossings, he was finally taken into household, and
made great hunter, which office had long continued in families of gentlemen of
mean account: under Du Tillet chap. of the great hunter and ^alconer.
Charles the 6. it was administered by Lewis of Orguechin: under Lewis the 11.
by Iuon of Fou: under Lewis the 12. by the Lords of Chenetz and Rouuille,
whereby it is to be presumed, that this Lorraine was then far off from the
greatness pretended by his successors, and that it could not be said of him,
that he made way to dignity by the countenance of his ancestors, as by a
certain Roman it was objected to Piso: but rather that of a course hair and
small credit himself opened a way to himself to honor through craft and guile,
yea, like a wily Fox, as is said of Pope Boniface the 8. For in truth he so
cunningly pursued the point of his good hap, and from time to time so soundly
husbanded the kings favors, that according to the diverse occurrences of
affairs he executed sundry functions. For about the year 1515, the king
leuying Du Bellay. lib. 1.
an Army for the conquest of Millan, got into his pay 6000 Allemaigns, under
the leading of the Duke of Guelderland, who shortly after hearing that the
Brabanders had entered his country, posted home to relieve his own people, and
left his charge to Claude of Lorraine, Lord of Guise: nevertheless in the
year 1521, in Admiral Boniuels voyage into Navarre, he had the conduct only
of 2500 launce-knights, and in the year 1522, serving in Picardy under the
Lord of Vendosme, he had the charge only of one company of men at Arms: But
the wind turned so favorably for him, that in the year 1523, when the Lord of
Trimouile was made governor of Picardy, he left to him the government of
Burgondy, whereto the next year was adjoined Champaigne, by reason of the
journey into Italy, whither the chiefest of France accompanied the King, at
whose return this Lorraine did so cunningly bend his affections, that in
January 1527, he erected him his village of Guyse into a Duchy, and in tract
of time Charles Duke of Orleance, the kings younger son being sent with a
great Army to ground and cast the burden of the wars upon the Duchy of
Luxembourg, had for his chief Counselors the Lords of Iametz and Guise. Thus
may we see this Lorraine crept very high for a gentleman of base gold: but
such was the kings pleasure, whose power appears in exalting the base,
enriching the poor, and increasing the small: such was his favor, yea such,
that although there still rested in him some sinister impression of this
strangers humors, yet would he not nevertheless deprive him of any of his
offices or dignities, so that he prosecuting his good hap, obtained so ready
entry into the favors of king Henry the 2. that his children being honorably
appointed, he procured Aumale to be erected into a Duchy, in the year 1547.
and so, to be brief, being grown rich in goods, alliance, and honor, as
being Duke of Guyse and Aumale, Peer of France, and governor of Burgundy, he
deceased the 18. of April 1550. in this like to M. Perpenna, who, as
witnesses Valerius, was Consul before he was Citizen: but unlike in that,
that as says the same author: The life of Perpenna was triumphant, but his
death ignominious, through the law Papia in his fathers person, who being
naturally a stranger, was banished Rome for usurping the privileges of Roman
Citizens, whereas contrariwise this man's children continued their fathers
triumphs, yea as it was said of Perpenna, They have with a mischief rooted
themselves in a foreign land.

This was the stranger, O ye Frenchmen, to Plut. in his notable sayings of the
Lacedaemonians. Plut. in the life of Silla. Plut. of brotherly love.
whom you might have said, as the Lacedaemonians said to Philip king of Macedon,
that they would not he should come into their land, either as a friend or as a
foe: this is that wretch, of whom ye may say as of Sillaes father, that he
could scarce be honest, seeing he grew so soon rich: this is that vagabond,
on whom we should practice the saying of Theophrastus, importing, that we must
not love strangers to prove them, but prove them to love them: this is that
great hunter, that faulconer that has brought up his children after the manner
of ravenous fowls, who with their ambition, as with a crooked beak, do rent
poor France in pieces, and with sharp tallants do seek to seize upon this
estate: O wise and valiant king Frauncis, how near a true prophet came you,
when you foretold that if ever this wretches ospring took footing or sure root
in France, it would strip the kings into their doublets, and the people into
their shirtes: for we may guess at that which is to come, by that which is
either present or past, considering that nothing is done without cause, neither
can any thing be foreseen without some reason preceding. This Oracle might
have made us to hauestood upon our guard, but who can avoid destiny?

The children of this Claude of Lorraine being fatally destinate to the
subversion of this estate, have enjoyed the most part of the favors of Court
under Henry the 2. at whose coronation they so cunningly exalted their
ambition, that they got the chief point of honor and presidence before the
Duke of Montpensier, a prince of the blood, as by the act reserved by du Their
Secretary of commandments, the 25. of July 1547. which also in the year
1559. they put in practice at the anointing of king Frauncis the 2. in
respect, said they, of the antiquity of their Peeryes, wherein must be more
regard of the represented then of the representing, notwithstanding Du Tillet
in his collection of the great men of France.
it had been otherwise adjudged by a decree of the parliament of Paris,
between the Dukes of Montpensier and Neuers in June 1541. Having won this
bar and title of greatness over France, they began upon the earnest penny of
their credit more and more to display the wings of their ambition: and in
truth, as the defect of vessels cannot be seen so long as they stand empty,
but when licour is powered into them: even so rotten and corrupt minds can no
longer conceal themselves, when they have once attained to authority and
power, but must needs burst forth and display themselves in their covetous
affections and insolences, as may be noted in these untimely births of
fortune: For about the year 1548, when a certain advocate of the parliament
in his plea for the Duke of Guyse, had given him the quality of a Prince,
which by a present decree was razed, it so set them out of joint, and filled
them with bitterness, that the Cardinal Charles of Lorraine never left removing
every stone for the displacing of President Liset, until he had compassed the
same in the year 1550, though under an other pretense. Afterward, for the
further aduauncing of their ambitious drifts, and the nearer to resemble the
Cantharides, who, as Plutarch says, do still creep into the purest wheat and
freshest roses, they entered listes with the Lord Anne of Montmorency, upon
whom after sundry crossings, and under favor of his imprisonment, which fell
in the year 1557, at the battle of Saint Laurence, they so encroched, that
the king gave to Francis of Lorraine a commission of Lieutenant general, whereat
the Constable, as a wary person, and one practiced in serving the time, could
very well wink, and so set a fair countenance upon a foul game. But in tract
of time the king grew to be so glutted with the fair speeches of these
Lorraines, and their importunate baying at the chief offices of the crown,
that as one not troubled with any lethargy of mind, but even to the quick
feeling some drifts of their ambition, he resolved utterly to rid his hands of
such and so subtle husbands, and to drive them from about his person, yea, even
out of his dominions, wherein they had through their crafty conueiances
fattened them selves, even to the great contempt of the Queen now the kings
mother, who through their persuasions was at the point to have been shamefully
rejected, and to the desolation of the French nation, among whom they have
served only for bellows to kindle the fire of civil dissentio^s, so that
since they came to be our guests we may exclaim of France, as did Agesilaus
Plut. in his notable sayings of the Lacedaemonians.
of Greece, when he heard of a cruel conflict near to Corinth between the
mutinous Graecians one against another. Oh unhappy Greece, who with their own
hands have made away men ynow in one day of battle to have overcome all the
Barbarians together! But the kings purpose was prevented by Gods providence,
who not willing to take that scourge from us, made France a widow of this good
king in July, 1559, and so gave us over for a pray to the intolerable
ambition, insatiable avarice, and raging cruelty of these strangers, who
reigning over us under the shadow of king Francis the 2. and under the favor
of his minority played open play against the Princes of blood, yea, and set so
sure foot upon the throat of this estate, that France was the bloody scaffold,
good Frenchmen the martyrs, and these Lorrains, most cruel, fellonious, and
unmerciful hangmen. This storm might immediately after the decease of K. Henry
have been foreseen: for whilst the Princes of the blood and chief officers
of the crown kept their masters body at the Tournelles the kings house in S.
Anthonies street, where every thing sounded of sorrow and mournful sonnets,
these gentlemen triumphed at the Louure, whither they had carried the king,
about whom they commanded at pleasure, and under the cloak of tutorship made
themselves way to the souereigntie, as did Tarquin the 1. who under the like
pretense wrested the Roman kingdom out of the hands of Ancus Martius
children, or as Stillico^ and Ruffin, who being tutors to Arcadius and
Honorius, brought the Roman Empire into combustion. But what ingratitude, what
in humane unthankfulness was it to stand with dry eyes, when all other
accompanied the king with weeping and tears? What tyranny, to bend their
masters minority to their passions? What impudency, to in trude upon the
authority of the Princes of the blood? The law (by the common advise of the
three estates assembled at Tours, Anno 1484. decreed) commands, If the
crown sall to a pupil the 3. estates must be assembled, and by them the king
provided of a counsel for the government of his nonage: The custom is, The
Princes of the blood have the first place in this counsel, as it fell out,
when at the decease of Lewis the 11. Charles the 8. at the age of 14. years
came to the crown. The Roman laws will, That he that affects or intrudeth
himself into any tutorship, should be rejected as suspect. Besides, it is a
general, sacred and inviolable rule, That no foreign Prince hold degree in
France. But what can reason do in rage, or custom among disorders? what can
right do where force bears sway? or of what force are laws among murder,
blood, and tyranny? having assured themselves of his Majesty's person, they
played their game so cunningly, that a new guard was established under the
Seneschall of Again: Diana of Poictiers Duchess of Valentinois, banished the
Court: Bertrandi President of Toulouse, unto whom Henry the 2. had committed
the seals of France, flatly deferred, though pacified under hope of better:
The superintendence of the Treasury taken from Auanson, and under color of
good husbandry, the faithfullest servants of the crown being displaced, the
gate of honor was open to none but the confederates of two strangers, who for
their own particular profit encroched to themselves all public affairs,
even as the wind Coecias, which (as it is said) draws the clouds to it,
and furnished the law with men of like stuff as themselves, and such as were
vowed unto the execution of their bad purposes: as also at the same time they
strengthened their own faction with the amity of the Marshals Brissac and S.
Andrew, and the Cardinal of Tournon, the Conestables sworn enemy. Putting in
practice also Andronodorus counsel (who abusing the minority of Hierom king
of Sicill, whom he purposed to rob of his estate, persuaded him to banish the
chief of his Realm from the Court) they did under the kings auow craftily
disperse all those that might have crossed the course of their fortune, and
with whom they could by no means bear, not so much because of the difference
of their natures, as for that the French cannot put on the Lorraines nature, or
the Lorraine the Frenchmans, according to the saying of Cicero, speaking of the
ordinary controversies between the Roman Consuls and Tribunes. The fire of
civil dissension is kindled between them, not so much through diversity of
qualities, as by contrariety of humors and complexions. And thus was the
Prince of Condesent into Flaunders, under pretense of strengthening the amity
with king Philip, and after him the Prince of Roch-sur-yon, who at his return
was chosen together with the Cardinal of Bourbon, to conduct La. Elizabeth into
Spain: The Duke of Montpensier was furnished with the government of Touraine,
but they appointed Chauigny to be his Lieutenant, with such authority, that
the Prince had only the title: The Constable had the gentle thumpe, and among
other trauerses lost the office of Greatmaister, which wound was afterward
renewed in the controversy for the county of Dampmartin, which Frauncis of
Lorraine Cessionary of Rambures pretended to carry away. The court being thus
become a widow of the Princes of the blood, and naked of the brauest of the
French knights, the Guysians began to build up their houses with the decay of
many other, yea in such sort as they spared neither friend nor foe, Papist nor
Protestant, spiritual goods nor temporal: witness the County of Nantueil,
and the chief benefices of the Cardinal of Lenoncourt, a friend to their
family: witness the goods of the Marquise of Neelle, and of the Lord of
Grignan, the castle of Meudon, the house of Marchais, and the land of Cheureus:
witness the Monks of Monstier* end, whom the Cardinal thrust out, and
burned all the titles of their church for the enriching of his house of
Ginuille: witness the Storier of S. Disier, whom he caused to be burned for a
Lutherian, notwithstanding, by the testimony of all the country, he went
ordinarily to Mass, so as the poor man might say as Quintus Aurelius, who
finding himself in the roll of those who by placards were banished,
notwithstanding he never meddled with the Plut. in Silla.
wars of either Marius or Silla, cried out, Helas my house at All kills
me. Shall I come to the conclusion and last act of the Tragedy? Shall I open a
wound which yet bleedeth? Things grew to that pass, that by the Cardinal and
his brother all laws and good decrees were taken down: the Parliaments of the
Realm dishonored, and every way derided: the people choked with tyranny: the
Prince of Conde imprisoned at Orleance for fellonie, falsely invented, as
afterward it is declared by a decree of the privy council, dated the 13. of
March 1560. and by two decrees of the court of Parliament: the La. of Roye
imprisoned at S. Germans in Lay: the Constables house appointed to ruin and
subversion: his nephew the L. d'Andelot discharged of the office of Coronell of
the French footmen: the Cardinal of Arminacke banished the court: the Vidame
of Chartres miserably detained in the Bastille: the prisons full of poor
innocents: the skaffolds red with blood: the gibbets ordinary: fires kindled:
all was but destruction and desolation: but robbing of houses: proclamations of
banishments: and most cruel executions: in peace we bare the effects of a
bloody war, and in calm and fair weather the face of France was horrible
and fearful: and yet do we suckle up these hangmen with our blood: we feed
them with our goods: we make them triumph in our shame, and to them only are
the gates of honors open: but why do we not rather speak as did Rabirius by
his advocates mouth? Grac^hus (said he) would rather have suffered 1000. most
cruel deaths, then have seen the hang man assistant in his court, who by the
laws of the Censors, ought to have no habitation in Rome. And yet is the
hangman, as the minister of justice, more tolerable then these, who in their
bloody executions were not authorized, but by their own ambition, whereto they
had so smoothed the way, that there wanted no more but with open title to
proclaim themselves kings. For, to give provinces and the treasury: to make
laws, and to break them: to determine of war and peace: to give and take
away offices: to send embassages: and in all things to have the last voice, was
common among them: what then did they want more then the name, anointing, and
crown? having also laid their principal plot upon certain seditious
ministers of their passions, they drew apace to the soueraignitie, if God,
even God truly, the preserver of France, had not cast a block in their way
anno 1560. by the kings death, whose name they made their buckler to the
destruction of himself and his estate: and under whose pretense they made the
rampire of the unruly effect of their immoderate passions, so that not being
yet thoroughly fortified with all things necessary for their purposes, they
stumbled in the mid way, and their affairs suffered a change. But now, Oye
Frenchmen, look upon your kings funeralles: his body without any pomp or
solemnity was conveyed by Sansac and Brosse to S. Denis, where it was simply
buried. Blush ye Guysians, yea for shame hide your selves, when you hear that
Hanniball bestowed honorable funerals upon the Consul Caius Flaminius, whom he
slew at the lake of Peruse: that Lucius Cornelius did as much for Hanno the
general of the Carthagineans, and Marcus Antonius upon his enemy Arcilaus: and
yet you without any pomp do commit to the earth the body of so great a king,
yea of that king that raised you to the tipe of honor. Hide, hide your selves,
I say, when you understand that Alexander spent 6. millions of gold upon the
funerals of Ephestion, and yet you that have been so prodigal of the
commonwealth in your own private affairs are become so nigardly in matter
concerning the funerals of one of the mightiest monarckes of the earth. The
Emperor Augustus even in winter time came from Rome to Pauye before the body of
Drusus: Tiberius did assist the funerals of Augustus, Caligula those of
Tiberius, and Nero those of Claudius: The kings, Childebert and Clotaire led
the body of Queen Clotilde from Tours to Paris: Jews the gross that of king
Philippe the first, from Meleun to S. Bennets upon Loyre: and Phillip the 3.
help to carry the Biere of S. Jews from Paris to S. Denis, and yet you
unthankful persons, you mushroms of a nights grouth cannot vouchsafe to set
one foot out of the gates of Orlea^ce for the least service of piety to your
masters body* and yet must you be termed the Zopires of our kings, the
corner stones of this realm, the eyes, the sinews, and the veins of this
body! but rather indeed the tirants of our kings, the scourges of the poor
people, and the spunges of our treasures: you I say, who have no other God but
ambition, no other king but Avarice, ne any other religion then desire of gain,
after which we see that you are fleshed as Ravens after cartio^, who rather
then to leave your hold will sometimes cast your honor at your backs: witness
the lies that the late Lord prince of Conde in the year 1559. gave you, when
he offered to forget his degree and quality of prince to uphold it against
you with the point of his sword or spear.

King Francis the second thus dead did for a time choke up, not their evil
wills but their practices: For under Charles the 9. although they endeavored to
seed in him a marvelous mistrust of his subjects, yet began the estates at
Orleance to taste them so near, and to go about to make them spue up the
treasures that they had swallowed, that their best waywas in have to follow
Tiberius Gracchus one of the plagues of Rome, who perceiving that the senate
were framing of his process struck sail quietly, so that they thought it
best to ship into Lorraine, and thence into Germany, where they promised the
Princes of the Empire to frame themselves to the confession of Ausbourg, which
the Card. openly allowed and preached in the town of Sauerne, showing the
greater testimony of his conversion by the rich gifts that he bestowed upon
Brentius the D. of Wittemberges minister, wherein these ij. fugitives made
themselves like unto Theramenes slipper which ferued for either foot.

But what? the hard fortune of France soon after, called the^ again to the
end to go forward with their game and make an end of the set: yea it placed
them in the chiefest degrees, contrary to the good example of the ancients, who
shut up the gates of honor against such as yielded no account of their
administration: upon which ground Diodetus and Aeschines formed their complaint
against Ctesipho, at whose instance the Athenians had bestowed a Crown of gold
Plut. in the lives of the 10 Orators.
upon Demosthenes, before they called him to account of the office that was
committed to him for the reparation of the walls of Athens: which did import a
blow and alteration in the laws, which permitted not those that were
accomptable so much as to give any thing to the Gods, neither, as said the
Emperor Antoninus, to proceed to any dignity in the commonwealth. Out of this
reuocation as out of Tit. de debit. Ciuit. l. 1. C.
Pandoraes box, are come the wars, murders, and manflaughters, wherein they
so obstinately set themselves, that in the year 1563 they had a soppe of the
same bread, with the cost of Francis of Lorrains life. Howbeit the hap of
this accident brake not the blow of their purposes. For he left 3 sons in
whom after his death his passions lived, and under the favor of their uncle
the Card. they entered the same vow as their father, and have taken the Crown
of France Plut. in Silla.
for the butte of their ambition, so as of them we may say as the Romans did of
Silla, That only they had changed the tyrant, but were not discharged from
tyranny. Also for their first blows the studied to feed the war that was
hatched in their fathers and uncles ambition: and in laps of time, namely in
the year 1571 the kings favor resembling a fair wind, the first of these
three blinded with his good fortune, and neglecting the meanness of his race,
presumed so far as to aspire to the marriage of that goodly flower of France,
Lady Margaret now Queen of Navarre, which coming to the knowledge of king
Charles the ninth, a Prince jealous of the honor both of himself and of his
blood, he caused the Lord great Pryor to tell him, that if he pretended to
branche so high, he would bring him so low, that he should be an example to
the poste^^tie: yea that if within two months he married not some other,
himself would dagger him with his own hands. These threats of so great a
Prince, cooled the boiling affections of this Lo^raine, who by his iournies
together with the favor of his friends so well acquitted himself, that within
the term to him by the king prescribed, he married the widow of the late
Lord Prince of Porcian: as also since his second brother matched with the widow
of the late Lord of Mon^pesat, or rather they both married the great goods of
these two Ladies, thereby to set a color upon their smalenesse. To enter into
the discourse of those tragedies, which at their instance were played during
the reign of king Charles the ninth, were to refresh a wound which yet
bleedeth to freshly: and who can without tears look upon our France so
tainted in blood, cruelty, destruction, and disloyalty? In the end the
Cardinal, whose life full of discretion stunck even among the Anheistes and
Epicures, ascending into Auignon left the Triumuirat of his nephews, who bring
formed after his lore, have no whit belied his actions, not so much as to admit
any companion of court, or not to hate those in whom his majesty had fixed
his affection: The Lord of Ho being gotten far into the Kings favor had a
wry look: out he so well husbanded his fortune, that they could catch no hold
in he Lord of S. Maigrin did they mortally push with their horns, yea even
under the gates of the Lou^re: But the vicount of Riberac having for the
^^eathes of the Lords of Chelu and Maugiron encurred the kings indignation,
wounded as he was could find no better sanct^^ie then the house of the Guyses,
who seemed a sufficio^t contrepoise against the kings authority. Afterward,
because the late Monsieur was a troublesome thorn in their foot, they framed
a match against him: The blood of Salcedo executed at Paris yet speaks, and
the truth of his deposition appears plainly in these commotions. What is it
not therefore, that as occasions have fallen out, they have not enterprised
against France? What Prince, what greatness have they not endeavored to
undermine. The king himself, of whose secrets they have made a traficke, have
they sold to the Spanyard, as flesh to the shambles, and under covered fire
still drawing against him, they have put in ure whatsoever wicked inventions
their evil angel has to them presented, whereby to cause their passions to
bear swaye, if not in calm and fair weather, yet during the tempest, amongst
the blood, murder, cruelty, desolation, and destruction of this poor estate:
witness a Jesuit of Pont a-Mousson in Lorraine, called father Claude Matthew,
who never did good but in weening to do evil, confect in wickedness, and one
of those sacred persons spoken of at Rome in this Tribunary law; He shall not
be accounted a Lex 12. tabul.
manslear, who by the decree of the people shall have killed a hallowed man.
Witness, I say, this reverend, this spark of sedition, this spirit of Satan,
who in two or three of his voyages into Italy and Spain, has in^ited the
Pope, king Philip, and the Sauoyan to the destruction of France: and withal
you Frenchmen, to the end to use you as vipers against our common mother, to
make you bath your selves in your own blood, to change your courtesy into
cruelty, your fidelity into disloyalty: to be brief, of the fair face of
France to make a horrible and fearful spectacle of death, to convert her
body into a grave, her towns into churchyards, her castles into broken walls,
her fields into butcheries, her trees into gibets, her rivers into blood, her
life into pitiful, horrible, and fearful death: to such purposes, I say, so
furious, tragical, and bloody, do they loud and shrill sound out, that they
proceed out of the stock of Charlemaine, and that ever since Lothair, our
kings have their tables covered through the unjust usurpation of Capet, and
with the expense of their race the lawful inheritour of this crown. Here do I
desire all good Frenchmen to mark one practice of Tarquine the proud, who
determining to rob Seruius Tullius of the kingdom of Rome, began by bewitching
the people with the discourse of his race, and by repeating to them, how that
after the death of king Tarquine his father woefully murdered, Seruius had
ouerthwartly practiced the sovereignty: so that the fathers lulled on sleep
with his fair words, and the youth snared with the presents wherewith he laid
a bridge to to his purposes, he so far slacked the bridle of his ambition,
accompanied with rashness, that in full senate seizing upon Seruius by the body,
he carried him out of the chamber, and cast him down the stairs. A tragical
and pitiful example, such a one as might stand France in stead for a morning
wake, now that it is thus baied at with tempests on every side: but
particularly the king, whose greatness with like tools as that wherewith
Seruius was overthrown, they now undermine. And king Clouys understanding that
a Lord of Artoys named Cannacare, puffed up with wealth, gave out that he came
of Clodio the hairy, and so was lawful heir of the crown, being not only
quick of hearing, but also ielous of his greatness, caused that sower of lies,
and al his progeny to be rooted out. In the mean time, least the people being
ticklish and itching at every new devise, should suffer themselves to be led
away with the persuasions of these abusers, I would demand of you Lorraines,
what is the ground of your pretended right? you say that Hugh Capet by force
carried away the crown from Charles of Lorraine, uncle to Lewis the 5. in
who^ the race of Charlemain ended, and that you are come of the stock of
Charles: If it were so, why did you lately make the card. of Burbo^ your
banner, as he that was fittest to succeed in this realm? was it not to show
that you could not agree but in contrarieties? or rather to imitate the wren,
who hearing that the birds made a match who should be first in heaven, hid
himself under the eagles wing, from whence he crept out in so good time, that
he gat the title of king? you say that Charles of Lorraine had but one son,
named Ottho, and that this Ottho had but a daughter. We have enough of this one
distaffe to beat you withal, we, I say, who are freed from the women's
government, who stop not under the empire of women, through the benefit of
the Salike law, a law that is the only oracle of France, bought with the
price of our ancestors blood, with the destruction of our towns, with the
decay of our houses, and with the loss of two wretched battles Cressy and
Poictiers: a law that preserves us from the dominion of strangers, and that
cutteth off all foreign fashions and kinds of life, which long since had
filled ours with bastardy, since it is much easier to know a fault in nature,
then any vnlikelines between the Prince and the subject, as said Theodorike
king of the Goths in his writing to the Senate of Rome. But because the
enemies of this Realm, and among others our selves do reject this so holy,
sacred, and hitherto inviolable a law, as some shadow, dream, or bugbeare, I
pray you cast your view upon custom time out of mind practiced in France,
and that which has no less force then all the laws in the world, even by the
saying of the Lawyers, Things brought in by ancient custom do seem more
just then those that are commanded by laws. Childebert left two daughters,
Cherebert three, Gentran nine, Lewis Hutin one, who succeeded in the Realm of
Navarre, but not of France: Philip the long, three, who never quarrelled for
the crown, to the which in process of time succeeded Lewis the 12. who
excluded Lady Anne and Lady Ione, the daughters of king Lewis the 11. and
sisters to Charles the 8. and king Francis the 9. set it upon his head, but not
in the right of his wife Queen Claude daughter to king Lewis the 12. Hereto
add that the whole does ordinarily retain the nature of his country, so that
the crown cannot fall to the distaffe, since that the property of the
provisions of the yongers of the house of France, does ever in default in
heirs males return to the crown: and with that condition did Lewis the 8. in
February 1223. indue his brother king Philip of France, Earl of Bologne, and
by his will dated in June 1525. left Artois to his second son, Aniow and
Maine to the third, Poictou and Auuergne to the fourth, with condition, for
default of heirs males to return to the crown. The like did S. Lewis in
March 1268. with the County of Valois to his fifth son John of France, also
Philip the fair in December 1311. to Philip the long his second son, after
whose decease without heirs male, his daughter Ione of France wife to Eudo the
4. D. of Burgondy, instantly challenging the possessory endowment of her father
against Charles the 4. was overthrown by decree of Parliament dated the 2^. of
February 1322. This custom being of it self strong enough, is accompanied
with a decision of the law. If the Intruders successors do for the space of
one hundred years hold the souereigntie, in such case the prescription of so
long years may serve for a title: namely, if there be no opposition or
protestation of the subjects to the contrary, as that of the tribune Aquila,
who took away the crown that had been set upon Caesar's image: so as the
successors of Hugh Capet having bin masters of this crown ever since the
year 997. have too important an exception against these Carlingues. But
utterly to shut up their mouths, we do in truth say, that our kings are of
the blood of Charlemaine, whose race having failed in seven geuerations after
Capet, was renewed in the person of king Lewis the 8. For Philip August, or
Given of God, in the year 1180. at Bapaulines married Isabell the daughter of
Baldwin the 4. of that name, Earl of Henault, who was descended of Hermengarde
Countess of Namure, and daughter to Charles the simple, from whose successors
Hugh Capet took the right of the crown: of which marriage of king Philip and
Lady Isabell, was borne the 6. of September 1587. king Lewis the 8. father to
S. Lewis, out of whom as out of a nursery of plants, are issued the noble
families of Valois and Bourbon. Yea I will say more, namely, that the Guyses
cannot be of the branches of Charles of Lorraine, the brother of Lothair the
33. king of France, and uncle to Lewis the 5. neither consequently of
Charlemaine: for it is but 120. years since the race of Vaudemo^t took land
in the house of Lorraine, which in less then 460. years has fallen in seven
several families, namely, from the house of Charlemaine into the house of
Ardenne 1005. from the house of Arden into the house of Bologne 1089. from the
house of Bologne into the house of Lembourg, from the house of Lembourg into
the house of Louuain 1106. The^ in tract of time Rene K. of Sicile, son to
Lewis of Aniou, married the heir of Lorraine, by whom he left a son named John,
and a daughter named Yolande, who was wife to Frederick of Vaudemont, and
afterward in 1464. inherited the duchy of Lorraine, through the decease of her
nephew Nicholas her brother John's only son: hereby we plainly may see that
these men are like Esops crow, who disguised her self with many other fowls
feathers, supposing, that process of time might serve for a veil to cloak
their falsehood: but it falls out clean contrary, for truth is the daughter of
time. Then persuading themselves that their Jesuit (a fit ambassador for such
potentates) had removed both heaven and earth, as well in Italy as in Spain,
and that the brute of their false descent had brought such effects
correspondent to their desires: that the nobility had liked to lend them a
shoulder, and the people had been wholly bent to their passions they brake the
impostume: and to the end to free themfelues from quietness, which was n^^some
unto them, and to stiffle up all peace which could no whit delight them, eue^
as an infected stomach that can relish no good food, they did of late put in
practice that game which their predecessors had kept close and sealed up, and
so began to play at thrust out with the king. True it is, that for fear of
going barefoot in so thorny a way, they have disguised their ambition with many
fair pretenses, and to color their wars they have propounded.

1. The rooting our of heresy. 2. The nomination of a Catholic successor to
the crown. 3. The reestablishing of the church in her a^ncient liberties. 4.
The reintegration of the nobility into their former dignity. 5. The abasing of
certain persons whom the king has exalted. 6. The disburdening of the third
estate.

Propositions which in outward appearance are good, but bad in effect; sweet to
hear of, but of bitter taste; wholesome without, but heavy within. For the two
first are forged against the king of Navarre and the Prince of Conde: the rest
have no other end but to yield the king odious to the clergy, hated of the
nobility, and to pull upon him the malice of the people. This is the rediest
way that they can find to prevent the greatness of the king, and of the two
chief^ princes of the lilly, and to make that agreement with us, whereof
Demosthenes warns the Athenians by the sheep and the wolves, that willed the
sheep if they would have any peace with them to deliver into their hands all
the mastifes that kept them. Of the rest of the Princes, they ween to have a
great peny-worth, which all will prove but dust before the East wind, and
snow before the same. At the fame of these propositions, as trumpets that give
warning of wars, many took part with their weapons, and turned themselves
to the fortune of these deceivers, abandoning an assured peace, to the end to
follow a doubtful war: some being won with hope of amending their estate:
others having already followed the wars, and lived according as the liberty
of the time and impunitie had suffered them, seeing that peace took from them
all means of spoil. Some that had miserably consumed al their goods, and
were still brauled at by their creditors, and as Cic. in Catelinariis.
Cicero said of Catelines confederates, Those whose hands were died in blood,
their tongues formed to lies, their souls bent to all wickedness, their
consciences corrupt with sundry misdeedes, such as undermined by poverty,
were assalted by justice: Such outcastes (I say) did willingly lend their
hands to these novelties: and yet is it a strange matter that some Gentlemen
durst suffer themselves to be led at these men's pleasure, as if they could not
but say well, neither themselves do well but in obeying of them: A pitiful
case, that they should take the shadow for the substance, smoke for fire, the
visage and lies, for truth, without considering that these pretenses are but so
many snares to entrappe them, that they do wake them but to bring them on
sleep, that they instruct them but to destroy them, and that as an ancient man
has said, There can be no lust cause to fight against their country. But who
could choose but be bewitched with so many fair pretenses? Besides that these
fire brands have left no means unproven for the continuance of the traficke
of their drifts. Furthermore, to the end to keep their confederates in
breath, and courage, and to make others willing to take their parts, they
promised us mountains and maruels, as knowing that oftentimes things fained,
yet taken for true, are of great force in wars, as Marcus Portius, when the
Ilergetes solicited him for succor: The earth should tremble under their
power: the Spanish weapons did already rattle upon the frontiers: The Sauoyan
did but ask Where is it? The Pope calls forth the devils, gives them the
enemies bodies, they carry them away, they cast them in hell: The Albanians
with their Iauelings, should come to beat down the mountains, and to put all
to fire and sword: And as the Consul Varo said of Hanniball, These Guisians
should end the wars even the first day that they should see the
Protestants, calling to mind the foolish enterprise, though not the weak
success of La Brosse, who in the year of our Lord, 1559. being by their
Father and Onckle, sent with the Bishop of Amiens into Scotland, promised in
one month to drive all the Lutherans out of the land: But the Scottish
nobility more ielous of their liberties then we, showed him that he reckoned
without his host: and that he ought not to sell the Bears skin before he
see him, especially considering that as that noble Lacedemonian captain
Brasidas said, There is not so small a beast, but is able Plut. in the notable
saiings of kings.
to save his life, if his heart would serve him to defend himself: and the
Consul Paulus Aemilius marvelled how any Captain could aforehand tell what
was to be done in the battle, before he had seen either his own army, or
his enemies: either situation of the place, or nature of the soil: for his
part he would take no other counsel before the time, then such as the
occasions did usually minister to man, and not man to occasions. And indeed
these Lorrains do resemble that great mountain, which after many pangs of
childbirth brought forth but a mouse. Besides, what promise have they
performed? Of the Wisigothes that Liuius. li. 2. Dec. 3.
should come and fall upon us, we have no news, they be so many bugbeares:
for besides that King Philip has but few men, and too many matters in hand,
he is too old to take counsel of the young: although through a desire that
he has to strike a stroke, and make some alteration in the peace of France,
and being allured by some hope to obtain Marseiles as a first dish to his
table, he furnishes the^ of a few crowns, which they will receive without
waying, to warm their kitche^ withal: and God wot, whether the poor man who^
they made twice or thrice to trot into Spain, who so lively prosecuted their
affairs, that he fell sick al Barbast, was any thing slack in opening the
mouth of his pouch more thirsty then an advocates. Of the Sauoyan what can
they hope? He is so near the bear, that his best way will be to set sure
sooting and have a good eye to his own country. From the Pope they can have
nothing but Bulls, wherewith they can not run far, least the devils whom
he will send abroad to entrap the protestants, should light upon these
Guysians. What do they then lack, more then Gods vengeance to oppress them,
a tormented conscience, and a blind rage? For besides that there be two
hundred families in France, which will not yield one jot to that of Guyze, the
most part alredie of those whom they promised to advance to honors, do imitate
Lisander, who would not receive the rich and sumptuous robes which Denis the
tyrant sent his daughters, saying, that such gay garments would make them
seem more foul. Plut. in the notable saiings of old kings.
Many of those that suffered themselves to be carried upon the wings of
their good fortune, do alredie make no farther account of their prosperity,
which is tied together with points, as a Lacedemonian said of Lampis a
Burgess of Egina. All good Frenchmen whom they called to their party, in
tickling them with fair promises, have made answer that they will not hold
so much as their lives of the murderers of their country, as a certain
Prenestine said to the Dictator Silla, who had put all the Prenestines to the
sword, saving him, because he had been his host. Yea many of those into whose
hands they have even thrust weapons, Caesar. lib. 3 de bell. civil.
do with Pompeyes soldiers say, that they will fight against the enemies, but
not against their fellow countrie-men: of whom those that have better regard
of common health and private commodity, do with their ears and valiancie
favor that noble and valiant Prince Henry, king of Navarre, least they should
resemble the Argonautes, who after they had forsaken Hercules, were forced to
have recourse to a woman: So that although a first blush and opinion, and at
the first push, the weapons of the Guyzes did somewhat astonish the common
people, which was as it were dazeled in the darkness of their driftes: yet
now it is freed from that fear, and perceives that their threats are no
spears, that they have embarked themselves without either rudder or biscuit,
and that their false wings that prognosticated so high and long a fight, will
lead the^ to the like end as Icarus. And indeed ye Guizards, the ways of your
purposes are so surely shut up, that shortly you shall feel the saying of Job:
Those that Job. 4.
plow iniquity and sow malice shall reap the same. Your pride has kindled
the torch of division in the bowels of France, and you shall prove the saying
of Solomon true, Pride goes before destruction, and highness Prou. 16.
of mind before desolation. You have lift up your nose against the king, and
shall taste of the wise man's saying: The wrath of the king is as the raging of
the Lion, Pro. 1. and 20
and he that displeases him, sins against his own soul. You have gone
about to bring a whole storm of mischief upon the king of Nauar, and the
prince of Conde, and shall shortly, to your costs, learn this Proverb of
Solomon: He that casts a stone Pro. 26.
at an other, it will light upon him self. You shall learn that you have
hasted to outrunne your shadow, and that against them you have done no more
than he, who undertaking to slay Prometheus Plut. of taking profit of enemies.
the Thessalian, thrust the sword into his impostume, which he pierced and so
saved his life. And for the conclusion of this tragedy, you shall sooner be
destroyed then fought withal, and sooner fought withal, then assaulted: for
they be no petty wretches like your selves ye Guizardes: they be Princes, yea
the chief Princes of the lilly, noble by birth, rich in amity, husbands of
time, resolute in all points of honor, gentle and gracious in peace, two
thunderboultes in war, such as use not vialles in steed of trompets, a
daunsing hall, for a fighting field: or gentlewomen in liew of courageous
soldiers: who never ask how many the enemies be, but where they be: who were
not Captains before they were soldiers, but soldiers under themselves the
Captains: to be brief, who are such as the Egyptians pictured their great
Mercury by a double Idol of both an old and a young man, thereby showing that
a Prince must be both valiant and wise: and yet O Frenchmen, they go about to
defeat you of these two pearls of Europe, of these two eyes of your body, of
these two lilly flowers: but under what pretenses? These Leaguers do see that
these two Princes, and many other Lords which do stop the course of their
enterprises do live in the same doctrine wherein they were first suckled up:
to the end therefore to send discord poast through out all parts of the
realm, and to advance their ambition under the visarde of common wealth, what
do these strangers? They propound unto us the rooting our of heresy: they
arm themselves with the beautiful titles of Protectors of Saint Peter, and
pillars of the Church: but it is not enough to have the bare name, but to have
it lawfully. In France therefore of a private authority to take upon them the
protection of Christianity, is it not as much as to encroch upon the rightes
of the most Christian king? Is it a lawefull vocation to be a title? Neither is
it enough that the will be good, unless the means also to bring it to pass
be good: otherwise, as an ancient man said, It is better to stay the
execution of a good thing, then to execute it amisse^ yea it is not possible
(says Saint Austen) for the counsel to be good, when the means are naught:
at the least, that which is to be commended in the cause, is to be reproved in
the effect. Saul was desirous to know the issue of his war with the
Philistians: this desire of it self was not to be misliked; but the unlawful
means that he used, made it to stink. These Lorraines, these great bucklers
of the faith, would cut up the root of Heresy, this will is not badde, but
what means do they use? The most Christian king having tried all The Guisians
first pretense.
industry, all force, yea even to the abandoning of his life, to the hazard
of battayles, for the cutting off the exercise of all religions, except the
Catholic Roman, in the end perceiving that the restoring of the Church is a
work belonging to God and not to man, did imitate the good Phisician, who
having used all sharp remedies, and profiting nothing, has recourse to the
gentle: and to the end to set his estate free from those miseries wherewith it
was oppressed, quenched the civil broils with an edict of pacification, not
forcibly wrested from him, but grounded upon the only consideration of common
commodity, and vpholden by the solemn oath of his Majesty, the Queen his
mother, the Princes of his blood, the chief, Officers of the crown, yea even
by the Guizes, and ratified in all his courts of Parliament. This so solemn
edict, this so authentical law ought not to have bin plucked up without the
like sole^nities wherewith it was planted: for as says Vlpian: There is nothing
so natural, as to disolue a thing with the same means wherewith it was
conjoined. And yet these frebrands, of their own private authority, have trod
it under foot to the great contempt of the king, oppression of the people, and
destruction of this estate, yea contrary to their own so solemn oath. Is it
then a good beginning, to root out heresies with infringing faith? Must we be
treacherous to our neighbors, to be true to God? Does the true spirit of
religion counsel us to violate public laws, to break oths, and to fill a
whole estate with murder and blood? But what color do not the suppostes of
Satan find to set a countenance upon their actions? The counsel of Constance
(say they) commands us to keep no faith with the enemies of the faith: by
which decree, John Hus and Hierome of Prague were condemned to death, and the
Cardinal S. Tulian, w^ sent as legate into Hungary, to break the treaty of
peace made with the Turks. Surely they have reason, as if we should confound
two several questions, the one of law, the other of deed: If we must break
promise with infidels, it is a point of law, for the decision whereof they
allege the decree of this Council, the execution of two poor Priests, and
the breach of peace with the Turk: as if God had not showed the error of that
decree, by the tragical effects ensuing: for the blood of these two Doctors
(who under Sigismundes safeconduct came to that Counsel as to a schole of
salvation, the better to learn, if better they might be taught) did so cry for
vengeance, that Zischa a mean Gentleman lift up his head against many
Potentates, a handful of nouices in matter of war, against many thousands of
old beaten soldiers: whose courage surmounted the number. On the other side
the king of Turks, being certified of the breach of peace, did put on
Sigismundes spurs so near, that having given him sundry notable checkes, he
finally built his great Empire with the spoils of Christendom. And who does
not in that Council note rather the cruel furies of Antichrist, and the
bloody passion of Nicholas Abbot of Palerme, principal author of that decree,
than a mild inspiration of the holy Ghost, and an Apostolical voice? Or what
Christian Potentate liked of that resolution, when Luther was by the Popes Bull
denounced an Arch-hereticke, the Emperor Charles the fifth in the year 1519.
gave him his faith to come to the diet at Worms, where Eckius building upon
the decree of Constance, would have bought his life with the price of the
Emperors faith, yea even at the same price as were John Husses, and Hieromes
of Prague. But there was no Prince but detested that bloody mind, and Luther
was sent safe home with a pasport and strong hand.

Since that time the Emperor Charles, having made a league with the Sultan of
Persia, and king Francis the first with the Turk, laid in no better pledges
then their own faith: as also Joshua when the Gabaonites had deceived him,
would not nevertheless violate the agreement made between Iosue 9.
them, least (says he) the wrath of God that they had sworn should fall upon
them. Upon this ground did Pope Gregory the ninth cut off al those generally
from the Church, that willingly did break their oaths. These examples do
stand with reason, for if it be lawefull to parley with Infidels, it is also
necessary to keep promise with them: otherwise it were the way to quench all
hope of reconciliation: besides that it is a manifest decision, That those
among whom there is any community of right, might mutually bind them selves
one to an other. For this cause did the Romans always make a conscience of
breaking their faith, with banished persons, and such as were convict of any
notable crime, because by the saying of the Lawyer Martian. They do
participate in the right L. Sunt quidam f. de paen. Bona fides ^. depos.
of Nations. And to whom Triphonius wills we should restore the gage and
pledge, in respect of the law of Nations and of Nature, which stretches even
unto thieves, to whom we must keep promise as did Augustus to Crocotas, and
Dagobert to the Bulgarian robbers that were scatered all over France: No less
to such as have Cic. Philip. 12. Salust. in Coniur. Catelinae.
betrayed their Country, with whom (as a Roman said) we may often enter
parley, and keep promise inuiolably, as Salust notes in the confederates of
Cateline, who by decree of the Senate, were denounced public enemies.
Otherwise we must promise nothing for, infringing our faith, which is the
foundation of all agreementes. For this cause would not Tiberius hear the
Ambassadors of Tackfarin a Captain of certain thieves in Africa: and the
Roman Senate would never grow to any accord with Spartacus, when he had
already overcome them in three pitched fields, and was Captain over six
thousand bonde-men. As also the Venetians by a decree of the ten published in
the year 1506. forbad their Governors to give any safeconduct to the
banished men. Now as for us, we have not to do with men of such sort, either
with such as have falsified their obedience due to the king. The spindle that
we are to reele, is with frenchmen, with whom we have community of birth, of
laws, of manners and customs, so that being so straightly bound together, as
well by civil law, as by nature, and after the example of the ancient
Romans, and other famous Princes the great masters of Justice, and of public
faith, we can not in their respect dispense with so religious a bond as an
oath, notwithstanding the purport of the decree of Constance correspondent to
this maxim of Lisander: We must deceive children with small bones, and men
with cates. Plut. in the notable saiings of the Lacedaemonians.
Thus much for the question of law. Now to that of deed, whether those whom
we term Protestants, be attainted of Heresy? We call those men Heretics,
who with obstinate ambition do depart from the articles of our faith: all
these articles do consist in the Apostles Creed, whereupon the Protestants
do ground their belief: They do abandon the way of worldly honors: they
walk in the contrary, even in the path of persecution and disgrace: they will
not bring in man's fantasies to be rules of faith, but they promise to amend if
they may be better instructed: be they then obstinate, ambitious, or
heretics? It is to no purpose to allege the Council of Trent, unless we
prove it to be lawefull. The Council of Millaine consisted of almost three
hundred Bishops, Sosomenes lib. 4. ca. 8. Euagrius li, 1, cap. 10.
who in a manner all condemned Athanasius that mirror of virtue, that lamp of
the Church, of Heresy: In the second Ephesine Council was that holy Bishop
Flauian and his adherentes banished, and the doctrine of Eutiches allowed.

Will you then call such congregations lawefull councels? or rather the
diuelles great days, the assistes of Antichrist, and the general estates of
the enemies of the faith. Moreover, king Francis the first, knowing that the
Council of Trent was framed only for the private profit of some, and not for
the Christian common wealth, protested by the mouth of his Ambassador the
Abbot of Bellozane, that neither he, neither any of his realm should be
bound by the decrees of the same counsel. The like did Henry the second,
upon the support of the authority of al his parliaments, who evermore
withstood the decrees wouen at Trent, as being of no force and abusiue.

But the K. of Nauar has his more particular exceptions: he is a sovereign K.
and one of the auncientest, yea the fourth in the degree of the kings of
Christendom, yet was he not called to this council, and so consequently there
can be no default in him, for as says Harmogenian. He is a contumaxe, who
having had three summons or one peremptory day L. Co^tumacia. F. de re Iudic.
does not appear: so that the sentences formed against him, and those of the
religion have no ground: and as the Emperors Dioclesian, and Maximilian do say.
The sentences denounced against the absent that have L. Ea quae C. quomodo and
quando iud. etc.
not bin lawfully summoned, can have no force in the matter judged. Yea in
civil causes, the party absent is ordinarely restored: much rather then in
criminal causes, considering that as the lawyer Paul says, We ought L. Diuus
F. de in Interrest. L. Arrianus F. de act. and oblig. L. I. C. de requie re.
to be more inclined to absolve then to condemn. For this cause would not the
Emperor Valerian permit the determining of the process of the party absent,
being burdened with trespasses: but that an inventory being taken of his
goods, he should be summoned to purge himself of such crimes, as he was charged
withal. These circumstances not observed in the Tridentine counsel do make it
void, as also the protestations of our kings, and the parliaments of this
realm, take from it al strength and beauty: what reasons then have we to
convince these protestants of heresy?

Where they confess not the bishop of Rome to be universal, they say S.
Gregory taught that it was a profane name, sacrilegious and a foregoing of
Cap. 16.
Antichrist, for says he, if he that is named universal stumbleth, the whole
Church falls. They do also allege the 3. Council of Carthage, wherein it
was forbidden that any should be called Prince of bishops. Authent. Col. 2. tit.
4.
For as for that which we read in the Autenticals touching the high Priest,
they greatly suspect it, and as Duarene notes, that constitution is not to be
seen in the greek Code. If they walk in darkness, if Duaren de sac. sand.
Eccles. ministeriis. li. 1. cap. 10. August. Epist. 12.
they be blind in that mystery, which we call the holy sacrament of the altar,
let us show the^ the light and condemn S. Auste^ of heresy, who against
Adamantus the disciple of Manichee, says thus: these three things The blood is
water, This is my body, and The stone was Christ are spoken figuratively, by
sign, and by signification. Let us reject that which Tertullian writes
against Tertu. lib. 4 Amb. lib. de sacram. Cap. 1.
Marcion. Jesus Christ having taken bread and broken it to his disciples, made
it his body by saying, This is my body, that is to say, the sign of my body.
Let us correct Ambrose: Like as in baptism thou have received the similitude
of death, even so have thou also in this sacrament drunk the similitude of the
precious blood of Christ.

Where as they be so gross that they cannot comprehend purgatory, let us
prove unto them, that the blood of our Lord is not sufficient to purge us from
our sins: Let us plainly show them the name or doctrine of Purgatory in
the scripture, and reject this place of Chrysostom. When we crave mercy,
Chrisost. hom. 2. in 50. Psalm.
we do it to the end not to be examined of our sin, to the end not to be
dealt with according to the rigor of justice: to the end all punishment may
cease, for where there is mercy, there rests no farther torture,
examination, extremity or pain.

For eating flesh in Lent they do it, say they, by the permission of Pope
Eleutherius: by the authority Did. 30. ca. 51. quis.
of the Council of Bracare, holden in the year 619. and of the 13. Council of
Tolete, which excommunicateth all such as forbid the eating of flesh at all
times indifferently. Also by the example of the holy bishop of Cyrus Spiridon,
who said, That he durst Hist. Tripart. lib. 1. cap. 10.
freely eat flesh in lent, because he was a Christian. In that they adorn not
their temples with sundry pictures and images, It is, say they, because
Athanasius thus cries out against the Gentiles. Why come ye not to the
knowledge of God by the true creatures, rather then by shadows and
remembrances? It is because they credit the saying of Lactance Firmian: Lact.
lib. 2. Instit. ca. 1.
That God, whose spirit and power is dispersed al over, can not be absent,
and therefore that the image is superfluous: It is because they be tied to this
place of Augustine. August. de Cuit. lib. 4. cap. 9. and 13
The first bringers in of Images, took the fear of God out of the world, and
augmented error. If their ministers marry, they do it because we say that
marriage is a sacrament, and the ministers of the church ought to participate
in every sacrament: they do it because S. Ambrose says, Let no man be
restrained, lest while we forbid him a thing lawful, he falls to unlawful:
They do it, because in Eusebius. they find that Eusebius. li. 3. cap. 27.
S. Peter and Philip were married: They do it, because S. Auste^ says, That he
dare not prefer S. John's virginity Aug. tract. de Nupt. cap. 21.
before Abraham's marriage. They do it because Pope Pius said, that for good
cause they had taken marriage from priests, but for greater cause they ought to
restore it: They do it least men should have occasion, with Platina de vitis
pontisicum.
Pope Alexander to say. That God has taken away sons from Priests, but the
devil has given them Nephenes.

As for other points in controversy, if we deeply and fully consider of them,
we shall find that they consist rather in outward ceremonies of the church
then in substance of doctrine, which is not cause sufficient to denounce them
heretics: for heresy has relation to the substantial points of faith, not
to the outward ceremonies. But howsoever it be, by the order of the common and
ancient decrees, they cannot be accounted heretics before they have bin
admonished by sundry synodes and judged by a council: whereupon Pope Gregory
the seventh, writes to the Princes of Germany concerning the excommunication
of the Emperor Henry the fourth: thus: We have sought to bring him to
repentance, but to Abbas vsperg. in Hen. 4.
our fair songs he has lent the adders ear. Also Pope Innocent the third,
speaking of heretics, says, If a bishop with his chapter have condemned any
man of heresy, let him be accursed. He must therefore be judged before he be
condemned, and heard before he be L. Diuus. F. de in Integ. restit. Solomenes
lib. 1. ca. 16.
judged: otherwise the Lawyer Marcellus shows that the party absent is to
be restored against the sentence pronounced in the prejudice of his reasons
not alleged. Likewise the Emperor Co^sta^tine for the cutting off of the
heresy of Arrius a priest Euag. lib. 2. cap. 2.
of Alexandria, called the first council of Nice, where he gave day of
assignation to the Arrians: Martian for abolishing the error of Eutiches called
the fourth council at Calcedon. Theodosius the 2. Euag. lib. 1 cap. 3. and 4.
assembled the 3. at Ephesus against the heresy of Nestorius. Gratian and
Theodose Emperors, for rooting out the doctrine of Macedonius, called the
second at Constantinople. And yet do we bind the Popes to mount Caucasus, we
make them to turn Ixions wheel, and roll Sisiphus stone, when we call for a
council: so that the K. of the Romans, and K. Lewis the 12. in the year
1510. could obtain none at the hands of Pope Julius the 2. Also when Charles
the 5. being at Bologne, by his Chancellor ptopounded a general assembly of all
Christian Bishops, Pope Clement answered him in bitter words, that it needed
not, since that all ne^w opinions were condemned by the ancient councels: as well
might he have said that the ancient councils were superfluous, considering that
the holy Ghost in his word condemns all heresies. But the chief purpose of
councels tends to call heretics to repentance, and to pray to God in the^ to
fulfill the prophecy of Ezechiell: I will Ezech. 11.
give them a new heart to walk in my commandments. As it fell out in the time
of the emperor Theodosius, who by means of a council that he gathered together
at Constantinople, reduced to the knowledge of the truth an infinite number
who^ the heresies of Arrius, Nouatus and Macedonius had seduced. It is not
therefore enough to say that the ancient councils co^demn heresies, but we must
have new, to convert heretics: Aug. de fide catholica.
otherwise, as says S. August. He erreth in faith, that calls not heretics
from error. So we find in the decrees that the ancients celebrated the councels
from 5. years to 5. and from 10. years to 10. since the universal crown of
Basil. Neither is it sufficient to hold one council for the reclaiming of
heretics to the union of the church, but for so godly a work they should not
spare for two or three. Saint Ambrose was not content that the Arrians had
sundry times been convict of heresy: but that seeing them spring up again in
France and Italy, in an assembly of Bishops at Aquilee, he disputed against
Palladinus, who was infected with the same heresy. And that wise Emperor
Theodosius, notwithstanding the Nicene council, wherein the Arrians,
Nouatians, and Macedonians had been condemned, caused them to be called to
the general assembly at Constantinople. According to these examples we cannot
find any speedier way to prevent the pretended heresy of the Protestants, then
by calling a council: they crave it, let them have it: they would lay down
their reasons, let them be heard: they would learn, let them be taught: they
seek light, let them have it: yea, if they stand in doubt, let them be
assured: if they be not assured, let us go to them, let us dispute, let us
endeavor to take away the causes of their division. Hereof are we not without
examples, for when the Donatists infected Africa with their wicked doctrine,
and that they practiced all kinds of cruelty against the Catholics, a great
number of Christian Bishops assembled together, and besought them to grant them
time and place to dispute, and through a friendly conference to root out their
division: then if the Protestants, being urged to agreement, do nourish
debate: if they shut their eyes against the light, then let the church use her
authority and power: but if ourselves in lieu of instructing do destroy: if
in lieu of mitigating we do make more eager: if for health we minister death:
if in the chair of justice, clemency, and truth, we preach murder, blood, and
slaughters, are not our selves the fire-boxes of sedition, the trumpets of
Satan, the soldiers of Antichrist, and the enemies of the Catholic church?
And yet these firebrands, without other order of law, would have us to condemn
the Protestants for heretics, and even at the first to begin against them with
treason, disloyalty, and perjury: and of the father of France they seek to
make an executioner of Frenchmen: of our most merciful king, a bloody tyrant,
a Phalaris, a Busiris, who should be blind at the tears, deaf at the
lamentations, and inexorable at the most humble petitions of his obedient and
afflicted subjects. Wherein therefore do not these mad beasts resemble the
cursed Bertaire, who possessing the will of his master king Thierry, diswaded
him from yielding to the prayers, lamentations, and tears of the poor
Frenchmen, who, as men born to bear the blame, or thrust forward with the
calamity of the time, were banished out of their country? But God, whose
help, as a matter worthy his mercy and our hope, we do crave, will raise up
some Pepins against these infamous Bertaires. In the mean time, ye Frenchmen,
let us awake, and let us not have eyes to be blind, or veins and sinews to be
filled with lethargy, neither let us account the bloody murderers of Frenchmen
to be partakers of the French church. If not, of necessity, we must by arms
set to the last help for this quarrel for religion, who may better then my
lords the Princes of the blood, that yet are not departed out of the bosom of
the catholic church? who rather then these noble and religious children of S.
Lewis, whose faith never came in suspect? who may, I say, better then they,
take in hand the thunder, the lightening, and the three tined forke, to
disperse all heresies? Next to these Princes, what surer pillar, what stronger
buckler can our church have, then that wise Fabius, that notable Scipio, the L.
Marshal of Montmorency? And yet have none of these been so much as called to
this league: for although they be Catholics, yet be they not good Catholics
after the manner of the leaguers, that is, ambitious, treacherous, cruel and
bloody: notwithstanding they be even thunderbolts in war, yet are they no good
warriers as the world goes, I mean, enemies to peace, blinded with ambition,
starued after goods, thirsty after blood and void of all humanity. For whilst
the Pope auctoriseth the Guisians, and gives the spoil of the K. of Navarre
and Prince of Condies goods, he practices not the commandment of Jesus
Christ: Go forth and Math. 10.
preach, the kingdom of God is at hand. It is an other lesson then S. Paul
teaches, saying: The armors of our 1. Cor. 10.
warfare are not carnal, but mighty in the Lord, to bring all knowledge to
the obedience of Christ. He follows Hier. ad nepotem.
not S. Hieromes precepts, Let the bishops be ministers, not masters: for
truth cannot be joined with force. The persecuted to follow Christ, the
persecutor Antichrist. He is deaf to hear the doctrine of Lactance: Religion
Lactance instit. lib. 5. cap. 20.
must be defended, not by slaying, but by offering to be slain, not by
cruelty, but by courtesy, not by wickedness, but by faith. He gives place to
the complaints of Hilary: Hilar. epist. ad Constable.
What means this (says he) that the Priests by prisons are forced to fear
God? that the people being bound are committed to ward among the chayned? and
the Virgins stripped naked to suffer pain? Finally, he takes an other course
then God teaches in the 3. of Jeremy, speaking unto him: Have thou not seen
that this rebel Israel has done? she has gone a whoring into every high
mountain, and into every green tree: Go therefore and cry out these words
toward the North, Return Israel, thou disobedient, and I will not let my
wrath fall upon thee. He wills not to rob, to spoil and sack, to f^ll
all with murder and blood, as the Pope does, yea even in matter where there is
but prevention, not sentence: but accusation, not proof. To allege that the
King of Navarre and Prince of Conde, in the year 1572. being brought home into
the bosom of our church, do seem in there letters to the Pope, dated at Paris
the third of October, to confess that before they had been detained in the
snare of error, is as much as to be blind in the circumstances of the time and
place: they were at Paris amongst their enemies, who barked at their lives, and
were dyed red in the blood of their servants, yea even in the time that the
Frenchman was the cruel butcher and bloody murderer of Frenchmen: that the
father cut his sons throat, that the mother slew the daughter, that the brother
dispatched the sister, one neighbor killed another, cruelty triumphed over
clemency, and rage over pity: who then at such a time with a trembling hand
would not have written whatsoever his enemies had endited? But in such cases
the laws of the Emperors, and edicts of the ancient Pretors do declare all
such actions none, as if they had not been: for that is not called consent
that we force him to do that is deprived of his power: for this cause does
Pope Alexander the 3. will Cap. 1. ext. de his quae v^met. Abbas. Vsperg. in
Hen. 5.
those me^, that for fear of death are become Monks to ^ast their weed into
the nettles, and to marry. And Pascall the 2. having been forced the right of
inuestiture of benefices to the Emperor Hen. the 5. called a council at
Lateran, where he made void all that by force he had been compelled to do.
Likewise, Platina de vitis Pont.
the doings of Silla were denounced to be tyranny, because that he having a
mighty army within the walls of Rome, established himself Dictator, as also
did Caesar by the law Seruia. So that the king of Navarre and Prince of Conde
may justly disallow the declaration contained in their letters, since that the
more force that was used, the less will they had. At all adventures, from
whence does the Pope take this authority to excommunicate the goods. Kings
(says Christ) have dominion over the nations, but it Math. 20.
shall not be so among you: Feed (says S. Peter) the flock of Christ, not as
having dominion over their heritage, but so as you may be an example to the
flock. Justinian Epist. 1. c. 5 Nou. 81.
also writing to Epiphanius, divides the ministry from the Lordship, and in
an other place forbids the Priests to take upon them the titles of Lords,
but of spiritual fathers. Yea Balde, one of the bucklers of the Romish Priest,
exalting his power, is still forced to put in this bridle, In spiritual cases:
and S. Bernard speaking to Pope Eugenius, says: It is evident that the
Apostles are forbidden all Lordship: how therefore dare thou usurp the title
of an Apostle in playing the Lord, or play the Lord while thou sit in the
Apostolic sea? In old time also the Priests judged of heresies, but not of
the punishment of heretics: which was the reason that S. Paul was brought
before Festus Act. 25. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 20. Tit. de heret. c. 1 lib. 1. De
sum. trinit. L. Placet de sacro Eccles. c.
the Emperors Lieutenant: that Constantine forebad the Bishops of Nicomedia
from showing any favor to Eusebius and Theognis: that Honorius appointed the
Provost Marcellus to be a judge for the Catholics against the Donatists: and
that the Emperors Constantine, Gratian, Theodosius, and Justinian, did ordain
grievous punishments for heretics. Yea in the old time so far were the
sacrificers and Priests from meddling with secular jurisdiction, or incroching
upon the authority of kings, that in whatsoever concerned priestly
discipline, they bowed to them: Solomon deposed Abiathar the high 1. King. 2.
1. Chro. 29
Priest, and placed Sadoc in his room: Ezechias reformed the order of Levites,
and brought them unto their first purity: Judas Machabeus deposed the 1.
Macab. 4 Liuius lib. 1. dec. 1.
wicked Priests of the law: and Numa, says Liuy, delivered in writing, and
signed a note unto the high Priest, with what cattle, upon what days, and in
what temples they should offer sacrifice, and from whence they should have the
money to furnish such expenses. Afterward by the law of the twelve tables the
whole depended upon the will of the Senate, who by that authority in the
Consulship of P. Cornelius Lentulus, and M. Bebius Pamphilus, did openly burn
the books of Numa, as being repugnant to their religion: the like also did
Constantine with the Niceph. lib ^. ^. 18
books of Arrius: for from time to time the power of holding councels, and
ordering the churches, depended upon the Emperors, as we may gather by the
decrees of Constantine, Gratian and Honorius, written in the first Code of
Justinian, who said, That he had no less care of religion then of his own
life: and of whom we read 17. constitutions concerning ecclesiastical
discipline. As also our kings upon the like argument have builded many goodly
decrees, namely Charlemaine, and Charles the 7. who the 13. of July 1438.
published the Pragmaticall sanction at Paris: and indeed, as says Isidore,
Emperors and Kings have the first degree in the Church, whose nurses they are,
according as Esaias says chap. 49. which was the cause that in old time they
had the greatest functions in the Church, as commanding of fasts and calling of
councels, etc. That Boniface the 1. besought the Emperor Honorius to ordeine
that they might lawfully proceed to the election of the Popes of Rome: that
Pelagius the 1. swear in the hands of Ruffin, Childebert K. of France his
ambassador: that Leo the 4. protested obedience unto the laws of Lothair, and
that Gregory entituleth himself the unworthy servant of Maurice.

But since the Popes gat a taste of worldly affairs, they have endeavored to
satisfy themselves at the costs of the authority of Kings and Emperors,
whom, notwithstanding that according to S. Paul, every soul ought to be
subject to them, they have gone about to bring in subjection to the cross of
Rome, whereto their enterprises have had so good success, that they have made
the kings of England, Arragon, Naples, Sicill, Jerusalem, Poland, Sardinia,
Corsica, and the Canaries tributaries to the Pope: whereupon the Clergy
themselves, considering that they had girded too far into temporal
jurisdiction, and that oftentimes their ambition opened the gate into sundry
schisms, were forced to bridle them, and the Emperors to restrain their
insolences, as the Patricians were wont to do at Rome, who, as witnesses
Liuie, Thought good that the Salians and Flamines, Liui. lib. 4.
should without farther power and authority tend to their sacrifices only.
Thus in the year 1046. the christian bishops seeing the wound which the church
received through the ambition of Benet the ninth, Abb. Vrsp. in Hen. 3.
Siluester the 3. and Gregory the sixth, Antipopes, did canonically depose the^
al in a sinode holde^ at Rome, being supported with the authority of the
Emperor Henry the third. Afterward anno 1076. a council was holden at Worms,
wherein with the consent of all the German Bishops, except the Saxons,
Gregory the seventh, called Hildebrand, was excommunicated as one that brethed
nothing but tyranny, Abb. Vrsperg. in Hen. 4.
as appears by a letter which the council wrote unto him in these terms:
Because thou thorough disloialtie and perjury have opened the gate of honor:
that the Church of God being tormented with thy new inventions, as with a
vehement storm, fleeteth in danger: and that thy life is tainted with many
villainies: we shake off the yoke of obedience, that hitherto we have lent
thee, and as openly thou give out that thou accountest none of us to be
bishops, so do not we take thee to be Apostolical. Besides this Council, the
Emperor Henry the fourth, summoned another at Bresse, anno 1080. wherein
Gregory the seventh, was again deposed and Wigibert Archbishop of Rauenna,
substituted in his place: The same Emperor also anno 1083. took Rome, and
Gregory fled to Salerne, Platina in vitis Pontif.
where he died. Shortly after, namely, anno 1111. the Emperor Henry the fifth,
seeing that Pope Pascall the second sought to intrude upon the ancient rightes
of the Empire, concerning the inuestiture and collation of benefices, kept him
prisoner until he had by declaration confessed that he had gone farther then
he ought. Also by the advice of the German bishops, Philip the son of
Frederike Barbarossa raised an army to bridle Pope Innocent the third, who had
wrongfullie excommunicated him, and who ordinarely used to say, that either
Innocent should pluck the royal diadem* from Philip, or Philip the Abb.
Vrsp. in Philip.
Apostolical mitre from Innocent. But in the end all was appeased by the Popes
Nephews marriage with the Emperors daughter. In process of time, Frederick
the second, to whom the Church was much bound, as well for raising an army anno
1222. against the Sarazens in Sicill, Calabria and Pouille, as also Abb. Vrsp.
in Fred. 2.
for going about the conquest of the holy land, in anno 1228. was thrice by
Pope Gregory the ninth, excommunicate, viz. in the years 1223. 1237. 1238. So
as he by the counsel of the German Prelates fell upon Italy, seized upon
Verona, spoiled the territories of Padua: in whose time began the factions of
Guelphes and Gibelines. Again, about the Vit. P^d.
year 1323. Jews of Bauier, against whom pope John the 22. had opposed
Frederike of Austrich, did by the advice of the Romans, elect a new pope
called Peter of Cerberie, whom he named Nicholas the fifth, who immediately
created new cardinals, and burned Pope John in picture, in the presence of the
Emperor, who moreover in the year 1336. assembled a diet at Francfort, wherein
by the decree of the Princes of the Empire, Pope John's proceedings and
excommunications were declared void and of no force. In the year 1415. John
the three and twentieth flying from the Council of Constance, by the help of
Frederick Duke of Austrich, and the Archbishop of Mayence, was by the
authority of the Council and of the Emperor Du Tillet.
Sigismond deposed, together with Gregory the twelft, and Benedict the
thirteenth Antipopes: to whom in November 1417. was Surrogate Ottho, Cardinal
of Columna, afterward called Martin the fifth.

These Popish insolences had no better entertainment in France then in
Germany: for in the year 1198. when this realm was by the Council of Diion
accursed, because the king Philip Augustus, rejecting Engelberge sister to Cain
king of Denmark, had married Anne daughter to the D. of Morauia, the king
appealed to his swoords point, and sharply punished those that were assistant
at that Council: so that the Pope perceiving that so great a Monarch would
not be handled without a snafle, endeavored to appease him, and in the year
1201. called a Council at Soissons, where by orderly exhortations for
bishops, the king took again his wife Engelberge. But Philippe the fair
proceeded farther: for at that time when Pope Boniface the eight had accursed
the realm, and abandoned the same as a pray to the Emperor Albert of Austrich,
in the presence of his princes and council, he caused the Bull to be burned,
and sent into Italy Noguarel with an army, and a decree of seizure of body,
by virtue whereof he took the Pope prisoner. Also Jews the twelfth, whose
greatness the Priest of Rome had often bayed at, but never could bite,
perceiving that Julius the second followed the train of his predecessors
insole^cies, and that having excommunicated him and his subjects, he stirred
up the Englishmen, Germans and Spaniards against him, did openly by a decree
of his Parliament, rent the Bull of introduction, and imprison the bringers
thereof: and then by the advice of the French Bishops, assembled at Tours,
about the year 1511. did resolve, by arms to withstand the Popes tyranny,
who since from time to time has still practiced some mischief against France,
and as Martin du Bellay in the second book of his remembrances testifies,
Pope Leo hearing that the Frenchmen under the conduct of the Lord of Lautree,
had lost Millanine, anno 1521. conceived such joy thereof, that he died
suddenly. Oh glorious death of one of the Apostles successors! O the holy
father, who does not only delight in the mischief that he commits, but
also does even bathe himself in that harm that he does not! Since that this
Popish ambition has of ouerflowed all Christendom, that the Church is at this
present utterly disfigured: witness the kingdoms of England, Scotland,
Denmark, and Sueden, the seculars of the holy Empire, a great part of Poland
and Boheme, the chief Cantons of the Zwitzers, and many great towns and
communalties of Germany that have played bankerout with the catholic romish
religion: what think thou, O thou Romish priest, how go thou to wrecke,
and how corrupt is thy life! Is thy holy water now turned to blood? Have thou
no other holy water stock tha^ poor France, rent in pieces with so many
mischiefs? Is the knife the holy water sprinkle? Be the harquebushes S. Peter's
kayes? Is thy courtesy cruelty? and thy peace war? do thou saly for to
heal? do thou scatter to gather together again? do thou provoke, to
appease? and pull down, for to build again? My kingdom is not of this world,
says Christ, and yet thou will lift up thy cross above scepters, and thy
miter over diademes. Nourish (says he) peace and charity, and thou sendest
thy bulls post abroad to sow debate among those that be at one! He shows
thee the heavens, but thou beholdest the earth: he gives thee the charge over
souls, but thou will master the body. Thou have been hurt, and yet seek
to refresh thy wound. For if any heresy springs up in the world, thou
should deal with the mind, not with the goods, neither should thou fight
with knives, but with reason. If we use not to apply to the body the medicines
fit for the soul, why should thou apply to the soul those that appertain
to the body: like disease, like medecin: like wound, like ointment: like
occasion, like remedy. To bodily wounds, belong bodily medicines: and to
spiritual diseases, spiritual remedies. To seek therefore by force to root
out heresies, is to cure the soul by the body: or rather to slay and not to
heal: to vex, not to comfort: by darkness to show light, and by cruelty
to teach courtesy. If thou will not destroy, thou must use instruction: to
instruct, thou must subvert; to subvert, thou must convince, and to convince
reason is necessary. Is it reason to pass to condemnation before proof? to
commit the stews to the reformation of harlots, and the execution of sentence
to the party adjudged?

To the general reasons of this discourse the king of Nau. and prince of Conde
do add particulat exceptions. As that by decree of Charles the 6. published
anno. 1369. it was forbidden to excommunicate any town, communaltie, body or
college of this realm: besides that by the privileges of the lilly the Pope
can not excommunicate either the k^ or his subjects: so that Clement the 5. by
his bull made void the interdiction of Boniface the 8. against Philip the
fair, and declared this realm exe^pt from the Popes power, and so was
accounted and adjudged by Alexander the 4. Grogory the 8. 9. 10. 11. Clement
the 4. Urban the 5. and Benedict the 12. Also in the year 1488. the kings
proctor appealed as of abuse, from the excommunication that the Pope had cast
upon the inhabitants of Gaunt, vassals to the crown of France. And the court
of Parliament by a decree of the 27. of June 1526. and an other of the last of
January, 1552. declared the clause by the Apostolic authority, inserted into
the Popes rescriptes, and sent into France to be void and abusiue. Again when
in March, 1563. the Romish inquisition had cited the Queen of Navarre
personally to appear before the Pope, within 6. months under pain of
confiscation of goods, king Charles the 9. thinking that this adiournment
touched his honor and the privileges of his realm, told the Popes Nuntio,
that he would chastise the authors of that enterprise. As in the like case did
Jews the young 1143. deal with Tibault Earl of Champagne, who had procured
Raoul Earl of Vermandois, to be censured. Hereunto do I add with Du Du Tillet
cap. of the Peer.
Tillet bishop of Meaux, that we ought not to suffer a peer to be
excommunicate, because we are to be conversant with him about the kings
counsels, who in case he had not whereof to live, ought to find him. Upon
such reasons, examples and privileges, do the king of Nauar, and prince of
Conde depend: and as true Frenchmen, make a shield against the enemies of
France, who for preparing the way to their ambition with the price of the poor
people, do study to corrupt those goodly privileges, using the priest of
Rome, as the minister of their fury: who being filled with rashnosse have
hatched The Guizians second pretense.
all the tragedies at this day played in France, yea even so far as to seek
to make the king to nominate a successor to the Crown. In old time the
Dictator Fabius Buteo, endeavoring to bring into order, that which time and
necessity had disordered, said that he would not depose out of the Senate
any of those whom the Censors C. Flaminius Liuius li. 3. dec. 3.
and L. Aemilius had established. Who can then believe that the king would
deprive from the right of the realm, those that are called not by the Censors,
but by the law, which is the ^^le of Censure? I mean that grounded law of
France, by virtue whereof the successor is seized in a manner during his
predecessors life, and without other inuestiture, is half possessioner: whereof
grows this proverb, In France the king never dies. Besides, to corrupt
those laws whereby he reigns after his predecessors, even since the
beginning of this Monarchy, were as much as to hate himself: for although we
live under a sovereign, whose hands can not be bound, yet must we say with L.
Valerius against the Oppian law. There be laws that Liuius li. 4. dec. 4.
be inviolable, in respect of the perpetual profit of the common wealth, and
there be others necessary for a time only: those do never die, but these are
mortal according to the diversity of occurrences. So that these things thus
by nature distinguished, we place first the laws Royal, and such as concern
the state of the realm, because they be annexed and united to the crown, as is
this law of succession, to the prejudice whereof the king can not elect any
other successor then whom the same does appoint him, and in this case we may
say that which Pacatius said to the Emperor Theodosius. That only is lawful
for thee to do, Bartol. in li. prohibere. Plane f. quod fiant clam.
that the laws do permit, and no otherwise, for diverse considerations.

First that that is observed in part, must take place in all. But the kings do
hold it for a general rule, that the public demaynes are by nature holy,
sacred, and inalienable. For that cause was the town of Zikeleg that Achis
gave to David never alienated. And the kings of England, France, Spain, and
Polande, do swear never to dismember their demaynes: yea the king of England
in his treaty with the Pope and Potentates of Italy added this clause: That
they should give no part of the demaynes of France, for the delivery of king
Frances. The reason is, because the demaines of the Crown is a public
valuation in respect of the prosperity thereof, the profit whereof is made
private and particular to the king that reigns only so long as he lives.
This caused the Emperor Pertinax to raze his name that was graven in
demainiall inheritances: that Antonine the pitiful would not dwell but upon
his own inheritance: and that Jews the 8. chose rather to sell his own
moueables and jewels for the satisfying of his legacies, then to touch the
demains: which considering the other rights of the common wealth, can be
termed but a part thereof: so that if the king can not alienate, much less
may he pass away his kingdom and subjects from one stock to an other.

The second consideration shall be taken of the example of tutors, who as
witnesses Aulus Gellius. lib. 5. cap. 9. could not pass away their pupils
into other men's power, neither kings their subjects, considering that they
are only tutors to the people, to whose general benefit their eyes ought to
be more open then to their own particular commodities: and by the saying of an
ancient man. Even as tutorshippe, so the charge of Cicer. lib. 1 Offic.
the common wealth has more regard to the profit of the Governors then of
the governed. So that if the king being led by evil counsel, transferreth
his realm, the fittest to succeed may frustrate whatsoever has been done to
his prejudice: which was put in practice by Charles the 7. against Henry the 5
king of France and England, who in respect of his marriage with Lady Katherin
of France, daughter to Charles the 6. was invested in this realm, as appears
by the agreement made the 21. of May 1420 Moreover, although in certain cases
our laws do permit the father to disinherite his son, yet does this
permission take no place in our kings, as being heirs not to them, but to the
crown: for by law the heir is bound to all hereditarie actions, whether
active or passive, because as says the lawyer L. Non minus ff. de haered.
Instit.
Caius, the inheritance represents the person of the deceased. And yet we
hold that the king is not bound to the private agreementes and oaths of his
predecessors: for when Philip the fair, for the co^cluding of the marriage of
his eldest son Jews Hutin with Margaret of Burgu^dy in February 1299 agreed
that in case Jews Hutin deceased before he came to the crown of France,
leaving any heirs male, every younger brother should have 20000. frankes of
rent, the said agreement bound not his successor. Likewise when Charles the
fifth in October 1374. decreed that his second son Jews of France should
have for his maintenance 12000. frankes of rent with the title of Earl, and
40000. paid him at one payment, this decree bound none but himself. Also king
Jews the 12. answered those that demanded the artilerie that had been lent to
his predecessor Charles the 8. that he was not his heir to pay his debtes. And
king Frances the 2. in the year 1559. January 19. writ thus to the Lords of
the league. Although we be not bound to the payment of our most honorable late
lord and fathers debtes, for that we take not this crown in title of his
heir, but by the law and custom generally observed in this realm ever since
the first institution thereof, yet wishing to discharge our said Lord and
fathers conscience, we are determined to pay so many as we shall find justly
to be dew, etc. Thus, since the crown comes not by fatherly succession, but
by the law of the realm, the king can not take it from him, to whom the law
gives it. Furthermore we are in far better condition, then the franchized
Romans, who by the constitution of the Emperors Dioclesian and Maximian might
chose to inherit where it pleased the^, and the heir (as says Pomponius)
that was charged to set them free might not without their own consent
discharge themselves by an other: much less then should any against our
wills, make us to bow our necks under the power of others then those that are
appointed us by succession, which is of greater force then the last will of a
testator. And to say that the king of Navarre by reason of his religion can not
be sacred, or receive the oil, observed according to custom by the Guizians
saying ever since Clouis the 1. and so consequently may not be k. of France, is
to go about to make the accessarie principal, and of the accident the essence:
for the sacring of a king is no part of the essence, or else they might serve
for a difference in the definition of a king: and eue^ as the definition and
thing defined ought to have relation, so should it follow that he that were
anointed and sacred should be king, and every king should be anointed and
sacred. Which notwithstanding throughout the whole line of the Merouing ans the
Chronicles make no mention of sacring or oil. Clouis the first, by the
testimony of Gregory of Tours, after his baptism, was crowned and carried
about the camp upon a Target: likewise Sigebert in steed of Chilpericke that
was besieged at Tournay. And according to Aimoinus, certain Dukes having
conspired against the kings Gontran and Childebert, did at Briue la galliard
make Gondeuault their king with like ceremonies which were common to other
Nations. For Brinion was made Duke by the Kennemer lands, as says Tacitus:
Valentinian the first, and Pliocas by the Roman army as says Nicephorus, and
Hipatius, as says Cassiodore. Who then sees not that the enemies pretended
reasons are but folly accompanied with deceit? Hereto I will add, that at the
request of these Guizians, this realm, should be made elective, also besides
the law and reasons aforesaid, the custom should be violated: since that by
the testimony of Agathius a greek writer, who lived in the year 400. and of
Cedrenius, who lived in the time of Philip the first, king of France, the
Frankes having chosen the best form of common wealth, had no king but by
successiue law. But what stone do those men let ly still, that yaune after
principalities? The house of Bourbon, say these firebrands, are at this day
passed the tenth degree of agnation from the Royal house, and therefore by the
civil law excluded from succession. Mark here you French men, how this young
Alexander, this beautiful branch of S. Jews, Henry K. of Nauar is not alone
the mark that the wretched purposes of these strangers aim at, but also all
the Princes of the house of Bourbon, generally are barked at. But in what
sort? with some breach still in the realm which holds of none but God and
the sword. They here oppose against us the laws of the Romans: and we say
they are a-bodie without a soul, saving so far as they take life at the
authority of our kings, as appears by the privileges granted to the
university of Orleance, in the year Du Tillet in his collection of the kings
of France cap. titres and grand.
1312. by Philip the fair, and the decree dated the 15. of July 1351. wherein
it was said that the king might derogate from the Civil law: which also
Philip of Valois put in practice in the two wills that he made anno 1347. and
in his donation to the Queen anno 1330. the 21. of November. To cut the^
therefore off short: this realm is not hereditarie, but in the family: and the
succession of our kings is not ruled by a written law, but by custom, and her
grounded laws, which do transport the crown to the next of the blood royal
descending from the male, yea were he in the thousand degree. And yet
notwithstanding al these reasons, and nothing considering Liui. lib. 2, Dec. 3.
the saying of Fabius Max. we may oftentimes make right sick, but kill it we
cannot: the Guisians mean to pluck away the crown from those whom nature has
made kings, yea even to bring the king to such pass that he must be forced to
nominate to them a successor. Although, as says the wise man, The height of
the heavens, the depth of the earth, and the hearts of kings ought not to be
sounded. The Counsel also Prou. 25.
of Tolete excommunicateth all those that enquire who shall reign over them
after him that rules the scepter: for besides a vicious curiosity, we may
still suspect some practice against the king. And in deed when in the year
1566. in the Parliament of England, the estates solicited the Queen to
nominate to them a successor to her crown, she answered them, that they
dug her grave before she were dead: at the least she might say that they
endeavored to abase her authority: for as said Pompee, Men worship the sun
at her rising, rather then at her setting. But to what purpose is this naming
of a successor? The Egyptians surnamed all their kings Pyramid, which
signifies the selfsame thing, because we cannot term any thing good in
nature that is not proportioned in all parts. Who then Arist. l. 7. Polit.
dare be so bold as to say, that our king being a man is none, either that he
is unable to engender? If by nature the time of generation ends not before
60. years, or as some say before 70. shall we say that a lusty Prince, even
in the flower of his age is past hope of issue: also if, as Seneca says,
Every light belief is a foolish document, why should we persuade our
selves that our king is barren? but let us proceed to that that goes yet
nearer.

The Guysians by vow and profession ancient enemies to the blood royal of
France, weening to have brought his majesty to have a taste in practicing the
counsel that Tarquine the proud gave his son Sextus, which was to slay all
the chief lords of the Gabiens, and thinking it an easy matter to break an
eele with their knee, and to wurry the Princes of the blood, who cannot be so
much as shaken without the total destruction of this estate, do by their last
propositions study to bring all the estates of this realm out of taste with
their duty, whereto nature and the law of God does bind them, and under the
kings support to oppress the Princes of the blood, and by the subjects revolt
to trippe away the kings leg. This appears evidently: for in propounding
The Guyses third pretense.
to reestablish the Church in her liberties and and ancient privileges, seek
they notto bring in the clergy to play against his majesty?

Has the church lost her prerogatives? Who but he that has authority has
taken the^ away? or who has authority but the K. only? But if, as a certain
Emperor said, we ought not to have any sinister opinion of our Princes, who
shall say that our king has willed more then he ought, or that he has not
ruled his power with reason? It is, said Pliny to the Emperor Traian, the
highest degree of happiness to be able to do what a man will, and of
greatness to will that which a man may. Now this power is not measured
according to man's affections, but by the foot rule of virtue and laws. Herein
do we know tyra^ts from kings, for tyrants will have their affections serve for
laws, and kings have no other affections but laws: and yet, as if his majesty
had contrary to all reason ravished from the church her ancient liberties,
these Guysards will restore them to her again. But what do these Mushromes of
a nights growth call ancient? In old time according to the decrees of the of
Antioch, and since by the ordinances of Charlemaine, the Election of bishops
consisted in the approbation Theod. li. 14 cap. 18.
of the people, without whose aduow, the universal Council of Constantinople
would not ordain Nestorius bishop: and when Athanase declared Peter his
successor, the people, says Theodoret, did allow him. Yea even by the decree
of Pope Nicholas. The election of Popes made by the Cardinals ought to be
ratified by the people. In old time the Pope was no Prince of Priests, neither
was president in councils, where the order of the Hierarchy ought strictly to
be observed: In the Council of Nice, Athanasius was present, In the second of
Ephesus, Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria. In the fifth of Constantinople,
Menas Patriarch of the same place: At Carthage, Aurelius Archbishop of the
town: and S. Cyprian speaking of the bishop of Rome, calls him but brother
or companion. In old time the Guysards were no body, and of late of petty
companions they are grown up at the cost of the crucifix: Restore things then
to their first estate, and ye make a breach in the Popes authority, and the
Guysards must lose their grace: yet do they speak of reestablishing the Church
in her ancient privileges! but from whence have they this authority? from
their ambition. By what means? by sucking the goods of the Church, not for the
advancement of the clergy, but to smooth the way to their pernicious
practices: like as those factious persons, Robert Earl of Angiers, and his
brother Hugh, who seeking to wrest the scepter out of the hauees of Charles the
simple, hired their men with Church goods. But these men will keep her. O what
a good keeper of the sheep is the wolf! How will they keep her? with arms:
as if they might levy arms without the Princes commandment: who is the
dispenser of the same? Read over the laws, you shall find that L. vnica. c.
vt ar. vsus etc. Taboeth in para. Reg.
the enemies Valens and Valentinian, do expressly forbid the raising of any
banner without their authority: Examine the regal laws, and you shall find
that it is one point of majesty to appoint war: look into reason, there shall
you know that the taking of arms which touches the commonwealth, should not
be practiced by any particular person: peruse the histories, there shall you
see that the estates of the Athenian people denounced war, as they did
against the Siracusians, Megarians, and the kings of Macedon: you shall find
that the Aetolians forebad Liuius lib. 31.
the concluding of any thing concerning war, except in Panaetolio and Pylacio
consilio: also that at Rome it lay in the people to denounce, as they did
against Mithridates by the law Manilia: against Philip the second king of
Macedon, by the law Sulpitia: against the Pirates, by the law Gabinia. And
because Caesar Plut. in Cat.
warred in France without the peoples commandment, Cato was of opinion, that
the army should be revoked, and Caesar delivered to the enemies. Yea, the
Senate seeking to encroch that authority unto themselves, was still withstood
by the Tribunes. There was (says Liuy) debate touching the resolution, Liuy
lib. 4.
whether war should be denounced by the commandment of the people, or
whether the decrees of the Senate should suffice. The Tribunes had the upper
hand: as also it fell out when the second Punike war was motioned: also when
they were to fight against the Hernicques, Vestins, Palepolitains, Prenestines,
and Eques. Likewise when the Tarentines denounced war to the Romans. The
Senate Plut. in Pyrr.
(says Plutarke) gave the advice, and the people of Tarent granted the
precept. What laws then, what right, what reason, what examples do authorize,
or rather do not condemn the weapons of these perturbers, who of their own
authority have kindeled the fire of an unjust, cruel, and bloody war? And
shall these be the bucklers of the faith, and pillars of the church? no, but
the devils sergants, and scourges of Antichrist: for war, murder, and cruelty
are no marks of a Christian, who (as says Socrates the Scholast. lib. 7. cap.
15. speaking of the murder of Hipatie) ought to have his hands clean from
blood. And according to an old saying, We must rather debate our right with
reason, then with arms. Which was the cause, that the Athenians and
Mitelenians those Periander for an arbitrator in their controversies for a
certain territory: that the Acheans remitted their quarrel with the Argiues
to the judgment of the Mantineans: and that the Romans before they took
arms against Hanniball, solicited him to raise his siege before Sagunt. Yea,
in old time, when necessity forced them to the taking of arms, it was not
done without southsaying, and for the most part they asked the counsel of
Oracles: so that P. Claudius and L. Iunius being Consuls, they were by the
decree of the people condemned, for sailing away without southsaying: as was
also Gabinius, for leading an army into Egypt, contrary to the tenor of the
Sibils books: and shall the murderers of the commonwealth, robbing even before
the magistrates face, be accounted the pillars of the Church? men that have not
put on armor, but to the end to increase their meanness, to fish in troubled
water, to triumph upon the Frenchmens reproach, shall they be named the
protectors of Saint Peter?

What benefit, my masters, ye Bishops, do you look for of so many mischiefs
committed in your favor? you lend your hand to the seditious: Is Eccles. 7.
that the way to retire from the wicked, least his sin fall upon you? Is that
your practicing of Tertullians counsel, that it is better to be killed, then
to kill: to be betrayed, then to betray: and to serve for a mark to the
wicked, rather then to do evil? What may the Romans say unto you, Liuy lib.
9. dec. 1.
they that delivered the Consul Posthumous unto the heralds, and so returned
him bound and fettered unto the Samnites for making a necessary peace with
them, of you, I say, who through passion, rather then reason, do favor an
unjust war? For whereof do you complain? If you say that sundry gentlemen
do hold Abbyes and Bishoprics in commandment, or otherwise, we may
answer, that aforetime they were given in portions: as we find that Adolph
the second son unto Bald wine the second Earl of Flaunders, and Lady
Estrilde daughter unto Elfrede King of England, had for his portion the County
of Saint Pol, and Abbey of Saint Berthine. Also Robert Earl of Angiers, before
the decease of his brother of Eude, held the Abbyes of S. German in the
meadows, S. Cross and S. Owen. Yea, and our kings, seeing that Abbyes were
grown most wealthy, and were reduced in manner to the form of their warlike
favors, conferred them to their soldiers, who by discretion placed in them a
head, whom they termed Deane, which appears to have been used since the
reign of Charles the balde, unto the time of K. Robert. If your argument
consist upon the unfit promotions unto ecclesiastical dignities, does not
the imposition of hands, and consecration rest in your selves? why do you then
give them to unworthy persons? Besides, there is no appearance to cut off the
kings from their right of presentations, because they In the old history of
S. Denis.
be the patrons of the churches. Yea, Pope Adrian held a council, wherein it
was decreed, that thence forth Charlemaine should have the inuestiture of
Archbishops and Bishops in their prelacies: besides that, as says Duarene, The
installing of Bishops, by the authority of our kings, is one of the corner
stones of this Realm. For (says he) who knows not the Duaren de sac.
sanct. eccles. min. lib. 1. cap. 6
sleights of the Court of Rome, and how much French blood that horsleach
sucketh up? And the exchange of his lead with our gold is grown to a Proverb,
as that in Homer of Glaucus and Diomedes. And S. Bernard Bernard lib. 4. de
consider. ad Eug.
even in his time complains, that from al parts of the world, the ambitious
Simonists, whoremaisters, and incestuous persons ran to Rome to get the honors
of the church. If you complain because of some levy of coin upon the
clergy, we may tell you that necessity has no law: that men are governed
according to the time, not the time according to the men: and the occurrences
are as it were guides to our actions. Whereupon in the year 1171. Lewis the
young had an aid of the clergy, wherewith to send the Earl of Sancerre to
the conquest of the holy land: Again, in March 1188. king Philip August, by
the decree of the council holden at Paris, obtained the tenthes of the church
for one whole year, which were termed Saladins tenths: and with part of the
like in the time of Theodorike the second, Charles Martell rewarded such
gentlemen as had borne the brunt of the war against the Saracens. Also in the
time of Charles the 6. the Earl of Aniou, by permission of Clement the
Antipope, leuyed diverse upon the clergy. Again, in the year 1532. king
Francis being molested with foreign war, had the help of the prelates of his
realm. Besides all which, the clergy cannot exempt themselves from tribute,
because Christ paid it: and Ambrose says, Ambrose de Basil trad. Theod. lib.
4. cap. 8.
If the Emperor requires it, we must not refuse it. Valentinian likewise
writing to the Bishops of Asia and Phrigia, says, that good Bishops are not
slack in contributions: yea in such a case the Emperor Constantine threatens
them with grievous pains. And in the time of the Macedonian wars, the Roman
Senate seeing the people oppressed, raised a tax upon the Priests,
notwithstanding their oppositions framed upon such freedoms as Numa Pompilius
had granted them, from the which they appealed to the Tribunes: who, says
Liuy, declared the Priests appeal to come out of season, so as they exacted
of them the taxes of all the years that they had not paid: and yet you my
masters, do practice enterprises against your king, because that he, forced
by necessity does exact of you some tribute, and tickleth you, when he might
claw you unto the very bones, by a just reformation grounded upon the estate
of the primitive church. Wake not therefore him that sleeps, neither think,
my masters, that those that do serve their own turns by the wars, as by a
spoonge wherewith to suck up the substance of the Church, and have no other
goods but the wealth of the crucifixe, will provide any remedy for your
pretended sickness: and to say that now they will root out the Protestants, is
but badly to weigh their actions, and well worse their power: for are they
become Briarees since they began to fight under our kings authority?
undoubtedly there is nothing increased in them but folly, and desire of
dominion. At all adventures, if they be led by the fear of God, and piety of
Catholic religion, why do they not turn their weapons against Jews, who do
scatter the accursed seed of their doctrine throughout Europe, in Italy, yea
even in Rome the sea of that holy Priest? If they be so deep as they say in
the king of Wisigothes favor, why do they not persuade him to expel the
Moors out of Spain? If they be kings of Jerusalem, why go they not to
thrust out the Turks? If they be Princes of the Empire, why do they not
display their force against the Lutherans, but must needs come to disturb the
quietness of France, wherein they are but strangers? But herein may we see
our bad destiny, that has brought us to that pass, that we take our enemies
for our friends, perjured wretches for faithful persons, forreiners for
household servants, and Atheists for religious men: so as we may say, Ephraim
is as a cake on the herth not turned: strangers have devoured his force, and
he knows it not. Thus much for the first attaint that they give the king:
let us proceed to the rest.

Their bad Angel, the spirit of discord has taught them, that there is a
great sympathy or resemblance between heaven, man's body, and a monarchy: that
in each of them them there are two principal things. In heaven, the sun and
the moon. In man's body, the head and the heart. In a monarchy, the king and the
nobility. That the eclipse of the sun or moon darkeneth the heaven, the
sickness of the head or heart disquiet the whole body; and through
controversy between the king and his nobility, the whole monarchy tends
unto destruction. Following therefore this lesson, they seek to kindle the
torch of division between the king and his nobility: for whereat The Guysards
4. and 5. prete^ces.
else does that fierce desire to encroch upon certain gentlemen whom the king
has advanced, aim? or whereto tends the reintegration of the nobility in
her former dignity? It is novelty: it is a wonder in France, yea it is
felony, it is sacrilege, that a subject should set down a law and measure to
his Prince, that he should bridle his will, that he should limit or straighten
the supreme authority. It is a spite to nature, that the arm should command
the head, that the soul should obey the body, and that reason should stand in
awe of the senses. It is the dissolution of all civil society, to make the
master to honor the servant, the regent obey his scholar, and the
magistrate yield to the passions of the people. And what is all this but to
seek to make the Prince hate those whom he loves: contemn those whom he
esteems: abase those whom he aduanceth: and to face him to will that that he
wills not? and yet is it the thing that the seditious now seek to put in
practice: it is one of the marks that their purposes do aim at: it is the way
that they take to cross the kings power: but under what pretense? that men of
base gold have received open honor, and honorable persons be forced to lie at
ancker. Who complains? strangers. What strangers? such as of petie companions
have by the liberality of our kings been exalted. But admit they were
household servants, yea natural Princes, what of that? If the king holds not
the crown of us, but of God, and the ancient law of this realm, who divides
honors as he lists, why should we prescribe him a law and measure in loving
of us? Kings use not to submit themselves to that distributive justice of the
rules of Philosophy, which measures the reward by the desert, neither to the
form of the Olimpian judgment, which had certain laws beyond the which they
never passed. Kings are as auditors, Realms as counting houses, and subjects
so many cou^ters, whom we make to be worth sometime 100. sometime 1000. and
sometime 10000. Kings do resemble the sun, and dignities the moon, which
sometime appears great, sometime small, now in a corner, then in the plain
midst, sometime light, sometime dark, even as the sun gives it light: and
even so do kings make dignities high or low, great or small, as occasion
falls out, according to the time, and as it please them: in which case the
subject should resemble the Lesbian rule, which bends some time to one side,
sometime to another, even as it please the sovereign: and so shall we have the
subjects obedient to Princes, which the ancients, as Eschines says, have
pictured unto us by the goddess Pitarchie, the wife of Jupiter and mother of
felicity.

I say not that the Prince should indifferently divide honors, for the reward
of virtue being communicated Plut. in Nicia. Liu. lib. 9. de 1.
to the unworthy, grows into contempt: as it happened at Athens, when the
people seeing Hyperbolus fallen, brake the Ostracisme: at Rome when Flauius
Appius libertine had gotten the office of Aedilis Curulis: and in France when
Charles the sixth, at the siege of Bourges made above 500. Monstrolet cap. 93.
bannerets. But by force, violence and open threat to endeavor to limit the
kings will, is it not to seek to stay the sun, or rather to fasten a haulter
to hang themselves? For if the the law do deem those guilty of treason, that
have used the Emperors sacred L. Sacri affatus. cap. de diu. vesc.
anchor: If in old time the Roman Censors disgraded a bourgesse for yaning too
wide in their presence: if in respect of the magistrate it was not lawful to
laugh in the Senate of the Areopagites: and if according to Vlpian, the
magistrate may lawfully proceed by a mends and seizure upon body and goods
against those that rashly do speak against him: what shall become of these
rebels that do bring the subjects out of taste with their due obedience to the
K. that do kindle the fire of sedition in his estate, that arm themselves
against his person, that seize upon his towns, and that do convent foreign
Princes to the spoil of his realm? And the law Valeria says, that in such
cases we must prevent the way of justice by the way of deed. Whereat then
stays it, ye french men, that the law is not fulfilled? what lets us from
imitating that good tribune Aulus Cornelius Cossus, who in the battle spying
out Tolumnius the Captain of the Fidenates, exclaimed saying, Is this that
perjured and breaker of alliance? Is this that defiler Liuie lib. 4. dec. 4.
of the common law of nations? And wherefore do not we with that valiant
Roman bring to ground with the spears point those traitors, those perjured
persons that do break the law of nations, that do delight only in our
displeasure, and do bring this estate into combustio^? To say that they will
restore the nobility to their first eminency, is to cover themselves with a
wet sack: for who but their race have trodden under foot al respect of French
nobility? who but their father and Oncle caused that by edict of the 18. of
August 1559. al donations, sessions, transports and alienations given to
Gentlemen in recompense of their service were revoked and made void? who but
those furies made the edict that forbad all bearing of arms, yea even the
nobility, and revoked all particular provisions to whomsoever the same was
granted? And yet, as if the crow had ingendered the swanne, these men will
build up that which their father destroyed. Yield then ye Guysards your
affected gouernements of Burgondie, Champagne, and Britain to the domestical
servants, not to strangers: refer the offices of great master, and
chamberlain, that you stole from the houses of Montmorencie and Longueuille:
Give over your titles of Earls and Dukes, wherewith within these 25. or
thirty years, ye have shadowed your meandness: and walk in that estate
wherein your grandfather came into France, weak of goods, poor of honor, and
naked of dignity. But what? yet by their saying is the king in their debt; and
by their coffeehouse they do sufficiently show that they will not suffer the
nobility so much as to taste of those honors wherewith it ought to be satisfied,
gleane where they have reaped, or gather any grapes where they have made their
vintage: do they then term this the restoring of the nobility? What
advancement may any French Ge^tleman look for, when 24. Lorraines must have
dined before he sit down? and when they must beglutted with honors before he
may taste of any? Or rather why do we not rather abandon all hope, considering
that their appetite is insatiable, and that they are men, yea men that are
starued after honors, thirsty of goods, and hot with ambition? Moreover, since
they will dazzle our eyes with the false show of their services, know we not that
they have anointed our lips with honey, but made us swallow gall? know we
not, since the reign of Francis the second, they never permitted any young
peace to wax old in France? Or who has not seen them more willing to hafard
this realm for a pray, then to give over any jot of their particular
passions? At all adventures, was there ever such impudency as to seek to
bring the King to such pass that he shall be forced to reward their
pretended merits, and to let them choose their recompense?

We read of a brave Roman soldier that refused a chain of gold at
Labienus Cesars Lieutenants hand, saying that he would not have the wages of
the covetous, but of the virtuous: and that Pittacus being by his citizens
forced to take so much of the land that he had conquered of the enemies as he
listed, would take no more then he could cast his Iaueling: we find that
Sicinius was 65. times hurt in the stomach, and had been in 120. battles: that
Manlius preserved the Capitol: that Camillus expelled the Gauls out of Rome:
and that diverse others have abandoned their lives to the hazard of wars, for
the service of their country: we read that almost all the Princes of the noble
race of Bourbon, or rather of that Orchard of Alexanders, sacrifising their
lives in the service of our kings, have had no other hearse but the field of
battle: Peter of Bourbo^ was slain the 19. of September 1356. at the battle
of Poictiers: James and his son Peter at the battle of Brunay near Lions:
Jews at Agincourt field, 1415. Francis at the battle of S. Brigit upon holy
roode day in September 1515. John at saint Lawrence field 1557. Antony at the
siege of Roan 1562. We find that many french knights have prodigally spent
their blood in the service of our kings: but that any have sought violently to
wrest the reward of their merits we find not. Only we read that one Sigibert
governor of Coloine, every where showing his wounds, and co^plaining of his
small recompense was by Clouis the first, deprived of al his dignities: and yet
these good children shall force the K. to part his estate with them. And what
king, ye insatiable glotons, what estate can satisfy your hunger? What sea, ye
dropsicke persons, what waters can quench your thirst? Or who can fill the
perced vessels of the Danaides? Of strangers they have been made household
servants: of Gentlemen, Dukes and Earls: to advance them we have made a breach
in the authority of the princes of the blood: to prefer them, a thousand
brave gentlemen have bin put back: so as Sir, they want no more but the
crown, which God, the grounded law and custom of the realm, have set upon
your head: and yet do they gape after goods, greatness and glory: or rather
they unfold all means to win the hearts of the nobility, and to bring
upon you the hatred of the same. For with what impudency can they deny that to
be their intent? You (O most christian king) are the father of this great
family, and Pilote of this The 6. pretense of the Guizians.
French ship. If the Offices of the house be evil divided, or the ship
misgouerned, is not the father in the fault, and the Pilote to blame?

It is in manner the same argument that they have begun, wherewith to bring
the commons to revolt against his Majesty. For they set before us one that is
naked of fat, flesh, and blood: they figure us an anatomy of man's body,
having no more but skin and bones, which they say, the Frenchmen do by a
wonderful simpathie resemble: that we must restore and make up again this
poor body, that we must cure it of this wound, that themselves will be the
Chirurgions, and their weapons the plasters: but who is so blind as for
sundry considerations not to judge this proposition to have a very bad savor?

First, because it touches the kings honor whom by this means with hue and
cry they proclayme a Tyrant: and withal do endeavor to entangle him in the
same mishappe as Acheus king of the Lidians, whom his subjects slew for the
tributes which he went about to exact. Or as Henry king of Sueden, Theodorick
king of France, and many other Princes, who for like cause have been deprived
of their estates. Secondly, because, (as says Plutarch) it is not his part
that falls, to lift up: that knows nothing, to teach: that is disordered,
to order: that is unruly, to rule: or that can not obey, to command: but as
said Licurgus, a man must show a thing in himself, that he wishes to be in
others. This was the reason, wherefore they mocked Philip k. of Macedon, who
living at variance with his wife Olympiades and his son Alexander, was
inquisitiue of the Grecian life among themselves. If therefore the Guisards do
mislike the kings loanes, let not themselves borrow: If they will needs
discharge the people, let the^ leave the heavy burden of debtes that hangs
upon their own arms and stop their creditors mouths that daily do cry after
them. But wherein will not Plut. in Silla.
they resemble Sulpitius, a man confect in all mischief, who having by the
voice of the people passed a decree that no Senator should borrow above 200
crowns, at his death owed 3. hundred thousand.

The third reason is civil: for by the laws it lies not in the meaner
magistrate to co^ma^d the greater, neither may he resist the judgment of his
superior, as says the Emperor Justinian, or correct his acts, either take
notice of appeals from him, as Vlpian says: yea if he chance to admit any
accusations against his superior, he may be taken for a party, and called
into an action of injury: as Caesar when he being but Praetor, was accused
before a Quaestor to be a party in the conspiracy of Cateline, he caused the
judge to be condemned in great fines, because Suetonius in Iulio.
(says Suetonius) he suffered a greater magistrate to be accused before him.
Also by decree of the Parliament the 7. of January, 1547. all inferior judges
were forbidden to use any defenses against the royal judges, because by an
ancient saying, The lesser may not command the greater, Does it then beseem
the Guisardes to receive the peoples complaints, to take notice of the kings
actions, or to limitte the kings will? Besides, since that under the benefit
of peace, tilled by his Majesty's wisdom, the people were freed from sundry
impositions, what need we now counterfeit Hercules, Dyon, Timoleon or Aratus,
who were entitled correctors of tira^ts? must we use such corrosiue medicines
where there was scarce any sore, and where passed calamities were buried under
the law Amnestia? would right that we should prevent the way of Justice by the
way of deed? were it reason the servant should prescribe a law to his master?
Is it not the custom in case of excessive exactions to have recourse to the
estates, as we had in the year 1338. in the time of Philip of Valois?
Otherwise to proceed to fire and sword before we lay any playsters, is to
fester, not to close up the wound: to empaire, not to amend the condition
of the people, which had never good success against their king: under Philip
the fair, anno, 1312. under Charles the sixth, about the year 1382. and under
Henry the second, the people oppressed with extraordinary taxes, sought by
force to shake off that yoke, but the whole storm light upon themselves. Not
that I mean herein to imitate Anaxarchus, who to the end to comfort
Alexander, who was oppressed with sorrow for the murder of Clitus, told him
that Dice and Themis, that is, justice and equity, are Jupiters assistors,
thereby to show that whatsoever the princes actions can be no other but just
and right: but contrariwise I say, that it is evil done to wast treasures
prodigally, and to oppress the subjects: as Tiberius Caesar said, It is the
part of a good shepherd to sheare his sheep, not to slay them. I say with
Seneca, the more lawful that all things are to the king, the less lawful
they are. And that the father is not more bound to the bringing up of his
children, or the nurse to give them her breast, then is the Prince to the
protection of his subjects: But withal I say, that resisting the power by God
established, we resist his ordinance: also that it would prove a dangerous
gappe and of great consequence, if conspirators might by force and violence
proceed to reformation, as do these factious persons that manifestly do aspire
to the crown: which is the thing that has armed them: neither must these
hypocrites alter the occasion, for at whom are they grieved? Not at the third
estate: for as they say, they purpose to discharge the same of the burden of
subsidies: neither at the nobility: for it they will restore to the ancient
dignity: neither at the Clergy: for they go about to reestablish the Church
in hi^ ancient liberties: neither at the Protestants: for they show all favor
to sundry of them, besides that heretofore they have sought to give them a
desire to come under the covert of their protection, therein resembling (but
with this gloss, if the Protestants Plut. de defect. orat.
be heretics) the God of the Planetiades who expelling the wicked by one gate,
let them in again at an other. It is then the king that they shoot at: the
Princes of the blood: Justice: yea it is all good Frenchmen that they are
offended withal: and yet do they live, yea they live in greatness and glory,
and are esteemed faithful in their disobedience: loyal, in their disloyalty:
true, in their falseshoode: peace masters in their bloody wars: zealous to
the commonwealth in their private commodity: fathers of the people in
exactions, and pillars of the Church in their sacrileges: This is the cause O
eternal God that have so long favored the French Monarchy, that we do
present to thee our tears, our sighs and sobbes: for what else may a torn
people, rent in pieces with a thousand mischiefs, and choked with foreign
tyranny, present unto thee. O Lord in their anguish they visit thee, and thy
discipline causes them in complayntes to cry unto thee. Since therefore thou
art pitiful, take from us the torch of thy indignation, cover our faults with
thy grace, and display thy providence upon this miserable estate. Let thy issue
be prepared as the break of the day, and come unto us as the slow rain and
seasonable upon the earth. Wherefore, O almighty God, who art the Iusticer,
since thy fury traceth like the fire, and that the rocks do cleave before thy
face, plead O Lord with plague and blood with these infamous monsters, who
delight only in murder and cruelty: Come upon the^ in a storm, and let thy
paths be in a tempest: give them to be a slander and curse in all places. Send
upon them famine and sword: and make them O God to reap the whirle wind,
because they sow the wind. And you O most christian king, ween not in
reading this to hear the voice of a mutinouspeople, and such as desire
domestical troubles, but rather Sir, the mournings, and as it were the last
sobs of your poor subjects: Hearken O merciful king to the complaints of your
France, which is divided into factions, spoiled by the stranger, and covered
with sores. Is it not enough (says she) that man is borne in tears, grow up
in sighs, live in pain, and finish his life in griefs, but he must be made
utterly miserable? Is it not enough that being bauled at of my enemies, I have
groned under the burden of so many foreign wars, but that my own children
must pearce my flanks, pluck out my guts, and bath themselves in my blood?
Is it not enough that the plague consume me, but I must be wasted with
famine? Is it not enough that I perish with hunger, but that wars must hasten
my death? Is it not enough that I become a fable to strangers, but they must
drink my blood, gnawe my bones and suck up the marrowe of my children? And if
(as the wise man says) the multitude of people be the Crown of the King, and
that the principal law that God and nature has given unto Princes, is the
preservation of their subjects, wherefore, most Christian king, do you
authorize the hangmen of your people? If good Princes do fear for their
subjects, and Tyrants their subjects, why do you (O Prince) take weapons in
the midst of your subjects: or rather, why do you not arm your self for
the defense of Frenchmen against strangers?

If sir, there be no question of your own remaining in your country only,
but also that your country must dwell in it self, as Camillus said to the
Romans, will you suffer your France to be made a butcherie, a grave, and a
wilderness? If, as it was said to Denis the Tyrant of Siracuse, tirannous
domination is no beautiful monument to be buried in, what brave sepulcher may
a king have in a land all tainted with the blood of his poor subjects? If,
as a certain Roman said, Caesar fastened his images by raising those of
Pompey, what footing may your estate take by authorizing the nearest of your
blood? If, as said Jason the tyrant of Thessaly, it be necessary to do wrong
in retayle to the end to do right in gross, what were it to redeem public
peace with the life of two or three rebels? If a king ought rather to fear
doing evil, then receiving evil, as the one being cause of the other: and
that he does evil, that hinders not the doing of evil when he may; will
you Sir, suffer so many bloody murders to be committed under your name and
authority: and (which is more) by those that claim to them selves the
branches of Charlemagne: that do even by trompet sound you a Tyrant, and that
do turmoyle both heaven and earth, to pull upon you the hatred of the
Clergy, of the Nobility, and of the people? Shall it be said, that under
your scepter these young harebraynes, these lost children of fortune, have with
incredible boldness trodden down your edictes, violated your laws, strangeled
the peace whereto you were so solemnly sworn, and robbed and murdered your
poor subjects? Can you without horror hear of their bloody slaughters;
without pity, of the destruction of your towns: without tears, of the
desolation of your subjects, and without grievous displeasure, of that ease
which the strangers do reap in your trauayles? Consider most merciful king,
that they thrust the knife into your hands wherewith to shed your own
blood: that the rigor of your weapons lights upon your subjects: that
getting the victory over them, you can not triumph, but in your own shame,
neither gain, but in your own loss: that those are to be feared that do
nothing but upon necessity, that have no hope but in despair: that look for
no peace, but in war, and that have nothing left but weapons and courage.
That the destruction of the Princes of the blood, and of the members and
subjects of the estate can not be far from the inevitable destruction of your
crown: That extremity changes humanity into fury, clemency into despair,
and obedience into rebellion. That there be certain virtues that do openly
fight against the enemies, as force and valiancie, but that those are best
which do undermine the adversaries hearts, as faith, clemency and mercy: That
the course of reason must stay the Princes power, in imitating the same, which
when it is at the highest in the North part, walks more slowly and by
slacknesse makes his course more assured. Consider that those whom with fire
and sword they pursue, are the same children to whom you are a father: the
sheep to whom you are a shepherd: the servants to whom you are a master, the
subjects to whom you are a king: even the same subjects to whom of late you
pawned your faith. And since it is accounted among matters of fortune, if a
Prince breaks promise, since it is a warrant to his subjects of their mutal
oblagitions: with far greater reason is he debtor to justice in his own
deed. Taint not therefore sir your so pure and cleaine faith, neither make it a
slave to the passions of a few seditious persons. The people beholds you as
the sun that shines equally upon al: let your love therefore be general (if
you desire to be beloved, for love naturally will begin at the most perfect) of
the true Prince to his subjects: of the true father to his children, and by a
certain reflection the children do love the father, and the subjects the
Prince.

If in your opinion any heresy buddeth forth in France: if there be any
maime in the Church, let it please your majesty to consider that the wound
lies in the souls of the heretics: that the soul is a spiritual thing,
which neither fire, nor water can bite: that for obtaining the victory
thereof, you must be armed with spiritual weapons: that the disease is not
cured by the disease, that to lay a necessity where God leaves a liberty, is
to make a mortal wound in the conscience: that only rigor causes not men to
change advice, but for the most part makes them more resolute and to persevere:
That religion cannot be advanced by the destruction of the estate, and that the
estate is scattered by the dissipation of the subjects. And if there be
nothing upon earth more greater, or more religious then your majesty, it may
please you to set before you the example of 300. bishops that were in the
Council of Nice 150. in the Council of Constantinople: 200. in the Council
of Ephesus, and 630. in the Council of Calcedon, who all were of opinion to
use no other wepons the^ Gods word against Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius and
Eutiches, monsters convicted of heresy and blasphemy against the holy
Trinity. Let your majesty, if it please you, cast your view upon the
clemency of Augustus toward the Jews, to who^ he sent his ordinary alms,
and sacrifices to Jerusalem: upon Theodoricke king of the Goths, who being a
fauorer of the Arrians would not force the consciences of his subjects: upon
the king of the Turks, who sent his alms to the Calogers, Christian religious
persons of mount Athos, to the end they might pray to God for him: upon the
Pope, who suffers the Jews to set foot in Italy: upon the Emperor Charles
the fifth, who by provision at Ausbourge 1530. granted that peace which we call
of the religion, and in the year 1555. converted the said provision into a
perpetual edict: upon your realm of Poland and Boheme, wherein sundry
religions do flourish: And yet only in your realm of France shall they
endeavor to plant faith by arms? Other Princes do live in peace, and you sir
are wrapped in continual wars. After their example most courteous Prince then,
change the labors of your poor subjects into rest, and their misfortunes into
prosperity. And now that it seems God has chosen your reign to the end
under the same to repair the breaches of his church, with both your hands,
seize upon this heavenly gift: prepare a council, a school of salvation,
wherein the blind in faith may be lightened, the diseased consciences healed,
the darkness of heresies expelled, and the truth may shine forth: so shall God
be served of you, you of your subjects, and this realm set free from the
miseries that do now oppress it. This shall be the right felicity of a good
king.

FINIS.

