THREE Rare Monuments of Antiquity, OR BERTRAM, PRIEST, A FRENCHMAN, Of the
Body and Blood of CHRIST, (written 800 years ago) with the late Romish
purging thereof:

AELFRICVS, Archbishop of Canterbury, an ENGLISHMAN, His Sermon of the
Sacrament, (preached 627 years ago:) AND MAVRVS, Abbot, A SCOTS-MAN, His
discourse of the same (820 years ago:) All strongly convincing that gross
Error of TRANSVBSTANTIATION.

Translated and compacted By M. William Guild, Master at King-Edward.

Printed at ABERDENE, by Edward Raban, For David Melvill, 1624.

To the truly Noble, and right honorable, WILLIAM, EARL, Marshall of
Scotland, Lord Keyth and Altrie, etc. My singular good Lord, and Patron: AND TO
The Right Honorable, His most Worthy and Religious Lady; the Gracious
Daughter of a most Godly Mother.
I Doubt not but your Honors know, that when the most ancient treuth of the
ancient of days, registrate in his holy word, and left unto us to be the
only rule of our faith, does fail our Adversaries of the Romish Church, that
then their next refuge is, after that they have loaded sacred Scripture with
odious imputations of obscurity, imperfection, and sweying every way, in
their several conflictes, to fill the ears of each one with their clamorous
vp-brayding of Antiquity, and humane authority, when divine has forsaken
them; like Saul, who when God would not answer him, had his recourse to
Samuel. Which notwithstanding how little it makes for them, and how as smallie
it avayleth them, as Balaam did Balak, when he sent for him to curse, where in
the contrary he blessed: or as Baal aided his own priests, when he was so
earnestly in-called upon by them to answer, while in the mean time there was
no voice heard; any one, who with a single eye ever perused the same, may
easily perceive, and manifold experience has oftentimes proven.

And yet we see that this is their great Diana of Ephesus, wherein they glory
more than the Jews, when they cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord: and as Rahel hid her fathers Idols, with the Camels furniture, and sat
on the same, and would not arise; So with the furniture of venerable, but
wrested and wronged Antiquity, they would hyde their Errors, and cover the
Idolatry of their whorish mother, from whom they can not be moved to depart,
nor go out of Babel, or put away their strange gods, and be purged with
Iaakobs godly family.

So that their doing is like the crafty dealing of the Gibeonite
Ambassadoures, Joshua, 9.
who to make a League with the Lords People, pretended that they had journeyed
from a very far country, and were come for the Name of the Lord: and this
their impudent lie (which yet they would have to be believed as an undoubted
truth) they soothe up (forsooth) by demonstration of Antiquity; that
therefore all which they had was old: and this was their only proof, whereby
Joshua, and both Princes and People were deceived: the reason whereof is given
in Scripture, Because they asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord.

Even so, that which our Adversaries bring, when they have quitted Scripture,
to make their blasphemous lies to be believed, as sure and sacred truth, is
that which (as they pretend) is from a very far, even the Apostles times,
and ancient holy Fathers of the primitive Church, glorious in sufferings, and
from their immediate successors: And all this they do (forsooth) but for the
Name of the Lord, having a religious pretense (as Simeon and Levi did) of
clearing truth, and convincing error thereby, and so to make unity of faith
in the Church of God.

And to perform all this, all which they would seem to show or say, is all
old, drawn from Antiquity: But being aware (by Joshua's example) will we
try the men, and their speeches, their furniture, and pretenses, and all this
by the right rule, with the men of Berea, and as Israel should have done the
Gibeonites, asking counsel at the mouth of the Lord, which he has opened in
holy Scripture, and which we are bidden search, not believing rashly every
doctrine, to be carried about therewith, but trying the spirits, whether they
be of God, or no: and then we shall easily discern and discover their
guyle, and know the Beast by his Dragon mouth, to be but a crafty counterfeit
of the Lamb.

And tho for a seducing end (as was that of the old Prophets of Bethel, 1.
King. 13.
pretending the word of the Lord) that these ancient Fathers are adduced by
them to prove, yet they are found rather to improve their erroures: and being
violently drawn contrary to their mind, to plead for lies, they either
stand (as Christ before Pilate) not uttering a word, or (as Daniel for Susanna)
opening their mouths to withstand conspyring falsehood, and defend injured
innocence, whereby bragging Goliath so, has oftentimes his head cut off with
his own sword; and what they most repose in, is found truly to depose against
them.

And moreover, How the Papist^s ^buse Antiquity.
how they use Antiquity, let the single eye judiciouslie heere-by remarke:

First, 1. By making them ^lu^^ Iudg^s over the Ancients.
by making themselves Judges of the Fathers, whom yet they pretend to admit
as Judges over them, by admitting the Interpretations of such as they list, and
seem to make for them, and roundly rejecting the Expositions of others; as
Bellarmine does clearlie, lib. 1, de Pu^g. cap. 5, of such as make against
them. And as for the Pope, by giving him uncontrollable power to overtop them,
(...) Q^^to. de (...). Epist. in (...)
assigning to their words his fittest meaning, yea, and to make to be the
mea^^ng which is not, by his celestial judgment.

Next, 2 By wresting then meaning.
(as is set down in the ^xpurgatorie Index of this same ^ERTRAM) they
avowedlie profess, That in the ancient Catholic Writers they tolerate many
Er^ours, and must extenuate and ex^use them, and oftentimes must de^ye them, by
devysing a fit shi^t, and some handsome meaning unto them, when in Disputations
they are opposed against them.

Besides, 3. By razing out of their W^^s what makes against them.
how shamelessly they raze out of Auncientes whatsoever makes against them,
their avowed practice of the same, in the last Edition of Saint Augustine,
printed at Paris, by Nivel, in Saint Iacques Street, at the Storks, 1571, in
these words does testify, Ex sanctiss. Tridentini Concilii decreto veterum
patrum codices sunt expurgandi. To whom I must say as Amb^ose said of old to
the Arrians, Orat. ^. contra Arria^.
That they may well blot out the letters, but the faith they shall never
abolish.

Moreover, 4. By rejecting them g^oss^ly.
how disdainfullie^ times they reject all the Father^ and bring in some
handsome expo^sition of their own, to fit their pur^pose, let that practice of
Bellarmine^ lib. 1. de purg. cap. 6, give proof^ and in particular of some, (as
o^ Tertullian) saying, (...)
That little cred^ is to be given him: and of others (as Origin) That he was
accursed on earth, (...) lib. 2. cap. 8.
and was seen in Hell after death, with Arrius and Nestorius.

Yea, of them all in common h^^ spares not to say, when they mak^ against him,
Scripta Patrum non sun^ regulae, De Co^. (...) 2, cap. 12.
nec habent authoritatem obligandi. And again, Argumenta a veterum testimonio
petita, De Council. I. 1, cap. ^3.
posse merito c^ntemni dum ^a opponuntur.

In like manner, such as they grant of the Auncientes to be but counterfets,
5. By calling them Count^rf^ts, wh^^ they make against them: but obtruding them
as true, when they seem to make for them.
(especially affirming so, when they are adduced against them) in peremptor
manner they obtrude them as true, when they seem to make for them, as the
clear collation of the ensuing places will evidentlie give notice: Bella^m.
lib. 1, de Christo, cap. 10, compared with lib. 2, de Pont. cap. 16. Also lib.
2, de Missa, cap. 12, compa^ed with lib. 1, de Verbo, cap. 14.

In the same form they use their own most famous Writers, 6. By calling them
manif^st L^ars.
and Histriographers, calling them ^eart Liars, when they make against them, as
Bellarmine does ^ozomen and Socrates, lib. 1, de Cleri^is, cap. 20: and yet as
most faithful Writers he uses them to prove this point, lib. 4, de Pont.
cap. 9.

Neither may I omit the shameless corrupting of the Fathers, 7. By putting in
fal^e words of their own in the Writs of the Ancients.
by putting in false words, as well as ^hey raze out the true: Examples
whereof in place of many we may see in Bellarmine, lib. 2, de verbo, cap. ^2:
where he cites Chrysostom to have (...), where he has truly (...): and
lib. 2. de reliq. Sanctor. cap. 3, he makes Chrysostom to say in his Sermon
of luventius and Maximus, Tumules Martyrum adoremu^. where there is no such
word in t^^ Greek.

And as we have shown, 8 By call^^g the most ancient Councels false. and
fraud^ull.
how they use the ancient Fathers at the pleasure, so how they use ancie^^
Councels, when they make not f^^ them, let Bellarmine declare in h^^ Preface,
De summo Pontifice, and e^ where; accusing the second gen^rall Council of
Heresy, for oppug^^ning the Papal Supremacy, B^ll l. 1, de L^ i^^, cap. 20.
An^ 381: and the Council of Chalcedo^ holden Anno 451, (...) 1, de P^^^^,
cap. 9
of falsehood an^ fraud, while as yet they will have the Pope only with his
privat^ Consistory, whether he err, (...) not, to be obedientlie believed.

But most clearelie (to con^clude) how despisinglie they reject not only
humane Antiquity, 9. But most of all, in pudentlie rejecting^ and
tran^gre^sing (by their own Con^^ss^on, the most sacre^ Antiquity of ^ll,
which is that of scripturall Precept, and Christ^s practice.
b^^ divine there-withall, how ever the^ brag of nothing more, let their ow^^
plain Confession in that Councel^ of Constance, Sess. 13, bear witnesse^
where concerning the taking away the Cup from the people, they say^ Albeit
Christ instituted the Supper under both kinds of Bread and Wine; and
such-lyke, albeit in the primitive Church this Sacrament was received under
both kinds, yet for avoiding some dangers, let it be taken heere-after by
Laiks only under one kind, Council. Trid. S^ss. 5, cap. 3, can. 1.
and that under the pain of a Curse, as the Council of Trent has decreed.

So that as the chief Priests, and Elders, and all the Council, sought false
witnesses against Christ, and tho many came; yet found they none, till at last
two came: Even so, although the Pope, and all his Council, seek busily false
witnesses against Christ's blessed Truth registrate in Scripture, yet amongst
these reverend Fathers, and ancient Doctors of the primitive Church, they shall
find none conspyring so together in every age, as they allege for them: and
tho they would make a show of many who seem to say for them, yet in effect
the judicious and impartial Reader and remarker shall find it so no wise,
till some came in in later times for the behoose of that Romish high Priest,
and few Pople in great store in the Lords field, and through fair pretenses,
and secret subdolous means which they used, and the not so wary vigilancie of
the Lords own Servants, although they were not so clearelie perceived, nor
heedfullie resisted in the beginnings, yet when that wicked seed began to
kythe more plainly by any growth and discovery of it self, it was remarked
by sundry who were awake, and from time to time opposed by some, tho few,
who were as Elias in Achabs time, or the two afflicted witnesses spoken of in
the Revelation, who were still suppressed as they rose and spoke, or else killed
by that bloody Beaft.

A particular prooffe of the truth hereof your Honors may see in these
worthy Monuments of Antiquity, concerning that maine pillar whereon Popery
stands, TRANSVESTANTIATION.
the very Soul of their Soule-Masses; which being taken away, like Dagons
house, it falls to the ground, and the palms of the hands of that proud
Idol are cut off, where-by for their spiritual merchandise they so largely
receive.

COnsidering then the worthy pains that the Pens of the godly of our
Neighbour-Nation from time to time have taken, for the common benefit of all,
in translating sundry worthy Authors, for comforting and confirming the
truly religious amongst them; as also finding how that glorious reformed and
refined Church of France had not suffered the same to be hid from the eyes of
their people, and had therefore translated the same into their native Idiom;
the sight whereof in that worthy Gentle-mans Library, George Ogilvie of
Carnusie, (a Lover of Letters, and the Learned) did much encourage me to put
Pen to Paper. And therewith considering with what serious entreaty that great
and glorious Martyr, ^ooke of. Martyrs, Fol. 1660.
Bishop Hooper, at his going to the fire, made to Doctor Brooks, then Bishop
of Gloucester, for his right information in the matter of the Sacrament;
desiring him to read this worthy BERTRAM, whom in a singular and earnest
manner he recommended unto him.

Weighing these together, (I say) and viewing with what rare light, as a clear
Torch-bearer, this man so long since has gone before, howsoever others
worthily of late have followed after, I was moved to bestow some pains in
exposing it (especially in these dangerous days) to the common view of all:
whereby if our spiritual Nasci and Pasci, the new birth, and new repaste, be
compared, and the truth, or realitie of both, according to the effectual
force and virtue which a thing has, be rightly considered, (which makes the
very renewed Gentile to be a true Jew indeed) so far as ignorant Nicodemus
swarved by his literal and carnal meaning, Romans 2, 29.
from the true understanding of Christ's words, when He spoke of the one; as
far with the carnal Capernaite shall our Adversaries be groslie found to
err, by their like literal and carnal meaning, from the true understanding
of Christ's words, when he spoke of the other. And that to them as clearelie He
shows the way to understand aright the true manducation of His Body, while
as He says, The words that I speak, are spirit and life, John, 6, 63.
as He points at the true meaning of His words, that a man must be borne of
new again, while as He says, Except a man be borne of water, John, 3, 5.
and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD.

These pains then that I have taken herein, with a most duetifull hand, and
devoted heart, to your Honors gracious acceptance, humbly do I offer the
same, without assentation, (which least of any becomes not my calling)
ceasing to blaze man's praise; and as best befits me, I pray to God, that the
deep Impression of His Image, who is the viue Character of the Father, may by
the powerful hand of his Spirit be so seated and settled in your hearts, that
by that heavenly Stamp it they be both inwardly witnessed to your own
Consciences, and outwardly testified in your lives to the world, that Your
Honors are the adopted Children of that heavenly Father, whom as You set
Your selves to glorify on earth, he shall not (after the heaping of much
Honor and Happiness upon You and Yours) fail to glorify You in the highest
Heavens, which is the full Felicity and blessed Rest of His own Saints, and
which, as the highest of all Wishes, I shall not cease to beseech GOD to
effectuate toward YOUR HONORS, and YOUR Hopeful and Happy Offspring.

Your Honors, in all humble duty, WILLIAM GVILD.
TO THE READER.
THis Popish Plasma, bred of Hydra's Brain,
Come from the Snakie Cerberus his Lake;
Which Pitchie- Charon-Popes for truth maintain,
And it a Fulcre of their Faith does make.
Lo! GVILD but guyle does here expand their Pack
Of wicked Wares, unto judicious view:
That who so reads this Book, may notise take,
And clearlie see this Paradox untrue.
By written Word, and Antiquaries old,
He does this Dogma dash, and Truth unfold.
WALTER FORBES.
The Life of BERTRAM, PRIEST, BY JOHN TRITHEMIVS, a Popish Histriographer.
BERTRAM, PRIEST, and MONK, was one that was singularly Skillful in holy
Scripture, and notably learned in like manner in humane Sciences, of a most
pregnant and quick wit, of an excellent and eloquent utterance: Neither was
he less Notable and renowned for his holy life, than his great learning.

He wrote many excellent Works, and Treatises, where-of not-with-standing
few have been suffered to come to our knowledge: but in especial, he wrote a
most laudable and prayse-worthie Work of Predestination, unto King Charles,
Brother to Lotharius the Emperor: and like-wyse a Book of the Body and Blood
of the LORD. He lived in the time of Lotharius the Emperor aforesaid, in the
YEAR of GOD 840.

BERTRAM His Treatise Of the Body and Blood OF CHRIST: TO CHARLES, King of
FRANCE, Nephew to CHARLES, the Great Emperor.
THE PREFACE.
YOu command (Renowned Prince) that what I think concerning the mystery of
the Body and Blood of CHRIST, I should signify to your Highness: A
Commandment (indeed) in how much worthy of your high Soveraignitie to
enjoyne, in so much most hard to my small strength to perform: For what is
more worthy of Royal providence, than catholicklie to understand His holy
Mysteries who has deigned to bestow upon you that princely Throne, and not
to suffer your Subjectes divers^ie to be distracted in Opinions concerning the
Body and Blood of CHRIST, wherein does consist the sum of Christian
Redemption?

For while some of the Faithful affirm, The state of the Cont^oversie.
that the mystery of the Body and Blood of Christ, which is daily celebrated
in the Church, is to be considered without any figure or veil, (of usual,
to wit, and sacramental speech) and to be taken only according to the naked
simplicity of the very literal words: and others again, that these things
are set down, and comprehended under a figure, and mystically; so that it is
one thing which is seen by the bodily sight, and another thing altogether
diverse which the eye of faith only beholds. Hereby it comes to pass,
that no little strife is found to be amongst them.

And seeing the Apostle writes to the faithful, 1. Corinthians. 1.
that they think and speak all one thing, and that no division be seen to be
amongst them; they are not then a little divyded, who speak so diverslie of the
Body and Blood of Christ, not being alike minded.

Wherefore your Royal Majesty, stirred up by the zeal of Faith, weighing
these things aright, and desiring according to the Apostles direction, that all
think and speak one thing, does diligently search the hid truth of this
point, that you may call back the wanderers unto it: whence it is that you
disdain not to inquire the verity thereof, even from them of the meanest
rank, knowing that the mystery of such an hid secret cannot be understood
but by God his revealing of the same, who without exception of persons shows
forth the light of his truth by whomsoever he chooseh.

But in how much it is pleasing to my meannes to obey your command, it is as
hard to dispute concerning a matter most distant from humane senses, and not to
be passed through without the instruction of the Spirit of God.

Being subject then to the direction of your Highness, and confyding in his
favor and aid concerning whom we speak, in as few words as I can, not
trusting to mine own wit, but following the footesteps of the holy Fathers, I
shall open up what I think in this matter.

YOUR High Excellence desires then to understand, The two Questions which this
Trea^ise proponeth.
If that Body and Blood of CHRIST which is taken by the mouth of the Faithful
in the Church, be taken so in a mystery, or according to a literal verity?
that is, Whether it contain some secret thing, which is only manifest to the
eyes of Faith? or without the covering of any such mystery, if the eyes of
the body behold that outwardly, which the soul and mind does behold
inwardly?

That the whole matter which is in hand then, may appear manifest, and if it
be that same Body which was borne of the Virgin Marie, which suffered, died,
and was buried, and rising again, ascended to heaven, and sits now at the
right hand of the Father; let us look thoroughly first to the former of these
questions.

And lest we be entangled within the obscure circuit of ambiguous and doubtful
words, The first Question is, Whether the literal sense, or a figu^ at ^e, is
to be ^etained in the word^s of the LORDS Supper?
we must first define what a figure is, and what we call literal verity, that
so eyeing some certain thing, we may know assuredly whither to direct the
course of this our present discourse.

A figure then, He call^th at a figure, which we call a Tro^^, and C^^ero. the
ligh^es of speech.
is a certain overshadowing of a thing with some vailes (or ornaments of
speech) manifesting so what it intendes, as for example, So Sacraments are
visible words, and external ^ig^^es, whereby (as Loinbard says, lib. 4,
did. 1.) we are taught in heavenly matters.
when we speak of the word, we call it Bread, as in the Lords Prayer, when
we desire to be given us our daily Bread, or when Christ (who is the
incarnate word) speaking in the Gospel, says of himself, I am the living
Bread, which came down from Heaven: John, 6, and 15.
Or when he calls himself a Vine, and his Disciples Branches; all these
speeches say one thing, and signify another.

But [literall] verity is the demonstration of a manifest thing not covered
with any resemblances of shadowing, He c^lleth that V^ritie, which is a proper
speech: and which there^fter he calls a propriety. Therefore Augustine
says, lib. 3, contra Maxim, Sacraments are one thing, but signify another.
Therefore we must beware, that we take not a figurative spe^ch according to
the let^^r, lib. 3, de do^^. Christ. cap. 10.
but insinuated in its own pure and proper (and that we may speak more
plainly) in its own natural and manifest signification, as when Christ is
said to be borne of the Virgin Marie, suffered, was crucified, died, and
buried; there is nothing here over shadowed with covering figures; but the
verity of the thing is shown by the proper signification of the natural
words themselves; neither may we understand any other thing here than is
spoken. But in the former examples it was not so: for Christ substantiallie is
not Bread, nor a Vine, neither were the Apostles Branches; wherefore here is
pointed forth a figure: but in the preceding speeches the literal verity,
that is, the plain and open meaning in a clear discourse is manifestly
shown.

But let US return to that for whose cause these things are formerlie spoken,
to wit, to the consideration of the Body, and Blood of Christ:

For if the mystery thereof be celebrated without any figure, 1. Argument,
taken from the nature of a mystery.
it is not convenientlie called a mystery; seeing that cannot be called a
mystery, wherein there is no secret thing, nothing removed from our corporal
senses, nothing hid with some coverture or other: But that bread which by the
administration of the Priest is made the Body of Christ, shows one thing to
the outward senses of men, and cries another thing inwardly to the souls of
the Faithful: Outwardly the Bread is that selfsame which it was before; for
we see that same shape, and color, and that same savor thereof is also
perceived; but inwardly a far more different, precious, and excellent thing
is intimated and exhibit, because it is heavenly and divine; that is, the
Body of Christ is shown unto us, which is not seen with these fleshly eyes,
but is seen, and taken, and eaten, by the looking on of a faithful soul.

The Wine also which by the Priestlie consecration is made the Sacrament of
Christ's Blood, 2. Argument, from the judgment of our senses^ and from
experience^ unto which judgment Christ him self eppealeth, Luke, 24.
represents one thing outwardly, and contains another thing inwardly; for
what see we outwardly, but the substance of Wine? taste it, and it is Wine;
smell it, and it savours Wine; look to it, and you shall behold the color of
Wine: But if it be considered inwardly in the mind, it tastes not as Wine,
but as the Blood of Christ, unto the Believers souls, and is acknowledged so
while it is seen, and is approven while it is so smelled.

These things to be so, it is manifest, seeing no man can deny the same;
because that Bread and that Wine figuratiuelie only is the Body and Blood of
Christ: for in that Bread, as is clearelie seen, there is no flesh known to
be in it; or in that Wine any drop of blood to be pointed forth, while as
after this mystical consecration they are not-with-standing neither called
Bread nor Wine, but the Body and blood of Christ.

For if according to some there be nothing taken figuratively in this
Sacrament, 3. Argument, from the nature of faith, whose property is ^o be^
conver^^^^ about spiritual subjectes. Heb^. 11, 1.
but all be considered according to the ^oresaide verbal verity, (or
literal meaning) then faith works nothing here, because there is nothing
here considered spirituallie, but all whatsoever, is taken corporally. And
seeing faith, according to the Apostle, Heb. 11. 1, is an evidence of things
which appear not, that is, not of those substances which are seen, we shall
get nothing here by faith, because whatsoever is here, falls under, and we
judge it with our corporal senses.

There is nothing more absurd 4. Argument, diffe^^t things cannot be pred^^ble
one of another^ but the br^^d and the bodi^ of Christ are different, etc. L^go.
also than to take that bread to be flesh carnally, or to say that that Wine
is Blood reallie; for so it will not be a mystery, seeing there is no secret
nor hid thing in this sort of speech any way contained.

How likewise are these said to be the Body and Blood of Christ? seeing there
is no change understood to be made of them; 5. Argument, from the ^^du^uon of
diverse forces of substanti^ll changes, whereof Tr^nsubs^ntiation (...) e^ 1.
o^^.
for all (...) change is either from that which is not, into that which is, or
from that which is, into that which is not, or from that which already is,
into another which in like manner is. But in this Sacrament, if the truth in
simplicity be only considered, and none other thing be believed by the
senses than that which they see, there shall none alteration here be seen to
be made.

For neither is there a change out of that which was not, into that which is,
which manner of change is seen in things growing, seeing they were not before,
but that they may have a being, they are changed from not being, into that
which has a being: But this Bread and Wine were, before they were turned into
the body and blood of Christ. Neither is there such a mutation as of that
which has a being, changing into that which has no being; which sort of
alteration is in things perishing by decaying; for whatsoever decays, first
of necessity had some being; neither can that suffer such an alteration, which
never had a being. Now that this sort of alteration, is not in the Sacrament,
is clear likewise; because according to the truth, the form of the creature
which it had before, is known as yet constantly to remain.

Also, there is an alteration which is of that which has a being, into that
which lyke-wyse has a being; which sort is seen in things suffering a change
in their qualities only, (the substance remaining) as when that which was
white, is changed into that which is black: but neither is this alteration
known to be made in this Sacrament; for there is nothing found here to be
changed, neither in touching, nor color, nor favor. If therefore there be
nothing here changed, the elements are none other, than that they were before.

But here the Bread and Wine are other things, 6. Argument, from a
S^cr^mentall sort of (...), which must be granted in (...)
because the bread is made to be the body, and the wine the blood of Christ;
for so says he himself, Take, eat, this is my body: and so of the Cup, Take
drink, this is the blood of the new Testament, etc. We must then demand of
them, who will understand nothing here figuratiuelie, but all things to
consist in verbal simplicity, wherein this alteration is made? seeing they
are not now these things which they were before, to wit, bread and wine, but
are the body and blood of Christ; for according to the form and shape of
visible things, both these have in themselves (substantiallie) none
alteration: and if they have suffered no alteration, they are nothing else but
that which they were before.

Wherefore (Renowned Prince) your Highness sees to what point these of the
contrary opinion are driven; for they deny that which they are thought to
affirm, and that which they believe, they are found to destroy.

For they confess truly, that it is the body and blood of Christ: and when
they say this, without doubt they grant, that the bread and wine is not that
now which they were before: and if they be other than they were, then they
are changed, seeing that cannot be denied. Let them therefore tell wherein
they are changed? for we see nothing corporally to be changed in them: of
necessity then they must confess either that they are changed in some other
respect, (to wit, in use) and consequently not to be that which they
otherwise are seen to be in verity, but another thing which they are not
seen to be according to their own proper and substantial existence. Or if
they will not confess this, they shall be constrained to deny, that they are
the body and blood of Christ at all: which not only is abominable to say,
but to think only.

But because they will confess, that they are the body and blood of Christ,
neither could they have been so, except the change had been to the better;
neither is that change corporally, but spirituallie made, of necessity the
speech thereof is figurative; because under the veil or curtain (as it were)
of corporal bread and wine, is convoyed unto the soul the spiritual body
and blood of Christ: Not that these are the existences of two diverse things,
to wit, as of a body and a spirit, but one and that same self thing,
according to one consideration is a sort of bread and wine, and according to
another is the body and blood of Christ: according to that, as they are
touched corporally, they are kinds of corporal creatures; but according to
that power whereby they are made so spirituallie, they are the mysteries of the
body and blood of Christ.

Let us consider also the Laver of holy Baptism, 7. Argument, from B^ p^^^^,
wher^^n the water change^h not its (...) nature; therefore neither the bread
and w^ne in the Lords Supp^^.
which worthily is called the fountain of life, because it reformeth the
comers unto it, by the newness of a better life, and gif^eth them that are
dead in sin, with lively grace and righteousness: according to that it is
the element of water, has it that power? and yet except it had the virtue of
Sanctification, it could not wash away the blot of sin: and except it
contained the strength of life, it could no wise give life to the dead: not in
the flesh, (I mean) but in the soul. And yet if we consider, in that
fountain only that which our bodily eye perceives, it is seen to be a
moist element, subject to corruption, having no power, but to wash only the
body: but the accessorie virtue of the holy Spirit, by priestlie
consecration, makes it pithie, not only to wash away the filth of the body,
but also to purge, by a spiritual grace, the foulness of the soul.

Behold then, in one, and that same element, we see two contrarieties to
remain; that is, that which is subject to corruption, to give incorruption;
and that which has no life, to give life. It is manifest then, into that
fountain to be both that which the corporal senses seeks, and therefore to
be changeable, and corruptible: and again that also to be in it, which
only says beholds, and therefore cannot be corrupted, nor suffer the
loss of life. If thou consider it, as it washes outwardly, it is an element;
but if thou weigh it, as it cleanses inwardly, it is the power of life, of
sanctification, and immortality. Therefore in the proper nature thereof it is
corruptible water, but in the mystery thereof, and holy use, it is curing
grace: even so that which is called the body and blood of Christ, in the
outward show considered, it is a creature, subject to mutabilitie, and
corruption, but if we consider the virtue of the mystery thereof, it is life,
giving immortality to the partakers thereof.

These things then are not all one, 8. Argument, from (...) for that which
(...) the body (...) he (...) or (...) which i^ (...) of the body.
as they are seen, and as they are believed: for according to that as they are
seen, they being corruptible, they feed the body which is corruptible; but
as they are believed, being immortal, they feed our souls to immortal^^ie.

The Apostle also writing to the Corinths, 1. Cor 10. 9 Arg^ment, from (...)
Apostl^. his (...) Our F^thers in the Ser, (...) and in the water that pushed
out of the Rock, were p^^t^kers of Christ his body and blood; otherwise they
should no^ (...) unto the faythfu^l in the Old. Testam^t that which they (...)
but all the form^, non (...) of them required not the ^o porall prefence of
that which they signi^^ied. ther^oe according to the invisible ^fficacie of the
holy Ghost only they had their (...) men^^ll force^ as does the LORDS
Supp. ^.
says, I would not, Brethen, that you should bee^ ignorant, that all our
Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed though the Sea, and were all
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and did cate the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink: For they drank of
that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was CHRIST.

We perceive then, that the Sea, and the Cloud, did carry a figure of
Baptism, and that our Fathers in the old Testament have been baptized in
them. Now, could the Sea, in that it was an element, have in it the virtue of
Baptism? or could the Cloud, in that respect it did kythe the thickest part
of the air, sanctify the people? Neither can we say, that the Apostle
(speaking in Christ) has said untruely, that our Fathers were baptized in
the water, and in the cloud. And albeit that Baptism did not represent the
same form of Baptism of Christ which is now used in the Church daily, yet
notwithstanding no man, in his wits can deny, but it was a sort of Baptism,
and in it our Fathers to have been baptized; except, madlie, he presume to
gainsay the Apostles words.

Therefore the sea and the cloud, in that they are natural bodies, give not
the cleanness of sanctification, but according to that they contained in them
invisiblie the sanctification of the holy Spirit; for there was in them a
visible form, which might appear to the corporal senses of all, not in
similitude, but in the verity it self; and inwardly a spiritual power
shyned, which appeared, not to carnal eyes, but to the eyes only of the
souls of the godly.

Like-wyse the heavenly Food which rayned from Heaven, and the water that
gushed from the rock, was corporal, and fed and watered the people
corporally: yet not-with-standing the Apostle calls that M^nna, and the
water Spiritual Food. Wherefore serves this? Because there was a spiritual
power of the word of GOD in these substances, which did feed and water rather
the souls of the believers, than their bodies.

And although that meat and drink fore-shewed the mystery of the body and
blood of Christ, 10, Argument, from the intern^ll matter of the Sacrament^s:
Our F^th^rs were m^d^ pa^t^k^ts of Christ, but we are m^de (...) of Christ:
(...), both we and they of one thing.
then only to come, which the Church now celebrateth as come;
not-with-standing the holy Apostle affirms constantly, That our Fathers did
eat that same spiritual food, and did drink that same spiritual drink.

Perhaps then thou will ask, what he means by that same spiritual meat
and drink? To wit, Even that same which the Children of the faithful eat and
drink now-a^ days in the Church: for we must not conceive diverselie here,
because one, and that selfsame CHRIST, who fed the people in the Desert, being
baptized in the water, and the cloud, he watered them then with his blood,
which he gave them to drink, and fed them then with his flesh: and now in
the Church of the Faithful he feeds his people with the same bread of his
body, and gives them the same water of his blood, both for drink and
nowrishment. Which thing the Apostle did go about to signify, when he said,
That our Fathers did eat that same spiritual food, and drank that same
spiritual drink: and therefore he did consequently add, That they drank
of that Spiritual Rock which followed them, and the Rock was CHRIST: that
we might there-by understand, that Christ in the Desert did consist in that
spiritual Rock, and gave to the people the water of his blood. Who
there-after having taken flesh of the Virgin, has given him self in our time
unto the death of the Cross, for the saving of the faithful: and since that
time has shed the water of his blood, where-by not only we might be
redeemed, but also where-of we might plentifully drink.

A wonderful mystery indeed, because incomprehensible, and inestimable! He
had not as yet taken on the shape of Man, He had not as yet tasted of Death,
for the safety of the World, He had not as yet redeemed us, with his
precious blood, when already our Fathers in the Desert, by Spiritual Food,
and invisible Drink, did eat his body, and drink his blood, as the Apostle
t^stifyeth, when he affirms our Fathers to have eaten that same Spiritual
Food, and drunken that same Spiritual Drink: Not that how the same was done
is to be inquired; but Faith that it was so done, is to be acquired: For that
selfsame GOD, who in his Church, by his Almighty power, changes the Bread
and Wine, into his Flesh and Blood, after a Spiritual manner; that selfsame
GOD (I say) turned in the very like sort the Manna which rayned from Heaven,
into his own body unto them invisiblie; and turned the water, gushing out of
the rock, into his own blood.

Which thing David understanding, 11. Argument, from o^^ feleo^ pur^^^^rs o^
that ^pirituall and ^^^^^^lie food. The Angels did not^ (...) of that corpo^
^ll Manna, (...) of that spiritual; therefore even so the ^aythfull, not in a
corpor^ll, but in a spiritual manner, by faith do ^ate the ^od^e of CHRIST.
he declared the same manifestly, being instructed by the holy Ghost,
saying, that Man did eat the bread of Angels. For it is a thing to be laughed
at, to suppose that that corporal Manna given to the Fathers, does feed that
heavenly hoaste, or that they do eat any such meat, who are filled with
the Banquets of that Heavenly word. The Psalmist surely shows, or rather
the Spirit of God speaking by the Psalmist, either what our Fathers by that
heavenly Manna did receive, or what the faithful now in the mystery of the
body and blood of Christ ought to conceive, and believe. In both these
(surely) Christ him self is meant, who feeds the souls of the earthly
believers, and is the meat of the heavenly Angels: and both this is done, not
with a corporal tasting, nor by a bodily food, but by the virtue of the
spiritual word.

And we understand by the Evangelistes rehearsing, 12. Argument, from the
c^rcumstance of the time of the (...) rat^on and institution of the Lords
Supp^^s Matthew, 20.
that our Lord Jesus Christ, before that he suffered, taking bread, gave
thanks, and gave to his disciples, saying, This is my Body which is given for
you; do this in remembrance of Me. Likewise He took the Cup, after Supper,
saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you: Where
we see that Christ as yet had not suffered, and yet the mystery of his body
and his blood was already celebrated: for we think not, that any of the
faithful will doubt, that that bread was made the body of Christ, which
giving to his disciples, he says thereof, This is my Body, which is given
for you: Neither that they will doubt, that that Cup does contain the blood
of Christ (sacramentallie, to wit) concerning the which he says also, This
Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you: So that a
little before he suffered, he could thus have changed that substance of
bread, and creature of wine, into his own body which was to suffer, and into
his blood, which was to be shed: and so also he was able to convert that
heavenly food after the same manner that rained in the wilderness, and that
water which gushed out of the Rock, into his body and blood, albeit that long
after he was incarnate, and his flesh was to hang upon the Cross for us, and
his blood was to be shed for our ablution.

Here also we ought to consider how the words are to be taken which himself
says, John, 6. ^3 Argument, from the absued and wicked v^^l (...), which
necessar^^^^ follows that gross^ and (...) ^^t^ng of Chi^stes ^od^^.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you. He says not, that his flesh which did hang upon the cross
should be cutted in pieces, and eaten by his Disciples; or that his blood,
which was to be shed for the redemption of the world, was to be given to his
Disciples to drink, for that were a facinorous and an abominable thing, if
either his blood were so drunken, or his flesh eaten; according, as that gross
and incredulous people thought. Wherefore in the words following, 14. Argument,
from Christ's visible as^^^sion, and the estat^ of his glorious body in
heaven: not to be broken any more, or catnallie to be eaten by p^^^^^ale on
earth.
he says to his Disciples, who indeed believed his words, but not as yet
had thoroughly pierced unto their right meaning, Does this (says he) offend
you? what therefore if ye shall see the Son of man going up, where he was
before? As if he would have said, Ye shall not think that my body is to be
divyded in parts amongst you, to be eaten corporally, or my blood to be so
drunken; when after my resurrection ye shall see me going up to the heavens,
with the whole fullness of my body and blood, then ye shall understand that my
flesh is to be eaten by the faithful: not as these gross and incredulous
people do think, but truly, and in a mystical manner, bread and wine being
converted (sacramentallie, to wit) into the substance of my body and blood, to
be taken by the faithful.

And thereafter he lyke-wyse says, 15. Argument, from the Author of that
(...), whereof the (...) by the (...) to wit, the (...), which qu^^keneth.

Where we have to no^, (...)


It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. He says, the
flesh profits nothing that way as the incredulous Capernaites understood: for
other-wise it gives life, as it is taken in a mystery by the faithful. And
he shows manifestly himself wherefore this is, when he says, It is the
Spirit that quickneth. Therefore in this mystery of the body and blood of
Christ, there is a spiritual operation which gives life; without the which
operation these mysteries profit nothing, because they may feed the body
indeed, but they cannot nowrish the soul.

But here aryseth a question, which sundry do propone; affirming, That these
things are not figuratiuelie to be understood, but according to the very
literal verity: which while they say, they withal gainsay the writings of
the holy Fathers. Saint Augustine, one of the chief Doctors of the Church,
in his third Book concerning the doctrine of Christ, writes so; Except ye
eat (says our Savior) the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
ye shall not have life in you. He seems to command a wicked and facinorous
fact; but he does not so: for he speaks figuratiuelie, commanding us to
communicate of the Passion of the Lord; and that we should profitablie and
comfortablie lay it up in our mind, That his body was crucified, and wounded
for us.

We see then, that Augustine says, 16. Argument. from the (...) of (...) who
says, (...) words (...).
that the mystery of the body and blood of Christ, is to be celebrated by the
faithful, under a figure, or in resemblance: for to eat his flesh, and drink
his blood carnally, it is not a point of Religion, but of wicked villainy:
amongst whom were these, who in the Gospel understanding the words of our
Savior carnally, departed from him, and went no longer with him.

Lyke-wyse Augustine, 17. Argument, from the ^^u^l soune of speech in such
things, which is ^igura^^^^e, and yet easily understood.
in that Epistle which he writes to Bishop Boniface, amongst other things
says this, to wit, When Easter approaches, we usually say, that the morrow
is the day of the Lords Passion, when not-with-standing he has suffered many
years ago; neither was that Passion of his but once, and upon the Sabbath
thereafter we say, This is the day of the Lords Resurrection, when
notwithstanding many years are bypast since he arose. Wherefore no man will
be so foolish, as to accuse us, because we call these days so, but according
to the similitude and memorial of those on which these things were done. So
that that is called the day, which is not the day it self, but alyke unto it
by revolution of time, and that is said to be done on that day, in respect of
the celebration of the Sacrament, and memorial thereof, which notwithstanding
is not on that day indeed, but long ago is done.

Was not Christ lyke-wyse but once only crucified in his own person? 18.
Argument, from the sacramental proportion and similitude between the sigue,
and thing signified; which who takes away, overthrows the nature of a
Sacrament.
and yet not-with-standing not only in the Sacrament at all these solemnities
at Easter, but every day also he is crucified before the whole people.

Neither speaks he untruely, 19. Argument, likewise who knows not, that
for this resemblance the name of the thing signified is imposed on the sign,
is ignorant of the nature of Sam^ntes.
who being asked at the time of the Sacrament, and in the mean while
answers, that Christ is in crucifying: for if Sacraments had not a
similitude of the things themselves whereof they are Sacraments, they were not
at all to be called Sacraments.

From this similitude then, 20. Argument, that which after a sa^^ament^ll
manner is Christ's bod^e, is not the same properly.
and resemblance, the Sacraments, for the most part, take the names of the
things them selves.

As then, according to a certain manner, the Sacrament of Christ's body, is
the body of Christ; and the Sacrament of Christ's blood, is the blood of
Christ; so the Sacrament of Faith, is Faith.

We see then, 21. Argument, Who con^oundeth the sign, with the thing
signified, making the one to be the other, destroys the n^t^re of a S^^^^ment.
that holy Augustine says, that the Sacrament, in effect, is one thing, and
the thing signified, another: for the body of Christ which suffered, and that
blood which gushed forth out of his side, are the real things them selves;
but the mysteries of these things, are that which he calls the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, which is celebrated in rememberance of the Lords
Passion: not only at the solemnity of Easter yearlie, but also every day
through-out the whole year.

And not-with-standing that there is but one body of the Lord, 22. Argument,
from the nature of Christ^^^^ Bo^^e, which is but one, and therefore can be
but in one place at once. And seeing he suffered therein on^^ (...), it cannot
be any more corporally broken, nor his blood shed again.
where-in he suffered once only; and one blood, once only shed for the
redumption of the world: yet the Sacraments have taken the names of those
same things them selves: so that they are called the Body and Blood of
Christ, while as they are so only called but for the similitude of those
things which they signify: as the Passion day, and the day of the
Resurrection, are so called, which are yearlie celebrated, while as
not-with-standing in his body he suffered but once, (as is said) and rose
but once: Neither can these days be called back again, because they are
already bygone: Yet not-with-standing, by that form of speech, they are
called such days, where in the rememberance of the Lords death and
Resurrection is commemorated, because they have the similitude and resemblance
of those days, where-on our Savior suffered, and rose again: Whence we say,
the day, or tomorrowe, or the day after, to be the day of the Lords
Passion, or his Resurrection: when as not-with-standing those days where-on
these things were reallie done, are bypast many years ago.

So also we may say, That the Lord is sacrificed, or offered up, when the
Sacrament of his Oblation is celebrated, 23. Argument, from the manner how he
is said daily to be sac^^^ced, or suffer; which is sacramentallie only, or
by resemblance, and commemoration.
while as not-with-standing he was but once only sacrificed, for the
salvation of the world, in his own person, as the Apostle says, CHRIST once
suffered for us, leaving an example unto us, that we might follow His
Foote-steppes: 1. Pet. 2.
For he says not, that he suffers daily in his own person, which he
did but once: but he left us that example, which unto us that are the
faithful, is daily represented in the mystery of his body and blood: that
who-so-ever comes unto it, may know, that he must be partaker of the Lords
sufferinges: the pattern and resemblance where-of, he gives in his holy
mysteries, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 23.
When thou come to eat at the Table of a mighty man, consider diligently
what is set before thee, knowing that thou must prepare such things again.

To come then to the Table of this mighty man, 24. Argument, the thing
signified in the Sacrament. cannot be received and eaten with the mouth.
is to be partaker of the heavenly Food: and the taking heed to those
things which are set before thee, is the understanding, and discerning aright,
of the body and blood of Christ: Whereof who-so-ever he be that is partaker,
let him take heed, that he must prepare such things also; to wit, that he
must be Christ's follower, by dying with him: the memory of whose death, he
must not only by believing, but by tasting also confess.

Also the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, writing to the Hebrews, says, Such an
high Priest it became us to have, Hebr. 7.
who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher
than the Heavens: Who needs not daily, as those high Priests under the
Law, to offer up Sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the
peoples: for this the Lord JESUS CHRIST did once, when he offered up him
self. And now that which he did once, is daily re-iterated: for he offered
himself once for the sins of the people, and yet not-with-standing this
Oblation is daily celebrated by the faithful, but in a mystery, that that
which our Lord JESUS fulfilled, by offering up him self once in person, might,
in rememberance of his Passion, be daily performed, and that by celebrating
the holy mysteries thereof.

Neither is it untruely said, that in these mysteries the Lord is crucified,
or suffers, because they carry the similitude of that death and suffering,
whereof they are resemblances: Whence it is also, that they are called the
Lords body, and his blood, because they take the name of that, whereof they
are the Sacrament.

Hence it is, 25. Argument, from the matter of the Sacrament, which is the
fruits of the earth; and therefore not Christ's body and blood properly,
seeing it was of the seed of the Virgin.
that blessed Isiodor, in his Book of Etimologies says, that this word
SACRIFICE, is so called as it were a Sacred fact, because this action, or
Sacrament, is consecrated with a mystical sort of Prayer, unto the remembrance
of the Lords Passion. From whence it is, that at his command we call that the
body and blood of Christ; the which while it is made of the fruits of the
earth, it is sanctified, and so becomes a Sacrament, by the Spirit of God,
working invisiblie. The Sacrament of which Bread also, and of which Cup, is in
the Greek called Eucharict, which in Latin being interpreted, signifies
THANKSGIVING.

And what is better (I pray you) than the body and blood of Christ? 26.
Argument, That which is compared unto the body and blood of Christ, is not
the very same.
and therefore that bread and that wine are compared to the body and blood of
Christ, because as the substance of this visible bread and wine nowrisheth, 27.
Argument, That which is the food of the soul only, is not food for the
body also.
and refreshes the outward man, so that word of God, which is the living
bread, by the participation of it refreshes the mynds of the faithful.

And that holy forenamed Father does ever teach, that the mystery of the
Lords Passion, 28. Argument, That which is celebrated in remembrance only of
Christ his suffering, is not that body which properly suffered.
is to be celebrated in remembrance only of the Lords suffering for us. And so
by saying this, he shows, that the Lords proper suffering was but once, but
that the daily rememberance thereof in our holy Solemnities is often to be
represented. Whence it is, that the bread which is offered, al-be-it it be
taken of the fruits of the earth, while it is sanctified, it is turned in the
body of Christ; and that wine which did proceed from the Vine-grape, by the
sanctification of the holy mystery, is made the blood of Christ: not
visiblie, (as is usual, is substantial conversions) but (as the same Father
says) by the invisible operation of the holy Ghost.

And because they are a far more different thing, 29. Argument, whatsoever
outwardly is taken by the mouth, serves for the refreshment of the body: but
Christ's body and blood serves for the invisible and spiritual feeding of
the souls, and therefore it is so taken.
by the invisible power, than they appear outwardly, and are seen to be,
he distinguishes them, while he says, that the bread and wine are therefore
compared to the body and blood of Christ; because as the substance of the
visible bread and wine nowrisheth and cheareth the outward man, so the word of
God, which is the lively bread, by the participation thereof, refreshes in
like manner the souls of the faithful.

By saying of which things, he confesses plainly, that whatsoever is taken
outwardly in the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, it is meet for
the refreshment of the body only; but the word of God, which is the
invisible bread, being invisiblie present in that Sacrament, does feed the
souls of the faithful invisiblie, quickening them by the participation of
himself.

Hence it is, that the same divine Doctor says, that it is a Sacrament, in
any celebration, when the action is so performed, that some thing is
understood to be signified, which is to be holielie taken. By saying which,
he shows, that all Sacraments in holy matters, do contain some mystical
thing, and that it is one thing which is seen by our outward eyes, and another
thing which is inwardly to be understood by our mynds. And after this he
shows what Sacraments are to be celebrated by the faithful, to wit,
Baptism, and that of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Which are called Sacraments, 30. Argument, Those thing^s which under the over
of corporal thing^s have an b^^^ and divine operation, ends not to h^^ge their
essence: but the sacraments are so: Ergo, etc.
because under the covering of the corporal things in these Sacraments, the
divine virtue more secretly works salvation: Whence it is, that from their
secret and sacred virtue, they are called Sacraments. And thereafter he
says, that in the Greek they are called MYSTERIES, because they have a
secret and hid nature and disposition with them.

What then are we taught here? 31. Argument, Those things that are not
perceived, nor taken, but by diverse instruments, they are not the same, but
the Bread and Wine, and the Body and Blood of Christ, are not perceived, nor
taken, by the same instruments, but by diverse: and therefore are not the same.
but that these things which are said to be the body and blood of our Lord,
are therefore called mysteries, because they have a secret and hid disposition
and quality; that is, that one thing they show outwardly, and another thing
invisiblie they work inwardly. From this they are also called Sacraments,
because by the covering of corporal things, the heavenly power more secretly
dispenses the salvation of the faithful partakers.

Out of all then which has been formerlie spoken, we have shown unto you,
that the body and blood of Christ, which is taken in the Church, by the mouth
of the faithful, are signs and figures, according to their visible shape; but
according to their invisible substance, Conclusion.
that is, according to the power of the heavenly word, they are the body and
blood of CHRIST truly: whence it is, that according as they are seen as the
visible creatures, they nowrish the body; but according to the virtue of the
more powerful substance, they both nowrish and sanctify the souls of the
faithful.

WE must look now to the drift of the second Question, The second Question,
Whether the matter of the Sacrament be the natural Body of CHRIST, or no?
and consider if that same body which was borne of the Virgin, and suffered,
died, and was buried, and sits now at the right Hand of the Father, be that
which is taken by the mouth of the faithful, daily in the mystery of the
Sacrament?

Then let us ask at Saint Ambrose, 1. Argument, from (...) showi^g, that the
matter of the Sacrament is taken corporally, and nowrisheth of itself but the
natural life: But the Body of Christ is not so, for it nowrisheth only the
spiritual life.
what he does think concerning this matter? for he says, in his first
Book of the Sacraments, Surely it is a wonderful thing, that God rained
down heavenly Food unto our Fathers, and that they were daily nowrished upon
celestial meat; whence it is said, that Man did eat the bread of Angels: and
yet they who did eat that bread, died all in the Desert. But that meat which
thou take, and that bread of life which came down from heaven, furnishes the
nowrishment of everlasting life: and who-so-ever eats this bread, he shall
never die: and this bread is the body of Christ.

Look then in what respect it is, that this holy Doctor says, that Christ's
body is food, which the faithful receive in the Church; for he says, that
bread of life which came down from heaven, furnishes the nowrishment of
everlasting life. These words directly contradict Pope Nicolas, De
Consceratione, Did. 2. cap. Evo Berengarius.
Now (I ask) if it furnishes that nowrishment, as it is seen? or as it is
taken corporally? as it is chewed with the teeth? swallowed with the mouth?
and received in the stomach? Not. For that way it should feed the flesh
only, which is mortal; neither gives it any immortality that way, nor can
it be said, that who-so-ever eats this bread so, shall not die for ever:
for that which the body receives, is corruptible: neither can it avail unto
eternal life, because that which is subject to corruption, cannot give
eternity. Therefore in that bread there is a life, which is not seen with
these corporal eyes, but which we behold with sight of faith, and that is
that heavenly bread which came down from heaven; and concerning the which it
is said, who-so-ever eats this bread, shall live for ever, which is the body
of our Lord.

Also in the words following, when he was speaking of the almighty power of
Christ, he says so, The word of God that might of nothing make that which was
not, can He not change these things which are, into that which they were
not? For it is not a greater matter to create new things, than to change
natures.

Saint Ambrose then says, that there is in the Sacrament of the body and
blood of our Lord, a mutation made marveilouslie, because divinelie and
ineffablie, in respect it is an incomprehensible mystery.

Let them tell then (says he) who will have nothing understood according to
an internal secret virtue, 2. Argument, What change is in the Sacrament? Not
of substances: and therefore no T^^usubstan^^ation, but a mystical change, and
in use.
but all to be esteemed after an outward and visible manner only, wherein
this mutation is made? for according to the substance of the creatures, they
are that same thereafter, which they were before the consecration: they were
first bread and wine, under the which shape they being consecrated, are seen
still so as yet to remain. It must be inwardly then, that they are changed,
by the mighty power of the holy Spirit; and that which faith beholds,
feeds the soul only, and furnishes the nowrishment of eternal life.

Also in the words following he says, Wherefore seek thou the order of
nature in the body of Christ? above the order of nature our Lord was borne of
the Virgin Marie. But here then aryseth the hearer, and says, that that is
the very body of Christ which is seen, and that is his blood which is
drunken; neither that we must ask, how it is so; but that we must believe,
that it is so.

Thou seem (for-soothe) to think well, but if thou weigh diligently the
force of the words, thou believe indeed faythfullie, that it is the body
and blood of Christ: but yet if thou would understand aright, thou shall
find that that which thou believe, thou see not as yet: for if thou
did see it, thou would not say, I believe that this is the body and
blood of Christ, but I see the same.

Now then, because faith only beholds all that, 3. Argument. The Br^ad and
Wine are Christ^s Body and Blood in ver^^^ only, and efficacy, unto the
faithful applyer alone: and not so of themselves substantiallie.
what-so-ever the same be, and the carnal eye apprehends nothing thereof, a
man may easily understand, that these things in outward form which are seen,
are not the body and blood of Christ, but that they are so in virtue only
and efficacy.

Whence he says, The order of nature is not to be looked to here, but the
mighty power of Christ to be adored, who what-so-ever he will, how-so-ever
he will, and in what-so-ever he will, creates that which was not, and being
created, changes it into that which it was not before.

The same Doctor subjoyneth, 4. Argument, From the distinction between Christ
his Flesh, where-in he was but once crucified in verity, and the Sacrament of
his Flesh. where-in he is daily crucified in resemblance and mystery.
The true flesh of Christ (says he) which was crucified, and buried, is then
truly the Sacrament of his flesh: for the Lord Jesus Himself cries, saying,
This is My Body. How carefully and wyselie, therefore, is this distinction
made? for he speaks concerning the flesh of Christ, which was crucified,
which was buried, that is, according to which Christ was both crucified and
buried; that is indeed the true flesh of Christ: but concerning that which is
taken in the Sacrament, he says, This is truly the Sacrament of his flesh:
distinguishing so the Sacrament of his flesh, from the verity of his flesh, in
that respect that he says, According to the verity of his flesh, which he
took of the Virgin, that he was crucified, and buried: but that mystery
which is now celebrated in the Church, he would call that the Sacrament of
that true flesh wherein he was crucified: Teaching the faithful evidentlie,
that this flesh where-in Christ was crucified, and buried, is not a mystery,
but the plain verity of nature: but this flesh which bears the similitude
of it in the mystery, is not flesh indeed, but by a sacramental manner,
seeing according to the outward shape it is bread, but in the Sacrament it is
the body of Christ, seeing he says himself, This is My Eodie.

Also in the words following: 5. Argument, from the spiritual sense of ^us^^g
spiritual^^ how sweet the Lord is: and not by a corpovall taste, which is but
of Bread and Wine only.
what we should eat, and what we do drink, the holy Spirit (says he)
expresses unto us, by the holy Prophet elsewhere, saying, Taste, and see how
sweet the LORD is; happy is the man that trusts in Him. Shows the
corporal taste of that bread or wine how sweet the Lord is? Not: For
what-so-ever is sweet that way, is corporal only, and delights the mouth.

To taste then how sweet the Lord is, is it to taste by the outward sense
any corporal thing? Not: It is the Spiritual taste then which inviteth us to
prove this sweetness spirituallie; and in that bread and wine to consider
nothing corporally, but to understand all to be spirituallie meaned, 6.
Argument. Christ is in that Sacrament, (as the thing signified with the sign,)
completing the same^ but the Bread and Wine is to: Christ. For by that
substantial ch^^nge, the sign, with the thing signified, should be so
confounded.
because the Lord is a Spirit, and blessed is the man that puts his trust
in Him.

Also there-after he says, Christ is in that Sacrament, because that Sacrament
is the body of Christ: therefore it is not a corporal food, but a spiritual
nowrishment. What is more clear, more manifest, and more divinelie spoken? For
he says, In that Sacrament CHRIST is. He says not, that that bread and
that wine is Christ. Which if he had said, he would have affirmed, that
Christ was subject to corruptabilitie, and mortality: for what-so-ever is
seen, or tasted in that food corporally, it is manifest, that it is subject
unto corruption.

Heere-to he adds; Because it is the body of Christ (says he) thou will
object, and say, Behold, manifestly he confesses, that this bread, and this
wine, is the body and blood of Christ. But take heed what is subjoyned: This
is not corporal food, but spiritual. Look that thou conceive not a a
carnal meaning heere-fore; for there is no such thing here. True it is, that
it is the body of Christ; not corporal, but spiritual: the blood of Christ;
not corporal, but spiritual. Therefore there is nothing to be understood
here corporally, but spirituallie. It is the body and blood of Christ, but
not corporally.

Also in the words following, he says, The Apostle speaks concerning the
Type of Him, Our Fathers did eat the Spiritual Food, and drank the
Spiritual Drink: For the body of God, is a spiritual body: the body of
Christ, is the body of a divine Spirit, because that Spirit is the Spirit of
Christ, (who is God, and therefore it is divine) as we read in the
Lamentations, Lament. 4.
He is a Spirit before our face, even CHRIST the LORD.

The Apostle has taught us then sufficiently, how we ought to understand
the mystery of the body and blood of Christ: For when he had said, that
Our Fathers did eat that Spiritual Food, and drank that Spiritual Drink;
which Manna not-with-standing that they did eat, and which Water whereof they
did drink, were corporal bodies, as no man doubts, he adds there-to,
concerning the mystery which is used in the Church daily, 7. Argument. No
spiritual thing is visible, nor p^lpable. but th^^ which we receive in tha^
divine mystery, is spiritual: The Blood and Wine of the contra^^, being
palpable, and visible, therefore they are no that spiritual things seeing we
both feel and see them.
showing in what respect it is the body of Christ, while he says, that the
body of God, is a spiritual body: For Christ is God, and that body which
he took of the Virgin, which suffered, which was buried, and rose again,
was a true body, to wit, that same which remained visible, and palpable. But
that body, which is called The divine Mystery, is not corporal, but
spiritual. And if it be spiritual, it is not visible, nor palpable.

Hence Saint Ambrose subjoyneth this, saying, The body of Christ, is the
body of a divine Spirit: but a divine Spirit has in it no corporal nor
corruptible thing, neither is it palpable in the existence thereof. But this
body, which is celebrated in the Church, according to the visible form
thereof, it is both corruptible, and palpable. How is it said then to be the
body of a divine Spirit? To wit, according to that it is spiritual; that is,
as it is invisible, impalpable, and consequently incorruptible.

Hence in the words following, Note That the (...) of Christ indeed gives
life, (...) not absoluteli^, but as it is the flesh or the divine Word. From
whom, as the Po^^^taine, by the flesh, as the Channel, life is conveyed unto
us.
Because CHRIST is a Spirit, as we read Lament. 4, He is a Spirit before
our face, even CHRIST the LORD, he shows clearlie, in what respect it is
esteemed the body of Christ; to wit, because the Spirit of Christ is in it;
that is, the power of the Word of God, which not only feeds the Soul, but
also cleanses it.

Wherefore the Author him self says in the words following, 8. Argument,
From the nature of the soul, which is spiritual: and therefore requires
spiritual Food.
To what effect, as the Prophet rehearses, does that food confirm, and that
drink gladden the heart of man? for confirms corporal food the heart of
man? or does earthly drink gladden the soul? No. That he might show then
what food, and what drink he meant, he added emphaticallie, and in a
special manner, That drink (says he) and that meat. What means he by
that meat, and that drink? to wit, the body of Christ, the body of that
divine Spirit. And that it may be more clearelie named, It is spiritual
Christ, concerning whom it is said, Christ the Lord is a spirit before our
face.

By which things it is shown evidentlie unto us, that nothing is understood
in that meat and drink corporally, but all is to be taken spirituallie: for
the soul of man, which is signified by his heart, is not fed with corporal
food, but is nowrished and quickened by that word of God. Which the same
Doctor shows more manifestly, in his fifth Book of the Sacraments, saying,
It is not that bread which enters into the body, but that bread of life,
which gives quickening to our souls.

And that Saint Ambrose spoke not this of the common bread, but of the bread
of the body of Christ, the next words manifestly declare, for he speaks of
the daily bread, which the faithful desire to be given them, and therefore
he subjoyneth these words, If it be our daily bread, why take ye it only
at the end of a whole year? as the Grecians in the East used to do. Take
then that daily, which will be profitable to thee daily; and live so, that
thou may be worthy daily to receive it.

It is manifest then concerning what bread he speaks, to wit, concerning the
body and blood of Christ, which nowrisheth not, in that it goes down into
the body, but because it is the bread of everlasting life.

By the authority then of this most learned man we are admonished, A clear
Conclusion of Ambrose mind.
that there is a great difference between the body of Christ which suffered,
and his blood which gushed forth out of his side on the Cross, and between
this body which is celebrated daily by the faithful, in the mystery of the
Lords Passion, and that blood which is taken by the mouth of the faithful;
seeing it is the mystery only of that blood, wher-with the whole world was
redeemed.

That bread and that drink, therefore, according to that they are seen; are
not the body and blood of Christ, but according to that they furnish the
nowrishment of life spirituallie. But that body of Christ, wherein he was
crucified, carried none other shape, or appearance, than wherein it did consist
truly: for it was truly that body which was seen, which was touched,
which was crucified, which was buried; lyke-wyse that blood which gushed forth
out of his side, seemed not one thing outwardly, and mystically covered
another thing inwardly; therefore it was true blood which sprang from that
true body. But that blood of Christ, which now the faithful drink, and the
body which they eat, is one thing according to their shape, and another thing
according to their signification: for it is one way whereby they feed the body
with corporal food, and another where^y they fill our souls with the
substantial nowrishment of eternal life.

Concerning which thing Saint Jerome, 9 Argument, From Saint Jerome his
testimony.
in his Commentary upon Saint Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians, writes so,
The body and blood of Christ (says he) may be understood two manner of
ways; either spirituallie, concerning the which he says, My Flesh is Meat
indeed, and My Blood is Drink indeed: or corporally, according to that flesh
which was crucified, and that blood which was shed by the Soldiers Lance. It
is not then by a small difference that he makes such a distinction of the
body and blood of Christ: for while he says, That this flesh or blood which
is taken by the faithful, is spiritual, but that flesh which was crucified,
and that blood which was shed by the Soldiers Lance, is not spiritual, he
insinuates thus much, that there is great difference between these, as there
is between corporal things and spiritual, visible and invisible, natural
and supernatural: and in respect that they differ so, it follows, that they
are not one.

Therefore that spiritual flesh which is taken by the faithful only, and
that spiritual drink, which is exhibited unto the believers daily to be
drunken, differs from the flesh which was crucified, and the blood which was
shed by the Soldiers Lance, as the authority of this holy Man
testifies: and therefore (I say) they are not all one thing.

For that flesh which was crucified, 10 Argument, From the diversity of that
which is Christ's natural bod^e, ^^d that which is his sacramental body.
was made of the Virgins flesh, joined with Bones and Sinews, distinguished
by the Lineamentes of humane Members, quickened with the spirit of a
reasonable soul, to the use of a proper life, and agreeable motions. But that
spiritual flesh, which feeds the believers spirituallie, according to the
outward shape, it consists of the grains of Corn, made by the hand of the
Baker, joined with no sinews nor bones, distinguished with no variety of
members, quickened with no reasonable soul, and which can exercise no proper
motions: for what-so-ever in it gives life, is of a spiritual power, of an
invisible efficacy, and of an heavenly virtue: for it is a far more
different thing, as it is believed in a mystery, than as it is seen
outwardly.

More-over, 11. Argument. As the Bread made of many Grains, is the Body of
the Church, so is it the Body of Christ: But it is the one by representation,
(...) ^ot by any corporal change: Therefore so is it the other.
the flesh of Christ which was crucified, showed no more outwardly, than it
was in it self, because it was the flesh of a true man only, to wit, a true
body, under the shape of a true body. But we must not only consider in that
bread, this body of Christ, but also the body of the whole believers in him
must be represented, for which cause it is made up of many grains of Wheat,
because so the body of the Church is made up of many believers, by the word
of Christ: for which cause as in the mystical bread, the body of Christ is
understood; so also in the same mystery the members of the Church are
represented, to be one in Christ: and as not corporally, but spirituallie,
that bread is called the body of the Church, or believing people. So also of
necessity it must be understood to be the body of Christ, not corporally,
but spirituallie.

So also in the wine, 12. Argument From (...) Christ's blood^^ is converted in
his blood.
which is called the blood of Christ, it is commanded to be mixed with water:
neither is it suffered, that one of them be offered without the other, because
the people can-not be without Christ, nor Christ without his people; even as
the head cannot be without the members, nor the members without the head: for
the water in that Sacrament signifies the people. Then if that wine, which is
sanctified by the office of the Ministers thereof, be turned corporally into
the blood of Christ, the water also which is mixed with it, of necessity must
be converted corporally into the blood of the believers: For where there is
one sanctification, there is one operation; and where there is a-lyke reason,
there is a-lyke mystery: But we see in the water nothing to be changed
corporally, and therefore consequently neither in the wine: So that
what-so-ever in the water is signified concerning the people, it is taken
spirituallie: Then of necessity what-so-ever in the wine is meaned concerning
the blood of Christ, must be taken spirituallie.

Also these things which differ amongst them selves, 13. Argument, From the
opposite difference of Christ his natural body, and the sacramental^^.
are not one: the body of Christ then, which has died, and is risen, and is
made immortal, dies not now; for Death has no more dominion over it, for it
is eternal, neither is it now passible at all: but this which is celebrated in
the Church, is temporal, and not eternal; corruptible, as that which is yet
in the way, and not already in the native Country: wherefore they differ from
them selves, and therefore are not one.

But if they be not one, how then are they called the true body and blood of
Christ? For if it be the body of Christ, and that be said truly, because
it is so, then in verity it is his body: and if it be in verity his body,
it is incorruptible, and does not now suffer, and consequently is eternal.
Then of necessity this body which is celebrated in the Church, must be
incorruptible, and eternal. But it can-not be denied, but that is subject to
corruption, which is divyded in parts, to be taken; and being brayed with
the teeth, is sent down into the Belly. Therefore it is one thing that is
seen outwardly, and another thing which is believed by faith inwardly. For
as it falls under the sense of the body, it is corruptible; but as faith
believes, it is incorruptible. That which is seen then outwardly, is is not
the thing it self, but the resemblance of it; but that which is felt
inwardly, and understood by the mind, is the verity of the thing it self.

Hence it is, that Saint Augustine, in the Exposition of the Evangelist Saint
John, says, while he was speaking of the body and blood of Christ; 14.
Argument, From the testimony of Augustine.
Moses did eat (says he) that Manna, and Aaron, and Phineas, and many more
die eat the same there, who pleased GOD, and they died not. Wherefore? because
they took that visible meat spirituallie, they tasted spirituallie, that they
might be filled spirituallie: for we now-a-dayes in lyke-manner take visible
bread. But a Sacrament is one thing, and the virtue of a Sacrament another.

Also in the words following: this is the bread which came down from heaven:
that heavenly Manna did fore-show this bread: the Altar of God also did
fore-shadow this bread. All these were Sacraments, which are diverse, according
to their signs, but a-like in that which they signified.

Let us hear the Apostle Saint Paul also: 1. Corinthians. 10
Brethren, 15. Argument, From Saint P^^^^ his words.
(says he) I will not have you ignorant, that our Fathers were all under the
Cloud, and did all pass through the Sea, and that they were all bap^ized unto
Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat that same Spiritual
Meat, and did all drink that same Spiritual Drink. I say, that same
spiritual meat, and that same drink, because they did eat other corporal
meat, and drank other corporal drink, in respect they did eat Manna; But
we do eat another thing, and yet they did eat the same spiritual meat
which we do: and they all drank that same spiritual drink. But according
to the visible shape, these things were different, which notwith-standing did
signify but one thing spirituallie. How then did they drink of that same
drink? He answers, They did drink of that spiritual Rock that followed
them, and that Rock was Christ. From thence came the Bread also, from whence
the Drink came: and the Rock Christ was given them for a sign: but true
Christ was exhibited in the word, and in the flesh.

Also, this is the Bread which came down from Heaven; whereof if any man
eat, he shall not die. But he means here that which appertains unto the
virtue of the Sacrament, and not that which appertains to the visible
Sacrament. Who so eats within, and not without, participateth heere-of, who
so eats with his heart, and not with his mouth.

Also in the words following, bringing in the words of our Savior, John, 6.
he says, 16. Argument, From Christ his words.
Does this offend you, because I said, I give you my Flesh to eat, and my
Blood to drink? What then if ye shall see the Son of man going up where he
was before? What means he by this? Here he takes away that doubt which
troubled them: here he clears that which offended them: For they thought,
that he was carnally to bestow his body upon them by morsels. But he
showed, that he was to go up to Heaven, with his whole body. When ye shall
see the Son of Man then going up where he was before, surely then it shall
be manifest, that the LORD bestows not his body according as ye suppose:
surely then ye shall understand, that his grace is not consumed by mo^sels.

Also he says, It is the Spirit that quickens, 17. Argument.
the flesh profits nothing. And a good while after he adds this,
Who-so-euer has not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 4.
(says the Apostle) the same is not his. Then it is the Spirit that
quickens, the flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak unto you are
Spirit and Life: That is (says he) they are to be understood spirituallie.
Understand thou them spirituallie? Then they are Spirit and Life unto thee,
Understand thou them carnally? Even yet they are Spirit and Life, but not
unto thee.

By the authority then of this learned Doctor, A clear Conclusion out of
Augustines words.
we are taught manifestly, that the words of our Savior, concerning the
Sacrament of his body and blood, are to be understood spirituallie, and not
carnally: as he says him self, The words that I speak unto you, are
Spirit and Life: To wit, the words concerning the eating of his flesh, and
drinking of his blood: For it was concerning this that he was speaking when
his Disciples were offended. Therefore, that they might not be offended, our
heavenly Master calls them back, from the flesh, unto the Spirit; from
corporal sense, to spiritual understanding.

We see then, in the eating of the Lord body, and drinking of his blood, in
what respect the same is his body, and his blood, truly; to wit, according
to that that the same is Spirit and Life.

Also these things that are a-like, are comprehended under one definition. Now
concerning the true body of Christ, it is said, That he is true God, and
true man, who in the latter times of the world was borne of the Virgin Marie.
But these things cannot be said of the body of Christ, which is celebrated by
a mystery in the Church. According then to a certain manner only, it is
acknowledged to be the body of Christ; and that manner is by a figure, and in
resemblance, that so the verity and thing it self may be the more sensibly
understood.

In the Prayers also which are said after the mystery of the body and blood
of Christ, 18. Argument, From the old custom of praying at the Sacrament.
and wherein the people answer AMEN, Here we see, that of old, when these
Prayers were made, there were no private Masses, where^^ the Priest (...)
communicated: but both People and Pa^^or did communicate. And the Sacrament
then was for (...), and thankesgiving; and not a propi^^^ sacrifice for the
quick and the dead.
the Priest utters these words, We request Thee humbly, O LORD, who are
now partakers of the Pledges of eternal Life, that which we touch in the
resemblance of this Sacrament, we may receive in the manifest participation of
the thing it self.

Now we know that a pledge or resemblance, is of another thing, where-of they
are the pledges or resemblances; that is, they are not to be considered as
they are in them selves, but as they have a reference to another thing: for a
pledge is of that for the which it is given; and so is an Image the resemblance
of that whose similitude it represents: they signify then the thing whose
Images they are, and does not show the same in it self manifestly.

Which while they are so, it is evident, that this body and blood are the
pledges and resemblances of that to come, that that which is shown unto us by a
similitude now, shall be clearlie revealed unto us in time to come. It is one
thing then which is done now, and another which shall be manifested
hereafter.

Wherefore it is the body and blood of Christ which the Church celebrateth,
(...) Prayer.
but as a Pledge and resemblance: the verity it self shall be when neither
Pledge, nor representation, but He him self shall clearlie appear.

And in another place he says, 19 A^gument, F^o ^he distin^^on of the
resemblance, and the thing it self.
O LORD, accomplish in us that which THY Sacraments contain; that that which
we now celebrate in resemblance, we may be partakers also of the verity of
the things them selves. He says then, that these things are celebrated in
resemblance; that is, by similitude, and not by the manifestation of the thing
it self: So that the resemblance, and the verity of the thing it self, are
there distinguished.

Wherefore the body and blood of Christ, which is now celebrated in the
Church, differs from that body and blood which is known to be glorified in
Christ his body by his resurrection. And this body which is celebrated in the
Church, is but a Pledge and resemblance of that; but that is the verity it
self. This is done, while we come to that; but when we come to that, this
shall be remooved.

It is manifest then, that there is great difference between them, as much as
there is between a Pledge, and that wherefore it is given; and as much as
there is between an Image, and that which it represents; and as much as
there is between the resemblance of a thing, and the verity it self.

We see then that there is great difference between the mystery of the body
and blood of Christ, which is taken in the Church by the Faithful, and that
which was borne of the Virgin, which suffered, which was buried, which rose
again, and went to heaven, and now sits at the right hand of the Father:
For this which is celebrated in this mortal Journey, is taken spirituallie,
because faith believes that which it sees not, and spirituallie feeds the
soul, and gladdeneth the heart, and gives eternal life, and immortality,
while that is not taken heed unto which feeds the body, 20. Argument From
the properties and (...) of the (...) of Christ his natural body, eve^ after
his resurrection, which that which is ^orged by Transsubstantiation has not.
and is torn with the teeth, and broken in pieces; but that which is
spirituallie taken, and by faith apprehended.

But that body wherein he suffered, which rose again, and is his proper body,
which he took of the Virgin, was palpable and visible, after his
resurrection, as he him self says unto his Disciples; Luke, 24.
Wherefore are ye troubled? and wherefore do cogitations enter into your
hearts? Look to mine Hands and Feet, if I be not the same Man: handle, and
see, because a spirit has not flesh and bones, ye see me have.

Let us also hear what holy Fulgentius says, 21. Argument, From the
Testimony of E^lg^^ius.
in his Book concerning Faith; Gripe steadfastly, (says he) and doubt
no-wyse, that the only begotten Son of God was made flesh, that he offered
him self up in a Sacrifice acceptable to God, to whom, with the Father, and
the holy Spirit, the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Priests in time of the Old
Testament sacrificed Beasts; and to whom now in the time of the new Testament,
with the Father and the holy Spirit, who makes but one Godhead, the
Sacrifice of bread and wine is through faith and charity offered by the
Catholic Church throughout the world. In these carnal Sacrifices, there was
a representation of the flesh of Christ, which he was to offer for our sins,
being without sin him self; and of his blood, which he was to offer (...)
the remission of our sins. But in this Sacrifice is a Thanksgiving, and
commemoration of the body of Christ, which he offered for us; and of his
blood, which he shed for us: concerning which the blessed Apostle Paul says,
in the Acts of the Apostles; Acts, 20.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, over which the
holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he
has conquest with his own blood. In those Sacrifices then it was shown
figuratively, what was to have been given unto us: but in this Sacrifice is
clearelie shown, what is already given unto us. Saying then that it was
signified in those Sacrifices, what was to be given unto us, but in this
Sacrament that we should commemorate that which is already given, he shows
evidentlie, that as that had a figure of the things to come, so this should
have a resemblance of things already bygone.

By which words also he declares manifestly, what great difference is
between the body of Christ which suffered, and that body which serves for
the commemoration of his death and suffering: for the one was his true and
proper body, having no mystical signification, nor resemblance of any other
thing in it; but this other is mystical, showing one thing outwardly by
figure, and inwardly representing another thing unto us, by the understanding
of faith.

Let us bring one testimony yet of Saint Augustine, 22. Argument From a
Testimony of saint Augustine.
which will confirm the thing we have said, and put an end also to our
present Discourse: In that Sermon which he made unto the people concerning this
Sacrament of the Altar, he says; That which ye see on the Altar of God, ye
saw it this night bygone, but ye heard not yet what it was, or what it
meaned, and of how great a thing it was a Sacrament. That which ye see then,
it i^ bread and wine, which your eyes point forth unto you: but that which
your faith is to be instructed in, is this, That that Bread is the Body of
Christ, and that Cup the Blood of Christ. This is shortly said, which perhaps
would suff^ce your faith: but your faith requires instruction; for the Prophet
says, Except ye^ believe, I^^, 6.
ye shall not understand. Ye may then say unto me, Thou have commanded us to
believe; declare unto us, that we may understand; for this cogitation may
enter into the mind of any man; we know whence our Lord Jesus took flesh,
to wit, of the Virgin Marie, being an Infant, he sucked, he was nowrished,
he came unto youth-head, he suffered persecution of the Jews, he hung upon
a Tree, he was killed, taken down from the Cross, he was buried, and rose
again the third day, at his appointed time, he went to the Heavens, and lifted
up his body thither, from whence he is to come, to judge the quick and the
dead, and there he is presently, at the right hand of his Father sitting; how
then can this be his body? or this Cup, or that which it contains, his
blood? Brethren, these things are called Sacraments, because in them there is
one thing seen, and another thing is understood: that which is seen, has a
corporal shape; but that which is understood, has a spiritual fruit.

This Venerable Doctor then, by saying this, teaches us, what we ought to
think, concerning the proper body of Christ, which was borne of the Virgin,
and sits now at the right Hand of the Father, in which he is to come to
judge the quick and the dead: and what we ought to think of that which is
offered upon the Altar, where-of the People are made partakers. That body is
whole; neither is it divided by any cutting, nor covered with any figures: But
this which is set upon the Table of the Lord, is a resemblance of that, because
it is a Sacrament: And that which is seen outwardly, has a corporal shape,
and feeds the body: but that which is understood inwardly, it has a
spiritual fruit, which quickens the Soul.

And when he would have spoken more manifestly, concerning this mystical
body, he says thus in the words following; If ye will understand
concerning the body of Christ, 1. Cor^nth. 10.
hear the Apostle, saying, Ye are the Body and Members of Christ. If then
ye be the body and members of Christ your mystical resemblance is set on
the Lords Table, and ye receive the mystery of the Lord, and unto that which
you are, ye say AMEN, Here you see, that the old custom was, that the whole
people, and not the C^^^ke only, said AMEN.
and by aunswering so, Just. Apolog. 2.
ye subscrybe thereunto. Thou hear then of the body of Christ, and thou
aunswerest AMEN. Be a member then of the body of CHRIST, that that may be a
true AMEN.

Wherefore then is this mystery in the bread? We shall bring nothing here of
our own wit, but let us hear the Apostle, when he was speaking of that
Sacrament, saying, For we being many, are one bread, and one body.

And holy Augustine, instructing us sufficiently of the rest, says, That as
in that bread which was offered on the Altar, the body of Christ was
resembled, so also the body of the people that did receive, it was lyke-wyse
represented; that so he might show manifestly, that that is the proper body
of Christ only, which was borne of the Virgin, sucked, suffered, died, was
buried, rose again, ascended to the Heavens, and which presently sits at
the right Hand of his Father, and is to come to Judgment: But this which is
set upon the Lords Table, contains the mystery of the body of the
faithful, as the Apostle witnesses, saying, For we being many, are one
bread, and one body in Christ.

Wherefore (most Noble Prince) let your wisdom consider, that it is most
clearlie shown, by Testimonies of holy Scripture, and Sayings

one, not according to that that our SAVIOVR has a body, but according to the
fullness of the DEITY which dwells in the Man CHRIST. But in that which is
celebrated in a mystery, is a resemblance, not only of the proper body of
Christ, but also of all believers in him: for it bears the figure of both the
bodies; that is, both of Christ which suffered, and rose again, and of the
people which are renewed in Christ by Baptism, and quickened from the dead.

Let us also add this, That that Matthew, 26.
as him self said in the Gospel, Do this in rememberance of Me. Which the
Apostle Saint Paul expounds, 1. Corinthians. 11.
saying, How often so-ever ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye
shall remember the LORDS death, till His coming again. We are taught then by
our Savior, and also by the holy Apostle Saint Paul, That that Bread, and
that Blood, which is set upon the Altar, is set down in rememberance and
resemblance of the Lords death and Passion, that it may call to recent memory
that which was done long a-goe: where-by we being remembered of his death and
suffering, may be made partakers there-by of that heavenly Gift, where-by we
are redeemed from Death ever-lasting.



Neither, there-fore, let it be John, 6.
It is the Spirit that quickens, for the Flesh profits nothing.

Desiring, then, to obey Your Highness Command heere-in, I being but of
small ability, have undertaken to reason concerning things of no small
importance and controversy: not following the presumption of mine own thoughts
and estimation, but looking to the authority of Fathers, and those that have
gone before me. Which if You allow to be spoken catholicklie, attribute the
same unto the worthiness of Your Faith; who laying a-syde the Glory of Your
Royal Majestic, was not ashamed to have an Answer of the Verity from Your
humble Servaunt. But if it please You not, let it be imputed unto mine
insufficiency, who was not able to declare these things so effectually, as
other-wyse I desired.

AMEN.
The Purging of BERTRAM,
Out of the Expurgatorie Spanish Index, of Don Gasp^r, Quiroga, Cardinal, and
Archbishop of Toledo, General Inquisitor of Spain; and set forth by his
Command, and of the Council of the said General Inquisition; according to
the Decree of the Council of Trent: and by the special Mandate and
Authority of Philip the second, King of Spain; And by the care and direction
of the Duke of Alue, in the Low Countries. Framed, and made up, Anno 1571.

According to that Copy, printed at Madrill there-after, by Alphonsus
Gomesius, His Majesty's Printer there, Anno 1594.

That the Book of BERTRAM, Priest, Of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, being
amended, may be hence-foorth tolerated.

The Judgment, and Decree, of the University of Duay, approoved by the
Censures, as fol^oweth:

Although we greatly account not of this Book, and therefore we are not much
careful although it were not at all, or had perished: yet not-withstanding seeing
it has been often printed here-to-fore, and read by sundry, and that by the
forbidden name thereof it has been made known to all, and that the
Heretics do understand of this man's prohibition by diverse Catalogues, and
that he was a Catholic Priest, and a Monk of the Monastery of Corbei, and
greatly beloved and reverenced, not so much by Charles the Great, as Charles
the bold, as we may consider in the History of his age: yet in him, as in
other Catholic Writers, we must bear with many Erroures of theirs, and we
must extenuate and excuse them, and oftentimes by devising a fit exposition to
their words: Let us even oftentimes deny them, and frame a commodious meaning
unto them, while as in Disputes, or conflicts with the Adversaries, they are
opponed against us: And therefore we see not why this BERTRAM requires not
the same equity, and diligent examination: lest doing other-wyse, by full
suppressing of him, the Heretics accuse us, That we burn and prohibit all
Antiquity making for them: And therefore, that it is no marvel that few
seem to make for them, when we that are Catholics, so vnreverentlie and
disdainfully thrust forth, and destroy all Antiquity amongst us, that but in
very show do disagree from us.

As also we fear that not only that Book be read by Heretics, but also
that by disobedient Catholics the same be more greedylie perused, in respect
of the interdiction thereof, and that the same be more dangerously alleged;
and that being al-to-gether prohibited, that it shall hurt more than being
permitted: for there is nothing in it worthy of rebuke, except the
obscurenesse of the man's speech, and an unfit, either usurpation, or
exposition, of some words, and sentences, which by a marginall explanation,
either prefixed, or affixed, if they were interpreted, and the Authors meaning
and scope were there-by declared; and finally, if that some things which
seem not obscurelie to be by some Heretic inserted, or added, about the end
of the Treatise, were remarked, and eschewed, there would be nothing then
resting which might be feared by the Reader in this Work.

There-fore, neither evil, nor vnadvisedlie, let all these things be omitted.

About the end of the third Page, these words, It is lyke-wyse to be
considered, that in that Bread, etc. Even to this a good deal after, But it is
another thing which is outwardly done, etc. And again, even in the same Page,
and in the next thereunto, all these speeches which follow.

As also these things that are one, are comprehended under one Definition, etc.
Even unto that. For that which is done in the life spirituallie, etc. So these
things being omitted, neither shall they obscure the preceding meaning, nor
cause any thing to be maimed, or superfluous.

There rests only one scruple, but very little to them that are
Catholicklie taught, (as BERTRAM not once says) That that which appears in
the ^VCHARIST does seed the body, is corruptible, and not eternal, etc. For
that the Catholic Faith attributes all these things unto the Species and
Accidents of the Substances which were before Trans-substantiation, is more
clearlie known, than can be declared other-wyse. For so we answer unto the
Experiences and Assertions of the Berengarians, which are rehearsed in
Gvitmundus, who said, That they found by experience, some to have lived long,
and grown, by the Encharist alone: to wit, these Accidents did as much as
other Substances.

Neither do we think, with Guitmundus, that another substance was substitute
for their incredulity, or that Consecration or Trans-substa^tiation did not
solow, when their intention who did celebrate the same was wrong: For the
naming of the Substances of Bread and Wine, (as has been said) are taken for
the forms, or accidents, of Bread and Wine. Although I deny not, but BERTRAM at
that time did not exactlie vnder-stand, that these Accidents did subsist
without a substance; and other things also, which in the latter Age most
subtillie, and truly, by holy men were added.

Next, follows those things which out of BERTRAM are al-together not to be
deleted.

Fol. 1137, read Invisiblie for Visiblie. And there-after, According to the
substance of the creatures, which they were before Consecration, that same they
remain after. It is to be interpreted, According to the external Accidents
of the Sacrament.

Fol. 1140. But this which is celebrated in the Church, is temporal, not
eternal. It is to be interpreted, According to the corruptible accidents, or
of the thing it self, or use of the Sacrament, which only is in this Life.

An ancient Sermon, of AELFRICVS, Archbishop of Canterbury, an Englishman,
OF THE SACRAMENT: Convincing the late Error now-a-dayes of
Trans-substantiation. Preached in the time of Etheldred, King, And in the Year
of our LORD 996. Uttered in the SAXON Tongue: And thereafter in an old English
translated.
MEN, BELOVED, It has been often said unto you, about our SAVIOVRS
Resurrection; How he on this present day, after his suffering, mightily rose
again from Death. Now will we open unto you, by GODS Grace, of the holy
HOVSELL or Sacrament,
, which ye should now go unto; and instruct your understanding about this
Mystery, both after the Old Covenan^, and after the New, that no doubting
trouble you concerning this lyuelie Food.

The Almighty God bade Moses, his Captain, in the Land of Egypt, to command
the people of Israel to take to every Family a Lamb of a year old, the
night that they departed out of the Country, toward the Land of Promise; and
to offer that Lamb to God; and after to cut it, and make the sign of the
Cross with the Lambs blood upon the side-poastes, and upper poast of the
door: and afterward to eat the Lambs flesh roasted, and unleavened Bread,
with wild Lettuice. God says unto Moses, Eat of the Lamb, not raw, nor
sodden in water, but roasted at the fire; eat the head, and the seete, and the
inwards; and let nothing of it be left till the morning: and if any thing
remain, that shall ye burn with the fire. Eat it this wise, Gird your
Loins, and do your Shoes on your seete, have you Stau^s in your hands, and
eat it in haste. This is the Lords Passover. And there was r^a^^e on that
night, in every house throughout Pharaohs Reign, the f^^st-borne child: and
Gods people of Israel were delivered from that sudden death, through the Lambs
offering, and his bloods marking.

Then said God to Moses, Keep this day in your remembrance, and hold it a
great Feast in your Kinreds, with a perpetual observation; and eat unleavened
bread always seven days at this Feast.

After this deed, God led the people of Israel through the red Sea, with dry
foot, and drowned therein Pharaoh, and all his Army, together with their
Possessions; and fed afterward the Israelites forty years, with heavenly
food, and gave them water out of the hard Rock, until they came to the
promised Land.

Part of this Story we have treated of in another place, and part we shall now
declare; to wit, that which belongs to the holy Housell.

Christen men may not now keep that old Law bodily; but it behooves them to
know what it ghostly signifi^th. That Innocent Lamb, which the old
Israelites did then kill, had signification after ghostly understanding of
Christ's suffering, who vnguiltie shed his holy blood for our redemption.
Heere-of sing Gods servantes at every Mass, Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata
mundi, miserere nobis: that is in our speech, Thou Lamb of God, that take
away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.

Those Israelites were delivered from sudden death, and Pharaohs bondage, by
the Lambs offering, which signified Christ's suffering; through which we are
delivered from ever-lasting Death, and from the Devils cruel reign, if we
rightly believe in the true Redeemer of the whole World, even Christ, the
Savior.

That Lamb was offered in the Evening, and our Savior suffered in the last
Age of the World. This Age of the corruptible World, is reckoned to the
Evening.

They marked with the Lambs blood upon the Doors, and upper posts, (...),
THAV, that is the sign of the Cross, and were so defended from the Angel
that killed the Egyptian firstborn. And we ought to mark our Foreheads,
and our Hearts, with the Blood of our Lords Suffering.

Those Israelites did eat the Lambs flesh yearlie, at Easter time, when they
were delivered: And we receive Christ's body ghostly, and drink his blood,
when we receive, with true belief, that holy Housell.

That time they kept yearly at Easter, seven days, with great worship, when
they were delivered from Pharaoh, and departed from that I and. So also
Christen men keep Christ's Resurrection, at the time of Easter, seven days,
because through his Suffering, and rising, we are delivered, and are made
clean, by going to this holy Housell, as Christ says in his Gospel,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye have no life in you, except ye eat My
Eleshe, and drink My Blood. He that eats My Flesh, and drinks My Blood,
abides in Me, and I in him, and he has that Ever-lasting Life, and I will
raise him up at the last Day. I am that lyuelie Bread which came down from
Heaven: not so as your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness, and died. He
that eats this Bread, lives for ever.

He blessed then Bread before his suffering, and divided it unto his
Disciples, thus saying, Eat of this Bread, It is My Body: and do this in My
rememberance. Also he blessed Wine in one Cup, and said, Drink ye all of
this: This is My Blood, which is shed for many, in forgiveness of sins.
The Apostles did also as Christ commanded: that is, They blessed Bread and
Wine, to housell again afterward in his rememberance. Even so also their
Successoures, and all Priests, by Christ's Commandment, do bless Bread and
Wine, to housell in his Name, with the Apostolic Blessing.

Now men have often searched, and do yet often search, how Bread, which is
gathered of Corn, and through Fyres heat baked, may be turned to Christ's
body? Or how Wine, which is pressed out of many Grapes, is turned, through a
blessing, to the Lords blood?

Now say we unto such men, That some things be spoken of Christ by
signification, and some be things certain. True this is, and certain, That
Christ was borne of a Maid, and suffered death of his own accord, and was
buried, and on this Day rose again from Death. He is said to be Bread then
by signification, and a Lamb, and a Lion, and a Mountain. He is called
Bread, because he is our Life, and Angels life. He is said to be a Lamb,
for his innocence. A Lion, for strength, wherewith he overcame the strong
Devil. But Christ is not so, not-with-standing, after true nature, neither
Bread, nor a Lamb, nor a Lion.

Why is then that holy Housell called Christ's body? or his blood, if it be
not truly that which it is called? Truly the bread and the wine, which in
the Supper by the Priest is hallowed, show one thing without, unto humane
understanding; and another thing with-in, unto believing minds. Without, they
are seen bread and wine, both in figure, and taste: and they be so truly
after their hallowing: But Christ's body and blood, by ghostly mystery.

An Heathen Child is christened, yet he alters not his shape without,
though he be changed with-in. He is brought unto the Font-stone sinful,
through Adams disobedience: And how-be-it he is washed from all sin with-in,
yet he has not changed his shape without.

Even so the holy Font water, which is called the Wellspring of Life, is like
in shape unto other water, and is subject to corruption: but the holy Ghostes
might comes to the corruptible water, through the Priests blessing: and it
may after wash the body and soul from all sin, through Ghostly might.

Behold, now we see two things in one creature, after true nature, that
water is corruptible moisture, and after ghostly mystery, has whole-some
virtue. So also, if we behold that holy Housell after bodily understanding,
then we see that it is a creature, corruptible, and mutable: but if we
acknowledge there-in ghostly might, then understand we that life is there-in,
and that it gives Immortality to them that eat it with belief. Much is
between the invisible might of this holy Housel, and the visible shape of its
proper nature. It is naturally corruptible bread and wine: and is by might of
Gods word, truly Christ's body, and his blood: not so, not-with-standing,
bodylie, but ghostly.

Much is between the body of Christ, which he suffered in, and the body
which is hallowed to housell. The body, truly, that Christ suffered in, was
borne of the flesh of Ma^ie, with blood and bone, with skin and sinews, in
humane limbs, with a reasonable soul, living: But his ghostly body, which
we call the Housell, is gathered of many Corns, without blood and bone,
without limme, without soul; and there-fore nothing is to be understood
there-in bodily, but all ghostly. What-so-ever was in that Housell, which
gives substance of life, that is of the ghostly might, and invisible doing.

Therefore is that holy Housell called a mystery, because there is one thing
in it seen, and another thing understood. That which is there seen, has
bodily shape; and that which we do there understand, has Ghostly might.

Certainly, Christ's body which suffered death, and rose again from death,
never dies hence-foorth, but is eternal, and impassible. That Housell is
temporal, not eternal; corruptible, and dealed in-to sundry parts; chewed
between the Teeth, and sent down in-to the belly: how-be-it never-the-lesse
after Ghostly might, it is all in every part: Many receive that holy body,
and yet not-with-standing it is so all in every part, after Ghostly mystery.
Though some chewe the less, yet there is no more might not-with-standing, in
the more part, than the less, because it is whole in all men, after the
invisible might.

This mystery is a Pledge, and a Figure. Christ's body is Truth it self.
This Pledge we do keep mystically, until that we be come unto the Truth
it self, and then is this Pledge ended. Truly it is so as we before have
said, Christ's body, and his blood, not bodily, but ghostly.

But now hear the Apostles words about this mystery. Paul the Apostle
speaks of the old Israelites thus, writing in his Epistle to faithful men;
All our Forefathers were baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea; and all they
did eat the same ghostly Meat, and drank the same ghostly Drink: They
drank truly of the Stone that followed them, and that Stone was Christ.
Neither was that Stone then from which the Water ran, bodily Christ; but it
signified Christ, who calls thus to all believing and faithful men;
Who-so-ever thirsts, let him come to Me, and drink, and from his bowels
shall flow lively water. This he said of the holy Ghost, which they
received, who believed in him.

The Apostle Paul says, that the Israelites did eat the same ghostly Meat,
and drank the same ghostly Drink, because that heavenly Meat that fed them
forty years, and that water which from the Stone did flow, had signification
of Christ's body and his blood, which now are offered daily in Gods Church. It
was the same which we now offer, not bodily, but ghostly.

We said unto you ere-while, that Christ hallowed bread and Wine, to housell
before his suffering, and said, This is My Body, and My Blood: yet he had not
then suffered, but so, not-with-standing he turned, through invisible might,
that bread to his own body, and that wine to his own blood, as he before
did in the Wilderness, before that he was borne to be a Man, when he turned
that heavenly meat to his flesh, and the flowing water from that Stone to his
own blood.

Very many did eat of that heavenly Meat in the Wilderness, and drank
that ghostly Drink, and were never-the-lesse dead, as Christ said: and
Christ meant not that death which none can escape; but that ever-lasting death,
which some of that folk deserved for their unbelief. Moses and Aaron, and
many others of that people which pleased God, did eat that heavenly Bread,
and they died not that everlasting death, tho they died the common death. They
saw that that heavenly Meat was visible and corruptible, but they ghostly
understood, by that visible thing another Meat, and ghostly received it.

Our Savior, says, He that eats My Flesh, and drinks My Blood, has
ever-lasting Life. Now he bade them not eat that body wherewith he was
enclosed, nor drink that blood which he shed for us: but he meant by these
words, that holy Housel, which ghostly is his body and his blood; and he
that tastes it with a believing heart, has that eternal life.

In the old Law faithful men offered to God diverse Sacrifices; which had
fore-signification of Christ's body, which for our sins he him self has
since offered to his heavenly Father for sacrifice. Certainly this Housell,
which we hallow now at Gods Altar, is a Remembrance of Christ's body, which
he offered for us: and so him self commanded, Do this in My remembrance.
Once suffered Christ by him self; but yet never-the-lesse his suffering is
daily renewed at this Supper, through the mystery of the holy Housel.

Therefore we ought to consider diligently, how that this holy Housel is
both Christ's body, and the body of all faithful men, after ghostly
mystery, as wise Augustine says of it, If ye will understand of Christ's
body, hear the Apostle Paul, thus speaking, Ye, truly, be Christ's body,
and his members. Now is your mystery set on Gods Table, and ye receive your
mystery, which mystery ye your selves be. Be that which you see on the
Altar, and receive that which ye your selves be.

Again, the Apostle Paul says, We being many, are one Bread, and one
Body. Vnder-stand now, and rejoice: Many be one Bread, and one body in
Christ: He is our head, and we are his limbs. And as the Bread is not of one
Corn, but of many; nor the Wine of one Grape, but of many: So also we all
should have one unity in the Lord; as it is written of the faithful Army,
how that they were in so great an unity, as tho all of them were one soul,
and one heart. So Christ hallowed on his Table, the mystery of our peace, and
of our unity. He which receives that mystery of unity, and keeps not the
band of true peace, receives no mystery for him self, but a witness against
him self.

It is very good for Christen men, that they go often to housell, if they
bring with them unto the Altar Vnguiltinesse, and innocence of heart: if they
be not oppressed with sin. To an evil man it turns to no good, but to
destruction, if he receive unworthily that holy Housell.

Holy Books command, that water be mingled with that wine which shall be
for housell; because the water signifies the people, and the wine Christ's
blood: And there-fore the one, without the other, shall not be offered at the
holy Housell: that Christ may be with us, and we with Christ; the head, with
the limbs; and the limbs with the head.

We would before have entreated of the Lamb which the old Israelites offered
at their Easter time, but that we desired first to declare unto you of this
mystery, and after, how we should receive it.

I. That signifying-Lambe was offered at the Easter: and the Apostle Saint
Paul says, in the Epistle of this present day, that Christ is our Easter, or
Passe-over; who was offered for us, and this day rose again from death.

II. The Israelites did eat the Lambs flesh, even as GOD had commanded them,
with unleavened bread, and wild Lettuice: So should we receive that holy
Housell of Christ's body and blood, without the leaven of Sin and
Iniquity: For as Leaven turns the creatures from their nature, so does
Sin also change the nature of Man, from Innocence, to Uncleanness. And the
Apostle has taught, how we should feast, not in the Leaven of Evilnesse, but
in the sweet Dough of Purity and Truth.

III. The Herb which they should eat with the unleavened bread, is called
Lettuice, and is bitter in taste: So we should with bitterness of unfeigned
repentance purify our minds, if we will eat Christ's body.

IIII. Those Israelites were not wont to eat raw flesh, and therefore God
bade them to eat it neither raw, nor sodden in water, but roasted with fire.
He shall receive the body of God raw, that shall think, without reason,
that Christ was only Man, like unto us, and was not God. And he that will,
after man's wisdom, search of the mystery of Christ's Incarnation, does like
to him that seetheth Lambs flesh in water; because that water in this same
place signifies man's vnder-standing. But we should vnder-stand, that all the
mystery of Christ's humanity was ordered by the power of the holy Ghost. And
then eat we his body roasted with fire, because the holy Ghost came in
fyerie likeness unto the Apostles, in diverse Tongues.

V. The Israelites should eat the Lambs head, and the feet, and the
purtenances; and no-thing must thereof be left overnight. If any thing
thereof was left, they did burn that in the fire: And they brake not the
bones. After ghostly vnder-standing we do then eat the Lambs head, when
we take hold of Christ's Divinity in our Belief. Again, when we take
hold of his Humanity with love, then eat we the Lambs feet; because that
Christ is the Beginning, and the End, GOD before all World, and Man in the
end of this World. What be the Lambs purtenances, but even Christ's secret
Precepts? And these we eat, when we receive with griedinesse the Word of
Life. There must no-thing of the Lamb be left till the morning; because all
Gods Sayings are to be searched with carfulness, and great diligence: so
that all his Precepts must be known in understanding and deed, in the night
of this present life, before the last day of the universal Resurrection do
appear. And if we can not search out thoroughly all the mystery of Christ's
Incarnation, then ought we to betake the rest unto the might of the holy
Ghost, with true humility: and not to search rashly of that deep
secretnesse, above the measure of our understanding.

VI. They did eat the Lambs flesh with their Loins girded. In the Loins, is
the lust of the body. And he that will receive that holy housell, shall
cover and wrap in that Concupiscence, and take with Chastity that holy Receipt.

VII. They were also shod. And what be Shoes, but of the hydes of dead
beasts? We be truly shod then, if we match in our steps and deeds, the
lives of men departed this life, which pleased God with keeping of his
Commandementes.

VIII. They had Staves in their hands, when they did eat. This staff
signifies a care-fulnesse, and a diligent over-seeing: and all they that best
know, and can, should take care of other men, and stay them up with their
help.

IX. It was enjoined to the eaters, that they should eat the Lamb in haste;
for God abhors sloath-fulnesse in his Servants: and those he loves, which
seek the joye of Ever-lasting Life, with quickness, and hastiness of mind.
Prolong not to turn unto GOD, left the time pass away, through thy slow
tarrying.

X. The eaters might not break the Lambs bones: No more might the
Souldioures, which did hang CHRIST, break His Holy Legs, as they did of the
two Thieues which hanged on either side of Him: And the LORD arose from death
sound and whole, without all corruption: And at the last Judgment, they shall
see Him, Whom they did most cruelly wound on the Cross.

XI. This Time is called in the Hebrew Tongue PASCHA, and in Latin TRANSITVS,
and in English a PASSE-OVER; Because that upon this day the people of Israel
passed from the Land of Egypt, through the red Sea, from the bondage of
Pharaoh, toward the Land of Promise. So also did our LORD, at this Time,
depart (as says Saint JOHN the EVANGELIST) from this World, to His
heavenly Father. And even so we ought to follow our HEAD, and to go from the
Devil, unto CHRIST: from this unstable World, unto His stable KINGDOM:
How-bee-it we should first, in this present life, depart from Vice, unto
holy VERTVE: from evil manners, unto good: if we will, after this our lent
life, go to that Eternal Life, and after our resurrection, to CHRIST: He
bring us unto His Ever-lasting Father, Who gave Him unto Death for our Sins:
To Him be Honor, and Praise of Well-doing, Wordle without end.

AMEN.


A Notable Short DISCOVRSE, Written by a Scots-man, (AS BALE witnesses) OF
THE SACRAMENT: Who lived in that same Age with BERTRAM, 800 years ago: named
RABANVS, or Magnentius Maurus: learned in all Sciences, A Professor long in the
University of Paris, and at last made An Abbot, under Lodovicus Pius.
OF the other two things, Lib. 5. c. 11 De Seim. propriet.
left unto us in Legacy, that is, Of the Body and Blood of the LORD, it may
be asked, Why amongst all the Fruits of the Earth, chiefelie he did choose
Bread and Wine, to design the same, as if these did excel all other Fruits
of the Earth in worth, and were of greatest value? Which Question we think
may be thus solved: Our LORD did choose, that the Sacrament of his body and
blood should be so received by the mouth of the Faithful, and that the same
should be converted to their nowrishment; that by the visible work, the
invisible effect, and working of the other, might be shown, and made manifest.

For as the material Food outwardly nowrisheth and feeds the body, so the
Word of God inwardly nowrisheth the Soul, and strengthens the same: For it
is not by Bread only that Man lives, but by every Word that proceeds out
of the Mouth of God: And the Word is become Flesh, and has dwelt amongst us
(says Truth it self.)

And (as says Christ himself) My Flesh is Meat indeed, and My Blood is
Drink indeed. Now the flesh of Christ is Meat indeed, because it feeds
truly, and nowrisheth man unto eternal Life; (which is only true Life) and
his blood is Drink indeed, because truly and solidlie it satiateth and
slockeneth for ever the hungering and thirsting soul after Righteousness. For
as for temporal life, men indeed may have the same without this meat and
drink; but that Eternal they cannot attain unto; because that this Meat and
Drink signifies that eternal society and fellowship of the members with
their head, and their strait conjunction: For (says he,) He that eats My
Flesh, and drinks My Blood, abides in Me, and I in him. Wherefore it is
needful, that we receive his body and blood, that we may abide in Him, and
become members of His Body.

And the Sacrament heere-of, to wit, of our Becoming one with CHRIST'S body
and blood, it is taken off from the Table, to some men, unto destruction; but
the thing it self which is signified, is taken by all men unto life, and by
none unto destruction. For who-so-ever is partaker of that, the same man shall
be associate as a member to CHRIST his head, into that Heavenly Kingdom.

For it is another thing the Sacrament it self, and the virtue of the
Sacrament. The Sacrament it self, is only taken by the mouth; but by the
virtue of the Sacrament, the inward man is refreshed. The Sacrament also is
turned into the food of the body; but by the virtue of the Sacrament, the
dignity of eternal Life is obtained. In the Sacrament again, all the
faithful Communicantes make a paction of mutual fellow-ship, and brotherly
peace amongst them selves here; but by the virtue of the Sacrament, all the
members, joined and straightly coupled with their head in eternal Glory, shall
rejoice for ever.

Therefore, as the Sacrament it self is turned in our substance, when we have
eaten and drunken the same; so lyke-wyse shall we be turned into the body of
Christ, if we obedientlie and holilie live in him.

Wherefore, because Bread strengthens the body, therefore for the like
operation toward the soul, it is called Christ's body: and because Wine
furnishes nutritive blood, and cheareth the body, therefore is for that
relation to Christ's blood, why it is compared thereunto. And these visible
signs, when they are sanctified, then by the holy Spirit they are converted
into the Sacrament of the body of Christ.

But it is only in the way of this life, Cap. 10. de Eucharistia.
that we are so sed, and refreshed with the Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ; that so nowrished there-by, we may become one body: and by the
tasting of this here, we may be prepared for immortal and eternal things
heere-after.

And in so far as spirituallie we are quickened in him, being sealed up by
Angels Food unto that life, that holy Spirit of his works powerfullie in
us, by these his holy Sacraments.

And because according to the flesh it behoved him to pearce the Heavens, Cap.
41.
that these who by faith are renewed, and borne over again in him, might more
confidentlie and earnestly long after him, he has left unto us this
Sacrament, as a visible Figure, and Resemblance; a Sign, and a Seal of his
body and blood: that by these things, our minds, and our bodies, by faith,
more plenteouslie may be nowrished, to partake of invisible and spiritual
things.

Now it is the Sign and Seal which outwardly we see and feel: but that
which is inwardly participated, is all Substance and Truth, and no shadowing
or resemblance: and therefore there is nothing but Truth, and the Sacrament of
the very flesh of CHRIST, which is manifested unto us. For the very flesh of
CHRIST which was crucified, and buried, even the SACRAMENT of that true flesh
it is, which by the Priest upon the Altar, through the word of CHRIST, and
power of the holy Spirit, from Above is consecrated, and made holy.

FINIS.



