THE LAST part of the Mirour for Magistrates, wherein may be seen by examples
passed in this Realm, with how gree^ous plagues, vices are punished in great
Princes and Magistrates, and how frail and unstable vvorldly prosperity is
found, where Fortune seems most highly to Favor.

Newly corrected and enlarged

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

IMPRINTED at London in Fleetstreete, near unto Saint Dunstanes Church, by
Thomas Marsh. 1578.

Cum Priuilegio.

Love and Live. TO ALL THE Nobility, and all other in office, God grant
wisdom and all things needful for the preservation of their Estates. Amen.
PLato among many of his notable sentences concerning the government of a
common weal has this: well is that Realm governed, in which the ambicious,
desire not to bear office. Whereby you may perceive (right honorable) what
offices are, where they be duly executed: not gainful spoils for the gredy
to hunt for, but painful toils for the heady to be charged with. You may
perceive also by this sentence, there is nothing more necessary in a common
weal, then that Magistrates be diligent and trusty in their charges.

And sure in whatsoever Realm such provision is made, ye officers be forced to
do their duties: there is it as hard a matter to get an officer, as it is in
other places to repulse and shift of those that with flattery, brybes, and
other shifts, sue and preace for offices. For the ambitious (that is to say
prollers for power or gain) seek not for offices to help other, for which
cause officers are ordained: but with the undoing of other, to enrich
themselves. And therefore ^ar them once of this bayt, and force them to do their
duties, then will they give more to be rid from their charges, than they did
at yt first to come by e^e^: For they seek only their private profit. And
therefore, where the ambitious seek no office: there no doubt, offices are
duly ministered. And where offices are duly ministered, it cannot be chosen,
but the people are good, whereof must needs follow a good common weal. For if
the magistrates be good, the people cannot be ill. Thus the goodness or badnes
of any Realm lies in the goodness or badnes of the Rulers. And therefore not
without great cause do the holy Appostles so earnestly charg us to pray for the
magistra^es: For in deed the wealth and quiet of every common weal, the
disorder also and miseries of the same, come specially thorough them. I need
not go either to the Romans or Greeks for the proof hereof, neither yet to
ye Jews, or other nations: whose commonweals have always flourished while
their magistrates were good, and decayed and ra^ to ruin, when vici^us men had
the government.

Out country stories (if we read and mark them) will show us examples enough,
would God we had not seen mo tha^ enough. I purpose not to stand hereupon the
particulars, because they be in part setforth in the tragedies following. Yet
by ye way this I note (wishing all other to do the like) namely, that as good
governors have never lacked their deserved praises: so have not the bad
escaped infamy, besides such plagues as are horrible to hear of. For God (ye
ordeiner of offices) although he suffer them for punishment of the people to be
often occupied of such, as are rather spoilers and Iudasses, than toilers or
Justices (whom the scriptures call Hypocrites) yet suffers he them not to escape
unpunished, because they dishonor him. For it is Gods own office, yea his
chief office which they bear and abuse. For as Justice is the chief virtue, so
is ye ministration thereof, the chiefest office: and therefore has God
established it with the chiefest name, honoring and calling Kings and all
officers under them by his own name: Gods. Ye be al Gods, as many as have in
your charge any ministration of justice. What a foul shame were it for any
now to take upon them the name and office of God, and in their doings to show
themselves devils? God cannot of Justice, but plague such shameless
presumption and hypocrisy, and that with shamful death, diseases, or infamye.
How he has plagued evil rulers from time to time, in other nations, you may
see gathred in Bochas book entitled The fall of Princes, translated into
English by Lydgate a Monk of y^ Abbey of Bury in Suff. How he has dealt with
some of our countrymen your ancestors, for sundry vices not yet left, this
book named, A Mirror for Magistrates, shall in part pla^inye set forth before
your eyes which book I humbly offer unto your honors, beseching you to accept
it favorably. For here, as in a mirror or loki^g glass you shall se if any vice
be found, how the like has been punished in other heretofore, whereby
admonished, I trust it will be a good occasion to move me^ to ye sooner
ame^dme^t. This is ye chief end why this book is setforth, which God grant it
may talk according to the manner of the makers. The work was beg^^ and part of
it printed in queen Mary's time, but staid by such as the^ were chief in
office, nevertheless, through ye means of the right honorable Henry Lord
Stafford, ye first part was lice^ced, and imprinted ye first year of ye reign
of this our most noble and virtuous Queen, and dedicated to your honors with
this preface, Since with time, although I wa^ted such help as before, yet the
said good Lord Stafford has not ceased to call upon me, to publish so much
thereof as I had gotten at other men's hands, so yt through his Lordships earnest
means, I have now also setforth another part, containing as much as I could
obtain at ye hands of my friends: Which in ye name of all the authors, I humbly
dedicate unto your honors, insta^tly wishing, yt it may so like and de^^te
your minds, y^ your chereful receiui^g thereof* may encourage worthy wi^s to
enterprise and perform ye test. Which as soon as I may procure. I ente^d
through Gods leave and your favorable allowance, to publish with all expedicion.

In the mean while my Lords and Gods, (for so It may call you) I most humbly
beseech your honors favorably to accept this rude work, and diligently to
read and consider it. And although you shall find in it, that some have for
their virtue bin envied and brought unto misery: yet cease not you to be
virtuous, but do your office to the uttermost. Embrace virtue and suppress the
contrary, both in your selves and other, so shall God whose officers you are,
either so maintain you that no malice shall prevail, or if it do, it shall be
for your good, and to your eternal glory both here and in heaven which I
beseech God you may both seek and attain, Amen.

Yours most humble VV. B.

A TABLE OF THE Contents of this Book.
1. Robert Tresilia^ chief Justice of England hanged at Tyburn and his fellows
Justices banished for misco^strui^g ye laws. Fol. 1 2. The unfortunate end of
the two Mortimers. Fol. 4 3. Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, murdered in
prison Fol. 8. 4. Thomas Mo^bray Duke of Northfolk banished and died in exile.
Fol. 12. 5. King Richard ye second deposed and miserably murdered Fol. 16 6.
Owen Glendour Prince of Wales, was chased to y^ mountains, where he miserably
died for lack of food. Fol. 19 7. Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland taken
in battle and put to death. Fol. 25. 8. Richard Plantagenet Earl of
Cambridge put to death at Southampton. Fol. 28 9. Thomas Montague Earl of
Salisburye, chaunceablye slain at Orliaunce with a piece of ordinance. Fol.
30 10. James the first King of Scotts ^ruelly murdered by his own subjects.
Fol. 36. 11. Humphrey Plantagenet Duke of Gloucester Protector of England by
practyse of Enemies was brought to confusion. Fol. 40. 12. Lord William
Delapole Duke of Suffolk, worthelye banished and beheaded. Fol. 56 13. Iack^
Ca^e worthily punished for rebellion. Fol. 60. 14. Edmonde Duke of Somerset,
slain in the first battle at S. Albanes. Fol. 65. 15. Richard Plantagenet
D. Of York, slain through his over rash boldness, and his youngest son
the Earl of Rutland being a child cruelly murdered. Fol. 77. 16. The Lord
Clifford for his abominable cruelly came to a sudden death. Fol. 80 17. The
infamous end of the Lord Tiptofte Earl of Worcester. Fol. 82. 18. Richard
Neuil Earl of Warwick, and his brother John Marquise Montacute slain at
Barnet field. Fol. 86. 19. The virtuous king Henry the sixth cruelly murdered in
the Tower of London. Fol. 89. 20. George Plantagenet Duke of Clarence, Brother
to K. Edware the fourth, cruelly drowned in a Vessel of Mal^sye, Fol. 93. 21.
A lamentacion upon the death of King Edward the 4. Fol. 100. 22. Sir Anthony
Woduile Lord Rivers, with his Nephewe Lord Richard Graye and others, causles
imprisoned and cruelly beheaded at Pomfret. Fol. 102 23. The Lord Hastings
betrayed by his counsailour Ca^es^y, and murdered in the tower of London. Fol.
114. 24. Master Sackuils Induction. Fol. 129. The Tragedy of H. duke
Buckingham. Fol. 138. 25. Collingbourne cruelly executed for making a fosish
rhyme Fol. 153. 26. King Bichard the third slain at Bosworth. Fol. 159. 27 The
fall of the black Smith, and fatal end of the Lord Awdeley. Fol. 166. 28.
The complaint of Shores wife, one of the Concubins of King Edward the fourth.
Fol. 176.
A BRIEF Memorial of sundry unfortunate Englishmen. WILLIAM BALDVVIN to the
Reader
WHEN the Printer had purposed with himself to Print Lidgates translation of
Bochas, of the fall of Princes, having made privy thereto, many both honorable
and Worshippefull: he was cou^sayled by diverse of them to procure a
continuance of the Storye from whereas Bochas left, unto this present time,
chiefly of such as Fortune had abused here in this Island: which might be as a
Myrrour for men of all estates and degrees as well Nobles as other, to behold
the slippery deceiptes of the wavering Lady, and the due reward of all kind of
vices. Which advice liked him so well, that he required me to take pains
therein: but because it was a matter passing my wit and skill, and more
thancklesse than gaynefull to enterprise. I refused utterly alone to undertake
it without the help of such, as in wit were apt, in learning allowed, and in
judgment and estimation able to wield and discharge the weight of such a
burden, thinkinge so to shift my hands. But he earnest and diligent in his
affairs, procure me an Athlas to lay the burden upon my shoulders, which I
would not have undertaken, but that shortly after diverse learned men (whose
many gifts need few praises) consented to take upon them part of the travail.
And when certain of them to the numof seven, were through a general assent at
an appoyncted time and place, gathered together to devise thereuppon: I
resorted unto them, bringinge with me the book of Bochas translated by Dan
Lidgate, for the better observation of his order: which although we did not
mislyke, yet would it not conveniently serve, seeing that both Bochas, and
Lidgate were dead, neither were there any alive that had meddled with like
argument, to whom the unfortunate might make their moan. To make therefore a
state meet for the matter, they al agreed that I should usurp Bochas rome,
and the wretched Princes complain unto me: and took upon themselves, every man
for his part to be sundry personages, and in their behalfes to bewail unto me
their sundry chances, heavy destenies, and woeful misfortunes. This done, we
opened such Books of Chronicles as we had there present, and Master Ferrers
after he had found where Bochas left, which was about the end of King
Edward the thirdes reign, to begin the matter, said thus.

I maruayle (quod he) what Bochas means to forget among his miserable
Princes, such as were of our Nation, whose number is as great as their
Adventures wonderful. For to let pass all, both Britaynes, Danes, and Saxons,
and to come to the last Conquest, what a sort are they, and some also in the
time of Bochas himself, or not much before. As for example William Rufus the
second king of England after the Conquest, either by malice or misaduenture
slain hunting in the new forest, by Walter Tirrell with ye shot of an arrow.
Robert Duke of Normandy eldest son to William Conqueror deprived of his
inheritance of England, by Henry his youngest brother having both his eyes put
out, and after, myserably imprisoned in Cardiffe Castle, whereas he died. The
most Lamentable case of William, Rychard, and Mary, children of the said Henry
the first called Beauclerke, drowned upon y^ Sea by the negligence of drunken
Mariners, and King Rychard the first slain with a quarrel in his chief
prosperity. The most unnatural murder of Artur Duke of Britayne right Heir
of England, by king Ihon his uncle, with the death of Isabell his Sister by
Famyne. The miserable end of the said king Ihon their uncle by Surfeit, or as
some write poisoned by a Monk of the Abbey of Swinsted in Lyncolneshrye. Are
not their Histories ruful, and of rare Example? But as it should appear,
Bochas being an Italian, minded most the Romayne, and Italike Story, or else
perhaps he wanted the knowledge of ours. It were therefore a goodly and
notable matter, to search and discourse our whole story from the first
beginning of the inhabiting of the Isle. But seeinge the Printers mind is to
have us supply where Lidgate left, we will leave that great labor to other yt
may intend it, and (as one being bold first to break the Ise) I will begin at
y^ reign of Rychard ye second, a time as troublesome to ye people, as unlucky
to y^ Prince. And for asmutch friend Baldwin, as it shall be your charge to
pen orderly the whole process: I will so far as my memory, and judgment
serves, somewhat further you in the truth of the story. And therefore
omitting the ruffle made by Jack Straw and his Lewd meiney, with the murder
of many notable me^ which thereby happened, (for Jack as ye know was but a
poor Prince) I will begin with a notable example, which within a while after
ensued. And although the person (at whom I begin) was no king nor Prince:
yet since he had a Princely office, I will take upon me the miserable person
of Sir Robert Tresilian chief Justice of England, and of other his fellows
learned in ye Law yt were plagued with him: thereby to warn all of their
calling and profession, to be ware of wrong Judgments, misco^struinge of
Laws, or wrestinge the same to serve the Princes turn, which rightfully
brought them to a miserable end, which they may justly lament in manner
ensuinge. *

THE FALL OF SIR Robert Tresilian chief Justice of England, and other his
fellows, for misconstruinge the Laws and expoundinge them to serve the
Princes affections. Anno. 1388.
IN the rufull Regester of mischifee, and mishap,
Baldwin we beseech thee with our names to begin,
Whom unfriendly Fortune did train unto a trap,
When we our state esteemed most stable to have bin:
So lightly leese they all, which all do ween to win:
Learn by us ye Lawyers, and Judges of the Land,
Upright and vncorrupt in dome always to stand.
And print ye this president to remain for ever,
Enroll and record it in tables made of Brass,
Engraue it in Marble that may be razed never,
Where Judges of the Law may see as in a Glass,
What guerdon is for guile, and what our wages was,
Who for filthy lucre, corrupt with meede and awe,
Wittingly and wretchedly did wrest the sense of Law.
A change more new or strange, when was there ever seen,
Then Judges from the Bench to come down to the Bar,
And counsaylours that were, most nigh to King and Queen
Exiled their country, from Court and counsel far,
But such is Fortunes play that can both make and mar,
Exaltinge to most high, that was before most low,
And turning tail again, the lofty down to throw.
And such as late before, could stoutly speak and plead
Both in Court, and Country, careless of the trial,
Stand muet as Mammers without advice, or read
All to seek of shiftinge, by trauerse or denial
Which have seen the day, when for a golden Riall
By finesse and cunning, could have made black seem whit
And most extorted wrong, to have appeared right.
Whilst thus on bench above, we had the highest place,
Our reasons were to strong, for any to confute,
But when at bar beneath, we came to plead our case
Our wits were in the wane, our pleadinge very brute,
Hard it is for Prisoners, with Judges to dispute
When many against one, and none for one shall speak.
Who weenes himself most wise, shall happily be to weak.
To you therefore that sit, these few words will I say,
That no man sits so sure, but may be brought to stand,
Wherefore whilst you have place, and bear the swing, and sway
By favor without rygor, let poincts of Law be skand:
Pity the poor Prisoner that holds up his hand,
Ne lade him not with Law, who least of Law has known,
Remember ere ye dye, the case may be your own.
Behold me unfortunate Foreman of this Flock,
Tresilian, sometime chief Justice of this Land.
A Gentleman by birth, no stayne was in my Stock,
Locketon, H^lt, and Belknay, with other of my band,
Which the Law and Justice had wholly in our hand,
Under the second Rychard a Prince of great estates
To whom and us also, blind Fortune gave the mate.
In the common Laws our skill was so profounde,
Our credit and aucthority such, and so esteemed,
That what that we concluded was taken for a ground,
Allowed was for Law, what so to us best seemed.
Life, Death, Lands, goods, and all by us was deemed.
Whereby with easy pain, great gain we did in fet,
And every thing was fish, that came unto our net.
At Sessions and Sises, we bare the stroke and sway,
In pantents and commission, of Quorum always chief:
So that to whether side, soever we did way,
Were it by right or wrong, it past without represe,
The true man we let hang, somwhiles to save a Thief,
Of Gold and of Silver, our hands were never empty,
Offices, F^rmes, and Fees, fell to us in great plenty.
But what thing may suffice unto the greedy man?
The more he has in hold, the more he does desire,
Happy and twyce happy is he, that wisely can
Content himself with that, which reason does require,
And moyleth for no more, then for his needful hyre:
But greediness of mind does seeldome keep the syse,
To whom enough and more, at no time does suffice.
For like as Dropsy pacients drink and still be dry,
Whose vnstaunched Thirst no Liquor can Alaye,
And drink they nere so mutch, yet Thirst they by and by,
So Catchers, and Snatchers toil both night and day,
Not needy but greedy, still prollinge for their Pray,
O endelesse Thirst of Gold* corrupter of all Laws,
What mischief is on mould whereof thou art not cause.
Thou made us forget the faith we did profess,
When Sergeants we were sworn to serve the common Law,
Making a solemn oath in no paynt to dygresse.
From approved Principles in sentence nor in saw:
But we unhappy wyghts without al dread and awe,
Of the Judge eternal, more high to be promoted.
To Mammon more then God, all wholly were devoted.
The Laws we did interpret and statutes of the Land,
Not truly by the Text, but newly by a gloase:
And words y^ were most plain, when they by us were scand,
We turned by construction like a Welshmans hoase,
Whereby many a one both life and Land did loose:
Yet this we made our mean to mount a loft on Mules,
And serving times and turues, perverted Laws and rules.
Thus clyming and contending always to the top.
From hie, vato higher, and than to be most hye,
The honny dew of Fortune so fast on us did drop,
That of King Richards counsel we came to be most nigh:
Whose favor to attain, we were full fine and slye
Always to his avail, where any sense might sound,
That way (were it all wrong) ^he Laws we did expound.
So workinge Law like wax, the subject was not sure
Of Life, Land, nor goods, but at the Princes will,
Which caused his kingdom the shorter time to dure,
For clayminge power absolute both to save and spill,
The Prince thereby presumed his people for to pill:
And set his lusts for Law, and will had reasons place,
No more but hang and draw, there was no better grace.
The King thus outleaping, the limits of his law,
Not raygning but raginge, as will did him entice,
Wise and worthy persons from Court did daily draw,
Sage counsel see at naught, proud vaunters were in price,
And roysters bare the rule, which wasted al in vice,
Of riot and excess, grew scarcity and lack,
Of ^acking came taxing, and so went wealth to wrack.
The Barons of the Land, not bearing this abuse,
Conspiring with the commons assembled by assent,
And seeing no reason nor trea^ye could induce
The king in any thing his rigor to relent,
Maugre his princely mind: they called a Parliament
Francke and free for all men, vnchecked to debate
As Well for weal public, as for the Princes state.
In which high assemblye, great things were proponed.
Touching the Princes state, his regally and crown,
By reason that Richard, which much was to be moned,
Without regard at all, of honor or renown,
Misled by ill advise, had turnde al vpside down:
For sure^ie of whose state, them thought it did behooue.
His counsailours corrupt, by order to remove.
Among whom, Robert Veer, called Duke of Ireland,
With Mighel Delapoole, of Suffolk new made Earl.
Tharchbyshop of York was also of our hand:
With Brembre of London a full discourteous churl)
Some learned in the law in exile they did hurl:
But I judge Tresilian, because I was the chief,
Was dam^ned to the Gallows to dye there as a thief.
Lo the fine of falshoode, the stipend of corruption,
The ^ickle f^e of fraud, the fruits it does procure,
Ye judges now living, let out just punition
Teach you to shake of brybes, and keep your h^ndes al pure,
Riches and promocion be vain things, and unsure:
The favor of a Prince is an untrusty stay,
But Justice has a fee, that shall remain always.
What gloryis more greater in sight of God or man.
Then by paths of Justice in Judgment to proceed?
So duelye and truly the laws always to skan,
That Justice may take place without reward or meede,
Set apart all flattery and vain worldly dreede:
Set God before your eyes the righteous Judge supreme,
Remember well your reckening at the day extreme.
Abandon all affray, be soothfast in your sawes,
Be constant and careless of mortal men's displeasure.
With eyes shut, and hands closde, you should pronounce ye laws
Way not this worldly mucke, think there is a treasure
More worth then Gold or stone, a thousand times in valor,
Reposed for all such as righteousness ensue,
Whereof you cannot fail, the promise made is true.
If Judges in our days would ponder well in mind,
The fatal fall of us, for wresting law and right,
Such statutes as touch life, should not be thus definde
By senses constrained, against true meaning quite,
As Well they might affirm the black for to be white.
Wherefore we wish they would, our act and end compare,
And waying well the case, they will (we trust) beware.
Finis.
G. F.

WHen finished was this Tragedy, which seemed not unfit for the persons touched
in y^ same. Another which in the mean time had stayde upon sir Roger Mortimer
Earl of March, and heir apparaunt of England, whose miserable end (as it
should appear) was somewhat before the others: said as follows. Although it be
not greatly appertinent to our purposed matter, yet in my judgment, I think
it would do well to observe the times of these great infortunes, and as they be
more ancient in time, so to place their several plaintes: For I find that
before these (of who^ master Ferrers here has spoken) there were two earls
of ye name of Mortimer, the one in the time of king Edward the third out of our
date: another in Richard the secondes time, slain in Ireland, a year before
the fall of these Justices: whose history sith it is notable, and thexample
fruitful, it were not good to ouerpasse. And therefore by your license and
favors, I will take upon me the personage of the earl Mortimer called Roger,
who full of bloudye wounds mangled, with a pale countenance, and grieslye
look, may make his moan to Baldwin, in this wise.

HOW THE TWO ROGERS, surnamed Mortimers, for their sundry Vices, ended their
lives vnfortunatelye, the one Anno. 1329. the other. Anno. 1387.
AMong the ryders on the rolling wheel,
Which lost their holds, Baldwyn forget not me
Whose fatal thread, vntimelye death did reele
Ere it were twisted, by the Sisters threee,
All folk be ^rayle, their blisses brittle be:
For proof whereof, although none other were,
Suffice may I, Sir Roger Mortimer.
Not he that was in Edwardes days the third,
Whom Fortune brought from boot to extreme bale,
With love of whom, the Queen so much was stird,
As for his sake from honor she did scale,
And whilst Fortune, blew on this pleasant gale,
Heauing him high on her triumphall Arch,
By mean of her he was made Earl of March.
Whence pride out sprang, as does appear by many,
Whom soden hap, aduaunceth in excess,
Among thousands, scarce shall you find any,
Which in high wealth that humor can suppress,
As in this earl, plain proof did well express:
For whereas he too loftye was before,
His new degree has made him now much more.
For now alone he rules as him lust,
Respecting none save only the Queen mother,
Which moved malice to foulder out the rust,
Which deep in hate, before did lie and smother.
The Peers, the People, as well the one as other.
Against him made so heinous a complaint,
That for a traitor, they did the Earl attaynt.
Than al such crimes as hidden lay before,
They skower a fresh, and somewhat to them add,
For hydden hate has eloquence in store,
When Fortune biddes small faults to make more bad,
Five heinous crimes against him soon were had,
Causing the king to yield unto the Scot,
Towns that this father, but late before had got.
And therewithal the Charter called Ragman,
Yeuen to the Scots for brybes and privy gain,
That by his means sir Edward of Carnaruan
In Berckley Castle, most cruelly was slain:
That with his princes mother he had layne,
And last of all by pyllage at his pleasure,
Had spoyld the king and commons of their treasure.
For these things lo, which erst were out of mind,
Dampened he was, and honged at the last,
In whom dame Fortune fully showed her kind,
For whom she heaues, she hurleth down as fast:
It men to come, would learn by other past,
My coosius fall might cause them set aside,
High clymim, brybing, adultery and pride,
The fynal cause, why I this process tell,
Is that I may be known from this other,
My like in name, unlike me though he fell.
Which was I wene my graund sire or his brother:
To count my kin, Dame Philip was my mother,
Eldest daughter and heir of Lyonell,
Of King Edward the third the second sequel.
My Father hight sir Edmund Mortimer,
Called Earl of March, whence I was after Earl,
By true descent these two my parents were,
Of whih the one of knighthood bare ferl
Of Ladies all, the other was the pearl:
After whose Death I only stood in plight,
To be next heir unto the crown by right.
Touching the case of my cousin Roger,
(Whose ruful end even now I did relate)
Was found in time an undue atteindre
Against the law, by those that bare him hate:
For where by law each man of free estate,
Should be heard speak before his judgment pass,
That common grace to him denied was.
Wherefore by doom in Court of Parliament,
His atteindre appering erroneous,
The King, the Lords, and Cammons of assent,
His lawless death unlawful did discuss,
And both to blood and good restored us:
A president worthy, in record left,
Lords lygnes to save, by lawles means bereft.
While Fortune thus did friendly me reteyne,
Rychard the king, that second was by name,
Having none heir after him to reign:
Made me his mate in earnest and in game:
The Lords themselves so well allowd the same,
That through my titles ^ulye coming down,
I was made heir apparaunt to the crown.
Who then but I was every where esteemed?
Well was the man that understood my ^ert,
Whom I allowed, as Lords the People deemed,
And me to serve was every man's intent,
With all that wit or cunning could invent:
To me as prince attended great and small,
In hope a day would come to pay for all.
But seeldome joy continues trouble void,
In greatest charge cares greatest do ensue,
The most possessed, are ever most anoyed,
In largest seas sor^ tempests lightly brue,
The freshest colors, soonest change their hue,
In thickest place is made the diepest wound,
True proof whereof, my self to soon have found,
For whiles Fortune so luld me in her lap,
And gave me gifts more than I did require,
The double Dame behind me set a trap,
To dash me down and lay all in the mire:
The Irish Kernes against me did conspyre,
My Lands of Vlster unjustly to bereave,
Which my mother for heritage did me leave.
And whiles I there to set all things in stay,
(Omit my toils and troubles thytherwarde)
Among mine own, with my retinue lay,
The wylder sort, whom I did least regard,
And therefore the rechlesse man's reward:
When least I thought, set on me in such number,
That fro my corpse, the life they set asunder.
Naught might avail my courage nor my force,
Nor help of friends. which were alas to few:
The cruel folk assaulted so my horse,
That all my helps in pieces they to hew,
Our blood distaind the ground as drops of dew.
Naught might prevail to fly or yet to yield,
For whom they take they murder in che field.
No law of Arms they know, nor none will learn:
They make not war (as other do) a play,
The Lord, the Boy, the Gallowglasse, the Kerne,
Yield or not yield, whom so they take they slaye,
They save no prisoners, for ransom, nor for pay:
Their booty chief, they coumpt a deadmans head
Their end of warre's to see their enemy dead.
Amongst these men, or rather savage beasts
I lost my life, by cruel murder slain,
And therefore Baldwin note thou well my gestes,
And warn all princes rashness to refrain,
Bid them beware their enemies when they feign,
Nor yet presume to make their match amiss,
Had I not so done, I had not come to this,
At naught I set a sort of naked men,
And much the less, seeming to fly away,
One man me thought was good enough for ten,
Making small account of number more or less,
Madness it is, in war to goo by guess,
At unawares assaulted by our fone,
Which were in number forty to us one.
See here the slay of pomp and high estate,
The feeble hold of this uncertain life,
For I but young, proclaimed Prince but late,
Having fair fruict by my belooued wife:
Lost all at once by stroke of bloody knife:
Whereby assurde, let men themselves assure,
That wealth, and life are doubtful to endure.
FINIS.
T. Chapter

AFter this Tragedye ended, Mays^er Ferrers said, seeinge it is best to place
each person in his order, Baldwin take you the Chronicles and mark them as
they come: for there are many worthy to be noted, though not treated of.
First the Lord Murrey a Scottish man, who took his deaths wound through a
stroke lent him by the Earl of Notingham, whom he challenged at the Tylt: But
to omit him and also the fat Pryor of Typtre, pressed to death with thronge
of People upon London Bridge at the Queens entrye, I will come to the Duke of
Gloucester the kings uncle, a man mynding the common wealth, and yet at length
miserably made away, in whose person if ye will geeue ear, ye shall hear what I
think meet to be said.

HOW SIR THOMAS of VVoodstocke, Duke of Glocestre, Uncle to King Rychard the
second, was unlawfully murdered. Anno. 1397.
WHo stablisht is in State, seeming most sure,
And so far from danger of Fortunnes blast,
As by the compas^^ o^ man's conjecture,
No brazen pylter may be fyxt more fast:
Yet wanting the stay of prudent forecast,
When froward Fortune list for to frown,
May in a moment turn vpside down.
In proof whereof, O Baldwin, take pain,
Turn thine care to Thomas of Woodstocke,
Pressed in presence on Fortune to complain,
In the forlorn hope of English flock:
Who by descent was of the royal stock,
Son to king Edward, third of that name,
And second to none in glory and fame.
This noble father to maynteyn my state,
With Buckingham Earldom did me i^dowe:
Both Nature and Fortune to me were grate,
Denying me nothing which they might allow:
Their sundry graces in me did so flow,
As beautye, strength, high favor, and fame,
Who may of God more wish then the same?
Brothers we were to the number of seven,
I being the sixth, and youngest but one:
A more royal race was not under heaven,
More sto^t or more stately, of stomach and person,
Princes al peerless in each condition,
Namelye sir Edward, called the black Prince,
When had England the like before or ever since?
But what of all this, any man to assure,
In state vncarefull of Fortunes variaunce?
Sith daily and hourelye we see it in ure,
That where most cause is of affiaunce,
Even there is found most weak assurance:
Let none trust Fortune, but follow reason,
For often we see in trust is treason.
This proverb in proof over true I tried,
Fynding high treason in place of high trust,
And most false faith where I most affyed:
Being by them that should have been just.
Trayterouslye entrapt, ere I could mistrust,
Ah wretched world, what is it to trust thee?
Let them that will learn now harken to me.
After king Edward the thirdes decease,
Succeeded my Nephewe Richard to reign,
Who for his glory and honors increase,
Which princely wages did me entertain,
Against the Frenchmen to be his Chieftayne:
So passing the Seas with royal puissaunce,
With God and S. George I invaded France.
Wastinge the country with sword and with fire,
Over turning towns, high Castles and towers,
Like Mars God of war, enflamed with ire,
I forced the Frenchmen t'abandon their bowers?
Where ever we matched, I wan at all hours,
In such wise visiting both City ad village,
That always my soldiers were laden with pyllage.
With honor and triumph was my return,
Was none more joyous than young king Richard
Who minding more highlye my state to adourne,
With Glocestre Dukedom did me reward:
And after in marriage I was prefarde,
To a daughter of Bohun an Earl honorable:
By whom I was of England high Constable.
Thus hoysted high on Fortunes whyrling wheel,
As one on a stage attending a play,
Sees not on which side the scaffold does reele,
Til timber and poales and al fly away.
So fared it by me. for day by day,
As honor increased I looked still higher,
Not seeing the danger of my fond desire.
For Fortunes flood thus running with full stream,
And I a Duke descended of great kings,
Constable of England, chief officer in the realm,
Abused with assurance in these vain things,
I went without feet, and flew without wings:
Presuming so fair upon my high estate,
That dread set apart my Prince I would mate.
For whereas all kings have counsel of their choice,
To whom they refer the rule of their Land,
With certain familiers in whom to rejoice,
For pleasure or profit, as the case shall stand,
I not hearing this, would needs take in hand,
Maugre his will, those persons to disgrace,
And such as I thought ^^tie to settle in their place.
But as an old Book says, who so will assay,
About the Cats neck to hang on any Bell,
Had first need to cut the Cats claws away
Least if the Cat be cursed, and not camed well,
She happly with her nails may clawe him to the fell,
So putting on the Bell about the Cats neck,
By being too busy I caught a cruel check.
Read well the sentence of the Rat of renown,
Which Pierce the Plowman describes in his Dream,
And who so has wy^ the sense to expoune,
Shall find, that to bridle the Prince of a Realm,
Is even (as who says) to strive with the stream:
Note this all subjects and construe it well,
And busy not your Brains about the Cats bell.
But in that ye be Lieges learn to obey,
Submitting your wills to your Princes Laws,
It sits not a subject to have his own way,
Remember this prouer be of the Cats claws:
For Princes like Lions have long and large paws
That reach at Randon, and whom they once twitch,
They claw to the boane before the skin itch.
But to my purpose, I being once bent,
Toward the atchieving of my attemptate.
Four bold Barons were of mine assent,
By oath and aliaunce fastlye confederate,
First Henry of Derby an Earl of estate,
Richard of Arundel, and Thomas of Warwick,
With Mowbray the Marshal, a man most warlike.
At Ratecote bridge assembled our band,
The commons in clusters came to us that day,
To daunt Robert Veer, then Duke of Ireland,
By whom King Richard was ruled always,
We put him to flight and brake his array,
Then Maugre the king his leave or assent,
By Constables power we called a Parliament.
Where not in Roabes, but with Baslardes bright,
We came for to parle of the Public weal,
Confirming our quarrel with maine and with might,
With swords and no words we tried our appeal,
In steed of reason declaring our zeal,
And whom so we knew with the king in good grace,
We plainly deprived of power and of place.
Some with short process were bannisht the Land,
Some executed with capital pain,
VVherof who so lis^, the whole to understand,
In the Parliament roll it appears plain,
And further how stoutly we did the king strain,
The rule of his realm wholly to resign,
To the order of those, whom we did assign.
But note the sequel of such presumption,
After we had these Miracles thus wrought,
The king inflamed with indignation,
By Subjects thus in bondage to be brought,
Suppress^^ge the Ire of his inward thought:
Studied naught else but how that he might,
Be highly revenged of this high dispight.
Agreeued was also this later offense,
With former cause of (...) to renew,
For once at Wyndsor I brought to his presence,
The Mayor of London with all his retinewe,,
To ask accoumpt of the Realms reuenew:
And the Soldiers of Breast by me were made bold
To claim their wages, when the town was sold.
These griefs remembered with all the remnaunt,
Fulfyld his heart with hate out of measure,
Yet openly in show made he no semblaunt,
By word or by deed to bear displeasure:
But Friendship feigned, in proof is found unsure.
And who so trusts a foe reconcilde,
Is for the most part always beguilde.
For as fire ill quenched will up ^at a start,
And sores not well salued do break out of new,
So hatred hidden in an ireful heart,
Where it has not had long season to brew,
Upon every occasion does easily renew:
Not failing at last, if it be not let,
To pay large usury besides the due de^,
Even so it fared by this friendship feigned,
Outwardly sound and inwardly rotten:
For when the kings favor in seeming was gained:
All old displeasures forgeeuen and forgotten,
Even than at a soden the shaft was shotten,
Which pierced my heart void of mistrust,
Alas that a Prince should be so unjust.
For lyinge at Plashey my self to repose,
With long sickness^ diseased very sore:
The King espying me apart from those,
With whom I was confedered before,
Thought it not meet to tract the time more
But glad 'to take me at such advantage,
Came to salute me with friendly visage.
Who having a Band bound to his bent,
By color of kindness to visit his Eame,
Took time to accomplish his cruel intent:
And in a small vessel down by the stream,
Conueid me to Calais out of the realm,
Where without process or doom of my pears,
Not nature but murder abridged my years.
This act was odious to God and to man,
Yet rigor to cloak to ha^it of reason,
By craftye compass devise they can,
Articles nine of right heinous treason:
But doom after death is sure out of season,
For who ever saw so strange a president,
As execution to go before judgment.
Thus hate harbored in depth of mind,
By sought occasion burst out of new.
And c^u^l^ye abused the law of kind,
When that the Nephue the uncle slew,
Alas King Richard, sore may thou rue-
Which by this fact preparedst a plain way,
Of thy hard destenye to hasten the day.
For blood axeth blood as guerdon due,
And vengeance for vengeance is just reward:
O righteous God thy judgments are true,
For look what measure to others we awarde,
The same for us again is preparde:
Take heed ye princes by examples past,
Blood will have blood either first or last.
FINIS.
G. F.

WHen master Ferrers had ended this fruictfull Tragedye, because no man was
ready with an other, having perused the story which came next, said: because
you shall not say (my masters) but that I will somewhat do my part. I will
under your correction, declare the tragedye of Thomas Mowbrey, Duke of
Northfolke, the chief worker of the Duke of Glocesters destruction: who to
admonish all counsaylours to b^ware of Flattring Princes or falsely envying or
accusing their Peregalles, may lament his vices in manner folowinge.

HOW THE LORD Mowbray promoted by King Rychard the second, to the State of
a Duke, was by him Banished the Realm, in the year of Christ. 1398. and
after died myserably in exile.
THough sorrow and shame abash me to reherce,
My loathsome life and death of due deserved,
Yet that the pains thereof may other pearce,
To leave the like, least they be likewise served,
Ah Baldwin mark, and see how that I swerued:
Dissemblinge, envy, and Flattery, bane that be
Of al their Hosts, have showed their power on me.
A blame not fortune though she did her part,
And true it is, she can do little harm,
She guides goods, she hampreth not the heart,
A mind well ^ent, is safe from every charm:
Vice, only vice, with her stout strengthlesse arm,
Does cause the heart from good to ill incline,
Which I alas, do find to true by mine.
For where by birth I came of noble race,
The Mowbreys heir, a famous house and old,
Fortune I thank, gave me so good a grace,
That of my Prince I had what so I would:
Yet neither was, to other greatly hold,
For I through flattery abusd his wanton youth,
And his fond trust augmented my untruth.
He made me first the Earl of Notingham,
And Marshall of England, in which estate
The Pieres and people jointly to me came,
With sore complaint, against them that of late
Made officers, had brought the king in hate,
By making sale of Justice, right, and Law,
And living naught: without all dread or awe.
I gave them aid these evils to redress,
And went to London with an army strong,
And caused the king, against his will oppress
By cruel death, all such as led him wrong:
The Lord chief Justice suffered these among,
So did the Steward of his household head,
The Chauncellor escaped, for he aforehand fled.
These wicked men thus from the king removed,
Who best us pleased succeeded in their place:
For which both King, and Commons mutch us loved,
But chiefly I with all stood high in grace,
The King ensued my read in every case,
Whence self love bred: for glory makes proud,
And pride ay looks alone to be allowde.
Wherefore to the end I might alone enjoy
The Kings favor, I made his lust my law:
And where of late I labored to destroy,
Such flatteringe folk, as thereto stood in awe,
Now learned I among the rest to clawe:
For pride is such, if it be kindly caught,
As stroyeth good, and stirs up every naught.
Pride provoke to flatter for the pray,
To poll, and oppress for maintenance of the same,
To malice such as match uneaths it may:
And to be brief, pride does the heart inflame,
To fire what mischief any fraud may frame,
And ever at length the evils by it wrought
Confound the worker and bring him unto naught.
Behold in me due proof of every part,
For pride pricked me first my prince to flatter
So much, that who so ever pleased his heart,
Were it never so evil, I thought it a lawfll matter,
Which caused the Lords afresh against him clatter:
Because of Holds beyond the sea that ^e sold.
And seen his soldiers of their wages polde.
Though all these ills were done by mine assent,
Yet such was luck that each man deemed no:
For see the Duke of Glocestre for me sent,
With other Lords whose hearts did bleed for woe,
To see the Realm so fast to ruin go:
In fault whereof, they said the two Dukes were,
The one of York, the other of Lancaster.
On whose remove from place about the king
We all agreed, and swear a solem^ne oath,
And whilst the rest provided for this thing,
I flatterer I, to win the praise of troth:
Wretch that I was brake faith and promise both:
For I bewrayed the King, their whole intent,
For which unawares they all were taken and shent.
Thus was the warder of the Common weal,
The Duke of Gloucester giltlesse made away,
With other more, more wretch I so to deal,
Who through untruth their trust did ill betraye:
Yet by this means obtained I my pray,
Of king and Dukes I found for this such favor,
As made me Duke of Northfolke for my labor.
But see how pride and envy jointly run,
Because my Prince did more then me prefer,
Sir Henry Bolenbroke the Eldest son
Of John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster,
Proud I that would alone be blazing sterre,
Envied this Duke, for naught save that the shine
Of his deserts, did glister more then mine.
To thend therefore his light should be the less,
I slylye sought al shifts to put it out,
But as the poyze that would the palmetree press,
Does cause the bows sprede larger round about,
So spite and envy causes glory sproute,
And aye the more the top is over trod,
The deeper does the sound root spread abroad.
For when this Henrye Duke of Hereford saw,
What spoy^e the King made of the noble blood,
And that without al Justice, cause, or law:
To suffer him so, be thought not sure nor good,
Wherefore to me twofaced in one hood,
As touching this he fully brake his mind
As to his friend that should remedy find.
But I, although I knew my Prince did ill,
So that my heart abhorred sore the same,
Yet mischief so through malice led my will,
To bring this Duke from honor unto shame,
And toward my self, my Soueraygne to inflame:
That I bewraye^ his Words unto the King,
Not as a read, but as a most heinous thing.
Thus where my duty bound me to have told
My Prince his fault, and wild him to refrain,
Through flattery lo, I did his ill uphold,
Which turned at length both him and me to pain:
VVo, woe to Kings whose counsaylours do feign,
VVo, woe to Realms where such are put in trust,
As leave the law, to serve the Princes lust.
And woe to him that by his flatteringe read,
Maynteyns a Prince in any kind of vice:
VVo worth him eke for envy, pride or mede,
That misreportes any honest enterprise,
Because I beast, in all these poynctes was nice,
The plagues of all together on me light,
And due for ill: All doers does acquit.
For when the Duke was charged with my plaint,
He flat denied that any part was true,
And claymde by Arms, to answer his attaint,
And I by use, that Warly feats well knew,
To his desire incontinently drew:
Wherewith the King did seem right well content,
As one that past not mutch with whom it went.
At time and place appoyncted we appeard,
At all poynctes Armed to prove our Quarelles Just,
And when our Friends on each part had us cheard,
And that the Harolds had us do our lust:
With spear in rest we took a course to just.
But ere our horses had run half their way,
A shoute was made the King commanded stay.
And for to avoid the sheddinge of our blood,
With shame, and death which one must needs have had,
The King through counsel of the Lords thought good
To banishe both, which judgment strait was rad:
No maruayle than though both were wroth and sad
But chiefly I, that was Exild for aye,
My Enmy straungd but for ten years day.
The date expird, when by this doubtful dome,
I should depart to live in banished hand,
On pain of death to England not to come,
I went my way: the King sea^d in his hand
Mine Offices, my Honors, Good, and Land,
To pay the due as openly he told,
Of mighty sums, which I had from him pold.
See Baldwin see, the salary of sin,
Mark with what meede, vile vices are regarded
Through Pride, and Envy loose both kith, and kin,
And for my flatteringe plaint so well rewarded,
Exile, and slander are just to me awarded:
My Wife, and Heir lack Lauds, and lawful Right,
And me their Lord made Dame Dianais Knight.
If these mishaps at home be not enough,
Adioyne to them my Sorrows in Exile:
I went to Almayne first, a Land right rough,
In which I found such churlishe Folk, and vile,
As made me loathe my life each otherwhile:
There lo, I learnd what it is to be a gest
A broad, and what to live at home in rest.
For they esteem no one man more than each,
They use as well the Lackey as the Lord,
And like their manners churlishe in their spech,
Their lodging hard, their bourd to be abhord,
Their pleityd Garments herewith well accord,
All Iagde, and Frounst, with diverse colors decked,
They swear, they curse, and drink till they be flekt.
They hate all such, as these their manners hate,
Which reason would, no Wiseman should allow,
With these I dwelt, lamentinge mine estate,
Till at the length they had got knowledge, how
I was exilde, because I did auowe
A false complaint, against my trusty freende,
Which made them think, me worse then any feende.
That what for shame, and what for other grief,
I parted thence, and went to Venice town,
Whereas I found, more pleasure and relief,
Which was not long: for now the great renown,
Of Bolenbroke whom I, would have put down,
Was waxt so great in Britayne, and in France,
That Venice through, each man did him Auaunce.
Loo! thus his Glory grew great, by my dispite,
And I thereby increased in defame:
So envy ever, her hatred does acquit
With Trouble, Anguishe, Sorrow, and self Shame,
Whereby her Foes do shine in higher Fame:
Like Water waves, which cleanse the Muddy stone,
And soil themselves by beatinge thereupon.
Or ear I had soiourned there a year,
Strange tidings came, he was to England gone,
Had ta^e the King, and that which touched him near,
Emprisoned him with other of his Fone,
And made him yield him up his Crown, and Throne:
When I these things for true by search had tried,
Grief griped me so, I pined a way and died.
Note here the end of pride, see Flatteries fine,
Mark the reward of envy, and false complaynt,
And warn all people from them to decline,
Least likely fault do find the like attaynte.
Let this my life, to them be a restraynt,
By others harms who lists take no head:
Shall by his own, learn other better read.
FINIS.
T. CHAPTER

THis tragical example was of all the company well liked, howbeit a doubt was
found therein, and that by means of the diversity of ye Chronicles for whereas
Hall (whose Chronicle in this work was chiefelye followed) makes Mowbr^y
appellant, and Bolenbroke defendant. Fabian reports the matter quite
contrary, and that by record of the Parliament roll, wherein it is plain
that Bolenbroke was appellant and Morobrey defendant wherefore whatsoever shall be
said in the person of Mowbrey (who being a most noble prince had to much wrong
to be so causeles defamed after his death) imagine the same to be spoken
against his accuser. Which matter sith it is more hard to decide, than
needful to our yurpose, which mind only to dissuade from vices and exalt
virtue, we refer to such as may come by the Records of the Parliament,
contented in the mean while with Master Halles judgment, which makes best
for our foreshewed purpose.

This doubt thus let pass. I would said M, Ferrers, say somewhat for K. Rich.
the 2. after whose depriving, his brother and diverse other made a mask mynding
by K. Henry's destruction to have restored him, which maskers matter so runs
in this yt I doubt which ought to go before, but seeing no man is ready to say
ought in their behalf, I will give (who so lists) leisure to think thereon,
and in ye mean time to further your enrerprise. I will in K. Richards behalf
recount such part of his storye, as I think most necessary. And therefore
imagine Baldwin y^ you see y^ corpse of this Prince al to be ma^gled, with bloody
wounds, lyinge pale and wanne, naked upon a Beer in Paul's Church, the People
standing round about him, and making his complaint in manner as follows.

HOW KING RICHARD the second was for his evil governance deposed from his
seat, in the year 1399. and miserably murdered in prison the year following.
HApyye is the Prince, that has in wealth the grace
Virtue to follow and vices to keep under,
But woe to him whose will has wisdoms place:
For who so renteth right and law asunder,
On him at length all the world shall wonder,
Boast of high birth, sword, scepter, ne mace.
Can warrant King or Keyser fro the case,
Shame sueth sin, as rain do drops of thunder,
Let kings therefore the Laws of God embrace,
That vain delights cause them not to blunder
Behold my hap, see how the seely route
On me do gaze, and each to other say:
See where he lies, but late that was so stout,
Lo how the power, the Pride, and rich array,
Of mighty Princes lightly fade away.
The King which erst kept all the realm in doubt,
Dead and least dread, to grave is carried out,
What would be Kings made of but earth and clay:
Behold the wounds his body all about,
When living here, thought never to decay.
Me think I hear the people thus devise
Wherefore Baldwin, since thou will now declare
How Princes fell, to make the living wise,
My lawless life, in no poynct see thou spare,
But paint it out, that rulers may beware,
Good counsel, Law, or virtue to despise:
For Realms have rulers, and rulers have a sise,
Which if they break, thus mutch to say I dare,
That eythers griefs, the other shall agrise
Till one be lost, the other brought to care.
I was a King, who ruled all by Lust
Without respect of Justice, Right, or Law,
In false Flatterers reposinge all my trust,
Embracinge such as could my vices clawe:
Fro counsel sage I did always withdraw,
As pleasure pricked, so needs obey I must:
Having delight to feed and serve the gust,
Of God or man I stood no wise awe,
Me liked least to Torney or to Just.
To Venus games my Fansy did more draw.
Which to maintain, I gathered heaps of gold
By Fines, Fiftenes, and loanes by way of pressed,
Blanke Charters, Oaths, and shifts not known of old,
For which the people, my doings did detest.
I also sold the noble town of Breast,
My fault wherein, because mine uncle told,
(For Princes acts, may no wise he controld)
His life I took, untried without Quest,
And all such Lords as did his cause uphold,
With long exile, or cruel death oppressed.
None aid I lackt, in any wicked deed,
For gayinge Gulles, whom I promoted had.
Would further all in hoope of higher ^eede,
There can no King, ymagin ought so bad,
But shall find some, to do the same most glad:
For sickness seldom does so swiftly breed,
As humors ill, do grow the grief to feed.
Thus Kings estatas, be worst of all bestad.
A^usde to wealth, abandoned at need,
And nearest harm when they be least adrad.
My life and death the truth of this has tried:
For while I sought in Ireland with my foes,
Mine uncle Edward, whom I left to guide
My Realm at home, rebelliously arose,
Traitors to help, which plied my depose:
And called fro France, Earl Bolenkroke whom I
Exiled had, for ten years there to lie:
Who tyrantlike did execute all those,
That in mine aid durst look but once awry,
Of which sort sooneafter some their lives did lose.
For coming back this soden stur to stay,
My Steward false to whom I trusted most:
(VVhiles I in Wales at Flint my castle, lay,
Both to refresh and multiply mine Oste)
There in any Hall, mindinge to fly the Coast,
His Staff did break, which was my household stay
Bad each make shift and rode himself away.
See Princes, see, the strength whereof we boast,
Whom most we trust, at need do us Betray:
No better stay, then in a rotten Post.
My Steward false, thus being fled and gone,
My servants slye shrancke of on every side,
Then caught I was, end led unto my soen,
Who for their Prince no Pallaice did provide,
But prison strong, where Henry puffed with pride,
Causde we resign, abandonig my throane,
And so forsaken and left as post alone,
These holow friends, ^y Henrye sone espied,
Became suspect, and faith was geeuen to none,
Which caused them from faith again to slide.
Conspiring straight their new Prince to put down,
Which to perform a solemn oath they swore,
To tender me my sce^ter and my crown,
Whereof themselves, deprived me before,
But ^ate medcines can help no festred sore:
When swelling floods have overflowed the town,
To late it is to save them that shall drown,
Till sails he spread a ship may keep the shore,
No anchor hold can keep the vessel down,
When wind and stream has set the seas in rore.
For though the P^eres set Henrye in such state,
Yet could they not dispiace him thence again:
And where with ease my pride they did abate.
They ^ere to weak to set me up again,
Things hardly mend, but may be mard amayne.
And when a man is fallen by froward fate,
Still mischiefs ^ight one on another pace:
And means w^l meant al mishaps to restrain
Wax wretched moanes, whereby his joys a bate.
Due proof whereof, in this appeared plain.
For when the king did know that for my cause,
His Lords in Mask, would murder him by ^ight,
To da^h al doubts, he took no further pause:
But Pi^rs of Exto^ a cruel cut throat knight,
To P^^fret Castle sent with great dispite,
Who reft my life by force against al Laws,
Thus lawless life to lawless death ay draws.
Wherefore (...) kings be ruled, and rule by right.
And so I end concluding with this clause:
That God though sat, at last will surely smite.
FINIS.
G. F.

WHen Master Ferrers had ended this so woeful a Tragedye, and to all Princes a
right worthy instruction: having passed through a miseable time full of piteous
Tragedies, we paused a while. And seeing ye reign of Henry the fowerth ensued,
a Prince more ware and Prosperous in his doings, although not untroubled with
wars, both of outfoorth and inward enemies: we began to search what Peer^s
were fallen therein, where of the number was not small. And yet because their
examples were not much to be noted for our purpose, we passed over all the
Maske^s of whom king Richardes brother was chief: which were al slain and put
to Death for their traiterous attempt. And fynding Owen Glendour, a great
Prince in Wales, next in succesion of ill Fortune with the stout Percies his
confederates, I thought it not meet to ouerpasse, so great persons with
silence, and therefore said thus to the sylent company: What my masters is
every man at once in a brown study? has no man affection to any of these
stories? you mind so much some other belike, that these do not move you: and
to say the truth, there is no special cause why they should. How be it Owen
Glendour, because he was one of Fortunes own darlingrs, and affected to be
Monark of Wales, although to his own mischief and destruction, rather then he
should be forgotten, I will pray Master Phaer who of late has placed himself
in that country, and happily has met with his ghost in the forest of Kylgarran
that he will say somewhat in his person: which Owen coming out of the wild
Mountains of Wales like the image of Death in all points (his heart only
excepted) as a ghost forpined with extreme famine, cold and hunger, may
lamente his great misfortune in such manner as you master Phaer are able most
aptly to utter and set forth.

HOW OWN GLENdour seduced by false Prophecies, took upon him to be Prince
of Wales, and was by Henry Prince of England chased to the Mountains, where
he most miserably starued for hunger. Anno. 1401.
I Pray thee Baldwin since thou do entend,
To show the fall of such as climb to hye,
Remember me, whose miserable end
May teach all men Ambition to fly,
Oh false Fortune, Fortune vengeance on thee I cry:
Which offeringe a Sop of sweet receyt,
Haste made me byte the Hook in steed of Bayt.
A Brytton borne, and of the Tropan blood,
But ill brought up, whereby full well I find,
That neither birth nor Lineage make us good:
Though it be true that Cat will after kind,
Flesh gendreth flesh, but not the Soul or Mind,
They gender not, but foully do degender,
When men to vice, from virtue they surrender.
Each thing by nature, tends to the same
Whereof it came, and is disposed like:
Down sincks the mould, up mountes the fiery flame,
With Horn the Heart, with Hoof the Horse does strike,
The Wolf does spoil, the subtle Fox does pike,
And to conclude, no fish, flesh, foul, or plant
Of their true dame, the property does want.
But as for men, sith severally they have
A mind whose manners are by learning made,
Good bringinge up, al only does them save,
In honest acts, which with their Parents fade,
So that true gentry stands in the trade
Of virtues life, not in the fleshly line:
For blood is brute, but Gentry is divine.
Experience, does cause me thus to say,
And that the rather for my country men,
Which vaunt and boast themselves above the day,
If they may strain their stock fro worthy men:
Which let be true, are they the better then?
Nay far the worse, if so they be not good,
For why they stayne the beuty of there blood.
How would we mock the burden bearinge Mule,
If he would brag he were an horses Sun,
To press his pride (might nothing else him rule)
His boastes to prove, no more but did him run:
The horse for swiftnes has his glory won,
The Mule could never the more aspyer,
Though he should prove that Pegas was his Sier.
Each man crake of that which was his own,
Our Parents virtues are theirs, and no w^it ours,
Who therefore will of noble birth be known,
Ought shine in virtue like his Ancestors,
Gentry consists not in Lands, and Towers:
He is a churl though all the World were his,
Yea Arthurs heir, if that he live amiss.
For virtuous life a Gentleman does make,
Of her possessour all be he poor as Job,
Yea though no name of elders he can take:
For proof take Merlin fathered by an Hob.
But who so sets his mind to spoil and rob,
Although he come by due descent from Brute,
He is a chorle, ungentle, vile, and brute,
Well, thus did I for want of better wit,
Because my parents naughtely brought me up:
For Gentlemen (they said) was naught so fit,
As to attast by bold attemptes the cup,
Of conquestes wine, whereof I thought to sup:
And therefore bent my self to rob and ryue,
And whom I could of Lauds, and goods deprive.
For Henry the fourth did then usurp the Crown,
Despoyled the King, with Mortimer the heir:
For which his subjects sought to put him d^wne,
And I while Fortune offered me so fair,
Did what I might, his honor to appayre:
And took on me to be the Prince of Wales,
Entiste thereto by prophecies, and tales.
For which, such Idle, as wait upon the spoil,
From every part of Wales unto me drew,
For loytering youth untaught in any toil,
Are ready aye all mischief to ensue:
Through help of these so great my glory grew,
That I defied my King through lofty heart,
And made sharp War on all that took his part,
See lack, I took Lord Raynold Gray of Rythen,
And him enforst my Daughter to espouse,
And so vnraunsomed I held him still, and sythen,
In Wigmore land through battle rigorous,
I caught the right heir of the crowned house:
The Earl of March sit Edmond Morti^^er,
And in a Dungeon kept him prisoner.
Than all the Marches longinge onto Wales,
By Seuerne West I did invade and burn:
Destroyed the Towns, in Mountains, and in Vales,
And rich in Spoils had homeward saulfe return:
Was none so hold durst once against me spurn,
Thus prosperously does Fortune forward call,
Those whom she minds to give the sorest fall.
When Fame had brought these tidings to the King,
(Although the Scotts than vexed him right sore)
A mighty army against me he did bring:
Whereof the French King being warned before,
Who mortal hate against King Henry bore,
To grieve our For he quickly to me sent,
Twelve Thousand Frenchmen, Armed to War, and bent.
A part of them led by the Earl of March
Lord James of Burbon, a Valiant tried Knight,
Which held by Winds to Wales ward forth to march,
Took Land at Plimmouth privily an a night:
And when he had done all that he burst or might,
After that a meyney of his men were ^ayne,
He stale to Ship, and sailed home again.
Twelve thousand more in Milford did ariue,
And came to me then lyinge at Denbigh,
With armed Welshmen Thousands double five,
With whom we went to Worcester well nigh,
And there Encampt us on a mount on high,
To abide the king who shortly after came
And pitched his field, on a hill hard by the same.
There eight days long our Hoastes lay face, to face,
And neither durst others power assail:
But they so stopped the passages the space,
That victayles could not come to our avail,
Where through constraynde our hearts began to fail:
So that the Frenchmen shranke away by night,
And I with mine to the Mountains took our flight:
The King pursued greatly to his cost,
From Hills to Woods, from Woods to Valleis plain:
And by the way his men and stuff be lost.
And when he saw, he gained naught but pain,
He blewe retreat, and gat him home again:
Then with my power I boldly came abroad,
Taken in my Country for a very God.
Immediately after fell a Jolly Jar
B^twene the King, and Percies worthy bloods,
Which grew at last unto a deadly War:
For like as drops Engender mighty Floods,
And little seeds sprut forth great Leaves, and buds,
Even so small strives, if they be suffered run,
Bread wrath and war, and death or they be don.
The King would have the Ransom of such Scots,
As these the Percies taken had in the field:
But see how st^ongly lacre knits her knots,
The King will have, the Percies will not yield,
Desire of gooos some craves, but grants seeld:
Oh cursed goods desire of you has wrought
All wickedness, that has, or can be thought.
The Percies deemed it meeter for the King,
To have redeemed their Coosin Mortimer,
Who in his Quarrel all his power did bring,
To fight with me, that took him Prisoner,
Than of their pray to rob his Soldier:
And therefore willed him see some mean were ^ound,
To quite forth him, whom I kept vily bound.
Because the King misliked their request,
They came themselves and did accord with me,
Complayninge how the Kingdom was oppressed
By Henry's rule, wherefore we did agree
To put him down, and part the realm in three:
The North part theirs, Wales wholly to be mine,
The rest, to rest to The Earl of Marches Line.
And for to set us hereon more agog,
A Prophet came (a vengeance take them al)
Affirminge Henry to be Gog magog,
Whom Merlin does a Mould warp ever call,
Accursed of God that must be brought in thrall
By a Wolf, a Dragon, and a Lion strong,
Which should divide, his Kingdom them among.
This crafty dreamer made us three such beasts,
To think we were the foresaid beasts in deed.
And for that cause our Badges, and our Creastes,
We searched out which scarsely well agreed:
Howbeit the Haroldes ready at such a need,
Drew down such Issues from old Auncesters,
As proved these Ensigns to be surely ours.
Ye crafty Welshemen, wherefore do ye mock,
The noble men thus with your feigned rimes?
Ye Noble men why fly ye not the Flock,
Of such as have seduced so many times?
False Prophesies are Plagues for diverse crimes,
Which God does let the deuilish sort devise,
To trouble such as are not godly Wise.
And that appeared by us three beasts in deed,
Through false persuasion highly borne in hand,
That in our feate we could not choose but speed,
To kill the King, and to enjoy his Land:
For which exployt we bound our selves in band,
To stand contented each man with his part,
So fully, folly assured our foolish heart.
But such they say as fish before the Net,
Shall seldom surfeit of the Pray they take,
Of things to come the haps be s^ unset,
That none but Fools may warrant of them make:
The full assured, success does often forsake.
For Fortune finds none so fyt to flout,
As suresby Sots, which cast no kind of doubt.
How say thou Henry Hotspur, do I ly?
For thou right manly gave the King a Field,
And there wast slain because thou would not fly,
Sir Thomas Percy thine Uncle forced to yield,
Did cast his head a wonder seen but seelde,
From Shrewsbury town, to the tope of London Bridge,
Lo! thus fond hope, did both their lives Abridge.
When King Henry this Victory had won,
Destroyed the Percies, put their power to slight,
He did appoinct Prince Henry his eldest Son:
With all his power to meet me if he might:
But I discomfit, through my Partners fight,
Had not the heart to meet him face, to face,
But fled away, and he pursued the Chase.
Now Baldwin mark, for I, calde Prince of Wales,
And made believe, I should be he in deed,
Was made to fly among the Hills, and Dales,
Where all my men forsook me at my need.
Who trusts Loyterers seeld has lucky speed:
And when the Captains Courage does him fail,
His Soldiers hearts a little thing may quayle.
And so Prince Henry chased me, that lo!
I found no place wherein I might abide!
For as the Dogs pursue the sely Do,
The Brache behind, the Hounds on every side,
So traste they me among the Mountains wide:
Whereby I found, I was the heartlesse Hare,
And not the beast Colprophet did declare.
And at the last: like as the little roche,
M^st either be eat, or leap upon the shore
When as the hungery pickerell does approach,
And there find death which it escapt before:
So double death assaulted me so sore
That either I must unto mine Enmy yield,
Or starve for hunger, in the barrayne feelde.
Here shame, and pain a while were at a strife
Pain bad me yield, shame bad me rather fast,
The one badad spare, the other bad spend my life,
But shame (shame have it) overcame at last,
Than hunger strong, that does the stonewale brast,
Forced me to feed on Bark of trees, and Wood,
And last of all, to g^aw my flesh and blood.
This was mine end to horrible to bear,
Yet good enough for him that did so ill,
Whereby O Baldwin warn men to forbear,
The vain desires, when w^^ does yield to will:
Bi^ Princes fly Colprophetes lyinge skill,
And not presume to climb above their states,
For they be faults that foil men, not their fates.
FINIS.
Th. Ph.

When master Phaer had ended the Tragedy of this hunger staruen Prince of
Wales, it was well liked of all the company that a Saxo^ would speak so mutch
for a B^ytton, then suddenly one found a doubt worth the mouinge and yt
concerning this title, Thearle of March: for as it appears, there were three
men of three diverse nations together in one time entitled by that honor:
first sir Edmund Mortimer, whom Owe^ kept in Prison, an Englishman: the second
y^ Lord George of Dunbar a valiant Scot, banished out of his country, and
well esteemed of Henry the.iiij: the third Lord James of Bourbon a Frenchman,
sent by the French king to help Owen Glendour. These three men had this title
all at once, which caused him to ask how it was true that every one of these
could be Earl of March: whereto was answered, that every country has
Marches belonging unto them, and those so large, that they were Earldomes, and
the Lords thereof entitled thereby: so ye lord Edmu^d Mortimer was Earl of
March in England, lord James of Burbo^ of y^ Marches of France, and Lord
George of Dunbar Earl of the Marches in Scotland. For otherwise neither could
have interest in others title. This dout thus dissolved, master Ferrers said:
if no man have affection to the Percies, let us pass the times both of Henry
the fourth, and the fifth, and come to Henry ye sixth, in whose time Fortune (as
she does in the mynority of Princes) bare a great stroke among ye nobles. And
yet in Henry the fourths time are examples which I would wish Baldwin yt you
should not forget, as the conspiracy made by the Bishop of Yorcke, and the
Lord Mowbray, son of him whom you late treated of: pricked forward by the
Earl of Northumberland, father to sir Henry Hotspur, who fled himself, but
his partners were apprehended and put to death, with Baynton and Blinkinsops,
which could not se their duty to their king but took part with Percy that
banished Rebel. As he was proceedinge, he was desired to stay by one which
had pondered the story of the Percies, who briefly said. To the end Baldwin
that you may know what to say of the Percies, whose story is not all out of
memory (and it is an notable story) I will take upon me the person of the Lord
Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, father of Sir Henry Hotspur, in whose
behalf this may be said as follows. *

HOW HENRYE Percy Earl of Northumberlande, was for his covetous, and
traiterous attempt put to death at York. Anno. 1407.
O Moral Senec, true find I thy saying,
That neither kin, riches, strength or favor
Ace free from Fortune, but are aye decayinge:
No worldly wealth is ought save doubtful labor
Man's life in Earth is like unto a Tabour.
Which now to mirth does mildly men provoke
And straight to War with a more sturdy stroke.
All this full true I Percy find by proof,
Which whilom was Earl of Northumberland:
And therefore Baldwin for my Piers behoof,
To note men's falls since thou have taken in hand,
I would thou should my state well understand:
For few Kings were more than I redoubted,
Whom double Fortune lifted up and louted
As for my kin their nobleness is known,
My valiant acts were folly for to praise,
Where through ye Scots so often were overthrown.
That who but I was doubted in my days:
And that king Richard found at all assayes,
For never Scots rebelled in his raygne,
But through my force were either caught or slain.
A Brother I had was Earl of Worcester,
Always in Office, and Favor with the King:
And (...) my W^fe Da^e Elinor Mortimer,
A Son I had, which so the Scots did sting,
That being young, and but a very spring,
Hen^y Ho^spur they gave him unto name,
And though I say it, he did deserve the same.
We three triumphied in King Richards time,
Til^ Fortune ought both him and us a spite:
But chiefly me, whom clearly from any crime,
My King did banishe from his favor quite,
Proclayminge me a tra^terous Knight:
Where through false slander forced me to be,
That which before, I did most deadly flee.
Let men beware how they true folk defame,
Or threaten on them the blame of vices naught,
For Infamy breeds wrath, wreke follows shame:
Eke open slander oftentimes has brought
That to effect, that erst was never thought,
To be misdeemed, men suffer in a sort:
But noue can bear the grief of misreporte.
Because my King did shame me wrongfully
I hated him, and so became his foe:
And while he did at War in Ireland lie,
I did conspire to turn his Weaie to woe:
And through the Duke of Yorcke and other more,
All Royal power from him we quickly took,
And gave the same to Henry Bolenbroke.
Neither did we this only for this cause,
But to say truth, force drove us to the same:
For he despisinge God and all his laws,
Slew whom he would, made sin a very game,
And seeinge neither age nor counsel could him tame,
We thought it well done for the Kingdoms sake,
To leave his rule, that did all rule forsake.
But when sir Henry had attaynd his place,
He straight became in all poynctes worse than he,
Destroyed the Piers and slew King Richardes grace,
Against his oath made to the Lords and me:
And seeking Quarrels how to disagree,
He shamelesly required me and my Son,
To yield him Scots, which we in Field had won.
My Nephew also Edmonde Mortimer
The very heir apparaunt to the Crown,
Whom Owen Glendour held as prisoner,
Vilely bound in Dungeon deep cast down,
He would not Ransom but did selly frown,
Against my Brother and me which for him spoke,
And him Proclaimed Traitor for our sake,
This foul despite did cause us to conspire,
To put him down as we did Richard erst,
And that we might this matter set on fire,
From Owens Iayle, our Coosin we remeerst,
And unto Glendour all our griefs reherst:
Who made a bond with Mortimer, and me,
To prive the King, and part the Realm in three.
But when king Henry heard of this devise,
Toward Owen Glendour he sped him very quick,
My ^ding by force to stop hur enterprise:
And as the devil would, than fell I sick,
Howbeit my brother and son more pollitike
Than prosperous, with an host from Scotland brought,
Encountered him at Shrewesbury where they fought.
The one was taken and ^yld, the other slain.
And shortly after was Owen put to flight:
By means whereof, I forced was to feign,
That I knew nothing of the former fight.
Fraud often auayles more than does sturdy might:
For by my fayning I brought him in belife,
I knew not that wherein my part was chief.
And while the king thus took me for his friend,
I sought all means my former wrong to wreake,
Which that I might bring to the sooner end,
To the bishop of York I did the matter break,
And to the earl Marshall likewise did I speak.
Whose father was through Henryes cause exiled,
The bishops brother with traiterous death defiled.
These strayt assented to do what they could,
So did the Lord Hastings and Lord Fauco^bridge:
Which altogether promised they would,
Set all their power, the kings days to abridge,
But see the spite, before the birds were flydge
The King had word and seasoned on the nest,
Whereby alas, my friends were all oppressed.
The bloudye Tyrant brought them all to end
Excepted me, which into Scotland skapt,
To George of Dunbar therle of March, my friend,
Who in my cause all that he could ey scrapt,
And when I had for greater succor gapte,
Both at the Frenchmen and the Fleminges hand,
And could get none, I took such as I fand.
And with the help of George my very friend,
I did invade Northumberland full bold,
Where as the folk drew to me still on end,
Bent to death my party to uphold:
Through help of these full many a fort and hold,
The which the king right manfully had mand,
I easily won and seized in my hand.
Not so content (for vengeance drove me on)
I entered Yorkshire there to wast and spoil,
But ere I had far in the country gone,
The sheriff thereof, Rafe Rokesby did assoyle,
My troubled host of much part of our toil,
For he assaulting freshly took through power,
Me and Lord Bar^olph both at Bramham more.
And thence conveyed us to the town of York,
Until he knew what was the kings intent,
There lo Lord Bardolphe kynder then the Storke
Did loose his head, which was to London sent,
With whom for Friendship mine in like case went,
This was my hap my fortune or my fault,
This life I led, and thus I came to naught.
Wherefore good Baldwin will the Piere^ take heed,
Of slander, malice, and conspiracye,
Of couetise, whence all the rest proceed:
For couetise joint with contuniacye,
Does cause al mischief in men's hearts to breed:
And therefore this to Esperance my word,
Who causes Bloodshed shall not escape the Sword.
FINIS.
BY that this was ended, I had found out the storye of Richard Earl of
Cambridge: ^because it contained matter in it, though not very notable, yet for
the better understanding of the rest, I thought it meet to touch it, and
therefore said as follows: You have said well of the Percies and fauourablye,
for in deed as it should appear, the chief cause of their conspiracye
against K. Henry, was for Edmund Mortimer their consins sake, whom the king
very maliciouslye proclaimed to have yielded himself to Owen coulourably, when
as in deed he was taken forciblye against his will, and very cruelly ordered
in Prison And seeing we are in hand with Mortimers matter, I will take upon me
the person of Richard Plantagenet earl of Cambridge, who for his sake
likewise dyed. And therefore I let pass Edmond Holland Earl of Kent, whom
Henry the fowerth made Admiral to skowre the Seas, because yt Britains were
abroad: which Earl (as many things happen in war) was slain with an arrow
at yt Assault of Briack: shortly after whose death this king dyed, and his
son Henrye the fyft of that name succeeded in his place. In the beginning of
this Henry the fyftes reign dyed this Rychard, and with him Henry the L.
Scrope and other, in whose behalf, this may be said.

HOW RICHARD Pla^tagenet Earl of Cambridge entending the Kings destruction,
was put to death at Southampton. Anno. Domini. 1415.
Have makes wast, has commonly been said,
And secret mischief seeld has lucky speed,
A murdering mind with proper poyze is wayd,
All this most true I find it, as my creed,
And therefore Baldwin wa^ne al states take heed
How they conspyre any other to entrappe,
Least mischiefement light in the meaners lap.
For I Lord Richard heir Plantagenet,
Was Earl of Cambridge and right fortunate,
If I had had the grace my wit to set,
To have content me with mine own estate:
But O false honors, breeders of debate,
The love of you our lewd hearts do allure,
To leese our selves by seeking you unsure.
Because my brother Edmond Mortimer,
Whose eldest sister was my wedded wife,
I mean that Edmund that was prisoner,
In Wales so long through Owens busy stryte,
Because I say that after Edmondes life,
His rightes and tytles must by law be mine,
For he ^e had, nor could increase his lygne.
Because the right of Realm and Crown was ours,
I searched means to help him thereunto,
And where the Henry's held it by their powers,
I sought a shift their tenures to undo,
Which being force, since force or slight must do:
I void of might, because their power was strong,
Ser privy slight against their open wrong.
But since the Death of most part of my kyn
Did dash my hope, through out the fathers days
I let it slip, and thought it best begin,
When as the son should dred least such assayes,
For force through speed, slight speedeth through delays,
And seeld does treason time so fitlye find,
As when all dangers most be out of mind.
Wherefore while Henrye of that name the fifth,
Preparde his army to go conquer France,
Lord Scrope and I thought to attempt a drift,
To put him down my brother to advance,
But were it Gods will, my luck, or his good chance,
The king wist wholly where about we went,
The night before to shipward he him bent.
Then were we straight as traitors apprehended,
Our purpose spyed, the cause thereof was hid,
And therefore lo a false cause we pretended,
Where through my brother was fro danger ryd:
We said for hyre of French kings coin, we did
Behight to kyl the king: and thus with shame
We staynd our selves, to save our friend fro blame.
When we had thus confessed so foul a treason,
That we deserved, we suffered by the law,
Se Baldwin see, and note as it is reason,
How wicked deeds to woeful ends do draw,
Al force does fail no craft is worth a straw,
To attain things lost, and therefore let them go.
For might rules right, and will though truth say no.
FINIS.
When stout Richard had stoutly said his mind, belike said one, this Rychard
was but a little man, or else little favored of writers, for our Chronicles
speak very little of him But seeing we become now to king Henry's voyage into
France, we cannot lack valiaunte men to speak of, for among so many as were
led and sent by the king out of this Realm thither, it cannot be chosen but
some, and that a great sum, were slain among them: wherefore to speak of
the^ al, I think not needeful. And therefore to let pass Edward Duke of
York, and the Earl of Suffolk, slain both at the Battle of Agincourte, as
were also many other. Let us end the time of Henry the fifth, and come to his
son Henry the syxte: whose Nonage brought France and Normandye ^oute of
Bondage, and was the cause that so few of our noble men dyed aged.

Of whom to let pass the number, I will take upon me the Person of Thomas
Montague Earl of Salisburie, whose name was not so good at home (and yet he
was called the good Earl) as it was dreadful abroad: who exclaminge upon the
mutability of Fortune, may iustlye say in manner as folqweth.

HOW THOMAS MONtague Earl of Salisburie, in the midst of his glory, was
chaunceablye slain at Orliaunce with a piece of Ordinance the third of
November. Anno 1428.
WHat fools be we to trust unto our strength,
Our wit, our courage, or our noble fame,
Which time it self must needs devour at length,
Though froward fortune could not foil the same
But seeing this Goddess guydeth all the game,
Which still to change does set her only lust,
Why toil we so for things so hard to trust,
A goodly thing it is surely good report,
Which noble hearts, do seek by course of kind:
But seen the date so doubtful and so short,
The way so rough whereby we do it find,
I cannot chose but praise the Princely mind
That preaseth for it, though we find oppressed,
By foul defame those that deserve it best.
Concerning whom mark Baldwin what I say
I mean the virtuous hyndred of their brute,
Among which number reckon well I may,
My valiant father John Lord Montacute,
Who lost his life I judge through just pursuit:
I say the cause and not the casual speed,
Is to be wayde in every kind of deed.
This rule observed, how many shall we find,
For virtues sake with infamy oppressed:
How many again through help of Fortune blind:
For ill attemptes achieved with honor blessed:
Success is worst ofttimes when cause is best:
Therefore say I: God send them sorry haps
That judge the causes by their after claps.
The end in deed is judge of every thing,
Which is the cause or latter point of time:
The first true verdict at the first may bring,
The last is slow, or slipper as the slyme,
Often changing names of innocence and crime:
Duke Thomas death was Justice two years long,
And ever since, sore tyranny and wrong.
Wherefore I pray thee Baldwin way the cause,
And praise my father as he does deserve,
Because Earl Henry, King against al laws,
Endeavored king Rychard for to starve
In Iayle, whereby the regal crown might swerve,
Out of the ligne to which it than was due,
(Whereby God knows what evil might ensue)
My Lord John Holland Duke of Excester,
Which was dear cousin to this wretched king,
Did move my father and the Earl of Gloucester,
With other Lords to ponder well the thing:
Who seeing the mischief that began to spring,
Did all consent this Henry to depose,
And to restore king Richard to the rose.
And while they did devise a pretty train,
Whereby to bring their purpose better about,
Which was in Mask this Henry to have slain,
The Duke of Awmerle blew their counsel out:
Yet was their purpose good there is no doubt.
What cause can be more worthy for a knight,
Than save his king, and help true heirs to right?
For this with them my father was destroyed,
And buried in the Dunghill of defame,
Thus evil chance their glory did avoid,
Whereas their cause does claim eternal fame:
When deeds therefore vnluckely do frame,
Men ought not judge the authors to be naught,
For right through might is often ouerraught.
And God does suffer that it should be so,
But why, my wit is feeble to decise,
Except it be to heap of wrath and woe
On wicked heads that injuries devise:
The cause why mischiefs many times arise,
And light on them yt would men's wrongs redress,
Is for the tancour that they bear I guess.
God hates rigor though it further right,
For sin is sin, how ever it be used:
And therefore suffers shame and death to light,
To punish vice, though it be well abused,
Who furthereth right is not thereby excused.
If through the same be do some other wrong,
To every vice due guerdon does belong.
What preach I now I am a man of war,
And that my body I dare say does profess,
Of cured wounds beset with many a skarre,
My broken Iaw vnhealde can say no less,
O Fortune, Fortune, cause of al distress:
My father had great cause thy fraud to curse,
But much more I, abused ten times worse.
Thou never flattredst him in all thy life,
But me thou dandledst like thy darling dear,
Thy gifts I found in every corner ryfe,
Where ever I went I met thy smyling cheer:
Which was not for a day, or for a year,
But through the reign of three right worthy kings
I found the forward in all kind of things.
The while King Henrye conquered in France,
I sued the wars, and still found victory,
In all assaults so happy was my chance,
Holds yield or won did make my enemies sorye:
Dame Prudence eke augmented so my glory,
That in all treaties ever I was one,
When weighty matters were agreed upon.
But when this king this mighty conqueror.
Through death unripe was both his realms bereft
His seelye infant did receive his power,
Poor little babe full young in Cradle left,
Where crown and Scepter ^urt him with the heft.
Whose worthy Uncles had the governance,
The one at home the other abroad in France.
And I which was in peace and war well skylled,
With both these rulers greatly was esteemed:
Bare rule at home as often as they wylled,
And fought in France when they it needeful deemed,
And every where so good my service seemed.
That English men to me great love did bear,
Our foes the French, my force fulfilled with fear.
I always thought it fitly for a Prince,
And such as have the regiment of Realms,
His subjects hearts with myldenesse to connince,
With Justice mixed, avoiding all extremes,
For like as Phoebus with his cheareful beams,
Does freshly force the fragrant flowers to flourish,
So rulers myldnesse subjects love do norish.
This found I true: for through my myeld behavior
Their hearts I had with me to live and dye,
And in their speech bewrayer of their favor,
They called me still good Earl of Salisburie,
The Lords confessed the commons did not lie:
For virtuous life, free heart, and lowly mind,
With high and low shall always favor find.
Which virtues chief become a man of war,
Whereof in France I found experience,
For in assaults due mildenes passes far
Al rygour, for^e, and sturdy violence,
For men will stoutly stick to their defense,
When cruel Captains covet after syoyle,
And so enforst, often give their foes the foil.
But when they know they shall be friendly used,
They hazard not their heads but rather yeilde,
For this my offers never were refused
Of any town, or surely very sield,
But force and furies fit be for the field,
And there in deed I used so the same,
My foes would fly if they but heard my name.
For when Lord Steward and Earl Vantadore,
Had cruellye besieged Crauant town,
Which he had won, and kept long time before,
Which lies in Awxer on the river Youne:
To raise the siege the regent sent me down:
Whereas I used all rigor that I might,
I killed all that were not saved by flight.
When therle of Bedforde then in France Lord Regent,
Knew in what sort I had removed the siege,
In Brye and Champaigne he made me Vicegerent,
And Lieutenaunt for him and for my liege:
Which caused me to go to Brye, and there besiege
Montagui^lon with twenty weeks assaut,
Which at the last was yielded me for naught.
And for the Duke of Bretaines brother Arthur,
Both Earl of Rychmond and of Yuery,
Against his oath from us had made departure,
To Charles the Dolphin our chief enemy,
I wi^h the Regent went to Normandy:
To take his town of Yuery which of spite,
Did to us daily all the harm they might.
They at the first compounded by a day
To yield, if rescues did not come before,
And while in hope to fight we at it lay,
The Dolphin gathered men two thousand skore,
With Earls, Lords, and Captains ioly store,
Of which the Duke of Alanson was guide,
And sent them down to see if we would bide.
But they left us and down to Vernoyle went,
And made their vaunt they had our army slain,
And through that lie the town from us they hent,
Which shortly after turned to their pain:
For there both armies met upon the plain:
And we eight thousand whom they flew, not slew before,
Did kill of them ten thousand men and more.
When we had taken Vernoyle thus again,
To drive the Dolphin utterly out of France,
The Regent sent me to Aniow and to Main,
Where I besieged the warlike town of Mauns
There Lord of Toysers Baldwines valiaunce
Did well appear, which would not yield the town,
Till all the Towers and walls were battred down.
But here now Baldwin take it in good part,
Though that I brought this Baldwin there to yield,
The Lion fierce for all his noble heart,
Being ouermatched, is forced to fly the field,
If Mars himself there had been with his shield,
And in my storms had stoutly me with stoed,
He should have yield, or else have shed my blood.
This worthy knight both hardy stout and wise,
Wrought well his feate, as time and place require,
When Fortune fayles, it is the best advise
To stryke the sail least all lie in the mire,
This have I said to thend thou take no ire:
For though no cause be found, so nature frames,
Men have a zeal to such as bear their names.
But to return, in Main wan I at length,
Such towns and Fortes as might either help or hurt,
I manned Mayon, and Suzans town of strength,
Fore Barnard, Thanceaur, and S. Cales the curt,
With Lile, sues, Bolton, standing in the dirt:
Eke Guerland, Suze, Loupeland, and Mountsure,
With Malicorne, these wanne I and kept full sure.
Besides all this I took nere forty holds,
But those I razed even with the ground,
And for these deeds, as seely sheep in foldes,
Do shrink for fear at every little sound,
So fled my foes before my face full round:
Was none so hardy that durst abide my fight,
So Mars and Fortune furthered me their knight.
I tell no lie so gastful grew my name,
That it alone discomfited an host,
The Scots and Frenchmen well confess the same,
Else will the town which they like Cowardes lost,
For when they sieged Beauron with great boast:
Being forty thousand Brytaynes, French and Scots,
Five hundred men did vanquish them like sots.
For while the Frenchmen freshlye assaulted still,
Our English men came boldly forth at night,
Cryinge S. George, Salisburye, kyl, kyl, kyl,
And offced freshlye with their foes to fight,
And they as frenchly took themselves to flight,
Supposing surely that I had been there,
See how my name did pu^them al in fear.
Thus was the Dolphins power discomfited,
Four thousand slain, their Camp taken as it stood,
Whereby our Town and soldiers proficed,
For there were vitailes plenteous and good,
This while was I in England by the Roode,
To appease a strife that was right foul befall,
Between Duke Humfrey and the Cardinal.
The Duke of Excester shortly after dyed,
Which of the King at home had governance.
Whose room the Earl of Warwick then supplied,
And I took his and sped me into France,
And having zeal to conquer Orliaunce,
With much a do I gat the Regentes aid,
And marched thither, and siege about it laid.
But in the way I took the town of Yane,
Where murdered were for stoutnesse many a man:
But Baugencey I took with little pain.
For which to show them favor I began:
This caused the towns of Mewne and Iargeman,
That stood on Loyer: to profer me the keys,
Ere I came nere them, welny by two days.
See here how Fortune forward can allure,
What Baytes she lays to bring men to their ends
Who having hap like this, but hops sure,
To bring to ^ale what ever he entendes?
But sone is sower the sweet that fortune sendes:
When hope and hap, when health and wealth is hiest
Then woe and wrack, disease, and need be nyest.
For while I, suing this so good success,
Laid siege to Orliaunce on the River side,
The Bastard (Cuckold Cawnies son I guess,
Tho thought the Dukes) who had the town in guide
Came fiercely forth, when he his time espied,
To raise the siege but was bet back again,
And hard pursued both to his loss and pain.
For there we wan the Bulworke on the Bridge,
With a mighty tower standing fast thereby.
Ah cursed tower that did my days abridge,
Would God thou had been further either I:
For in this tower a chamber stands on hye,
From which a man may view through all the town
By certain wyndowes iron grated down.
Where on a day, now Baldwin note mine end,
I stood in viewing where the town was weak,
And as I busilye talked with my friend,
Shot fro the town, which all the Grate did break,
A pellet came and drove a mighty fleake
Against my face, and care away my cheek,
For pain whereof I dyed within a week.
See Baldwin see the uncertain glory,
How sudden mischief dasheth all to dust,
And warn al Princes by my broken storye,
The bappiest Fortune chieflye to mistrust,
Was never man that always had his lust:
Than sac^b be fools, in fancy more then mad,
Which hope to have that never any had.
FINIS.
THis strange adventure of the good earl drove us al into a dumpe, inwardly
lame^ting his woeful destenye, out of which we were awaked after this sort.

To what end (said one) muse we so much on the matter. This Earl is neither
the first nor last whom fortune has foundred in the height of their
prosperity. For all through the reign of this unfortunate king Henrye, we
shall find many which have been likewise served, whose chances since they be
martial, and therefore honorable, may the better be omitted. And therefore we
will let go the Lords Molines, and Poyninges, slain both at the siege of
Orleaunce, shortly after the death of this Earl. Also the valiant Earl of
Arundel destroyed with a bowlet at the assault of Gerborye, whose stories
nevertheless are worth the hearing. And to quicke^ up your spirits, I will
take upon me a tragical person in deed, I mean king Iamy slain by his
servants in his privy Chamber: who although he be a Scot, yet seeing he was
brought up in England, where he learned the language, his example also so
notable, it were not meet it should be forgotten. And therefore mark Baldwyn
what I think he may say. *

HOW KING JAMES THE first for breaking his oaths and bonds was by Gods
sufferaunce miserably murdered of his own Subjects. Anno. 1437.
IF for examples sake thou wrote thy Book,
I chardge thee Baldwin thou forget me not,
Whom fortune always frowardly forsook.
Such was my luck, my merit or my lot.
I am that James King Roberts Son the Scot,
That was in England Prisoner all his youth,
Through mine uncle Walters traiterous untruth.
For when my Father through disease and age,
Unwieldy was to govern well his Land,
Because his Brother Walter seemed sage,
He put the rule thereof into his hand.
Than had my Father, you shall understand,
Of lawful Barnes, me and one only other,
Nempt Dauy Rothsay, who was mine elder Brother.
This Dauy was Prince of Scotland and so take,
Till his aduoutry caused men complain:
Which that he might by monishment forsake,
My Father prayed mine Uncle take the pain.
To threaten him his vices to refrain.
But he false Traitor butcherly murderinge wretch,
To get the Crown began to fetch a fetch,
And fynding now a proffer to his pray,
Devised means my brother to devour,
And for that cause conuayed him day by day
From place to place, from Castle unto tower,
To Faulkland fort, where like a tormentour
He starued him, and put to death a wife,
Whom through a Reed he sucked to save his life.
O wretched death, fie cruel tyranny,
A Prince in prison lost for fault of food:
Was never enmie wrought such vilany,
A trusty brother destroy his brothers blood,
VVo worth so frendlye, fie on double hood,
Ah wretched father see thy soon is lost,
Sterued by thy brother whom thou trustedst most.
Of whom when some began to find the fraud,
And yet the traitor made himself so clear,
That he should seem to have deserved laud,
So woeful did he for his Prince appear,
My doubtful father loving me full dear.
To avoid all danger that might after chance,
Sent me away but nine years old to France.
But winds and weather were so contrary,
That we were driven to thenglish coast,
Which Realm with Scotland at that time did varye,
So that they took me as prisoner not as host:
For which my father fearing I was lost,
Conceived shortly such an inward thought,
As to the grave immediately him brought,
Than had mine uncle all the regiment
At home, and I in England prisoner lay.
For to himself he thought it detriment,
For my release any ransom for to pay,
For as he thought he had possessed his pray:
And therefore wished I might in duraunce dure,
Til I had dyed, so should his reign be sure.
But good king Henrye seeing I was a child,
And heir by right unto a realm and crown,
Did bring me up not (like my brother) wyloe,
But vertuouslye in feats of high renown?
In I beral arts, in instrumental sown:
By mean whereof when I was after king,
I did my realm to ciuel order bring.
For ere I had been prisoner eightene year,
In which short space two noble Princes dyed,
Whereof the first in prudence had no peer,
The other in war most valiant thoroughly tried,
Whose room his son babe Henry eke supplied:
The peers of England which did govern all,
Did of their goodness help me out of thrall.
They married me to a cousin of their king,
The Duke of Somersets daughter rich and fair,
Relcast my ransom save a trifling thing:
And after I had done homage to the heir,
And sworn my friendship never should appayre,
They brought me kingly furnished to my land,
Which I received at mine uncles hand.
Whereof my Lords and commons were full glad,
So was mine uncle chieflye as he said,
Who in his mouth no other matter had,
Save punish such as hab my brother trayed:
The fault whereof apparauntly he laid,
To good Duke Murdo, his elder brothers son,
Whose father dyed long ere this was done.
My cursed uncle slyer than the snake,
Which would by craft unto the crown aspire,
Because be saw this Murdo was a stake,
That stayed up the top of his desire.
(For his elder brother was Duke Murdoes sire)
He thought it best to have him made away,
So was he sure (I gone) to have his pray.
And by his crafts the traitor brought to pass,
That I destroyed Duke Murdo and his kin,
Poor innocents, my loving friends alas.
O Kings and Princes what plight stand we in,
A trusted traitor shall you quickly win,
To put to death your kin and friends most just,
Take heed therefore, take heed whose reed ye trust.
And at the last to bring me hole in hate,
With God and man at home and eke abroad,
He counsaild me for suraunce of my state:
To help the Frenchmen, then nigh ouertrode
By Englishmen: and more to lay on led,
With power and force al England comu^de,
Against the oath and homage that I made.
And though at first my conscience did grudge,
To break the bounds of friendship knit by oath
Yet after proafe (see mischief) I did judge,
Iemadnesse for a king to keep his troth,
And semblably with all the world it goth:
Sins often assayed are thought to be no sin,
So soyleth sin the soul it sinketh in.
But as diseases common cause of death,
Bring danger most, when least they prick and smart,
Which is a sign they have expulst the breath
Of lively heat which does defend the heart:
Even so such sins as felt are on no part
Have conquered grace, and by their wicked bre,
So killed the soul that it can have no cure.
And grace agate, vice still succedeth vice,
And al to have the vengeance for the furst,
I areade therefore al people to be wise,
And stop the bracke when it begins to burst,
Attast no poison (vice is veuim worst,
It mates the mind) beware eke of to much,
Al kyl through muchnesse, some with only touch.
When I had learnde to set my oath at naught,
And through much use the sense of sin exiled.
Against King Henry what I could I wrought,
My faith my oath unjustly foul defiled,
And while slye Fortune at my doings smyled,
The wrath of God which I had well deserved,
Fell on my neck, for thus lo was I served.
Ere I had raygned fully fiftene year,
While time I lay at Pertho at my place
With the Queen my wife and children me to cheer
My murdrynge uncle with the double face,
That longed for my kingdom and my mace,
To slay me there suborned Robert Grame,
With whom his nephue, Robert stuart came.
And when their time fit for their purpose found,
Into my privy chamber they astart,
Wherewith their swoordes they gave me many a wound,
And slew al such as stuck unto my part
There lo my wife did show her loving heart,
Who to defend me felied one or twain.
And was sore wounded ere I could be slain.
See Baldwin, Baldwin, the unhappy ends,
Of such as pass not for their lauful oath
Of those that causeles leave their faith or friends
And murdre kinsfolks through their foes untroth,
Warn, warn al princes, al like sins to loath,
And chiefly such as in my realm be borne
For god hates highly all that are forsworns
FINIS
WHen this was said (quod one of the company) let pass these Scottish
matters, and return we to our English stories which minister matter enoughe
of tragedy, without seking or trauaylinge to foreign countries. Therefore
return we to the rest of ye Tragical trobles and broils which happened in this
realm? during the minority of king Henry the vi. and the sundry falls and
overthrows of great princes and other noble persons happening thereby. Well said
(quod M. Fer.) and as it happens. I have here ready penned ii. notable
tragedies, the one of Hamfrey Duke of Glocestre, the other of the Duches
Elienor his wife which as (me seems) be two of ye most memorable matters
fortuning in y^ time But whether of the^ is first to be placed in the order of
our book, I somewhat stand in doubt. For albeit the said Dukes death happened
before the deceasse of the Duches, yet was her fall first, which finally was
cause of overthrow to both* why should you doubt then (quod the rest of ye
company) for seeing ye cause does always go before theffect and sequel of any
thing: it is good reason you should begin with her first. And therefore we pray
you let us hear first what she has to say, for all this while we have not
hard the complaint of any Lady or other woman.

HOW DAME ELIANOR Cobham Duchess of Gloucester* for practicing of witchcraft
and Sorcery, suffered open penance, and after was banished the realm into the
isle of Man.
IF a poor lady damned in exyle
Amongst princes may be allowed place
Then gentle Baldwin stay thy pen awhyls
And of pure pity ponder well my case,
How I a Duches, destitute of grace
Have found by proof, as many have and shall
The proverb true, that pride will have a fall
A noble Prince extract of royal blood
Humfrey sometime Protector of this land
Of Gloucester Duke, for virtue called (the good)
When I but base beneath his state did stand
Vouchsafte with me to join in wedlockes vande
Having in Court no name of high degree
But Elinor Cobham as parents left to me
And though by hyrth of noble race I was,
Of Barons blood, yet was I thought unfit,
So high to match, yet so it came to pass,
Whyther by grace, good fortune, or by wit
Dame Venus Iures so in mine eyes did sit,
As this great Prince with out respect of state
Did worthy me to be his wedded mate^
His wife I was, and he my true husband
Though for a while he had the company
Of lady Iaquet the Duchess of holland
Being an heir of ample patrimony
But that fell out, to be no matrimony
For after war, long suit in law and strife
She proved was the Duke of Brabants wife.
Thus of a Damsel a Duchess I became,
My state and place advanced next the Queen
Whereby me thought I felt no ground, but swam
For in the Court mine equal was not seen
And so possessed with pleasure of the spleen
The sparks of pride so kyndled in my breast
As I in court, would shine above the rest
Such gifts of nature god in me has graft
Of shape and stature, with other graces moo
That by the shot of Cupids fiery shafte
Which to the heart of this great prince did go
This mighty Duke, with love was linked so
As he abasyng the height of his degree,
Set his hole hatte, to love and honor me
Grudge who so would, to him I was most dear
Above all Ladies advanced in degree
(The Queen except) no Princess was my peer
But gave me place, and lords with cap and knee
Did all honor and reverence unto me
Thus hoysted high upon the rollinge wheel
I sat so sure, me thought I could not reele.
And weening least that fortune has a turn,
I looked aloft, and would not look allow,
The brondes of pride so in my breast did burn
As the hot sparks, burst forth in open show,
And more and more the fire began to glowe,
Without quenching, and daily did increase,
Til fortunes blastes with shame did make it cease.
For (as it is said) Pride passes on before,
And shame follows, for just reward and meede
Would god ladies, both now and evermore
Of my hard hap, which shlal the story reed
Would bear in mind, and trust it* as their Creed*
That pride of heart, is a most hateful vice,
And lowlines, a pearl of passing price.
Namely in Queen's, and Ladies of estate
Within whose minds, al mekenes should abound
Since high disdain, does always purchase hate.
Being a vice, that most part does redound
To their reproach, in whom the same is found.
And seeldome gets good favor or good fame
Bat is at last, knit up with worldly shame.
The proof whereof I found most true indede,
That pride before, has shame to wait behind.
Let no man doubt, in whom this vice does bread,
But shame for pride by justice is assynde,
Which I well found, for truly in my mind
Was never none, whom pride did more inflame,
Nor never none, received greatter shame.
For not content to be a Duchess great,
I longed sore to bear the name of Queen
Aspyring still unto an higher seat,
And with that hope my self did euerweene
Sins there was none, which that time was between
Henry the king, and my good Duke his Eame
Heir to the crown and kingdom of this Realm.
So near to be, was cause of my vayn hope
And long awayte when this fair hap would fall.
My studies all were tending to that scope,
Alas, the while to council I did call
Such as would seem, by skill coniectural
Of art Magic and wicked Sorcery
To deem and dyuine the princes desteny
Among which sort of those that bare most fame
There was a Beldame called the wytch of Ey,
Old mother Madge her neighbors did her name
Which wrought wonders in countries by heresaye
Both feendes and fayries her charmyng would obey
And dead corpsis from grave she could vprere
Such an Inchauntresse, as that time had no peer
Two pryestes also, the one ^ight Bolenbroke
The other Suthwell, great Clerks in coniuration
These two Chapleins, were they that undertook
To cast and calke, the kings constellation
And then to judge by deep dyuination.
Of things to come, and who should next succeed
To Englandes crown, all this was true in deed.
And further sure they never did proceed
Though I confess, that this attempt was ill,
But for my part, for any thing in deed
Wrought, or else thought, by any kind of skill.
God is my judge I never had the will
By any Inchauntment sorcery or charm
Or other wise, to work my princes harm.
Yet netheles, when this case came to light,
By secret spies to Cayphas our Cardinal
Who long in heart had borne a privy spyght,
To my good Duke his nephew natural
Glad of the chance, so fitly forth to fall
His long hid hate, with justice to color
Used this case with most extreme rigor.
And caused me with my complyces all,
To be cyted by process peremptory,
Before Judges, in place Judicial
Whereas Cayphas, sytting in his glory
Would not allow my answer disatory
Ne Doctor or Proctor, to allege the laws.
But forced me to plead in mine own cause.
The kings council were called to the case
My husband than) shut out for the season
In whose absence I found but little grace
For Lawiers turned our offense to treason
And so with rigor, without ruth or reason
Sentence was given that I for the same
Should do penance, and suffer open shame.
Nay the like shame had never wight I ween
Duchess, Lady, ne Damsel of degree,
As I that was, a Princess next the Queen,
Wife to a Prince, and none so great as he,
A Kings uncle, Protector of his country,
With Taper burning, shrouded in a sheet
Three days a row, to pass the open streate.
Barelegd, and bare foot, to all the worlds wonder
Ye, and as though such shame did not suffice
With more despyte, then to part a sunder,
Me and my Duke, which Traitors did deuyse
By Statute law, in most unlawful wise,
First sending me, with shame into exile.
Then murdryng him, by treachery and gyle.
Ye and besides, this cruel banishment
Far from al friends, to comfort me in care
And husbands death: there was by Parliment
Ordaynd for me, a mess of courser fare.
For they to bring me to beggars state most bars
By the same act, from me did then withdraw.
Such right of dower, as widows have by law.
Death (as it is said) does set al things at rest,
Which fell not so in mine unhappy case,
For sins my death, mine enmies made a Jest
In minstrels ryme mine honor to deface.
And then to bring my name in more disgrace
A song was made in manner of a lay
Which old wives sing of me unto this day.
Yet with these spytes, their malice did not end
For shortly after, my sorrows to renew
My Loyal Lord, which never did offend
Was called in have, the cause he little knew
To a Parliament, without Sommons due
Whereas his death, was cruelly contryued
And I his wife of earthly joys depryued.
For all the while my Duke had life and breath
So long I stood, in hope of my restore
But when I hard of his most causeles death
Then the best salve for my recureles sore
Was to despair of cure for evermore,
And as I could, my careful heart to cure.
With patience, most paynful to endure.
O Traitors fell, which in your hearts could find!
Like friends of hell, the guiltles to betraye
But ye chefely, his kinsemen most unkind
Which gave consent to make him so away,
That unto God, with all my heart I pray,
Vengeance may light on him that caused all,
Beaufort I mean, that cursed Cardinal.
Which Bastard priest of the house of Lancaster
Son to Duke John, surnamed John of Gaunt
Was first create, Bishop of Winchester,
For no learning, where of he might well vaunt
Ne for virtue, which he did never haunt
But for his gold and Sums that were not small
Paid to the pope, was made a Cardinal.
Proud Lucifer, which from the heavens on hye
Down to the pit of Hell below was cast,
And beyagous an Auugell bright in sky
For his high pride, in Hell is chayned fast
In deep darkness, that evermore shall last
More hault of heart was not before his fall
Then was this proud and pompes Cardinal
Whose life good Baldwine paint out in his pickle,
And ^^ase this Baal and Belligod most blind,
An Hipocryte, all faythles false and fickle,
A wicked wretch, a kinseman most unkind,
A Devil incarnate, all deuilishly enclynde
And to discharge my conscience all at ones
The Devil him gnaw both body, blood and bones
The spyteful Priest would needs make me a Witch,
As would to god I had been for his sake.
I would have clawd him where he did notitche,
I would have played the Lady of the Lake
And as Merlia was, cloasoe him in a Brake,
Yea a Meridian to Lul him by daylight
And a night mare to ride on him by night.
The s^ery feends with fevers hut and freuzye
The Ayeryhegges with stench and carren savors
The watery ghostes with gowtes, and with dropsy
The earthy Goblius, with Aches at all hours
Faryes and Faicies, with all infernal powers
I would have stird from the dark dongeon
Of hell Center, as deep as Demagorgon.
Or had I now the skill of dame Erichto
Whose dreadful charms, as Lucane does express
All feendes did fear, so farforth as Prince Pluto
Was at her call for dread of more distress
Then would I send of helhounds more and less,
A legion at least, at him to cry and yel.
And with that chy^me, herrie him down to hell
Which need not, for sure I think that he
Who here in earth leads Epicurus life,
As far from god as possible may be
With whom all sin and vices are most ryfe
Using at will both widow maid and wife
But that some Devil his body does possess
His life is such, as men can judge no less
And god forgive my wrath and wreakful mind
Such is my hate to that most wicked wretch
Dye when he shall, in heart I could well find
Out of the grave his corpse again to fetch
And rack his lymmes as long as they would stretch
And take delight to listen every day
How he could sing a mass of welawaye
The isle of Man was the appointed place
To penance me for ever in exile
Thither in have they poasted me apace,
And doubtinge skape, they pind me in a Pyle
Close by my self in rare, alas the while
There felt I first pore prisoners hungry fare,
Much want, things skant, and stone walls hard and bare
The change was strange, from silk and cloth of Gold
To rugged fryze my carcas for to cloathe,
From princes fare, and dayntyes hot and cold,
To rotten fish, and meats that one would loathe
The diet and dressing were mutch a like boath
Bedding and lodging were all alike fine,
Such Down it was, as served well for swyne.
Neither do I mine own case thus complain
Which I confess came partly by deserte
The only cause which doubleth al my pain
And which most nere goes now unto my heart.
Is that my fault, did finally reuerte
To him that was least gilty of the same
Whose death it was, though I abode the shame.
Whose fatal fall, when I do call to mind,
And how by me his mischief first began
So often I cry on fortune most unkind
And my mishap most vitterly do banne,
That ever I to such a noble man,
Who from my crime was innocent and clear,
Should be a cause to buy his love so dear
Oh to my heart how grievous is the wound
Calling to mind this dismal deadly case
I would I had been doluen under ground.
When he first saw, or looked on my face,
Or took delight in any kind of grace
Seming in me, that him did stir or move
To fancy me, or set his heart to love.
Farewell Grenewych my Palace of delyght,
Where I was wont to see the Cristal streams,
Of royal Thames most pleasant to my sight
And farewell Kent, right famous in all realms
A thousand times I mind you in my dreams
And when I wake most grefe it is to me
That never more again I shall, see you
In the night time when I should take my rest
I weep, I wayle, I weat my bed with tears
And when dead sleep my spirits has oppressed
Troubled with dreams, I fantazy vay^e fears
Mine husbands voice then ringeth at mine ears
Crying for help, O iaue me from the death
These villaynes here do seek to stop my breath.
Ye and somtymes me thinks his drery ghost
Appears in sight, and shows me in what wise,
Those fell tryantes, with torments had emboost
His wynd and breath, to abuse peoples eyes
So as no doubt or question should arise
Among rude folk which little understand,
But that his death came only by gods hand
I plain in vain, where ears be none to hear
But roaring Seas, and blustering of the wynd
And of redress am near a whit the near
But with wast words to feed my mournful mind,
Wishing full often, the Parcas had vntwynde
My vital stringes, or Atropos with knife,
Had cut the line of my most wretched life.
Oh that Neptune, and Eolus also,
Thene God of Seas, the other of weather
Ere mine Arriual, into that isle of woe
Had suncke the ship where in I sailed thither
(The shipmen saved) so as I together
With my good Duke, might have been dead before
Fortune had wroken her wrath on us so sore.
Or else that God when my first passage was
Into exile along Saint Albanes town
Had never let me further for to pass,
But in the Streat with death had struck me down
Then had I sped of my desired down
That my pore corpse might there have lien with his
Both in one grave, and so have gone to bliss.
But I alas, the greatter is my grief
Am past that hope to have my sepulture
Nere unto him, which was to me most leefe
But in an isle, land country most obscure.
To pyne in pain, whilst my poor life will dure
And being dead, all honorles to lie
In simple grave, as other poor that dye.
My tale is told, and time it is to cease
Of troubles past, al which have had their end
My grave I trust, shall purchasse me good peace
In such a world, where no wight does contend
For highest place, whereto all flesh shall wend
And so I end, vsyng on word for all,
As I Began, that pride will have a fell
FINIS.
quod G. F.

SVerly (said one of the company) this Lady has don much to move the hearers
to pitye her, and has very well knyt up the end of her tragedy according to y^
beginning but I marvel much where she learned all this Poetry touched in her
tale, for in her days, learning was not common, but a rare thing, namely in
women, yes (quod Master Ferrers) that might she very well learn of ye Duke her
Husband, who was a Prince so exellently learned, as the like of his degree was
no where to be found, And not only so, but was also a Patron to Poets and
orators much like as Mecenas was in the time of Augustus Caesar This Duke was
foundor of the Divinity Schole in Oxforde, whereas he caused Aristoles works
to be translated out of Greek into Latin, and caused many other things to be
done for aduaunceme^t of lerni^g, having always learned me^ near about him no
marvel therefore though ye Duchess brought some piece away. Me think (quod
another (she passes bounds of a Ladies modesty, to inuey so cruelly against
the Cardinal Beaufort. Not a whit (quod another) having such cause as she had,
and somewhat ye must bear with women's passions. Therefore leave we her to
eternal rest, and letre us hear what Master Ferrers will say for the Duke her
husband whose case was the more lamentable, in that he suffered without cause.
And surely though the Cardinal against nature was the Dukes mortal Foe, yet
the chief causers of his confusyon, was ye Queen, and William Delapoole E^le
of Suffolk and afterward Duke, whose counsel was chefely followed in the
contryuing of this noble man's destruction, She through ambicion to have
soueraynty and rule and he through, flattery to purchase honor and promotion,
which as he in short time obtained: so in as short time he lost again, and
his life withal by the just judgment of God, receiving such measure as he
before met to this good Prince. This drift of his turned to the utter
euerthrow of the king himself, the Queen his wife, and Edward their son a most
goodly prince, and to the subversion of the hole house Of Lancaster, as you may
see at large in the Chronicles: but now let us hear what the Duke will say.

HOW HVMFREY PLANtagenet Duke of Gloucester Protector of England, during the
minority of his Nephue king Henrye the sixth, (commonly called the good Duke)
by practice of enemies was brought to confusion.
AS highest hills with tempests been most touched
And tops of trees, most subject unto wind,
And as great towers with stone strongly rowched.
Have heavy falls when they be under mind,
Even so by proof, in worldly things we find,
That such a clyme the top of high degree
From perril of failing never can be free.
To prove this true (good Baldwin) harken hither,
See and behold me unhappy Humfrey,
Englands Protector and Duke of Gloucester
Who in the time of the sixth king Henry,
Ruled this Realm years mothen twenty:
Note well the cause of my decay and fall,
And make a mirror for Magistrates all.
In their most weal, to beware of unhap,
And not to sleep in slom bring sickernesse,
Whilst Fortune false does lul them in her lap
Drowned in dreams of brittle blessedness,
But then to fear her freakes and sicklenesse,
Accompting still the higher they ascend:
More nigh to be to Danger in the end.
And that vain trust in blood or royal race.
Aouse them not with careless assurance
To trust Fortune, but waying well my case,
When she most smyleth to have in remembrance
my soden fall, who in all apparaunce:
Having most stays, which man in state maintain,
Have found the same untrusty and most vain.
Better then I, none may the same affirm,
Who trusting all in height of high estate,
Led by the ears with false flatteries chyrme,
Which never Prince could banishe from his gate,
Did little think on such a sodein mate,
Not heeding, less dreeding, al unaware,
By foes least feared, was trapt into a snare.
If noble birth or high authority
Number of Friends, kindred, or alliance,
If wisdom, learning, or worldly pollicye
Might have been stayers to Fortunes variaunce,
None stood more strong, in worldly countenance,
For all these helps had I to avail me,
And yet in fine, all the same did fail me.
Of King Henry the fourth, fourth son I was
Brother to Henry, the fyft of that name,
And uncle to Henry the sixth, but alas,
What cause had I to presume on the same?
Or for vain glory, aduauncing my fame
My self to call in records, and wrytinges,
The son, brother, and uncle unto kings.
This was my boast, which lastly was my bane,
Yet not this boast, was it that brought me down
The very use, which made my weal to wane
So near of Kin that I was to the Crown,
That was the Rock that made my Ship to drown.
A rule there is not faylinge, but most sure
Kingdom, no kyn does know, ne can endure.
For after my Brother the fyft Henry
Wan by Conquest the Royal Realm of France,
And of two Kingdoms made one Monarchy
Before his death, for better obeysaunce.
To his young Son, not ripe to governance
Protector of England I was by Testament,
And Ihon my Brother, in France made Regent.
To whom if God had lent a longer life,
Our house to have kept from storms of inward strife
Or it had been the Lord Almighties will
Plantagenettes name in State had standen still
But deadly discord which Kingdoms great does spill
Bred by desire of high Dominacion,
Brought our whole house to playde desolation.
It is for trowth in an History Found
That Henry Plantagenet first of our name
Who called was, King Henry the second
Son of Dame Mawde, the Empress of High Fame
Would often report, that his Ancient Grandame
Though seeminge in Shape, a Woman natural,
Was a Feende of the Kind that (Succubae) some call.
Which old fable, so long time told before
When this Kings sons against him did rebel:
He called to mind, and being grieved sore.
Lo! now (quoth he) I see and prove full well
The Story true, which folk of old did tell
That from the devil descended all our race,
And now my children, do verefy the case.
Whereof to leave a long memorial,
In mind of man evermore to rest
A Picture he made and hong it in his Hall,
Of a Pellicane sittinge on his Nest.
With four young Birds, three peckinge at his breast
With bloody Beakes, and further did devise
The youngest Bird, to pecke the fathers eyes.
Meaning hereby, his rebel children three
Henry, and Richard who bet him on the breast:
Ieffrey only, from that offense was free)
Henry died of Englandes, Crown possessed:
Richard lived his father to molest,
John the youngest peckt still his fathers eye
Whose deeds unkind, the sooner made him dye.
This king (some write) in his sickness last
Said, as it were by way of Prophecy
How that the Devil, a Darnell grain had cast
Among his Kin to increase enmity,
Which should remain in their Posterity,
Till mischief, and murder had spent them all
Not leauinge one to piss against the wall.
And yet from him in order did succeed
In England here of crowned kings fourtene
Of that surname, and of that line and seed,
With Dukes and Earls, and many a noble Queen,
The number such as all the world would ween
So many ympes could never so be spent,
But some heir Male, should be of that descent.
Which to be true if any stand in doubt,
Because I mean not further to digress,
Let him peruse the stories throughout
Of English kings, whom practice did oppress,
And he shall find the cause of their distress
From first to last, unkindly to begin,
Always by those that next were of the kynne.
Was not Richard, of whom I spoke before,
A rebel plain until his father dyed,
And John likewise an Enmie evermore
To Richard again, and for a rebel tried?
After whose death, it cannot be denied,
Against all right this John most cruellye
His brothers children caused for to dye.
Arthur and Isabell (I mean) that were
Geffreyes children, then Duke of Britain
Henry's third son, by one degree more near,
Then was this John, as stories show most plain,
Which two children were famisht or else slain,
By John their Eame called Saunzterre by name,
Of whose foul act, al countries speak great shame.
Edward, and Richard, second both by name
Kings of this land, fell down by fatal fate
What was the cause, that princes of such fame,
Did leese at last their honor, life, and state?
Nothing at all, but discord and debate,
Which when it haps in kindred or in blood,
Erynnis rage was never half so wood.
Be sure therefore ye kings and princes all
That concord in kingdoms is chief assurance,
And that your families do never fall,
But where discord does lead the doubtful dance
With busy brawles and turns of variaunce,
Where malice is Minstrel, the pype ill report,
The Mask mischief, and so ends the sport,
But now to come to my purpose again,
Whilst I^my charge applied in England,
My brother in France long time did remain,
Cardinal Beauford took proudly in hand,
In causes public against me to stand,
Who of great malice so much as he might
Sought in all things to do me dispight.
Which proud prelate to me was bastard Eame,
Son to Duke John of Gaunt as they did feign,
Who being made high Chancellor of the Realm,
Not like a Priest, but like a prince did reign,
Nothing wanting which might his pride maintain,
Bishop besides of Winchester he was,
And Cardinal of Rome which Angels brought to pass.
Not Gods Angels, but Angels of old Gold,
Life him aloft in whom no cause there was
By just desert, so high to be extold,
(Riches except) where by this Golden ass,
At home and abroad al matters brought to pass,
Namely at Rome, having no mean but that
To purchase there his crimzin Cardinal hat.
Which thing the king my father him forbad
Plainly saying, that he could not abide,
Within his realm a subject to be had
His Princes peer, yet such was this man's pride,
That he forthwith after my father dyed,
(The King then young) obtained of the Pope,
That honor high, which erst he could not hope.
Whose proud attemptes because that I with stood,
My bounden duty the better to acquit,
This holy father waxed welnere wood,
Of mere malice devising day and night,
To work to me dishonor and dispite,
Whereby there fell between us such a Jar,
As in this land was like a civil war.
My brother John which lay this while in France,
Heardof this hurl, and past the seas in have,
By whose traueil this troublesome distaunce,
Ceased a while, but nethelesse in wast:
For rooted hate will hardly be displast
Out of high hearts, and namely where debate,
Happens amongst great persons of estate,
For like as a match death lie and smolder,
Long time before it comes to the train.
But yet when fire has caught in the poulder,
No art is able, the flames to restrain:
Even so the sparks of envy and disdain,
Out of the smoke burst forth in such a flame,
That France and England yet may rue the same.
So when of two realms the regiment royal,
Between brothers was parced equallye,
One placed in France for affairs Martial,
And I at home for civil policy:
To serve the state, we both did so apply,
As honor and fame to both did increase,
To him for the war, to me for the peace.
Whence envy sprang, and specially because
This proud prelate could not abide a Peer,
Within the land to rule the state by laws,
Wherefore lifting my life and acts most near,
He never ceast, until as you shall bear,
By practice foul of him and his allies,
My death was wrought in most unworthy wise.
And first he sought my doings to defame,
By rumors false, which he and his did sow
Letters and hills to my reproach and shame
He did devise, and al about bestow,
Whereby my troch in doubt should daily agow,
In England first and afterward in France,
Moving al means to bring me to mischaunce.
One quarrel was, that where by common law
Murder and theft been punished all alike,
So as manslears, which bloody blades do draw,
Suffer no more, then he that does but pike,
Me thought the same no order politic,
In setting pains to make no difference,
Between the lesser and greater offense.
I being seen somewhat in civil law,
The rules thereof reputed much better,
Wherefore to keep, offenders more in awe,
Like as the fault was smaller or greater,
So set I pains more easier or bitter,
Waying the quality of every offense,
And so according pronounced sentence,
Amongst my other Delicta Iuuentutis,
Whilst rage of youth my reason did subdue,
I must confess as the very truth is,
Driven by desire, fond fancies to ensue,
A thing I did, whereof great trouble grew,
Abusing one to my no small rebuke,
Which wife was than to John of Brabant Duke.
Called she was Lady Iaquet the fair,
Delightful in love like Helene of Troy:
To the Duke of Bauier sole daughter and heir,
Her did I marrye to my great annoy
Yet for a time, this dame I did enjoy,
With her whole lands, witholding them by force,
Til, Martin the Pope, between us made divorce.
Yet all these blastes not hable were to move
The anchor strong, whereby my ship did stay,
Some other shift to seek him did behoue,
Whereto ere long il fortune made the way,
Which finally was cause of my decay
And cruel death, contrived by my foes,
Which fell out thus, as now I shall disclose.
Elianor my wife, my Duchess only dear,
I know not how but as the nature is
Of women al, aye carious to enquiere
Of things to came (though I confess in this
Her fault not small) and that she did an isse,
By wytches skill, which sorcery some call,
Would know of things which after should befall.
And for that cause made her self acquainted
With mother Madge, called the wytch of Eye,
And with a Clerk that after was attaited,
Bolenbroke he hight, that learned was that way,
With other more, which famous were that day,
As Well in Science, called Mathematical,
As also in magic and skill supernatural
These cunning folks she set on work to know,
The time how long the king should live and reign,
Same by the Stars, and some by devils below,
Some by witchcraft sought knowledge to attain,
With like fancies, frivolous fond and vain,
Whereof though I knew least of any man,
Yet by that mean my mischief first began.
Yet besides this there was a greater thing,
How she in wax by counsel of the witch,
An Image made, crowned like a king,
With sword in hand, in shape and likeness syche
As was the king, which daily they did pytch
Against a fire, that as the wax did melt,
So should his life consume away unfelt.
My Duchess thus, accused of this crime,
As she that should such practice first begin,
My part was then to yield unto the time,
Geeuing her leave, to deal alone therein
And since the cause concerned deadly sin,
Which to the clergy only does perteine,
To deal therein I plainly did refrain.
And suffered them her person to ascite
Into their Courts, to answer and appear,
Which to my heart was sure the greatest spite,
That cauld be wrought, and touched me most near,
To see my wife, and lady leefe and dear,
To my reproach, and plain before my face,
Entreated se, as one of sort most base.
The clergy then examining her cause,
Convinced her, as guilty in the same,
And sentence gave according to their laws,
That she and they whom I before did name
Should suffer death, or else some open shame:
Of which penance my wife by sentence had
To suffer shame of both the two, more bad.
And first she must by days together three,
Through London streets pass a, along in sight
Bare legde and barefoote, that all the world might see,
Bearing in hand a burning taper bright,
And not content, with this extreme despite,
To work me woe, in all they may or can,
Exilde she was into the I Will of Man.
This heinous crime and open worldly shame,
With such rigor showed unto my wife,
Was a fine fetch further things to frame,
And nothing else, but a preparatiue
First from office, and finally from life,
Me to deprive, and so passing further,
What law could not, to execute by murder.
Which by slye driftes, and wyndlaces aloof,
They brought about, persuading first the Queen,
That in effect it was the kings reproof,
And hers also, to be exempted clean,
From princely rule, or that it should be seen
A king of years, still governed to be
Like a Pupil, that nothing could forsee.
The danger more considering the king
Was without child, I being his next heir,
To rule the realm, as Prince in every thing
Without restraint, and all the sway to bear
With Peoples love, whereby it was to fear
That my hault heart, unbridled in desire,
Time would prevent, and to the crown aspire,
These with such like, were put into her head,
Who of her self, was thereto sone enclinde,
Other there were, that this it humor fed,
To neither part, which had good will or mind,
The Duke of York, our cousin most unkind,
Who keeping close a title to the crown,
Lancasters house did labor to pull oowne.
The stay whereof he took to stand in me,
Seeing the king of courage nothing stout,
Neither of wit great peril to foresee,
So for purpose, if he could bring about
Me to displace, then did he little doubt
To gain the Goal, for which he drove the ball,
The crown I mean to catch ere it should fall
This hope made him against me to conspyre
With those which foes were to each other ^ate,
The Queen old ween, to win her whole desire
Which was to rule, the king and all the state
If I were ryd, whom therefore she did hate:
Forecasting not, when that was brought to pass,
How weak of friends, the King her husband was.
The Dukes two, of Excester, and Buckingham,
With the Marquise Dorset therein did agree,
But namely the Marquise of Suffolk William,
Contriuer chief of this conspiracy,
With other mo, that sat still and did see,
Their mortal foes on me to whet their knives,
Which turnde at last to loss of all their lives.
But vain desire of soueraintie and rule,
Which otherwise (Ambition) has to name,
So stirde the Queen that wilful as a Mule,
Headlong she runs, from smoke into the flame,
Driving a drife, which after did so frame,
As she, the King, with all their line and race,
Deprived were of honor, life, and place.
So for purpose she thought it very good,
With former foes, in friendship to confeder,
The Duke of York, and other of his blood,
With Neuils all, knyt were then together.
And Delapoole, friend before to neither:
The Cardinal also, came within this list,
As Herod and Pylate, to judge Jesus Christ.
This cursed league* to late discovered was
By Bayardes blind, that lincked in the line,
The Queen and Cardinal brought it so to pass,
With Marquise Suffolk master of this mine,
Whose il advise, was counted very fine,
With other more which fynely could disguise,
With false visours my mischief to devise,
Concluding thus they point without delay
Parliament to hold, in some unhaunted place,
Far from London, out of the common way,
Where fewor none should understand the case,
But whom the Queen and Cardinal did embrace,
And so for place they chose Saint Edmondesburye
Since when (some say) England was never merye.
Somens was sent, this company to call,
Which made me mose, that in so great a case,
I should no whyt of counsel be at all,
Who yet had rule, and next the king in place,
Me thought nothing, my state could more disgrace,
Then to bear name, and in effect to be.
A Cipher in Alg^^m, as al men might see.
And though just cause I had for to suspect,
The time and place appointed by my foes,
And that my friends most plainlye did detect,
The subtle train, and practice of al those,
Which against me, great treasons did suppose,
Yet trust of truth with a conscience clear,
Gave me good heart, in that place to appear.
Upon which trust with more have then good speed,
Forward I went to that unlucky place,
Duty to show, and no whit was in dread
Of any train, but bold to show my face,
As a true man yet so fell out the case,
That after traueyle, seeking for repose,
An armed hand, my lodging did enclose.
The Vicount Beaumount, who for the time supplied,
The office of high Conestable of the Land
Was with the Queen and Cardinal allied,
By whose support, he stoutlye took in hand,
My lodginge to enter with an armed hand
And for high treason, my person did arest,
And laid me that night, where him seemed hest
Then shaking and quaking, for dread of a Dream,
Half waked al naked in bed as I say,
What time struck the chime of mine hour extreme,
Oppressed was my rest with mortal affray,
My foes did unclose, I know not which way
My chamber doors, and boldly they in brake,
And had me fast before I could awake.
Thou look now, that of my secret murder,
I should at large the manner how declare,
I pray thee Baldwin, ask of me no further,
For speaking plain, it came so at unware,
As I my self, which caught was in the snare,
Scarcely am able the circumstaunce to show,
Which was kept close, and known but unto few.
But be thou sure by violence it was,
And ^o whit bred by sickness or disease,
That felt it well before my life did pass,
For when these wolves, my body once did cease,
Used I was, but smally to mine ease:
With torments strong, which went so nerethe quick,
As made me dye before that I was sick.
A Palsy (they said) my vital sprites oppressed,
Bred by excess of melancholy black,
This for excuse to lay, them seemed best,
Least my true friends the cause might further rack,
And so perhaps discover the whoole pack,
Of the conspyrers, whom they might well suspect,
For causes great, which after took effect.
Dead was I found, by such as best did know,
The manner how the same was brought to pass.
And than my corpse, was set out for a show,
By view whereof, nothing perceived was:
Whereby the world may see as in a glass,
The unsure state, of them that stand most hye,
Which than bread least, when danger is most nigh.
And also see, what danger they lyu^ in,
Which next their king are to succeed in place:
Since kings most part, be Ielous of their kynne,
Whom I advise, fore warned by my case,
To bear low sail, and not to much embrace,
The peoples love: for as Senec says truly:
O quam funestus est favor populi.
FINIS.
G. F.

THe good Duke having ended his wof^ll tragedye, after much talk had
concerning discention among these that be magistrates, good Lord (quoth one)
what mischief and destruction does priuye grudge and malice, raise among all
sorts of people, both hye and low? but especially among Magistrat^^s b^^ng ye
head and guide of the Common wealth: for what mischief did the discention
between these two persons (being both of high estate) bring afterward to both
the realms: yea and the utter ruin of most part of them that were the chief
workers of this Dukes death, you say troth (quoth I) and now for that, it I
may crave your patience awhile, you shall hear what I have noted in y^ Duke of
Suffolkes doings, one of the chief procurours of Duke Humfreyes destruction,
who by the providence of God came shortly after in such hatred of ye people,
that the king himself could not save him from a strange and notable death.
For being banished the realm for the term of five years, to apprase the
continual rumors and inward grudges, that not only the commons, but most part
of the nobility of England, bare toward him for the death of the said Duke,
he saylinge toward France was met with a ship of Devonshire, and beheaded
forthwith the first day of May, Anno 1450. And the dead corpse thrown up at
Dover upon the sands, which may lament his death after this manner.

HOW WILLIAM DELApoole Duke of Suffolk was worthelye banished for abusing
his king, and procuringe the death of Duke Humfrey of Gloucester, protector of
England. Anno. 1450.
Heavy is the hap whereto all men be bound,
I mean the death, which no estate may fly:
But to be banished, beheaded and than dround,
In sincke of shame from top of honors hye,
Was never man, so served I think but I,
Wherefore good Baldwin amongst the rest by right,
I claim of thee my woeful case to write.
My only life in all ponintes may suffice,
To show how base al baytes of Fortune be,
Which thawe like Ise, through heat of enuies eyes:
Or vicious deeds which much possessed me:
Good hap with vice, long time cannot agree,
Which bring best Fortunes to the basest fall,
And happiest hap, to envy to be thrall.
Called I was William Delapoole,
Of Suffolk Duke in Queen Margarets days,
That found the mean Duke Humfreyes blood to cool,
Whose worthy acts deserve eternal praise,
Whereby I note that Fortune cannot raise
Any one al often, without some others wrack,
Fluds drown no fields, before they find a bracke.
But as the waters which do break the walls
Do lose their course, they had within the shore,
And daily rotting stincke within their stalles,
For faule of moving which they found before:
Even so the state that over high is bore,
Does loose the life of Peoples love it had,
And rotts it self until it fall to bad.
For while I was but Earl, each man was glad,
To say and do the best by me they might:
And Fortune ever since I was a lad,
Did smyle upon me with a cherefull sight,
For when my king had dubbed me a knight,
And sent me forth to serve at war in France,
My luckye speed mine honor did enhaunce.
Where, to omit the many feats I wrought
Under others guide, I do remember one,
Which with my soldiers valiauntly was fought,
None other Captain save my self alone,
I mean not now the apprinze of Pucel Ione
In which attempt my travail was not small,
Though the Duke of Bourbon had the praise of al.
But the siege of Awmarle is the feate I praise,
A strong built town, with castles, walls, and vaultes,
With men and weapon armde at all assayes:
To which I gave nigh five times five assaults,
Til at the last they yielded it for naughts,
Yet Lord Ramburs like a valiant knight,
Defended it as long as ere he might
But what prevailed it these Towns to win,
Which shortly after must be lost again?
Whereby I see there is more glory in
The keepinge things than is in their attain:
To get and keep not, is but loss of pain.
Therefore ought men provide to save their winninges
In all attemptes, else lose they their beginninges.
Because we could not keep the Towns we won,
For they were more than we might easily wyeld
One year undid what we in ten had don:
For envy at home, and treason abroad, did yield
King Charles his realm of France, made barrain field:
For bloody wars had wasted all increase,
Which causde the Pope help poverty sue for peace.
So that in Tourayn, at the town of Toures
Duke Charles, and other for their Prince appeared,
So did Lord Rosse, and I than Earl, for ours:
And when we showed wherein each other dered,
We sought out means al Quarrels to have clered,
Wherein the Lords of Germany, of Spain,
Of Hungary, and Denmark, took exceedinge pain.
But since we could no final peace induce,
For neither would the others couenau^tes here,
For Eighteen months we did conclude a truce:
And while as friends we lay together there,
Because my Warrant did me therein bear,
To make a perfect peace, and through accord,
I sought a marriage for my Soueraygne Lord.
And for the French Kings Daughters were to small,
A fancied most Dame Margaret his Niece,
A lovely Lady, Bewtifull, and Tall,
Fair spoken, pleasant, a very Princely piece,
In Wit, and learning, matchless hence to Greece,
Duke Rayners Daughter of Antow, King by style
Of Naples, Jerusalem, and of Scycill I Will.
But ere I could the grant of her attain:
All that our King had of her fathers lands,
As Mountes the City, the county whole of Main,
And most of A^iow Duc^y in our hands,
I did release him by assured hands.
And as for Dowry with her none I sought,
I thought no peace could be to derely bought.
But when this marriage thoroughly was agreed
Although my king were glad of such a make
His Uncle Humfrey abhorred it in deed,
Because thereby his precontract he brake,
Made with the heir of the Earl of Arminacke,
A noble Maid with store of goods endowed,
Which more than this with loss, the Duke allowed.
But love, and bewty in the king so wrought,
That neither profit, or promise he regarded,
But set his uncles counsel still at naught:
And for my gaynes, I highly was awarded.
Thus virtue starues, but lust food must be larded,
For I made Marquise, went to France again,
And brought this Bryde unto my Soueraygne.
At whom because Duke Humfrey ay repined.
Calling their marriage aduoutrie (as it was)
The Queen did move me, erst thereto enclyned,
To help to bring him to his Requiem mass,
Which since it could for no crime come to pass:
His life and doings were so right and clear,
Through privy murder we brought him to his Beer.
Thus righteousness brought Humfrey to rebuke,
Because he should no wickedness allow,
But for my doings I was made a Duke.
So Fortune can both bend and smoth her brow
On whom she list, not passing why or how.
O Lord how high, how soon she did me raise,
How fast she fildime both with prays and praise.
The Lords and Commons both of like assent,
Be sought my sovereign kneeling on their knees,
To record my doings in the Parliament,
As deeds deserving everlasting fees,
In which attempt they did no labor leese,
For they set not my praise so fast in flame,
As he was ready to reward the same.
But note the end, my deeds so worthy deemed
Of King, of Lords, and Commons altogether,
Were shortly after treasons false esteemed,
And all men cursed Queen Margets coming hither,
For Charles the French king in his feaces not lither,
When we had rendered Rayner, Maunts, and Main,
Found means to win al Normandy again.
This made the Peopie curse the marriage,
Esteeming it the cause of every loss:
Wherefore at me with open mouth they rage,
Affirming me to have brought the realm to mosse^
When King and Queen saw things thus go a cross
To quiet al a Parliament they called,
And caused me in Prison to be thralled.
And shortly after brought me forth abroad,
Which made the commons more than double wood
And some with weapons would have laid on load,
If their graund Captain Blewberd in his mood,
Had not in time with wisdom been withstode:
But though that he and more were executed,
The people still their worst against me bruted.
And so applied the Parliament with Bylles,
Of heinous wrongs and open traiterous crimes,
The king and Queen were forced against their wills
Fro place to place to adiourne it diverse times.
For Princes power is like the sandy slymes,
Which must perforce geeue place unto the wave,
Or sue the windye sourges when they rave.
Their life was not more dear to them than I,
Which made them search al shifts to save me still,
But aye my foes such faults did on me try,
That to preserve me from a worser ill,
The king was fayue full sore against his will:
For five years space to send me in exile,
In hope to have restorde me in a while.
But mark how vengeance wayteth upon vice,
To shun this storm, in saylinge toward France,
A Pirates Bark, that was of little price,
Encount^ed me upon the Seas by chance,
Whose Captain there took me as in a trance,
Let pass my ships, with all their frait, and load,
And led me back again to Dover road.
Were, unto me recountinge all my faults,
As murdringe of Duke Humfrey in his Bed,
And how I, had brought all the Realm to naughtes,
Causing the King unlawfully to wed,
The^e was no grace, but I must loose my head,
Wherefore he made me to shriue me in his boat,
And on the brinke, my Neck in two he smoate.
This was mine end: which was by reason due
To me, and such as others deaths procure.
Therefore be bold to write, for it is true,
That who so does such practice put in ure,
Of due reward at last shall be most sure,
For God is just, whose stroke delayed long,
Does light at last, with pain more sharp and strong.
FINIS.
VV. B.

When this was said: every man reiosed to hear of a wicked person so
righteously punished: for though fortune in many points be injurious to
Princes, yet in this and such lyk^ she is most righteous: and only deserves
the name of a goddess, when she provides means to punish and destroy
tyrants. And when we had a while considered the driftes of the King and
Queen to have saved this duke: and yet they could not: It is worth ye labor
(said one) to way the works, and judgments of God: which saying they are
known most evidently by comparing contraries, I will touch the story of Jack
Cade in order next following.

Whom King Henry with all his puissaunce was no more able for a while to
destroy (yet was he his rebellious enemy) tha^ he was to preserve the Duke of
Suffolk his derest friend: by which two examples does appear how notably God
disposes all things, and that no force stretches father, than it pleases
him to suffer. For this Cade being an Irisheman, but of mean parentage, of no
ability, and less power, accompanied with a few naked Kentish me^, caused the
king with his army at al points appointed, to leave the field, and suffer him
to do whatsoever he lusted for a time, but in the end he was slain at
Hothfield in Suffer, and carried thence to London in a Cart, and there
quartered. In whose behalf, seeinge he is one of Fortunes Whelps, I will
trouble you a while to hear the process of his enterprise, which he may
declare in manner followinge.

HOW JACK CADE NAminge himself Mortimer, traitorously rebellinge against his
King in June. Anno. 1450. was for his treasons, and cruel doings worthily
punished.
SHall I call it Fortune or my frowardfolly,
That lift me up, and laid me down below?
Or was it Courage, that made me so Ioly.
Or strength of stars, with make men high to grow?
What ever it were this one poynct suer I know,
Which shall be meet for every man to mark.
Our lust and wills, our evils chiefly warke.
It may be well that planets do incline,
And our complexions move our minds to ill,
But such is reason, that they bring to fine
No work vnayded of our lust, and will:
For Heaven, and Earth are subject both to skill.
The skyll of God rules all it is so strong,
Man may by skill guide things that to him long.
Though lust be sturdy, and will enclinde to naught,
This forced by mixture that by Heavens course,
Yet through the skill, God has in reason wrought
And given man, no lust nor will to course,
But may be stayed, or swaged of the sourse,
So that it shall in nothing force the mind:
To work our woe, or leave the proper kind.
But though this skill be given to every man
To rule the will, and keep the mind aloft,
For ^acke of grace full few use it can.
These wordly pleasures tickle us so often:
Skull is not weak, but will strong, flesh is soft
And yeldes it self to pleasure that it love to.
And ^ales the mind to that it most reproves.
Now if this hap whereby we yield our mind
To lust, and will, be Fortune as we name her,
Than is she justly called false, and blind,
And no reproach can be to mutch to blame her:
Yet is the shame our own when so we shame her,
For s^er this hap if it be rightly known,
Comes of our selves, and so the blame our own.
For who so lives in the Schole of skill,
And med^eth not with any worlds affairs,
Forsakes Pompes, and honors, that do spill
The minds recourse to Graces quiet st^yres,
His state no Fortune by no mean a^payres:
For Fortune is the folly, and plague of those
Which to the World their wretched wills dispose.
Among which Fools (mark Baldwyn) I am one,
That would not stay my self in mine estate.
I thought to rule, but would obey to none,
Wherefore I thought to be my Princes mate,
And by some mean his power to abate,
And for that ends, Mortimer would be nam'de,
Heir apparent, of England once proclaym'de.
This shift I used the people to persuade
To leave their Prince, and on my side to stick.
Whereas in deed, my fathers name was Cade.
Whose noble stock was never worth a stick.
But touching wit I was both ripe and quick.
Had strength of Luns, large stature, comely face,
Which made men wene my lignage were not base.
And seeing stoutnesse stuck by men in Kent,
Whose valiant hearts refuse none enterprise,
With false persuasions strait to them I went,
And say they suffered too great injuries:
By mean where of I caused them to rise,
And Battle wise to come to Blackheath plain,
And thence their griefs unto the king complain.
Who being deaf (as men say) on that ear
For we desired release of subsedies,
Refused roughly our requests to hear,
And came against us as our enemies:
But we to tarry sought our subtilities,
Removed our camp, and back to Senocke went,
After whom the Staffordes with their power wa^^^
See here how Fortune setting us aflote,
Brought to our nets a Portion of our pray.
For why the Sea ordes with their army hot,
Assailed us at Senocke where we lay:
From whence alive they parted not away,
Which w^an the kings retinue understood,
They all affirmde my quarrel to be good.
Which caused the King and Queen whom all did hate,
To raise their Camp, and suddenly depart:
And that they might the Peoples grudge abate,
To imprison some full sore against their heart.
Lord Say was one, whom I made after smart,
For after Staffordes and their host was slain,
To Blackheath field I marched back again.
And where the King would nothing hear before,
Now was he glad to send to know my mind:
And I thereby enflamed much the more,
Refused his grauntes so folly made me blind.
For this be flew, and left Lord Scales behind,
To help the town and strengthen London tower,
Toward which I marched forward with my power.
And found there al things at mine own desire.
I entered London did there what I list,
The Treasorer, Lord Say, I did conspyre
To have condemned: whereof when I mist,
(For he by law my malice did resist)
By force I took him i^ Guildhal fro the heap,
And headed him before the Cross in Cheap.
His Son in law James Cromer shriue of Kent
I caught at Mile end, whereas then he lay:
Beheaded him and on a poale I sent,
His head to London where his fathers lay.
With these two heads I made a pretty play,
For pight on poales I bore them through the street,
And for my sport made each kiss other sweet.
Than brake I Prisons set forth whom I would,
And used the city as it had bin mine:
Took from the Merchants, money, ware, and gold.
From some by force, from other some by syne.
This at the length did cause them to repyne,
So that Lord Scal^s, consentinge with the Mayre,
Forbad us to their City to repair.
For all this while mine host in Southwarke lay,
Who when they knew out passage was denied,
Came boldly to the bridge and made a fray.
For in we would the towns men us defied:
But when with strokes we had the matter tried,
We wan the Bridge and set mutch part on sier,
This dane to Southwarke bock we did retier.
The morrow after came the Chancellor,
With general pardon for my men, half gone,
Which heard and read, the rest within an hour,
Shranke all away each man to shift for one.
And when I saw they left me post alone,
I did disguise me like a knight of the post,
And into Sussex rode away in post.
And there I lurked till that cursed coin,
That restless Begle sought, and found me out,
For straight the King by promise did emoyne,
A thousand mark to whosoever might
Apprehend my corse, which made them seek about:
Among the which one Alexander Iden,
Found out the Hole wherein the Fox was hidden.
But ere he took me, I put him to his Trumps,
For yield I would not while my hands would hold,
But hope of money made him stur his stumps,
And to assault me valiauntly, and bold.
For two long Hours, our Combat was not cold
Till at the last he lent me such a stroke,
That down I fell, and never after spoke.
Than was my Carcass carried like a Hog.
To Southwarkes Borough where it lay a night,
The next day drawn to Newgate like a dog,
All men reioysinge at the rufull sight:
Than were on Poales my perboyls Quarters pight,
And set a loft for Vermin to devour,
Meet grave for Rebels that resist the power.
Full little know we Wretches what we do,
When we presume our Princes to resist.
We War with God, against his glory to,
That places in his office whom he list:
Therefore was never Traitor yet, but mist
The Mark he shot, and came to shameful end,
Nor never shall till God be forced to bend.
God has ordain the power, all Princes be
His Lieutenantes, nor deputies in realms,
Against their Foes therefore fights he,
And his Enemies drives them to extremes,
Their wise devises, prove but Doltish dreams.
No Subject ought for any kind of cause,
To force the Prince. but yield him to the laws.
Wherefore Baldwin warn men to follow reason.
Subdue their wylles and be not Fortunes slaves,
A shameful end does ever follow treason,
There is no trust in Rebels, rascal knaves,
In Fortune less, which works as the waves:
From whose assaults who lists to stand free,
Must know his state, and so contented be.
FINIS.
BY saint Mary (said one) if Jack were as well learned, as you have made his
oration, whatsoever he was by birth, I warrante him a Gentilman by his
learning. How notablye and philosopher like has he described fortune, and the
causes of worldly cumbraunce? how like a divine has he determined the office
both of Magistrates and subjects For in deed Magistrates be Gods deputies, and
it is Gods office which they bear: and it is he which ordeyneth thereto such
as himself lists, good when he favors the People, and evil when he will
punish them. And therefore whosoever rebelleth against any ruler, either good or
bad, rebelleth against God, and shall never see good end of his attempt: for God
cannot but mainteyn his deputy. Yet this I note by the way concerning rebels
and rebellions. Although the devil raise them, yet God always uses them to
his glory, as a part of his justice. For when kings and chief rulers, suffer
their under officers to misuse their subjects, and will not hear nor remedy
their peoples wrongs (wha^ they complain) then suffers God the Rebel to
rage, and to execute that part of his Justice, which the parcial prince would
not.

For the Lord Say a very corrupt officer, and one whom notwithstanding the
king always maynteyned. was destroyed by this Jack, as was also the Bishop of
Salisburye (a proud and covetous Prelate) by other of the Rebels. And
therefore whatsoever prince desires to live quietly without rebellion must do
his subjects right in all things and punish such Officers as oppress, his
People: thus shall they be sure from all Rebellion. And for ye clerer opening
hereof, it were well done to set forth this Lord Says tragedye. What need that
(said another) seeing ye like example is seen in the Duke of Suffolk, whose
doings are declared sufficientlye already. Nay let us go forward for we have
a great many behind that may not be omitted, and the time as you see passes
away. As for this lord Say, whom Cade so cruellye killed, and spitefullye
used after his Death (I dare say) shall be known thereby he was to all that
read or hear this storye. For God would never have suffered him to have been
so used, except he had first deserved it.

Therefore let him go and with him the Bishop, and all other slain in that
rebellion which was raised by some sly drift of the Duke of York, who shortly
after by open War, manifested his title to ye crown, and therefore gathered an
army in Wales, and marched toward London: And preuentinge ye king, goinge
northward to prepare an army, in the way at Sayncte Albanes: Who for want of a
sufficient power to take the field, was forced with such small power as he had
about him, to defend the Lanes, and backsydes of the town, and to send out the
Duke of Buckingham for a treaty, which the Duke of York being head of the
contrary faction, would not allow without first having the Duke of Somerset
and other at his will, duringe which treaty Richard Neuill Earl of Warwike,
the stout maintayner of yorckes title entered the Town by force, fought a
Battle in the high streat, where of the Kings part were slain the said Duke
of Somerset called Edmond Beauford, Henry Percy the second of that surname,
Earl of Northumberlande, Humfrey, Earl of Stafford, Son and Heir to
Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, Ihon Lord Clifford, Babthorp the Kings attorney,
and his Son and heir, besides a great number of Knights, Esquiers, Gentlemen,
and yeomen of ye kings household and of other Lords servants, on who^ all the
slaughter, and bochery fell, being all for the more part unarmed. But because
the Duke of Somerset was the chief of the Kings part passinge over the rest,
let us only hear him speak for all.

THE TRAGEDY OF EDmond Duke of Somerset, slain in the first battle at Saynct
Albanes, the. 23. day of May, in the. 32. year of Henry the sixth. Anno. 1454. *
SOme I suppose are borne unfortunate,
Else good endeavors could not so ill succeed,
What shall I call it? ill fortune or fate,
That some attempts have never happy speed,
But travail thanklesse, al bootlesse their heed:
Where other unlike in workinge, or in skill,
Win what they will, and wield the world at will.
Of the first sort, myself I count for one,
To all mishap, I we^ne predestinate,
Believe me Baldwin, there be few or none,
To whom Fortune was ever more ingrate.
Make thou therefore my life a Caveat,
That who so with force will work against kind,
Sayleth (as who says) against the stremt, and wind.
For I of Somerset which Duke Edmond hight,
Extract by descent from Lancaster line,
Were it by folly, or Fortunes despite,
Or by ill aspect of some crooked sign,
Of mine attempts could never see good fine:
What so I began did seldom well end:
God from such Fortune, all good men defend.
Where I sought to save, most part I did spill,
For good hap with me was always at War.
The Lineage of York whom I bare so ill,
By my spite became bright, and shone like a Star,
Thus some whiles men make, when feign they would mar.
The more ye lop Trees, the greater they grow.
The more ye stop Streams, the higher they flow.
Maugre my spighte, his glory grew the more,
And mine, as the Moon in the wane, waxt lest
For having the place which he had before,
Governor of France, needs I must confess,
That lost was Normandy yet nethelesse,
Always I wrought that wit might well contriue,
But what boots it, against the Stream to strive?
Borne was I neither to War ne to peace,
Mars was malign, and enemy to my trade:
My Birth I believe was in Jove's decrease,
When Cancer in course, being retrograde,
Swarued from Sol, unto Saturnus shade,
Where aspectes were good, opposites did mar,
So grew mine unhap both in peace, and war.
A strange Nativity in calculation,
As my lives course, did after well declare,
Whereof in brief to make relation,
That other by me may learn to beware,
Ouerlight credence was cause of my care.
And want of foresight in geuinge assent,
Humfrey to damme that Duke most innocent.
Humfrey mean I that was the protector,
Duke of Gloucester of the royal blood,
So long as he was Englandes directour,
King Henry's title to the Crown was good,
This worthy Prince, as a Pillar long stoad:
Or like a strong prop set under a vine,
In state to uphold all Lancasters line.
O headless trust, unware of harm to come,
O mad malice where wit obeys will,
Was there ever any, whom folly did so nome:
Of all forecast, rigth, reason, wit, and skill,
As me blind Bayard consentinge to spill
My Coosyns blood, my refuge, and my stay,
To my destruction, making open way?
So long as he in England bare the sway,
So long Rebels no Quarelles durst begin,
But when the post, was pulled once away,
Which stood to uphold the king, and his kin,
The Duke of York, than stoutly he stepped in,
And challenged the Crown, by color of right,
Beginning with Law, and endinge with might.
And spread great brutes in England up and down,
That he of England was the heir true,
And how Henry had usurped the Crown
Against all right, by practice most untrue:
The people than, embrasinge titles new,
Irksome of present, and longing for change,
Assenced soon, because they love to raunge.
True is the text which we in Scripture read,
Vae terrae illi cuius rex est puer.
Woe to that land whereof a child is head,
Whether child or childishe, the case is one sure,
Where Kings be young, we daily see in bre,
The people awlesse, by weakness of their head,
Lead their lives lawless, having none to dread.
And no less true is this text again,
Beata terra cuius rex est nobilis.
Blessed is the Land, where a stout King does rain.
Wherein good peace each man possesses his,
For dread of whom, no man dare do amiss,
Whose Prince is pressed always, and Sword in hand,
At home and abroad, all enemies to withstand.
In case the son had proved such a one,
Hardy and stout as his fathers before,
Sure had he sitten in the Royal throne,
Dreadlesse, and careless of common vpror.
But Henry's weakness appeered more, and more,
Which boldness gave, to the contrary band,
To spoil him at last both of life, and land.
His humble heart was nothing unknown,
To the gaye gallants, of Yorkes retinue,
Any low ground, is highly overflowed,
And shored houses cannot long continue,
Joints cannot knit whereas is no Synowe.
And so a Prince, not dread as well as loved,
By hold Traitors may be soon removed.
Well might I see, had I not wanted brain,
The work begone to undermine the state,
When the chief link was loosed fro the chain,
And that some durst upon blood royal grate,
How tickle hold I had of mine estate?
When the chief post lay flat upon the flore,
Might not I think my staff then next the door?
So might also, dame Margaret the Queen,
By whose malice this mischife first began,
Did she (trow ye) her self not ouerwene
Death to procure to that most worthy man?
Which she and hers afterward might well ban,
On whom did hang, as I before have said,
Her Husbands life, his honor and his aid.
For whilst he lived which was one stable stay,
York and his Impes were kept as under Yoke,
But when the Pillar removed was away,
Then durst out flame, that late before was Smoke,
The close Traytoure, then cast of his Cloak,
And from the dark came forth in open light,
With titles blind which he set forth for right.
But this to achieue, first it him behooved,
The King and his kin a sunder for to set:
Who once perforce, or practice ill removed,
Then had they avoided the principal le,
With kept the sought pray so long from the Net:
The next poynct after, was themselves to place
Next to the Prince, and other to abase.
I was the first whom they put out of place,
No cause pretendinge, but the common weal,
The crown on England was the very case,
Why to the Commons they burned so in zeal,
My faults were Cloakes their practice to conceal,
In counsel hearing consider the intent,
For by pretense of truth, treason often is meant.
So their pretense was only to remove,
Counsel corrupt from place about the King,
But O ye Princes, you it does behoue,
This case to construe, as no feigned thing,
That never traitor did subdue his king,
But for his plat* ere he would further wade,
Against his friends, the Quarrel first he made.
And if hap he could so bring about,
Them to subdue, and have them at his will,
Then would he wax so arrogant, and stout,
That no reason, his outrage might fulfill,
But to proceed upon his purpose still,
Till King, and Counsel brought were in one case:
Such is their folly, to rebels that give place.
So for the fish, when cast forth was the Net,
The next poynct was in driuinge out the plat,
Commons to cause, in rage to fume, and fret,
And to rebel, I cannot tell for what,
Requiringe redress of this, and of that:
Who if they speed, the stander at receipt,
Grasp will the Pray, for which he does awayt.
Then by surmise of some thing pretended,
Such to displace as they may well suspect,
Like to withstand their mischief intended,
And in their roumes their banders to elect,
The adverse party proudly to reject
And then with reports the simple to abuse,
And when these helps fail, open force to use.
So this Dukes traynes were covert, and not seen.
Who little meant, that which he most pretended,
Like to a Serpent lurkinge under green,
To the weal public seemed wholly vended:
Zealous he was, and would have all things mended,
But by that mendment nothing else he meant,
But to be King, to that mark was his bent.
For had be bin plain, as he meant in deed,
Henry to depose from the royal place,
His have had bin waste, and murch worse his speed,
The King then standinge in his peoples grace,
This Duke therefore setforth a goodly face,
As one that meant no quarrel for the Crown,
Such as bare rule, he only would put down.
But all for naught, so long as I bare stroke,
Served these driftes, and proved all but vain,
The best help then, was people to provoke,
To make Commotion, and Vprores a main:
Which to appease, the King himself was feign,
From black Heath in Kent, to send me to the Tower,
Such was the sorce of Rebels in that Hour.
The tempest yet therewith was not ceased,
For York was bent his purpose to pursue,
Who seeinge how soon I was releassed,
And ill success of sufferaunce to ensue:
Then like Judas, unto his Lord untrue,
Thynkinge time lost any longer to defarre,
By Warwickes aid proclaimed open war.
S. Albanes town, where both our Hoastes did meet,
To cry a field was not an equal place,
For we were forced to fight within a street,
With few against many, such was the case,
There I and Warwick fronted face to face,
At an Inn door, the Castle was the sign,
Where with a Sword was cut my fatal line.
Often was I warned to come in Castle none,
But little thought of any Common sign,
I did Imagine a Castle built with stone,
For of no June, I could the same divine,
In Prophets skill my wits were never fine,
A fool is he that such vain dreams does dred,
But more Fool he, that will by them beiled.
My life I lost in that unlucky place,
With many Lords that leaned to my part,
The Earl Percy had no better grace,
Courageous Clifford could not eschew the dart,
Buckinghams Heir was at this mortal mart,
Babthorp the Attorney for all his skill in Law,
In this poynct of pleadinge appeared very raw.
So thus poor Prince disarmed of his bands,
His friends all slain, wantinge good assistence,
Was made a Pray unto his enemies hands,
Priued of power and Princely reverence,
And as a Pupil boyde of all experience,
Innocent plain, and simple witted,
Was as a Lamb unto the Wolf committed.
A Parliament than was called with speed,
A Parliament, nay a plain conspiracy,
When against right it was decreed,
That after the death of the sixth Henry,
The Duke of York should have the regally,
And in his life, the charge, and protection,
Of King and Realm at the Dukes direction.
And thus was York declared Protector,
Protector said I, nay Proditor plain.
A rank Rebel the Princes directour,
A vassal to lead his Lord, and Sovereign,
What honest heart would not conceive disdain,
To see the foot surmount above the head,
A Monster is in spite of nature bred.
Some happily here, will move a farther dout,
And for Yorkes part allege an elder right,
O braynlesse head, that so run in and out,
When length of time a state has firmly pight,
And good accord has putall strife to flight,
Were it not better such titles still to sleep,
Than all a Realm, about the trial weep?
From the female, came York, and all his leede,
And we Lancastrians, from the Heir Male,
Of whom three Kings in order did succeed,
By just descent: this is no feigned tale.
Who would have thought that any storm or gale
Our ship could shake having such Anchor hold,
None I think sure, unless that God so would.
After this burle the King was feign to flee,
Northward in post, for succor, and relief,
O blessed God how strange it was to see!
A rightful Prince pursued as a Thief!
To thee O England, what can be more repreefe?
Then to pursue thy Prince with armed hand,
What greater shame, may be to any Land?
Traitors did triumph, true men lay in the dust,
Reuiage, and Robbiage, toysted every where,
Will, stood for skill, and Law obeyed lust,
Might, trod down right, of King there was no fear,
The title was tried only by Shield, and Spear:
All which vnhaps, that they were not foreseen,
Suffolk was in fault, who ruled King. and Queen.
Some here perhaps, do look I should accuse
My self of slight, or subtilty unjust,
Wherein I should my Princes Ears abuse
Against the Duke, to bring him in mystrust,
Some part whereof, though needs confess I must,
My fault only, consisted in consent
To my Foes driftes, which I could not prevent.
If I at first when Brandes began to smoke,
The Sparks to quench by any way had sought,
Never had England felt this mortal stroke,
Which now to late lamentinge helps naught
Two poynctes of Wit to dearly have I bought,
The first that better is timely to foresee,
Then after over late, a Counsaylour to be.
The second is, not easily to assent,
To any advice, against thy faithful friend,
But of the Speaker ponder the intent,
The meaning full, the poinct, and final end:
A Saint in show, in proof is found a Fend,
The subtle man, the simple to abuse,
Mutch pleasant Speech, and Eloquence does use.
And so was I, and other mo abused
By Suffolkes sleights, who sought to please the Queen,
Forecast we lackt, which cannot be excused
Of things to come, as soon was after seen:
Which glosinge tongue, he made us fools to ween,
That Humfrey did to Englandes crown aspyre,
Which to prevent his death they did conspyre.
What should I more of mine vnhaps declare,
Whereof my death at last has ma^e an end?
Not I alone was cause of all this care,
Some besides me there were that did offend.
None I accuse, nor yet my self defend,
Faults I confess, as no man lives without,
My chief fault, was folly, out of dout.
Folly was chief, the noughty time was next,
Which made my Fortune subject to the chief:
If England then with strife had not bin vexed.
Glory might have grown whereas ensued grief,
Yet one thing is, my comfort, and relief,
Constant I was in my Princes Quarrel,
To dye or live, and spared for no parel.
What though Fortune envious was my foe,
A noble heart ought not the sooner yield,
Nor shrincke a back for any weal or woe,
But for his Prince ly bleeding in the field:
If privy spite at any time me belde,
The price is paid: and grievous is my guerdon,
As for the rest God (I trust) will pardon.
FINIS.
G. F.

AFter this Tragedy ended, one said seeinge this Duke has so vehemently
exclaymed against the Duke of Yorkes practices, it were well done to hear what
he can say for himself. For after ye first battle at S. Albanes when he
took K Henry prisoner, he was made protector, which so mutch grieved Queen
Margaret, and her accomplices, y^ privy grutches, and open dissembling never
ceased til ye Duke, and his allies were feign to sly both field, and Realm, he
into Ireiand, and they to Calaies. Whence they came again with an Army,
whereof Richard Neuill Earl of Salisbury was leader, and marched toward
Couentry (where the King was, and had gathered an army to subdue them, and
encountered them at Northampton on ye. 10. day of July in yt year of grace.
1460. sought with them, lost the field, and was taken himself, and many of his
friends slain, as Humfrey Stafforde Duke of Buckingham, Ihon Talbot the
second of that name Earl of Shrewesbury, Ihon Vicounte Beaumont, Thomas Lord
Egremont, Sir William Lucy, and diverse other. But ouerpassinge all these and
many mo because they were honorably slain in the field, let us come to him
who was the chief cause thereof, that is to say, Richard Plantagenet Duke of
York slain in the battle at Wakefield on Christmas eue^, and Edmond Earl of
Ruflande his young son, who was there murdered by the Lord Clifforde as he
would have fled into the town to have saved himself.

Therefore imagine that you see a tall man's body full of fresh wounds but
lacking a head, holdinge by the hand a goodly child, whose breast was so
wounded that his heart might be seen, his lovely face and eyes disfigured
with droppinge tears, his Hair through horor standinge upright, his mercy
crauinge hands, al to be mangled, and all his body embrued with his own
blould, out of the Wesand pipe of which headles body came a shreking voice
saying as follows.

HOW RICHARD PLANtagenet Duke of York was slain through his over rash
boldness, and his Son Earl of Rutland an Infant cruelly murdered Anno. 1460.
TRust Fortune (quoth he) in whom was never trust,
O Beasts most brute, that have no better grace,
All rest, renown, and deeds lie in the dust,
Of all the sort that sue her slipper trace,
How now? Why do thou Baldwin hide thy face?
Thou need not fear, although Imisse my head,
See this poor Boy, whom by the hand I lead.
The cause why I thus lead him in my hand,
With blood, and tears halinge his body staynd,
Is that thou may the better understand,
How hardly Fortune has for us ordaynde
In whom her love and hate be whole contaynde.
Rychard I am Plantagenet by name,
Whilom of York the Duke of worthy fame.
For Richard Earl of Cambridge, eldest son
Of Duke Edmond, third son of King Edward,
Engendered me whereof the course did run,
Of Mortimers to be the Issue guard:
For when Edmond ber brother dyed Ward,
She was sole heir by due descent of line,
Whereby her Rightes, and Titles all were mine.
But mark me now I pray the Baldwin mark,
And see how force often ouerbeareth right,
Way how usurpers tyrannously warke,
To keep by murder that they get by might,
And note what troubles and dangers do alight,
On such as seek to repossesse their own,
And how by might, often right is overthrown.
Duke Henry of Hereforde called Bolenbrooke.
Of whom Duke Mowbray told the now of late,
When traitor like he had king Richard took:
Killed him in prison, usurped his estate,
Without al right, or title, saving hate
Of others rule, or love to rule alone,
These two excepted title had he none.
The Crown by right came to Edmond Mortimer
Whose Father Roger was king Richardes heir,
Which caused Henry, and them of Lancaster,
To seek all shifts our houses to appayre,
For sure he was to sit beside the chair,
Were we of power to claim our lawful right,
And therefore thought good, to extirpe us quight.
His cursed son ensued the fathers trade,
And kept my cousin guiltless in sure hold,
For whom my father full often did persuade,
With his allies and consins that they would.
Their Kinsmans right mainteyn and uphold.
And to depose by policy or power.
The heir of him that was an usurper.
Whereof when Henry of that name the fifth,
Had heard, and knew of this conspiracye,
He from sir Edmond all the blame to shift,
Said that my Father was the French kings aly,
And hired by him to work this trecherye,
For which at Hampton as it came to pass,
His life he lost, and there veheaded was.
Thus was the name of Mortimer extinct,
Whose right and title descended unto me,
Being forced to live, within a precinct
For fear I would to other countries flee
And so being at mine own libertee,
Might haplye move sedicion or strife,
For guilty hearts, can lead no quiet life.
Yet at the last in Henry's days the sixth,
I was restored to my fathers lands,
Made duke of York: where through my mind I fixed,
To get the Crown and kingdom in my hands,
For aid wherein I knit assured bands
With Neuils stock, whose daughter was my make
Whereby great friends I had my part to take.
O Lord what hap had I by marriage,
Four fair Sons my young wife to me bore,
Valiant men and prudent for their age,
Such brothers she had and nephews still in store
As none of the kin had any time before:
The Earl of Salisburie, and his son of Warwick,
Were knights peerless, from Barbary to Barwick.
Through help of whom, and Fortunes friendly grace,
I first began to claim my lawful right,
And my chief foes with stoutnesse to deface.
I raised power at al points pressed to fight:
Of whom the chief that chiefly bare me spite,
Was Somerset the Duke, whom to annoy
Al my hole force, I daily did employ.
And maugre him so choice lo was my chance,
Yea though the Queen was wholly on his side,
I twice vare rule in Normandy and France,
And last lieutenant in Ireland I did bide,
Full often driven of force my head to hyde,
Yet through the love, my doings there did breed,
I had their help at al times in my need.
This doutye Duke most dear to King and Queen,
With armed hoaste, I thrice met in the field,
The first unfought through treaty made between,
The second ioynde wherein the King did yield,
The Duke was slain, the Queen her party held
Far in the North, where ouermatcht with power
My life I lost, in an unlucky hour.
Before this last were other battles three,
The first the Earl of Salisburie alone,
Fought on Bloreheath, and got the victory,
I at the next was present in person
With my chief kin, whereas by one and one,
Our soldiers false, withdrew away by night,
Unto our foes and we put all to flight.
This Boy and I in Ireland did us save,
Mine eldest son with Warwick and his father,
To Calais got, whence by the read I gave
They came again to London, and did gather,
Another host, whereof I spoke no rather:
And met our foes slew many a Lord and knight,
And took the King and drove the Queen to flight.
This dove I came to England all in haste,
New claim to make unto the realm and crown,
And in the house while Parliament did last,
In the Kings seat, I boldly sat me down,
Clayming the place, whereat the Lords did frown,
But what for that, I did so well proceed,
That al at last to my demand agreed.
But since Henry had reigned than so long,
They would be should continue til he dyed.
And to thend to make my title strong,
Apparent heir of England they me cried,
But since the Queen and others this denied,
I sped me straight Northward whereas she lay,
Meaning by force to cause her to obey.
She thereof warned, prepared a strong power.
And ere my men were altogether redye
To Sandale came, where in a dismal hour
I like a Beast, so rash was, and so heddy
To try Fortune, which always is unsteady
With thousands five, of soldiers to assail
The double number, in camp to their avail.
And so was slain at first: and while my pore infant
Scarce twelve year old, sought way himself to save,
That cruel Clifford that fell bloody tyrant,
While the pore child with tears did mercy crave,
With dagger sharp his heart a sunder claue.
This don he came to the camp where I lay dead,
Dispoyld my corpse, and cut away my head.
And set a crown of paper theruppon
Which for a sport he sent unto the Queen
And she for spyte commanded it anon.
To be had to York and set up to be seen.
In some such place as theuis and Traitors been,
This mock I had of fortune for reward,
After long hope that she would me regard
Wherefore Baldwin see that thou set her forth
With her slipper pranks so as they may be known,
And warn all princes well to way the worth
Of things, for which the side of war be sown
The gain no surer but as of dice thrown
No worldly good can counterpeyze the pryse
Of half the pains that may thereof arise.
Better it were to lose a piece of right,
Then limbs and life in wrestling for the same,
It is not force, of friendship nor of might,
But god above that kingdoms set in frame
Not wit, but chance does weild the winners game,
Wherefore if we our follies would refrain,
Time would redress all wrongs we void of pain.
Wherefore warn Lords no wise to wade in war
For any cause, save their countries defense,
Their troublous titles are unworthy far
The blood, the life, the spoil of innocence,
Of scendes, of foes, behold my long expense,
And never the near: best than to tarry time,
Low by the ground, than over high to clyme.
FINIS.
WIth that master Ferrers shoke me by the sleeue saying: why how now man do
you forget your self? belike you mind our matters very much. So I do in
deed (said I) for I dream of them. And when I had rehearsed my dream, we had
long talk concerning the nature of dreams, which to stint, and to bring us
to our matter again, thus said one of them: I am glad it was your chance to
dream of Duke Richard for it had been pity to have ouerpassed him.

And as concerning this Lord Clifforde which so cruelly killed his son, I
purpose to geeue you notes: Who (as he well deserved) came shortly after to a
sudden death, and yet too good for a cruel tyrant. For on Palmesonday next
following, being the 29. Day of March, in the year of Christ, a Thousand
four hundredth threescore and one, this Lord Clifford with Henry Percy the
third Earl of Northumberlande, the Earl of Westmerlande, the Lord Dacres,
the Lord Wells and other were slain at Towton in Yorkeshyre. Wherefore as you
thought you saw and heard the headless Duke speak through his neck, so now
suppose you see this Lord Clifford al armed save his head, with his Breast
plate all gore blood running from his throat, wherein an headless Arrowe
sticks, through which wound, he ratleth out this Rhyme.

How the Lord Clifforde for his extreme cruelty, came to a cruel, strange,
and sudden death. Anno. 1461.
OPen confession asks open Penance,
Yet wisdom would a man his fault should hide:
But since pardon comes by repentance,
Playnesse is best when truth is plainly tryde,
Open or hid, al faults at length be spyed.
For cover fire never so close within,
Yet out it will and so will secret sin.
As for my self, my faults be out so plain,
Bruted and known abroad in every place,
That though I would I cannot them reteyne,
Al care is bootelesse in a curelesse case,
To learn by others some have had the grace,
Wherefore Baldwin, write thou my wretched fall,
The brief whereof I briefly utter shall.
Clifford I am that slew Duke Richards child,
The lovely babe that craved life with tears:
Whereby my fame, most foully I defiled
Pore sely Lambs the Lion never tears,
The feeble mouse may ly among great bears
But wrath of man his rancoure to requyt,
Forgets al reason, ruth and mercy quyte.
I mean such wrath as works parental wreke
Surnamed a virtue (as these reuengers say)
But little know those people what they speak
Which kyndle us, our ennemis kin ^o slay,
To punish sin is good, it is no nay.
They wreke not sin, but merit wreke for sin,
The fathers faults that wreake upon the kin.
Because my father Lord John Clifforde died
Slain at S. Albanes, in his princes aid,
Against the Duke my heart for malice fried,
So that I could from wreke no way be stayde
But to avenge my fathers death assayd
Al means I might the Duke of York tannoy:
And all his kyn and friends to kill and stroy.
This caused me with bloody dagger wou^d
His giltles son that never against me stord:
The fathers corpse dead lying on the ground,
The neck I cut asunder with my sword
The bleding head I pight by way of board,
Upon a spear, with a white paper crown
And in great scorn I sent it to York town.
But cruel deeds can never escape the scourge
Of open shame, or of some bloody death,
Repentance self that other sins may pourge,
Does fly from this, so sore the soul it slays,
Despair dissolues the tyrants blustering breath:
For vengeance due does suddenly alight,
On cruel deeds the mischief to requite,
This find I true, for as I lay in stale
Against Coward Duke Richards eldest son
My death I caught not far from Dintingale
For as I would my gorget have undone
To vent out heat traueiling in the son
An headles arrowe percyd my throat boule
Which parted straight my body from the soul.
Was this a chance? no sure Gods just award
Wherein his justice plainly does appear:
An headles arrow paid me my reward,
For headding Richard lying on his bear,
And as I would his child in no wise hear,
So sudden death bereft my tongue the power
To ask mercy at my last dying hour.
Wherefore Baldwin persuade the bloody sort.
To leave their wrath, and rigor to refrain:
Tell cruel judges horror is the port
To which they sail to suffer endless pain
Hell haseth tyrants down to death amayne.
Was never yet nor shall be cruel deed
Vnquy^ed lefe but had as cruel meede.
FINIS
When this tragedy was ended, O Lord said another, how horrible a thing is
division in a Realm, to how many mischieues is it the mother, what vice is
not thereby kindled, what virtue left unquenched?

For what was the cause of the Duke of Yorkes death and of the cruelty showed
to his young son by this merciless man, save the variaunce between King
Henry and the house of York: which at length besides millions of the Commons,
brought to destruction most part of the nobility. For Edward the Dukes eldest
son immediately after Richard his father was slain, through help of the
Neuils gave the king a battle at Towton in Yorkshire, whereat besides this
Clifford, were slain y^ Earls of Northumberlande, and Westmerland, with the
Lords Dacres and Wells, besides mo then 3000. men, the winning of which fyeld
brought Edward to the Crown, and the loss drove K. Henry and his wife into
Scotland. But as few reigns begin without blood, so King Edward to keep
the common course, caused Thomas Courtney earl of Deuonshyre, and John Veer
Earl of Oxenford, and Awbrey Veer eldest son to y^ said Earl, with diverse
other of King Henry's part, to be attainted and put to death. And shortly
after did execution upon the Duke of Somerset, and the Lords Hungerford, and
Rosse, whom he took prisoners at Exham fyelde. For thither came those Lords
with king Henry out of Scotland, with an army of Scots, and sought a Battle,
which they lost, wherein most part of them were slain. And because these are
al noble men I will leave them to Baldwins discrecion.

But seeinge the Earl of Worcester was the chief instrument, whom king Edward
used as well in these men's matters, as in like bloudye affairs, because he
should not be forgotten, ye shall hear what may be noted by his end.

THE INFAMOVS END of the Lord Tiptoft, Earl of VVorcestre, for executing his
princes cruelty. Anno. 1470.
THe glorious man, is not so loath to Wurke,
As the infamous glad to lie unknown:
Which makes me Baldwin disalow thy lurk,
Where Princes faults so openly be blown,
I speak not this alonelye for mine own
Which were my Princes (if that they were any)
But for my Pieres, in number very many.
Or might report uprightly use her tongue,
It would less grieve us to augment the matter.
But sure I am thou shall be forced among,
To frayne the truth, the living for to flatter:
And other whiles in points unknown to smatter.
For time never was, nor never I think shall be
That truth vnshent, should speak in all things free.
This does appear (I dare say) by my storye,
Which diverse writers diversely declare,
But story writers ought for neither glory,
Fear, nor favor, truth of things to spare,
But still it fares as always it did fare,
Affections, fear, or doubts that daily brue,
Do cause that stories always be not true.
Unfruitful Fabian followed the face
Of time and deeds, but let the causes slip,
Which Hall has added some with better grace,
For fear I think lest trouble might him trip:
For this or that (says he) he felt the whip.
This story writers leave the causes out,
Or show them so as they were in some dout.
But seeing causes are the chefest things
That should be noted of the story writers,
That men may learn what ends al causes bringes,
They be unworthy the name of Chroniclers
That leave them clean out of their registers,
Or doubtfully report them for the fruit
Of reading stories stands in the suite.
Wherefore Baldwin either speak thou vpryght
Of our affaiers, or touch them not at all
As for my self I way al things so light,
That naught I pass, how men report my fall
The truth whereof yet plainly show I shall
That thou may write and other thereby reed,
What things I did whereof they should take heed.
Thou have heard of Tiptoftes Earls of Worcester,
I am that Lord that lived in Edwardes days
The fowerth, and was his friend and counsailour,
And Butcher too, as common rumor says.
But Peoples voice is neither shame nor praise,
For whom they would alive devour to day,
To morrow dead they will worship what they may.
But though the peoples verdite go by chance,
Yet was their cause to call me as they did,
For I enforst by mean of Governance,
Did execute what ere my king did bid,
From blame therein my self I cannot ryd:
But fie upon the wretched state that must,
Defame it self to serve the Princes lust.
The chiefest crime wherewith men dome charge,
Is death of the Earl of Desmundes noble sons,
Of which the kings charge does me clear discharge
By strait commandment and injunctions:
Theffect whereof so rigourouslye runs
That either I must procure to see them dead,
Or for contempt as traitor loose my head.
What would mine enemies do in such a case,
Obey the king or proper death procure?
They may well say their fancy for a face,
But life is sweet and love hard to recure,
They would have done as I did I am sure:
For seeldom will a wealthy man atease,
For others cause his Prince in ought displease.
How much less I which was lieutenaunt than
In the Irish Isle, preferred by the king:
But who for love or dread of any man
Consentes to accomplish any wicked thing,
Although chief fault thereof from other spring,
Shall not escape Gods vengeance for his deed:
Who scuseth none that dare do il for dreede.
This in my king and me may well appear,
Which for our faults did not escape the scourge:
For when we thought our state most sure and clear,
The wind of Warwick blew up such a sourge,
As from the realm and crown, the king did urge,
And me also from office, friends and wife,
From good report, from honest death and life.
The Earl of Warwick, through malice and grudge,
Which to King Edward causeless he did bear,
Out of his Realm by force did make him trudge,
And set King Henry again upon his chair,
And than al such as Edwardes lovers were
As traytaurs taken, were grievously oppressed,
But chiefelye I, because I loved him best.
And si^h my goods, and liuinges were not small,
Some greedy gulles did bear the world in hand
For ten years space that I was cause of all
Murder, and mischief, done within the land,
For this did such as did not understand
Mine enmies drift, think all reports were true:
And so to hate me worse then any Jew.
For seeldome shall a ruler loose his life,
Before false rumors openly be spread,
Whereby this proverb is as true as ryfe,
That rulers rumors hunt about a head,
Frown Fortune once all good report is fled,
For present show does make the mainy blind,
And such as see dare not disclose their mind.
Through this was I king Edwards butcher named
And bare the shame of all his cruel deeds:
I clear me not I worthily was blamed,
Though force was such I must obaye him needs,
With hiest rulers seldom well it speedes,
For they be ever nearest to the nyp,
And fault who shall, for all feel they the whyp.
For when I was by Parliament attainted,
King Edwardes evils al were counted mine.
No truth auayled so lies were fast and painted,
Which made the People at my life repine,
Crying Crucifige kill that Butchers line,
That when I should have gone to Blockham feast
I could not pass, so sore they on me pressed.
And had not been the officers so strong,
I think they would have swalowed me alive,
Howbeit hardly haled from the throng,
I was in the Fleet fast shrouded by the Shriue,
Thus one days life their malice did me give:
Which when they knew, for spite the next day after,
They kept them calm, so suffered I the slaughter
Now tell me Baldwin what fault do thou find
In me, that justly should such death deserve?
None sure, except desire of honor blind,
Which made me seek in offices to serve:
What mind so good that honors make not swerue?
So may thou see it only was mystate
That caused my Death and brought me so in hate.
Warn therefore al men wisely to beware,
What offices they enterprise to bear:
The highest always most maligned are,
Of Peoples grudge, and princes hate in fear,
For Princes faults his faultors al men tear.
Which to avoid, let none such office take,
Save he that can for right his Prince forsake.
FINIS.
THis Typtoftes Tragedye was not so sone ^inished, but one of the company had
provided for another, of a notable person Lord Tiptoftes chief Enemy,
concerning whom he said: Lord God what trust is there in worldly chau^ces?
what stay in any prosperity? for see the Earl of Warwick which caused the
earl of Worcester to be apprehended, attainted, and put to death, triumphing
with his old imprisoned and new vnprisonned Prince K. Henry, was by and by
after and his brother with him, slain at Barnet field by king Edward whom he
had before time damaged diverse ways. As first by his friends at Banbury
field, where to revenge the death of his cousin Henry Neuil sir John Coniers,
and John Clappa^ his servants slew 5. thousand welshme^ and beheaded their
captains, the Earl of Pembroke, and sir Richard Harbert his brother after
they were yielded prisoners, of whom sir Richard Harbert was the tallest
gentleman both of his person and hands that ever I read or heard of. At which
time also, Robin of Ridsdale, a rebel of therle of Warwicks raising, took the
earl Rivers K. Edwards wives father, and his son John, at his manor of
Grafton, and carried them to Northhampton, and there without cause or process
beheaded them: Which spites to requite, king Edward caused the Lord Stafford
of Southwike, one of Warwickes chief ^^indes, to be taken at Burnt march, and
headed at Bridgewater.

This caused yt Earl shortly to raise his power, to encounter the king which
came against him with an army, beside Warwick at Wol^ey, where he wan the
field, took the king prisoner, and kept him a while in Yorkeshyre in Middleham
castle: whence (as some say) he released him again, but other think he corrupted
his kepers and so escaped. Then through the Lords ye matter was taken up
between them and they brought to talk together, but because they could not
agree, y^ earl araised a new army, whereof he made Captain the Lord Wells
son, which broile king Edward minding to appease by policy foully distained
his honor committing perjury for he sent for the Lord Wells and his brother
Sir Thomas Dymocke, vndersafe conduite promising them upon his faith to keep
them harmless: But after, because yt Lord Wells son would not dissolve his
army, beheaded them both and went with his power into Lincolnshyre and there
fought with Sir Robert Wells, and slew ten thousand of his soldiers (yet ran
they a way so fast, that casting of their clothes for yt more speed, caused it
to be called Lose coat field (and took sir Robert and other, and put them to
death in the same place.

This misfortune forced the Earl of Warwick to sail into France where he
was entertained of y^ king a while, and at last with such pore help as he
procured there of Duke Rainer, and other, he came into England again, and
increased such a power in king Henry's name, that as the Lord Tiptofte said
in his tragedy, king Edward unable to abide him, was feign to fly over the
washes in Lincolnshyre to get a ship to sail out of his kingdom to his brother
in law the Duke of Burgoine: So was king Henry restored again to yt kingdom.
Al these despites, and troubles the Earl wroughte against king Edward. But
Henry was so unfortunate that ere half a year was expyred, king Edward came
back again, and emprisoned him, and gave ye Earl a field, wherein he slew
both him, and his brother. I have recounted thus much before hand for ye better
opening of the story, which if it should have bin spoken in his Tragedy would
rather have made a volume than a Pamphlete. For I entend only to say in ye
Tragedy, what I have noted in the Earl of Warwickes person, wishinge that
these other noble men, who^ I have by the way touched, should not be forgotten.

And therefore imagine that you see this Earl lyinge with his brother in Poules
Church in his Coat armure, with such a Face, and Countenance as he bears
in Portrayture over ye door in Poules at the goinge down to Jesus Chapple from
the South end of the Quier stayres, and saying as follows.

HOW SIR RICHARD Neuill Earl of Warwick, and his Brother John, Lord Marquise
Montacute, through their to mutch boldness were slain at Barnet, the 14. of
April. Anno. 1471. *
Among the heavy heap of happy Knights
Whom Fortune stald upon her staylesse stage,
Often hoyst on high, often pight in wretched plightes,
Behold me Baldwin, A per se of my age,
Lord Richard Neuill, Earl by marriage
Of Warwick Duchy, of Sarum by descent,
Which erlt my father through his marriage hent.
VVouldste thou behold false Fortune in her kind
Note well my self so shall thou see her naked:
Full fair before, but tootoo foul behind,
Most drowsy still when most she seems awaked:
My fame, and shame her shift full often has shaked,
By enterchaunge allow, and up aloft,
The Lylard like that changes hew full often.
For while the Duke of York in life remayn'de
Mine uncle deace, I was his happy hand:
In all attempts my purpose I attayn'de,
Though King, and Queen, and most Lords of the Land
With all their power did often me withstand:
For God gave Fortune, and my good behavior
Did from their Prince steal me the peoples favor.
So that through me in fields right manly fought:
By force mine uncle took king Henry twyse,
As for my cousin Edward I so wrought.
When both our syers were slain through rash advice
That he at chie^de his fathers enterprise:
For into Scotland king and Queen we chased,
By mean whereof the kingdom he embraced.
Which after he had enjoyed in quiet peace,
(For shortly after was king Henry take,
And put in prison his power to increase,
I went to France and match him with a make
The French kings daughter, whom he did forsake:
For while with pain I brought this suit to pass,
He to a widow rashly wedded was.
This made the French king shreudly to mistrust,
That all my treaties had but ill pretense,
And when I saw my king so bent to lust,
That with his faith he past not to dispense,
Which is a Princes honors chief defense:
I could not rest til I had found a mean.
To mend his miss, or else to mar him clean.
Wherefore I me allied with his brother George,
Encensing him his brother to malign
Through many a tale I did against him forge:
So that through power that we from Calais bring
And found at home we fcayd so the king,
That he did fly to Freseland ward amayn,
Whereby king Henry had the crown again.
Than put we therle of Worcester to death
King Edwardes friend a man lo foul defamed
And in the while came Edward into breath.
For with the Duke of Burgoyne so he framed
That with the power that he to him had named,
Unlooked for he came to England straight
And got to York and took the town by sleight.
And after through the sufferance of my brother,
Which like a beast occasion foully lost,
He came to London safe with many other
And took the town to good king Henryes cost:
Who was through him from post to pillar tossed,
Til Therle of Oxeford, I and other more,
Assembled power his fredome to restore.
VVher of king Edward warned came with speed,
And camped with his host in Barnet town
Where we right fearce encountered him in deed
On Easter day right early on the down:
There many a man was slain and stricken down
One either side and neither part did gain
Til that I and my brother both were slain.
For we to heart our ouermatched men,
Forsake out stedes, and in the thickest thronge,
Ran preacing forth on f^te, and fought so then
That down we drove them were they never so strong
But ere this luck had lasted very long:
With number and force we were so foully cloyed,
And rescue fayld, that quite we were distroyed,
Now tell me Baldwin have thou hard or read
Of any man that did as I have done?
That in his time so many armies l^d,
And victory at every voyage won?
Have thou ever hard of subject under son,
That pl^ast and beast his sovereign so often,
By enterchaunge now low and then aloft:
Perchance thou think my doings were not such
As I and other do affirm they were.
And in thy mind I se thou musest much
What means I used, that should me so prefer:
Wherein because I will thou shall not err
The truth of al I will at large recite,
The short is this: I was no hypocrite.
I never did nor said save what I meant,
The common weal was still my chefest care
To private gayn or glory was I never bent,
I never past upon delicious fate.
Of nedeful food my board was never bare,
N^ creditour did curse me day by day
I used playnenesse, ever pitch and pay.
I heard poor soldiers and pore workmen whyne
Because their duties were not truly paid.
Again I saw how people did repyne
At those through whom their payments were delayde
And proof did often assure (as scripture said)
That god does wreke the wretched peoples greues.
I saw the polles cut of from polling thieves.
This made me always justly for to deal,
Which when the people plainly understood,
Because they saw me mind the common weal.
They still endeavored how to do me good,
Ready to spend their substance, life, and blood,
In any cause whereto I did them move:
For suer they were it was for their behoue.
And so it was. For when the Realm decayed
By such as good King Henry sore abused,
To mend the state I gave his Enemies aid:
But when King Edward sinful pra^ks still used,
And would not mend, I likewise him refused:
And help up Henry, better of the twain,
And in his Quarrel (just I think) was slain.
And therefore Baldwin teach by proof of me,
That such as covet peoples love to get,
Must see their works, and words in all agree:
Live liberally, and keep them out of det,
On common weal let all their care be set:
For upright dealinge, debts paid, poor sustained,
Is mean whereby all hearts are thoroughly gained.
FINIS.
AS soon as y^ Earl had ended this admonition, sure (said one) I think the
Earl of Warwick although he were a glorious man has said no more of
himself than what is true. For if he had not had notable good virtues, or
virtuous qualities, and used lawdable means in his trade of life, the people
would never have loved him, as they did: But God be with him, and send his soul
rest, for sure his body never had any. And although he dyed, yet civil wars
ceased not. For immediately after his death came Queen Margaret with a power out
of France, bringing with her, her yongue sone Prince Edward: and with such
friends as she found here, gave King Edward a battle at Thewkesbury, where
both she, and her son were taken prisoners, with Edmond Duke of Somerset her
chief captain: whose son Lord Ihon, and the Earl of Devonshire were slain
in fight, and the Duke himself with diverse other immediately beheaded. Whose
infortunes are worthy to be remembered, chiefly Prince Edwards, whom the King
for speaking truth, cruelly stroke with his Gaunt^et, and his Brethren cruelly
murdered. But seeinge yt time so far spent, I will pass them over, and with
them Fawconbridge that ioly Rou^r beheaded at Southampton: whose commotio^ made
in Kent, was cause of sely Henry's destruction. And seeing king Henry himself
was cause of the destruction of many noble princes, being of all other most
unfortunate himself, I will declare what I have noted in his unlucky life: Who
wounded in Prison with a Dagger, may lament his wretchedness in manner
followinge. *

HOW KING HENRY the sixth a virtuous Prince, was after many other miseries,
cruelly murdered in the Tower of London the. 22. of May. Anno. 1471. *
IF ever woeful wight had cause so rue his state,
Or by his rufull plight to move men moan his fate.
My pitious plaint may preass^. my mishap to rehearce,
Whereof ye least most lightly hard, y^ hardest heart may pearce.
What heart so hard can hear of Innocence oppressed,
By fraud in worldly goods, but mealte to in the breast?
When guiltless men be spo^^^, imprisonned for their own,
Who waileth not their wretched case to who^ y^ case is known.
The Lion licks the sores of sely wounded Sheep,
The dead man's Corse cause the Crocodile to weep,
The Waves that waste the Rocks refresh the rotten Reeds.
Such ruth yt wrack of Innocence in cruel creatures bredes.
What heart is then so hard but will for pity bleed.
To hear so cruel luck so clear a life succeed?
To see a sel^ Soul with woe, and sorrow so^st,
A King depriu'de, in Prison pent, to death with daggers doust
Would God the day of Birth bad brought me to my bear,
Then had I never felt the change of Fortunes cheer,
Would God the Grave had gript me in her greedy Wound,
Wha^ crown in cradel made me king with Oil of holy Thou^be.
Would God the rufull Toumbe had been my royal Trone,
So should no kingly charge have made me make my moan:
O that my Soul had slowen to Heaven with the Joy,
When one ^ort cried, God save y^ king another, Viue le Roy.
So had I not been washed in Waves of worldly woe,
My mind to q^iet bent, had not been tossed so:
My Friends had be^e a live, my Subjects not oprest,
But Death, or cruel Desteny, denied me this rest.
Alas what should we count the cause of Wretches cares,
The Stars do stir them up, Astronomy declares:
Our humors says the Leach, the double true deuines
Toth'will of God, or ill of man, the doubtful cause assigns.
Such doltish heads as dream that al things drive by haps.
Count lack of former care for cause of after claps.
Attributinge to man a power fro God be rest,
Abusinge us, and robbinge him through their most wicked theft,
But God does guide the World, and every hap by skill,
Our Wit, and willinge power are payzed by his will:
What wit most wisely wardee, and will most deadly vrkes,
Though all our power would press it down, does dashe our warest wurkes.
Than Desteny, our sin, Gods will or else his wreake
Do work our wretched woes, for humors be to weak:
Except we t^ke them so, as they provoke to sin,
For through our lust by humors fed al vicious deeds begin.
So sin and they be one, both working like effect,
And cause the wrath of God to wreake the soul infect.
Thus wrath and wreake divine, man's sins and humors ill
Concur in one, though in a sort, each does a course fulfill.
If likewise such as say the welkin Fortune warks,
Take Fortune for our fate and sterres thereof the marks,
Then desteny with fate and Gods will all be one:
But if they mean it otherwise, skath causers skies be none
Thus of our heavy haps chief causes be but twayn,
Whereon the rest depend, and under put remain.
The chief, the will divine, called desteny and fate,
The other sin through humors holp, which God does highlye hate
The first appoynteth pain for good men's exercise,
The second does deserve due punishment for vice:
This witnesses the wrath, and that the love of God
The good for love, yt bad for sin, God beats with his rod.
Although my sundry sins do place me with the worst,
My haps yet cause me hope to be among the first:
The eye that searches al and sees every thought,
Is judge how sore I hated sin, and after virtue sought.
That solace of my soul my chiefest pleasure was,
Of worldly pomp, of fame, or game, I did not pass:
My kingdoms nor my crown I prysed not a crum,
In heaven were my riches heapt, to which I sought to com,
Yet were my sorrows such as never man had like,
So diverse storms at once, so often did me strike:
But why, God knows, not I, except it were for this
To show by pattern of a Prince, how brittle honor is.
Our kingdoms are but cares, our state deuoyde of slaye,
Our riches ready snares, to hasten our decay:
Our pleasures, privy pricks, our vices to provoke,
Our po^pe, a pumpe, our fame, a flame, our power, a smouldri^g smoke.
I speak not but by proof, and that may many rue,
My life does cry it out, my death does try it true:
Whereof I will in brief, rehearse the heavy hap,
That Baldwi^ in his woeful warp, my wretchedness may wrap
In Windsore borne I was: and bare my fathers name,
Who won by war all France to his eternal fame:
And left to me the crown, to be receiu'de in peace
Through marriage made with Charles his heir upon his life's decease,
Which shortly did enfue, yet dyed my father furst,
And both the Realms were mine ere I a year were nursed:
Which as they fell to soon, so faded they as fast
For Charles, and Edward got them both or forty years were past.
This Charles was eldest son of Charles my father in law,
To whom as heir of France, the Frenchmen did them draw:
But Edward was the heir of Richard Duke of York,
The heir of Roger Mortimer: slain by the kerne of Korke.
Before I came to age Charles had recovered France,
And killed my men of War, so lucky was his chance:
And through a mad contract I made with Raynerds daughter
I gave and lost all Normandy, the cause of many a slaughter.
First of mine uncle Humfrey, abhorringe sore this act,
Because I there by brake a better precontract:
Than of the flattering Duke that first the marriage made,
The just reward of such as dare their Princes ill persuade.
And I poor seely wretch abode the brunt of all,
My marriage lust so sweet, was mixed with bitter Gall.
My Wife was wise and good, had she bin rightly sought,
But our unlawful getting it, may make a good thing naught.
Wherefore warn men beware, how they just promise break
Least proof of paynful plagues do cause them wail ye wreake
Advise well ere they grant, but what they grant perform,
For God will plague al doublenes although we feel no worm.
I falsely borne in hand, believed I did well,
But all things be not true that learned men do tell:
My clergy said a Prince was to no promise bound,
Whose words to be no Gospel tho I to my grief have found
For after marriage joined Queen Margaret and me,
For one mishap before, I daily met with three,
Of Normandy, and France, Charles got away my Crown,
The duke of York and other sought at home to put me down.
Bellona rang the bell at home and al abroad,
With whose mishaps amayne fell Fortune did me lode:
In France I lost my forces, at home the foughten field,
My kynred slain, my friends oppressed, my self enforst to yield
Duke Richard took me twice, and forced me to resine
My crown and titles due unto my fathers line:
And kept me as a ward did al things as him list,
Til yt my wife through bloody sword had rane me from his fist.
But though we slew the Duke my sorrows did not slake,
But like to Hyders head still more and more awake:
For Edward through the aid of Warwick and his brother
From one field drove me to the Scots, and took me in another
Then went my friends to wrack, for Edward ware y^ crown
For which for nine years space his prison held me down:
Yet thence through Warwickes work I was again releast,
And Edward driven fro y^ realm to seek his friends by East.
But what prevails pain or providence of man,
To help him to good hap, whom desteny does ban?
Who moyleth to remove the rock out of the mud,
Shall mier himself and hardly escape the swelling of the find
This al my friends have found, and I have felt it so
Ordaynde to be the touch of wretchedness and woe,
For ere I had a year possessed my seat again,
I lost both it and liberty, my helpers al were slain.
For Edward first by stealth, and since by gathered strength,
Arriude and got to York, and London at the length:
Took me and tied me up, yet warwick was so stout,
He came with power to Barnet field, in hope to help me out
And there alas was slain, with many a worthy knight.
O Lord that ever such luck should hap in helping right:
Last came my wife and son, that long lay in exile,
Defied the king, and fought a field, I may dewaile the while.
For there main only son, not thirtene year of age
Was taken, and murdered straight by Edward in his rage:
And shortly I my self to stint al further strife,
Stabbe with his brothers bloody blade in prison lost my life
Lo here the heavy ^aps, which happened me by heap,
See here the pleasant fruictes, that many Princes reap,
The paynfull plagues of those yt break their lawful bands.
Their mede which may and will not save their friends fro bloody hands.
God grant my woeful haps, tao grievous to rehearse,
May teach al states to know how diepely dangers pearce:
How frail al honors are, how brittle worldly bliss,
That warned through my fearful fate they fear to do amiss
FINIS.
THis tragedy ended, another said: either you or King Henry are a good
Philosopher so narrowly to argue ye causes of misfortunes? but there is
nothing to experience which taught, or might teach the king this lesson.

But to proceed in our matter: I find mention here shortly after ye death of
this king, of a Duke of Excester found dead in the sea between Dover and
Calais, but what he was, or by what adventure he died, master Fabian has not
showed, and master Hall has ouerskipped him: so that except we be frendlier
unto him, he is like to be double drowned, both in sea, and in the gulf of
forgetfulness. About this matter was much talk, but because one took upon him
to seek out that story, that charge was committed to him.

And to be occupied in ye mean while I have found the story of one drowned
likewise, and that so notable, though privily, that all the world knew of it
wherefore I said: because night approaches, and y^ we will loose no time, ye
shall hear what I have noted concerning the Duke of Clarence, king Edwards
brother, who al to be washed in Wine, may bewail his infortune after this
manner. *

HOW GEORGE PLANtagenet third Son of the Duke of York, was by his Brother.
K. Edward wrongfully imprisoned, and by his Brother Richard miserably murdered
the. 11. of January. Anno. 1448.
THe Foul is foul men say, that files the Nest,
Which makes me loath to speak, now might I choose,
But seeinge time vnburdend has her breast,
And Fame blown up the blast of all abuse,
My silence rather might my life accuse
Than shroude our shame, though feign I would it so
For truth will out, although the world say no.
Wherefore Baldwin with tearis I the beseech
To pause a while upon my heavy plaint,
And though uneath I utter speedy speech,
No fault of wit nor folly makes me faint:
No heady drincks hane given my tongue attaynt
Through Quaffiuge craft, yet Wine my Wits confound
Not which I drancke, but wherein I was dround.
What Prince I am although I need not show,
Because my wine bewrayes me by the smell,
For never creature was loust in Bacchus dew
To death, but I through Fortunes rigor fell:
Yet that thou may my story better tell,
I will declare as briefly as I may,
My wealth, my woe, and causers of decay.
The famous house surnam'de Plantagenet,
VVhereat Dame Fortune frowardly did frown,
While Bolenbroke unjustly sought to set:
His Lord King Richard quite beside the Crown,
Though many a day it wanted due renown,
God so preferred by providence, and grace,
That lawful Heirs did never fail the Race.
For Lionell King Edwards second child,
Both Eame, and Heir to Richard issulesse,
Begot a Daughter Philip, whom vndefylde
The Earl of March espous'de, and God did bless
With fruit assin'de the Kingdom to possess:
I mean Sir Roger Mortimer, whose Heir
The Earl of Cambridge married Anne the Fair.
This Earl of Cambridge Richard clepte by name,
Was son to Edmond Langley Duke of York:
Which Edmond was fifth brother to the same,
Duke Lionell that all this Line does Korke:
Of which two houses joined in a Forke,
My Father Richard Prince Plantagenet
True Duke of York, was lawful Heir beget.
Who took to Wise as ye shall understand
A Maiden of a Noble house, and old,
Raulfe Neutis Daughter, Earl of Westmerland:
Whose Son Earl Richard was a Baron bold,
And had the right of Salisbury in hold,
Through marriage made with good Earl Thomas Hair,
Whose earned praises never shall appayre.
The Duke my father had by this his wife
Four sons, of whom the eldest Edward hight,
The second Edmond who in youth did lose his life,
At Wakefield slain by Clyfford cruel Knight,
I George am third of Clarence Duke by right,
The fowerth borne to the mischief of us all,
Was Duke of Gloucester whom men did Richard call.
When as our Sire in suit of right was slain,
(Whose life, and death himself declared erst)
My brother Edward, the Quarrel styrd again,
And wan the Crown as Warwick has rehearst:
The pride whereof so deep his stomach pearst
That little passinge on them that brought him in,
Forgot his friends, and set at naught his kin.
Which made the Earl of Warwick to malign,
His dealinge ingrate, and to attempt away,
From prison to enlarge Henry the sely King,
Him to restore to Kingdom if he may,
And knowinge me, to be the chiefest stay
My Brother had, he did me undermine
To his ill practice the sooner to incline.
VVhereto I was prepared long before,
Because the king to me was so unkind:
No canker sure, soft flesh does fret so sore,
As unkind dealinge does a louinge mind.
Loves strongest bands unkindness does unbind,
It moves love to malice, zeal to h^te,
Chief friends to foes, and brethren to debate.
And though the Earl of Warwick subtle sire,
(...) I bare a grudge against my brother,
Yet toward his feate to set me more on fire,
He kindled up one firebrand with another:
For knowinge Fancy was the forcinge rother
Which stirs youth to any kind of strife,
He offered me his daughter to my Wife.
Where through, and with his crafty filed tongue,
He stale my heart that erst unsteady was:
For I was witless, wanton, fond, and yongue,
Whole bent to pleasure, brittle as the glass:
I cannot lie, In vino veritas.
I did esteem the bewty of my Bride
Above my self, and all the world beside.
These fond affections joined with lack of skill,
(Which trap the heart, and blind the eyes of youth,
And pricked the mind to practice any ill)
So tickled me that void of kindly truth:
(Which if it want all wretchedness ensues)
I stinted not to persecute my brother,
Till time he left his kingdom to another.
Thus carnal love did quench the love of kind,
Till lust were lost through fancy fully fed:
But when at length I came unto my mind
I saw how lewdly lightness had me led,
To seek with pain the peril of my head:
For had King Henry once been settled, sure,
I was assuer'd my days could not endure.
And therefore, though I bound my self with oath
To help king Henry all that ever I might,
Yet at the treaty of my Brethren both,
Which reason granted to require but right,
I left his part whereby be perished quite:
And reconcil'de me to my Brethren twain,
And so came Edward to the Crown again.
This made my Father in law to treat, and fume,
To stamp, and stare, and cal'de me false forsworn,
And at the length with all his power presume,
To help King Henry utterly foriorne.
Our friendly Profers still he took in scorn,
Refused peace, and came to Barnet field,
And there was ki^'de because he would not yield.
His Brother also there with him was slain,
Whereby decay'de the Keys of Chiualry.
For never lived the matches of them twain,
In Manhood, Power, and Martial policy,
In vertous thewes, and friendly constancy,
That would to God if it had been his will
They might have tourn'de to us, and lived still.
But what shall be, shall be: there is no choice,
Things needs must drive as desteny decrees,
For which ought in all out haps rejoice,
Because the eye eterne, all thing foreseeth
Which to no ill at any time agrees,
For ils, to ill to us, be good to it,
So far his skils exceed our reach of Wit.
The wounded man which must abide the smart,
Of stitchinge up, or searinge of his sore,
As thing to had, reproues the Surgeons art
Which notwithstanding does his health restore,
The child likewise to Science plied sore,
Countes knowledge ill, his Teacher to be wood,
Yet Surgery, and Sciences be good.
But as the Pacients grief, and Scholars pain,
Cause them dream bad such things as sure be best,
So want of Wisdom causes us complain,
Of every hap, whereby we seem oppressed:
The poor do pine for Pelf, the rich for rest,
And when as loss or sickness us assail,
We curse our Fate, our Fortune we bewail.
Yet for our good, God works every thing:
For through the death of these two noble Peers
My Brother lived, and raygned a quiet King,
Who had they lived perchance in course of Years
Would have delivered Henry fro the Breres,
Or holy his Son t'enioy the careful crown,
Whereby our Ligne should have been quite put down.
A careful Crown it may be justly named,
Not for the cares which thereto been annexed,
To see the Subject well and duly framed,
With which good care few Kings are greatly vexed
But for the dread wherewith they are perplexed,
Of loosinge Lordship, Liberty, or Life:
Which woeful wracks in Kingdoms happen rife.
The which to shun while some to sore have sought.
They have not sparde all persons to suspect:
And to destroy such as they guilty thought,
Though no apparaunce proved them infect,
Take me for one of this wrong punished sect,
Imprisoned first, accused without cause,
And done to death no process had by laws.
Wherein I note how vengeance does acquit
Like ill, for ill, how vices virtue quell:
For as my marriage love did me excite
Against the King my Brother to rebel,
So love to have his children prosper well,
Provoked him against both law, and right,
To murder me, his Brother, and his Knight.
For by his Queen two Prince like Sons he had,
Borne to be punished for their Parents sin:
Whose Fortunes kalked made the father sad,
Such woeful haps were found to be therein:
Which to avouch, writ in a rotten Skin,
A prophesy was found which said a G.
Of Edwards children should destruction be.
He to be G. because my name was George,
My brother thought, and therefore did me hate,
But woe be to that wicked heads that forge
Such doubtful dreams to breed unkind debate:
For God, a Gleue, a Gibbet, Grate, or Gate,
A Gray, a Griffeth, or a Gregory,
As well as George are written with a G.
Such doubtful riddles are no prophecies.
For prophecies, in writing though obscure,
Are plain in sense, the dark be very lies:
What God foresheweth is evident, and pure,
Truth is no Harold, nor no Sophist sure:
She notes not men's Names, their Shieldes, nor Creasts,
Though she compare them unto Byrds, and Beasts.
But whom she does foreshewe shall rain by force,
She terms a Wolf, a Dragon, or a Bear:
A wilful Prince a raynlesse raging horse.
A Bore, a Lion: a Coward mutch in fear
A Hare, or Heart: a crafty, pricked Ear:
A Letcherous, a Bull, a Goat, a Foale:
An vndermyner, a Moldwarpe, or a Mole.
By known beasts thus truth does plain declare
What men they be of whom she speaks before.
And who so can men's properties compare
And make what beast they do resemble more,
Shall soon discern who is the griesly bore.
For God by beasts expresses men's conditions,
And not their Badges, Harroldes, Supersticions.
And learned Merlyne, whom God gave the spirit,
To know, and utter Princes Acts to come,
Like to the Iewishe Prophets, did recite
In shade of Beasts their doings all, and some,
Expressinge plain by manners of the down,
That Kings, and Lords such properties should have
As have the beasts, whose name he to them gave.
(...) He knew my Brother Richard was the Bore,
Whose Tuskes should tear my Brothers Boys, and Me,
And gave me warninge thereof long before.
But Wit, nor warninge can in no degree
Let things to hap, which are ordayn'de to be.
Witness the painted Lioness, which slew
A Prince imprisoned, Lions to eshew.
He told me eke my yoke fellow should dye,
(Wherein would God be had bin no divine)
And after her death I should woo earnestly
A Spouse, whereat my Brother would repine:
And find the means she should be none of mine.
For which such malice should among us rise,
As save my death no treaty should decise.
And as he said so all things came to pass:
For when K. Henry and his Son were slain,
And every broyle so thoroughly quenched was,
That the King my Brother quietly did raygne,
I, reconsiled to his love again,
In prosperous health did lead a quiet life,
For five years space with honors laden rife.
And to augment the fullness of my bliss,
Two lovely children by my Wife I had:
But froward hap, whose manner ever is,
In chiefest joy, to make the happy sad,
Bemixt my sweet with bitterness to bad:
For while I swim in joys on every side,
My louinge Wife, my chiefest Jewel dyed.
Whose lack when sol^ I had bewailed a year,
The Duke of Burgoyns wife dame Margaret
My louinge sister willinge me to cheer,
To mary again did kindly me entreat:
And wished me matched with a maiden neat,
A step daughter of hers, Duke Charles Heir,
A noble damsel, young, discreate, and Fair.
To whose desire because I did incline,
The King my brother doubtinge my degree
Through Prophecies, against us did repine:
And at no hand would to our wills agree,
For which such rancour pearst both him, and me,
That face to we fell at flat defiaunce,
But were appeased by friends of our aliaunce.
Howbeit my marriage utterly was dashed:
Wherein because my servant said his mind,
A mean was sought whereby he might he lasht.
And for they could no crime against him find,
They forg'de a fault, the peoples eyes to blind,
And told he should by sorceryes pretend,
To bring the King unto a speedy end.
Of all which poynctes, he was as innocent,
As is the babe that lacks kindly breath:
And yet condemned by the Kings assent,
Most cruelly put to a shameful death.
This fyerd my heart, as foulder does the heath:
So that I could not but exclame, and cry,
Against so great, and open Injury.
For this I was commaundedd to the Tower,
The King my Brother was so cruel hearted:
And when my Brother Richard saw the hour
Was come, for which his heart so sore had smarted,
He thought it best take the time before it parted.
For he endeavored to attain the Crown,
From which my life must needs have held him down.
For though the King within a while had dyed,
As needs he must, he Surfayted so often,
I must have had his Children in my guide
So Richard should beside the Crown have coft:
This made him ply, the while the Wax was soft,
To find a mean to bring me to an end,
For Realm Rape spares neither Kin, nor freende.
And when he saw how reason can assuage
Through length of time my Brother Edwards ire.
With forged Tales he set him new i^ rage,
Till at the last they did my death conspire,
And though my truth fore troubled their desire,
For all the world did know mine Innocence,
Yet they agreed to charge me with offense.
And covertly, within the Tower they cal'de
A Quest, to give such verdite as they should:
Who what with fear, and what with favor thral'de,
Durst not proudunce, but as my Brethren would.
And though my false accusers never could
Prove ought they said, I guiltless was condemned:
Such verdites pass where Justice is contemned.
This feate achieved yet could they not for shame
Bereue my life by any common way,
But like a Wolf the Tiraunt Richard came,
(My Brother, nay Butcher I may rightly say)
Unto the Tower, commaundinge all away,
Save such as were provided for the Feate,
Who, in this wise did straungely me entreat.
His purpose was with a prepared stringe
To strangle me: but I ^estird me so,
That by no force they could me thereto bring,
Which caused him that purpose to forgo.
How beit they bound whether I would or no.
And in a But of Malmesy standinge by,
New christened me because I should not cry.
Thus dround I was yet for no due desert,
Except the zeal of Justice be a crime:
False Prophecies Bewitched King Edwards heart.
My Brother Richard to the Crown would clime.
Note these three causes in thy rufull rhyme:
And boldly say they did procure my fall,
And Death of Deaths most strange, and hard of all.
And warn Princes Prophecies to eschew,
That are to dark, and doubtful to be known
What God has said, that cannot but ensue,
Though all the World would have it over thrown.
When men suppose by fetches of their own
To fly their fate, they further on the the same,
Like Blasts of Wind, which often revive the flame.
Will Princes therefore not to think by murder,
They may avoid what Prophecies behight,
But by their means their mischiefs they may further,
And cause Gods vengeance heavier to alight:
VVo worth the wretch that strives with Gods foresight.
They are not wise, but wickedly do arre,
Which think ill deeds, due destenies may bar.
For if we think that Prophecies be true,
We must believe it cannot but betide,
Which God in them foresheweth shall ensue:
For his decrees unchanged do abide,
Which to be true my brethren both have fried.
Whose wicked warks, warn Princes to detest,
That others harms may keep them better blessed.
FINIS.
BY that this tragedye was ended, night was so nere come that we could not
conuenie^tly tarry together any longer, and therefore said master Ferrers: It is
best my masters to stay here. For we be now come to ye end of Edward the
fourths raygne. For the last who^ we find unfortunate therein, was ye Duke of
Clarence: in whose behalf I commend mutche that which has been noted.

Let us therefore for this time leave with him, and some other day when your
leisure will best serve let us mete here altogether again, And you shall see
that in the mean season I will not only deuyse upon this my self, but cause
diverse other of my acquaintance which can do very well to help us forward
with the rest. To this every manne gladly agreed, how beit (said another) seeing
we shall end at Edwardes the fourth end, let him self make an end of onr days
labor with the same oration which master Skeleton made in his name, the true
copy whereof as he wrote the same I have here ready to be red

HOW KING EDWARD the fourth through his surfeting and vnte^perate life
suddenly dyed in the midst of his prosperity, the ninth of April Anuo. 1485
MIseremini mei ye that be my friends,
This world has formed me down to fall:
How may I endure when that every thing ends?
What creature is borne to be eternal?
Now there is no more but pray for me all.
Thus say I Edward that late was your king,
And years xxii. bare Scepter ryall,
Some unto pleasure and some to no lyking:
Mercy I ask of my misdoing,
What avails it friends to be my foe?
Since I cannot resist, nor amend your complaining,
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
I siepe now in mould as it is natural,
As earth unto earth has his reuerture:
What ordaynd God in the world uniuersall,
Without recourse to the earth by nature,
Who to live ever may himself assure?
What is it to trust to mutability,
Since that in this world nothing may endure?
For now am I gone that was late in prosperity.
To presume thereupon it is but vanity,
Not certain but as a chery fair full of woe,
Rayned not I of late in great felicity,
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio
Where was in my life such a one as I,
While Lady Fortune with me had continuance:
Granted not she me to have victory,
In England to raygn and to contribute France,
She took me by the hand and led me adaunce,
And with her sugared lips on me she smyled,
But what for dissembled countenance,
I could not be ware til I was beguiled.
Now from this world she has me exiled,
When I was lothest hense for to go,
And am in age who says but a child,
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
I had enough I held me not content,
Without remembrance that I should dye:
And moreover to encroch ready was I bent,
I knew not how long I should it occupy,
I made the tower strong I wist not why,
I knew not to whom I purchased Tater sall.
I mended Dover on the mountain hye.
And London I provoked to fortify the wall,
I made Notingham a place full royal.
Windsore, Eltam, and many other mo,
Yet at the last I went from them all.
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
Where is now my conquest and victory?
Where is my riches and royal array?
Where be my coursers and my horses hye?
VVher is my mirth, my solace, and my play?
As vanity to naught else is withred away:
O Lady Bes long for me may you call,
For I am departed until, domes day:
But love you that Lord that is souerayn of all.
Where be my Castles and buildings royal?
But Wyndsore alone now have I no more,
And of Eton the prayers perpetual,
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
Why should a man be proud or presume hye,
Saint Barnarde thereof nobly does treat,
Saying a man is but a sack of stercory,
And shall return into worms meat:
Why what became of Alexander the great?
Or else of strong Sampson, who can tell,
Were not worms ordaynd their flesh to freate?
And of Salamon that was of wit the well,
Absolon proffered his here for to sell,
Yet for his bewty worms eat him also
And I but late in honors did excel,
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
I have played my pageant, now am I past,
Ye wot well all I was of no great elde.
Thus al things concluded shall be at the last
When death approaches then lost is the stelde:
Then seeing this world me no longer vphelde,
For naught would conserve me here in this place,
In manus tuas domine my spirit up I yield,
Humbly beseching thee O God of thy grace
O you courteous commons your hearts embrace
Beningly now to pray for me also.
For right well ye know your king I was.
Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio
FINIS.
When this was red every man for the time took his leave of other, and
departed (for then it waxed dark) appoyntinge a new day of meti^g which being
com we met altogether again. And when we had saluted one an other, then one
took the book and began to read the story of king Edward the fyft (for there
we left) and when he came to the apprehending of the Lord Rivers: stay there I
pray you (said I) for here is his complaynt. For the better understanding
whereof you must ymagine that he was accompanied with the Lord Richard Gray,
Hawt, and Clapham, whose infortunes he be waileth after this manner.

HOW SIR ANTHONY WOD vile Lord Rivers and Scales, governor of Prince Edward
was with his nephu Lord Richard Gray, and other causeless imprisoned and
cruelly murdered. An. 1483
AS sely suitors let by delays
To show their prince the meaning of the mind
That long have bought their brokers ye as and naies
And never the nyer: do daily wayt to find
The princes grace from wayghty affayrs vntwynde:
Which time attained by attending all the year,
The weried prince will then no suitors hear:
My cause was such not many days a go,
For after brute had blazed al abroad
That one Baldwin by help of other more,
Of fame or shame fallen princes would unload,
Out from our graves we stert without abode,
And pre^ced forth among the ruful rout
That sought to have their doings voulted out.
But when I had long tended for my turn
To tell my tale as diverse other did:
In hope I should no longer while soiourne
But from my suits have spedely been rid,
When course and place both orderly had hid
Me show my mind, and I prepared to say
The hearers paused arose and went their way.
These doubtful doings drove me to my dumps,
Uncertain what should move them so to do:
I feared lest affections lothly lumps,
Or inward grudge, had moved them thereto.
Whose wicked stinges al stories truth undo.
Often causing good to be reported ill,
Or dround in suds of Laethes muddy swill.
For hitherto sly writers wily wits
Which have engrossed princes chief affayrs,
Have been like horses snaffled with the bittes
Of fancy, fear, or doubts full dipe dispayres,
Whose rains enchayned to the chefest chayrs,
Have so been strayned of those that ba^e the stroke
That truth was forced to chew or else to choke.
This caused such as lothed loud to lie,
To pass with silence sundry princes lives,
Less fault it is to leave then lead awrye:
And better draund then ever bound in gyues,
For fatal fraud this world so fondly dryues.
That what soever writers brains may brue
Be it never so false, at length is cane for true.
What harm may hap by help of lying pens,
How written lies may lewdly be maintaynde,
The lothly rytes, the deuilish idol dens:
With giltles blood of virtuous men beslainde,
Is such a proof as all good hearts have plainde.
The taly grounds of stories thoroughly ^ryes,
The death of Martirs vengeance on it cries.
Far better therefore not to write at all,
Then stayne the truth for any manner cause,
For this they mean to let my story fall:
(Thought I and ere my time my volume clause,
But after I knew it only was a pause
Made purposely, most for the readers ease
Assure thee Baldwin, highly it did me please.
For freshest wits I know will sone be weary,
In reading long what ever book it be,
Except it be vayn matter strange or merry,
Well saust with lies and glared al with glee
With which because no grave truth may agree,
The closest style for stories is the metest,
In rufull moads the shortest form is swetest,
And since the playntes already by thee pende,
Are brief enough, the number also small,
The tediousnes I think does none offend,
Save such as have no lust to learn at all,
Regard none such: no matter what they brall.
VVarne thou the wary lest they hap to stumble,
As for the careless, care not what they mumble.
My life is such as (if thou note it well)
May cause the wise, and welthy to beware.
For their sakes therefore plainly will I tell,
How false and combrous worldy honors are,
How can^cred foes, bring carles folk to care
How tyrants suffered and not queld in time
Do cut their throtes that suffer them to clyme.
Neither will I hyde the chefest point of all
Which wisest rulers least of all regard.
That was and will because of many a fall,
This cannot be to earnestly declarde*
Because it is so seeld and slackly heard.
The abuse and scorning of Gods ordinances,
Is chefest cause of care and woeful chances.
Gods holy orders highly are abused,
When men do change their ends for strange respects:
They scorned are, when they be clean refused
For that they cannot serve out fond affectes,
The one our shame the other our sin detectes.
It is a shame for Christians to abuse them,
But deadly sin for scorners to refuse them
I mean not this al only of degrees,
Ordaynd by God for peoples preservation,
But of his law, good orders, and decrees,
Provided his creatures conservation
And specially the state of procreation
VVherin we* here the number of them increase
Which shall in heaven enjoy eternal peace.
The only end why God ordained this,
Was for the increasing of that blessed number
For whom he has prepared eternal bliss,
They that refuse it for the care or cumber
Being apt thereto are in a sinful slumber:
No fond respect, no vain devised vows
Can quit or bar what God in charge allows.
It is not good for man to live alone
Said God: and therefore made he him a make:
Sole life said Christ is granted few or none,
All seed sheders are bound like wife to take:
Yet not for lust, for lands or riches sake,
But to beget and foster so their fruit
That heaven and earth be stored with the suit.
But as this state is damnable refused
Of Many apt and able thereunto,
So is it likewise wickedly abused
Of all that use it as they should not do:
Wher^in are gylty all the gredye who
For gain, for friendship, land, or honors wed,
And these pollute the undefiled bed.
And therefore God through Justice cannot cease
To plague these faults with sundry sorts of whips:
As disagrement, healths or wealths decrease.
Or lothing sore the never liked lips,
Disdain also with rigor sometime nyps
Presuming mates unequally that match:
Some bitter leaven sowers the musty batch.
We worldly folk account him very wise
That has the wit most welthily to wed.
By all means therefore alwayse we deuyse
To see out issue rich in spousals sped.
We buy and sell rich orphans: babes scant bred
Must mary ere they know what marriage means.
Boys marry old trots, old fools wed young queans
We call this wedding which in any wise
Can be no marriage but pollucion plain.
A new found trade of humain merchandise,
The devils net a filthy fleshly gain:
Of kind and nature an unnatural stayne:
A foul abuse of gods most holy order
And yet alloud almost in every border.
Would god I were the last yt shall have cause
Against this creping cankar to complain,
That me^ would so regard their makers laws
That al would leave ye lewdnes of their brain
That holy orders holy might remain.
That our respects in weddi^g should not choke
The end and fruit of gods most holy yoke.
The sage king Solon after that he saw,
What mischifs follow missought marriages,
To bar al baits, established this law.
No friend nor father shall give heritages,
Coin, cattle, stuff, or other cariages,
With any maid for dowry or wedding sale
By any mean on pain of banning bale.
Had this good law in England been in force,
My father had not so cruelly been slain.
My brother had not causeles lost his corpse.
Our marriage had not bred us such disdain,
My self had lackt great part of grievous pain
We wedded wives for dignitye and lands
And left our lives in enmies bloody hands.
My father highte Sir Richard. Wooduile he
Espousde the Duches of Bedforde, and by her
Had issue males my brother John, and me
Called Anthony king Edward did prefer
Us far above the state wherein we were.
For he espoused our sister Elizabeth
Whom Sir John Gray made widow by his death:
How glad were we think you of this aliance
So nerely coupled with so noble a king,
Who durst with any of us been at defiance.
Thus made of might the mightiest to wring
But sie what cares do highest honors bring,
What carelesnes our selus or friends to know
Whot spyte and envy both of high and low.
Because the king had made our sister Queen
It was his honor to prefer her kin.
And since the rediest way, as wysest ween,
Was first by wedding welthy heirs to win,
It pleased the prince in like mean to begin
To me he gave the rych lord Scales his heir,
A virtuous maid in mine eye very fair.
He joined to my brother John, the old
Duches of Norfolk notable of fame:
My nephue Thomas (who had in his hold
The honor and right of Marquis Dorcets name)
Espoused Cicelie a right welthy dame
Lord Bonuiles heir: by whom he was possessed
In all the rytes where through that house was blessed
The honors that my father atteind were diverse
First Chamberlayne, then constable he was,
I do omit the gaynfullest Earl Rivers,
Thus glistred we in glory clear as glass
Such miracles can princes bring to pass
Among their lieges whom they mind to heave
To honors false, who al their gestes deceive
Honors are like that cruel king of Thrace,
With new com gestes that fed his hungry horses
Or like the tyrant Busiris whose grace
Offered his gods al strangers strangled corses.
To forreiners so hard false honors force is
That all her bourdens, strangers either geastes.
She spoils to feed her Gods and gredy beasts
Her Gods be those whom God by law or lot.
Or kind by birth, does place in highest rowmes
Her beasts be such as gredely have got
Office or charge to guide the sely gromes.
These officers in law or charge are bromes,
That swepe away the sweet from simple wretches,
And spoil the enryched by their crafty fetches.
These pluck down those whom princes set aloft,
By wrestyng laws, and false conspiracies
Yey kings themselves by these are spoiled often,
When wilful princes carlesly despise
To hear thoppressed peoples heavy cries.
Nor will correct their pollinge thieves then god,
Does make those reues the retchles princes rod.
The second Richard is a proof of this
Whom crafty Lawyers by their laws deposed.
An other pattern good king Henry is
Whose right by them have diversely been glosed,
Good while he grew, ^ad when he was vnrosed,
And as the foadred these and diverse other
With like deceit they used the king my brother.
While he prevailed they said he owed the crown,
Al laws and rightes agreed with the same
But when by dryftes he seemed to be down.
Al laws and right extremely did him blame
Naught save vsurpinge traylour was his name.
So constantly the Judges construe laws,
That all agree still with the stronger cause.
These as I said, and other like in charge
Are honors horses whom she fedes with gests,
For all whom princes franckly do enlarge
With dignityes these bark at in their breasts:
Their spite, their might, their falshode never rests.
Till they devour them: sparing neither blood,
Ne limme, ne life, and al to get their good.
The Earl of warwick was a praunsing courser
The hauty heart of his could bear no mate:
Our wealth through him waxt many a time y^ worser
So cankardly he had our kin in hate.
He troubled often the kings vnstedy state
And that because he would not be his ward
To wed and work as he should list a ward.
He spyted us because we were preferred
By marriage to dignities so great,
But craftily his malice be deferd
Till traitorously be found means to entreat
Our brother of Clarence to assist his feate:
Whom when he had by marriage to him bound,
Then wrought he straight our lineage to confound.
Through slanderous brutes he brued many a broyle
Throughout the realm, against the king my brother
And raised traiterours rebels thirsting spoil
To murder men: of whom among all other
One Ro^in of Riddesdale many a soul did smother
His rascal table at my father wroth
Took sier and son, and quick beheaded both.
This heinous act although the king betested,
Yet was he feign to pardon for the route
Of rebels all the realm so sore infested,
That every way assayld he stood in doubt:
And though he were of courage bighe and stout,
Yet he assayd by fair mean to assuage
His enemies ire, reueyld by rebels rage.
But Warwick was not pacifyed thus,
His constant rancoure causeles was extreme
No mean could serve my quarrel to discus,
Til he had driven the king out of the realm.
Neither would he then be awaked from his dream.
For when my brother was come and placed again,
He stinted not til he was stoutly slain.
Than grew the king and Realm to quiet rest,
Our stock and friends still flying higher and higher,
The Queen with children fruitefully was blessed
I gouernd them, it was the kings desire.
This set their uncles furiously on fire,
That we the Queen's blood were assignde to govern
The prince, not they, y^ kings own blood and brethern.
This caused the Duke of Clarence so to chafe
That with the king he braynles fell at bate:
The counsel warely for to keep him safe
From raising tumultes as he did of late,
Imprisoned him: where through his brothers hate
He was condemnde, and murdered in such sort
As he himself has truly made report,
Was none abhorred these mischiefs more then I
Yet could I not be therewith discontented,
Considering that his rancour touched me ny,
Else would my conscience never have consented.
To wish him harm, could be have been contented.
But fear of hurt, for sauegard of our state
Does cause more mischief then desert or hate.
Such is the state that many wish to bear,
That either we must with others blood be staynd
Or lead our lives continually in fear,
You mounting minds behold here what is gaynd
By combrous honor painfully attaynd:
A damned soul for murdring them that hate you,
Or doubtful life in danger lest they mate you,
The cause (I think) why some of high degree
Do deadly hate all sekers to assend,
Is this: The cloyne contented cannot be
With any state til time he apprehend
The highest top: for thereto clymers tend.
Which seldom is attaind without the wrack
Of those between, that stay and bare him back.
To save themselves they therefore are compeld
To hate such clymers, and with wit and power
To compass means where through they may be queld
Ere they assend their honors to devour.
This causde the Duke of Clarence frown and lowre
At me and other, whom the king promoted
To dignityes: wherein he madly doted.
For seeinge we were his dear allied friends,
Our furderaunce should rather have made him glad
Than Enmy like to wyshe our woeful ends.
We were the nearest Kinsfolk that he had.
We ioyed with him his sorrow made us sad:
But he esteemed so mutch his painted sheath
That he disdayn'de the love of all beneath.
But see how sharply God reuengeth sin:
As he maligned me, and many other
His faithful Friends, and kindest of his kin,
So Richard Duke of Gloucester, his very Brother,
Maligned him, and beastly did him Smouther.
A Deuilish deed, a most unkindly part,
Yet just revenge for his unnatural heart.
Although this Brother Queller, Tyrant fell
Envied our State, as mutch, and more than he:
Yet did his cloakinge Flattery so excel
To all our Friends ward, chiefly unto me,
That he appeard, our trusty stay to be:
For outwardly he wrought, our State to further,
Where inwardly he mind naught save murder.
Thus in appearaunce who but I was blessed?
The chiefest honors heaped on my head:
Beloved of all, enjoying quiet rest,
The froward Prince by me alone was led,
A Noble Impe, to all good virtues bred:
The King my Liege without my counsel known,
Agreed naught: though wisest were his own.
But quiet bliss in no state lasts long
Assailed still by mischief many ways:
Whose spoylinge battry glowinge hot, and strong,
No flowinge wealth, no force nor Wisdom stays
Her smoakelesse Poulder beaten Soldiers stays.
By open force, foul mischief often preuayls,
By secert slight, she seeld her purpose fayls.
The King was bent to mutch to foolish pleasure,
In banquetinge he had so great delight:
This made him grow in grosnesse out of measure,
Which, as it kindles carnal appetite,
So quenches it the liuelynesse of the spirit.
Whereof ensue such Sickness, and diseases
As none can cure save death that all displeases.
Through this fault furdered by his Brothers fraud
(Now God forgive me if I Judge amiss)
Or through that beast his ribald or his Baud
That larded still these sinful lusts of his,
He suddenly forsook all worldly bliss.
That loathed leach, that never welcome death,
Through Spasmous humors stopped up his breath.
That time lay I at Ludloe, Wales his border,
For with the Prince the King had sent me thither
To stay the Robberies, Spoil, and foul disorder,
Of diverse Outlawes gathered there together:
Whole bandinge tend^d no man wist well whither
When these by wisdom safly were suppressed,
Came woeful news, our Sovereign was deceassed.
The grief whereof when reason was assuaged,
Because the Prince remained in my guide,
For his defense great store of men I waged,
Doubtinge the storms which at such time betide.
But while I there thus warely did provide,
Commandment came to send them home again
And bring the King thence with his household trayn^.
This charge sent from the Counsel, and the Queen,
Though mutch against my mind I beast obayed:
The devil himself wrought all the drift I ween,
Because he would have Innocents betrayed:
For ere the King were half his way conveyed,
A sort of Traitors falsely him betrapt
A caught before, and close in Prison clapped.
The Duke of Gloucester that incarnate devil
Confedred with the Duke of Buckingham,
With the Lord Hastings, hasty both to evil
To meet the King in mourninge habit came,
(A cruel Wolf though clothed like a Lamb)
And at Northampton, where as than I bayted
They took their Inn as they one me had waited.
The King that night at Stonystratford lay,
A town to small to harbor all his Train:
This was the cause why he was gone away
While I with other did behind remain.
But will you see how falsely friends can feign?
Not Sinon sly, whose fraud best Fame rebukes,
Was half so subtle as these double Dukes.
First to mine Inn, comes in my brother false
Embraces me: well met good Brother Scales,
And weeps withal: the other me enhalse
Which welcome Coosin, now welcome out of Wales
O happy day, for now all stormy gales
Of strife, and Rancour utterly are swaged,
And we our own to live, or dye vnwaged,
This proferd service, Saust which Salutacions
Immoderate, might cause me to suspect:
For commonly in all Dissimulations
Th'exces of glaueringe does the guile derect:
Reason refuses falsehoode to dyrect,
The will therefore for fear of being spyde,
Exceeds mean, because it wants guide.
This is the cause why such as feign to weep
Do howl outright, or waylinge cry ah,
Teringe them selves, and strayninge Sighs most deep.
Why such Dissemblers as would seem to laugh
Breath not tibhee, but bray out, hah, hah hah.
Why Beggars fayninge Bravery are the proud'st?
Why Cowards bragginge boldness wrangle loud'st?
For commonly all that do counterfayte
In any thing, exceed the natural mean,
And that for fear of faylinge in their feate.
But these Conspirers couched all so clean,
Through close demeanor, that their wiles did weane
My heart from doubts, so many a false device
They forged fresh, to hyde their enterprise.
They Supt with me propoundinge freendly talk
Of our Affairs, still geuinge me the praise.
And ever among the Cups to me ward walk:
I drink to you good Cuz, each Traitor says,
Our banquet done when they should go their ways
They took their leave, often withinge me good Night
As haertely as any Creature might.
A noble heart they say is Lion like,
It cannot couche, dissemble, crouch, nor feign,
How Villainous were these, and how unlike?
Of noble Stock the most Ignoble stayne.
Their Woluish hearts. their Traiterous Foxly brain
Either prove them base, of rascal race engendered
Or from hault Lynage Bastardlike degendred.
Such polling heads as praise for prudent policy
False Practices. I wish were pact on Poales.
I mean the Bastard saw brood, which can molify
All kind of causes in their crafty nolles.
These undermine all virtue, blind as molles,
They bloster wrong, they rack, and straiue the right
And praise for Law, both Malice, Fraud, and Might.
These quench the worthy Flames of noble kind,
Prouokinge best borne to the basest vices,
Through crafts they make the bouldest Courage blind,
Dislikinge highly valiant enterprises:
And praysinge vily, villainous devices.
These make the Bore a Hog, the Bull an Ox,
The Swan a Goose, the Lion a Wolf, or Fox.
The Lawyer Catesby and his crafty feers
A rout that never did good in any Realm,
Are they that had transformed these noble Peers:
They turn'de their blood to melancholicke fleume.
Their courage hault to cowardice extreme
Their Force, and Manhood, into Fraud, and Malice,
Their Wit to wiles: stout Hector into Paris.
These Glauerers gone, my self to rest I laid,
And doubtinge nothing, soundly fell a sleep:
But suddenly my servants sore afraid
A waked me: and drawinge sighs full deep,
Alas (quoth one) my Lord we are hetraide.
How so (quoth I) the Dukes are gone their ways,
They have barred the Gates, and borne away the Keys.
While he thus spoke, there came into my mind
This fearful dream, whereout I waked was:
I saw a River stopped with storms of wind
Where through a Swan, a Bull, and Bore did pass.
Fraunchinge the fish, and fry, with teath of brass,
The River dried up save a little stream
Which at the last did water all the Realm.
Me thought this stream did drown the cruel Bore,
In little space, it grew so deep, and broad:
But he had kil'de the Bull, and Swan before.
Besides all this I saw an oughly Tode
Crall toward me, on which me thought I trod:
But what became of her, or what of me
My sudden wakinge would not let me see.
These dreams considered with this sudden news
So diverse from their doings over night,
Did cause me not a little for to muse,
I blessed me, and rise in all the have I might,
By this, Aurora spread abroad the light.
Which fro the ends of Phoebus beams she took
Who than the Bulls chief Gallery forsook.
When I had opened the window to look out
There might I see the streates each where beset,
My Inn on each side compassed about
With armed watchmen, all escapes to let
Thus had these Neroes caught me in their Net.
But to what end, I could not thoroughly guess,
Such was my playnnesse, such their doubleness.
My Conscience was so clear I could not doubt
Their deadly drift, which less apparent lay,
Because they caus'de their men return the rout
That yode toward Stonistratford as they say,
Because the Dukes will first be there to day:
For this (thought I) they hinder me in jest,
For guiltless minds do easily deem the best.
By this the Dukes were come into mine Inn
For they were lodged in another by,
I got me to them thinking it a sin
Within my Chamber cowardly to lie.
And merely I asked my brother why
He used me so? he stern in evil sadness
Cried out: I arrest the Traitor for thy badnesse,
How so (quoth I) whence rises your suspicion?
Thou art a Traitor (quoth he) I the arrest
Arrest (quoth I) why? where is your Commission?
He drew his Weapon, so did all the rest
Cryinge: yield thee Traitor. I so sore distressed
Made no resistaunce: but was sent to ward:
None save their servants assigned to my guard.
This done they sped them to the King in post,
And after their humble reverence to him done,
They traitorously began to rule the roste,
They picked a quarrel to my sister son
Lord Richard Gray: the King would not be won
To agree to them, yet they against all reason,
Arrested him they said for heinous Treason.
Sir Thomas Vaughan, and Sir Richard Haule
Two worthy Knights were likewise apprehended,
These all were guilty in one kind of fault,
They would not like the practice then pretended:
And seeinge the King was herewith sore offended,
Back to Northampton they brought him again
And thence discharged most part of his Train.
There lo! Duke Richard made himself Protector
Of King, and Realm by open Proclamation,
Though neither King nor Queen were his Elector,
Thus he presumed by lawless usurpation.
But will you see his deep dissimulation?
He sent me a dish of Deinties from his Board
That day, and with it this false friendly word.
Commend me to him all things shall be well,
I am his friend, bid him be of good cheer:
These news I prayed the Messenger go tell
My Nephue Richard, whom I loved full dear.
But what he meant by well, now shall you hear:
He thought it well to have us quickly murdered,
Which not long after thoroughly he furdered.
For strait from thence we closely were conuayed
From Iayle to Iayle Northward we wist not whither:
Where after we had a while in sunder strayed,
At last we met at Pomfret all together.
Sir Richard Ratcliffe had us welbome thither,
Who openly, all law, and right contemned
Beheaded us before we were condemned.
My Coosin Richard could not be content
To leave his life, because he wist not why.
Good Gentleman that never harm had meant,
Therefore he asked wherefore he should dye:
The Priest his ghostly Father did replye
With weepinge eyes: I know one woeful cause,
The Realm has neither righteous Lords, nor laws.
Sir Thomas Vaughan chasinge cried still:
This Tyrant Gloucester is the graceless G.
That will his Brothers Children beastly kill.
And least the people through his talk might see
The mischiefs toward, and thereto not agree
Our Tormentour that false perjured Knight
Bad stop our mouths, with words of high dispight.
Thus dyed we guiltless process heard we none,
No cause alleagde, no Judge, nor yet accuser,
No quest empaneld passed us upon.
That murdrer Ratcliffe, Law, and Rights refuser,
Did all to flatter Richard his abuser.
Unhappy both that ever they were borne,
Through guiltless blood that have their souls forlorn.
In part I grant, I well deserved this,
Because I caused not speedy execution
Be done on Richard for that murder of his,
When first he wrought King Henry's close confusion.
Not for his Brothers hateful persecution.
These cruel murders paynefull death deserved
Which had be suffered, many had bin preserved.
VVarne therefore all that charge, or office bear
To see all murdrers speedely executed:
And spare them not for favor or for fear:
By guiltless blood the earth remaynes polluted.
For lack of Justice kingdoms are transmuted.
They that save murdrers from deserved pain,
Shall through those murdrers, miserably be slain.
FINIS.
WHa^ I had read this, they liked it very well, one wished yt the combat which
he fought with the Bastard of Burgoyne, and the Honor which he wan with both
spear and Axe should not be forgotten. Another moved a question about a great
matter, and yt is the variaunce of the Chronicles about the Lord Thomas Graye
Marquise Dorcet: who^ Fabian every where calls ye queens brother: sir Thomas
Moore and Hal, call him the Queens son as he was in very deed. Fabian
says he was governor of yt Prince, and had ye conueiaunce of him from Ludlo
toward London. The other (whom we follow) say he was than at London with the
Queen providing for the kings coronation, and took Sanctuary with her as soon as he heard of the apprehending of his uncle. This disagreing of writers is a
great hindraunce of ye truth, and no small combraunce to such as be diligent
readers, besides the harm that may happen in succession of heritages. It were
therefore a worthy and good deed for the nobility, to cause all the records
to be sought, and a true and perfect Chronicle there out to be written Unto
which we refer ye deciding of this and of all other like controversies, geuinge
this to understand in the mean time, that no man shall think his title
either better or worse by any thing that is written in any part of this
treatise. For the only thing which is purposed herein, is by example of others
miseries, to dissuade al men from al sins and vices. If by the way we touch
any thing concerning titles, we follow therein Halles Chronicle. And were we
seem to swerve from his reasons and causes of diverse doings, there we gather
upon conjecture such things as seem most probable, or at the least most
convenient for the furderaunce of our purpose. When the reader would have
proceeded in the Chronicle which straighte entreats of the villainous
destruction of the Lord Hastings, I willed him to surceas, because I had there
his Tragedy very learnedly penned. For the better understanding whereof, you
must imagine yt you see him newly crept out of his grave, and speakinge to me
as follows.

HOW THE LORD HAstings was Betrayed by trustinge to mutch to his evil
Counsaylour Catesby, and Vilanously murdered in the Tower of London by Richard
Duke of Gloucester, the. 13. of June Anno. 1483.
I Am that Hastinge whose to h^sty death.
They blame that know wherefore I lost my breath,
With others fearinge least my headless name
Be wrong'de, by parciall Brute of flatteringe Fame.
Hearing O Baldwin that thou mean to pen,
The Lives, and Falls of English Noblemen.
My self here present, do Present to thee
My Life, my Fall, and Forced destenye.
Ne fear to stayne thy credit by my tale.
In Laethes flood, long since, in Stigian vale.
Self love I drowned, what time has fined for true,
And ceasseth not, (though stale) still to renew:
Recount I will: whereof take this for proof.
That blase I will my praise, and my reproof.
We naked ghosts are but the very man
Nor of our selves more than we ought, we scan.
The Heavens high, and Earthly vale below,
Yet ring his Fame, whose deeds so great did grow.
Edward the fourth ye know unnamed I mean.
Whose noble nature so to me did lean,
That I his staff was, I his only joy,
And even what Pandare was to him of Troy.
Which moved him first, to create me Chamberlayne,
To serve his sweetes, to my most sower pain.
Wherein, to justly praised for secretnesse
(For now my guilt with shrikinge I confess)
To him to true, to untrue to the Queen,
Such hate I wan, as lasted long between
Our families: Shores wife was my Nice cheat,
The holy hoar, and eke the wily peat.
I Fed his lust with lovely Pieces so,
That Gods sharp wrath I purchased, my just woe.
See here of Nobles new the diverse sourse.
Some virtue rayseth, some clime by sluttish sorts.
The first, though only of themselves begone,
Yet circle wise into themselves do ron.
Within themselves their force united so,
Both endless is, and stronger against their foe.
For, when endth hit that never has begone?
Or how may that, that has no end, be undone?
The Other as by wicked means they grue,
And raygned by flattery, or violence: so soon rue.
First tomblinge step fro honors old, is vice.
Which once stepped down, some Linger, none arise
To former type: But they catch virtues spray,
Which rayseth them that climb by lawful way.
Beware to rise by seruinge Princely lust.
Surely to stand, one mean is risinge just.
Which learn by me, whom let it help to excuse,
That ruthful now my self I do accuse
And that my Prince I ever pleased with such,
As harmed none, and him contented mutch.
In vice some favor, or less hate let win,
That I ne wryed to worser end my sin.
But used my favor to the safety of such,
As fury of later War to live did grutch.
For as on dirt (though durty) shines the Sunn:
So, even amids my vice, my virtue shoane.
My self I spared with any his cheat to stayne,
For love or reverence so I could refrain.
Gisippus Wife erst Titus would desire
With frendships breach. I quenched that brutish fire.
Manly hit is, to loath the pleasinge lust.
Small vaunt to fly, that of constreint thou must.
These faults except, if so my life thou skan,
Lo! none I hurt but furdred every man.
My Chamber England was, my staff the law:
Where by saunce rigor, all I held in awe.
So louinge to all, so beloved of all,
As, (what ensued upon my bloody fall
Though I ne felt) yet surely this I think.
Full many a tricklinge tear their mouths did drink.
Disdain not Princes easy access, meek cheer.
We know then Angels statelier port ye bear
Of God himself: to massy a charge for sprits.
But then, my Lords, consider, he delights
To veil his grace to us poor earthly wants,
To simplest Shrubs, and to the Dunghill plants.
Express him then, in might,and mercies mean.
So shall ye win, as now ye rule the realm.
But all to long I fear do delay
The many means, whereby I did be wray
My Zealous will, to earne my Princes grace.
Least thou differ, to think me kind percase.
As naught may last, so Fortunes chaunginge cheer
With poutinge looks began lower on my sire,
And on her Wheel, aduaunst high in his room
The Warwick Earl, Mase of Christendom.
Besides the temptinge prowess of the foe,
My Princes Brother did him then forgo.
The cause was liked, I was his linked allye.
Yet nor the cause, nor Brothers treachery,
Nor Enmies force, nor band of mingled blood:
Made Hastings bear his Prince other mind then good.
But taken, and escaped from Warwicks gripinge Paws.
With me he fled through fortunes frowardst Flawes.
To London come, at large we might have seemed,
Had not we then the Realm a prison deemed.
Each Bushe, a Bar, each Spray, a Banner splayed,
Each House, a Fort, out Passage to have stayed.
To Linne we leap, where while we awayte the Tide,
My secret friends in secret I supplide,
In Mouth to maintain Henry sixth their King,
By deed to deuoyre, Edward to bring in.
The restless, to bar the empty Bay,
With waltringe Waves roames wamblinge forth. Away
The merry Mainer hales. The bragginge Boy,
To Masts high top up hies. In sign of Joy
The waueringe Flag is vaunst. The surginge Seas
Their swellinge cease: to calmest even peace
Sinkth down their pride. With dronke^nesse gaynst all care
The Seamen armed, a wayt their noble Fare.
On board we come. The Massy Anchors wayde,
One English Ship, two Hulkes of Holland, aid
In such a pinch. So small tho was the Train,
Such his constraynt, that now, that one with pain
Command he might, who late might many more:
The ghastly Greeks erst brought to Tenedo.
So naught is ours that we by hap may lose,
What nearest seems, is farthest of in woes.
As banished wights, such joys we might have made.
Easo of aye threatening death that late we dradde.
But once our countries sight (not care) exempt,
No harbor showing, that might our fear relent,
No covert ca^e, no shrub to shrowde our lives.
No hollow wood, no flight that often depriues.
The mighty his pray, no sanctuary left
For exiled prince, that shroudes each slave for theft:
In prison pent whose woody walls to pass
Of no less peril then the dying was:
With the Ocean moated battred with the waves,
(As chaind at dares the wretched galley slaves,
At mercy sit of sea and enmies shot,
And shonne with death that they wit flight may not)
But grenish waves, and heavy lowering skies
Al comfort else forclose our exiled eyes:
Lo lo from highest top the slavish boy
Sent up, with sight of land our hearts to joy:
Descries at hand whole fleet of Easterlings
As then whot enmies of the British Kings.
The mouse may sometime help the Lion in need
The bittle Be once spile the Aegles breed.
O princes seek no foes. In your distress,
The earth, the seas, conspyre your heaviness.
Our foe descried by flight we shon in have
And lade with Canuas now the bending mast
The ship was rackt to try her sailing then.
As Squirels clime the troops of trusty men.
The ^^eresman seeks a redier course to run,
The Soldier stirs, the Gunner hies to Gunne.
The Fleammings sweat, the English Ship disdayns
To wait behind to bear the Fleammings Trayns.
Forth flies the Bark, as from the violent Goonne
The Pellet pearseth all Stays, and stops eftsoone.
And swift she Swyndgth, as often in Sunny day,
The Dolphin fleetes in Seas, in merry May.
As we for lives, so Th'easterlinges for gain,
Thwack on the Sails, and after make amayne.
Though heavy they were,and of burden great:
A King to master yet, what Swyne nold sweat?
So mid the vale the Brehound saying start
The fearful Hare, pursues Before she flerteth.
And where she turn'th her there to bear.
The one pray pricketh, the other safties fear.
So were we chased, so fled we before our Foes.
Bet flight then fight in so uneven close.
I end. Some think perhaps, to long he staieth
In peril present shewinge his fixed faith.
This ventred I, this dread I did sustain,
To try my truth, my life I did disdain.
But, lo! like trial against his civil foe,
Fayths worst is trial, which is reserved to woe.
I pass our escape, and sharp returninge home,
Where we were welcomed by our wonted fone.
To Battle main discends the Empyres right,
At Barnet join the Hoastes in bloody fight.
There joined Battayles ranged in such array,
As might for terror, Alexander fray.
What should I stay to tell the long discourse?
Who wan the Palm? who bare away the worse?
Suffiseth to say by my reserved band,
Our enemies fled, we had the upper hand.
My iron army held he steady place,
My Prince to shield, his feared foe to chase.
The like success befell me in Tewkesbury field.
My furious force, there fors'de perforce to yield
My Princes foe: and render to my King
Her only son, least he more bate might bring.
Thus have thou a mirror of a Subjects mind,
Such as perhaps is rare agayue to find:
The caruinge cuts, that cleave the trusty steel,
My faith, and du allegiaunce, could not feel.
But out alas, what praise may I recount,
That is not stain'de with spot, that does surmount
My greatest vaunt? bloody for War to feet
A Tiger was I, all for peace unmeet,
A soldiers hands must often be dyed with goare,
Least stark with rest, they fi^ewd wax and hoare.
Peace could I win by War, but peace not use.
Few days enjoy he, who Warlike peace does choose.
When Crofts a Knight presented Henry's Heir
To this our Prince, in furious mood enquere
Of him he began, what folly or phrensy vain,
With Arms forced him to invade his Realm?
Whom auusweringe that he claym'd his fathers right:
With Gauntlet smit, commanded from his sight:
Clarence, Gloucester, Dorcet, and I Hastinge slew.
The guilt whereof we shortly all did rue.
Clarence, as Cirus, drowned in blood like Wine,
Dorcet I furthered to his speedy pyne.
Of me, my self am speakinge president,
Nor easier fate the bristled Boar is lent.
Our bloods have paid the vengeance of our guilt,
His fried bones, shall broyle for blood he has spilt.
O waltsome murder, that attaynteth our fame,
O horrible Traitors wantinge worthy name.
Who as mischieuously of all men deserve,
As they merit well, who do men's lives preserve.
If those, therefore we reckon heavenly wights,
These may we well deem Feendes, and damned Sprits.
And while on Earth they walk, disguised devils,
Sworn foes of virtue, factours for all evils.
Whose bloody hands torment their goared hearts,
Through bloudsheds horror, in soundest sleep he stars.
O happy World were the Lions men,
All Lions should at least be spared then.
No suerty now, no lasting leage is blood.
A meacocke is he, who dreadth to see blood shed.
Old is the Practice of such bloody strife,
While ij. wear Armies.ij. the Issues of first Wife,
With armed heart and hand, the one bloody brother,
With cruel chase pursues, and murdreth the other.
Which who abhors not? yet who cease to sue?
The bloudye Caynes their bloudye sire renew.
The horror yet is like in common fraies.
For in each murder, brother brother slayes.
Traitors to nature, country kin and kind.
Whom no band serves in brothers love to bind.
O simple age, when slander slaughter was.
The tongues small evil, how does this mischief pass?
Hopest thou to cloak thy covert mischief wrought?
Thy conscience, Caytif, shall proclaim thy thought.
A vision, Chaucer shows, discloasde thy crime.
The Fox descrie the crows and chattring pyen,
And shall thy fellow felons, not bewray
The guiltless death, whom guiltye hands do slaye?
Unpunished escaped for hayuous crime some one,
But vnaduenged, in mind or body none.
Vengeance on mind, the freating furies take,
The sinful corpse, like earthquake agues shake.
Their frowning lokes, their troubled minds bewray,
In have they run, and mids their race they stay,
As gidded Roe. Amids their speech they whist,
At mea^e they muse. No where they may persist
But some fear netleth them. Ay hang they so.
So never wants the wicked murderer woe.
An infant rent with Lions ramping paws?
Why slander I Lions? They fear the sacred laws
Of royal blood. Ay me more brute than beast.
With enfants sides, (Licaons pie) to feast.
O tyrant Tigers, O insaciate wolves,
O English courtesy, monstrous mawes and gulfes.
Only because our Prince displeasde we saw
With him, we slew him straight before al law,
Before our Prince commanded once his death,
Our bloody swords on him we did vnsheath.
Preventing law, and even our Princes hest,
We hid our weapons in the younglings breast.
Whom not desire of reign did drive to field,
But mothers pride, who longd the Realm to weld.
But straight my death shall show my worthy meede,
If first to one other murder I proceed.
While Edward lived, dissembled discord lurked:
In double hearts yet so his reverence worked.
But when succeding ^ender feeble age,
Gave open gap to tyraunts rushing rage:
I help the Bore, and Burke, to captiuate
Lord Rivers, Gray, sir Thomas Vaughan and Haw^e.
If land would help the sea, well earnde that ground
Her self, to be with conquering waves surround.
Their speedy death by privy dome procured,
At Pomfret: tho my life short while endured.
My self I slew, when them I damned to death,
At once my throat I riued, and reft them breath.
For that self day, before or near the hour
That withred Atropos nipt the springing flower
With violent hand, of their forth running life:
My head and body, in Tower twinde like knife.
By this my pattern al ye percs beware.
Often hangth he himself who others weenth to snare
Spare to be each others butcher. Fear the Kite,
Who soareth aloft, (while frog and mouse do fight
In civil combat, grappling void of ^eare
Of foreign foe) at once al both to bear.
Which playner by my pitied plaint to see,
A while a new your listening lend to me.
Too true it is two sundry assemblies kept,
At Crosbies place, and Baynardes castle set.
The Dukes at Crosbies, but at Baynardes we.
The one to crown a king the other to be.
Suspicious is secession of foul feendes,
When eithers drift to thocers mischief tendes,
I feared the end, my Cates^ies being there
Discharged al doubts. Him held I most entyre.
Whose great preferment by my means, I thought
Some spur, to pay the thankfulness be ought.
The trust he ought me, made me trust him so,
That privy he was both to my weal and woe.
My hearts one half, my chest of confidence,
Mine only trust, my joy dwelt in his presence.
I loved him Baldwin, as the apple of mine eye.
I loathed my life when Catesby would me dye.
Fly from thy chanel Thames forsake thy streams,
Leave the Adamant Iron. Phoebus lay thy beams:
Cease heavenly Spears at last your weary warke.
Betray your charge, return to Chaos dark.
At least, some ruthlesse Tiger hang her whelp,
My Catesby so with some excuse to help.
And me to comfort, that I alone, ne seem
Of all dame natures works left in extreme.
A Golden trasure is the tried friend.
But who may Gold from Counterfayts defend?
Trust not to soon, nor yet to soon mistrust.
Which the one thy self, with the other thy friend thou hurt'st.
Who twyneth betwixt, and steareth the golden mean,
Nor rashly loves, nor mistrusteth in vain.
In friendship sovereign it is as Mithridate
Thy friend to love as one whom thou may hate.
Of tickle credit ne had been the mischief,
What needed Virbius miracle doubled life?
Credulity surnamed first the Aegean Seas.
Mistrust, does treason in the trustiest raise.
Suspecious Romulus, stayn'd his Walls first reard
With Brothers blood, whom for light leap he feared.
So not in Brotherhoode jealousy may be borne,
The Ielons Cuckold wears the Infamous Horn.
A beast may Preach by trial, not fore sight.
Could I have shond light credit, nere had light
The dreaded death, upon my guilty head.
But fools aye wont to learn by after read.
Had Catesby kept vnstaynd the truth he plight,
Yet had yet enjoyed me, and I yet the light
All Derbies doubts I cleared with his name.
I knew, no harm could hap me without his blame.
But see the fruictes of tickle light belief.
The ambicious Dukes corrupt the Traitor thief,
To groape me, if allured I would assent,
To bin a Partner of their cursed intent.
Whereto, when as by no means friendship vail'de,
By Tyrant force behold they me assail'de.
And summond shortly a Cousaile in the Tower,
Of June the fifteenth, at appointed hour.
Alas, are counsels wryed to catch the good?
No place is now exempt from sheading blood,
Since counsels, that were careful to preserve
The guiltless good, are means to make the^ starve.
What may not mischief of Madman abuse?
Religious Cloak some one to vice does choose,
And makes God Protector of his Crime.
O monstrous world, well ought we wish thy fine.
The fatal Skies, roll on the blackest day,
When doubled bloodshed, my blood must repay.
Others none forces. To me sir Thomas Haward
As Spur is buckled, to provoke me froward.
Derbie who feared the parted sittings yore.
Whether, mutch more be knew by experience hoare,
Or better minded, clearlyer truth could see:
At Midnight dark this message sends to me.
Hastings away, in sleep the Gods foreshow
By dreadful dream, fell fates unto us two.
Me thought a Boar with Tuske so rased our Throat,
That both our Shoulders of the blood did Smoke.
Arise to horse, straight homeward let us hye.
And since our foe we cannot match, O fly.
Of Chaun^eclere you learn dreams sooth to know
Thence wisemen co^ster, more then y^ cock does crow.
While thus he spoke, I held within mine arm
Shores Wife, the tender piece, to keep me warm.
Fie on Adultery, fie on Lecherous lust.
Mark in me ye Nobles al, Gods Judgments just.
A Pandare, M^rtherer, and Adulterer thus,
Only such death I dye, as I ne blushe.
Now least my dame might think appalled my heart
With Eger mood up in my Bed I start.
And, is thy Lord (quoth I) a Sorcerer?
A wise man now become? a dream reader?
What though so Chau^teclere crowed? I reck it not?
On my part pleads as well Dame Partelot.
Vniudge hangth yet the case betwixt them tway.
Ne was his dream cause of his hap I say.
Shall dreaminge douts from prince my serving slack?
Nay, then might Hastings life and living lack.
He parts. I sleep, my mind surcharged with sin,
As Phoebus beams by misty Cloud kept in,
Ne could misgeue, ne dream of my mishap.
As block, I tumbled to mine Enemies trap.
Security causlesse through my feigned friend,
Rest me foresight of my approchinge end.
So Catesby clawed me, as when the Cat does play.
Dalyinge with Mouse whom straight she means to slay.
The morrow come, the latest light to me,
On Palfray mounted, to the Tower I hye.
Accompanied with that Haward my mortal Foe,
To slaughter led, thou God did suffer so.
(O deep Dissemblers, honouringe with your cheer,
Whom in hid heart ye traitorously tear)
Never had Realm so open Signs of wrack.
As I had showed me of my heavy hap.
The vision first of Stanley late descryed.
Then mirth so extreme, that near for joy I dyed.
Were hit, that Swanlike I foresong my death,
Or merry mind foresaw the loss of breath
That long it coueyted, from this earths annoy,
But even as siker as the end of woe is joy,
And glorious light to obscure night does tend:
So extreme mirth, in extreme moan does end.
For why, extremes are haps rackt out of course.
By violent Might far swinged forth perforce.
Which as they are pearcingst while they violentst move,
For that they are near to cause that does them shoue:
So soonest fall from that their highest extreme,
To the other contrary that does want of mean.
So lawghed he erst, who lawghed out his breath.
So lawghed I, when I lawghd my self to death.
The pleasingst means boade not the suckiest ends.
Not aye, found treasure to like pleasure tends.
Mirth means not mirth all time, thryse happy hire
Of wit, to shun the excess that all desire.
But this I pass. I hie to other like.
My palfrey in the playnest paued street,
Thrice howed his bones, thrice kneeled on the flower
Thrice sh^nd (as Balams ass) the dreaded tower.
What? should I ^hinke he had sense of after haps?
As beasts foreshow the drought or rayny drops,
As humors in them want or else abound,
By influence from the heavens, or change of ground?
Or do we interpret by success each sign?
And as we fancye of each hap divine?
And make that cause, that kin is to theffect?
Not having ought of consequence respect?
Bucephalus kneeling only to his Lord,
Showed only he was, monarche of the world.
Why may not then the steed foreshew by fall,
What casual hap the sic^er bappen shall?
Darius horse by brayinge brought a realm.
And what lets, why he ne is (as ye ass) Gods mean
By speaking sign, to show his hap to come,
Who is deaf hearer of his speaking domme?
But forward yet. In tower street I stayed,
Where (could I have seen) ^oe Haward al bewrayd
For as I commond with a priest I met:
Away my Lord quoth he* your time is ne yet
To take a priest Lo, Synon might be seen,
Had not the Trojans hares foolish forthright eyes,
But since the time was come that I should dye,
Some grace it was to dye with wimpled eye.
Ne was this all. For even at Towerwharfe,
Near to those Walls within the which I starse,
Where erst, in sorrow soust, and deep destresse,
I emparted all my pyninge pensifnesse
With Hastings: (so my purseuant men call)
Even there, the same to meet it did me fall.
Who began to me most dolefully renew,
The woeful conference had erst in that Lieu.
Hastings (quoth I) according now they fare,
At Pomfret this day dyinge, who caus'de that care.
My self have all the world at my will,
With pleasures cloyed, engorged with the fill.
God grant it so quoth ^e, why doubtest thou tho
Quoth I? and all in chafe, to him began show
In ample wise, our drift with tedious tale.
And entered so the Tower to my bale.
What should we think of signs? They are but haps
How may they then, be signs of afterclaps?
Does every chance forshew or cause some other?
Or endinge at it self, extendth no further?
As th'ouerflowinge floude some mount does choke,
But to his aid some other flood it yoke:
So, if with signs thy sins once join, beware.
Else whereto chances tend* do never care.
Had not my sin deserved my death as wreake,
What might my mirth have hurt? or horses beck?
Or Hawardes bitter scoff? or Hastings talk?
What mean then fool Astrologers to talk?
That twinckilng sterres fling down the fixed fate?
And all is guyded by the sterry state?
Perdye a certain charge assignd they have
To shine, and times deuyde, not fate to grave.
But grant they somewhat give it at one instant
Of every babe the birth in heaven so skand,
That they that restles roll, and never stay,
Should in his life bear yet so violent swaye:
That, not his actions only next to birth,
But all his life and death be swayed therewith?
How may one mocion make so sundry affectes?
Or one impression tend to such respects?
Some rule there is yet. Else, why were deferd
Til now, these plagues, so long ere now deserude?
If for they are trifles, they ne seem of care:
But toys with god the stateliest scepters are.
Yet in them to plain does appear foreset,
The certain rule and fatal limittes set,
Yet think we not, this sure forsetting fate.
But gods fast providence for each princely state.
And has he erst restraind his providence?
Or is he nigard of his fre dispense?
Or is he uncertain foreset driftes to drive?
That not dame Chance but he al goods may give?
A beathen God they hold whom fortune keep,
To deal them haps while god they wene a sleep
Mock Gods they are and many Gods induce,
Who fortune feign to father their abuse.
How so it be, it might have warned me
But, wha I could not that in me see ye,
Who run in race, the honor like to win
Whose fairest form naught may deforme but sin
Alas, when most I did defye all dread,
By single hear deaths sword ho^g over my head,
For berke the end and listen now my fall.
This is the last, and this the fruit of all.
To connsayle chamber come, a while we stayed
For him without whom naught was done or said.
At last he came, and courteously excused,
That he so long our patience had abused.
And pleasauntly began to paint his cheer,
And said. My lord of Elye, would we had here
Some of the Strawberies, whereof you have store.
The last delighted me so as nothing more.
Would, what so you wish, I might as well command,
My Lord (quoth he) as those. And out of hand.
His servant sendth to Ely place for them.
Out goes from us the restless devil agaiue.
Belike (I think) scarce yet persuaded full,
To work the mischief that did mad is scul.
At last determind, of his bloody thought
And force ordaynde, to work the wyle he sought:
Frowning he enters, with so changed cheer,
As for mylde may had chopped foul Ianuere.
And lowering on me with the goggle eye,
The whetted tuske, and furrwed forehead hye,
His Crooked shoulder bristellike set up,
With frothy Jaws, whose foame he chawde and supd,
With angry looks that flamed as the fy^r:
Thus began at last to grunt the grymest sire.
What merit they, whomme, the kingdoms stay,
Contryued have counsel traitorously to slay?
Abash d^ll sat. I thought I might be bold,
For conscience clearness and aquaintance old,
Their hire is plain quoth I. Be death the least
To who so seeks your grace so to molest
VVithouten stay: the Queen and the whore Shores wife,
By witchcraft (quoth he) seek to wast my life.
Lo here the wythered and bewytched arm,
That thus is spent by those two Sorceresse charm.
And baced his arm and showed his swynish skin.
Such cloaks they use, that seek to clowd their sin.
But out alas, it serves not for the rain.
To all the house the color was to plain
Nature had given him many a maimed mark
And it among to note her monstrous warke.
My doubtful heart distracted this replye.
For thoue I cared not. The Other nipt so nigh
That whyst I cold not: ^^t forthwith brake forth.
If so it be, of death they are doubtless worth.
If, traitor quoth he? playst thou with yfs and ands?
I Will on thy body auowe it with these hands.
And there withal he mightlye bounced the board.
In rush^ his byl men one himself bestird.
Laying at Lord Stanley, whose brain be had surely cleft
Had he not down beneat be the table crept.
But Elye, York, and I were taken straight.
Imprisoned they: I should no longer wait,
But charged was to shriue me, and shift with have.
My Lord must dine, and now midday was past.
The Bores first dish, not the bores head should be.
But Hastinges head the boarish beast would see.
Why stay I his dinner? unto the chapel joins
A greenish hill, that body and soul often twineth.
There on a block my head was stricken of.
As Baptistes head, for Herod bloody gnoffe.
Thus lived I Baldwin, thus dyed I, thus I fell.
This is the sum, which al at large to tell
Would volumes fill. whence yet these lessons note
Ye noble Lords, to learn and ken by rote.
By fylthy rising fear your names to stayne.
If not for virtues love, for dread of pain.
Whom so the minds unquiet state vpbeaues,
Be it for love or fear: when fancye reaues
Reason her right, by mocking of the wit:
If once the cause of this affection flit,
Reason preuayling on the unbridled thought:
Downa falth he who by fancye clymbe aloft.
So has the ryser foul no stay from fall,
No not of those that raisde him first of al.
His surety stands in mainteining the cause
That heaued him first, which reft by reasons sawes,
Not only falth be to his former state,
But lives for ever in his princes hate.
And mark my Lords, God for adultery sleath
Though ye it think too sweet a sin for death.
Serve truly your Prince and fear not rebels might,
On Princes balues the mighty God does fight.
O much more then forswear a foreign foe,
Who seeks your realm and countrei to undo.
Murder detest, have hands unstained with blood.
Aye with your succor do protect the good.
Chase treason where trust should be wed to your friend
Your heart and power, to your lives last end.
Fly tickle credit, shun alike distrust.
To true it is, and credit it you must:
The Ialous nature wants no stormy strife,
The simple soul aye leads a sower life.
Beware of flatterers, friends in outward show.
Best is of such to make your open foe.
What al men seek, that al men seek to feign.
Some such to be, some such to seem, them pain.
Mark Gods just judgments, punishing sin by sin
And slipperie state wherein aloft we swim.
The proverb, al day up if we ne fall,
Agrees well to us hie heaued worldlinges al.
From common sort vpraisde, in honors weed
We shine: while fortune false (whom none erst feed
To stand with stay and forswear ticklenesse:
Sowseth us in mire of durtie brittlenesse.
And learn ye princes by my wronged sprite,
Not to misconster what is meant aright,
The whinged words to often prevent the wit,
When silence cesseth before the lips to sit.
Alas, what may the words yield worthy death?
The words worst is, the speakers stinking breath.
Words are but wind, why cost they then so much
The guiltye kycke, when they to smartly touch.
Forth irreturnable flies the spoken word,
Be hit in scoff, in earnest, or in bourd.
Without return, and vnreceiued, hit hangs.
And at the takers mercy, or rigor stands.
Which if he sowerly wrest with wrathful cheer,
The shiuering word turns to the speakers fear.
If friendly courtesy do the word expound,
To the speakers comfort swetely it does redound.
Even as the vapor which the fire repels,
Turns not to earth. but in myd aer dwells.
Where while it hangth, if Boreas frosty flawes
With rigor rattle it: not to rain it thawes,
But thunder, lightninges, rattling bail or snow
Sendes down to earth, whence first it rose below,
But if fair Phoebus with his countenance sweet
Resolve it, down the dew, or Manna sleete.
(The Manna dew, that in the eastern lands,
Excelth the labor of the bees small hands.)
Else for her Memnon gray Auroras tears,
On the earth it stilleth, the partener of her fears.
Or sends sweet showers to glad their mother earth.
Whence first they took their first inconstant birth.
To so great griefs, il taken words do grow.
Of words well taken, such delights do flow.
This learned, thus be here at length an end,
What since ensued, to thee I will commend.
Now farewell Baldwin, shield my torn name,
From sclaunderous trompe of blasting black defame.
But ere I part, hereof thou record bear.
I claim no part of virtues reckned here.
My vice my self, but God my virtues take.
So hence depart I, as I entered naked.
Thus ended Hastinges both his life and tale,
Containing al his worldly bliss and bale.
Happy he lived, to happy but for sin,
Happy he dyed whom right his death did bring.
Thus ever happy. For there is no mean
Twixt blisseful lives and mortal deaths extreme.
Yet feared not his foes to stain his name.
And by these sclaunders to procure his shame.
In rousty armure as in extreme shift,
They clad themselves, to cloak their devilish drift.
And forthwith for substancial citezens sent,
Declaring to them, Hastinges forged intent
Was to have slain the Duke: and to have seized.
The kings young person, slaying whom he had pleased.
But God of Justice had withturnd that fate,
Which where it ought, tight on his proper pate.
Then practiced they by proclamation spread,
Naught to forget, that naught defame him dead.
Which was so curious, and so clerkely pend,
So long withal: that when some did attend
His death so young: they saw that long before
The shroude was shaped, then babe to dye was bore.
So wonteth God to blind the worldly wise,
That not to see, that all the world espies.
One hearing it cried out. A goodly cast,
And well contrived, foul cast away for have.
Whereto another began in scoff reply,
First pend it was by enspiring prophecy.
So can God reap up secret mischiefs wrought,
To the confusion of the workers thought.
My Lords, the tub, that dround the Clarence Duke,
Dround not his death, nor yet his deaths rebuke.
Your politic secrets guard with trusty loyalty.
So shall they lurk in most assured secrecy.
By Hastinges death, and after fame ye learn,
The earth for murder cries out vengeance stern.
Fly from his faults, and spare to hurt his fame.
The eager hounds forbear their slain game.
Dead, dead, auaunt Curres from the conquered chase.
Il might he live who loves the dead to race.
Thus lived this Lord, thus died he, thus he slept.
Mids forward race when first ^o rest be stepped,
Envious death that bounceth as well with mace
At Keysars courts, as at the poorest gates:
Wheu Nature seemde to slow by this sloape mean,
Conueighed him sooner to his lives extreme.
Happy in preventing woes that after happd,
Ind slomber sweet his living lights he lappd.
Whose hastye death, if it do any grieve:
Know he, he lived to dye, and dyed to live.
Vntimelye never comes the lives last met.
In cradle death may rightly claim his det.
Straight after birth due is the fatal beer.
By deaths permission the aged linger here.
Enen in the swathebandes out commission goes
To loose thy breath, that yet but youngly blows.
Happy, thrice happy, who so loosth his breath,
That life he gayneth by his godly death.
As Hastinges here. Whom time and truth agree,
To engraue by fame in strong eternity.
Who spares not speaking, with danger of his blood?
Yet lo this noble Lord did think it good
To clear the innocent not to spare to speak,
Although his shoulders with his blood should reake.
Worthy to live, who lived not for himself
But prised his fame more then this worldly pelf.
Whose name and line, if any yet preserve,
We wish they live like honor to deserve.
Whether thou seek by martial prowess praise,
Or Pallas policy high thy name to raise,
Or trusty service honor to attain:
Hastinges foreled. Tracke here his bloody train.
FINIS.
Master D.

WHen I had read this, one said the admonition given in the history was
profitable for the avoiding of the vices contained in ye said history, and
for the imitating of the virtues in the same mentioned and commended. Then said
the reader: The next here whom I find miserable, are king Edwardes two
sons, cruelly murdered in the Tower of London: Have you their tragedy? No
surely (said I) The Lord Vaulx undertook to pen it, but what he has done
therein I am not certain, and therefore I let it pass, til I know further.

I have hear the Duke of Buckingham, king Richards chief instrument, written
by master Thomas Sackuile. Read it we pray you, said they: with a good will
(quoth I) But first you shall hear his preface or induction. Has he made a
preface (said one) what means he thereby, seeing none other has used the like
order? I will tell you the cause thereof (said I) which is this: After that he
understood that some of the counsel would not suffer the book to be printed
in such order as we had agreed and determined, he purposed to have gotten at
my hands, all the tragedies that were before the Duke of Buckinghams, which he
would have preserved in one volume. And from y^ time backwarde even to the time
of William the Conqueror, he determined to continue and perfect all the
storye himself, in such order as Lydgate (following Bochas had already used.
And therefore to make a meet Induction into the matter, he devised this
po^sie: which in my judgment is so well penned, that I would not have any
Verse thereof, left out of our volume. Now that you know the cause and
meaning of his doing, you shall hear also what he has done His Induction
begins thus.

THE INDVCTION,
THe wrathful winter proching on apace,
With blustering blastes had al ybard the treen,
And old Saturnus with his frosty face,
With chilling cold had pearst the tender green:
The mantles rent, wherein enwrapped been
The gladsome groaues that now lay overthrown,
The tapets torn and every tree down blown.
The soil that erst so seemly was to seen
Was al despoyled of her beauties hew:
And soote fresh flowers (wherewith the Summers queen
Had clad the earth) now Boreas blastes down blewe.
And small fowls flocking in their songs did rue
The winters wrath, wherewith each thing defast
In woeful wise bewayld the Somer past.
Hawthorne had lost his motley lyuerye,
The naked twigs were shiuering all for cold:
And dropping down the tears abundauntly,
Each thing (me thought) with weeping eye me told
The cruel season, bidding me withhold
My self within for I was gotten out
Into the fields whereas I walked about.
When lo the night with mistie mantles spread
Began dark the day, and dim the azure skies,
And Venus in her message Hermes sped
To bloody Mars, to will him not to rise,
While she her self approacht in speedy wise:
And Virgo hyding her disdainful breast
With Thetis now had laid her down to rest.
VVhiles Scorpio dreading Sagittarius dart,
Whose bow pressed bent in fight, the string had slipped,
Down siyd into the Occean flud apart,
The Bear that in the Irish seas had dipped
His griesly feet, with speed from thence he whipped:
For Thetis hasting from the Virgins bed.
Pursued the Bear, that ere she came was fled.
And Pha^ton now nere reaching to his race
With glistring beams, gold streaming where they bent,
Was pressed to enter in his resting place.
Erithius that in the cart first went
Had even now attaind his iourneis stent.
And fast declining hid away his head,
While Titan coucht him in his purple bed.
And pale Cinthea with her burowed light
Beginning to supply her brothers place,
Was past the Noone steed six degrees in sight
When sparkling stars amid the heavens face
With twinkling light shone on the earth apace,
That while they brought about the nights chare,
The dark had dimde the day ere I was ware.
And sorrowing I to see the Summer flowers,
The lively green, the lusty lease forlorn,
The sturdye trees so shattred with the showers,
The ^^eloes so fade that florisht so beforne,
It taught me well al earthly things be borne
To dye the death, for naught long time may last,
The Summers beauty yeldes to winters blast.
Then looking upward to the heavens leames
With nights stars thick powdered every where,
Which erst so glistred with the golden streams
That cheerful Phoebus spread down from his Sphere,
Beholding dark oppressing day so near:
The sudden sight reduced to my mind,
The sundry chaunges that in earth we find.
That musing on this worldly wealth in thought,
Which comes and goes more faster then we see
The flickring flame that with the fire is wrought*
My busy mind presented unto me
Such fall of Pieres as in the realm had be:
That often I wished some would their woes descriue,
To warn the rest whom Fortune left alive.
And strait forth stalking with redoubled pace
For that I saw the night drew on so fast,
In black al clad there fell before my face
A piteous might, whom woe had al forewast,
Forth on her eyes the crystal tears forth brast.
And sighing sore her hands she wrong and fold,
Tare al her hair, that ruth was to behold.
Her body small forewichred and forespent,
As is the stalk that Summers drought oppressed,
Her wealked face with woeful tears besprent,
Her color pale, (as it seemed her best)
In woe and plaint reposed was her rest.
And as the stone that drops of water wears,
So dented were her cheeks with fall of tearess.
Her eyes swollen with flowing streams a flote,
Where with her looks thrown up full piteouslye,
Her forcelesse hands together often she smote,
With doleful shrikes, that eckoed in the sky:
Whose plaint such sighs did strait accompany,
That in my doom was never man did se
A wight but half so woe begone as she.
I stood aghast beholding all her plight,
Twene dread and dolor so distreinde in heart,
That while my hears vpstarted with the sight,
The tears out streamde for sorrow of her smart:
But when I saw no end that could appart
The deadly dewle, which she so sore did make,
With doleful voice then thus to her I spoke.
Unwrap thy woes what ever wight thou be
And stint in time to spil thy self with plaint,
Tell what thou art, and whence: for well I see
Thou can not dure with sorrow thus attaint.
And with that word of sorrow al forfaint
She looked up, and prostrate as she lay
With piteous sound ^o thus she began to say.
Alas, I wretch whom thus thou see distre^ned
With wasting woes, that never shall aslake,
Sorrow I am, in endless torments payned,
Among the furies in the infernal lake:
Where Plu^o God of Hell so griesly black
Does hold his throne, and Laetheus deadly taste
Does rieue remembrance of each thing forepast.
Whence come I am, the drery destenie
And lucklesse lot for to bemoane al those
Whom Fortune in this maze of misery
Of wretched chance most woeful myrrours chose
That thou see how lightly they did lose
Their pom^e, their power, and that they thought most sure,
Thou may sone deem no earthly joy may dure.
Whose ruful vnice no sooner had outbrayed
Those woeful words, wherewith she sorowed so,
But out alas she shrikt and never stayed,
Fell down, and all to basht her self for woe.
The cold pale dread my lims began over go,
And I so sorowed at her sorrows eft,
That what with grief and fear my wits were reft.
I stretched my self, and strait my heart reuiues,
That dread and dolor erst did so appale,
Like him that with the fervent fever siriues
When sickness seeks his castle health to skale:
With gathred sprites so forced I fear to auale.
And rearing her with anguish al foredone,
My spirits returnde* and then I thus begone.
O Sorrow alas since sorrow is thy name,
And that to thee this dreere does well pertain.
In vain it were to seek to cease the same:
But as a man himself with sorrow slain,
So I alas do comfort thee in pain,
That here in sorrow art forsoncke so diepe
That at thy sight I can but sighe and weep.
I had no sooner spoken of a stike
But that the storm so rumbled in her breast,
As E^lus could never roar the like,
And showers down rayned from her eyes so fast.
That al bedreint the place, til at the last
Well eased they the dolor of her mind.
As rage of rain does swage the stormy wind.
For forth she paced in her fearful tale:
Come, come, (quoth she) and see what I shall show,
Come hear the playning and the bitter bale
Of worthy men, by Fortune overthrow.
Come thou and see them rewing al in row.
They were but shades that erst in mind thou rold.
Come, come with me, thine eyes shall them behold.
What could these words but make me more aghast?
To hear her tell whereon I musde while ere,
So was I mazde therewith: til at the last,
Musing upon her words, and what they were,
Al suddenly well lessened was my fear:
For to my mind returned how she teld
Both what she was, and where her won she held.
Whereby I knew that she a Goddess was,
And therewithal resorted to my mind
My thought, that late presented me the glass
Of brittle state, of cares that here we find.
Of thousand woes, to seely men assinde:
And how she now bid me come and behold
To see with eye that erst in thought I rolde.
Flat down I fell, and with all reverence
Adored her, perceiving now that she
A Goddess sent by godly providence,
In earthly shape thus showd her self to me,
To wayle and rue this worlds certaintye:
And while I honored thus her Godheads might,
With playning voice these words to me she shright
I shall the guide first to the grieslye lake,
And thence unto the blisful place of rest.
Where thou shall see and hear ye plaint they make.
That whilom here bare swinge among the best.
This shall thou see, but great is the unrest
That thou must bide before thou can attain
Unto the dreadful place where these remain.
And with these words as I vpraysed stood,
And began to follow her, that straight forth paste,
Ere I was ware, into a desert wood
We now were come: where hand in hand embraste,
She led the way, and through the thick so traste,
As but I had been guided by her might,
It was no way for any mortal wight.
But lo, while thus amid the desert dark,
We passed on with steps and pace unmeet:
A rumbling roar confusde with howl and hark
Of Dogs, shoke all the ground under our feet,
And stroke the din within our ears so diepe,
As half distraught unto the ground I fell,
Besought return, and not to visit Hell.
But she forthwith vplifting me a pace
Removed my dread, and with a steadfast mind
Bid me come on, for here now was the place,
The place where we our travail end should find.
Wherewith I rose, and to the place assinde
Astoinde I stalk, when straight we approached nere
The dreadful place, that you will dread to here.
An hydeous hole al vaste, withouten shape,
Of endless depth, orewhelmde with ragged stone,
With ouglye mouth, and grieslye jaws does gape,
And to our sight confounds it self in one.
Here entered we, and yeding forth, anon
An horrible lothly lake we might discern
As black as pitch, that cleped is Auern:
A deadly gulf where naught but rubbish grows,
With foul black swelth in thickened lumps yt lies,
Which up in thayre such stinking vapors throws
That over there, may fly no foul but dies,
Choakt with the pestlent savors that arise.
Hither we come, whence forth we still did pace.
In dreadful fear amid the dreadful place.
And first within the porch and jaws of Hell
Sat diepe Remorse of conscience, al besprent
With tears: And to her self often would she tell
Her wretchedness, and cursing never stent
To sob and sighe: but ever thus lament,
With thoughtful care, as she that al in vain
Would wear and wast continually in pain.
Ier eyes unsteadfast rolling here and there,
Whurld on each place, as place yt vengeance brought,
So was her mind continually in fear,
Tossed and tormented with tedious thought
Of those detested crimes which she had wrought:
With dreadful cheer and looks thrown to y^ sky
VVishing for death, and yet she could not dye.
Next saw we Dread al trembling how she shook,
With foot uncertain proffered here and there,
Benumbd of speech, and with a ghastly look
Searched every place al pale and dead for fear,
His cap horn up with staring of his hear,
S^oynd and amazde at his own shade for dread,
And fearing greater dangers then was need.
And next within the entry of this lake
Sat fell Revenge gnashinge her teeth for ire,
Deuisinge means how she may vengeance take,
Never in rest till she have her desire:
But frets within so farforth with the fire
Of wreakinge flames, that now determine shse,
To dye by death, or vengde by death to be.
When fell Revenge with bloody foul pretense
Had showd her self as next in order set,
With tremblinge Limbs we softly parted thence,
Till in our eyes another sight we met:
When fro my heart a sigh forthwith I fet
Rewing alas upon the woeful plight
Of Misery, that next appeard in sight.
His face was leave, and somedeale pyned away,
And eke his hand consumed to the bone,
But what his body was I cannot say,
For on his Carkas raiment had he none
Save Clouts, and Patches peeced one by one.
With staff in hand, and Scrip on shoulder cast,
His chief defense against the Winters blast.
His food for most, was wild fruictes of the Tree,
Unless sometime some Cru^mes fell to his share:
Which in his Wallet long God wot kept he,
As on the which full dayntely would fare
His drink the runninge stream: his Cup, the bare
Of his Palm clos'^e, his Bed, the hard cold ground.
To this Poor life was Mysery ybound.
Whose wretched state when we had well beheld
With tender ruth on him, and on his seres,
In thoughtfull cares, forth then our pace we held.
And by and by, another shape apperes
Of greedy care, still brushinge up the breres,
His K^^ckles knobbe, his Flesh deep dented in.
With tawed hands, and hard ytanned Skin.
The morrow gray no sooner has begone
To spread his light even peepinge in our eyes,
When he is up, and to his work yr^n,
But let the nights black misty Mantles rise,
And with foul dark never so mutch disguise
The Fair bright day, yet ceasseth he no while,
But has his candels to prolonge his toil.
By him lay heavy sleep the Coosin of death
Flat on the ground, and still as any stone,
A very Corpse, save yealdinge forth a breath,
Small keep took he whom Fortune frowned on
Or whom she lifted up into the Troue
Of high renown, but as a lyuinge death,
So dead alive, of life he drew the breath.
The bodies rest, the quiet of the heart,
The trauayles ease, the still nights fear was he,
And of our life in earth the better part,
Reuer of sight, and yet in whom we see
Things often that tide, and often that never be.
Without respect esteeminge equally
King Cresus pomp, and Irus Poverty.
And next in order sad Old age we found
His Beard all hoare, his eyes hollow, and blind.
With droupinge cheer still poringe on the ground,
As on the place where nature him assind
To rest, when that the sisters had vntwind
His vital thread, and ended with their Knife
The fleetinge course of fast declyninge life.
There heard we him with broke, and hollow playnt
Rewe which himself his end approchinge fast,
And all for naught his wretched mind torment.
With sweet remembrance of his pleasures past,
And fresh delights of lusty youth forewaste.
Recountinge which, how would he so and shrike:
And to be young again of Jove beseeke.
But and the cruel fates so fixed be
That time forepast cannot return again,
This one request of Jove yet prayed he:
That in such withred plight, and wretched pain,
As elde (accompanied with his loathsome train)
Had brought on him, all were it woe, and grief.
He might a while yet linger forth his lief.
And not so soon descend into the pit:
Where death, when he the mortal corpse has slain,
With retchlesse hand in grave does cover it,
Thereafter never to enjoy again
The gladsome light, but in the ground plain,
In depth of darkness wast, and wear to uought,
As he had never into the world diu brought.
But who had seen him sobbinge, how he stood
Unto himself, and how he would beemone
His youth forepast, as thought it wrought him good
To talk of youth, all were his youth foregone,
He would have mused, and maruayled mutch whereon
This wretched age should life desire so feign,
And knows full well life does but lenghth his pain.
Crokebackt he was, toothshaken, and blere Eyed,
Went on three feet, and sometime crept on four,
With old lame Bones, that ratled by his side,
His scalpe all pild, and he with eld forlore:
His withred fist still knockinge at deaths door,
Fumblinge, and driuelinge as he draws his breath,
For brief the shape, and Messenger of death.
And fast by him pale malady was plaste,
Sore sick in Bed, her color all foregone,
Bereft of Stomach, Savor, and of Taste.
Ne could the Brook no meat but Broths alone,
Her Breath corrupt, her Keepers every one
Abborringe her, her Sickness past recure,
Detestinge Physic, and all Phisicks Cure.
But oh the doleful sight that than we see,
We tourn'de our look, and on the other side
A griefly shape of Famine might we see,
With greedy looks, and gapinge mouth that cried,
And roarde for meat, as she should there have dyed,
Her body ruinne, and bare as any Bone,
Whereto was left naught but the case alone.
And that alas was gnawen on every where,
All full of Holes, that I ne might refrain
From tears to see how she her arms could tear
And with her teeth gnash on the bones in vain:
When all for naught she feign would so sustain
Her staruen Corpse, that rather seemde a shade,
Then any substance of a creature made.
Great was her force whom Stonewall could not stay,
Her tearinge nails snatchinge at all she saw:
With gapinge Jaws that by ne means ymay
Be satisfied from hunger of her Mawe,
But eats herself as she that has no Law:
Gnawinge alas her Carkas all in vain,
Where you may countech Sinow, Bone, and Vain.
On her while we thus firmly fixed our Eyes,
That bled for ruth of such a drery sight,
Lo! suddenly she shright in so huge wise,
As made Hell gates to shiuer with the might.
Wherewith a Dart we saw how it did light.
Right on her breast, and therewithal pale death
Enthrillinge it to reave her of her breath.
And by and by a dumme dead Corpse we saw,
Heavy and cold, the shape of death a right,
That dauntes all earthly creatures to his law:
Against whose Force in vain it is to fight
Ne Peers, ne Princes, nor no Mortal Wight,
No Towns, ne Realms, Cities, ne strongest Tower,
But all perforce must yield unto his Power.
His dart anon out of his corpse he took,
And in his hand (a dreadful sight to see)
With great triumph eftsoon the same he shoke,
That most of al my fears affrayed me:
His body dight with naught but Bones perdye
The naked shape of man there saw I plain,
All save the Flesh, the Sinow, and the Vain.
Lastly stood War in glitteringe arms yelad.
With Vysage grim, Stern looks, and Blackly hewed
In his right Hand a naked Sword he had,
That to the Hilts was all with blood embrued:
And in his left (that King, and Kingdoms rewed)
Famine, and Fire he held, and therewithal
He razed Towns, and threw down Towers, and all.
Cities he Sacked, and Realms that whilome flowred,
In Honor, Glory, and rule above the best,
He over whelm'de, and all their Fame devoured,
Consum'de, destroy'de, wasted, and never ceast,
Till he their wealth, their name and all oppressed.
His Face forehewed with Wo^noes, and by his side,
There hunge his Targe with gashes deep, and wide.
In mids of which, depaynted there we found
Deadly debate, all full of snaky hear,
That with a bloody fillet was ybo^ude,
Out breathinge naught but discord every where.
And round about were portrayde here and there
The hugy Hoastes, Darius and his power,
His Kings, Princes, his Peers, and and all his flower.
Whom great Macedo vanquished there in sight,
With deep slaughter, despoylinge all his pride,
Pearst through his Realms, and daunted all his might.
Duke Hanniball beheld I there beside,
In Cannas field, victor how he did ride,
And woeful Romans that in vain withstoode
And Consul Paulvs covered all in blood.
Yet saw I more the fight at Trasimene.
And Treberie field, and eke when Hanniball
And worthy Scipio last in arms were seen
Before Carthago gate, to try for all
The Worlds Empire, to whom it should befall.
There saw I Pompey, and Caesar clad in Arms,
Their Hoasts allied, and all their civilly harms.
With Conquerers hands forbathde in their own blood,
And Caesar weepinge over Pompeis head.
Yet saw I Scilla, and Marius where they stood,
Their great cruelty, and the deep blou^shest
Of friends: Cyrus I saw, and his Host dead,
And how the Queen with great despite has flonge
His head in blood of them she overcome.
Xerxes the Percian King yet saw I there
With his Huge Host that drancke the Rivers dry,
Dismounted Hills, and made the Vales vprere,
His Host, and all yet saw I slain peroye.
Thebes I saw all razde how it did lie
In heaps of Stones, and Tyrus put to Spoil.
With Walls, and Towers flat Euened with the Soil.
But Troy alas (me thought) above the^ all,
It made mine eyes in very tears consume:
When I beheld the woeful werd befall,
That by the wrathful will of God was come:
And Jove's unmoved sentence and foredoome
On Priam King, and on his town so bent.
I could not lin, but I must there lament.
And that the more since desteny was so stern
As force perforce, there might no force avail,
But she must fall: and by her fall we learn,
That Cities, Towers, Wealth, World, and all shall quayle.
No Manhood, Might, nor nothing might prevail,
All were there Pressed, full many a Prince, and Peer
And many a Knight that sold his death full dear.
Nor worthy Hector worthiest of them all,
Her Hope, her Joy, his Force is now for naught.
O Troy, Troy, there is no boot but bale,
The hugy Horse within thy Wales is brought:
Thy Turrets fall, thy Knights that whilome fought
In Arms amid the Field, are slain in Bed,
Thy Gods defilde, and all thy honor dead.
The flames vprisinge, and cruelly they creep
From Wale to Roof, till all to Cinders waste,
Some fire the Houses where the Wretches sleep,
Some rush in here, some run in there as fast.
In every where, or Sword, or Fire they cast.
The Wales are torn, the Towers wh^rld to the ground,
There is no mischief, but may there be found.
Cassandra yet there saw I how they baled
From Pallas House, with sparcled tresse undone,
Her Wrists fast bound, and with Greeks Rout empaled:
And Priam eke in vain how he did run
To Arms, whom Pyrrhus with dispight has done
To cruel Death, and Bath'de him in the Bayne
Of his Sons blood before the Altar slain.
But how can I descriue the doleful sight,
That in the shield so lively fair did shine?
Since in this world I think was never wight
Could have set forth the half, not half so fine.
I can no more but tell how there is seen
Fair Ilium fall, in burninge red gledes down,
And from the soil great Troy Neptunus Town.
Here from when scarce I could my eyes withdraw
That filde with tears as does the springinge Well,
We passed on so far forth till we saw
Rude Acheron, a loathsome Lake to tell
That Boyles and Bubs up swelth as black as Hell.
Where griefly Charon at their fixed tide
Still ferries Ghosts unto the farther side.
The aged God no sooner Sorrow spied,
But hasting strait unto the bank apace
With hollow call unto the Rout he cried,
To swerve apart and give the Goddess place,
Strait it was done, when to the shore we pace,
Where hand in hand as we than linked fast,
Within the Boot we are together plaste.
And forth we launch, full Fraughted to the Brincke,
When with the unwonted weight, the rusty Keele
Began to crack as if the same should sink.
We hoyse up Mast and Sail, that in a while
We fet the shore, were scarcely we had while
For to ariue, but that we heard anon
A three sound bark confounded all in one.
We had not long forth past, but that we saw,
Black Cerberus the hideous Hound of Hell,
With Bristles reard, and with a three mouthed Iawe,
Fore dinninge the Air with his horrible yelle.
Out of the deep dark Cave where he did dwell,
The Goddess strait he knew, and by and by
He peast, and couched, whils that we passed by.
Thence come we to the horror, and the Hell,
The large great Kingdoms, and the dreadful raygne
Of Pluto in his Trone where he did dwell,
The wide waste places, and the hugy Plain:
The Waylinges, shrikes, and sundry forces of pain,
The Sighs, the Sobs, the deep, and deadly groan,
Earth, Air, and all resoundinge plain, and moan.
Here pewed the Babes, and here the Maids Vnwed
With folded hands their sorry chance bewayl'd,
Here wept the guiltless slain, and Lovers dead,
That slew themselves when nothing else auayl'd,
A thousand sorts of Sorrows here that wayl'd
With Sighs, and Tears, Sobs, Shrikes, and all yfere,
That (oh alas) it was a Hell to hear.
We stayed us strait, and with a rufull fear,
Beheld this heavy sight, while from mine eyes,
The vapored tears down stilled here, and there,
And Sorrow eke in far more woeful wise.
Took on with plaint, vpheauinge to the Skies
Her wretched hands, that with her cry the Rout
Began all in heaps to swarm us round about.
Lo! here (quoth Sorrow) Princes of Renown,
That whilom late on top of Fortunes wheel
Now laid full low, like wretches whurled down,
Even with one frown that stayede but with a smile,
And now behold the thing that thou erewhile,
Saw only in thought, and what thou now shall hear
Recompt the same to Kezar, King, and Peer.
Then first came Henry Duke of Buckingham,
His Cloak of black, al pilde, and quite forworne,
Wringinge his hands, and Fortune often does blame,
Which of a Duke has made him now her scorn,
With ghastly looks as one in manner lorne,
Often spread his Arms, stretched hands he ioynes as fast,
With rufull cheer, and vapored eyes vpcast.
His Cloak he rent, his manly breast he beat,
His hear all Torn about the place it lay,
My heart so molte to see his grief so great,
As feelingly me thought it dropped away:
His eyes they whurlde about withouten slaye,
Wi^h stormy Sighs the place did so complain*
As if his heart at each had burst in twain.
Thrice he began to tell his doleful Tale,
And thrice the Sighs did swallow up his Voice,
At each of which he shriked so withal
As though the Heavens riued with the noise:
Till at the last recoueringe his Voice,
Suppinge the tears that all his breast beraynde
On cruel Fortune weepinge thus he playnde.
FINIS.
The Complaynt of Henry Duke of Buckingham.
WHo trusts to mutch to honors highest throne
And warely watch not slye Dame Fortunes snare:
Or who in court will bear the swinge alone,
And wisely weigh not bow to wield the care,
Behold he me, and by my death beware:
Whom flatteringe Fortune falsely so begil'de
That lo she slew, where erst full smoth she smyl'de.
And Sackui^e since in purpose now thou have
The woeful fall of Princes to descriue,
Whom Fortune both vplift and eke down cast,
To show thereby the vnsuerty in this life,
Mark well my fall, which I shall show beliue.
And paint it forth that all Estates may know:
Have they the warninge, and bemine the woe,
For Noble blood made me both Prince, and Peer
Yea Pearls too, had season purchased place,
And God with gifts endowed me largely hear.
But what auayles his gifts where fayles his grace?
My Mothers sire Spronge of a Kingly Race
And called was Edmond Duke of Somerset,
Bereft of life ere time by nature set.
Whose faithful heart to Henry sixth so wrought
That never be him in weal, or woe forsook,
Till lastly he at T^wkesbury field was cought
Where with an Axe his violent death he took:
He never could King Edwards party brook,
Till by his death he voucht that Quarrel good,
In which his Sire, and Graundsire spilt their blood.
And such was erst my Fathers cruel chance,
Of Stafford Earl by name that Humfrey hight
Who ever Pressed did Henryes part Auaunce,
And never ceast till at Saynct Albones fight
He lost his life, as than did many a Knight:
Where eke my Graundsire, Duke of Buckingham
Was wounded sore, and hardly escaped vntane.
But what may boot to stay the Sisters three?
When Atropos perforce will cut the Thread:
The doleful day was come when you might see
Northampton Field, with Armed men Orespred,
Where Fate would algates have my Graundsire dead:
So rushinge forth amids the fiercest fight,
He lived, and died there in his Masters right.
In place of whom as it befell my lot,
Like on a stage, so stepped I in straiteway,
Enioyinge there but woefully God wot,
As he that had a slender part to play:
To teach thereby, in earth no state may stay,
But as our parts abridge or lengtht our age
So pass we all while others fill the stage.
For of my self the drery fate to plain.
I was sometime a Prince withouten peer,
When Edward fifth began his rufull raygne,
Ay me, than I began that hateful year,
To compass that which I have bought so dear:
I bare the swinge, I and that wretched wight,
The Duke of Gloucester that Richard hight.
For when the fates had reft that Royal Prince
Edward the fourth, chief mirror of that name,
The Duke, and I fast joined ever since,
In faithful love, our secret driftes to frame:
What he thought best, to me so seem'de the same,
My self not bent so mutch for to aspire,
As to fulfill that greedy Dukes desire.
Whose restless mind sore thirstinge after rule,
When that he saw his nephews both to been
Through tender years as yet unfit to rule,
And rather ruled by their Mothers Kin,
There sought he first his mischief to begin,
To pluck from them their Mothers friends assinde,
For well he wist they would withstand his mind.
To follow which he ran so headlonge swift,
With eigre thirst of his desired draught,
To seek their deaths that sought to dash his drift,
Of whom the chief the Queens allies he thought,
That bent thereto with mounts of mischief fraught
He knew their lives would be so sore his let,
That in their deaths his only help he set.
And I most cursed caitife that I was,
Seeinge the state vnsted fast how it stood,
His chief complice to bring the same to pass,
Unhappy wretch consented to their blood:
Yea Kings, and Peers that swim in worldly good,
In seekinge blood the end aduert you plain,
And see if blood ey ask not blood again.
Consider Cyrus in your cruel thought,
A makelesse Prince in riches, and in might,
And weigh in mind the bloody deeds he wrought,
In sheadinge which he set his whole delight:
But see the guerdon lotted to this wight,
He whose huge power no man might overthrow,
Tomyris Queen with great dispite has slow.
His head dismembered from his mangled corpse,
Her self she cast into a vessel fraught
With clottred blood of them that felt her force.
And with these words a just reward she taught:
Drink now thy fill of thy desired draught.
Lo! Mark the fine that did this Prince be fall:
Mark not this one, but mark the end of all.
Behold Cambises, and his Fatal day,
Where murders mischief mirror like is left:
While be his Brother Mergus cast to slay,
A dreadful thing his wits were him bereft.
A Sword he caught where with he pierced eft
His body gored, which be of life benooms:
So just is God in all his dredfulll dooms.
O bloody Brutus rightly did thou rewe,
And thou Cassius justly came thy fall,
That with the Sword wherewith thou Caesar slew
Murdrest thy self, and reft thy life withal.
A mirror let him be unto you all
That murderers be, of murder to your meede:
For murder cries out Vengeance on your seed.
Lo! Bessius he that arm'de with murderers Knife,
And traitors heart against his royal King,
With bloody hands bereft his masters Life,
Aduert the fine his foul offense did bring:
And loathinge murder as most lothly thing
Behold in him the just deserved fall,
That ever has, and shall betide them all.
What booted him his false usurped raygne?
VVhereto by murder he did so ascend?
When like a wretch led in an iron chain
He was presented by his chiefest friend
Unto the Foes of him whom he had slain:
That even they should venge so foul a gilt,
That rather sought to have his blood yspilt:
Take bid ye Princes and ye prelates al
Ofs this outrage, which though it sleep a while
And not disclosde, as it does seeld be fall,
Yet God that suffers silence to beguile
Such giltes, wherewith both earth and air ye file,
At last discries them to your foul deface,
You see thexamples set before your face.
And diepely grave within your stony hearts,
The drery dewle that mighty Macedo,
With fears unfolded wrapped in deadly smartes,
When he the Death of Clitus sorowed so,
Whom erst he murdered with the deadly blow
Raught in his rage upon his friend so dear,
For which behold lo how his pangues appear,
The launced spear he writhes out of the wound,
From which the purple blood spins in his face:
His heinous gilt when he returned found,
He throws himself upon the corpse alas.
And in his arms how often does he embrace
His murdered friend: and kissing him in vain,
Forth flow the fluds of salt repentaunt rain.
His friends amazde at such a murder done,
In fearful flocks begin to shrink away.
And he thereat with heaps of grief for done.
Hates him self, wishing his later day.
Now he likewise perceived in like stay,
As is the wild beast in the desert bred,
Both dreading others and himself abred.
He calls for death, and loathinge longer life,
Bent to his Bane, refuses kindly Food:
And plung'de in depth of death, and dolours strife,
Had queld him self, had not his friends withstoode.
Lo! he that thus has shed the guiltless blood,
Though he were King, and Kezar over all
Yet chose he death to guerdon death withal.
This Prince whose Peer was never under sun
Whose glisteringe Fame the Earth did ouerglyde,
Which with his power welnigh the World had won,
His bloody hands himself could not abide,
But fully bent with famine to have died:
The worthy Prince deemed in his regard,
That death for death could be but just reward:
Yet we that were so drowned in the depth
Of deep desire to drink the guiltless blood,
Like to the Wolf, with greedy looks that ^epth
Into the Snare, to feed on deadly Food,
So we delighted in the State we stood,
Blinded so far in all our blinded Train
That blind we saw not our destruction plain.
We spared none whose life could ought for let
Our wicked purpose to his pass to come.
Four worthy Kinghtes we Headed at Pomfret
Guiltless (God wot) withouten law or dome.
My heart even bleedes to tell you all and some,
And how Lord Hastings when he feared least,
Dispiteously was murdered, and oppressed.
These rocks vpraught, that threatened most our wrecke
We seem'de to sail mutch surer in the Stream:
And fortune faringe as she were at beck
Lay'de in our lap the rule of all the Realm.
The Nephews strait depos'de were by the Eame.
And we aduaunst to that we bought full dear,
He Crowned King, and I his chiefest Peer.
Thus having won our long desired Pray,
To make him King that ^ee might make me chief,
Down throw we strait his sely Nephews tway,
From Princes Pomp, to woeful Prisoners life:
In hope that now stint was all further strife.
Since he was King, and I chief stroke did bear.
Who ioyed but we, yet who more cause to fear?
The guiltless blood which we unjustly shed,
The Royal Babes deuested from their Trons,
And we like Traitors raigninge in their sted,
These heavy Burdens passed us upon,
Tormentinge us so by our selves alone,
Mutch like the Felon that pursued by night,
Starts at each Bush, as his Foe were in sight.
Now doubtinge State, now dreadinge loss of life,
In fear of wrack at every blast of Wind,
Now start in Dreams through dread of murdrers knyfe,
As though even then reuengement were assinde.
With restless thought so is the guilty mind
Turmoylde, and never feels ease, or stay,
But lives in fear of that which follows aye.
Well gave that Judge his dome upon the death
Of Titus Glelius that in Bed was slain:
When every wight the cruel murder leyth
To his two Sons that in his Chamber layne,
That Judge that by the proof perceives plain,
That they were found fast sleepinge in their Bed,
Has deem'de them guiltless of this blood yshed.
He thought it could not be, that they which brake
The laws of God and man in such outrage
Could so forthwith themselves to sleep betake:
He rather thought the horror, and the rage
Of such an heinous gilt, could never swage.
Nor never suffer them to sleep, or rest,
Or dreadles breath one breath out of their breast.
So gnawes the grief of conscience evermore
And in the heart it is so deeply grave,
That they may neither sleep nor rest therefore,
Ne think one thought, but on the dread they have.
Still to the death for tossed with the wave
Of restless woe, in terror, and dispeire.
They lead a life continually in fear.
Like to the Dear that stricken with the Dart,
With draws himself into some secret place,
And feelinge green the wound about his heart,
Startlesse with pangs till he fall on the grass,
And in great fear lies gaspinge there a space,
Forth brayinge Sigbes as though each pange had brought
The present death which he does dread so often:
So we diepe wovnded with the bloody thought,
And gnawing worm that grieved our conscience so,
Never took ease, but as our heart outhrought
The stained sighs in witness of our woe,
Such restless cares our fault did well beknowe:
Wherewith of our deserved fall the fears
In every place rang death within our ears.
And as il grain is never well ykept,
So fared it by us within a while:
That which so long with such unrest we reapt,
In dread and danger by all wit and wyle,
Lo see the fine, when once it felt the wheel
Of s^ipper fortune, stay it might no stowne,
The wheel whurls up, but strait it whurleth down.
For having rule and riches in our hand,
Who durst gainsay the thing that we auerde?
Will was wisdom, our lust for law did stand,
In sort so strange that who was not afeard
When he the sound but of king Richard heard?
So hateful waxt the hearing of his name
That you may deem the residue of the same.
But what auaild the terror and the fear,
Wherewith he kept his lieges under awe?
It rather wan him hatred every where.
And feigned faces forced by fear of law:
That but while Fortune does with favor blaw
Flatter through fear: for in their heart lurkes aye
A secret hate that hops for a day.
Records Dionysius the King,
That with his Rigor so his Realm oppressed,
As that he thought by cruel fear to bring
His Subjects under, as him liked best:
But lo! the dread where with himself was strest,
And you shall see the fine of forced fear,
Most myrrour like in this proud Prince appear.
All were his Head with Crown of Gold ysprad,
And in his Hand the Royal Scepter set:
And he with Princely Purple richly clad,
Yet was his heart with wretched cares orefret:
And in wardly with deadly fear beset,
Of those whom he by Rigor kept in awe,
And sore oppressed with might of Tyraunts Law.
Against whose fear, no heaps of Gold, and glie,
No strength of guard, nor all his hired power,
Ne proud high Towers that preaced to the Sky,
His cruel heart of safty could assure:
But dreadinge them whom he should deem most sure,
Himself his Beard with burninge Brand would ceare,
Of death deseru'de so vexed him the fear.
This might suffice to represent the fine
Of Tyraunts force, their fears, and their unrest,
But hear this one, although my heart repine
To let the sound once sincke within my breast:
Of fell Phereus, that above the rest,
Such loathsome cruelty on his people wrought*
As (oh alas) I tremble with the thought.
Some he encased in the Coats of Bears,
Among Wild beasts devoured so to be:
And some for Pray unto the Hunters Spears,
Like Savage Beasts withouten ruth to dye.
Sometime to increase his horrible cruelty,
The quick with face to face engraued he,
Each others death that each might living see.
Lo! what more cruel horror might be found,
To purchase fear, if fear could stay his raygne?
It ^ooted not, it rather struck the wound
Of fear in him to fear the like again.
And so he did full often, and not in vain:
And in his life his cares could witness well*
But most of all his wretched end does tell.
His own dear Wife whom as his life he loved,
He durst not trust, nor proch unto her Bed,
But causinge first his Slave with naked Sword
To go before, himself with tremblinge dread
Strayt follows fast, and whurlinge in his head
His rollinge eyes, he searches here, and there
The deep danger that he so sore did fear.
For not in vain it ran still in his Breast,
Some wretched hap should hale him to his end.
And therefore always by his pillow pressed
Had he a Sword, and with that Sword be wend,
In vain (God wot) all perils to defend.
For lo! his Wife foreyrked of his Raygne,
Sleepinge in Bed this cruel Wre^ch has Slain.
What should I more now seek to say in this
Or one jot farther linger forth my Tale?
With cruel Nero, or with Phalaris,
Caligula, Domitian, and all
The cruel Rout? or of their wretched fall?
I can no more, but in my name aduert
All earthly powers beware of Tyrants heart.
And as our State endured but a throw,
So best in us the stay of such a State
May best appear to hang on over throw,
And better teach Tyraunts deserved hate
Than any Tyraunts death tofore, or late.
So cruel seem'd^ this Richard third to me,
That lo! my self now loath'de his crueltee.
For when alas, I saw the Tyrant King
Content not only from his Nephues twain
To riue Worlds bliss, but also al Worlds being,
Saunce earthly guilt ycausinge both be sl^yne,
My heart agrief'de that such a wretch should raygne,
Whose bloody breast so saluaged out of kind,
That Phalaris had never so bloody a mind.
Ne could I brook him once within my breast,
But with the thought my Teeth would gnashe wtal:
For toough I erst were his by sworn behest,
Yet when I saw mischief on mischief fall,
So deep in blood to murder Prince, and all
Ay then thought I, alas, and weal away,
And to my self thus mourninge would I say.
If neither Love, Kindred, ne knot of Blood,
His own alleageaunce to his Prince of due,
Nor yet the State of trust wherein he stood,
The Worlds defame, nor naught could form him true
Those guiltless Babes, could they no^ make him rue?
Nor could their youth, nor innocence withal
Move him from reuiage them their life, and all?
Alas it could not move him any jot,
Ne make him once to rue or wet his eye,
Stird him no more than that that stirs not:
But as the rock or stone that will not plye,
S^ was his heart made hard with crueltye,
To murder them, alas I weep in thought,
To think on that which this fell wreth has wrought.
That now when he had done the thing he sought,
And as he would, complisht and compast all,
And saw and knew the treason he had wrought
To God and man, to stay his Prince and all,
Then seemde he first to doubt and dread us all,
And me in chief, whose death all means he might
He sought to work by malice and by might.
Such heaps of harms vpharbard in his breast
With envious heart my honor to deface,
And knowing he that I ^^tch woted best
His wretched dr^ts, and all his wretched case,
If ever sprang within me spark of grace,
Must needs abhor him and his hateful race:
Now more and more can cast me out of grace.
Which sudden change when I by secret chance
Had well perceived by proof of envious frown,
And saw the lot that did me to advance
Him to a king that sought to cast me down,
To late it was to linger any stowne:
Since present choice lay cast before mine eye,
To work his death, or I my self to dye.
And as the knight in field among his foes,
Beset with swords, must slaye or there be slain:
So I alas lapd in a thousand woes,
Beholding death on every side so plain,
I rather chose by some slye secret train
To work his death, and I to live thereby,
Than he to live and I of force to dye.
With heavy choice so hastened me to choose,
That I in part agrieued at his disdain,
In part to wreake the doleful death of those
Two render Babes, his seely Nephues twain,
By him alas commanded to be slain,
With painted chea^e humblye before his face,
Straight took my leave and rode to Brecknocke place
And there as close and covert as I might,
My purpose^ practice to his pass to bring,
In secret driftes I lingered day and night:
Al how I might depose this cruel king,
That seemde to all so much a desy^rd thing,
As thereto trusting I emprisde the same:
But too much trusting brought me to my bane.
For while I now had Fortune at my beck
Mistrusting I no earthly thing at all,
Unawares alas least looking for a check,
She mated me in tourning of a ball:
When least I feared, the nearest was my fall.
And when whole hoastes were pressed to str^y my foen.
She chaungde her cheer, and left me post alone.
I had vpraisde a mighty hand of men,
And marched forth in order of array.
Leading my power amid the forest Dene,
Against the tyrant banner to displaye:
But lo my Soldiers cowardly shranke away,
For such is Fortune when she list to frown,
Who seems most sure, him sonest whurls she down
O let no Prince put trust in commontie,
Nor hope in faith of giddie peoples mind,
But let al noble men take heed by me,
That by the proof to well the pain do find:
Lo, where is truth or trust? or what could bind
The vain people, but they will swerue and swaye,
As chance bringes change, to drive and draw yt way.
Rome thou that once advanced up so hye,
Thy stay, patron, and flower of excellence,
Have now thrown him to depth of misery,
Exiled him that was thy whole defense,
Ne comprest it not an horrible offense,
To reeuen him of honor and of fame,
That wan it thee when thou had lost the same.
Behold Camillus, he that erst revived
The state of Rome, that dyinge he did find,
Of his own state is now alas deprived,
Banished by them whom be did thus det bind:
That cruel folk unthankful and unkind,
Declared well their false inconstancy,
And fortune eke her mutabilitie.
And thou Scipio, a mirror may thou he
To al nobles, that they learn not to late,
How they once trust the unstable commontie.
That thou recuredst the torn dismembered state,
Even when the conqueror was at the gate,
A^t now exilde, as though thou not deserved
To rest in her, whom thou had so preserved.
Ungrateful Rome have showed thy cruelty,
No him, by whom thou live yet in fame.
But nor thy deed, nor his desert shall dye,
But his own word^s shall witness aye the same:
For lo his grave does thee most iustlye blame.
And with disdain in Marble says to thee:
Unkind country my bones shall thou not see.
What more unworthy than this his exile?
More just than this the woeful plaint he wrote?
Or who could show a playner proof the while,
Of most false faith, than they thus forgot
His great deserts? that so deserved not?
His cinders yet lo^, does he them deny,
That him denied amongst them for to dye.
Melciades, O happy had thou be,
And well rewarded of thy Country men,
If in the Field when thou had forced to fly
By thy prowess, three hundred thousand men,
Content they had bin to Exile thee then:
And not to cast thee into Prison so,
Laden with Gyues to end thy life in woe.
Alas how hard, and Steely hearts had they
That not contented there to have thee dye,
With fettred Gyues in Prison where thou lay,
Increast so far in hateful Cruelty,
That burial to thy Corpse, they eke deny:
Ne will they grant the same, till thy Son have
Put on thy Gyues, to purchase thee a Grave.
Lo! Hanniball as long as fixed fate,
And brittle Fortune had ordained so,
Who evermore aduaunst his Country state
Then thou that liuedst for her, and for no more?
But when the stormy Waves began to grow,
Without respect of thy deserts ere while,
Art by thy Country thrown into Exile.
Unfriendly Fortune shall I thee now blame?
Or shall I fault the sates that so ordain?
Or art thou Jove the causer of the same?
Or cruelty her self does she constrayne?
Or on whom else alas shall I complain?
O trustlesse world I can accusen none,
But fickle faith of Commonty alone.
The Polipus nor the Chamelion strange,
That turn themselves to every hue they see
Are hot so full of vain and fickle change
As is this false unsteadfast commontie.
Lo I alas with mine adversity
Have tried it true, for they are fled and gone
And of an host, there is not left me one.
That I alas in this calamity
Alone was left, and to my self might plain
This treason, and this wretched cowardye,
And eke with tears be weepen and complain
My hateful hap, still looking to be slain.
Wandering in woe, and to the Gods on hye
Cleaping for vengeance of this treachery.
And as the Turtle that has lost her mate,
Whom griping sorrow does so sore attaint,
With doleful voice and souud that she does make
Mourning her loss filles all the grove with plaint,
So I alas forsaken and forfaint,
With restless foot the wood rome up and down,
Which of my dole al shiuering does resowne.
And being thus alone and al forsake,
Amid the chick, forewandred in despair,
As one dismayed ne wist what way to take,
Until at last began to my mind repair,
A man of mine called Humfrey Bauastaier:
Wherewith me feeling much recomforted,
In hope of succor to his house I fled.
Who being one whom erst I had up brought
Eeuen from his youth and loved and liked best,
To gentry state aduauncing him from naught,
And had in secret trust above the rest.
Of special trust now being thus distressed
Full secretly to him I me conveyed
Not doubting there but I should find some aid,
But out alas on cruel treachery,
When that this caytife once an inkling hard,
How that King Richard had proclaimde that he
Which me descried should have for his reward
A thousand pounds and farther be prefarde,
His truth so turnde to treason, al distainde
That faith quite fled, and I by trust was trainde.
For by this wretch I being strait betrayed,
To one John Mitton shyriffe of Shropshire then,
Al suddenly was taken and couayed
To Salisburie, with rout of harnest men,
Unto King Richard there encamped then:
Fast by the city with a mighty host
Withouten dome where head and life I lost:
And with these words as if the axe even there
Dismembered had his head and corpse apart,
Dead fell he down and we in woeful fear
Stood mazed when he would to life reuert:
But deadly grief still grew about his heart,
That still he Iry, sometime revived with pain,
And with a sighe becoming dead again,
Midnight was come, when every vital thing
With sweet sound sleep their weary lims did rest,
The beasts were still, the little birds that sing*
Now sweetly slept besides their mothers breast:
The old and al were shrouded in their nest.
The waters calm, the cruel seas did cease,
The woods, the fields, and al things held their peace
The golden stars were whirld amid their race,
And on the earth old laugh with twinkling light,
When each thing nestled in his resting place,
Forgot days pain with pleasure of the night:
The hare had not the greedy bounds in sight,
The fearful Dear of death stood not in doubt,
The Partridge drept not of the Falcons foot.
The ouglye Bear now minded not the stake,
Nor how the cruel mastiues do him tear,
The stag lay still vnroused from the brake,
The fomye bore fearde not the hunters speate:
Al thing was still in desert bush and breare.
With quiet heart now from their trauayles rest.
Soundly they slept in midst of al their rest.
When Buckingham amid this plaint oppressed,
With surging sorrows and with pinching pains
In sort thus sowned, and with a sigh ^e ceast,
To tellen forth the treachery and trains,
Of Banastar, which him so sore distreines.
That from a sighe he falls into a sound,
And from a sound lies raging on the ground.
So twitching were the panges that he assaied,
And he so sore with ruful rage distraught.
To think upon the wretch that him betrayed
Whom erst he made a Gentleman of naught
That more and more agreeued was his thought,
He storms out sighs, and with redoubled sore,
Stroke with the furies rages more and more.
Who so has seen the Bull chased with daries,
And with deep wounds foregalde and gored so,
Til he oppressed with the deadly smartes,
F^l in arage and run upon his foe,
Let him I say behold the raging woe
Of Buckingham that in these gripes of grief
Rages against him that has betrayed his life.
With blood red eyes he stareth here and there,
Frothing at mouth, with face as pale as clout:
When lo my lims were trembling all for fear,
And I amazde stood still in dreadn ad doubt,
While I might see him throw his arms about:
And against the ground himself plundge with such force
As if the life sorth with should leave the corpse.
With smoke of sighs sometime I might behold
The place al dimde, like to the morning mist:
And strait again the tears how they down rolde
Alongste his cheeks, as if the rivers hist:
Whose flowinge streams ne were no sooner whist,
But to the stars such dreadful shoutes he sent,
As if the crone of mighty Jove should rent,
And I the while with sprites welny bereft,
Beheld the plight and pangues that did him strain.
And how the blood his deadly color left,
And st^aight returned with flaming red again:
When suddenly amio his raging pain,
He gave a sighe and with that sigh he said,
Oh Banastar, and straight again he stayed.
Dead lay his corpse as dead as any stone,
Til swelling sighs storming within his breast
Vpraisde his head, that downward fell anon,
With looks vpcast, and sighs that never ceast:
Forth streamde the tears records of his unrest,
When he which shrikes thus groueling on the ground
Ybraied these words with shril and doleful sound.
Heaven and earth and ye eternal lamps
That in the heavens wrapped, will us to rest,
Thou bright Phoebe, that clearest the nights damps
Witness the plaintes that in these panges oppressed
I woeful wretch unlade out of my breast*
And let me yield my last words ere I part,
You, you, I call to record of my smart.
And thou Alecto feed me with thy food
Let fall thy serpents from thy snakie hair,
For such relief well sittes me in this mood,
To ferde my plain^ with horror and with fear,
While rage afresh thy venomde worm a^eare.
And thou Sibilla when thou see me faint,
Address thy self the guide of my complaint.
And thou O Jove, that with thy diepe fordome
Do rule the earth* and reign above the skies,
That wreakest wrongs, and geuest the dreadful dome
Against the wretch that does thy name despise,
Receive these words and wreake them in such wise,
As heaven and earth may witness and behold,
Thy heaps of wrath upon this wretch unfold.
Thou Banaster against thee I clepe and call
Unto the Gods, that they just vengeance take
O^ thee, thy blood, thy stained stock and all:
O Jove to thee above the rest I make
My humble plaint, guide me that what I speak,
May be thy will upon this wretch to fall,
On thee Banastar, wretch of wretches all.
O would to God the cruel dismal day,
That gave me light first to behold thy face,
With foul Eclipse had reft my sight away:
The unhappy hour, the time, and eke the day:
The Sun and Moon, the sterres, and all that was
In their aspectes helping in ought to thee,
The earth and air, and all accursed be.
And thou caytife, that like a monster swarued,
From kind and kindness, have they master lorne,
Whom neither truth, nor trust wherein thou served,
Ne his deserts, could move, nor thy faith sworn,
How shall I curse, but wish that thou unborn
Had been, or that the earth had rent in twaye,
And swallowed thee in Cradle as thou lay.
To this did I even from thy tender youth
VVitsaue to bring the up, did I herefore
Believe the oath of thy undoubted troth?
Advance thee up, and trust thee evermore?
By trusting thee that I should dye therefore?
O wretch, and worse than wretch, what shall I say?
But cleape and curse against thee and thine for aye.
Hated be thou, disdainde of every wight,
And pointed at where ever that thou go.
A traiterous wretch, unworthy of the light,
Be thou esteemed: and to increase thy woe,
The sound be hatefel of thy name also:
And in this sort with shame and sharp reproach,
Lead thou thy life til greater grief approach.
Dole and despair, let chose be thy delight,
VVrappes in woes that cannot be unfold,
To wayle the day, and weep the weary night,
With raynie eien and sighs cannot be told,
And let no wight thy woe seek to withhold:
But count thee worthy (wretch) of sorrows store,
That suffering much, ought still to suffer more.
Deserve thou death, yea be thou deemde to dye
A shameful death to end thy shameful life:
A sight longed for, iopful to every eye,
When thou shall be arraigned as a thief,
Standing at Bar and pleading for thy life,
With trembling tongue in dread and dolours rage,
Lade with white locks, and fourskore years of age.
Yet shall not death deliver thee so sone
Out of thy woes, so happy shall thou not be:
But to the eternal Jove this is my boon,
That thou may live thine eldest son to see,
Reft of his wyts, and in a foul Bores Stye
To end his days in rage and death distressed,
A worthy tomb where one of thine should rest.
Yet after this, yet pray I more thou may
Thy second son see drowned in a dyke,
And in such sort to clo^se his later day,
As heard or seen erst has not been the like:
Ystrangled in a puddle not half so diepe
As half a foot, that such hard loss of life,
So cruelly chaunst, may be the greater grief.
And not yet shall thy huge sorrows cease,
Jove shall not so withhold his wrath fro thee,
But that thy plagues may more and more increase,
Thou shall still live that thou thy self shall see
Thy dear daughter stricken with leprosye:
That she that erst was al thy whole delight,
That now may loathe to have her come in sight.
And after that let shame and sorrows grief
Feed forth thy years continuallye in woe,
That thou may live in death, and dye in life,
And in this sort forewaild and weried so,
At length thy ghost to part thy body fro:
This pray I Jove, and with this later breath,
Vengeance I ask upon my cruel death.
This said he flong his rechles arms abroad,
And groueling flat upon the ground he lay,
Which with his teeth he al to gnasht and gnawde:
Deep groans he fet, as he that would away,
But lo in vain he did the death assaye:
Although I think was never man that knew,
Such deadly pains, where death did not ensue.
So strove he thus awhile as with the death,
Now pale as lead and cold as any stone.
Now still as calm, now storming forth a breath.
Of smoakie sighs, as breath and al were gone:
But every thing has end: so he anon
Came to himself when with a sigh outbrayed,
With woeful cheer, these woeful words he said.
Ah, where am I, what thing, or whence is this?
Who reft my wits? or how do I thus lie?
My lims do quake, my thought agasted is,
Why sigh I so? or whereunto do I
Thus grawle on the ground? and by and by
Vpraisde he stood, and with a sighe has staide,
When to himself returned thus he said.
Suffiseth now this plaint and this regreete,
Whereof my heart his boccome has vnfraught:
And of my death let Pieres and princes weete
The Worlds untrust, that they there by be taught.
And in her wealth, since that such change is wrought,
Hope not too much, but in the midst of al
Think on my death, and what may them befall.
So long as Fortune would permit the same,
I lived in rule and riches with the best:
And past my time in honor and in fame.
That of Mishap no fear was in my breast:
But false Fortune when I suspected least,
Did turn the wheel, and which a doleful fall
Has me bereft of honor life and all.
Lo what auayles in riches floods that flows?
Though she so smylde as all the world were his?
Even kings and Kesars biden Fortunes throws,
And simple sore must bear it as it is.
Take heed by me that blithde in baleful bliss:
My rule, my riches, royal blood and al,
When Fortune fround, the feller made my fall.
For hard mishaps that happens unto such,
Whose wretched state erst never fell no change,
Agrieue them not in any part so much,
As their distress to whom it is so strange,
That al their lives nay passed pleasures raunge:
Their soden woe that aye wield wealth at will,
Algates their hearts more pearcinglye must thril.
For of my birth, my blood was of the best,
First borne an Earl, then Duke by due descent:
To swing the sway in Court among the rest,
Dame Fortune me her rule most largely lent:
And kind courage so my corpse had blent,
That lo on whom but me did she most smyle?
And whom but me lo, did she most beguile?
Now have thou hard the whole of my mishap
My chance, my change, the cause of al my care:
In wealth and woe, how fortune ^id me wrap,
With world at will to win me to her snare,
Bid kings, bid Kesars, did al states beware,
And tell them this from me that tried it true.
Who recklesse rules, right soon may hap to rue.
FINIS.
T. S.

HOw like you this my masters (quoth I) very well said one: the tragedy
excels: ye invention also of the Induction, and yt descriptions, are
notable. But whereas he fayneth to talk with the Princes in Hell, that I am
sure will be misliked, because it is most certain, that some of their souls be
in heaven. And although he herein, do follow allowed Poets, in their description
of hell, yet it sauoreth so much of Purgatory, which the Papists have dug
thereout, that the ignorant may thereby be deceived. Not a whit I warrant you
said one: for he means not by his hell y^ place either of damned souls, or
of such as lie for their fees, but rather the grave, wherein ye dead bodies of
al sorts of people do rest til time of the resurrection. And in this sense is
Hell taken often in the Scriptures, and in the writings of learned Christians,
and so would have it taken. Tush (quoth another) what stand we hereupon? it is a
Poesy and no deuinitye, and it is lawful for Poets to feign what they list so
it be appertinent to the matter: And therefore let it pass even in such sort as
you have read it. With a good will (quoth I) But whereas you say a Poet may
said what he list: in deed me think it should be so, and ought to be well
taken of the hearers: But it has not at al times been so allowed: ye say troth
quoth the Reader: For here follows in the storye that after the death of this
duke, one called Colling bourne, was cruellye put to death for making of a
time. I have his tragedy here (said I) For the better perceiving whereof, you
must imagine that you see him a m^^^cilous well sauoured man, holdinge in his
hand his own heart, new lie ripped out of his breast, and smoking out the
lively spirit: and with his hand, beckning too and fro, as it were to warn us
to avoid: and with his faint tongue, and voice saying as couragiouslye as he
may these words that follow.

How Collingbourn was cruelly executed, for making a foolish Ryme.
BEware, take heed, take heed, beware, beware
You Poets you, that purpose to rehearce
By any art what tyrauntes doings are,
Erinnis rage is grown so fell and fearce
That vicious acts may not be touched in verse,
The Muses freedom, granted them of elde,
Is bard, ^lie reasons treasons hie are held.
Be rough in ryme, and then they say you rail,
As luuenal was, but that makes no matter:
With Jeremy you shall be had to iayle,
Or forced with Martial, Caesar's faults to flatter,
Clerks must be taught to clawe and not to clatter:
Free Hellicon, and francke Parnassus hylls.
Are hellye haunts, and rank pernicious ills.
Touch couertlye in fermes, and then you taunt
Though praised Poets, always did the like,
Control us not, else traitor vile auaunt,
What pass we what the learned do mislike?
Our sins we see, wherein to swarm we seek.
We pass not what the people say or think,
Their shittle hate makes none but cowardes shrink.
We know (say they) the course of Fortunes wheel,
How constantly it whirleth still about,
Arrearing now, while elder headlong reele.
How all the ryders always hang in doubt.
But what for that we count him but a loute
That sticks to mount, and basely like a beast
Lives temperately for fear of Blockham feast.
Indeed we would of al be deemed Gods
What ever we do: and therefore partelye hate
Rude preachers that dare threaten us plagues and rods,
And blase the blots whereby we stain our state:
But naught we pass what any such do prate.
Of course and office they must say their pleasure,
And we of course must hear and mend at leisure.
But when these pelcing Poets in their rimes
Shall taunt, or least, or pai^^ our wicked works,
And cause the people know and curse our crimes,
This ougly fault, no tyrant lives but vrkes.
Wherefore we loath such ^aunters worse than Turks,
Whose meaning is to make us know our miss,
And so to mend, but they but doat in this.
We know our faults as well as any other,
We also doubt the dangers for them due,
Yet still we trust so right to guide the ^other,
That escape we shall the sourges that ensue.
We think we know mo shifts than other knew.
In vain therefore for us are counsels writ:
We know our faults and will not mend a whit.
These are the fea^es of the unhappy sort,
That preace for honors, wealth, and pleasure vain.
Cease therefore Baldwin, cease I thee exhort,
Withdraw thy pen, for nothing shall thou gain
Save hate, with loss of paper, ynke and pain.
Few hate their faults, al bate of them to hear
And fautiest, from fault would seem most clear.
Thy intent I know is honest, plain, and good,
To warn the wise, to fray the fond fro ill:
But wicked worldlings are so witless wood.
That to the worst they all things construe still.
With rigor often they recompense good will:
They rack the words til time their sinowes burst,
In doubtful senses, strayning still the worst.
A painful proof taught me the truth of this,
Through tyrauntes rage, and Fortunes cruel turn:
They murdered me, for meetring things amiss.
For wotst thou what? I am that Colling bourne
Which made the ryme, whereof I well may mourn.
The Cat, the Rat, and Louel our Dog,
Do rule al England under a Hog,
Whereof the meaning was so plain and true,
That every fool perceived it at furst:
Most liked it, for most that most things knew,
In hugger mugger, muttred what they durst.
The tyrant prince of most was held accursed,
Both for his own and for his counsels faults,
Of whom was three the naughtiest of al naughts.
Catesbye was one whom I called a Cat,
A crafty lawyer catching all be could.
The second Ratcliffe, whom I named a Rat,
A cruel beast to gnaw on whom ^e should.
Lord Louel barckt and bye whom Richard would,
Whom I therefore did rightly term our Dog,
Wherewith to ryme, I called the king a Hog.
Til he the crown had caught he gave the Bore,
In which estate would God he had deceased,
Then had the realm not ruined so sore.
His Nephues reign should not so sone have ceased,
The noble blood had not been so decreased.
His Rat, his Cat, and Bloudhound had not noyed
Such liegemen true, as after they destroyed.
Their lawless acts, good subjects did lament,
And so did I, and therefore made the rimes
To show my wit how well I could invent,
To warn withal the careless of their crimes,
I thought the freedom of the ancient times
Stood still in force. Ridentem dicere verum
Quis veta^? Nay nay, Veritas est pessimarerum.
Belike no tyrauntes were in Horace days,
And therefore Poets freely blamed vice,
Witness their Satyrs sharp, and tragic plays,
With chiefest Princes chieflye had in price.
They name no man they mix their gall with spice,
No more do I* I name no man out right,
But riddle wise, I mean them as I might.
When brute had brought this to their guilty ears,
Whose right surnames were noted in the ryme,
They al conspyred like most greedy ^eares,
To charge me straight with this most grievous crime:
And dampened me the Galow tree to clime,
And then strangled, in quarters to be cut,
Which shoud on high over London Gates be put.
This judgment geeuen so vehement and so sore
Made me exclaim against their tyranny.
Where with encenst, to make my pain the more,
They practiced a shameful vylanie:
They cut me down alive and cruelly,
Ripped up my paunch and bulk to make me smart,
And lingered long ere they took out my heart.
Here tyrant Richard played the eager Hog,
His grashing tuskes my tender gristles shore:
His blood bound Louel playde the ravening Dog,
His muluish teeth, my guiltless carcass tore:
His Rat, and Cat, did what they might, and more,
Cat Cates^y clawed my guts to make me smart,
The Rat Ra^cliffe gnawed me to the heart.
If Jews had killed the iustest king alive,
If Turks had burnt up Churches, Gods, and al,
What greater pain could cruel hearts contriue,
Than that I suffered, for this trespass small?
I was no Prince nor Pier, but yet my fall
Is worthy to be thought upon for this,
To see how cankard tyrants malice is.
To teach also al subject to take heed
They meddle not with magistrates affairs,
But pray to God to mend them if they need:
To warn also al Poetee that he strayers,
To keep them close in rompasse of their chayres,
And when they touch that they would wish amended,
To sause them so, that sewe need be offended.
And so to mix their sharp rebukes with mirth,
That they may pearce, not causing any pain,
Save such as follows every kindly birth,
Requi^ed straight, with gladness of the gain.
A Poet must be pleasaune, not to plain,
Faults to control, ne yet to flatter vice
But sound and sweet, in all things ware and wise.
The Greeks no paint a Poets office whole
In Pegasus, their feigned horse with wings,
Whom shaped so Medusaes blood did foale,
Who with his fe^ee struck out the Muses springes
Fro flintie rocks to Hellicon that clinges.
And then flew up into the starrie sky,
And there abides among the Gods (...) hye,
For he that shall a perfect Poet be,
Must first be bred out of Medusaes blood:
He must be chaste and virtuous as was she,
Who to her power the Occean God withstoode,
To thend also hiss doom be just and goad,
Ie must (as she) look rightlye wi^h one eye
Truth to regard (...) write nothing awrie,
In courage eke he must be like a horse,
He may not fear to register the right.
What though some frown, thereof be may not force,
No bit nor reine his tender jaws may twight.
He must be armde with strength of wit and sprite.
To dash the rocks, dark causes and obscure,
Til he attain the springes of truth most pure.
His hooues also must pliaunt be and strong,
To riue the rocks of lust and errors blind,
In brainlesse heads, that always wander wrong:
T^ese must he brise with reasons plain and kind,
Til springes of grace do gush out of the mind,
For ^il affections from the fond be driven,
In vain is truth told, or good counsel geeuen.
Like Pegasus a Poet must have wings,
To fly to heaven or where him likes best:
He must have knowledge of eternal things,
Almighty Jove must harbor in his breast,
With worldly cares he may not be oppressed,
The wings of wit and skill must heave him hier.
With great delight to satisfye desire.
He must also be lustye, free, and swift
To trauail far to view the trades of men.
Great knowledge often is gotten by the shift:
Things that impart he must be quick to pen,
Reproving vices sharply now and then.
He must be swift when touched tyrauntes chafe,
To gallop thence to keep his carkas safe.
If I had well these qualities considered,
Especially that which I touched last,
With speedy flight my feet should have delivered
My feeble body from a most boystrous blast,
They should have caught me ere I had been cast,
But too much trust unto a tyrauntes grace,
I never shroake, nor changed port or place.
I thought the Poets ancient liberties
For pleas had been allowed at the bar,
I had forgot how new found tyrannies
With truth and freedom were at open war,
That lust was law, that might did make and mar,
That among tyrauntes this is, and ever was
Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas.
Where lust is law it booteth not to plead,
No Privilege nor liberties avail.
But with the learn'de whom Law, and Wisdom lead,
Although through rashness Poets ^ap to rail,
A plea of dotage may all Quarrels quayle:
Their old license their Writings to expound,
Does quit them clear from faults by Momus found.
This freedom old ought not to be debard
From any wight that speaks ought, or writes.
The authors meaning should of right be herd,
He knows best to what end he enditeth:
Woros sometime bear more then the heart behiteth.
Admit therefore the authors exposicion,
If plain for truth: if forced, for his submission.
In case of sclaunder the laws require no more
Save to amend that seemed not well said:
Or to unsay the slanders said before,
And ask forgiveness for the hasty brayde:
To Heretics no grater pain is laid
Then to recant their errors or retract:
And worse than these can be no writers act.
Yes (quoth the Cat) thy raylinge words be treason,
And treason is far worse then Heresy.
Then must it follow by this auckwarde reason,
That Kings be more than God in majesty,
And souls be less then bodies in degree.
For Heretics both souls and God offend,
Traitors but seek to bring man's life to end.
I speak not this to abase the heinous fault,
Of traiterous Acts abhorde by God, and man,
But to make plain their judgment to be naught
That Heresy for lesser sin do ban,
I curse them both as deep as any can,
And always did: yet through my foolish rhyme,
They stained me with that most hateful crime.
I never meant the King, or counsel harm,
Unless to wish them safety were offense,
Against their power I never lifted Arm,
Neither Pen, nor Tongue for any ill Pretense.
The Rhyme I made, though Rude, was sound in Sense,
For they therein whom I so fondly named,
So ruled all that they were foul defamed.
This was no Treason but the very troth,
They ruled all, none could deny the same:
What was the cause then, why they were so wroth?
What? is it treason in a riminge frame
To clip, to stretch, to add, or change a name?
And this reserved, there is no rhyme nor reason.
That any craft can clout to seem a treason.
For where I meant the King by name of Hog,
I only alluded to his Badge the Bore:
To Louels name I added more our Dog,
Because most Dogs have borne that name of yore:
These Metaphors I use with other more,
As Cat, and Rat, the half names of the rest,
To hyde the Sense which they so wrongly wrest.
I may you now what treason find you here
Enough: you rubbed the guil^y on the Gaul,
Both Sense, and names do note them very near.
I grant that was the chief cause of my faule,
Yet can you find therein no treason at all:
There is no word against the Prince, or State,
No harm to them whom all the Realm did hate.
But since the guilty always are suspicious,
And dread the ruin that must sue by reason,
They cannot chose but count their counsel vicious
That note their faults, and therefore call it treason:
All grace, and goodness with the lewd is geason.
This is the cause why they good things do wrest
Where as the good take ill things to the best.
And therefore Baldwin boldly to the good
Rebuke their fault, so shall thou purchase thanks
As for the bad, thou shall but move their mood,
Though pleasauntly thou touch their naughty prankes:
Warn Poets all, no wise to pass the banks
Of Hellicon, but keep within the bound:
So shall their Freedom, unto no harm redound.
FINIS.
GOds blessinge on his heart that made this said one) specially for reuiuinge
our ancient Liberties. And I pray God it may take such place with the
Magistrates, yt they may ratify our old freedom, Amen said another, for that
shall be a mean both to stay and uphold themselves from fallinge: and also to
preserve many kind true, zealous, and well meaning minds from slaughter, and
infamy. If King Richard, and his Counsaylours had allowed, or at the least but
wynked at some such wits, what great commodities might they have taken
thereby. First, they should have known what the people misliked, and grudged
at, (which no one of their flatterers either would or durst have told them) and
so might have found mean, either by amendment (which is best) or by some
other policy to have stayed ye peoples grudge: the forerunner commenly of
Rulers destructions. Vox populi, vox dei, in this case is not so Famous a
prouer^e as true: The experience of al times do approve it. They should also
have bin warned of their own sins, which call continually for Gods
veng^au^ce, which never fails to fall one their necks suddenly and horribly,
unless it be stayed with hearty repentance. These weighty commodities might
they have taken by Collingborns vain ryme. But as all things work to the best
in the^ that be good, so best things heap up mischief in the wicked, and al
to haste^ their utter destruction. For after this poor wretches lamentable
persecution, (the common reward of best endeavors strait followed the fatal
destruction both of this Tyrau^t, and of his tormentours. Which I wish might
be so set forth that they might be a warninge forever, to all in authority to
beware how they usurp, or abuse their offices. I have here (quoth I) King
Richards tragedy. Read it we pray you (quoth they) with a good Will (quoth
I) For better understanding whereof, Imagine that you see him tormented with
Dives in the deep Pit of Hell, and thence howlinge this which follows.

HOW RICHARD PLANtagenet Duke of Gloucester, murdered his Brothers Children
vsurpinge the Crown, and in the.iij. year of his Raygne, was most worthily
deprived of life, and Kingdom in Bosworth Plain, by Henry Earl of Richmond,
after called King Henry the seventh, the.22. of August. 1485.
WHat heart so hard, but does abhor to hear
The rufull raygne of me the third Richard?
King unkindly called though I y^ Crown did wear.
Who entered by rigor, but right did not regard,
By tyranny proceedinge in killinge King Edward,
Fifth of that name, right Heir unto the Crown,
With Richard his Brother, Princes of Renown,
Of trust they were committed unto my Governance,
But trust turned to treason to truly it was tried,
Both agayust Nature, Duty, and Allegiaunce,
For through my procurement most shamefully they dyed
Desire of a Kingdom forgets all Kindred,
As after by discourse it shall be showed here,
How cruelly these Innocents in Prison murdered were.
The Lords, and Commons all with one assent,
Protector made me both of Land, and King,
But I therewith alas was not content:
For mindinge mischief I meant another thing,
Which to confusion in short time did me bring,
For I desirous to Rule, and Reign alone,
Sought Crown, and Kingdom, yet title had I none.
To all Peers, and Princes, a President I may be.
The like to beware how they do enterprise,
And learn their wretched falls by my Fact to foresee,
Which ruful stand bewaylinge my chance before their eyes,
As one clean bereft of all felicities:
For right through might, I cruelly defaced,
But might, helped right, and me again displaced.
Alas that ever Prince should thus his honor stayne
With the blood of Innocents most shameful to be told
For these two Noble Imps I caused to be slain,
Of years not full ripe as yet to rule, and raygne.
For which I was abhorred both of yongue, and old,
But as the deed was Odious in Sight of God, and man,
So shame, and Destruction in the end I wan.
Both God, Nature, Duty, Allegiaunce all forgot,
This vile, and heinous Act unnaturally conspired:
Which Horrible deed done, alas, alas, God wot
Such Terrors me tormented, and so my Sprites fired,
As unto surch a murder, and shameful deed required,
Such broyle daily felt I, breedinge in my breast,
Whereby more, and more, increased mine unrest.
My Brothers Children were right Heirs to the Crown
Whom Nature rather bound to defend than destroy,
But I not regardinge their Right, nor my Renown
My whole care, and study to this end did employ,
The Crown to obtain, and them both to put down:
Wherein I God offended, prouokinge just his ire,
For this my attempt, and most wicked desire.
To cursed Cain compare my careful case,
Which did unjustly slay his Brother just Abell,
And did not I in rage make run that rufull race
My Brother Duke of Clarence, whose death I shame to tell
For that so strange it was, as it was horrible?
For sure he drenched was, and yet no Water near,
Which strange is to be told to all that shall it hear.
The But he was not whereat I did shoot,
But yet he stood between the Mark, and me,
For had he lived, for me it was no boot
To attempt the thing that by no means could be,
For I third was then of my Brethren three:
But yet I thought the Elder being gone,
Then needs must I bear the stroke alone.
Desire of Rule made me alas to rewe,
My fatal fall I could it not foresee,
Puffed up in Pride, to Hauty then I grew,
That none my Peer I thought now could be,
Disdayninge such as were of high degree:
Thus daily rysinge, and pullinge other down,
At last I shot how to win the Crown.
And daily deuisinge which was the best way
And mean how I might my Nephues both devour
I secretly then sent without further delay
To Brackinbury then Lieutenaunt of the Tower,
Requestinge him by letters to help unto his power,
For to accomplish this my desire, and will,
And that he would secretly my Brothers Children kill.
He answered plainly with a flat nay,
Saying that to dye he would not do that deed:
But findinge then a proffer to my pray,
Well worth a freende (quoth I) yet in time of need.
James Tyrrill hight his name, whom with all speed,
I sent again to Brackinbury, as you heard before,
Commaundinge him deliver the Keys of every Door.
The Keys he rendered but Partaker would not be
Of that flagitious Fact. O happy man I say!
As you have heard before, he rather chose to dye
Then on those seely Lambs his violent hands to lay.
His Conscience him pricked, his Prince to betray:
O constant mind! that would not condescend
Thee may I praise, and my self discommend.
What though heee refused, yet be sure you may,
That other were as ready to take in hand that thing,
Which watched, and waited as duly for their Pray,
As ever did the Cat for the Mouse taking,
And how they might their purpose best to pass bring:
Where Tyrrell he thought good to have no blood shed,
Becast them to kill by Smotheringe in their Bed.
The Wolves at hand were ready to devour
The seely Lambs in Bed whereas they lay
Abidinge death, and lookinge for the Hour,
For well they wist, they could not escape away,
Ah woe is me, that did them thus betray,
In assigninge this vile deed to be done,
By Miles Forest, and wicked Ihon Dighton.
Who privily into their Chamber stale,
In secret wise somewhat before Midnight,
And began the Bed together Tug, and hale,
Be wrappinge them alas in woeful plight,
Keepinge them down, by force, by power, and might,
With Halinge, Tugginge, Turmoylinge, Turnde, and Tossed,
Till they of force were Forced yield the Ghost.
Which when I heard, my heart I felt was eased
Of grudge, of grief, of inward deadly pain,
But with this deed the Nobles were displeased,
And said: O God, shall such a Tyrant raygne,
That has so cruelly his Brothers Children slain?
Which Brute once blown in the Peoples Ears,
Their dolor was such, that they brast out in Tears.
But what thing may suffice unto the greedy man,
The more be bathes in blood, the bloudier he is always:
By proof I do this speak, which best declare it can,
Which only was the cause of this Princes decay.
The Wolf was never greedier than I was of my Pray,
But who so uses murder full well affirm I dare,
With murder shall be quit, ere he thereof beware.
And mark the sequel of this begone mischiefr
Which shortly after was cause of my decay,
For high, and low conceived such a grief
And hate against me, which sought day by day,
All ways, and means that possiblye they may,
On me to be revenged for this sin,
For cruel murderinge unnaturally my kin.
Not only kin, but King the truth to say
Whom unkindly of Kingdom I bereft,
His life from him I also raught away,
With his Brathers, which to my charge was left.
Of ambicion behold the work, and weft,
Prouokinge me to do this heinous Treason,
And murder them against all right and reason.
After whose death thus wrought by violence,
The Lords not sykinge this unnatural deed,
Began on me to have great diffidence,
Such brunninge hate began in their hearts to breed,
Which made me doubt, and sore my danger dread:
Which doubt, and dread proved not in vain,
By that ensued alas unto my pain.
For I supposinge all things were as I wished,
When I had brought these seely Babes to bane,
But yet in that my purpose far I missed:
For as the Moon does change after the Wane,
So changed the hearts of such as I had taken
To be most true, to Troubles did me turn,
Such rage, and rancour in boylinge Breasts do burn.
And suddenly a brute abroad was blown,
That Buckingham the Duke both stern, and stout,
In field was ready, with diverse to me known,
To give me Battle if I durst come out:
Which daunted me, and put me in great doubt,
For that I had no Army then prepared,
But after that I little for it cared.
But yet remembringe, that often a little spark
Suffered does grow unto a great flame,
I thought it wisdom wisely for to warke,
Mustered then men in every place I came.
And marchinge forward daily with the same,
Directly toward the Town of Salisbury,
Where I gat knowledge of the Dukes Army.
And as I passed over Salisbury down,
The Rumor ran the Duke was fled, and gone,
His Host dispersed besides Shrewesbury Town,
And he dismayed was left there post alone,
Bewaylinge his chance, and making great mo^ne:
Toward whom I hasted withal expedition,
Making due search, and dilligent inquisition.
But at the first I could not of him hear,
For he was escaped by secret Bywayes,
Unto the House of Humfrey Banastar,
Whom he had mutch preferred in his Days,
And was good Lord to him in all assayes:
Which he full evil requited in the end,
When he was driven to seek a trusty freende.
For it so happened to his mishap, alas,
When I no knowledge of the Duke could hear
A Proclamation by my Commandment was
Published, and Cried throughout every Shyre,
That who so could tell where the Duke were,
A Thousand mark should have for his pain.
What thing so hard but Money can obtain?
But were it for Money, Meede, or Dreede,
That Banastar thus Betrayed his Ghest,
Diverse have diversely deuined of this deed,
Some deem the worst, and some Judge the best,
The doubt not dissolved, nor plainly expressed,
But of the Dukes death he doubtless was cause,
Which dyed without judgment or order of Laws.
Lo! this Noble Duke I brought thus unto bane,
Whose doings I doubted, and had in great dred,
At Banastars house I made him to be taken,
And without judgment be shortened by the head,
By the Shriffe of Shropshire to Salisbury led.
In the Market place upon the Scaffolde new,
Where all the Beholders did mutch his death rewe.
And after this done I brake up the hoaste,
Great y applauded with this heavy hap,
And forthwith I sent to every Sea coaste
To fore see all mischieues, and stop every gap,
Before they should chance, or light in my lap,
Geuinge them in charge to have good regard,
The Sea coast to keept with good watch and ward,
Directinge my letters unto every Shriue,
With strait Commandment under our name,
To suffer no man in their parts to ariue
Nor to pass forth out of the same,
As they tendered our favor, and vodye would our blame,
Doing therein their pain, and industry,
With diligent care, and vigilant Eye.
And thus settinge things in order as you hear:
To prevent mischieues that might then betide,
I thought my self sure, and out of all fear,
And for other things began to provide:
To Notingham Castle strait did I ride,
Where I was not very long space,
Strange tydinges came which did me fore amaze.
Reported it was, and that for certaynty,
The Earl of Richmonde landed was in Wales
At Milforde Haven with an huge Army,
Dismissinge his Navy which were many Sails:
Which at the first I thought flyinge Tales.
But in the end did otherwise prove,
Which not a little did me vex, and move.
Thus fawninge Fortune began on me to frown,
And cast on me her scoruefull lowringe look:
Then began I fear the fall of my Renown,
My heart it faynted, my Sinowes sore they shook,
This heavy hap a scourge for sin I took,
Yet did I not then utterly despair,
Hopinge Storms past the whether should be fair.
And then with all speed possible I might,
I caused them muster throughout every Shyre,
Determininge with the Earl speedely to fight,
Before that his power mutch increased were,
By such as to him great favor did bear:
Which were no small number by true report made,
Daily repayringe him for to aid.
Directinge my letters to diverse Noble men,
With earnest request their power to prepare,
To Notingham Castle whereas I lay then.
To aid and assist me in this weighty affayre:
Where strayt to my presence did then repair,
Thou Duke of Northfolke, his Eldest Son also,
With the Earl of Northumberland, and many other mo.
And thus being furnished with men, and munition,
Forward we marched in order of Battle ray,
Making by Scouts every way inquisition,
In what place the Earl with his Camp say:
Toward whom directly we took then our way,
Evermore mindinge to seek our most avail,
In place convenient to give to him Battle.
So long we labored, at last our Armies met
On Bosworth plain besides Lecester town,
Where sure I thought the Garland for to get,
And purchase peace, or else to lose my Crown.
But sickle Fortune alas on me did frown,
For when I was Encamped in the Field,
Where most I trusted, I soonest was be guilde.
The Brand of malice thus kindlinge in my breast
Of deadly hate which I to him did bear,
Pricked me forward, and bad me not desist,
But boldly fight, and take at all no fear,
To win the field, and the Earl to conquer:
Thus hopinge glory great to gain, and get,
Mine Army then in order did I set.
Be tide me life or death I desperately ran,
And joined me in Battle with this Earl so stout,
But Fortune so him sauoured that he the Battle wan
With force and great power I was beset about.
Which when I did behold, in mids of the whole route
With deuteronomy of Sword I cast m^e on him to be revenged,
Where in the midst of them my wretched life I ended.
My body was hurried, and Tugged like a Dog,
On horseback all naked, and bare as I was borne.
My head, hands, and feet, down hanginge like a Hog,
With Dirt, and blood hesprent, my Corpse all to torn,
Cursnge the day that ever I was borne,
With grievous wounds be mangled most horrible to see,
So sore they did abhor this my vile cruelty.
Lo! here you may behold the due, and just reward
Of tyranny, and treason which God does most detest,
For if unto my duty I had taken regard,
I might have lived still in honor with the best,
And had I not attempt the thing that I ought lest.
But desire to rule alas did me so blind,
Which caused me to do against nature, and kind.
Ah crused Caytiue, why did I climb so hye,
Which was the cause of th's my balefull thrall.
For still I thirsted for the Regal Dignity,
But hasty rysinge threatens sudden fall,
Content your selves with your Estates all,
And seek not right by wrong to suppress,
For God has promised each wrong to redress.
See here the fine, and fall of me,
And guerdon due for this my wretched deed,
Which to all Princes a mirror now may be
That shall this Tragical Story after reed,
VVyshinge them all by me to take heed,
And suffer right to rule as it is reasou,
For time tries out both truth, and also treason.
FINIS.
F. Seg.

WHen I had read this, we had much talk about it. For it was thought not
vehement enough for so violent a man as king Rychard had been. The matter was
well enough liked of some, but the meetre was misliked almost of all.

And when diverse therefore would not allow it, what (quoth one) You know not
whereupon you stick: else you would not so much mislike this because of the
uncertain meetre. The cumelynesse called by the Rhetoricians Decorum, is
specially to be observed in all things. Seeing than that king Richard never
kept measure in any of his doings, seeing also he speaks in Hell, whereas is
no order: it were against the Decorum of his personage to use either good
meeter or order.

And therefore if his Oration were far worse, in my opinion it were more fytt
for him. Mars and the Muses did never agree. Neither is to be suffered that
their myld sacred Art should seem to proceed from so cruel and profane a
mouth as his: saying they themselves do abhor it.

And although we read of Nero, that he was excellent both in Music, and in
versifyinge, yet do not I remember that ever I saw any song or Verse of his
making: Minerau justly providing that no monument should remain of any such
unjust vsurpaton. And therefore let this pass even as it is which the writer I
know both could and would amend in many places, save for keepinge the Decoru^
which he purposely has oblerued herein.

In deed (quoth I) as you say: It is not meet yt so disorderly, and
unnatural a man as King Rychard was, should observe any metrycall order in
his talk: which notwithstanding in many places of his Oration is very well
kept: it shall pass therefore even as it is, though to good for so evil a
person. Then they willed me to read ye black Smith, With a good will (quoth
I) but first you must Imagine that you see him standinge on a Ladder ouershrined
with the Tybourne a meet Stage for all such Rebels, and Traitors: and there
stoutly saying as follows.

THE WILFVL FALL OF black Smith, and the foolish end of the Lord Awdeley in
June. Anno. 1496. *
WHo is more bold than is the blind Beard?
Where is more craft than in the Clouted shoone?
Who catch more harm than such as nothing feared?
Where is more guile then where mistrust is none?
No playsters help before the grief be known,
So seems by me who could no wisdom leare,
Until such time I bought my wit to dear.
Who being Boystr^us, Stout, and braynlesse bold,
Puffed up with Pride, with fierce, and Furies fret,
Incenst with Tales so rude and plainly told,
Wherein deceit with double knot was knit,
I trapped was as seely fish in net,
Who swift in swimminge, not doubtful of desceit,
Is caught in Ginne whererein is laid no bayt.
Such force, and virtue has this doleful playnte,
Set forth with Sighs, and tears of Crocodile,
Who seems in si^ght as simple as a Saint,
Has laid a Bait the warelesse to beguile,
And as they weep they work desceit the while
Whose rufull cheer the Rulers so relent,
To work in have that they at last repennt.
Take heed therefore ye Rulers of the Land,
Be blind in sight, and stop your other Ear,
In sentence slow, till skill the truth have scande,
In all your doomes both love, and hare forbear,
So shall your judgment Just, and right appear:
It was a southfast sentence long ago,
That hasty men shall never lack mutch woe.
Is it not truth? Baldwin, what say thou?
Say on thy mind, I pray thee muse no more.
Me think thou starest and lokest I wot not how,
As though thou never saw a man before:
By like thou musest why I teach this lore,
Else what I am that here so boldly dare,
Among the Preasse of Princes to compare.
Though I be bold, I pray thee blame not me,
Like as men sow, such Corn needs must the reap,
And nature has so planted in each degree,
That Crabs like Crabs will kindly crall, and creep:
The subtle Fore unlike the seely sheep:
It is according to mine Education,
Froward to Preasse in Rout, and Congregation.
Behold my coat burnt with the Sparks of Fire,
My Leather Aporn filde with horse shoe Nails,
Behold my Hammer, and my Pincers here,
Behold my looks a mark that seldom fayles:
My Cheeks declare I was not ^ed with Quayles,
My Face, my Clothes, my Tools with all my fashion,
Declare full well a Prince of rude Creation.
A Prince I said, a Prince I say again,
Though not by birth by crafrie usurpation,
Who doubts but some men princehood do obtain,
By open force and wrongful dominacion,
Yet while they rule are had in reputa^ion:
Even so by me the while I wrought my feate,
I was a prince at least in my conceit.
I dare the bolder take on me the name,
Because of him whom here I lead in hand,
Tychet Lord Awdley a Lord of birth and fame,
Which with his power and strength serude in my hand,
I was a Prince while that I was so^ mand:
His butterfly still underneath my shield,
Displayed was from Wells, to Blackheath field.
But now behold he does bewail the same:
Thus after wits their rashness do deprave,
Behold dismayed he dare not speak for shame,
He looks like one that late came from the grave,
Or one that came forth of Trophonius cave,
For that in wy the had so little pith,
As he a Lord to serve a traytout Smith.
Such is the courage of the noble heart,
Which does despise the vile and baser sort,
He may not touch that savors of the cart,
Him lists not with each Jack ^out to sport,
He lets him pass for payring of his port,
The iollye Egles carth not little flees,
The courtly silks match seeld with homely frees.
But surely Baldwin if I were allowd
To say the truth, I could somewhat declare:
But clerks will say, this Smyth does wax to proud,
Thus in precepts of wisdom to compare,
But Smithes must speak that clerks for fear ne dare
It is a thing that all men may lament,
When clerks keep close the truth least they be shent.
The Hostler, Barber, Myller, and the Smyth,
Hear of the sawes of such as wisdom ken,
And learn some wit although they want the pith,
The clerks pretend and yet both now and then,
The greatest clerks prove not the wisest men:
It is not right that men forbid should be:
To speak the truth al were he bond or free.
And for because I have used to fret and foam,
Not passing greatly whom I should displease,
I dare be bold awhile to play the mome,
Out of my sack some others faults to lease,
And let mine own behind my back to peyse,
For' he that has his own before his eye,
Shall not so quick another fault epsy
I say was never no such woeful case,
As is when honor does it self abuse:
The noble man that virtue does embrace,
Represseth pride, and humbleness does use,
By wisdom works, and rashness does refuse
His wanton will and lust that bridle can,
In deed is gentle both to God and man.
But where the nobles want both wit and grace,
Regard no reed, care not but for their lust,
Oppress the Poor, set will in reasons place,
And in their words, and domes be found unjust,
Wealth goes to wrack till all lie in the dust:
There Fortune frowns, and spite begins to grow,
Till high, and low, and all be overthrow.
Then since that virtue has so good reward,
And after vice so duelye wayteth shame,
How hapth that Princes have no more regard,
Their tender youth with virtue to inflame?
For lack whereof the wit and will is lame,
Infect with folly, prone to lust, and pride,
Not knowinge how them selves or theirs to guide.
Whereby it happens to the wanton wight,
As to a Ship upon the stormy Seas,
Which lackinge stern to guide it self a right,
From Shore, to Shore the Wind, and Tide do teese,
Findinge no place to rest and take his ease,
Till at the last it sink upon the Sand:
So fare they all that have not virtue cand.
The Plowman first his Land does dress, and turn,
And makes it apt or ere the Seed be sow,
Whereby he is full like to reap good Corn.
Where otherwise no seed but weed would grow:
By which ensample men may easily know,
When youth have wealth before they can well use it
It is no wonder though they do abuse it.
How can he rule well in a common wealth,
Which knows not himself in rule to frayne?
How should he rule himself in ghostly health,
Which never learnde one lesson for the same:
If such catch harm their Parents are to blame:
For needs must they be blind, and blindly led.
Where no good lesson can be taught or read.
Some think their youth discreet, and wisely taught,
That brag, and boast, and wear their Feather brave,
Can royst, and rout, both lowre, and look a loft,
Can swear, and stare, and call their fellows Knave,
Can pyll, and poll, and catch before they crave,
Can Card, and Dyce, both Cog, and Foyst at fare,
Play on unthrifty, till their Purse be bare.
Some teach their youth to pipe, to singe, and dance,
To Hawk, to Hunt, to choose and kill the game,
To wind their horn, and with their horse to praunce,
To play at Tenis, set the Lute in frame,
Run at the Ringe and use such other game:
Which feats although they be not all unfit,
Yet cannot they the mark of virtue hit.
For noble youth, there is nothing so meet
As learning is, to know the good from ill:
To know the Tongues, and perfectly endyte,
And of the laws to have a perfect skill,
Things to reform as right, and justice will:
For honor is ordained for no cause,
But see right mayntayned by the Laws,
It spites my heart to hear when Noble men
Cannot diclose their secrets to their friend,
In sauegarde sure with Paper, Ink, and Pen,
But first they must a secretary find,
To whom they show the bottom of their mind:
And be he false, or true, a Blab, or close,
To him they must their counsel needs disclose.
And where they rule that have of Law no skill,
There is no boot, they needs must seek for aid:
Then ruled are they, and rule as others will:
As he that on a Stage his part has playde:
But he was taught naught has he done, or said.
Such youth therefore s^eke Science of the Sage,
As think to Rule when that ye come to age.
Where youth is brought up in fear, and Obedience,
Kept from ill company, brydeled of their lust,
Do serve God duly, and know their allegiauuce,
Learn godly wisdom which time nor age can rust:
There Prince, People, and Peers needs prosper must,
For happy are the People, and blessed is that Land,
Where Truth, and Virtue have got the over hand.
I speak this Baldwyn of this rufull Lord,
Whom I perforce do here present to thee,
He faynts so sore he may not speak a word,
I plead his cause without reward, or Fee,
And am inforst to speak for him, and me.
If in his youth he had been wisely tought,
He should not now his Wit so dear have bought.
For what is he that has but half a Wit,
But may well know that Rebels cannot speed,
Mark well my Tale, and take good heed to it,
Recount it well and take it for good reed,
If it prove vutrue I will not trust my creed.
Was never Rebel before the World, nor since,
That could or shall prevail against his Prince.
For ere the Subject begins to rebel,
Within himself let him consider well,
Foresee the danger, and beat well in his Brain,
How hard it is his purpose to obtain,
For if he once be entered to the Brears,
He has a raginge Wolf fast by the Ears.
And when he is once entered to rule the beastly rout,
Although he would he can no way get out.
He may be sure noue will to him resort,
But such as are the vile, and rascal sort.
All honest men as well the most as lest,
To taste of treason will utterly detest.
Then let him way how long he can be sure,
Where faith, nor Friendship may no while endure:
He whom he trusts most, to gain a groate
Will fall him from, and assay to cut his throat,
Among the Knaves, and slaves where vice is rooted,
There is no other Freendship to be looked.
With Slashers, Slaves,' and Snuffers so falshoode is in price
The simple faith is deadly sin, and virtue counted vice.
And where the Quarrel is so vile, and bad,
That hope of aid then is there to be had?
Thyncks he that Men will run at this, or that,
To do a thing they know not hew, or what?
Nor yet what danger may thereof betide,
Where Wisdom would they should at home abide,
Rather then seek, and know not what to find.
Wysemen will first debate this in their mind:
Full sure they are if that they go to wrecke,
Without all grace they loose both head, and neck.
They loose their Lands, and Goods, their Child, and Wife
With Sorrow, and Shame shall lead a woeful Life,
If he be slain in field he dies accursed,
Which of all wrecks we should attempt the worst:
And he that dies defendinge his liege Lord,
Is blist, and blist again by Gods own Word.
And where the Soldiers wages is unpaid,
There is the Captain slenderly obayde,
And where the Soldier is out of fear, and dreede,
He will be lack when that there is most need,
And privately he seeks his ease, and leisure,
And will be ruled but at his will, and pleasure.
And where some draw forth, and other do draw back,
There in the end must needs he woe, and wrack:
To hope for aid of Lords it is but vain,
Whose fore taught wit of treason knows the pain,
They know what power a Prince has in his Land,
And what it is with Rebels for to stand.
They know by treason honor is defaced,
Their offspring and their progeny disgraced,
They know to honor is not so worthy a thing,
As to be true and faithful to their king,
Above cognisaunce or arms, or pedigrew far,
An unspotted cote is like a blazing star:
Therefore the rebel is accursed and mad,
That hops for that which rebel never had:
Who trusting still to dales does hang in hope,
Til at the last he hang fast by the rope,
For though such tales be told that hope might feed,
Such foolish hope has still unhappy speed.
It is a custom that never will be broken,
In broils the bag of lies is ever open,
Such lying news men daily will invent,
As can the hearers fancy best content,
And as the news do run and never cease,
So more and more they daily do increase,
And as they increase they multiply as fast,
That ten is ten hundred, ten thousand at the last.
And though the rebel had once got the ^elo,
Thinks he thereby to make his prince to yield?
A princes power within his own region,
Is not so soon brought unto confusion.
For Kings by God are strong, and stoutly hearted,
That they of Subjects will not be subverted:
If Kings would yield, yet God would them restrain,
Of whom the Prince has grace, and power to raygne:
Who straytly charge us above all thing,
That no man should resist against his King.
Who that resists his dread Soueraygne Lord,
Does dampne his soul by Gods own very word.
A Christian Subject should with honor due,
Obey his Soueraygne though he were a Jew:
Whereby assured when Subjects do rebel,
Gods wrath is kindled, and threatens fire, and hell.
It is soon known when Gods wrath is kyndled,
How they shall speed with whom he is offended:
If God gave victory to whom he likes best,
Why look they for it whom God does most detest?
For treason is hateful, and abhord in Gods sight,
Example of Judas that most wicked Wight:
Which is the chief cause no treason preuayles,
For ill must he speed, whom Gods wrath assayles:
Let Traitors, and Rebels look to speed then,
When Gods mighty power is subject to men.
Mutch might be said that goes more near the Pith,
But this suffiseth for a rural Smith.
Baldwin when thou hear my reason in this case,
Belike thou think I was not very wise,
And that I was accursed, or else lacked grace,
Which knowinge the end of my fond Enterprise,
Would thus presume against my Prince to rise:
But as there is a cause that moves every woe,
Somewhat there was whereof this sore did grow.
And to be plain and simple in this case,
The cause why I such matter took in hand,
Was nothing else but pride and lack of grace,
Vain hope of help, and tales both false and fond:
By means whereof I did my prince withstand,
Denied the tax assest by convocation
To maintain war against the Scottish Nation.
Whereat the Cornish men did much repine,
For they of Gold and Silver were full bare,
And lived hardly digging in the Mine,
They said they had no money for to spare:
Began first to grudge, and then to swear and stare,
Forgot their due obeysaunce, and rashly fell to rauing,
And said they would not bear suc polling and such shauing.
They first accusde the king as author of their grief,
And then the bishop Moreton. and sir Reinold Bray,
For they then were about the king most chief,
Because they thought the hole fault in them lay:
They did protest to ryd them out of the way.
Such thank have they that rule about a prince,
They bear the blame of other men's offense.
When I perceived the commons in a rore,
Then I and Flamocke consulted both together,
To whom the people resorted more and more,
Lamenting and crying, help us now or never,
Break this yoke of bondage then are we free for ever:
Whereat we enflamed in hope to have a fame,
To be their captains took on us the name.
Then might you hear the people make a shout,
And cry, God save the Captains, and send us al good speed,
Then he that fainted was counted but a lout,
The ruffians ran abroad to sow sedicious seed:
To call for company then there was no need
For every man labored another to entice,
To be partaker of his wicked vice.
Then al such news as made for our avail,
Was brought to me, but such as sounded ill,
Was none so bold to speak or yet bewail:
Euerich was so wedded unto his will,
That forth they cried with bows, sword and byll.
And what the ruffler spoke, the lout toake for a verdite
For there the best was worst, the worst was best regarded.
For when men go a madding, there still the vyler part
Conspire together and will have all the swaye,
And be it well or il, they must have all the port,
As they will do, the rest must needs obey,
They prattle and prate as does the Popingaye:
They cry and command the rest to keep tharray,
Whiles they may raunge and rob for spoil and pray.
And when we had prepared every thing,
We went to Tawnton with all our provision,
And there we slew the Prouos^ of Pentyn,
For that on the Subsedie he sat in commission:
He was not wise, nor yet of great discretion,
That durst approach his enemies in their rage,
When wit nor reason could their ire assuage.
From thence we went to Wells, where we were received
Of this Lord Awdley, as of our chief captain,
And so had the name, but yet he was deceived,
For I in deed did rule the clubbish train,
My cartly knights true honor did disdain:
For like does laue his like. it will be none other,
A chorle will love a chorle, before he will his brother.
From Wels to Winchester, and so to Blackheat^ field,
And there we encamped looking for more aid,
But when none came, we though our selves beguilde,
Such Cornish men as knew they were betraide,
From their fellows by night away they straide:
There might we learn how vain it is to trust,
Our feigned friends in quarrels so unjust.
But we the sturdy captains yt thought our power was strong,
Were bent to try our Fortune what ever should be^ide
We were the bolder, for that the king so long
Deferred battle: which so increast our pride,
That sure we thought the king himself did bide
Within the city, therefore with courage hault,
We did determine the cittye to assault.
But he working contrary to our expectation,
Was fullye minded to let us run our race,
Til we were from our domestical habitation,
Where that of aid or succor was no place,
And then to be plagued as it should please his grace,
But al doubtful plaintes* how ever they did sound,
To our best veil we asway did expound.
When that the king saw time, with courage bold
He sent a power to circu^nent us al:
Where we encloased as simple sheep in fold,
Where slain and myrdred as beasts in butchers stall,
The king himself, what ever thaunce might fall,
Was strongly enca^ped within S. Georges sield,
And there abode til that he hard us yield.
Then down we kneled, and cried to save our life,
It was to late our folly to bewail,
There were we spoiled of armor, cote, and knife:
And we which thought with pride the city to assail,
Were led in prisoners naked as my nail,
But of us two thousand they had slain before,
And we of them three hundred and no more.
This my Lord and we the captains of the west
Took our Jane at Newgate fast in ferters tide,
Where after trial we had but little rest,
My Lord throw London was drawn on a slide,
To Tower hill where with an axe he dyed,
Clad in his cote armor painted al in paper,
Corn and reuersed inspight of his behauer.
And I with Thomas Flamocke, and other of our bent,
As traitors at Tybourne our judgment did obey:
The people looked I should my fault lament,
To whom I holdly spoke that for my fond assay,
I was sure of fame that never should decay:
Whereby ye may perceive bayn glory does inflame
As Well the meaner sort as men of greater name.
But as the sickely patient, sometime has desire
To cast the things that Physic has denied,
And has both pain and sorrow for his hyre,
The same to me right well may be applied,
Which while I raught for fame on shame did slide
And sekinge fame brought forth my bitter bane.
As he that fyered temple of Diane.
I tell thee Baldwin, I muse right often to see
How every man for wealth and honor gapeth,
How every man would climb above the sky,
How every, man chassured mean so hates,
How froward Fortune often their purpose mateth:
And if they hap their purpose to obtaint,
Their wealth is woe, their honor care and pain.
We see the servant more happy then his Lord,
We see him live when that his Lord is dead,
He sleeps sound, is merry at his boorde,
No sorrow in his heart does vex his head:
Happy then is he that poverty can wed,
What gain the mighty conquerours when they be dead
By all the spoil and blood that they have shed?
The terrible tower where honor has his seat,
Is hye on rocks more slipper then the yse,
Where still the whorling wind does roar and beat,
Where sudden qualmes and peries still arise,
And is beset with many sundry vice,
So strange to men when first they come thereat,
They be amassed, and do they wot not what.
He that preuailes and to the tower can clime,
With trouble and care must needs abridge his days,
And he that slydes may curse the hour and time,
He did attempt to geeue so fond assaies,
And al his life to sorrow and shame obayes*
Thus slide he down or to the top ascend,
Assure himself repentance is the end.
Wherefore Baldwine do thou record my name
To be ensample to such as credit lies,
Or thirst to suck the sugared cup of fame,
Or do attempt against their prince to rise,
And charge them al to keep within their sise:
Who does assay to wrest beyond his strength,
Let him be sure he shall repent at length,
And at my request admonish thou al men,
To spend well the talent which God to them has lent,
And he that has but one, let him not toil for ten,
For one is too much, unless it be well spent:
I have had the proof, therefore I now repent,
And happy are those men, and blist and blist is he,
As can be well content to serve in his degree.
FINIS.
Master Cauille.

IT is pity (quoth one) that the meter is no better seeing ye matter is so
good: you may do very well to help it, and a little fyling would make it formal.

The author himself (quoth I) could have done that, but he would not, and
has desired me that it may pass in such rude, sort as you have heard it:
for he observes therein a double decorum both of the Smith, and of himself:
for he thinks it not meet for the Smyth to speak nor for himself to write
in any exact kind of meeter Welsayd another: the matter is notable to teach
al people as well officers as subjects to consider their estates and to live in
love and obedience to the highest powers. what so ever they be, whom God
either by birth, law, succession, or universal election, does or shall
aucthorise in his own rowme to execute his laws and justice, among any people
or nation: for by all these means God places his deputies, and in my
judgment there is no mean so good either for the common quiet of the people,
or for gods free choice, as the natural order of enheritaunce by lyneal descent
for so it is left in Gods hands, to create in the womb what prince he
thinks meetest for his purposes: the people also know their princes and
therefore the more gladly and willingly receive and d^^y them. And although
same realms more careful then wy^e, have en^ayled their Crown to their Male
thinking it not meet for the fyminine sex to bear the royal office: yet if
they consider all circumstaunces, and the chiefest uses of a prince in a
realm, they shall see how they are deceived. For princes are Gods
lieutenauntes or deputies, to see gods laws executed among their subjects, not
to rule according to their own lusts or devises, but by the prescript of
Gods laws: so that the chiefest point of a princes office consists in
obedience to god and to his ordinances, and what should let but that a woman
may be as obediente unto God as a man? The second point of a princes office is
to provide for the impotent, nedy, and helpelesse, as widows, orphans, lame,
and decrepite persons: and seeing women are by nature tender hearted, mild, and
pitiful who may better than they discharge this duty? Yea but a woman lacks
courage, boldness, and stomach, to withstand the adversary, and so are her
subjects an open spoil to their enemies. Debora, Iael, Judith. Thomiris, and
other do prove the contrary. But grant it were so: what harm were that
seeing victory consists not in wit or for^e, but in Gods pleasure. I am sure
that whatsoever prince does his duty in obaying God, and causing Justice to be
ministered according to Gods laws, shall not only lack war (be he man, woman
or child) but also be a terror to al other princes. And if God suffer any at
any time to be assailed it is for ye destruction of the assayler, whether he be
(...) foreign foe, and to the honor and profit of ye virtuous prince, in
whose behalf rather then he shall miscarye, God himself will fight with
enferuous, and earthquakes from the land and waters, and with storms, and
lighteninges from the air and skies. More wars have been sought through the
wilful and hauty courages of kings and greater destructions happened to realm
thereby, than by any other means. And as for wisdom and pollicye, seeing it
consists in following the counsel of many godly, learned, and long experienced
heads, it were better to have a Woman, who consideringe her own weakness and
inabilitie, should be ruled thereby, than a man which presuming upon his own
fond brain, will hear no advise save his own. You muse peradventure wherefore
I say this. The frantic heads which disable our Queen, because she is a
woman, and our king because he is a stranger, to be our princes and chief
governors has caused me to say thus much For what soever man, woman, or
child, is by the consent, of the whole realm established in the royal seat,
so it have not been iniuriouslye procured by rigor of sword and open force,
but quietly, by title, either of enheritaunce, succession, lawful bequeste,
common consent, or election, is undoubtedly chose^ by God to be his deputy:
and whosoever resistethe any such, resists against God himself, and is a
rank traitor and rebel, and shall be sure to prosper as well as the Black Smyth
and other such have done. Al resist that wilful break any law, not being
against Gods law, made by common conset for the wealth of the realm, and
commanded to be kept by authority of the prince: or that deny to pay such
duties, as by consent of the high court of Parliament, are appointe to the
Prince for the defense and preservation of the realm. You have said very truly
herein (quoth I) and I trust this terrible example of the Black Smyth, will
put all men in mind of their duties and teach them to be obedient to al good
laws, and lawful contributions. The scriptures do forbid us to rebel, or
forciblie to withstand Princes, though they commau^d unjust things: yet in any
case we may not do the^ but receive quietly at the princes hand whatsoever
punishment God shall suffer to be laid upon us for our refusal, God will suffer
none of his to be tempted above their strength. But because these two persons
last before rehearsed were thought not only obscure in matter, but also
crabbed in the meeter (I have here ready to supply that which lacked in
them) Shores wife, an eloquent wench, which shall fynish out both in meter and
matter, that which could not comlily be said in their persons Mark I pray you
what she says, and tell me how you like it.

HOW SHORES WIFE King Edward the fowerthes Concubine, was by king Richard
despoyled of al her goods, and forced to do open pennaunce.
AMong the rest by Fortune overthrown,
I am not least, that most may wayle her fate:
My fame and brute abroad the world is blown,
Who can forget a thing thus done so late?
My greae mischaunce, my fall and heavy state,
Is such a mark whereat each tongue does shoot,
That my good name is plucked up by the rohte.
This wandering world bewitched me with wyles,
And won my wits with wanton sugared joys,
In Fortunes frekes who trustes her when she smiles,
Shall find her false and full of ^ickle toys,
Her triumphs al but fill our ears with noyes,
Her flattering gifts are pleasure mixed with pain.
Yea al her words are thunders threatening rain.
The fond desire that we in glory set,
Does thirle our hearts to hope in supper hap,
A blast of pomp is all the fruit we get,
And under that li^^ hid a soden clap,
An seeking rest unawares we fall in trap:
In groping flowers: with nettles stong we are,
In laboring long we reap the crop of care,
Oh dark deceit with painted face for show,
Oh poisoned bayte that makes us eager still,
Oh feigned friend deceiving people so,
Oh world of the we cannot speak to ill:
Yet fools we are to bend so to thy skyl,
The plague and scourge, that thousands daily feel,
Should warn the wise to shun thy whirling whele.
But who can stop the stream that runs full swift?
Or quench the fire that crept is in the straw?
The thirsty drinks, there is no other shift,
Perforce is such that need obayes no law:
Thus bound we are in worldly yokes to draw,
And cannot stay, nor turn again in time,
Nor learn of those that sought to high to clime.
My self for proof so here I now appear,
In woman's weed with weeping watered eyes,
That bought her youth and her delights full dear,
Whose loud reproach does sound unto the skies
And bids my corpse out of the grave arise,
As o^e that may no longer hyde her face,
But needs must come and show her piteous case.
The sheet of shame wherein I shrouded was
Did move me often to plame before this day,
And in mine ears did ryng the trumpe of brass,
Which is defame, that dothech vice bewraye.
Yea though full dead and low in earth I lay,
I heard the voice of me what people said,
But then to speak alas I was afraid.
And now a time for me I see preparde,
I hear the lives and falls of many wightes:
My tale therefore the ^^^ter may be heard,
For at the torch the little candle lights.
Where pageauntes u^e, small things fill out the sights,
Wherefore geeue ear, good Baldwin do thy best,
My tragedye to place among the rest.
Because the truth shall witness well with thee,
I will rehearse in order as it fell,
My life, my death, my doleful destenie,
My wealth, my woe, my doing every deal,
My bitter bliss, wherein I long did dwell:
A whole discourse by me Shores wife by name,
Now shall thou hear as thou had seen the same.
Of noble blood I cannot boast my birth,
For I was made out of the meanest molde,
Mine heritage but seven foot of earth,
Fortune ne gave to me the gifts of Gold:
But I could brag of nature if I would,
Who filde my face with favor fresh and fair,
Whose beauty shone like Phoebus in the air.
My sh^pe some said was seemly to each sight,
My countenance did show a sober grace,
Mine eyes in looks were never proved light,
My tongue in words was chaste in every case,
Mine ears were deaf and would no lovers place,
Save that (alas) a prince did blot my brow.
Lo, there the strong did make the weak to bow.
The majesty that kings to people bear,
The stately port, the awful cheer they show,
Does make the mean to shrink and couch for fea^
Like as the hound, that does his master know:
What then, since I was made unto the bow:
There is no cloak, can serve to hyde my fault,
For I agreed the fort he should assault.
The Eagles forte subdues each bird that flies.
What metal may resist the flaming fire?
Does not the Sun, dastll the clearest eyes,
And melt the yse, and make the frost retire?
Who can withstand a puissaunt kings desire?
The stiffest stones are perced through with tools,
The wisest are, with princes made but fools.
If kind had wrought my form in common frames,
And set me forth in colors black and brown,
Or beautye had been parchd in Phoebus flames,
Of shame fast ways had pluct my feathers down,
Then had I kept my fame and good renown:
For natures gifts was cause of al my grief.
A pleasant pray entiseth many a thief.
Thus woe to thee that wrought my peacockes pride,
By clothing me with natures tapistrie,
Woe worth the hue wherein my face was did,
Which made me think I pleased every eye:
Like as the sterres make men behold the sky,
So beauties show does make the wise full fond.
And bringes free hearts full of to endiesse bond.
But clear from blame my friends cannot be found
Before my time my youth they did abuse:
In marriage, a prentise was I bound,
Then that mere love I knew not how to use.
But well away. that cannot me excuse,
The harm is mine though they devised my care,
And I must smart and sit in slanderous snare.
Yet give me leave to plead my cause at large,
If that the horse de run beyond his race,
Or any thing that keepers have in charge,
Do break their course, where rulers may take place:
Or meat be set before the hungries face,
Who is in fault thoffender yes or no,
Or they that are the cause of all this woe?
Note well what strife this forced marriage makes,
What loathed lives do come where love does lack.
What scratching breers do grow upon such brakes,
What commonweals by it are brought to wrack,
What beauye load is put on pacientes back,
What strange delights this br^unch of vice does breed
And mark what grain springes out of such a seed.
Compel the hanke to sit that is vnmand,
Or make the hound untaught to draw the Dear,
Or bring the free against his will in hand,
Or move the sad a pleasant tale to hear,
Your time is lost and you are never the near:
So love ne learnes of force the knot to knit,
She serves but those that feel sweet fancies fit.
The less defame redoundes to my dispraise,
I was entiste by traynes, and trapt by trust:
Though in my power remained yeas and nayes,
Unto my friends yet needs consent I must,
In every thing, ye lawful or unjust.
They brake the bows and shakt the tree by sleight,
And bent the wand y^ might have grown full streite.
What help is this, the pale thus broken down,
The dear must needs in danger run astray:
At me therefore why should the world so frown,
My weakness made my youth a Princes pray.
Though wisdom should the course of nature stay,
Yet try my case who list, and they shall prove,
The rypest wits are soonest thralles to love.
What need I more to clear my self to much?
A King me wan, and had me at his call:
His royal state his Princely grace was such,
The hope of will (that women seek for all,)
The ease, the wealth, the gyfts which were not small,
Besieged me so stronglye round about,
My power was weak I could not hold him out.
Duke Hannibal in all his conquest great,
Or Caesar yet, whose triumphs did excede,
Of al their spoils which made them toil and sweat,
Were not so glad to have so rich a meede,
As was this Prince when I to him agreed.
And yielded me a prisoner willinglye,
As one that knew no way away to fly.
The Nightingale for all his merye voice
Nor yet the Lark that yet delights to sing,
Did never make the hearers so rejoice,
As I with words have made this worthy king:
I never iarde, in tune was every string,
I c^mpered so my tongue to please his ear,
That what I said was current every where.
I ioynde my talk, my iestures, and my grace
In wictie frames that long might last and stand,
So that I brought the King in such a case,
That to his death I was his chiefest hand,
I governed him that ruled all this land:
I bare the sword though he did wear the crown,
I struck the stroke that threw the mighty down:
If Justice said that judgment was but death,
With my sweet words I could the king persuade,
And make him pause and take therein a breath,
Til I with suite the fautors peace had made:
I knew what way to use him in his trade,
I had the art to make the Lion meek.
There was no point wherein I was to seek.
If I did frown, who then did look awrie:
If I did smyle, who would not laugh outright?
If I but spoke, who durst my words deny?
If I pursued, who would forsake the flight?
I meant my power was known to every wight,
On such a height good hap had built my bower,
As though my sweet should never have turned to sower.
My husband then as one that knew his good,
Refusde to keep a Princes Concubine,
Forese^ing the end and mischief as it stood,
Against the King did never much repine,
He saw the grape whereof he drank the wine,
Though inward thought his heart did still torment.
Yet outwardlye he seemde he was content.
To purchase praise and win the peoples zeal,
Yea rather bent of kind to do some good,
I ever did uphold the common weal,
I had delight to save the guiltless blood:
Each suitors cause when that I understood,
I did prefer as it had been mine own,
And help them up that might have been orethrowne.
My power was pressed to right the pooremans wrong,
My hands were free to geeue where need required,
To watch for grace I never thought it long,
To do men good I need not be desired.
Nor yet with gifts my heart was never hired.
But when the Ball was at my foot to guide,
I played to those that Fortune did abide.
My want was wealth, my woe was ease at will,
My robes was ri^h and bra^^r than the Sun:
My Fortune thou was far about my skill,
My state was great, my glass did ever run,
My fatal ^^reede so happily was sponne,
That then I sat in earthly pleasurs clad,
And for the time a goodesse place I had.
But I had not so sone this life possessed,
But my good hap began to slip aside.
And Fortune then did me so sore molest,
That unto plaintes was turned al my Pride,
It booted not to row against the tide:
Mine dares were weak my heart and strength did fail,
The wind was rough I durst not bear a sail,
What steps of strife belong to high estate?
The climing up is doubtful to endure,
The seat it self does purchase privy hate,
And honors fame is ^ekle and unsure,
And al she bringes, is flowers that be vnpure:
Which fall as fast as they do sprout and spring,
Ind cannot last they are so vain a thing.
We count no care to catch that we do wish,
But what we win is long to us unknown,
Till present pain be served in our dish,
We scarce perceive whereon our grief has grown:
What grain proves well that is so rashly sown?
If that a mean did measure all out deeds,
Ind steed of corn we should not gather weeds.
The settled mind is free from Fortunes power,
They need not fear who look not up aloft,
But they that clyme are careful every hour,
For when they fall they light not very soft:
Examples has the wisest warned often,
That where the trees the smallest branches bear,
The storms do blow and have most rigor there.
Where is it strong but near the Ground, and Root?
Where is it weak but on the highest Sprayes?
Where may a man so surely set his Foot,
But on those Boowes that grows low always?
The little Twiges are but unsteadfast stays,
If they break not, they bend with every blast,
Who trusts to them shall never stand full fast.
The Wind is great upon the highest Hills,
The quiet life is in the Dale be low,
Who treades on Ise shall slide against their wills,
They want not Cares that curious Arts would know.
Who lives at ease, and can content him so,
Is perfect wise, and sets us all to School,
Who hates this lore may well be calde a Fool.
What greater grief may come to any life,
Than after sweet to taste the bitter sower?
Or after Peace to fall at War, and strife,
Or after mirth to have a cause to lower?
Under such Props false Fortune builds her Bower,
On sudden change her fliteringe Frames be set,
Where is no way for to escape her Net.
The hasty smart that Fortune sendes in spite
Is hard to brook where gladness we embrace,
She threatens not, but suddenly does smite,
Where Joy is most, there does she Sorrow place.
But sure I think, this is to strange a case,
For us to feel such grief amid our Game,
And know not why until we taste the same.
As erst I said, my bliss was turned to bale,
I had good cause to weep and wringe my hands,
And show sad cheer with Countenance full pale,
For I was brought in sorrows woeful bands:
A Pirry came and set my Ship on Sands,
What should I hide, or color Care, and Noye?
King Edward dyed in whom was all my Joy.
And when the Earth received had his Corse,
And that in T^umbe, this worthy Prince was laid,
The World on me began to show his Force,
Of Troubles then my part I long assayed:
For they of whom I never was afraid,
Undid me most, and wrought me such dispite,
That they bereft me from my pleasure quite.
As long as life remainde in Edward breast,
Who was but I? who had such friends at call?
His body was no sooner put in Chest,
But well was he that could procure my fall:
His Brother was mine Enemy most of all
Protector then, whose vice did still abound,
From ill to worse till death did him confound.
He falsely feigned, that I of counsel was
To poison him which thing I never meant,
But he could set thereon a face of brass,
To bring to pass his lewd, and false intent,
To sntch mischief this Tyrants heart was bent:
To God ne man he never stood in awe,
For in his wrath he made his will a law.
Lord Hastings blood for vengeance on him cries,
And many more, that were to long to name:
But most of all and in most woeful wise
I had good cause this wretched man to blame,
Before the World I s^ffered open shame,
Where people were as thick as is the Sand,
I Penance took with Taper in my Hand.
Each Eye did stare, and look me in the Face,
As I past by the Rumors on me ran,
But Patience then had lent me such a Grace,
My quiet Looks were praised of every man:
The Shamefaste blood brought me such color then
That Thousands said, which saw my Sober cheer,
It is great ruth to see this Woman here.
But what preuaylde the peoples pity there?
This raginge Wolf would spare no guiltless blood.
Oh wicked Womb that such ill fruict did bear,
Oh cursed Earth that yeldeth forth such Mud,
The Hell consume all thiuges that did thee good,
The Heavens shut their Gates against thy Sprite,
The World tread down thy Glory under Feet.
I ask of God a vengeance on thy Bones,
Thy stinkinge Corpse corrups the Air I know:
Thy shameful death no earthly Wight bemoanes,
For in thy Life thy works were hated so,
That every man did wish thy overthrow:
Wherefore I may, though parciall now I am,
Curse every cause whereof thy body came.
VVo worth the man that fathered such a child:
VVo worth the Hour wherein thou wast begat,
VVo worth the Breasts that have the world begilde,
To nourish thee that all the World did hate,
VVo worth the Gods that gave thee such a face,
To live so long, that death deserude so often.
VVo worth the chance that set thee up a loft.
Ye Princes all, and Rulers euerychone,
In punishment beware of hatreds ire.
Before ye scourge, take heed, look well thereon:
In wrothes ill will if malice kindle fire,
Your hearts will burn in such a boat desire,
That in those flames the Smoke shall dim your sight,
Ye shall forget to join your Justice right.
You should not judge till things be well discernde,
Your charge is still to maintain upright laws,
In conscience rules ye should be thoroughly learnde,
Where clemency bids wrath, and rashness pause,
And further says: Strike not without a cause,
And when ye smite do it for Justice sake,
Then in good part each man your Scourge will take.
If that such zeal had moved this Tyrauntes mind,
To make my plague a warrant for the rest,
I had small cause such fault in him to find,
Such punishment is used for the best:
But by ill will. and power I was oppressed.
He spoiled my goods, and left me bare, and Poor,
And caused me to beg from Door, to Door.
What fall was this, ^o come from Princes Fare,
To watch for crummes among the blind, and lame?
When alms were dealt I had an hungry share,
Because I knew not how to ask for shame,
Till force and need had brought me in such frame,
That starve I must, or learn to beg an Alms,
With book in hand to say S. David's Psalms.
Where I was wont the golden Chains to wear,
A pair of Beads about my Neck was wound,
A lynnen cloth was lapt about my hear,
A ragged Gount that trayled on the Ground,
A Dish that clapped, and gave a heavy sound,
A stayinge staff, and wallet therewithal,
I bear about as witness of my fall.
I had no house wherein to hide my head,
The open Streate my lodginge was perforce,
Full often I went all hungry to my Bed,
My flesh consumde, I looked like a corse,
Yet in that plight who had on me remorse?
O God thou know my friends forsook me than,
Not one help me who suckred many a man.
They frownde on me, that fawnd on me before,
And fled from me that fellowed me full fast,
They hated me, by whom I set mu^ch store,
They knew full well my fortune did not last,
In every place I was condemnd and cast:
To plead my cause at Ba^it was no boot,
For every man did tread me underfoot.
Thus long I liude all weary of myfe,
Till death app^ch^, and (...) me from that woe
Example take by me both Maid, and Wife,
Beware, takeheede, fall not to folly so,
A Mirror make by my great overthrow:
De^^e this World, and all his wanton ways,
Beware by me that spent so ill her days.
FINIS.
Th. Churchyard.


