A PVBLICATION OF GVIANA'S PLANTATION Newly undertaken by the Right Honble. the
Earl of BARKSHIRE (Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter) and Company
for that most famous River of the Amazones in America.

Wherein is briefly showed the lawfulness of plantations in foreign
Countries; hope of the natives conversion; nature of the River; quality of the
Land, Climate, and people of GVIANA; with the provisions for man's sustenance,
and commodities therein growing for the trade of Merchandise: and manner or the
Adventure.

With an Answer to some objections touching fear of the Enemy.

Like as I have watched upon them, to pluck them up, and to root out, and to
throw down, and to destroy, and to plague them; so will I watch over them, to
build and to plant them, says the Lord: IER. 51. 28. He that obeys me shall
dwell safely, and be quiet from fear of evil: PRO. 1. 33. LONDON Printed by
William Jones for Thomas Pain, and are to be sold in Trinity Lane at the
sign of the Horse-shooe. 1632.

A PVBLICATION OF GVIANA'S PLANTATION.
To all faithful, and well affected Christians.
FOR as much as diverse of this Nation are departed hence into foreign
Countries, as well for the propagating of Gods truth (most likely) as their
own private benefit, whereby the word of the Lord might be fulfilled in
those Heathen (through Gods infinite goodness and mercy) as in us Christians
formerly saying, Romans 9. 25. 26.
I will call them my people which were not my people, and her beloved, which
was not beloved, and it shall be in the place where it was said unto them, ye
are not my people, that there they shall be called the children of the living
God. Neither is it to be doubted, but that there are diverse yet remaining,
which retain the like Christian resolution, but want of true knowledge of a
plantation (that may prove profitable to the Church of God and themthemselves)
causes such to live here like plants, which many times prove less fruitful
in their natural soil, then when they are removed to places better liking
them, for which cause I have thought good at this present, to discover briefly
(to all such as are well affected) the knowledge of a most hopeful plantation
newly undertaken by the right honorable the Earl of Barkeshire (Knight of the
most noble order of the Garter) and company, for that famous river of the
Amazones in America, as by that which follows may appear.

But before I proceed further herein, I think it not amiss to speak
somewhat of the lawfullnesse of plantations in foreign countries, whereby such
as make doubt thereof, may be beetter satisfied herewith.

Now in plantations there are these two principalls to be considered: first,
whether it be lawful to remove from one place or country to another,
secondly, whether it be lawful to possess a country already inhabited by
others: touching the former it has these two several heads, namely, ordinary,
and extraordinary; extraordinary is that when God shall please immediately to
cause any man to depart from one country to another, as he caused Abraham to
depart from Haran to Canaan and Jacob to return from Padan Aram to the land of
his fathers, Genesis 12. 1, 4, 5, 31. 3. 18.
but no man may now expect any such removal and calling as these formerly had.

The latter of these which I call ordinary, is that when men shall be either
moved themselves, or by others to leave their ancient habitation, and go and
inhabit some other place: and this I take to be warrantable from that place of
the Kings, where the children of the Prophets said unto Elisha, 2 King. 6. 1,
2, 3, 4.
Behold now, the place where we dwell with thee is too narrow for us, Let us
go now to Jordan that we may take thence every man a beam, and make us a
place to dwell in; and he answered go, and one said, vouchsafe I pray thee to
go with thy servants, and he said I will, go so he went with them, and when
they came to Jordan they cut down wood. Which work of theirs (without
question) was no other to them then a new plantation, for they seeing the
inconvenience that was like to ensue by staying longer in their ancient
habitation, did thereupon remove to a place more spacious, and commodious for
them. In which progress of theirs, we may learn not to conceal any thing to
our selves, which may as well prove profittable to others, but discover the
same for their good, as doubtless the Children of the Prophets here did.

From hence then we may gather, the men may lawfully remoove with their
familyes from one place to another, and that for diverse causes; as here the
Children of the Prophets did, by reason of the straitness of the land wherein
they dwelt: and it is to be feared that many also among us have as great cause
to do the like, by reason of the daily increasing of all sorts of people,
whereby cittyes towns and countries, are so thronged, that men can hardly live
well one by another, appears by the general complaint of many in these times.

Neither has the said straitness alone, 2 Kings 8. 1, 2.
caused a removal from one place or Country to another, Ruth. 4. 1. 2.
but also famine, 1 Chro. 10. 7.
sword, and other alterations, happenning in the world: Ier. 14. 18.
And to speak truly, if that some in all ages had not departed into other
countries with their families (as God was pleased to moove them by his divine
providence) the world assuredly had not been so much inhabited abroad as now
it is, Heb. 11. 37, 38.
and men had been more burdened at home, then now they are: therefore such
men deserve rather to be commended, then condemned by any, and that because
they do nothing herein, but what God has commanded, to be done, as appears
Genesis Genesis 9. 1.
1. 28. Bring forth fruit and multiply and fill the earth: and this again is
ratified, to Noah and his sons, saying, bring forth fruit and multiply and
replenish the earth, which places, being no way contradicted in all the
scriptures (as I could ever perceive) are sufficient to prove the Lawfulness
of plantations in all ages. And the rather, when Kings shall be likewise
pleased to allow the same freedom to their natural subjects, and that not
only to the poor, but also to the rich, who have the like privilege of
removal, as appears by the places before mentioned, Genesis 13. 2, 5, 6, 1^.
and by that of Abraham and Lot, who departed one from the other, because the
Land wherein they dwelt were so strait that it could not bear them, by reason
their substance was so great.

So then we see all men have a like liberty of removing from one place to
another, excepting such only, Romans 12. 7.
which for the time being have any office, or shall be married, 1 Cor. 7. 5.
in which case men ought not to depart from their wives without consent, 1 Pet.
3. 7.
nor children from their parents without their liking, Colo. 5. 20. 22.
nor servants from their Masters without their leave.

It remains in the next place, that I show the lawfulness of possessing a
country already inhabited by others, which is our second question:

True it is, that all men through Adams fall were deprived of the glory of God,
and worlds good, until by Christ the use of the creatures was again restored
to all believers, therefore the right of that which we possess, comes now to
us by Christ, for which cause, the heathen have no right to that which they
deem theirs, Psalm. 115. 16.
notwithstanding, the Lord has been pleased to suffer such to live on earth
with his, Genesis 2. 32.
and not to be rooted out from the place of their habitations until the day of
harvest, Isay. 27. 13.
during which time the Land wherein such have lived has been called theirs: 2 Chronicles. 32. 21
As the land of the Philistims, the land of Egypt, Ier. 37. 7.
and of Ashur, of whom it is said, Isay 13. 14.
that he returned with shame to his own land, and of the Egyptians it is said,
Isay. 19. 17.
they shall return into their own land: 2 Kings 5. 2. ^
In like manner, the land of Judea and Israel, Psalm. 44. 1, 2, 3.
being taken from the Heathen (by Gods special command and assistance) was
afterward called their own Land: Ezech. 36. 17.
for as the Israelites land was not the heathens as says the Prophet, Esa. 14.
1.
Lo I raise up the Caldeans to possess the dwelling places that are not
theirs, Habak. 1. 6.
neither was the heathens land the Israelites, Genesis 24. 37.
as God tells Abraham; saying, know for a surety that thy seed shall be a
stranger in a land that is not theirs; Genesis 15. 13.
from whence we may gather, that God permits not his to dispossess a people
or nation of their ancient habitation for the enlarging of their own borders;
nevertheless, if such shall be willing that Gods people shall inhabit with
them, as Abimelech was willing that Abraham should dwell with him in his land
where it pleased him, Genesis 20. 15. and 47. 5. 6.
and Pharaoh liked well that Jacob and his sons should dwell with him in the
best of the land of Egypt. In such a case men may doubtless possess a country
already inhabited by others:

But the inhabitants of Guiana are willing that our nation should inhabit that
goodly and spacious country with them (as appears more fully in Mr. Harcourts
relation of Guiana dedicated to the Kings most excellent Majesty, 1626)
Therefore without all question, the plantations there made of late by our
nation are lawful.

Thus having briefly showed the lawfullnesse of plantations in foreign
Countries, for the better satisf^ing of such as make doubt thereof, I come in
the next place to speak somewhat of the nature of the river, quality of the
land, climate, and people of Guiana, with the provision for man's sustenance,
and commodities therein growing, whereby such as are ignorant of the same,
might be encouraged to adventure for the good of themselves, and of those
poor natives, which sit still in darkness, and in the shadow of death.

As touching that great and famous River of the Amazones in America, Harcort.
it is called for the excellency thereof, (by Iosepus A costa) the Empress
and Queen of all Floods, and for the large extent of the same, it is called by
others the sweet Sea, supposed to be the greatest River (not only of all
India, but also) of the whole world; it is said to slow from the Mountains of
Peru, and runs with many windings and turnings for the space of 1500
leagues, containing at the mouth thereof near sixty leagues in breadth; in it
are many Islands, diverse of which are inhabited by the Indians; it does ebb and
flow near three hundred leagues, and has in it great store of excellent
fishes for the use of man: of which more shall be said hereafter, when we
shall come to speak of the provisions of the country for man's sustenance.

The quality of the land is of diverse kinds; as low, middle, and mountainous,
(as here with us) it abounds in woods of diverse sorts, having plains in some
parts thereof, with plenty of grass, besides pleasant streams of fresh
waters, all which are very needful and fitting for a plantation.

The earth in those parts is of sundry mixtures, as black mould, clay, rossey,
and such like, besides stone for building if occasion serve.

The seasons there differ much from ours, for the dry weather which we call
there summer, begins about August, and the raines and winds, which we
account there winter, begin about February; which latter season is termed by
us their winter, by reason of the raines then falling extraordinary, and not
by reason of the coldness of the weather; for there are no frostes or snowes,
as with us here, but a continual spring and summer season: for no sooner do
the leaves wither and fall away, but presently it begins to spring again, as
here with us some years it seems the like; for when our autumme proves
somewhat warm, then commonly appears a second spring, which yet never
comes to perfection, and that by reason of the suns declining from our
horizon, and the cold winters present approaching, which causes always our
latter spring to keep back, until the time of our summer season: which in
Guiana is not so, for there is little difference of heat and cold throughout
the year, but a most pleasant growing weather, which commonly causes those
parts to be much more fruitful then many other parts of the world.

The day and night are there always equal, the Sun rising at six of the
clock in the morning, and setting at six in the evening or near thereabout
the year throughout.

The provisions for diet are many, as first, the root called Cassavie, of
which the Guianians make their bread; there is likewise a kind of great wheat
called Maix, it yields great increase, and makes excellent meal, or flower
for bread: of the aforesaid Cassavie, and this wheat, is made a sort of drink
called Paranaw, much like the best march bear here with us; other sorts also
they have, which for brevity sake I omit here to speak of.

There are Dear of diverse sorts, wild Swine, Hares and Conies in great
plenty, besides which there is a great beast called Maipnry which in taste is
like beef, and will take salt; there is also another creature which usually
comes into the fresh waters, and feeds upon the grass and weeds in the
marshes, (and is called by us the sea-Cow) being in taste like beef, and will
also take salt, as the former; of these there are great store in their seasons,
they will serve well for the victualling of ships homeward bound, as of late has
been proved.

Of fowls there be diverse kinds, namely, wild-duckes, wilde-geese, hens,
herons, cranes, storkes, pheasants, partridges, pigeons, stockdoves, parrats of
sundry sorts, besides ravenous fowls, and hawks, with diverse other sorts not
known in these parts.

The variety of fish is great, as first, mullet, seabreame, soale, scate,
thornebacke, swordfish, seal, a fish like a sammon, but differing in color,
shrimpes, lobsters, and oysters, other sorts there are, besides freshwater fish
of many kinds, which in these parts of Europe are not known to us.

The fruits there growing are the Pina, Plantana, Medler, Plumbes and Nuts of
diverse kinds, beside store of Potatoes, as for the Pina, it exceeds all
other fruits in those parts, being in taste much like ripe straberries with
clarret wine and sugar; the Plantana tastes like an old pippin, the medlers
exceed ours in greatness, and the nuts in sweetness.

Having thus briefly touched the several sorts of provisions necessary for
man's sustenance, it remains I show the variety of commodities therein
growing for the trade of Merchandise, which in short-time (by Gods assisting
our endeavors) may be brought to return great profit to the undertakers.

The first commodity of estimation there growing are sugarcanes, whereof in
some parts there are store, which by orderly planting and erecting of
convenient works, for boiling and making of sugars, may (through Gods
blessing) be returned yearly great profit to the adventurers, as the
plantation of sugarcanes made hertofore in Barbary by the Moors, and since
that in Brasseile by the Portugals may witness.

There is also cotton wool growing of the finest sort, it is a profitable
commodity, for making of sustians, callicoes and candle-wicke.

There is a natural hemp, or flax, of great use, it is much like raw silk,
and is called of some silkegrasse.

There are likewise many commoditie^ for diers, as namely a red berry called
Anotto, which dies a perfect oringe-tawny in silk, and a yallow in cloth, of
which there may be gotten good store every season* for my self with some
others setting forth a ship formerly for those parts, (by way of trade)
received upon return, above three thousand weight of the said Anotto, which
then bore a good price here, but much better in the neatherlands, other dies
there are (besides hope of Cutcheneale) which at this present I purpose briefly
to pass over.

There are likewise found of late, store of Nutmegs growing, with their Mace,
some of which I have recevied upon return of my foresaid adventure, which noe
man (I suppose) but my self can show the like, excepting some gentlemen, which
upon request have received some of me, which no doubt may in short time be
brought to a more fuller perfection, by either cropping the old trees and
dreaning the waters from them, or by transplanting the young trees, as by
experience is commonly seen, how that nature is much helped by art and
industry.

There is likewise Gumma, Lemina, Barrata, Ginnipepper, long Pepper, Cascia
fistula, Tobacco, spleen stones, speckled wood, Honey and wax*

As for mineralls, or mines of metals, it is very likely, this Country
affords many, not only of the basest, but also of the richest, which
hereafter may come to be discovered, if God shall be pleased, which he grant
to his glory, and our good, or that otherwise they may ever lie hid.

Now as touching the nature of these people they are generally held harmless,
tractable, trusty, and somewhat laborious; in which respect they differ much
from all other Americans, and which is better to be liked in them, there is
good hope conceived of their conversion to the Christian faith, Act. 16. 9. 10*
for as the man of Macedonia prayed St. Paul in a vision, to come into
Macedonia and help them; so have some of these poor ignorant souls desired
Captain Charles Leigh, Purchase. p. 1021.
to send into England for some men to teach them to pray; since which, one
being converted, Harcourt. p. 9.
and became a Christian, being at the point of death, desired some of our
nation then present, to sing a Psalm with him, which being ended, he told
them he could not live, and did withal acknowledge, that he had been a wicked
sinner, but did hope that he should be saved by the precious blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ; and moreover, he desired all of them there present, to
bear witness that he died a Christian; yea said he, a Christian of England.

A happy work no doubt it were to recover those poor souls out of Satan's
snare, who are taken captive of him at his will; 2 Timothy 2. 26
may we not well fear, that as he murders the body that denies it
nourishment when extremity requires it, so does he no less to the soul of
whom nourishment is implored, Alsted chron. in tit. deconuer.
and yet he denies it; was not the Nubians case most miserable, (once a
Christian people in Africa) when having not able Ministers of their own, they
sent to the Abassines their neighbors for teachers, and were denied; did not
such deserve worthily the calamity of a perpetual ignorance, who so
uncompassionately slighted the reasonable request of others? Heylin ^. 121.
on the contrary when some of the East Indians sent their Ambassadors to
Demetrus Patriarch of Alexandria for teachers to instruct them in the faith of
Christ, he willingly condescended thereunto, and sent not only such as
preached true doctrine, but also adorned the same by a holy conversation, so
that by their pious diligence, they won many of them to the faith, which was
the crown of their rejoicing: and who knows, but that he that infused such
desires into an inhabitant of the East indies, may work as powerfully in them
of the west, and may likewise bless these as he blessed them with the ^lessed
light of his most holy word, to which let every faithful Christian say, Amen.

Now seeing that the hope of worldly gain causes most men to adventure in one
kind or other, and that the gain conceived of this plantation may prove very
profitable both to the Church of God and all adventurers, it may therefore the
better encourage and stir up men of all sorts, to become adventurers herein,
and chiefly such as have received of the Lord both grace, and ability, for the
further setting forth of his glory.

And although it cannot be denied but that our nation of late years, has
been very forward in settling of diverse plantations beyond the seas, yet have
they not all thereby so much glorified God, as could be wished, nor dealt so
faithfully with some adventurers, as was expected, which thing no doubt being
considered by many, has been the only cause of keeping them back from being
adventurers; and no marvel, if when we consider the persons commonly sent (I
speak not of all, but of such only) whose lives being base and idle here at
home, can hardly be expected to be much better abroad in foreign
plantations, which to speak truly, have been no other (for the most part
formerly) then common sinkes, wherein too many grieved fathers have cast forth
their desperate offspring, and the commonwealth her most lawless inhabitants,
such as by their conversations cause the good name whereby they are called, 1
Pet. 2. 12.
to be rather evil spoken of amongst the Gentiles, then otherwise: by means
whereof it has happened that the heathen have deemed that God as evil as their
own, whose servants were worse then themselves, does not God and nature teach,
that whatsoever a man sows, Gal. 6. 7.
that shall he also reap, not grapes of thorns, Matthew. 7. 16
nor figgs of thistles can men expect. And now, though plants of grace (like
fruitful trees) are chiefest to be wished for in all plantations, yet no doubt
may civil men be sent in case of want, as natures flowers for ornament: I wish
therefore that care were had, to send those plants, and leave the bad.

As for the temper of the climate it exceeds not so in heat as some men have
thought of it, for though the situation be in part under the equinoctial, yet
is it habitable, as appears by the experience of our countrymen, which have
lived in those parts, and found it both healthful, and pleasant; for God in
wisdom has so ordered the heavens in their horizon, as that by means of a
brieze (or fresh gale of wind) blowing in the day time, it quallifieth the
heat, and makes the climate much more temperate, as with us is often felt the
like in heat of summer.

Besides the dewes there falling commonly in the night, adds much to the
cooling of that climate, and which is to be noted, the continual absence of
the Sun from the horizon, for the space of twelve hours every day, cannot
but cause the temper of that clymate to be moderate, there being a perfect
mixture of heat and cold, each qualifing the other in the space of twenty
four hours by an equal division of day and night, as before has been showed.

Their houses are built (most commonly) in length, like our barnes here with
us, some of which are so large, as that they contain in them above an hundred
persons, having therein hanging beds, (in which they lie) called hamackoes,
made of cotton woll very artificially, their vessels for use are made some of
clay, of which sort some are so great as that they will contain more then one
hogshead of water.

They will work a month or more for an axe of eighteen or twenty pence
price; for which they will fell your timber, clear your ground, plant your
sugarcanes, Anotto, and Cotton trees, and build your house after their
fashion: which in other plantations is not so, for in all other our
plantations, the adventurers are enforced to carry men over to do their work
for them, least otherwise they be driven to work themselves, as Virginia, St.
Christophers, and new England; with others can witness.

Besides which, in most former plantations except new England, men have
adventured only upon hope of one commodity (as namely Tobacco) but here are
many more commodities then one, (as has been showed) therefore is this
plantation more hopeful then all others: the foundation of which being already
laid, may give men better incouragment to become joint adventurers herein,
especially being thereupon presently intressed in the shipping stock, and
profits of the said plantation; for the preservation whereof, we have not
only sent diverse honest and able men (marren and other) but also some pieces
of great ordnance, with ammunition, and other materials very useful toward
building of a fort, for the better securing of our planters persons from the
danger of an enemy; having moreover caused a pinnace to be sent to abide with
the Colony in the river, for their better safety and trade in the country;
intending likewise this summer (if God shall be pleased) to set out a new
supply of more men (as artificers and others) besides women, as also more
ordnance, ammunition, and other materials, fitting for the defense of the
plantation, besides another shipp, greater then the former, to stay and abide
there together with the Colony in the river, for their better defense and trade
in the country aforesaid: in which supply I also purpose (God willing) to go
with my wife and friends, to inhabit some part of that spacious and goodly
country.

But here some may object fear of the enemy. Object.
Answ. Answ.
it is no other then what has bin usualy vented at the first setting forth of
al our plantations for America, as Virginia and others can witness; and if
there were so great cause to fear (as some have supposed) men would not
assuredly have adventured so freely; but this plantation here mentioned is
far from the Spaniards habitation, and therefore less cause to be feared.

But yet it may be further objected, Object.
that though the Spanyard be somewhat far distant, yet the Portugals in
Brasill (being near unto it) may prove as ill neighbors as the other. Answ.
Answer, if we consider the spatiousnes of the country (being supposed to be
more then twenty times greater then this kingdom of England) we have no such
great cause to fear them; for if we like not their neighborhood, (there
being room enough, and diverse goodly rivers besides in the country) we may
(if we please) go further out of their reach, where no doubt (through Gods
assisting of our endeavors) we may come to return as great profit (by means
of sugar canes and such like commodities growing in those parts) as in the
river aforesaid: for to speak truly, it were great weakness in any to presume
to sit near an enemy, and have not sufficient strength to oppose him, or
having room enough to go out of his reach, will notwithstanding abide near
him; yet I deny not, but that a Colony may be able to subsist near an enemy
by means of fortification, and especially when they are such as fear God,
being provided with ammunition, victual, and all other things needful for the
defense of the same: for to raise a fort for the relief of a Colony, and not
to victual it, (as some have carelessly neglected through indiscretion) were to
make it (with such) our peoples grave, and not their preservation: and if an
hundred of our nation, or thereabout (having neither fort, nor artillery for
defense,) were able (not long since) by means of the natives, to cause about
eighteen hundred of the enemy to retrayte, and abandon the river, with loss
of many of their lives; how much more then being fortified, and fitted with all
things needful for the defense of the same, may we be better able, (through
the help of the almighty) to repel and beat back a more potent power.

Now as the raising of forts for the defense of Colonies, and neglect of
storing them with victual, and other things needful for preservation of the
same, shows the great indiscretion of some sort of people: So in like manner,
is their folly as great, who looking after present profit, neglect planting
provisions needful for the preservation of their lives: which we taking into
consideration, have given express charge, that first of all they take care to
plant provisions needful for sustentation, whereby they may be able in short
time to subsist of themselves, without help of the natives, which usually
furnish our English plantations with store of provisions for diet, at marvelous
low rates; yet notwithstanding we have sent thither some few cattle for
breed, befids other creaturs, which in those parts have not yet been heard of
by us to have been amongst them.

And if any man shall desire to be further satisfied concerning the proceed of
the said plantation, or shall make doubt of any thing, they may please to
repair to the place of meeting (hereafter mentioned) and there receive further
satisfaction.

Now as touching the manner of the adventure, it is as follows.

Every one that shall be admitted into the Colony, or company of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Barksheire for his plantation in Guiana, is to be
admitted one of these three ways, that is to say; either in person and purse,
or in purse, or in person only. The first are called personal adventurers,
the second, purse adventurers, and the latter are servants to the Collony.

Concerning the former, they are such as not only adventure their persons, but
also their purses; of which sort none may be admitted under fifty pounds at
least, put into the joint stock (being a single share) in consideration
whereof, every such adventurer is to have for his personal service (over and
above the profits of his stock of adventure) his transportation and diet free,
(both in the passage and country,) besides a certain stipend or yearly
allowance (as others) toward the maintenance of his apparel and bedding, and
also aleventh part of a twelfth, of all the profits that shall arise by the
industry and labors of the Collony beyond sea; and lastly, a proportion of
land over and besides his stock of adventure of fifty pounds, or more as
every one pleases to put in, whose respect in the Collony, is held fitting to
be measured according to the greatness of every man's adventure, worth and
quality.

As for those which are called purse adventurers, they are such which adventure
their moneys but not their persons, whose names, and sums adventured, are not
only registered, but also acknowledged by indenture under seal, by Authority
from the said Earl, (for their better security, and more assurance of
faithful dealing) to become joint adventurers with the said Earl and company,
for his plantation aforesaid, and that at every return, (during the term of
five years) after the first return from the plantation, every adventurer, his
heirs, executours, administratours or assigns, shall receive the profits of
his stock of adventure, and shall the first return from the plantation (after
five years shall be expired) receive out the just residue and remainder of his
stock of adventure, and profits thereof, or may if he please, continue the same
longer in the joint stock then the term aforesaid, for his further benefit:
and shall have moreover, set forth for his use a proportion of land
correspondent to his said stock of adventure: and to the end that every
adventurer, his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns may clearly
see, that they have the due proportion of the profits of their adventure, it is
covenanted in the said indenture, that the heirs, executors, administrators
and assigns of the^ shall upon every setting forth and return, see the full
sum of all the disbursements, and receipts from time to time, paid and
received, touching the proceed of the said joint stock, and plantation: which
in like manner, every adventurer, as well personal, servant, as other, has
the like indenture for their better satisfaction, and more assurance of
faithful dealing, as aforesaid.

Now concerning the latter, which are servants to the collony, they are such,
which adventuring only their persons, are bound by indenture to serve the
said Earl and company in the plantation five years, in consideration whereof,
the said servantes, (as well wives, maids, as men) are to have their
transportation thither free, as also their diet, lodging, apparel, and all
other materials needful, provided for them, at the charge of the joint stock,
for the term aforesaid (apparrelling themselves here for the first year) and
to receive moreover, (for their beter encouragement) a twelfth part of all the
profits that shall arise by their labors and industry, and the women a
fifteenth (as of sugars, nutmeggs, mace, cotton wools, Anottoes, honey, wax,
tobacco, mineralls, and all other such like commodities, as shall be gotten in
the plantation, in manner aforesaid) as also at the end and term of five
years, every man servant to have livery, and season of thirty, and some forty
acres of land, and women twenty, which said lands are to be set forth for
their use, by the governor, or governors, and council then being.

And to the end that every one may know what profits are due unto them by
reason of their service, it shall be free for them to make choice of any two or
three amongst themselves, which shall once in the year, or thereabout (upon
reasonable request made to the governor, or governors then being) see the
accounts, and what is due unto them upon the foot of the same, for their
better satisfaction and avoiding of suspicion.

And furthermore all such servants, as shall be artificers. As Suger-cane, and
Vine planters: Sugar bakers, Druggists, Dyers, Lapidaries, Minerallmen,
Refiners, Founders, Potashe makers, Barbersurgeons, Ingeners, Gunners,
Survayers, Ship-wrightes, Mill-wrightes, Carpenters, Ioyners, Coopers, Turners,
Wheelers, Sawyers, Oar makers, Blacke-smiths, Locke-smiths, Gunn-smiths,
Pike-makers, Armorers, Cutlers, Edge-toole-makers, Ropers, Sayle-makers,
Mariners, Net-makers, Fishermen, Bakers, Butchers, Brewers, Distillers of
hot-waters, felt-makers, Spinsters, Weavers, Taylers, Tanners, Curriers,
Tawyers of Furs, Fellmongers, Girdlers, Glovers, Shoomakers, Potters, Masons,
Bricke-makers, Bricke-layers, Basket-makers, Thatchers, and such like; are to
receive a ninth part of a twelfth (more then others, which are no artificers,
of all the profits that shall arise by their labors, and industry) as a
recompense of their several arts for their further encouragement.

And lastly, it shall and may be free for every servent appertaining to the
colony, to put into the joint stock such sums of money, as they shall be able
from under fifty pounds to five (as already some have done) the receipt of which
sums being acknowledged by indenture, shall be as sufficient a warrant for
them to receive the just profits of the same, correspondent to their several
stocks of adventure, as to any other before mentioned.

And now to conclude, seeing that works of this nature require some time for
preparation of shipping, and all other things needful for transportation, and
that the summer season is most convenient for the performance of the same: it
is therefore thought fitting to give notice to all such, as shall become willing
adventurours with the said Earl and company, to bring in their stocks of
adventure, (so soon as conveniently they may, and the sooner the better, for
the reasons aforesaid) to the place of meeting appointed to be kept (for the
receiving in of adventurers, and servants to the company) at the house of Mr.
Edwards the Kings Pikemaker in Phillip lane near Cripplegate: London: which
first meeting is appointed on thursday the first of March (at two of the clock
in the afternoon) and so to continue every thursday after, until such time as
the joint stock, number of adventurers, and servants shall be full.

Thus having briefly showed the hopefulnesse of this plantation, above others,
whereby such as are faithful (having ability) might become chiefly adventurers
herein, and that such as are outwardly poor (yet rich in faith) might likewise
adventure their prayers with them, Iam. 2. 5.
for the prosperous success of this new plantation, that it may be as a
Vineyard which the right hand of the Lord has planted, and may grow up before
him in the wilderness (being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which
are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God) amongst the Heathen, who
seeing our pure conversation may be won thereby to the knowledge and love of
God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ: which that they may so do, grant O
most gracious God, that as thou wast pleased to love us, when we were enemies
as these, so likewise be pleased to love these with us, that we and they may
both agree to worship thee in sincerity of heart, and unity of faith.

Which work of grace and power being thine,

O let thy work and power appear, Psalm. 90. 18. 19.

and on thy servants light,
And show unto thy children dear,
thy glory and thy might,
Lord let thy grace and glory stand,
on us thy servants thus,
Confirm the works we take in hand,
Lord prosper them to us.

Amen. I. D.



