A WORTHY TREAtise of the eyes; containing the knowledge and cure of one
hundredth and thirtene diseases, incident unto them:

First gathered and written in French, by Iacques Guillemeau, Chyrurgion to the
French King, and now translated into English, together with a profitable
treatise of the SCORBIE; and another of the CANCER by A. H.

Also next to the treatise of the eyes is adjoined a work touching the
preservation of the sight, set forth by VV. BAILEY. D. of Physic

Printed by Robert Walde grave for Thomas Man and William Brom.

A Treatise of the diseases of the eyes, which are in number, an hundred and
thirteen: whereunto they are subject.
The first section containing the description of the eye.
The Praeface.
FOrasmuch as amongst all the sense, that of the eyes is most dear and
precious unto us, The annatomy of the eye is necessary.
it is needful that the Chirurgian which takes in hand the preservation of
them, should have perfect and sound knowledge, both of their temperature, and
of their composition, that is to say, of their whole nature. For we are
careful, and consider of every part, to the end we may restore it to the
own proper nature. But this knowledge of every member can not be generallye
comprised, but only by a full knowledge of every part in the same. Therefore
whosoever will know the nature of the eyes, must first of all know and
understand by little pieces all the parts whereof they are made, and by the
same manner all their offices and functions, to what end they serve, and of
what substance or matter they are made. Gal 3. book of method. med.
For the curing of diseases does not only consiste in the knowledge of them,
but also in the skill rightlye to appoint and duelye to apply the remedies
which are proper to the diseased parts, all which in respect of their diverse
nature require diverse medicines. For this cause I have thought it very
expedient to declare the nature of the eye, before I lay open the particular
diseases of the same.

CHAP. 1. Of the profitte, use, and situation of the eyes.
The excellency of the eye
GOD has created and framed the eyes with so great cunning, and set in them
such maruailous excellencye and beauty, that iustlye they may be judged the
most perfect work which is in our body, whether we consider the commodity of
them, their use in moving, their place, their rampires and defenses, the matter
whereof they are made, the beautye which is in their form and shape, or the
diuersitye of their colors Concerning their commodi^ye and use, The use and
commodity of the eyes.
they are given unto man principally to see therevvith and to guide and direct
him to the knowledge of God, by the beholding of his fair and goodly works,
whereof we can neither have knowledge nor institution by any other sense,
but by the eyes: as also to serve in the place of guiders, and leaders to the
whole body. And by good right they have such rule and sovereignty amongst
all the senses, and all other parts of the body, that those which are
deprived of sight either by nature, or by any other mishap do think them
selves in great miserye. They could not have been placed more fitlye then in
the highest part of all the body, The place of the eye.
as it were in a most high tovver, seeing they must serve as spies and
vvatch-men to defend and guide all the other parts: whereunto nature has
made most cunninglye two hollovve places or troughes in the head named of
their roundnes orbitas.

CHAP. 2. Of the rampires and defenses of the eyes.
THE eyes are compassed and armed above and beneath, on the right hand, and on
the left, and on every part, not only for their protection and defense, but
also to make them appear more beautiful and fairer. And indeed the nose
serves as a rampire and bulwark unto them, purging them and the brain of
superfluous humors. The bones named Ethmoides and Iugale are no less
commodiouslie placed for their preservation and maintenance. And concerning
the eye lyddes wherewyth they are defended and covered: The use of the eye
liddes.
they are not only an ornamente, but also as gates and drawing bridges,
having their muscles as chains to lift them up, and let them down when it
shall be expedient, either in seeing, sleeping, or waking, and to stay whatsoever
might fall into them, and on their edges they have the hairs called Cilia,
which are as little pales straight and sure placed in a convenient distaunce
one from another, The hayres of the eye liddes
that they might mutuallie embrace each other, whereby the eye should be more
surely shut. Moreover, they serve to direct the beams in seeing, that they
may look more straightly, and in like manner to defend them against little
flies, against the dust, against little chips or shiuers, and such like
things, which entering into them might hurt them: and they do also beautify
them being set round about them as a little border. The brows and hayres on
them.
Not unlike to these are the brows with their hair, which besides the
ornament that the eyes receive from them, do serve principally to defend them
against rain and sweat of the head and forehead, which descending down,
might fall upon them: therefore were they fashioned like unto half a circle or
cross, or a little vault, or appenthouse jointly or equally agreeing at the
top of the nose, to the end that the sweat and the rain might have his course
and easy descent on both sides without flowing or dropping into them. And
least themselves should be any hinderance unto the eyes or enter into them,
The hayres on the eielids grow little or nothing.
God has created the^ and the hairs on the eye lids of such a nature, that
either they grow not at all, or else very little, but abide almost always in
the same estate which the hairs of the head and beard do not.

CHAP. 3. Of the coats and membranes or Partchmemtlike skins of the eyes.
The matter of the eyes most excellent.
COncerning the matter whereof the eyes are made, it far excels all other
parts, whether we have respect to the membranes or partchement-like skinnnes,
or to the humors, sinews, veins, arteries, muscles, or to the glandulous
substance, and kernels whereof they are made. Now because the humors are
thin and moist, The use of the membranes.
nature has given unto them membranes or partchment skins which might fitly
keep them in their appointed place to the perfourming of their office, which by
the searching of the Anatomistes have been noted to be five in number. The
first coat of the eye.
The first is noted in Latin adnata, alba, adhaerem, coniunctiua, in English
the white of the eye. This me^brane or partchment skin is very thin and
slender, serving to contain the eye in his circle or collet: whose beginning
is from Pericranium, that is from the skin which compasses the the skull,
and his end is in the circle named Iris or the rainbow: this which is called
Iris, what Iris is.
is a circle in the eye representing many diverse colors, the variety and
number whereof are not to be judged to proceed from the humors but from the
membrane called vuea. For the humors in all persons are always of like color,
Humors are like in all men.
but the circle named Iris is not so, because in some me^ it appears more
black, in others more white or blew, according to the diversity of the
colors which are in the membrane called vuea. It was named Iris, which in
English signifies a Rainbow, because in it do appear such change of colors
as are seen in the Rainbow. The second coat of the eye
The second membrane or partchment skin is named Cornea, that is, hornie,
which is more strong and hard, resembling horn that is made thin and bright,
even such whereof Lanternes are made, from the likeness whereof it seems to
have been named Cornea, that is horny. Now god has so created it, that it
should be a surer defense to all the humors of the eyes, and to help the light
which the eyes receive into them, through whose midst it shines and sends
out the light even as the candle which is in the Lantern, casts his light
toward the horn whereof the same is made. The horny membrane is not in every
place of the same nature
This hornie membrane is not in every part like unto it self: for the former
part of it, which we may and do behold: wherein the apple of the eye is
placed and enuironned with Iris, or the Rainbowe, that part I say, is bright,
and has a through light, that so colors might have the better passage and
entertainment, but the hinder part of it is dark and very thick and gross,
The error of Arabians.
which thing caused the Arabians to make it two membranes. We must mark and
observe that it is made of many little skins, and as it were thin barks,
which take their beginning from dura matter, which is divided into sundry
small skins. The use and office of this membrane, is to make the eye round by
compassing in all the humors of the same. The third coat.
The third membrane or partchment skin is vuea, which is in English like to
a grape, being so called, because it has in the outvvarde part the
resemblaunce of a black grape when it is pressed, whose beginning is from the
second skin, compassing the brain, called pia matter, which after it has
enclosed the sinewe of sight, named neruur opticus, spreads abroad under the
hornie membrane, ascending unto the circle Iris, and yet inwrappeth not the
whole eye. For when it is co^med thus far, then leaving the hornie membrane it
makes the hole for the apple of the eye, and bends backward to the circle
and large circumference of the cristaline humor, unto which it cleaves fast,
staying the waterishe humor that it should not cover and bury all the whole
crystaline humor. The use.
The outward part of it is black, to the end it might gather and heap up in
it self, the glittering beams, and that the diverse kinds of colors might be
thereby better united, received, and conjoined. For as it is the property of
white to scatter abroad, so is it the nature of black to gather together.
Diverse colors in the eyes.
And touching the innermost part of it, it is endued with many colors, that by
seeing many colors we might the better judge of them, and be able to
distinguishe one from another when they are offered to our sight. Otherwise, if
it had been died but with one color only, then all things which our eyes
do behold, would have seemed to have been of this only color: even as we
see a green or red glass makes all things appear green or red.
Furthermore, this change and diversity of colors refreshes the weried eyes
in such sort, that before we have viewed and looked on a thing diligently, we
stay our eyes for this purpose, that the spirits of sight may as it were,
retire themselves to this diversity of colors as to a place of recreation and
comfort. This membrane named vuea is soft, least it might hurt the crystaline
humor, wherefore v^ea is soft.
and found directly set to the said humor, that the light might have more free
entrance, and that by his darkness the passage of the colors might not be
stopped: it is nourished with the veins and arteries of the hornie membrane.
The apple of the eye.
Now that which is seen on the hole or center of the eye like unto a black
prick, is named the apple of the eye, by the which we see: and albeit it does
appear black, yet is neither it nor any thing under it black, but thorowlie
clear and bright. The 4 coat.
The fourth membrane is named in Greek amphyblestroides, which in English
signifies a casting net, which takes his beginning from the sinew of sight
called ner^us opticus, whose coat is stretched forth, and woven like to a
net of many veins and arteries, which it receives from the membrane vuea,
both for his nourishment and life, and for the glassie humor wherewith it is
clothed on the hinder part. The 5. coa^
The fifth is called Arachnoides, because it resembles the Spiders web, which
is in greek arachne, whose beginning as some think is from Pia matter, but as
others affirm, from the crystalin humor to wit, from the superfluous matter
and excrement of the same. His use is to enwrap the said humor in all the
former part. Ambrose Pare.
Ambrose Pare reports one most excellent commodity of the same: that it
serves to the cristaline humor, as a glass to behold, so that it is unto it
as Lead, whereby it falls out that the diverse sorts and kinds of visible
things which are sent from any part of the object, that is from the thing which
is offered to our sight, may be retained in the said humor by such a
conjunction, and linking of each to other, as we see in a looking glass that
is made of glass and Lead, which has force and power to stay the outward
face and image from passing through, but holds them as it were gathered on a
heap in the uppermost part of it.

CHAP. 4. OF the humors which are in the eyes
COncerning the humors whereof the eye is made, the first called aqueus, 1. The
waterish humor.
that is, the waterish humor, because it is not unlike water settled in the
foremost part of it, between the hornie membrane and that which is called Vuea,
and some part of the crystaline humor. It has the first place that it may
bridle and stay the raging colors which come upon it, The use of the humor
and that the hornie me^brane should not press down that humor which fills
almost that part of the eye. Celsus.
Celsus has observed that between the waterish and cristal humor, there is a
place as it were empty, being only filled with bright shining spirit,
wherein the Cataracts are engendered, as we will show in the proper place.
There is a further commodity of this humor to keep by his moisture the
crystal humor, 2. The christalin humor.
from too much dryness. The second humor is the Crystal, so termed, for the
resemblaunce it has unto Crystal in vvhitenesse and shining, to the end it
might more easily receive the diversity of colors, The place and use.
as we see only white does. His seat is in the midst betvveen the
vvaterish and glassie humor, not only ministering nourishment and moisture, and
so preserving from dryness, but also to help and preserve the same, and to
moderate and appease the rage of spirits and colors, The form of it.
which might hurt it. The fashion of it is round, which more easily
resists outvvarde injuries: for this figure is hardly hurt, because it has
no corners. It is true that the roundnesse of it is somevvhat pressed and
pinched before and behind, but so that thereby it remains more sure and
steadfast in the place, which was hard to be done in a round figure. Again
by this co^pression, the colors of such things as we see are retained without
any dispearsing on either side, which they must of necessitye have done, if
the figure and shape had been perfectly round. It receives norishment from the
glassie humor, How it is nourished.
by the help of the little veins and arteries which it imparteth unto it.
And it is necessarily required that the glassie humor should make white the
blood before it pass to the Cristall humor: for if it were nourished with
pure blood which were not white as it is necessarily required. It is given
to the eye as the first instrument of sight, and therefore it is in it as a
little clear Cristall glass. And albeit the other humors do so shine, that the
light may pass through the^ as it does thorovv water or glass:
notvvithstanding they have no light of themselves as has the Christallin
humor, This humor has light of itself.
which could not receive the light which it receives outwardly, if it
were not partaker of the same within, and so partaker that it agreed
naturally with the same. And to prove that it is the first instrument of
sight thus it is plain, that after it shall be taken out of the eye, It is the
first instrument of sight.
and laid upon any thing written or imprinted, it shows the letter
tvvofold greater then it is in it self: and from this observation it is
supposed that men learned the use of spectacles. Invention of spectacles.
The third is the glassie humor, 3. The glassie humor.
so called because in his substance and color it is like clear shining glass
when it is melted: it is hollovv in the midst to the end it might keep the
Cristallin humor whereunto it is in place of a covvshin, as the vvaterie humor
is placed in the former part of the eye: The place of it.
so is this in the hinder part for this purpose, that it may repress and keep
in subjection sometimes the furious spirits which come upon the Cristallin
humor. How it is nourished.
It is nourished by means of the veins and arteries which spring from the
membrane called of the form of a casting net, Amphiblestroides, The greatness
of it.
the greatness hereof is threefolde, exceeding both the other membranes.

CHAP. V. OF the sinevves, veins, and arteries, of the eyes.
THE eyes are indevved with two sorts) of nerves or sinevves whereof the
first are called optici in Greek, The number of the sinews and use.
and visuales in Latin, which is in English sinevves pertaining to sight,
whereof either eye has one proper unto it, which differ from other sinews,
because they are neither of so sound and firm substance but soft, They differ
from other senewes.
and within full of little holes (albeit this hollovvnesse is not so evident in
them that are dead) which are as small Conduit pypes and little gutters, to
carry unto the eyes the spirits of sight, which in manner of a little flame
do issue from the light, by whose help they receive from the brain both life
and power to see. But before they come to the eyes, after they are gone out
from the brains, they are gathered together like as the iron in a Mill, The
form of them.
and make but one only body and conduit, whereby the spirit of sight is
carried out wholy and conioyntlie, which appears in this, that one eye
being closed, the apple of the other does so enlarge it self, that by the
passage thereout of the whole spirit, Wherefore we see as well with one eye as
with both.
we may see as fully and certainly with one only as with both the eyes.
This union was necessary, least when one thing is offered to our sight, we
should have beheld two, to vvitte, with either eye one, so that in looking
upon one man, we might suppose to have seen two. After this conjunction and
linking together they are divided, and each of them passes thorovv the holes in
the head, and is planted into either eye severally, ending their course in the
coat or membrane called amphiblestroides. Sinews which move the eye.
The second sort of sinews are those which serve to move the eye, whereof
each eye has one, which beginning near unto the aforesaid sinevves, passing
thorovv the holes in the head, are engrafted into the muscles of the eye to
cause them to move. And if we respect the veins, there are two in either
eye, Veins in the eye.
one within which is derived from the vessels of the brain with the
membranes, and the other without, which is plainly stretched unto the
outvvard parts thereof, and specialy to the white of the eye, by means vvherof
are stirred up oftentimes inflammations and redness in the eyes. These help to
the nourishment of the eye, as the artery serves to bestovv life on the same.

CHAP. 6. Of the muscles of the eyes.
ANd seeing the eyes are given to me^ to guide the body, and to discover such
things as might outwardly hurt them, they could not conveniently have been
fastened in one place, and so look only and continually straight forward:
therefore God has given to either of them six muscles, The number and use of
the muscles.
partly to hold them sure and straight in their places, and partly to change
their motions, upward, downward, to the right hand, to the left, inward, and
round about. There are four of these muscles straight, taking their beginning
from the bottom of the circle, in which the eye is placed, The use of the
four muscles
called orbita, which compassing the sinewe of sight do end in the midst of
the eye, that is to say one in the uppermost part drawing it toward the nose,
an other in the left side drawing it upward, the third in the lowest part
drawing it downevvarde, the fourth in the right side dravving it toward the
ear, and when they have accomplished their action, they pluck it inward.
The other two turn the eye, yet not fully, but only on the side, that it
might look backward. For there is not any thing to be seen within, but
only without the head. The first is very long and slender, beginning at the
bottom of the circle named orbita, toward the great corner ending with a thin
tendon, which pearceth thorovv a little membrane or skin like unto a ring,
which is made fast near unto the moist kernel, from which in weping tears
proceed, called commonly glandula lachrymalis, by the which when it has
passed as it were by a powly, it makes a straight corner going forwards,
until it be imparted in the uppermost part of the eye. His office is to turn
it tovvarde the nose. The use of the two muscles.
The sixth begins in the lowest part of the circle orbita, being very
slender, it ascends tovvarde the little corner, and imbracyng the whole eye
with a small Tendon, ends near unto the insertion, or implanting of the
fifte. His office is to turn the eye toward the ear.

CHAP. 7. Of the kernels commonly called the glandules of the eyes.
THere are besides the fat in the eyes, three kernels called in Latin
Glandulae, one within the circle, The number and use of the kernels.
an other underneath it, and the third above, which all serve to keep the eye
moist and wet, as shall be expedient, because of their continual moving and
hot nature, vvithholding also the humors, least in two great abundance they
flow upon them and hurt them. From these kernels issue out tears, either by
straightness and compression when we are sorovvful, or by rubbing the eyes,
as those gallant Dames use to make themselves vveep, when they would obtain
their desire at the hands of their lovers, Many causes of tears.
either by enlarging as, those which shed tears for joy, either through
weakness, as they which weep at their death, because their strength is quite
decayed, either from the abundance of any humor as it falls out in the^
which are drunk: either by sharpness in the humor, which we may perceive
by smoke, or the pilling of an Onion. Concerning the third kernel, it is
placed in the great corner of the eye near to the nose upon the little bone in
the circle orbita, in which place there is an hole which enters into the eyes
on each side, to stay the course of the excreme^ts coming from the brain,
from running into the eyes, as we may see it come to pass in such as having
the said kernel changed or consumed do vveep continually, as shall be
declared in the proper place when we speak of the disease called Fistula
lacrymalis, that is a continual watering of the eyes.

CHAP. 8. Of the form and figure of the eyes.
ALL the forenamed parts jointly together, do make and frame the eyes in the
fashion of a Pyramid, that is, Pyramid.
of a sharp steeple, whose point turns inward to the bottom of the
circle called orbita. But if we consider every part thereof separated from
the muscles, we shall find them to be in form and shape round, which is
commonly called sphaericall, Sphaere.
which is the most excellent and perfectest shape of all others, both in
regard of the easy and svvifte motion of it to the right hand, or to the
left, vpvvard or dovvnvvard, and in respect it most easily resists all
outvvarde and foreign injuries.

The second section containing such diseases as befall the whole eye.
CHAP. I. Of the eye that falls out of the place, which disease is called in
greek ecpiesmos or proptosis, and in latin pro^ipsus, exitus, expres^io,
exertio. Also of the Ox eye, or great eye, which is in Greek named
exopthalmia, in latin o^uli prominentia, of the common sort goglo eye.
Definition.
EXopthalmia, is a standing out, a lifting up, and as it were a casting forth
of the eye from the hollownesse and circle wherein it is set and placed as a
precious stone within his collet. This affection or disposition is sometimes
meerelie natural, as we may see in such as have great eyes, and to them it
is not needful to apply any thing. But if the eye do thrust out more and
more, until it depart wholy out of the naturalll place then comes
ecpiesmos. Ecplesmos.
In some it stands so far forth that it cannot be covered with the
eielids, and is in such sort removed out of the circle, that it hangs
without the bone ethmoides.

This disease comes either of outvvarde causes, Outward causes of it.
as from falling from an high place, by a great stroke on the head, or about
the eye with a ball or stone: it may grow also from strangling or choking as
appears in them which use wrasteling, whereunto we refer the great
violent straininges which women suffer in hard travels, and the stretching
which they abide that have the disease called ^enesmus. It is incident to them
which are troubled with grievous vomiting, straightness of breath, and use
blowing in great horns. The inward causes amongst others are great
inflammation, Inward causes.
and flovvinges commonly called fluxes, which fall upon the eye, and then
this standing out of the eye, because of the inflammation, is called by Celsus
proprosis. It may be called also by an Aposteme, being in the substance of
the brain, Pr^ptosis.
or in the skins and coats which cover the same, and from too much fullness
and vvindines, which is heaped together and engendered in the eye, as it
comes to pass in the child which dies and putrifieth in the mothers
womb: and to these may be added the loosing, and overmuch mollifiyng of the
muscles and membranes, which move and turn the eye. Signs.
According to these causes there are diverse signs whereby the disease is
known. For when the eye falls out through the abundance of humors, it is
greater and grosser then if it fell out by strangling and choking, by straining
or blowing (if there be none other fullness of humors) albeit there is in
both great stretching out of it: but if it arise from the soft^esse and
tenderness of the muscles, and membranes, it is not so puffed up and svvelled,
yea scarceslie can any stretching be perceived.

Cure in general.
Touching the general cure, blood letting is most necessary, and in that place
specially where the pain and inflammation appears, and in like manner apply
the cupping glasses, with scarrifiyng upon the shoulders and neck and if it
seem needful because of the great abundance of humors, you may use purging,
and cut of somevvhat in the diet of the patient. Cure in particular.
But concerning particular remedies, as the causes are diverse, so must the
medicines be diverse. For if the stroke be round, or the eye in the thrusting
out do hang, then first of all, let him with his hand put it into the place
again, pressing it down gently with his hand, and when it is either
wholy or in part thus put again into the place, he must lay on it little
stupes made of fine linen clothes, or such like, vvetting the^ in Rose
water, Plant in water, and the white of an egg, or rather make your
medicine of an egg, oil of Roses and wine, as Aetius appoynteth, Aetius.
or some such like.

All these medicines must be applied vvarme, and changed oftentimes, least they
heat too much, and so cause suppuration, that is, bring it to ripe matter.
After these remedies, let the eye be easily kept into the place, with a soft
Roller, named of Hippocrates, Hippocrates roller.
opthalmos. After this order you shall do if the like accident proceed from
strangling, choking, strayning or vomiting, for the child which is dead or
putrified in the mothers womb when it is drawn forth: and if it seem
convenient, use things to mollify and softe^ the muscles and membranes which
may keep it in his place, then apply a fomentation with a binding decoction
made of the pil of the Pomegranate, Shepheardes purse, Aui^en. 3. book. fen. 3.
tract. 3. c. 36.
Endive, Poppie, thereby to make the part strong, and upon it lay a Cataplasm of
Bean flovver, Roses, Franke^sence, and the white of an Egg. And where the
eye seems full of vapors, and slimy humors without any inflammation, there must
you use a fomentation and fume to make the^ thin before you do undertake the
restoring of it into the place, to the end you may waste and dispearse such
humors as hinder the restoring of it. But if the eye fall out thorovv the
greatness of the inflammatio^, you must take that away and delay the pain. And
for this purpose Celsus commends this Collyrium, that is the eye salve of
Nilens. Celsus his collyrium. 6. ca. 6
R. Nardi Indici, juice of Poppy, ana.i. Gum, i. Saphro^, ij. leaus of fresh
roses, 4. and sees them in rain water, or tart wine. Now following this
pattern you may appoint this prescription. R. of Spicknard j. leaves of roses
fresh P, i, the Pomgranate pill ij. and sees them in rain water, iiij. then
dissolve therein of the juice of black Poppie j. Saffron s make your Collyrium.
In it you shall wet linen clothes, folded together, co^monlie called stupes
to be laid upon the eye. They may use also this Cataplasm. R. of the leaves of
Poppy and He^bane, ana, m, i. Sorrel leaves and Plantin, A cataplasme.
ana, m, i. s red Roses, m i. sees the^ in water with dried Rasins, put thereto
ii. of Mirh and the yoke of one egg, make it a cataplasme, and apply it to the
eye. In this case those medicines will be necessary, which we shall set down
in the disease called opthalmia, which is the inflammation of the eyes. But if
neither by all these remedies, nor rolling, the eye can be restored into the
place, but it still remains ready to fall out and seems to hang, then it
is to be supposed that the sight is lost, and that the eye is in danger to
become dry and withered (because nourishment is wanting, which should keep the
parts in their natural moisture) or else to com to suppuratio^. And it is
expedient there to open the part toward the temples of the head where
suppuration appears to the end that the filthy slimie matter being
avoided, the inflammation and grief may cease: notwithstanding let the coats
thereof remain safe, and put them again into the place to eschew hereby the
deformity which might be in the face, using afterward such medicines as may
assuage pain: such is the white of an egg beaten with Rose water and
plantaine. Celsus h^s counsel.
And in what place through dryness and vvithering the eye shall be dead,
least it cause further infection by putrefactio^, that which stands forth is
to be cut away. He which shall do this, shall bind thereof as much as is
corrupt, filthy, and hanging out, as near unto it as it is possible, then
must he cut away so much as hangs over the ligature or binding, applying in
the mean time such medicines as may appease pain and stay inflammation. Aetius.
Notwithstanding Aetius would have it stayed till it come unto suppuration.
Now which is the best way to cut it after it is bound, we will declare in
chapter where we shall speak of staphyloma.

CHAP. 2. Of the lean, withered, or diminished eye, which is called in Greek
atrophia opthalmou, in Latin imm^^tio profunditas macies oculi: Also of the
little eyes, co^monlie called pinking eyes, and in Greek Micropthalmos, in
latin paruus oculus.
Atrophia opthalmou is an affection of the eye when all the parts of it are
leaner and slenderer than they ought, Definition.
and the whole eye smaller and lesser then naturally it should be, whereupon
there appears an hollovv deepenesse, it being sunck down within the circle,
and the sight being darkened and dimmed in such sort, that the things which
they look upon do see me much greater then they are. This affection
differs from Pthisis, Difference of Atropbia and Pth^sis.
that is the consumption of the eye, because therein is only a diminishing of
the apple of the eye, and not of the whole eye. The inward causes are the
flowing unto it of sharp and thin humors, continual tears, sharp fevers,
sadness, Causes.
old ache, great ache in the head: the outward, a greatstroke, troublesome
cares watching. Micropthalmos.
Micropthalmos, that is the pincking eye is, when any one has from his birth
so little eyes, that they seem scarcely opened, albeit they are not suncke
down within the circle more than they should be, whereunto it is not
expedient to apply any medicine, since nature cannot be amended. But to speak
of curing the lean eye in regard of general remedies, Cur^.
exercise is here first of all necessary, then rubbing of the head and face,
and washing of it, and closing the eyelids to rub the eye gently with the
fingers. The Patient must use to eat good nowrishing meat, and drink wine if
it be pleasant. He must not meddle with his household affairs, but command
them to be kept from his ears. Concerning particular remedies, such are most
commended which be gentle, and assuage pain, as fomentations of vvarme water
with a spounge, to use common milk warm, or woman's milk, Contrariety of
opinions P. Aeginet^.
dropping it into the eye, to avoid all sharp biting medicines which may
provoke weeping. Notwithstanding P. Aeginet^ used this R (...) i crocomag.
iiij. croci ij. erug. i. sta^ping them in water, and so framing them fitly
for his purpose. But it has been well observed, that he did not this to
procure tears, neither to dry as such remedies would do, but rather as it
were by tinckling and pricking of it a little, to bring and draw thither the
humors and spirits and more plentiful nowrishment: which thing is also
usually done in other lean parts when they rub, and apply sharp medicines
unto them, pricking also and beating them, to the end they may draw to them
more store of spirits and blood. Nevertheless Celsus rejects the aforesaid
medicines which cause tears.

CHAP. 3. Of the bursten and broken eye, called in greek rexis, in latin
ruptio.
RExis is taken generally for the separation or dissolution of any fleshly
part without a wound: Diverse uses of this word rexis.
notvvithstanding Galen places it amongst the particular affections of the
eyes, Definition by Galen.
affirming it to be a cut or wound made by a stroke or any other cause in
the bottom of the eye, which suddenly dividing asunder the me^branes or
partch mentlike skin, Definition by G^l^a.
the humors which govern the sense of sight are poured out, and scattered
abroad The causes are round strokes upon the eye, a fall from an high place, a
violent motion, Causes.
stretchynge, and enlarging of the membranes, which being broken are not able
to contain the humors in their natural place, whereupon it comes to pass
that all the eye bursteth, Cure.
and the humors flow out. It cannot be cured considering the humors are
issued forth, and the membranes remain d^ye, albeit that some will constantly
aduouch the aforesaid humors may be engendered again. For proose of their
speech they bring the trial which has been made on a pigeons eyes, The
humors lost may be restored in a Pigeon.
whereof they crushed forth the humors, which nevertheless in fifteen days
they have found recovered and restored, and the eyes as plain and sound as
before, which I am able to testify that I have seen, but it is not not has
not been proved true in any man. A strange history in Galen.
In deed Galen reports a history not ordinary, but rather incredible of a
young boy which being pricked directly upon the apple of the eye, the waterish
humor issued forth suddenly, by means whereof the apple of the eye remained
much less, and the horny membrane stood forth with vvrincles notvvithstanding
all this he was healed having perfect sight afterward the humor being again
engendered which had before flowed out and perished. VVaterish humor is an
excrement.
Which thing might befall to the waterish humor because it is nothing else but
an excrement of the nourishment which is in the Christalline and not any part
of seed as the glassye and aforenamed Chrystalline are, whose decay in this
respect is desperate and unrecoverable. For my part I have seen much of the
waterish humor issue forth when the needle has been plucked forth, which was
thrust in to take away the cataracts, VVaterish humor may be restored.
and afterward in short time the eye has been as full great and fair as at
the beginning: which yet could not be if all the humors were lost. Therefore
the Chirurgian shall be contented with asswaging the pain, Cure.
which he may accomplish partly by general remedies as bloudletting, cuppings
on the shoulders to prevent inflammation and flowing of humors, partly by
particular remedies, and before all othe^s with this eye salve of most
singular virtue and easy to be provided, An excellent easy medic^n.
which is the blood of a pigeon hot, wherein dipping a linen cloth lay it on
the eye, and the rest of the cure is so to be ordered as the accidents shall
require.

CHAP. 4. Of the eye which is troubled or confusedly mixed, and set out of
order, called in greek Synchysis, and in Latin Inflatio ^culi.
Definition.
Synchisis is a breaking or cutting of the eye coming by a stroke or of it
self, in the innermost membranes with a dispearsing or ouerturning of the
humors, and alteration of the apple of the eye, which in the beginning
stands forth largely, but in the end is made less then nature affoordeth
it: the humors of the eye in like manner possess not their natural place,
neither keep their appointed order, but are carried hither and thither, and
mingled together (as we say) hand over head. This malady arises after a great
stroke or inflammation of the membrane named Vuea, Causes.
because some part in it is broken. Those are more easily cured, who are most
easily cured.
which have the apple of the eye only made brother retaining still his color
and figure, then such as have it rent, and as it were cut asunder. The cure
must be in this order. Cure.
If the intermedling and confusion of humors came by a stroke, first let the
corrupt blood be quickly taken away, then fill up the eye with blood of a
Turtle or Pigion very hot, and upon it lay a Stupe (as it is commonly named)
of linen cloth, or wool vvetted in the white of an egg and oil of Roses
beaten together, continuing the use of it by the space of two days or more
if need require it. Or the third day yo^ must use a fomentation dropping into
the eye vvarme milk, or vvomans milk, and afterward apply this medicine
made of the yokes of eggs hard roasted, mingled with honey and a little saffron
to cleanse the part. In the rest of your cure, you shall have in readiness
proper medicines for such accidents as may happen.

CHAP. 5. Of the eye which is svvolne, and puffed up, called in greek oedema
^pthalmou, in latin inflatio oculi.
The diverse significations of Oedema.
OEdema is taken in ancient vvriters for all kinds of tumors or swelling,
but here we use it particularly according to Galen for a blowing or puffing
up of the eye, Definition by Galen.
when it is lifted up on high, loses his natural color, and is hardly
moved, the white part being higher lifted up then the black: Aetius.
or as Aetius vvoulde have it, when the eye (without any manifest cause)
becomes puffed up, svvolne, and discolored, through the flowing unto it
of sharp thin humors which stir up itching. Old age subject most to oedema^.
Others say, that swelling of the eye which is termed oedema is taken only
for the tumor which outvvardlie arises in eye lid. This affect happens
many times to men, the itching begins at the corner of the eye, not unlike
to that when one is stinged with a Be or Gnatte. Causes.
This disease is more incident and common in Summer then other times of the
years. The causes are the flowing to it of sharp waterish humors, or vapors
rising from the intrals and ascending on high, which afterward fall down upon
the eye, and chiefelie upon the white of it called coniuncti^a, which being
not so solid and hard as the hornie membrane does sooner suck in, and as it
were drink up the aforesaid vapors and humors, which causes it to be
raised above the hornie membrane. In curing of this malady, we must look to
that cause which went before, Cure.
that it may be turned away by frications or rubbinges on the neck back, and
arms, by cupping upon the shoulders by good diet, by avoiding all meats which
send up vapors, and principally strong wines. In particular you must use
fomentations, which do partly resolve, partlye comfort, applying them with a
Sponge as Aetius ordains. Atius medicine.
Take of flowers of Camomill and Melilot an. p. i. red Roses, p. ij Sage and
Betonie ana p. i. of Fene-greeke, Anise, Fenell, Line seeds ana iij. seethe
them in equal portions of tart wine and Spring water, apply it with a sponge.
In like sort you may lay to the eye this eye salve. Take of the mucilage of
Linseede and Fene-greeke drawn with water of Eyebright.. ii. Fenell water,
and rose water an. i. wherein disolue of mirh and Aloes an s. tutia prepared
i. and with this make your salve. The coniunctiua or white of the eye is
sometimes so so svvolne, A necessary caution.
that it goes forth of the eielidds, and is read and shining, which some
being ignorant of, would have cut it. Therefore you must take heed thereunto,
since by little and little the aforenamed remedies will bring it to the own
proper nature, as I have seen it accomplished contrary to some men's opinions.
But if this thing be not speedily achieved, then the Chirurgian must put it
gently and easily into the place with the point of a round prop, which some
have been constrained to do, the white of the eye standing and stretching
beyond the eie-lids.

CHAP. 6. Of the hot burning eye, or Carbuncle in the eye. called in greek
anthracosis opthalmou, in latin, carbunculatio
Definition.
ANthracosis in a general sense, is a hard, crustie, fretting ulcer with
flowing of humors, and swelling arising in any part of the body, but
specially in the eyes about the beginning of pestilent Fevers hurting not
only the eye, Causes.
but also the eie-lids. It happens sometimes through great infla^matio^, or
rather by melancholic blood boiling and remaining in that place. Signs set
down by Aetius.
Aetius gives these signs to know it, that there arises a little tumor like
unto a Barley corn, red in the beginning in such manner that the sick party
thinks his eye does burn, albeit the tumor is not much swollen: for because
of the great heat it opens it self and bursteth out, and that which runs
out of it, albeit it be sharp and biting, causes the top of the carbuncle to
be dry and crusty. Infection of parts adjoining.
It infecteth the parts adioining, whereupon ensues great infla^mation in the
eye, in the next parts and in the kernels commonly called glandules, which are
under the ear. Sometime it makes great rents and vlcerations in the eye, yea
the hairs fall away, and the eye lids are bare. In the general cure both of
that which is in the eye, Cure.
and the other on the eye lids, it is expedient that the patient eat little
meat, be let blood, and use glisters: For applying medicines to the place
affected, if the Carbuncle be on the eye lids, Aetins.
Ae^i^ commends a medicine made of Coriander, and Nightshade beaten together
with dried Rasins, and laid to the Carbuncle. If the Carbuncle grow brother,
apply a fomentation to the eye of Rose and Vine leaves. Oleum vitrioli.
It shall not be amiss if you stay the said Carbuncle with laying on it oleum
vitrioli in little quantity and softly touching it. But if the Carbuncle begin
in the eye, the most excellent course is to wash and cleanse the eye with
milk, and to sees together in water, honnie and Bean Flower, or white
flower, which you apply like a Cataplasme, Aegineta.
and sometime bruise to powder the root of the Flower-deluce and lay one it.
Against the great inflammation the mucilage of fleaseed quinceseede made with
Rose water, is wunderfullie commended, and in place of Rose water, you may take
Plantain water or milk. If the disease creep farther, Lentilles sodden with
honey are singular, and where it shall continue Olive leaves or the pill of the
Pomegranate sodden in wine then dried, and afterward mingled together with
honey are most excellent. Now when you see that the malady goes not
forward, and that his crustes are ready to fall away they shall use this
medicine made of the yoke of an egg hard roasted and beaten with a little honey
and Saffron using it till it be fully healed, or rather oil of eggs mingled
with a little Venise Turpentine, and a little oil of Saint John's VVort, or else
some common cleansing medicine.

CHAP. 7. Of the moist, running, or weeping eye, called in greek Reuma
opthalmou, in latin Fluxus oculi, delachrymatio.
RHeusma opthalmou is a flowing of thin humors, Definition.
which in such sort against the will, fall down into the eyes, that there
cannot be any means found to stay them. It comes to some by nature, as we
have seen some from their childhood never having dry, but always moist eyes,
with a thin pearsing humor, which alvvayes was painful to them. Causes.
And it will soon stir up an inflammation, and blearednes, in many
tormenting them all their life without admitting any cure. Those also which
have great and gross heads are subject to it, and scarcely does any medicine
at any time profit them. It may also arise from some outward causes, as from a
Fever, from some medicine, or sharp thing which has been put into the eye,
or fa^ne into it, from great weakness either in the faculty which retains,
or that which digesteth the nourishment in the eye, by the unskillfulness of
the Chirurgian, which in curing the disease of the eye called vngn^a did cut
away more of the flesh in the corner of the eye then he ought, whereof we
will speak in the proper place for a full discharge of all the head touching
this part. Concerning the cure, the Chirurgian must have recourse to former
medicines set down in the beginning, which are most easy and gentle, which are
either general or special. The general are, Cure
his manner of diet, which must be of such things as have thick juice, since
the humor is thin and sharp, his purgations, as blood letting, frictions
downward, applying the ruptories o^ seton, and this to be done with the advice
of a learned Physician. For the particular cure, Caution in curing.
if this affect was caused through the use of any sharp medicine or by any
other thing falling and fastened in the eye, let him abstain from the aforesaid
remedies until he has taken out that which so vexes and molesteth the eye,
otherwise the patient shall never be at rest and quietness, which being done,
he may use the medicines there set down. If it proceed from a continual
course of humors, there shall be particularly applied a stringent and binding
plasters upon the head, having shaued off the hair, and upon the forehead
and temples, as R. emplast. contra r^pt. and unguent. de bol. ana. i. s melt
them together and make a plaster for your use, or R. unguent. desiccat. ^ub.
and comitiss^an ii. Mastich. s mingle them for your use. And upon the eye you
shall lay plasters which are comfortable and somewhat binding, that thereby
the eye may be strengthened and armed against the flowing of humors. Aetius
Aetius does much commend this eye salve, which procures no great pain nor
heat. R. aeris vst. iii. cadmi^e iii. opii, mirth an^..iiii. acaci^e, gum arab.
ana. vii. s. put them into water: of these or the like you may make a salve,
and when you will use it, put it into the eye, and let him shut his eye a
little while and so keep it in, whereby it cannot bring much pain as the
Author himself affirms. And when all the former remedies will not prevail
the most singular mean to cure is the cutting of the veins and arteries of
the head and temples which dtavveth out the humor if it flow inward,
Incisio^ in the veins and arteries.
and cutteth off the course of it, if it be outvvard. For the better perfecting
of this work, let the diseased party be set on a bed, or in a chair, or
bind his neck with a Tovvel put about it, vvrithing both ends together that
being strait it may press his neck: let him hold in his breath a short time
that thereby the veins and arteries may swell and appear more plainly: For
by this means the blood and spirits will rise up, The compression of the
neck causes the blood to rise up.
and fill the veins and arteries. Then with your Launcet open whether you
will, making no greater an issue then you do in common blood-letting letting
run forth s;o much blood as shall be expedient, which, that it may come forth
more speedily, make straighter sometimes your Tovvell. when he has bled
sufficiently, the Rovvler or Tovvell shall be taken from his neck, and put on
the orifice or mouth of the vein or artery a little burnt linen cloth, How
the blood may be stayed.
or scraped lint, lay upon that a plaster agglutinatiue that is, which has
virtue to knit and join together, upon that lay a thick enfolded linen
cloth to the end that the band or rovvler may with greater ease keep fast
the vein or artery. Some use only a little dry linen cloth vvrapped
together, as they do in the blood-letting of the arm. The opinion of the old
Physicians.
The old Physicians have left in their vvritings that we must sear the
artery least the blood will not be stayed, but I have always stayed it by
this binding without causing more pa^ne to the sick party. Oftentimes the
only opening of a vein or artery, and the avoiding of blood in them
suffices not to heal and help this malady, because they are filled again
with nevve matter which flovveth as before; therefore the counsel of the
ancient vvriters is to cut the vessel asunder, that by this means you may
break the course and stop the way to the humors, Arteries cut asunder.
and then it shall not be unfit or unprofitable to sear it, or rather to
bind it above, and below as it is used to be done in the veins called
varices, which shall be a debarring of the whole passage of the humors. But
when this is done, I counsel you to apply your searing iron to the arm of
the sick party thereby to make an issue to this matter, D^uerting of the humor.
which might Perhaps fall upon some other part, namely the Lunges.

CHA.P. 8. Of certain diseases which the old writers have assigned to the
whole eye: and first of such as see best downward, or things that be near
them, commonly called po^e-blinde, in greek m^opiasis, miopia, citossis, in
latin, lus^ositas, nus^iositas, propiaqua visio.
Definition.
M^opiasis, myopia, catopsis is when one cannot see one thing, but such as be
very near and even offered unto his eyes with great difficulty pearcing
those which are far of. They which have this default are constrained when
they read to look very nigh, imagining oftentimes that they behold little
bodies like to flies, or motes which fly in the air, as we see it happens
to those which have looked very long on their books, or have vievved any
thing diligently. Causes.
This affection although it be in some from their birth, yet it proceeds also
from the small quantity of the spirits of sight, and weakness of the same.
Notvvithstanding Aristotle imputes the cause to the great quantity, In his
book de generat, animalium.
by marking little children to be most subject unto it, by reason of the
moisture of their brains: in like manner those which have black eyes are more
moist, as on the contrary the like is seen in old men, because of their
dryness: they which have blevv or gray, or ^kie colored eyes are subject to
the disease glaucoma, which has the same cause from dryness that the
membrane v^uea has from moisture, if we may so compare one with an other.
Wherefore some see nearer, some farther.
The reason wherefore some see better near then far off, as says the same
Philosopher, proceeds from the situation of the eye. For such as have them
standing forth cannot see far, and contrariwise they which have them sunk
into their circles do more easily discern things present before them,
because the spirit cannot be so easily scattered, when the eye is settled
deeply as when it stands out. Concerning the cure, albeit the old
Physicians appoint none, accounting it incurable si^h it arises from the want
of spirits, Care.
or is naturally incident unto men, yet since it proceeds from the fullness
of moisture, mine advise is, to use cuppings upon the shoulders and neck, to
purge him with such medicines as dravv from the brain, to dry the head with
bags and coyfs made to this purpose, to apply a seton, or rather a ruptorie,
either upon the hinder part of the head, or upon the arms. And touching other
medicines which are to be applied to the place affected you shall have recourse
to the chapter follovving, entreating of the dimnesse or diminishing of the
sight, and appointing such remedies as vvil strengthen and repair the decayed
and dispearsed spirits, which are in very small quantity.

CHAP. 9. Of the continual dimnes, diminishing, or hinderance of the sight,
called in greek amblyopia, in latin, hebetudo, or caligatio.
AMbliopia is a continual dimnesse and hinderance of the sight, Definition
without any appearance of any thing in the eye: notvvithstanding the sight is
darkened, and yet no hurt to be perceived in the membranes, neither appears
the apple of the eye made lesser or greater, Causes.
or having any other disorder. This disease happens either when the spirits
are gross, or the membranes are thick and straight or the humors of the eye
are not only gross, but also slimie. It proceeds from some long tedious
disease, and trouble, because the spirits are waste: it may come also by age.
For old folk besides the thicknes of the me^branes, and humors, have the
spirits of sight much weakened, and in fine diminished and lost. Cure.
In the general cure of dimnesse which is caused through the grossness of
membranes, spirits and humors, you must deal as it is used in the beginning
of the cataracts: and touching particular medicines to be applied in any kind
of the perishing of the sight this colliriu^ is excedingly co^me^ded to have
restored (as one vvriteth) sight to him that had been blind by the space of
nine years. R. succi api^, foenic. verbase. chamedr. pimpinell. gariophil,
Holerius.
saeluiae, chelidon. rutae. centinod. m^rsus gall. farinae, volat. ana. i.
piperis crasso modo triti, nucis moschaiae, ligni aloes ana. iii. let them all
steep in the urine of a sound child, and a pint of malmsey one hour, then
sees them a little while afterward strain them forth, and put the water
into a glass stopping it very close: put some of this water into his eyes
when he goes to sleep. Strawberie wine.
In like manner put Strauberies into wine which is svveete, and boil them
together a short time, and of this take every morning, and of the same make a
drink which you may use with your meat. Others esteem this water as
myraculous. They bury vipers in doung, An excelent water.
whereof are engendered worms which they distill, and put this water into
the eyes. The distilling of white honnie and rose flovvers is most singlar.
Leonellus Fauen^.
Leonellus Fauentinus says he healed such a disease by dropping into the eye
the juice of the Selandine and that he tried this remedy, to take of water
which runs through a vein of white earth, after you cut the earth, a
pint, and put into it the quantity of a nut of amber beaten to gross powder,
let it stand eight days in the Sun, afterward put thereof into the eye.
Beside the ascrenamed causes. Auicen says, 3. book fen. 3. tract, 4. chap. 24.
the decaying of sight may be procured many times by great light or whiteness,
as when one does a long time look upon the Sun, or upon snow, and specially
if one come forth of a dark place: so that he cannot see but such things as
are near, and those hardly: even as they which look upon any color suppose
they behold some white thing above them: Cornarius.
Galen.
he names this affection altum^r that is in latin albedo vincens in english
too much whiteness Galen makes mention hereof in his tenth book of the use
of the parts. This thing befalls them which are shut up in a dark place,
as in dungeons of prisons, and come out suddenly into the light. And some are
of this opinion that the christalline humor is so vveake, and so hurt that it
is turned vpside down, as if it were out of the place by the meeting and
encou^tring with this great light naming this disease in greek acatastatia
christalloidous. Sauanarola.
In curing of it the patie^t must usually behold green and blewe colors, and
be kept in a place neither ouerlight, nor ouerdarke Auicen praises fumes made
with wine poured upon a brick, Cure.
or rather a decoction made with herbs having virtue to dissolve, as
Hissope, Melilot, Camomill, Sage, Rosemary, and such like: whereof may be made
also little fomentations: as R. of the leaves of Sage Maiora^, Hislope, ana. m.
s Betony, eiebright an m.i. of leaves of Camomill, Melilot, Roses, ana. p. s of
Any seeds and fenill ana. s sees them in wine and water equally to be used
with a sponge, and make this your collirium, R. of water of Selandine and
eiebright ana. i. water of Hissope s in which dissolve Myrrh s Benjamin,
Stirac. Calamitae, ana. ij. when you have used your fomentation apply this
eiesalue to the part.

CHAP. 10. Of those which see not in the night which disease may be called
night bl^ndnesse, in greek it is called Nictalspi^sis, in latin Nocturna or
Vespertina Caecitudo.
NIctalopiasis is when one sees nothing in the night albeit he see most
clearly in the day, Definition.
and in such sort, that as the day passes, so his sight fails. This affect
grows from the weakness of the head, and grossenes of the spirits of sight,
Causes.
as also from the humors and coats of the eyes and principally of that cornea
or horny coat, which are broken and stuffed with a thick slimye juice: or as
Actuarius affirms, 3 book chap. 7. method.
it comes from the impuritie and plenty of humors which being enlightened by
the brightness of the clear air is able to minister sight but being obscured
and made gross by the shadow and darkness of the night, it troubles and
overthrows the whole action of sight. To this place may be referred that
disorderly affection which is called by some acies solaris, or solana visi^,
Acies solaris, or solana visi^
that is, when one cannot discern any thing but by the Sun beams. In
curing hereof these general things are to be observed, Cure.
bloudletting in the arm, and corner of the eyes and purging according to the
Physicians advise: this done move neesing by putting things fit for that
purpose into the nose. Some commend the use of selandine and eyebright water
in drink. Concerning local medicines Auicen avouches this experiment, Auicen.
to take the thin moisture coming of a goats liver laid on burning coals,
putting thereto a little salt and long pepper. Aetius.
Aetius extolleth the liver of a Bucke goat roasted with salt and eaten and to
put the thin humor issuing from it into the eyes, or rather whilst it is in
rosting to receive into the eyes the sum arising from it. The gall of a
Vulture or any other ravenous bird mingled with a little juice of a pigge, and
honey is much praised, as also the juice of Chickweede, or Fenell dropped into
the eye. Also to receive the vapor of Rue, Fenell, Eyebright, Selandine, Ligni
Aloes, Saffron, sodden together in wine or water, or else to still them with
honny, and put the water into the eyes.

CHAP. 11. Of day-blindnesse, or catts eyes, called in greek hemeralopia, in
latin nocturna visio.
HEmeralopia is, Definition
when one sees better in the night, then in the day but if the moon shine he
cannot see: Causes.
which thing proceeds either from the thinness and small quantity of the
spirits of sight, which are dispersed by the light of the Son, as on the
contrary, they are made strong, thick and gathered on an heap by darkness:
or rather because the membranes of the eye are over slender whereby the
spirits can not be retained, but breath forth, and perce thorough them. We
may bring to this place the disease named of the latins tenebrosa affectio,
which is, Tenebrosa affectio.
when one with great pain beholds the light though it be but very little.
Concerning the cure, there must be regard had that the sick party use good
diet, Cure.
which may procure store of blood, and thick gross spirits, if want and
thinness did first bring this disease: but if it proceeded from the weakness
and sle^dernesse of the membranes, let the eye be comforted and strengthened
with medicines agreeable thereunto, and which may moreover make thick the
spirits, as R. gallar. balaust, ana i. folioru^ plantag. betonicae, an. m. s
sees them in.iii. of sharp wine in which dissolve acatiae gum. trag. aloes,
an s make your collicium an other R. rosar. rub. fruct. oxiacan. tapsi barbati
centinod. ana. p. s sees them in water until it come to iiij. put into it
sarcocol dissolved in a woman's milk which gives suck s iutiae praeparat
aecerussae lotae, antimonij loti, ana. i. or a collirium made of half a dram
of olei vitrioli, dissolved in plantaine and rose water is singular.

The third section containing the diseases of the muscles of the eyes which are
by some referrd to the whole eye.
CHAP. I. Of the squint eye, called in greek Strabismus, in latin Strabositas
or oculi distortio.
Definition.
STrabismu^ is a wresting or writhing, which draws the sight unequally: or a
conuulsion and pulling of the muscles which move the eye: or when some muscles
of the eye are loosed, and the contrary to them shortened, in such sort, that
it is drawn either vpvvard, or downevvard, Observation
to the right side, or to the left. For sometime in the same part are contrary
muscles, equal in number and greatness, and strength, so that if some of them
be subject to a palsy, a conuulsion falls upon the contrary: To whom this
disease incident.
Old folk many times by the dravving back of the muscles being very dry or
moist are subject to this disease, or the like affection, as they also which
have been vexed with any great disease of the head as the falling sickness,
giddiness or any other: Causes.
I have seen it proceed in some of having too much company with women, the
excess whereof does maruelously scatter the spirits. Children most subject
to it.
But commonly it is a malladie most incident unto children presently after
their birth, through the negligence of the Nurce, who sets the cradle in
which the infant lies on the side of the light, and not directly contrary unto
it which makes the children looking to the light to turn the eye on the side
to it, and thus by continuance they are accustomed to turn their eye awry when
the muscles have attained to a habit, because one sort of them does so obey
and follovv the contrary which dravv them that these do grow longer the others
shorter. Cure.
For the cure if the disease come of fulness, softness, palseye, in some
muscles, it shall be necessary to purge the brain and to dry it, wherein the
fore-running cause of this disease was contained, to which purpose also let him
chewe things in his mouth, and put other into his nose, use good diet, and
strengthen the part as much as may be with drying and resolving fomentations.
But if on the contrary it is engendered by too much want, and emptiness of
the blood and spirits, the sick party must b^ nourished very well, and use
to drink asses milk. The particular remedies must be fomentations which are
moist, and the blood of a Turtle or Pigeon dropped into the eye. Paulus A
Eg^neta appointed a mask for such as had this disease, 3. book.
to the end they might look always straight, which is most fit for young
children. The portrayture with the description is in Ambrose Pare his book,
Ambrose Pare his pains commended
which without knowledge of the same set down in the old writers has very
wittely and cunningly invented the said mask and instrument as he has done
many other, thorough the long observation which he had in viewing many
diseases. Moreover the Nurse shall draw her hand over the childs eyes
oftentimes to repair the sight. Auicen. Aeginet. Actua^ Oribas.
And following the counsel of the old writers there shall be some read thing
hanged and fastened upon the temples, or on the contrary ear to the wresting
of the eye, that the child may to that turn the eye, and so amend the
deformed sight. In like manner the cradle shall be set with the contrary side to
the light.

CHAP. 2 Of the shaking eye, or horse eye, called in greek hippos, in latin
equus.
HIppos is an affection of the eye coming at the first framing, Definition.
and from the birth of the party wherein the eyes cannot abide in one place,
but are always shaking, and continually trembling in such manner, that you may
behold the eye going hither and thither without any rest. This affection (as
Galen says) comes by the defaulte of the muscle which makes fast the eye,
Definition. med.
compassing the lowest part of the sinewe of sight yet the latter anatomistes
have not found this muscle in men, Later anatomists dissent from Galen.
neither have I observed it, albeit in Oxen it is most evident. Therefore I
judge the cause of this trembling to come not from the weakness of one, but
rather of all the muscles. The same Author compares it to the natural
grinding or gnashing of the teeth, In prognost. Hip. com 2. sect 21.
which is in us from our Nativity, whereupon Gor^eus accompteth it not a
disease since no Physician has set down any cure for it. Gorraeus.


Nevertheless in laboring to redress this fault I would use the instrument
called a Mask as we have spoken in the former Chapter, to the end, that he
which were infected therevvith might not see but by that little hole, whereby
the eye should be compelled to stay in that place in looking which might
cause it to remain afterward steadfast in the same place Some think it best
to bind or roll the eyes for a short time, and again to vnroll them, which
may be profitable in this affection as also in the squint eye.

CHAP. 3. Of the Senseless eye, or Palsy in the eye, called in greek
paeralysis op^halmou, in latin resolutio oculi.
PAralysis is taken for want of sense and motion in the whole body, Definition.
or in any part, as we see in the eye, when it can neither be moved to
the right side not to the left, up, nor down because the muscles are
benumbed, and if any sharp remedy be laid to, it cannot feel the same.
Causes.
The causes are the flowing of the humors, and especially of fleume, which
fall upon the second pair of sinews coming from the brain, which spread
forth their branches into the muscles of the eye. Prediction.
If the whole eye be loosed it is hardly cured especially in old folk: if it
be natural it is utterly incurable. And where there is hope, you must do as
follows. The sick must eschew strong wines, vaporous and gross meats,
using such only, which are easily digested, and make the humors thin: if
the party be of a good complexion he shall be let blood in the arm, the^
being prepared with clisters, he shall be purged, afterward let him use to chewe
certain proper remedies in his mouth, and have others put into his nose to
draw down the matter, and use vomit fasting, yet without great constraint,
and also having bound the eye before least it might start forth thorough the
vehement vomiting. There shall be applied unto it cupping glasses on the
shoulders, with scarification, and set bloodsuckers on the temples. His head
being shaven make an embrocation of oxirodinum, wherein a little castoreum is
melted. In the particular cure the eye shall be bathed with such herbs as are
good for the sinews, having virtue partly to comfort, A tried remedy.
partly to make thin, and let a plaster or cataplasme be laid upon it made
of the same herbs putting to it a little castoreum carefully providing that
it go not into the eye. Then the water of Fenell, Anyfeedes, Cynamon,
Eyebright, mingled together and dropped into the eye in small quantitye are
singular: so is the blood of a Turtle or Pigeon.

The fourth section containing the diseases which are incident to the ey^liddes.
CHAP. 1. Of the blowing or puffing up of the eyelidde called in greek
emphisema opthalmou, in latin inflatio.
EMphisema is taken generally for an heap of windy spirits which are gathered
in the empty places of any part, Diverse acceptions of this word.
as appears in Galen, But it is here particularly used for a puffing up of
the uppermost eyelidde when it is lifted up, losing his natural color with
heaviness and hard moving, Def.
and in the end becomes pale and wan: and sometimes the white does in part
stand higher then the black. There is also a loose swelling without it
round about which being pressed down with the fingers, is suddenly stayed,
but presently is filled up again. And herein it differs from the tumor
called Oedema because it being pressed with the finger, How it differreth from
oedema.
the mark and sign thereof remains afterward, and it proceeds also from a
stroke which compassed the eielidde, which thing is not so to be seen in
this windy swelling of it. Causes.
This disease grows from some thin humor or vapor which arises in it by
weakness of heat, which is not able to alter the blood to the likeness of
the part, vvhereupon either vvinde or thick spirits are engendered, which
cannot be dispersed, nor digested, as we may see it happen to such as are
sick of fevers, or which vvatch much and sleep little, or which have an ill
constitution of body, or which are entering into a dropsy. Cure.
In curing of it, you shall use medicines necessary for the whole body, and
particularly shall be applied fomentations partlye strengthening, 3 Book chap.
22.
partly resolving. Paulus does much commend a fomentation of wine and water,
lentils and roses soden together or this R. ros. rub. P j. Flor. ath^s. P s.
Camomil. melilot. hyssop. absinthii, puleg^i, origani ana. m. s. Sees them in
equal portions of wine and water, and apply it with a spounge. Afterward
you may lay upon it vigoes plaster sieve merc. or de baccis lauri, de meliloto.
Vigoes plaster
Experiment.
I have tried vnguentum desiccatiuum rub. ad comitiss. mingled together to
dissolve such tumors. Aetius.
AEtius praises a Cataplasme made of Lentils sodden with a little honey. Now of
this ill affect follows oftentimes heaviness of the eieliddes called by
Auicen, grauitas palpebrae, Grauitas palpebrae. 3. Book fen. 3. tract. 3. chap
9. Cure.
when the thinner part is dissolved, or rather when there is weakness in the
part, or when it dries or consumes: In curing of this there must be used
contrary medicines to the former, whose virtue shall be to make moist and soft:
as fomentations of mallows, Holihock, Pellitory of the wall, Branck vrsine,
muscelage of Fenegreek and lineseed: of these also may be framed Cataplasms.
Emplastrum de mucaginibus, and that of Vigo aforenamed have singular virtue and
force to mollify and dissolve.

CHAP. 2. Of the Tettar, Ringworme, or Scabbs on the eielidds, or sharp fleumy
blearednes, called in greek Psoropthaimia in latin L^ppitud^pruriginosa.
Definition.
PSoropthalmia is when the eyeliddes are read, and salt biting tears issue
from them, the corners of the eyes having vlceration and reddnesse with much
itching. Causes.
This proceeds from salt sharp fleume flowing down to the eye stirring up
this itching and fretting. Cure.
To cure it you must change the course of the humor by bloodletting, cupping,
rubbing on the shoulders, abstaining from all salt slimy meats. In particular
you must use fomentations ex posca lenticulae decocto, Collyrium Philoxeni.
and rosarum, afterward apply collirium philoxeni which is named of AEtius
achariston, because the Patient is not able sufficiently to requite it: it is
this R. cadmiae. ii. chalcitidis crudae. i. aloes, obol. ii. aerug. obol. ii.
piperis gran. x. florum rosarum. iii. beat them together and use them. My
counsel is to put to them vng. pomat. to bring the^ to such a fit and
commodious form for your use as is vnguentum de tutia, and then to put some
of it into the corners of the eyes. Medicines against itching
For the itching after you have applied your fomentations use this collyrium
Take Rose water and plantine water. ana. ii. in which boil with a soft fire
aloes hepaticae s of white coporas. ii. of sugar Candy. i. this eiesalue
consumes and dries the sharp fleume and gives strength to the eye.

CHAP. 3. Of the itchinge or dry ringvvorme, or blearednesse of the eyes
called in greek xeropthalmia in latin arida l^ppitudo.
XEropthalmia is a dry blearednesse wherein the eyes are neither puffed up,
Definition.
nor send forth tears but are only read and heavy with pain, Celsus in his
6. book. 6. chap.
and in the night the eyeliddes stick fast, and are as it were glewed together
with thick fleume: which disease is of the longer continuance since the matter
is tough and heavy. In curing hereof bathes are most meet, Cure.
and good diet, and particularly such medicines as provoke tears to the end
to dravv the moisture to the eyes whereunto serves the plaster of AEtius
named acharistor. This remedy is greatly praised of Celsus to take bread
dipped in wine and apply it to the eye. Celsus.
For if therebee any humor it draws it forth and beats back the flowing
of other humors unto it. Now whereas they which have this infirmity are
greeuouslie vexed in the morninges, not being able to open their eyes, because
their eie-liddes are so fast gievved, they must at night when they go to
bed annoint them with vnguentum de tutia, which will hinder the eye-liddes
from stickyng together.

CHAP. 4. Of the hardness of the eye, or hard blearednesse called in greek
Scleropthalmia, in latin lippitudo dura, or siccitas oculi.
Def.
SCleropthalmia is when the eye-lyddes are more hard then accustomablye they
use to be, and also the eye, more slovve in moving, more read, more
paynefull, especyallie when one awaketh, the eye-liddes can hardely be opened,
yet no moisture issues from them and in the corners of the eyes sticks some
fleume dried and and folded together: and when we vvoulde turn the
eye-lidde, we cannot do it easilye, because of the great hardenesse, neither
can we shut it without pain, Causes.
except we take the advantage. This affecte happens by the flovvyng of a
gross humor, or after a great inflammation of the eye, when the slimie humor
is dried, either of it self or by the heat, or it befalls thorough the
default of the Chirurgian, who has applied over drying medicines. Cure.
In curing hereof, the same remedies are very convenient which are before
appointed for the dry blearednesse, since they only differ in greatness the
one and the other being dry, 3. book fen^ tract. 3 chapter 5.
Auicen extolleth greatly these remedies to apply a Fomentation unto the eye
with sponges wette in warm water, and after to put upon the eye the white of
an Egg with oil of Roses. And where the humor is thick and very salt he
uses the mucylage of Fenegreeke drawn in milk, and such remedies as are of
power and virtue to scatter and mollifye such an humor. For my part I have
oftentimes tried vnguentum rosatum Mesuae annoynting the eyes with it, both
within and without, especially at night when he would take his rest.

CHAP. 5. Of the fallng of hair from the eieliddes or bauldnesse of them
called in Greek Maedarosis and Milphosis, in latin Def^^uium pilorum or
Glabaties palp^bra^um also of thickness joined with baldness in the
eyeliddes, called in greek Ptilosis (...) latin, Cra^sittes callo
sapa^polrarum.
Definition.
MAdarosis is only taken for the falling of hair from the eyelids by a
flowing of sharp humors, and where the hayres do simply fall away, and the
utmost part and banckes as it were of the eyelids are red like unto lead the
affection is called milphosis or miltosis. The cause according to Auicen is
gross salt matter, Milphosis.
which makes the eyeliddes read, bringing vlceration to the parts where the
hairs take root, Causes.
the eye thereby being sometime impaired and corrupted. ^ut if the edges and
banks thereof grow thick and hard in such manner that the hair cannot there
be fastened and perce thorough the disease is named ptilosis jointly mixed and
compounded of madarosis and xeropthalmia. The cause as Auicen records, is not
only in regard of the matter (as when vermin and worms are engendered, or
rather when the humor is salt) but also in respect of the place, as when it
is hard and thick, which hinders the passage of the vapors whereof hair is
engendered, so that they cannot come to the edges of the eie-lidds. Cure.
In the cure you shall have regard to make sweet this humor so sharp, and so
biting, and if any vermin be there, they shall be either taken away, or
distroied by medicines applied for that purpose. This being done, lay to it
such remedies as have force and virtue to make hair grovve. Auicen aduaunceth
misedounge beaten to powder, Auicen.
as also alcoole cum melle. Where the eie-liddes are thick he uses this
Cataplasme of Endive, oil of Roses and white of an egg, commending moreover
the use of bathes in the morning.

CHAP. 6. Of the hardness of the eie-liddes, called in greek Scleriasis, in
latin Durities palp^brarum, and of the hard aposteme in them called Se^rrosis.
Definition
SCleriasis is an hard tumor on the eie-lidde with reddnesse, and pain
which cannot without much difficulty be wholy taken away, being of longer
continuance then an inflammation, and when it grows harder, and the
reddnesse of it changes into blewenesse it is named scirropthalmia. Causes.
These fall out upon some great inflammation which has gone before. Cure.
In the Cure especially the hardenesse being ontvvard you must shut the eye and
rub it a long time with your finger, and then use a mollifiyng Fomentation, as
R. of Mallows, Holihocke Pellitory of the wall, Violets an. M.i. Lineseede s
make thereof two bags which sees in water. After this shall be applied a
mollifiyng plaster, as de mucaginibus, and diachylum ireatum, amongst other
Vigoes plaster sine Mercurio is singular. You may put also into the eye
Colliria of mucilage of Linseede and Quinces, and a little woman's milk.

CHAP. 7. Of the roughness of the eie-liddes called in greek Trachoma, in
latin Aspritudo: Also of the Fig in the eie-lidds in greek Sicosis, in latin
Ficositas, or Ficosa Palpebra, and of the brawnie eie-liddes called in greek
Tilosis, in latin Callosa Palpebra.
TRachoma, Definition.
is an inequality and roughness of both the eie-liddes in their inward part
with an hard ruggedness as if the seeds of millet were in them. If the
malady grovve farther and there appear cleftes and rentes and little parts
standing forth not unlike figs it is called sicosis. Sicosis.
And when the disease is waxed old and hardened, the eie-lidde becomes as
hard as bravvne, which is called tilosis. Tilosis.
This ill affection comes many times by the long use of eie-salues or by a
sharp humor flowing unto them, Causes.
and sometimes without any evident cause. Cure.
In curing of it after general things accomplished the use of this collirium
is wonderfully commended by AEtius R. testae sepiae, Aetius.
viij. punicis viij. rubricae sinopiae, ammoniaci thimiamatis an x. gummi viij.
put them into water, wherevvith make an ointement for the eyes, and presently
upon the anointing with a sponge, dipped in cold water, wash the
eie-liddes: or R. cadmiae xvj. aeris vsti iiij. seminis hiosciami i. opii ij.
mirrh. fructus ericae, acaciae ana. iiij. gummi. viij, bruise them all dry,
and put to them woman's milk, and then beat them again, into vvomans milk,
lay them to the eye, but first look you have used a Fomentation or R.
chalcitidis vstae iij. croci viij. meli^e ix. bruise them with water, and then
dry them, put afterward honey unto them and use them.

CHAP. 8. Of the Hares eye, or open eye, called in greek Lagopthalmos, in
latin Leporina palpebra.
Definition
LAgopthalmos is when the higher eielidde is so drawn back, that in shutting
the eye, the whole is not nor cannot be covered wholy, and in sleep it is
open, as we see Hares do sleep. Three kinds thereof.
There are three kinds thereof according to Auicen: the first is, when the
eie-lidde being drawn back, covers not the white of the eye, which
comes either from the first frame of it, or by incision made in the
aforesaid eie-lidde, and this is called leporinus, that is the hares-eie. The
second kind is when one part of the white is not covered, and thereupon
arises abbreuiatio that is shortness, which has the same causes with the
former. The third is, when the higher eie-lidde touches not, nor covers the
lower, which proceeds either of some kernel, or outgrovving of flesh, or by
a conuulsion of the same eyelid. Beside the aforementioned causes, Causes.
this disease may come sometime by the closing up or as it is commonly called,
cicatrizing of a wound or ulcer, and that, either where the ulcer does it of
it self, as in a carbuncle, or after the eyelid is very much cut, and so
over much loosed, or because it has been lifted up by cutting, or has been
cauterized or feared unadvisedly. Concerning the cure, Cure.
if the eyelid be too short, it is impossible to recover it by any kind of
cure or operation: If it want but a little, it may be amended and restored in
this manner, when you have felt the sick party fittely, The manual
operation.
you must cut the skin a little under the brows in manner of a cross,
whose points and corners are turned down, with this consideration, that if
this default have arisen from the rash incision and sewing of the eyelid, you
then make your incision upon the scarre, or where it is drawn back. The
deepenesse of the incision must enter to the gristle, yet not touch it: For if
it be cut, the ey-lid falls down, and afterward cannot be lifted up. You
shall make separation of the edges in the incision with scraped lynt, to the
end that the eyelid may fall down, and return equally to his former shape
and greatness, as also to stay the divided skin from reioyning, causing a
little flesh to grow and fill up that place, that afterward the eye may be
easily and conveniently opened. Concerning local medicines, Local medicines.
there may not be any used which a^e drying, but only loosing, made of gross
unctuous things, as a fomentation of mollifiyng and loosing herbs. Vnguentum
basilicum made of wax, rosine, black pitch, and the sewet of an Ox is much
commended, as the mucilages of quince, senegreeke, and lineseede.

CHAP. 9. Of the inuersion, or turning inside out of the eye, called in Greek
Ectropium, in Latin Inuersio.
ECtropium is, Definition.
when the lovver eyelid turns the inside out, and draws so much back,
that it covers not the white of the eye, nor is joined to the other eyelid
which is above. This affection is not natural, but has grown from too much
loosing medicines, Causes.
or from superfluous flesh which has grown in the inner part of it: or
rather, as Aetius says, Aetius.
when the flesh in the corner of the eye is increased and ouergrowne: or by
cutting away too much of the skin in a palsy, laboring by that means to
make it shorter: in like manner, burning, cicatrizing, or cutting in the
outward part of the eyelid, may bring this fault* and old age also may
procure it. The cure must be diverse, Cure.
as the causes are diverse requiring rather the hand of the Chirurgian then
medicines: If then it proceed from the ouergrovving of flesh, and the same be
little and tender, it may be abated and consumed with medicines properly
affected to take away flesh, if it be old and dry it shall be cut away. The
operation shall be in this order. Take a needle with threade in it, and put it
thorough the lowest part of the flesh which grows out, then with the same
threade lift it up, and the eie-lidde with it, and with the point of a penknife
cut it by little and little, or with a crooked vause, you may cut it all at
once if you can, but take heed least you rake any part of the eie-lidde
away. If the eie-lidde recover his natural fashion, and returning inward do
cover the eye, we will be content therewith using only medicines, somewhat a
stringent to close up that which is cut away, and to prevent pain and
inflammation: but if it fall back, and return to the former disorder, An
other way of incision.
the^ must two ouertvvhart incisions be made gently in the innermost part of
the eie-lidde, which shall begin in the midst and lovver part of it, being
drawn both ouerthwartly, one to the great corner, the other to the sesse, nigh
unto the eie-lidde, and hauuing gathered both together there will be taken
away a little piece like unto the great letter of the Graecians named L, being
notvvithstanding careful to avoid cutting of the skin in such manner: Let
the point of it be to the lower part and bottom of the eye, and the larger
open part arise and ascend toward the eyelid. Now if this default have
proceeded from incision, burning, searing, cicatrizing in the eye lidde, which
has not been well and cunningly performed, then must incision be made of the
skin in the outvvarde part, not far from the eye-lidde, which beginning at
one corner of the eye shall end at the other, in form of a cross, making
seperatio^s of the edges with lint put between them least they should join
again. But if it proceed from olde-age, or of too much loosing, all that
which is loose must be outwardly seared, either with a fine instrument, which
kind is called Cauterium actuale, or with a medicine which is called Cauterium
potentiale, with great care that you touch not the eye.

CHAP. 10. Of the eyelids which are tied and joined together, called in Greek
Agcylosis, and Agchyloblepharon, in Latin Inuiscatio, or detentio
palprebrarum: and of the diverse kinds thereof, named Symphisis and Prophisis
blepharon.
Definition.
AGchiloblepharon is, when the eyelids take hold each of other, and join
together, so that the eye cannot be opened: And it so falls out sometime in
this malady, that the eye-lidde is knitted to the white of the eye, commonly
called coniunctiua, Causes.
and sometime with cornea, or the hornie membrane, and this disease is called
Simphisis, or prophisis blepharon. It is so that from the birth and
conformation of the part, the eyelids are joined together, as it is also
sometime seen in the hole of the ear, yard, matrice, fundament, mouth, or
when an ulcer has been negligently and ignorantly cured, either in the
eye-liddes or membranes, coniunctiua or cornea, because in healing of the
ulcer, the parts which ought to have been separated, have been glewed
together. ^re.
Concerning this cure if the eye-liddes are equally joined, they must be
separated, which I would have cunningly done with the point of a little
slender launcet, and after the incision, to put betvveene both parts little
clothes dipped in some eye-salue which may keep open the wound, Observation.
until both parts be healed* but when the eye-lidde is linked and fastened to
to the white of the eye or horny membrane, the eye-lidde must be with great
dexterity and discretion parted from the eye, cutting rather (if so it must
be) the eye-lidde than the eye: which being done, use such medicines as will
a^svvage pain, to eschevve inflammation, flowing of humors, and pain issuing
from them, and by little and little afterward to apply medicines, which may
heal and take away the roughnes which the incision has left, stirring it
daily, not only to put the medicine upon it, but also to keep it from joining
together again, giving in charge to the patient to lift it up many times with
his fingers. Celsus.
Celsus says he never savve any cured, Mesua.
and to his opinion agrees Mesua, albeit he had assayed many things, because
the eye-lidde is inseparable from the eye.

CHAP 11. Of the short or maimed eye-liddes, called in Greek Coloboma, in
Latin mutilatio, and after Celsus, curtum.
COloboma is here used for any defect and want, Definition.
either in the lips, ears, nostrels, or eye-liddes, when by nature (as it
oftentimes falls out) these parts are cloven, in such manner as if there had
been some whole piece taken away, and they left maimed. The cause of this
defaulte, Causes.
is either natural through the feebleness of that faculty and virtue which
fashioned the body in the womb, or from want and insufficiency of matter,
whereof those parts were framed, or from some other accident, as
rottenness, a carbuncle, or gangrene, which have eaten and wasted the part,
or by a stroke which has cut away or made a division in the part. C^e.
As touching the cure, it is impossible to restore that want which is in the
substance: that must be natures work, not the Chirurgions hand. But the
deformity of the part so maimed, may be repaired and recovered if it be but
little: if it be great it receives no cure, but he which deals with it,
Prediction.
shall make it more ouglie and ill favored then it was before the cure. The
way to amend this fault, when the eyelid is some-vvhat lame and maimed is,
that which is used in the disease called hare-lips, you must cunningly with
a launcet or crooked Vause, take of the skin from the outvvarde and inward
parts, which are to be joined* and then make fast together the edges of both
parts: but if they cannot conveniently touch each other, beside this pulling
away of the skin, there must be made two cross incisions on both sides, as
we have before said in the hares eye, Celsus in his 7. book.
which shall be turned from the vvound, cutting only the uppermost part of
the skin. When this is done, there shall be a needle thrust through both the
lips and edges without touching the gristle, and the threade shall be made
fast on each side as in the Hares-lippes, which Ambrose Pare has largely set
forth, Ambrose Pare.
plainly laying open the portraiture and fashion of that whole work.

CHAP. 12. Of a fat substance lying under the eye-lidde, called in Greek
Hidaus, in Latin aquula, or palprebarum aquositas, or vesica.
Definition.
HYdatis, is a growing out of fat in the higher eyelid between the skin
and the gristle. In some, and specially in little children which are very
moist, this fat grows more and more, and causes many grievous accidents
ouerlading the eye: and for this cause dravving down the revvme, the
eye-liddes seem svvollen under under the brows, neither are they able to
lift up themselves when need so requires. Signs.
If any one press them down with his fingers divided in sunder, that is
betvveene the fingers arises up, when the other which is under them is
pressed down. Those children (says Albucrasis) which have this malady,
Albucrasis.
lie sleeping alvvaies upon their face, and at the davvning of the day are
greatly tormented with that abundance of humors which has been gathered in
the night: they are not able to behold the sun, but their eye trembles, and
sheddeth tears. Cure.
If this disease be but newly begun, it may be easily healed with
resolving medicines without Chirurgerie: but if it be of long continuance, it
must be taken away by manual operation, that is by the hand of the
Chirurgian. When you have set the sick party in a convenient place, you must
press down the eye-lidde at both corners with your fingers, that by this
means the skin stretching forth, may be cut ouerthvvart, your hand
remaining hanging down, least the skin or bladder vvherin the fat is be
touched and hurt: and moreover, that it being opened, the same may be taken
away jointly with the bladder. This done, you must priest it out with the
fingers, or rather with a pair of pincers pluck it out by the roots, since
it may be easily separated, dealing afterward with it, as you would in the
disease called a Wolf. But if the bladder be cut it procures great pain,
because it sends forth his moisture, which being thin and small, or as it
were minced, cannot be gathered again. If this do so fall out, you must
apply such medicines as will bring it to suppuration, and so consume it, and
if it be needful to use such as will take away the abundance of flesh called
cathairetica: least if there remain any skin of the bladder it may engender
again the like disease, as we see it fall out in vvolfes.

CHAP. 13. Of the corruption or rottenness in the eyelids, called in Greek
Midesis, or midosis, in Latin putredo.
The diverse use of this word^.
MIdesis taken generally, is common to all parts, yet it is specially used for
the corruption of the eye liddes, when they seem much svvollen, and slimye
matter does distill from them usually, and they are ouer-laden with fatness.
Causes.
The cause of this disease proceeds from a stream of superfluous and
corrupt humors which fall down vppn the eye-lidde, specially in the
inward part of it, wherein nature has placed a fat substance to make
the eye moist because of the continual moving thereof. Cure. Dioscorides.
To cure it Dioscorides says, Nardus is a singular remedy, since it binds
and dries the superfluous humors, whose corruption brings forth this
disease. Such eye-salues as dry without great sharpness are most fit fot
it, as this: R. aquae plantag. and rosar. ana. j. iutiae prepar. aloes lotae an
s. trochischor alb. ras. j. fiat collyrium. If there be great corruption, a
little vnguentum Aegiptiaecum dissolved in wine will be most excellent: but
you must be circumspect least you hurt the eye.

CHAP. 14. Of the wart or barley corn on the eylidde, commonly called (as I
suppose) a Stian, in Greek crithe, or posthia, in Latin hordeum, or hordeolum.
CRithe is a small, hard, firm, Definition.
and somewat long tumor, like unto a barley corn whereof it has the name,
growing in the outmost part of the eie-lidde, where the hairs be, which has
his humor contained in a little skin, and it hardly comes to suppuration
or ripeness. Galen.
Galen names it in Greek Posthia, which signifies desire, as Philippus
Imgrassias writes, because that women when they have conceived are naturally
subject to longing, and desiring of many things, which if perhaps they be in
the power and possession of any who will not give it them at their request, It
is reported of the Romans. Cure.
they curse him with this malady, and threaten him with crithe, which commonly
befalls them. In curing of it Auicen uses the blood of a pigeon, Antonius
Musa.
or turtle, and this liniment. R. oliban. mirrh. an ii. ladani. s boracis i.
cum oleo liliorum fiat linimentum. Antonius Musa appointed a plaster of
galbanum mixed with nitrum Paulus made a fomentation of sodden barlye, Aegniet.
Galen.
Galen of the blood of ravenous birds which issues from them after the head
is pulled off, or else a plaster of white wax. If the matter in it may be
evidently seen, Celsus.
Celsus commands to open it, that the humor may run forth which by the
resting therein might corrupt the gristle. But if this accident be in the
outward part, Aetius.
to purge and cleanse it Aetius uses the yolke of an egg and honey mingled
together, and to engender and restore flesh, puluis capitalis. If the gristle
be corrupted within, then he turns the eye-lidde, scrapeth away so much of
the gristle as is decayed and defiled, puts upon it orichalcum burned and
made in fine powder, and upon that the yolke of an egg mingled with honey and
oil of roses: on the second day he uses a fomentation, and continues the
former medicine: on the third day he fills up the eyelid with honey, and
upon it applies a collyrium having force and virtue to repel, o^ beat back,

CHAP. 15. Of the hailestone of the eieliddes, called in Greek chalaxion, in
Latin grando.
Definition.
CHalaxion is an heap of superfluous humors gathered both in the higher and
lower eie-lid, in fashio^lyke to an hailstone: when this tumor is pressed, it
remains not fast fixed and immovable but cha^geth the place, wherein (as also
in the form* it is distinguished from aforenamed disease hordeum, How it
differs from hordeum. Aetius.
or a stian, Aetius makes two kinds of them, whereof the one is plainly to be
seen in the outward part, in which it grows like unto little round knobs,
clear as hayle, out of the which when it is opened issues forth an humor
like to the white of an egg. The other kind is a tumor in some part hard
like to a bean, marvelous paynefull, if it be roughly touched, This kind is
paynefull.
yea sometime the extremity of the pain causes the pacient to fainte and
sown. Concerning the cure, Cure.
if the tumor be without the eie-lid, let the incision be outward upon the
same, and with a little hook or other instrument pluck forth the corn,
applying to it incontinently a plaster having virtue to knitte and join. But
if the hailestone be within the eye-lidde, and shine overthwart the gristle,
when you have turned the inside out of the eye lidde, make incision overthwart,
and when the corn is taken away, use joining and knitting medicines: Paulus
in his 6. book.
Some put thereto a little chewed salt to consume the humor that may there
remain.

CHAP. 16. Of hard knottes upon the eye-liddes, named in Greek Poriasis, in
Latin Tophus: also of gravel or the stone in the eyelids, in Greek
Lithiasis, in Latin Lapidescentia, or lapis palpebrae.
POriasis is an hard brawnye tumor arising in the outward part of the
eye-lidde. Definition.
Galen affirms it to come also in the inside. Lithiasis is an hard, Galen.
white, rugged tumor, in color resembling the Sapphire stone. Causes.
They are both caused principally by an hardness of humors, which are
assembled and gathered in the eie-lidde, as if the second kind of Grando
aforementioned should become dry and thick, where-uppon should ensue poriasis,
and by growing more dry and hard like unto a stone, should ensue lithiasis.
In curing the hard knotnamed poriasis, Cvre.
the skin must be cut in the outside, and all the the matter taken forth
from the bottom, laying afterward unto it a joining plaster. In curing the
gravel or stone called lithiasis, the eyelidde must be turned, and the
incision made in the inside, drawing the matter of the tumor forth with an
instrument, and then apply unto it a little salt with spittle. Aetius.
Aetius uses the powder of orichalcum burned, and upon it lays a defensive
made of an egg, wine, and oil of roses mingled together, and rolleth ir.

CHAP. 17. Of lice which bread in the eye-liddes, called in Greek pthiriasis,
in Latin pediculatio.
Definition.
PThiriasis is, when many little broad lice trouble the hairs on the eyelids.
Causes.
They are engendered by excessive eating and drinking, of uncleanness, and ill
diet. Cure.
In the cure, the pacient must eat good wholesome meat, fith they come only
of ill humors, his hair must be shorn, he must use frictions or rubbings
fasting every morning, such remedies must be applied as may dry, strengthen,
and comfort the head. After this the lice which are engendered must cunningly
be taken away, and such medicines used as may not only destroy those which
remain, but also prevent the generation of other. Aetius.
To this purpose Aetius commends this medicine, to have a fomentation of Sea
water, and then to aplie this collyrium. R. alum. sciss, i, staphidis siluest.
obol. i. piperis obol. ij. aeris vsti i beat them to fine powder, and use them
dry. Celsus used this. Celsus.
R. sandarac. spumae nitri, vuae taminae, beat the^ together, put unto them as
much oil, and also vinegar until they be as thick as honey. Auicen commends
brimstone to this purpose. Auicen.
This is a tried ointement. R. unguent. rosar. mesue j. sulphur. viui. and
staphisag. an s. hydrarg. cum saliua extinct. i. fiat vngnentum.

CHAP. 18. Of hairs growing in the eielids which hurt the eye, called in
greek trichiasis, in latin oculorum a pilis offensio. also of the diverse
kinds thereof.
TRichiasis is, Definition.
when the hairs which grow either naturally or unnaturally on the eye-liddes,
do hurt and prick the eye, and cause weeping. The old writers have left
unto us three kinds of them, whereof the first is named ptilosis, which is,
Ptilosis.
when the eyelid is loose, and the natural hair falls round about into the
eye, and pricketh it. The second is called districhiasis, Districhiasis.
or duplex ordo pilorum, that is, a double order or set of hair, when one
hurts the other as contrary adversaries. The third is called phalangosis,
Phalangosis.
or acies pilorum, that is, ranks of hair, when the edge of the eie-lidde
with the hair which is upon it without any relaxation of the eie-lidde is
turned and wrested into the eye, in such manner that the hair is hid,
neither can it be seen without the eielidde be lifted on high. Causes.
The cause of this unnatural generation of hair, proceeds of the abundance
of superfluous moisture, which nevertheless is not sharp nor biting, even as
the earth being over moiste brings forth plenty of herbs. For if the
humor were sharp or in any manner fretting, by remaining in the eie-lidde it
would de file and corrupt the hair, which nature had there planted. It migt
also cause by increasing and long continuance a looseness in the eyelids.
Concerning the cure, if the hairs be unnatural which grow there, Cvre.
let them be pulled away with pincers, and afterward apply such medicines as
may stay them from growing again: of this sort, are antes eggs, the gall of
a calfe, the blood of al sorts of frogs: amongst other, rhis of Archigenes is
praised wonderfully, Archigenes medicine.
which is made of the blood and gall of an hedgehog, with castoreum in
equal proportion. I confess I have not seen any trial of these remedies, and
therefore, after the eye is turned where they stick, the best course is, to
sear them to the roots with an iron made for that purpose, for this will
utterly destroy them. This done, apply such remedies as may prevent
inflammation, and the escarre being once removed, the ulcer vvil heal easilye.
In this order shall you deal with those hairs which grovve naturally, if
their turning inward offend the eyes. But before you come to sear the place,
you must labor to gather and tie up the hairs, which you shall do more
conveniently, if you knitte them with other hair which is near to them, by
a plaster framed after the manner of dry stitching. When al are thus
gathered and made fast to the outvvarde part, let them so abide a good space,
that they may not return into the eye, but receive another shape: But if the
edge of the eye-lidde be also turned inward, yet the eye-lidde not loosed,
there must be incision made on the inside in a straight form or line, that by
this means the skin may be separated and let loose, The cure of the old
Physicians.
which did draw the eye-lidde inward, and the hair jointly with the same may
look upward. Concerning the curing of ptilosis, which is, when the
eye-lidde is relaxed, as we say, or too much loosed, you shall have recourse
to the operation, which shall be set down in the chapter follovving,
touching atonia, or weakness of the eie-lids.

CHAP. 19. Of the looseness or weakness of the eye-liddes, called in greek
atonia ton blepharon, in latin imbecillitas palpebrarum.
Definition.
AToniaton blepharon, is a simple weakness of the eye-liddes, without
appearance of any other outward cause yet the party thus affected is not able
to lift them up, but is enforced to keep them shut, unless he lift them up
with his hand, which is the cause that they which are in this miserable
estate, cannot awake, nor see plainly. Causes.
This malady comes by the abundance of moisture which softeneth and loses
the eye-lidde, which is stretched further then the bounds of nature, so that
when one would by the benefit of the muscles lift up his eye-lidde, and open
his eye, he cannot do it fully, because of the weakness and looseness.
Cure.
The cure must be in this order. When the Chirurgian has placed the patient
to his liking, he shall take betvveene his fingers the skin of the eye lidde
(leaving the gristle, which, since it is not loosed, The gristle must not be
cut.
needs not incision) lifting up so much of it as he shall think expedient
in the restoring of the natural form to be taken away. For there are two
dangers: one, least too much be cut away, for then the eye-lidde will not
cover the whole eye: the other least too little be cut, for then your
labor is lost, and the incision utterly unprofitable.

Therefore in this consideration, it shall be necessary to mark the place
with incke, dravving two straight lines where the incision shall be made In
this order, that between the edge where the hairs do grovve, and the
nearest of your lines, there be space remaining to thrust in a needle. Celsus.


This done, you shall cut gently, pearcing the skin which is between the two
lines, One kind of incision.
which may be done all at once, holding with the fingers, and lifting up so
much of the eye-lidde as you vvil cut away: afterward with a penknife,
launcet, or cisers cut directly upon the two lines, taking away the piece
which is in the midst: or rather make your incision upon each line so long
as is requisite, An other kind of incision.
and cut away that which is in the midst, beginning at one end, and
gently removing the skin until you come to the other, and all be clean
taken away. Having proceeded thus far, you shall then join both sides of
the wound with a needle put into the midst, which shall not be wholy and
suddenly stayed, but command the pacient to close his eyes, and if the eyelid
come not down to cover all the eye, let the point of the needle slip, if it
do cover all, make it fast: and in what part the skin of the eyelid shall
be yet too large, there take away your thread which is in the higher lip
of the vvound, and cut away so much of it as you see needful, How to stitch
then thrust thorovve the thread again, and dravve together both the lips or
edgcs of the wound: and afterward at both the ends put thorovv the needle.
This part of your work thus finished, you shall then apply a defensive, and
also a medicine, which may join the continuitie dissolved. You must be
prudent in pulling away your needle, least it may procure too great deformity
by the scarre uvhich remains. Aeginet.
Paulus Aegineta says, he knevv Chirurgians which used no stitching, but
such medicines only as had virtue to close it up, notvvithstanding the
aforesaid manner of stitching is the surest way.

CHAP. 29. Of little pieces of flesh in the eyelid, or mulbery, called in
greek pladorot^ (...) i^la^ m^rum.
Definition.
PLadarotes are little soft discolored bodies growing within the eyeliddes:
as sarcosis is an outgrovving of thick flesh, resembling small pieces of pitch
coming forth within the eie-lidde. Causes.
These proceed from corrupt blood, which engenders soft, slimie, discolored
flesh, not unlike the blood of flesh when it is vvashed. An exulceration in the
innermost skin of the eye-lidde which cannot close up, may also cause this
affect for in continuance these do grovve out, and close up the ulcer in some
part. Concerning the cure, Cure.
if they be thick and gross, they shall be cut away finely with the point
of a launcet, and and afterward let the place be touched with a little fine
salt, allam, or copperas water, applying also medicines which may dry the
eye without great pain.

CHAP. 21. Of the svvollen or stretched out veins called varix or varices, in
Greek cirsos, also of meliceris, steatoma, atheroma.
CIrsos is a stretching forth of the vein most usually proceeding of
melancholic blood. Definition.
Atheroma is filled with matter like unto a pulteise of wheat meal. Steatoma
contains matter not much differing from sewit: the humor in meliceris
resembles honey. All these humors are enfolded in a little bladder or skin,
and with the same oftentimes may be found many other strange bodies, as
stones, hair, nails, glass, yea little beasts, like to flies or gnattes. In
the cure, Cure.
the skin of the eye-lidde must be cut even to the bladder which keeps the
humor, and if it be possible it must be wholly together taken out: for if any
part remain, the disease returns. Therefore, if by occasion you be
constrained to leave any part behind (as sometime it falls out that must
be consumed by medicines which have virtue to mollify and procure suppuration,
but in fine such as do cleanse and increase flesh in the wound. But concerning
varices or swollen veins, Aetius forbids meddling with varix.
Aetius would not have them handled, because they are rebellious and malignant
for the most part, as also certain other read painful tumors are in like
sort pestilent and incurable.

The 5. section, containing the diseases which are incident to the membranes
or parchment like skins of the eye.
CHAP. 1. Of the black mortified or bloudshedding eye, called in greek
hipospagma, or aimalops, in latin sanguinis effusio, or sugillatio.
Definition.
HYposphagma are read spots in the end appearing black or blevve, coming
from blood which flovveth in the eye by the veins scattered amongst the skins
and coats of the same. This happens of some stroke, Causes.
cry, fall, or great gushing out of blood when the mouth of the veins are
opened, or by bursting of them when they are over full. They which are
troubled with this malady, imagine vvhatsoener they see to be read, because
the blood is not only dispersed, Wherefore all things seem read.
and as it were spilt amidst the coniunctiue membrane, or white of the eye,
but also in the hornie membrane which makes them read, whereupon it
follovveth, that whatsoever is offered to the sight seems read. The plain
proof whereof we may and do daily behold in glasses, which being green,
read, or yellow, represent to us all things of their color. Cure.
In curing it, bloodletting is most necessary, and of local medicines, the
blood of a Turtle or Pigeon is excellent at the beginning, as is also a
fomentation of camomill, melilot, hyssoppe, and other herbs which have
virtue to dissolve. The cataplasme of hyssop sodden with covves milk, Old
medicines.
is praised of A^icen. In old blevvnesse or blackness Aetius commends this
remedy. Put the urine of a sound boy into a vessel of red brass, and beat it
with a brazen pestill many days in the sun, that by this means the moisture
may decay: when it is dried, put honey into it, and use it.

CHAP. 2. Of the puffing up, or swelling of the membranes of the eyes, called
in Greek epanastoma octhodes, in Latin ficus, or othewise hymenon epanastasis,
rebelliones, or membranarum eminentiae, and extuberantiae.
EPanastema octhodes, is a tumor or swelling of all the membranes and skins
in the eye: Definition.
and when the affect is greatly increased, it is named hymenon epanastasis, as
if the said skins should swell until they were thrust out of their proper
place. This disease arises from abundaunce of humors suddenly and jointly
falling down upon the eye, Causes.
or from a windye spirit enclosed amongst the skins, or rather from an
inflammation which stretches forth the membranes. It may also be caused in
like manner, as is set down in that disease when the eye falls out. The
cure shall be the same which is used in great inflammations, and falling out of
the eye.

CHAP. 3. Of wrinckles in the membranes, called in Greek rutidosis, or
russosis, in latin corrugatio.
Definition.
RVtidosis or russosis, is a wrinckling or playting of the coats and skins
whereof the eye is made. Some make two kinds of it, whereof the one is inward,
to wit, when the membrane called vuea is wrinkled, which causes the disease
named pthisis, of which we will speak hereafter. The other is outward when the
membranes cornea and adnata are loosed. Causes.
This disease grows of weakness and cold, which sufficiently appears in
this, that it is most common to old folk, as we may see by their wrinckled
eyes. For the humors being diminished in old folk, and the spirits become
thick, yea the humors so dry, that the eye is utterly empty, it falls down,
and the membranes are so wrinckled and plaited together, that some see not any
thing, others with great pain and difficulty. For the plaits and wrinckles
being doubled upon the membranes, they make the hornie membrane so thick and
dark, which should be naturally plain and bright, that the things which are
offered to the eyes cannot be discerned. Cure hereof hard.
There is small hope of the curing hereof, since it is principally procured by
old age: nevertheless that we leave not the sick party destitute of all
succor, let him use such meats as are fit to beget and increase good
juice. Let him use particularly these eye-salues, whose virtue is to make
moiste and comfort the membranes. R. euphras. betonicae, verb. gariophyll.
ana. m ij. chelidoniae, saluiae an m.iiij. vini albi lib. s. seminis anisi, and
feniculi an j. nucis mosch. s. cinamom. ij. aloes hepat. iiij. distill them
together. Thus shall you use this water: you shall take a little of it, and as
much of the mucilage of quinc-eseede mingled together, and thereof put some
into the eye. The medicines set down before for dimnesse of the sight and
afterward in the chapter of the cataractes are very profitable in this case.

CHAP. 4. Of the inflammation of the eye, called in greek opthalmia, in latin
inflammatio adnatae, ot lippitudo: also of the diverse kinds thereof, which are
chemosis in greek, in latin hiatus or hiatulatio, phimosis, or praeclusio,
taraxis, or perturbatio, epiphora or delachrimatio, opthalmia sphacelisousa, or
inflammatio ocularis in sphacelum degenerans.
OPthalmia is an inflammation of the membrane in the eye named coniunctiua,
joined with swelling, Definition.
extension, pain, redness, heat, puffing up of the eye-liddes, which do
hardly either open or shut, and cannot suffer touching with the hands.
Taraxis.
Taraxis is taken for a swift inflammation of the eye, being read and moist,
but less grievous then opthalmia, Causes.
growing from outward causes, as smoke, dust, the sun, the moon, oil,
rubbing of the eye. Some affirm it comes by the use of strong wines,
garlike, onions or mustard Chemosis is, Chemosis.
when the membrane called coniunctiua, is higher lifted the^ cornea, as if this
were in a hole, which beside the redness and heat, causes the eye-liddes to
be turned, so that they cannot cover the eye: Phimosis.
contrary unto this is phimosis, when by means of a great inflammation, the
eye-liddes do stick fast each to other and cannot be opened. Some impute this
default to the eye-liddes, but the hurt which they receive is but an accident
in this disease. Epiphora.
Epiphora. is taken generally for a sudden stream of humors in any part, as
Plinye calls epiphoram vteri, ventris. Notwiihstanding it is properly used
for the affection in the eyes, when with great inflammation, Galen.
great quantity of humors flow unto them Al these aforenamed affections do
accompany each other. The causes are the recourse of blood, Causes.
choler, fleum, and melancholy, and most commonly blood and cholar These are
signs that it is engendered of blood, Signs of blood.
redness, heat, great swelling with extension, thick tears and soon dry,
soft slimie matter congealed in the corners of the eyes, the party of a
sanguine complexion. If cholar be the cause, the tumor is not so apparent, the
color of it somewhat pale, Signs of cholar.
the pain sharp and biting, either no tears issue out, or if any do, they
are salt and bitter, the slimy matter is dry and gross, the party of a
choleric complexion, whereby he is sometime subject to a tertian ague, and
auoideth choleric excrements. When the swelling is greater, Signs of flewme.
more lose, white in color, the tears without taste, and cold, little or no
slimie matter troubles the eyes, it may be supposed to come of fleume, which
is called by Aetius a cold distemperature of the eye. The general cure
consists in bloodletting, diet, Cure.
purging by the advice of a learned physician, not omitting in this case the
applying of cupping glasses upon the shoulders, with scarifiyng if it be
thought expedient: and if the inflammation be very great, and the malady
violent, it shall be necessary to open the veins in the temples and forehead,
yea to open an artery, as also to apply a felon behind in the neck, or a
ruptorie, either on the crown of the head, or behind, or rather upon the
arm, all which remedies bend only their force to alter and turn away the
course of the humors. Observation.
And forasmuch as such a course of humors for the most part passes by the
vessels which are within, so that it might seem lost labor to open such as be
without, since they being emptied of the humor which was in them, yet are filled
again from the humors that are within, because of the fellowshippe which each
has with other, it must be confessed that this cure is not speedy* as touching
medicines which are to be applied on the temples and forehead, they must be of
force and nature to beat back as emplastru^co^taruptura^, d^siccatiuum
vnguentum comitiss. vng. oxirhodinum, or oxicrat. and such like. Upon the eye
if the inflammation be little, it shall be sufficient to use this collyrium of
the white of an egg, To assuage great pain.
rose water and plantaine beaten together. Where the pain shall be vehement
apply this: Take of the mucilage of quince-seede, and flea-seede, drawn in
rose water one ounce, in which dissolve trochis. alb. Rhasis sine opio one
dram: make your salve, and apply it warm. If the inflammation do continue,
the aforesaid mucilages shall be drawn in water of poppye, or in a decoction
of it, adding thereunto a little camphire or poppy, and lay upon the eye this
cataplasme. R, of sodden apples 4. ounces, and with the white of an egg, and
woman's milk make a cataplasme. A cataplasme asswaging pain.
Also a cataplasme of pure cassia, new and presently drawn is most excellent.
Above all you must have especial care to change and renew these medicines,
least they dry, and so cause heat. Not long after you may use this collirium.
R. gum arab. trag, ana. j. cerus. lotae s opii grana. iij. let them be all
dissolved with the white of an egg, and two ounces of a woman's milk giving
suck. In the declining of this disease, In the declining of the disease.
this may be used. R. of the mucilage of fenegreeke and quince-seede drawn in
rose water, and water of eyebright ana. sj. s wherein dissolve sarcocol. in a
woman's milk that gives suck. ij aloes lotae i. mirrh.. s make an eiesalue.
And where there is any great itching, or rather where the inflammation comes
of fleame, Against itching or inflammation.
this is a most singular collirium. R. tutiae preparat. aloes lotae ana. s
sarcocol. mirh. an s. saccar. cand. i. vitriol. alb. s. aquae rosar. and
foenicul. an ij. boil them al together a little while in a violl glass, and
then drop thereof into the eye. Some commend this collirium in all
inflammations of the eyes, to take snailes with the shelles, and to beat them
with a little salt, and through an hypucras bag to let the water hereof
distill, which being clear, Observation.
put it into the eres. It many times falls out by long and unadvised applying
of medicines, which do cool and beat back, or else by some great
inflammation, that the natural heat is extinguished and choked, and
there-uppon ensues a worse inflammation then any of the aforenamed, Opthalmia
sphacelisousa.
which is called opthalmiae sphacelisousa, which depriving the ey of the
natural temperature, does make it corrupt and utterly perish, which disease is
named by Galen in his introduction gangraena opthalmon, Galen.
the gangrene, or mortificatio^ of the ey. When this happens, you shall have
recourse to the remedies proper for gangrenes, changing them as the state of
the disease and party shall require.

CHAP. 5. Of the nail of the eye, commonly called the web, in greek
pterugion, in latin vngula, or angulus.
Definition.
PTerugium is, when the white of the eye called coniunctiua, is increased above
measure, or when in it is engendered a superfluous growing of flesh, after a
continual recourse of humors or scabs, The beginning of it.
or an inflamed itching. This maladye most commonly begins to increase at
the great corner of the eye, nigh unto the nose, seldom at the less, and most
rarely it is seen to begin at the higher or lower eyelid. It is stretched
unto the hornie membrane, growing greater and greater until it cover the apple
of the eye, Three kinds hereof. 1. membraneus
and darken the sight. The ancient writers have made three kinds of it. The
first is named membraneus, that is skinny, which is a sinewish skin beginning
at the great corner by little and little stretching and growing outward. 2.
adipeus.
The second is called of Guido adipeus, that is fattie, which is as a congealed
humor that becomes round when it is touched to be pulled out: it grows in
the same place with the former. 3. sebel, or pan^niculus.
The third is called of the Arabians Sebel, in Latin panniculus, which is
worse then the others, being interlaced with gross red veins, and arteries,
resembling a thin cloth or web: upon this appears oftentimes
inflammation, redness, and itching. Some of them stick not to the eye in
every place, but hold only by their edges, so that betvveene the nail and
the eye an instrument may be put through. Causes.
The cause is a fullness in the head, specially of thin blood myngled with
salt fleume, and weakness in the eye, which makes it fit to receive these
humors.

It follows oftentimes, the ill curing of an inflammation, whose heat has
been disorderly assuaged, or else old and hard slimie matter which has taken
root in the eye. To what persons it is incident.
In some bodies it is engendered through the coldenes of the time and place, as
in old men which abound with salt fleume, or in an intemperate person. which
drinks so much that he quenches natural heat: the coldenesse of the time and
place do increase it, when they which are ouerladen with such humors, by cold
do multiply and stir up the coutse thereof. If the stream of humors be
outward, Signs to know the course of the humors.
the veins seem read and great, there is an obscure darkness like to smoke
upon the horny membrane, the checkes are read, and the disease very much
lifted up above the white of the eye, there is great pain and heat on the
brows, and the skin named Sebel, grows in some part of the eye-lidde. If
the course of humors be inward, the veins are not so thick and read, the
party neeseth often, specially if he be in the sun, he feels great
itching, the eye sends forth tears. This disease, and principally Sebel, is
joined with itching, boiling, reddenesse, ulcers, tears, swelling of the
eye-liddes, slow motion of the eye: it so hinders the sight, that the party
cannot abide the light any long time. The cure is both long and hard.
Praedictions.
For some are never healed, other have it by inheritance, Auicen.
and in certain it is contagious, yea ( Auicen says) it goes from one eye to
the other. That kind which is white, Which be curable or incurable.
and narrow at the bottom, is easily cured, especially if it stick not fast
in every place, but that which has none of these qualities can hardly be
healed. There is no dealing with a nail or vvebbe which is thick, standing
forth, hard, and by consent causing pains in the temples: for this is
malicious, and of a cancrous nature. The red nail being cured, causes pain
in the head, and procuseth the megrym. Moreover if the vvebbe be spread over
the apple of the eye, and be made fast unto it, Observation.
the cicatrice which remains after it is taken away stops the sight. If
at the same time there be a cataract and a vvebbe in the eye, and the cataract
be but beginning, by laboring to take away the vvebbe, the cataract will be
greatly increased. Cure.
After the general cure ended, which consists in bloodletting, purging,
cupping, good order of diet, and other necessary means, which may stay the
increasing of the vvebbe, and turn away the humors, you may cure it either by
medicines, or by the hand of the chirurgian. If it be but newly begun, it
may be consumed by such medicines as are used to make thin and eat away
the cicatrices in the eyes. Aetius affirms that they may be consumed by
medicines, whereof this is most singular. Aetius his corosiue.
R chaleitidis vstae sxx cadmiae sx. squamae aeris rubri sj, piperis si. But if
it be old and thick then must it be healed and taken away by incision in this
manner. The manner of he manual operation.
The patient must be placed either over against the Chirurgian, or rather in
such sort that he may lay his head in the Surgeons lap (as we use to
speak) Let one turn up one of the eye-liddes, and the Surgeon the other:
if he sit over against the patient, let him turn up the lower, if he have
his head on his knees, then the higher eye-lidde. At this same time let the
Chirurgian with a pair of pincers, Celsus.
or some fit instrument lift up the web, and with the other hand thrust
thorovve a needle with threade under the vvebbe, close by the membrane,
whereunto it is fast joined: and leaving the needle there, he shall take both
the ends of the threade which is passed thorovv and by them lift up the web:
How to separate the web.
if it stick fast in any part he shall separate it with the point of a
vause, or cisers, or some such sharp, fine, and delicate instrument, vviping
away the blood issuing from it at the same instaunt, until he see the
veins of the vvebbe decayed and consumed by the avoiding of this blood:
continuing his work until he come to the corner: and mark how often he
draws the threade, so often shall he loose it, until he attain to the
beginning of the vvebbe, and the end of the natural flesh resting in the
corner. Two inconveniences.
For there is danger of two inco^ueniences, one, least some piece of the web
remain behind, whereby it may grow again unless it be removed by medicines: the
other least he cut the flesh which is in the corner, since it follows the
vvebbe being violently pulled out, and so may deceive the chirurgian. If this
flesh be cut, the hole which it did stop is opened, whereby issues out
water continually, which affect the Graecians name Rhyada, of which we
will speak in the proper place. Therefore he must be able to discern how
much suffiseth to be cut away, which being done, he shall lay a fine
linen cloth or lint dipped in honey upon the eye, and above that a defensive
against infla^mation, and three or four times in a day the patient shall be
dressed, and open his eye, least perhaps the eye-liddes glue and join
together or else stick to the eye, which is a third inconvenience. A third
inconvenience.
You must continue the applying of lint in this order, and in fine use a
collirium which may close up the ulcer. As R. aquae plantag. and rosar. ana.
si. sii, tutiae praepar. aloes an s s trochise. alb. Rasis s s. saccaricand.
si. If any other hurtful accidents fall out, you shall help and heal
those, omitting the proper cure for so long time.

CHAP. 6. Of certain white spots in the membranes named cornea, and
coniunctiua, called in greek aglia, or aiglia, in latin albicans cicatrix:
also of a knotte there arising, in greek poros, and porosis, in latin tophus,
or durities adnatae or corneae.
AIglia, Definition*
is a white spotte resembling a cicatrice gathered upon the membranes
coniunctiua and cornea. Causes.
This comes by a fleume which by little and little is heaped in the part.
It may also proceed of some piece of a vvebbe being left behind, about the
which some humor may he congealed, and in time come to a scarre. And where
these humors become very hard, there may be seen as it were a knotte upon
the membranes coniunctiua and cornea, it is called porosis. Porosis. Cure.
Concerning the cure, if this white spot be very high lift up, it shall be
consumed away with the collyrium set down before in the cure of the web, or
rather if it may be conveniently done, there shall be only used a drying
medicine. In curing the knot called poros, you shall first pull off the skin,
then apply such means as may consume it, afterward use a drying collirium,
which may also close it up. But if neither of these aforementioned maladies be
much deformed, neither a great hinderance to the sight, mine advise is, The
council of the author.
to use such means only as may stay the increasing thereof any further.
For it falls out many times, that vvhilest some have endeavored to heal
them, they have made them worse. Put therefore into the eye a little of tutia
prepared, and sugar candy, with a little of the dried fishbone called sepia,
in english a cuttle, mingled all together in fine powder.

CHAP. 7. Of the blisters in the hornie membrane, called in Greek phlictaenae,
in Latin pustulae: also of their diverse kinds.
PHlyctaenae, are little hot blisters arising in the skins of the eye,
Definition.
but especially in the hornie membrane, to wit, betvveene the skins of it.
For it is most certain that this hornie membrane consists of four little
coats or skins, Aetius.
in regard whereof these blisters are accounted diverse. Diverse kinds
For when they grovve under the first skin, the humor flowing between the
first and the second, then is the matter of the blister more black: it is at
other times betvveene the second and third, or third and fourth, and the
blister seems more white, The blister is black.
albeit it is hidden in the bottom of the hornie membrane. Now the natural
color of the blister is black, but the membrane is white, resembling horn:
therefore by how much deeper the blister is hidden in the membrane, by so much
more it represents the color of it being most grievous and tormenting, and
in danger to make an vlceration, by breaking through the membrane, whereupon
might ensue an utter loss and decay of all the humors. Those therefore which
are in the ouermost part of it are less dangerous. Causes.
For the most part they are engendered of choleric sharp biting humors, or of
a thin malicious humor running between the aforesaid skins. In the general cure
the patient must be careful to be quiet, to beware of much light, to use little
speech, to keep his bellye loose. Concerning local medicines, he must use
soft cataplasmes, as is accustomed in great inflammations, which vvil cover
not only the eye, but also the temples, forehead, Aetius.
and cheeks, renewing them often least they be too dry. Aetius appoints
this remedy: take the white and yolke of an egg, beaten with saffron, and a
little juice of poppye, small quantity of wine and bread: in like manner you
may use sodden quinces. According to these medicines you may appoint such a
cataplasme. R. micae panis albi in passo vel lacte tepido macerat. siiii.
pulpae cydonior. coctor. sub cineribus sii. croci si. opii s s. make your
cataplasme, adding to it the white and yolke of an egg. The salues which are
to be put into the eye, shall be made of the mucilages of quince-seed, and
flea-seede drawn in milk, or rose water and plantaine. After the heat is
delayed and the pain mittigated, you may put thereto a little myrrh,
frankincense, Celsus salve.
and saffron. Celsus prayseth this collyriu^. R. mirrh. papaueris lachrim. an
si. plumbi elot, terrae samiae, tragac. an siiij. stibii cocti, amyli an svj
spod elot. cerusae elot. an sviij. put them into raine-vvater, use your
collirium with an egg, or milk.

CHAP. 8. Of the ulcers in the horny membrane called generally in greek elcos,
in latin vlcus: also of the diverse kinds of them, as mistines, in greek aclis,
in latin caligo, cloudines, in greek nephelion, in latin nubecula, the round
ulcer, in greek argemon, in latin vlcus rotundum, the fiery ulcer, in greek
epicauma, in latin vlcus inustum, the pit, in latin fossula or annulus, in
greek bothryon, holownes, in greek coiloma, in latin cauitas, the filthy
ulcer, in greek egcauma, in latin vlcu^ sordidum
ELcos is taken generallye for any ulcer in any perte: The diverse acception
of this word.
but Galen applies it to the eye. The old physicians have made seven kinds
of the^, 7 kinds.
whereof four are in the ouermost part of the horny membrane, which may be
named outvvard, and three are inward in the bottom of the same membrane. Achlis.
The first of the outward ulcers is called achlis, which rese^bleth smoke, or
a mistie air, of a sky color, relying upon the black of the eye,
possessing a great part of it, and when it has gained the apple of the eye,
Gorren^.
the party sees very little. Some suppose it to be a black scarre, which
begins to obscure and make dim the sight. Nephelion.
The second is called nephelion, like to the former, but more deep and
white, occupying less room, because it is not so stretched, not lifted up*
yet it hinders the sight. The third is called argemon, Argemon.
which is a round ulcer in the white of the eye near unto the circle named
Iris, or the rain bow: it is white near to the apple of the eye, and read
in the membrane coniunctiua. Galen.
Galen affirms it to be an vlceration appearing white in the black of the
eye, and read in the white of it. The fourth is called epicauma, Epicauma.
which is a fierye boiling ulcer, rough, in color like unto ashes, lying upon
the apple of the eye, as if it were a flock of woll. Third book 22. chap.
Notwithstanding Aegineta takes it for a deep, filthye, and crustie ulcer.
Beside these, there are three other inward and deeply settled. The first is
named bothryon, Bothrion.
which is a little strait deep ulcer, like to a prick without filthy matter.
The second is coiloma, like to the former, Coiloma.
but greater, yet not so deep. The third is encauma, Encauma.
which is a filthy and crustie ulcer, out of which comes most vile, stinking
slimy matter, which can hardly be kept clean. Concerning the cure, although
some ulcers be little, Cure.
yet if they be not well handled, or utterly neglected, they prove malicious.
And in what place the humor is sharp and biting, there happens elcosis, that
is a bursting of the hornie membrane, by means whereof, either all the
humors, or part of them issues out. Elcosis.
This may also chance by inflammation. After the general cure consisting in
bloodletting, purging, cupping, rubbing of the shoulders, the chirurgian shall
carefully consider whether there be any inflammation as sometimes it
happens, that he may ease it with the medicines set down before in optholnia,
or the infla^mation of the eye. If the ulcer be in the left eye, the patient
shall lie upon his left side, and on the contrary. And according to the
filthiness of the ulcer, A cleansing medicine.
it shall be cleansed with medicines fit thereunto. As with this: take of
water, of eyebright and plantaine an i. of syruppe of violets i. s, of sugar
candy s make a collirium. If greater cleansing be required, you shall use this*
take of betony and buglosse water ana i. s, of honey of roses, and syrup of
worm vvood, ana. s, of myrrh and aloes, ana.. i make a salve. The mucilage of
fenegreeke is most profitable, if you add unto it a little syrup of dried
roses. When the ulcers are cleansed, you must use dry medicines made of
olibanum, cerufae lotae amili, gum. tragac. plumb vst. and litharg. Celsus.
Celsus used this medicine to cleanse and dry. R. aeris combust and eloti,
thuris, stibii combust. and eloti, mirrh. gum. ana. ij make a salve. This salve
may be dissolved in rose water, and the mucilages of flea-seed, quince-seed,
fenegreeke drawn in eie^bright or plantaine water.

CHAP. 9. Of the malicious eating or consuming ulcers, called in greek nomae,
in latin vlcera depascentia.
NOmae are malicious ulcers, Definition.
which partly begin at both the corners, partly at the white of the eye, and
sometime at the hornie membrane. They gnavve the eye suddenly, especially in
corrupt bodies: Signs.
there comes out of them a great quantity of most stinking slimie matter,
with exceeding pain* the party has a fever, and oftentimes a bloudye flixe.
They go forvvard in such sort, that oftentimes they consume the parts next
adjoining to the eyes, Cure.
as the muscles and eye-liddes. In the cure the patient shall use good diet,
and have his bellye loose: if the veins or arteries in the temple seem very
full, it shall be most expedient to let them bleed, and for the eye, the salues
set down in the former chapter are to be used. But if these ulcers creep
further to other parts beside the eye, Aetius.
then take scoria ferri, cerusae, olumbi, wash them all together, with
vvomans milk make them fit for your use, applying them with pomaton or oil
of roses, in form of an ointment. Now if these gentle and easy medicines stay
not the ulcer from going further, then oleum vitrioli is to be used, which I
have seen stay the course hereof with good success. And where necessity
does so require, this cataplasme is much commended of the old vvriters:
videlicet, take two quinces, four handful of nightshade, as much housleeke,
sees them in woman's milk.

CHAP. 10. Of the crabbed, or as it is commonly called, canctous ulcer, in
Greek elcos carcinodes, in Latin vlcus canceratum.
Definition.
ELcos carcinodes are little ulcers, happening in the black of the eye, which
cannot be closed, Aetius.
very painful, full of swollen vessels, as in the disease called varix: and
sometime when they seem to be closed up upon no manifest occasion, they open
again, and become ulcers. Signs.
They may be known by wandering and running pointed lines which go to the
temples by a sharp and thin course of humors; the white and black of the eye
are alvvaies red, the patient refuses his meat and drink, the grief and
pain is greatly increased by using sharp medicines. Old folk and women most
subject to this disease.
This malady is incident many times to old folks, by reason of some great
inflammation, and to women whose months are stayed. In curing of it the
ancient Physicians do counsel the Chirurgian, to foretell, that the sick
party cannot be fullye and perfectly cured: Prediction.
the especial cure must be therefore to assuage the pain by good diet,
purging, cupping, the seton and seating applied either behind on the head, or
upon the arm, Cure.
to the end that the recourse of the humor which might increase the disease
may be stayed and diuerted.

Amongst local medicines, the white of an egg beaten with vvomans milk is
praised by many: also lintels sodden and steeped in plantayne water, or juice,
the mucilages of quinces and line-seede often renewed. But where great pain
and inflammation is, there you shall use the cataplasmes set down in the
chapyter which entreats of opthalmia, or the inflammation of the eye, that by
this means the grief may be mitigated.

CHAP. 11. Of a scarre in the cornea, or hornie membrane, called in greek
oule, in latin cicatri^: also of the diverse kinds thereof, as the spotte in the
eye, commonly called argis, and leucoma, in latin albugo: of the white
shining scarre, in greek paralampsis, in latin cicatrix splendens.
Although oule be used generally for a cicatrice or scarre in any part:
Diverse acceptions of oule.
yet Galen takes it for a white high scarre upon the hornie membrane,
because of a deep vlcer^t may also happen in the white of the eye, but not so
evidently to be seen. The kinds thereof are aigis and leucoma, Hip. in prophet.
Galen in d^f. ^d.
when the scarre in the hornie membrane is thicker and higher then the former,
arising of a greater ulcer then the former, possessing sometimes the circle
Iris, or rainbovve. Some assign this defaulte to the crystalline humor, which
is wholy made white. Paralampsis.
Paralampsis is a scarre on the black of the eye, more hard, gross, and
shining then aigis. In the cure you must consider whether they be hollovv, or
standing up. Cure.
If they be hollovv, Celsus.
Celsus uses this collirium to fill them up and make them plain.

R. lachrym. papais. sagap. op^pon. an sij. aeruginis siiij. cumini s iiij.
pipe^ s. xij. cadiniae elotae, and cerus. ena. s vj. make them into a salve.
Aetius forbids dealing with old scars
Aetius gives counsel not to attempt the curing of very hard, gross, old
scarres, since they cannot be removed but with sharp medicines, which will
cause vlceration in the parts adjoining* but on the contrary, others may be
dimished with gentle clensing medicines, as aes vstu^, squama aeris, flos
aeris, calchitis vsta, which shall be washed and prepared, that their great
sharpness may be delayed: mares milk with a little honey is commended.
Celsus.
Celsus appoints this collirium. R. gummi sii aerug, si. crocomag. siiij.
make of these a salve. It is a most singular remedy to cause a little child,
or some other person who has a clean tongue, to lick the scars which are
not over hard and gross. This salve was given to me for an undoubted
experiment: An experiment.
take a pynte of white wine* wherein you must put an ounce of tutia well
prepared to steep, half an ounce of mirrhe, as much aloes, two ounces of
sugar candy, let it all stand soaking or infusing in a glass bottel in the
sun by the whole space off the Dog days. Others distill this water, and put
some drops of it into the eyes. How to change the color of scarres.
Now to alter and change the black scarres to white, such medicines must
be used which have virtue to bring blackenesse unto it, as galls, the pill of
the pomgranet, nux cipresse, vitriolum, litharge, plumbum vstum, calx lota,
sage: of these or such like you may appointe this remedy. R. calcis lotae s.
litharg. vtriusque i. cum decocto gallarum, nucu^ cipress. and saluiae, make
your medicine. Although the ancient physicians do use these remedies yet I
have not seen any great profit of them, and indeed I have found more hurt
then help reaped thereof, in so much that the white of the eye has been
changed black: for it cannot be but that the medicine which is applied to
the horny membrane, should flow upon that. Therefore they which will use
these, must be very careful to wash their lime, for avoiding of imminent
danger.

CAAP. 12. Of the eye full of matter or corruption, called in greek pyosis
opthalmou, in latin oculus purulentus: of the kinds thereof, which are a
nail or web, in greek onix, in latin vnguis a putrefied eye, in greek
hipopyon, in latin sanies in oculo.
PYosis opthalmou is an heap or lump of slimy matter, Definition.
with inflammation in the black of the eye. The old physicians make two kinds
thereof, 2 kinds.
whereof the first is named onix, which is when the corruption or slimie matter
is gathered by a deep ulcer, Onix.
between the skins of the horny membrane, and shows it self in the apple
of the eye, about the circle iris or rainbow, like to the pairinges of
nails. The second is called hipopion, when the corrupt matter is in greater
abundance, Hip^pion.
so that it possesses half the blackc of the eye, or shines thorovv the
horny coat which covers the whole apple of the eye. Causes.
This affection may arise not only of an ulcer, but also of great pain in the
head, or inflammation in the corrupted eye. And beside this inflammation, it
may grovve from great abundance of humors which break open the mouths of the
veins, also by a stroke or fall, which may make the blood disperse and
scatter abroad, which turns to suppuration or slimy matter, when it is out
of the proper vessels. When this comes, the party feels great throbbing
pain, the eye is read round about, Cure
and about the temples he has much pain. To meet with these inconveniences,
the party must with all speed be letten blood in the arm, in the temples, in
the corners of the eyes if it be possible, use cupping upon his shoulders, and
medicines which may stay inflammations by the space of two or three days,
so long as necessity does require. After this shall be used such medicines as
will resolve and assuage pain, such as this is, which for the excellency
is named in greek isotheen, in latin par deo, A divine plaster.
it may be called in english a divine remedy. R. cadmiae viij. aeris vsti
iiij. rosarum siccar. iiii. croci i. folii i. lapidis scissi i. mirrh. i. gum
vi. beat them with sweet wine, and use them with an egg. The last remedy.
If all these medicines heal it not, but still the eye is full of matter fast
remaining there, tha^ must you come to attempt this course and way: Let the
patient be set conveniently, having one to stay his head: let the Chirurgian
hold his eye with one hand, with an instrument called speculum oculi,
Speculum oculi in Ambrose Pares book.
of which you may see the description and picture in Ambrose Pare, and with
the other hand with the point of a launcet he shall finely and cunningly
pick the hornie membrane until he come to the slimie matter, which by little
and little shall he avoided. After this operation ended, he shall use
medicines which have virtue to beat back, and mittigate pain, as the white
of an egg beaten with rose and plantaine water: and then apply the remedies
before set down for ulcers, which may cleanse, increase flesh, and close them
up. The sure experience of th^s operation.
This practice I have seen performed by Ambrose Pare the kings chirurgian,
and even most excellently has he accomplished it, being at the age of
threescore and twelve years: and according to his example I have twice
practiced the same without any hurt, yea with great comfort ensuing
there-uppon. The Chirurgian must be provident, least flesh grow and increase in
the incision of the membrane, which will bring both hurt and deformity to the
party. To preuente this danger, this collirium is much commended that no
inflammation happen thereby. R. gum. arab. vi. spodii iiij. thuris, mirrhae.
acatiae, spic. nard. squamae aeris, opii an. i. with rain water bring them to a
perfect form, and then make them unto little round bals named trochisci: when
you will use them, wette them in the white of an egg with rose and plantaine
water.

CHAP. 13. Of the falling out of the membrane vuea called in greek proptosis
ragoides, in latin procidentia: also of the diverse kinds thereof, resembling the
head of a fly, in greek miochephalon, in latin formicalis ruptura, or muscae
caput: 2. resembling a grape, in greek staphiloma, in latin vuatio or vuea: 3.
resembling an apple, in greek melon, in latin malum: 4. resembling the head of
a nail, in greek elos, in latin clauus.
PRoptosis is here taken for a starting or falling out of the membrane named
vuea, Definition.
when the horny membrane is either loosed or broken: and as this malady
appears greater or less, so there are numbered diverse kinds thereof,
Miocephalon.
having names given unto them from the likeness of things which they do
represente, as miocephalon, when the standing forth of the skin is little,
like unto the head of a fly (...) Staphiloma is of two sorts, whereof the
first is, when the hornie membrane is lifted up, or drawn awrye, Staphiloma is
of two sorts.
either because some humors are gathered between the skins of it, or rather
because a vvheale is engendered amongst those skins, which may happen
without any breach in the hornye membrane. This kind of staphiloma causes
only a standing forth like to a grape, not in color, since it is not black,
but in roundnesse add whiteness as it were an unripe grape.

The other sort of Stapholima is, when the horny membrane is by vlceration
fretted in sunder, in such sort that the coat or membrane named vuea, slippeth
forth, and makes a round swelling tumor, resembling a black grape when it is
ripe. Melon.
It is called melon, when the vuea issues forth a greater quantity, so that
it ouer-reacheth the eye lidde, representing an apple hanging by the stalk.
Elos.
Elos is, when vuea being so far thrust out of the eie-lids becomes hard
and the horny coat round about being brawnie presses it down, as if it were
the head of a nail. Howsoever this malady grows, it brings with it two
dangers and discommodities, Two discommodities of this disease.
whereof one does empaire and decay the sight, the other does deforme and
disgrace the face. If the sight be lost, there is no recovery: if it be only
a deformity in the countenance it may be helped, Cure.
and chiefly by chirurgerie. When the staphiloma or grape is new, and stirred
by inflammation to lift up the hornie skin of the eye, it must be cured by
salues and cataplasmes appointed for the asswaging of inflammations, and also
by good order of diet. But if the recourse of humors amongst the skins of the
horny membrane has raised this swelling, and therewith pain, you shall use
the mucilages of fenegreeke and line-seede with a little honey. When the
grief is somewhat delayed, Aetius.
Aetius commends this remedy, to wit, a cataplasme made of bean flower,
and the seeds of roses sodden together in water. You may in like manner make
binding and comforting fomentations, applying them vvarme, with this prouiso,
that too much heat draw not humors to the place affected. Theodotius collirium.
The collirium of Theodotius tempred with liquor of cole-worts, applied very
thick upon the eye with a spoonge, and kept close with a roler, consumes and
disperseth this tumor, if it be not of long continuance. And seeing Aetius
reports so great fruit and effect of it, I will here set it down. R.
cadmiae lotae, stibii loti, acatiae, gummi ana. xxv. rosar. siccar. depurgat.
xii. aeris vsti, mirrh, ana. viii castorii, licii indici, croci, folii, spicae
nardi, chalcitidis tostae, cerus. glancii seminis ericae, opii, gall, omphac.
ana. ii. make them all in fine powder, and frame thereof with water little
round balls. When you will use them, you may dissolve them either with the
juice of cole-worts, or with the white of an egg. An other medicine for
miochephalon. R. cadmiae, sqammae aeris, croci an sviij. opii s xii. misios
vsti, mirrhae, acaciae, gummi ana. siiii. put them in water. Now, that kind
of staphiloma which has a deep and large bottom, Predictions.
and veins full of blood is most hardly healed. Those which stand far out,
change their color, as that which is in vuea, stir up vehement pain even
to the temples are incurable. When these signs appear in stophiloma, none
other remedies are to be used, but such as may ease the pain. But where the
bottom of them is not narrow, neither the ulcer of a malicious nature, the
cure may be performed by binding and rolling not vnfittely in this order. The
manual operation.
The patient shall be so placed, that he may lay his head upon the
Chirurgians knees sitting in a chair. Then thrust through a needle with a
double thread in the midst of the root of the tumor, beginning this work at
the great corner of the eye, and so pearcing it unto the less: when the
threade is passed thorovve, he shall cut off the needle, that there may be
two ends of the threade in the same place, and take two ends thereof in
one hand, and two in an other. This done, he shall knit one of the threads
on a fast common knot, and after-ward with a running knot to the end it may
be more easily loosed at your pleasure: according to this manner you shall tie
the other threade. In continuance of time these threades by little and little
will separate and cut out the tumor. And where the tumor is gross, you may
cut off the top of it, leaving only the root of it, in which the threades may
be retained. For if they fall out, the humors issue forth wlth the fame, and
the eye sincketh down. Some are not contented with two threads, but will
have four. This part of your work thus accomplished, such medicines must
be applied as will mittigate pain, which are the white of an egg, beaten in
rose water, or milk, or specially in the blood of a pigeon, laying upon it a
defensive to preuente inflammation and other inconveniences. When you will
dress the party, you must be careful least in removing the cataplasme you
pluck away the threeades which oftentimes are dried, and stick fast to the
same. Therefore make a little fomentation with milk which may moisten it,
using the same medicines until the threades of their own accord fall away,
tiyng them straiter if need do so require. When they are fallen away, you
shall use gentle medicines which may cleanse and increase flesh: after them
apply such as may close it up, whereof you have had before prescripts set
down, Chap. 7. and 8.
which as occasion is offered, may be altered.

The sixth section, containing the diseases which are incident to the apple of
the eye.
CHAP. 1. Of the enlarged or broad apple of the eye, called in greek
mydriasis, or platycoriasis, in latin pupillae dilatatio: also of the displaced
apple of the eye, in latin pupillae e loco remotio.
MYdriasis or platicoriasis is, Definition.
when the apple of the eye does not alter nor change his color, but is greater
then naturally it should be, stretching sometimes unto the circle iris, or
raine-bowe, whereby the sight is either much empaired, or utterly lost. They
which are troubled with this disease, Signs.
think every thing which they see to be greater then it is, which error
comes by the scattering of the spirits at the largeness of the hole in the
apple of the eye. Sometime it is not only enlarged and stretched abroad, but
it seems to be removed from the midst of the eye, and to have changed his
place, which in Arnoldus is called, pupillae e loco remotio. Pupillae e loco
remotio.
Now both these diseases happen either naturally, or of some other cause. If
they be natural and from the birth, Causes.
yet they hurt and hinder the sight. If any other cause have procured them, it
is either outward, as by a fall, or stroke: or inward by a recourse of
humors, which falling down by little and little, do cause the membrane vuea
to be stretched out, whereupon ensues the enlarging of the apple of the eye.
This disease is hardly cured, Praedictions.
because the coat vuea being much stretched forth by his skinnie nature in
continuance of time becomes so hard, Black eyes have the apple of the eye
great.
that it cannot be afterward easily drawn strayter. They, whose eyes are
naturally black, have also the apple of their eye great, and for this cause
do easily incur this inconvenience. Some see very well, although they have
this default from their birth. Cure.
Concerning the cure, it is general in good diet, purging, cupping, rubbing,
blood letting, both in the arm and corners of the eye, or particular in the
use of binding, and strengthening medicines, as fomentations and salues made ex
rosis, croco, nardo, thuris cortice, pompholyge, spodio, acatia, being
provident to avoid sharp medicines, because they draw down great abundaunce
of humors, Observations.
which still make the apple of the eye broader. And you must be no less
circumspect that your medicines bind not overmuch, least on the contrary the
apple of the eye be over strayte and little. Auicen.
Auicen commends this collirium. Take of the gall of a kidde and craine, of
each three drammes, of saffton one dram, of pepper 170. graynes, of juice of
lyquorice five drammes and an half, of armoniake two drammes, as much honey as
will be sufficient, make them all into fine powder, and then put to them
fenel water, and with honey make them into little round balls.

CHAP. 2 Of the consumption of the apple of the eye, called in Greek Ptisis
opthalmou, in Latin tabes oculi.
PThysis is used generally for all kind of decaying and leanness: Pthisis
diversely used.
notvvithstanding it is used in the old writers for that affect of the eye,
Aetius.
when the apple of it is made narrower and weaker. This default (says Auicen)
may be in it from the first beginning, Little eyes have quick, sight.
but they which have the apple of the eye so little have their sight most
sharp and quick. When this affection is not natural, Causes.
it may grovve by the dryness of the membrane vuea, which is withered and
drawn together, or by abundance of moisture descending upon the same, which
makes the edges and borders of the hole so large, that they touch each other,
and so it is made narrovve: even as we see in a sieue made of parchment, the
which being wette, the holes thereof are closed up. Moreover the dryness of
the waterish humor may procure this disease, which being dried becomes
less, and thereby is the coat that covers it made narrower. Weakness of
fight causes all things to seem greater then they are.
It may also be engendered through great weakness and extreme ach of the head.
To them which are thus affected, all things appear greater then they are of
their own nature: and in truth in alweakenesse of the sight, the objects are
more great in show, but not so plainly discerned: which error happens by
the littleness of the apple of the eye. Cure.
This order must be observed in the cure: If moisture have brought forth this
malady, it shall be cured by contrary medicines. It is profitable to rub the
parts above it, and also the eyes with the fingers, to vvash the face and
head, to rub it, and anointe it with oil of flower-deluce. In like manner to
use some sharp biting salve which may dravve moisture unto the eyes, as this.
R. ammon. thimiamat. i. crocomag. iiij. croci ij. aerug siiij. put them into
water and beat them, afterward make them fit for your use. If drynes
procured it, Auicen gives counsel to use moist and suming meats, Auicen.
and upon the place this salve must be applied. R piperis, ammoniac. ana.
parts i^. olei balsami nonu^partis vnius, croci part. i. dissolve the
armoniake with fenel water, put upon it oleum balsami, and then with honye
make up your medicine. The author accompteth this a most singular remedy:
but in my judgment, I would in place of oleum balsami, take good venice
turpentine.

CHAP. 3. Of the web or cataract, called in greek hypochyma, in latin
suffusio, gutta, aqua, imaginatio.
HYpochyma is an heap of superfluous humors made thick, Definition.
like to a little skin between the horny membrane and the chrystalline
humor, directly upon the apple of the eye, swimming above the waterish humor
in that place which Celsus affirms to be void and empty. ^ernelius.
It hinders the sight, or at least the discerning and judging of such things
as are before our eyes. Fernelius appoints the place of it between the
membrane Vuea, and the Christalline humor. Differences herein.
The differences of it is borrowed from the quantity or quality. From the
quantity, when it is whole, covering all the compass of the apple of the eye,
in such sort, that the party cannot see any thing. Sometimes it covers
only half of the apple of the eye, How it comes to pass that only some
part of the obiectis seen
or some part of it either above or beneath, or in the midst in such manner
that that only part of the thing before our face can be discerned which is
placed against the part of the eye which is free from this disease, whereby it
falls out oftentimes, that either the party sees nothing, or only some
part of things. For if that which is offered to the sight be set before the
part affected fully, he sees nothing, but if he pry at it with that part of
the eye which is sound he may see clearly. Now if the spotte or web be in
the midst of the eye not touching the edges or borders thereof, even as a
prick in the midst of a circle, The cataract* in the midst of the eye.
then the party sees only the extremity and edges of things, in the
midst thereof supposing there is a window, or covering, Differences from the
quality.
or some dark place. The differences which are drawn from the qualities, are
either from their essence and substance, since some are thin, slender, and
clear, thorough the which the light of the Sun may be discerned, others are
thick and gross: or from their color, since some are like brass, others
white like Plaster or Pearls, others pale colored, mixed of green and white,
or green and yeallowe, others like gold, others black, others resembling
ashes. Amongst the Arabians, Arabians.
cataracta, suffusio, aqua, gutta, imaginatio are used for the same things,
herein only is the difference, that imaginatio is called by Auicen, Imaginatio.
gutta zala, as it were the beginning of a web or cataract, because we
imagine we see that which in deed we see not, when the cataract is as thin
and slender as a spiders web. It is then named, Aqua and Gutta.
aquae and gutta when the cataract begins to receive some form enlarging
and running abroad like water: but when it is thick and ripe, Gutta obscura.
and harder, it is called a cataract, and of Auicen gutta obscura. The causes
hereof may be a fall, stroke, heat, cold, pain, by whose means the humor
is drawn and gathered thither, or rather vapors and humors ascending to the
brain, Causes.
and from thence descending to the eyes, which in process of time, and by
reason of cold are changed into water, and in fine become thick and
congeled. In like sort this malady may proceed of ill digested nourishment in
the eye, or if the nourishment have been good, yet the superfluttie of it has
not been avoided, which is an excrement of the third digestion. Fernelius.
Fernelius thinks the cause thereof to be a course of humors descending by
little and little upon the sinewe of the sight, which in the beginning cannot
be perceived: A cataract engendered in one day.
notvvithstanding he boldly affirms to have seen a cataract made and framed
in one day. For (says he) if at one moment a gross slimie humor may fall
upon the sinevve of sight, wheruppon ensues the loss of the whole sight, why
may it not suddenly engender a perfect cataract, having before time had
recourse upon the apple of the eye? Signs of the cataract beginning.
Now when the vvebbe or cataract begins, these signs and tokens are
incident to the diseased. They imagine there are before their eyes little dark
things resembling flies: others suppose they see hairs, others threades of
wool, others spiders webbes, others think they behold a circle about the
candles when they are light, and sometime two candles for one. When these
things do thus fall out, if you look upon the apple of the eye, it appears
clear and pure, but if you behold and vievve it more nearely, it will seem
somevvhat troubled, and if you compare it with the other eye which is sound, it
vvil appear somevvhat appalled. Predictions ^ couching cataracts.
It has sometime the color of the sea as the disease increases. Concerning
praedictions, and foretelling of the event which vvil ensue, those which are
like to rustie iron or pearls, or have a green or ash color or resemble a
turquoise, or sea water, are fit to be couched: on the contrary, those which
are like to chalk, lead, citrons, black or yelowe, cannot be couched with a
needle. Beside their color the substance is to be examined whether it be
fit and prepared: for that which is enlarged and spread abroad without
seperating into pieces, Consideration of the substance.
returning to his former figure and greatness is known to be curable by this
his ripeness. But if it be scattered into pieces when it is spreadde abroad,
it is not yet ready nor fit to be couched. Neither may you deal with that
which is not stretched forth in breadth and largeness, since it is an evident
sign that the sinevve of sight is stopped, whereby the spirit which causes
sight should be conuayed forth as with a blast made larger: for it is but
lost labor since he could not see any thing albeit that were removed. How
to know if the sinew of sight be stopped.
Thus you may make proof hereof, if the eye being shut he rub gently
upon the eie-lidde with his fingers turning it sometime to this side, sometime
ot that, and then lifting up the eie-lidde suddenly, consider, if the
cataract do spreadde abroad and return again presently or not. The same
observation you may take by closing the other eye wherein is no cataract: for
in thus doing you shall perceive the spirits enlarged in that which ought to
have been carried to both the eyes.

That cataract is the worst, which comes either by great sickness, The
worst cataract.
or extreme ache in the head, or by a grievous stroke or wound. It is
incurable in old men and children which without this imperfection have their
sight decayed. Only age is a sufficient mean to receive cure in a cataract if
it be full ripe and the eye be neither too little, nor sunk down deep into
the head. Concerning the cure, if it be in the beginning of this disease, you
shall labor to prevent the further increase thereof by good order of Diet, and
by bloudletting in the Fore^heade, Cure in the beginning.
Temples, and Arm, by Purging, Cupping, Cauterizing, applying of a Seton, and
other remidies to be kept in the mouth, or put into the nose^ And touching
particular remedies, these salues following are highly praised. R. terebintl^.
lib. s. sulph. viu^ ij. ^ellis ros iiij. plantag. and arn^gloss, euphras.
chelidon. ana. m.ii. let them be altogether distilled in an alembicke of
glass, or this. R. zinzib, cinnamon, garioph nucis mosch. gran. parad. ana. ii
s foli^r. saluiae, m.ii. cardam. masti^. cubeb. galang* rorism, maioran,
lauand, m^liss. beton. an. i. let them soake in four pound of excellent
wine, by the space of ten days, then distill them. Put two or three drops
of this water into the eye, continuing this order a sufficient time. But if all
the afore-saide means both general and special be not able to heal the
cataract, it shall grow until it be ripe, without applying any other medicine
unto it. When it is ripe, which may be known by the signs before set
down, then enterprise the work, but with this caveat, that you have
diligent regard to the time of the year, What time is fitest to couch the
cataract.
wherein this may be most fitly achieved, which is especially the spring
time, then summer, and also if necessity so require, and the patient be
vvilling, vvinter, or the fall of the leaf. But above all other things do not
adventure to couch a cataract, either on a rainy, windy, very hot, or very
cold day. For we have learned by experience, that the couching of them at such
a time stirs up gteate, yea almost intolerable pains in the head.
Therefore when you have chosen a convenient time, the party must eat little,
and drink water, or some other thin drink, The patients diet sober.
abstaining from wine by the space of two or three days before you attempt
the couching of it* and especially on the day before, his eating and drinking
must be with marvelous sobriety. This being done, let him be set in a light
place, having his face turned tovvard the Chirurgian, and the light coming
directly upon him, let one hold his head steadfastly without moving: for
any little motion of it may bring blindness without recovery. The Chirurgian
must have a higher seat then the patitient. The affected eye must be kept
open, and the sound eye covered with a little linen cloth. Let the Chirurgian
rub the right eye with the left hand, and the left eye with the right
hand, before he begin his work, or rather let some child having a very
clean mouth chevv fenell or a^-seeds, which when he has spitte forth, let
him breath upon the diseased part, that by this means the cataract may be
made more thin, and smaller. When you have proceeded thus far, bid him turn
the eye which has the cataract tovvard his nose, as if he would look upon him
and presently put your needle unto it, which must be sharp pointed, not
slender, flat, nor round, to the end it may enter and pierce more easily, and
that the roundnes thereof cause it not to slip upon the cataract, then thrust
it straight inward, or overthwart the membranes named coniu^ctiua and cornea,
in the midst of the black of the eye, Observation
at the corner which is nearer to the temples guiding and directing it upon the
midst of the cataract, so that no vein be hurt: nevertheless you must
thrust boldlye without fear, since the place is there void, least after it be
entered in, the Chirurgian though he be cunning, be deceived, if he lift it up
with the needle, and perceives nothing to resist it. Now when the needle is
thrust through, it must be stayed on the the top of the cataract, and by little
and little turned gently to bring the cataract toward the lowest part of the
apple of the eye: and when it is couched there, you shall press it down very
hard, that it may abide in that place. If it do remain there, the cure is
perfect, if it ascend up again, the^ with the same needle break and cut it
into many pieces, which will cause less hindrance, and require less room.
After this draw out the needle, and lay with in the eye the white of an egg,
with a linen cloth folded together, and with out apply something to prevent
inflammation, with a roller binding it up. These things ended, The patient must
be quiet, and use abstinence.
the sick party must remain quiet without stirring, lying in his bed, without
moving his head any way, or very little, not seeing any great light for a
certain time, abstayning from meat, supping only thin broth by the space of
six or seven days, without chewing any meat with his teeth, because it
might dtavve down humors to the eye, and make the cataract ascend again.
When the inflammation is ceased, you shall order the patient as if he were
grieuouslie vvounded. He may not be dressed, nor the eye vnrolled, until the
second or third day after the couching of the cataract, unless there happen
any inflammation, or great pain.

When you will dress it, shut the windovves, and set a candle lighted
behind him, and not before his eyes, or rather far of from him on the side,
Great light is ^urtfull.
least the great light suddenly offerred to his sight, may trouble the eye, and
stir up the cataract. Now, sometime in couching of cataracts, Flux of blood.
there happens a flux of blood within the eye, in such sort, that the
humors seem all read. This arises of blood issuing out of some little vein
or artery which is cut or pricked: this blood mingling with the vvaterish
humor, gives it this red color, and as it were dries it so, that the
Chirurgian if he have not seen the like event, and all that stand by would
judge the eye bursten and utterly lost: notvvithstanding about two or three
days after, when the patient shall be dressed, this blood will be so waste,
that no token thereof will appear. There are some cataracts which vanish and
scatter as soon as the needle is applied to couch them, because they are not
hard and solid to bear the needle, which goes through them as it were a
green cheese, Cataractae lact^a.
whereof they are commonly called cataractae lacteae, because their color and
substance resembles milk. That the Chirurgian may meet with this
inconvenience, he must labor to loose it, pressing it with his needle on
every side: for by this means I have seen and proved sometime the grossest
part of the cataract to fall away, and come lovver, the thinner part to be
loosed and consumed, and in the end the party has recovered his sight.
Albucrasis.
Albucrasis does write, that it was reported in his time, one had devised to
pick the eye with an hollovve needle, and by the hollownesse of it he could
raise up and dravve forth the humor of the cataract. Notvvithstanding I
think he might sooner raise and dravv forth the vvaterish humor, then the
cataract, when it is ripe and ready to be couched, because it is an hard
skin.

The seventh section, entreating of those diseases, which are incident to the
humors of the eyes.
CHAP. 1. Of green, pale, or gray eyes, called in greek glaucoma, or
glaucosis, in latin glaucoma, or coesii oculi, and by the interpretour of
Auicen, viriditas oculi: also of the wolues-eie, or cursed eye in greek
aethemoma, in latin raui oculi.
Two significations of glaucoma.
GLaucoma is used in two senses: for it is taken improperly for a web
cataract or spot which is gathered and dried round about the apple of the eye:
which signification some of the old physicians have used this word as
Aegineta writes saying, the ancient writers have supposed Glaucoma and
hypochyma to be one and the same disease, Aegineta.
which have been only distinguished by the new writers. Galen.
Neither does Galen much descent from this opinion, affirming glaucoma to be
like to the web or cataract, and that both of them may be comprehended under
the same name. Gorraus.
Nevertheless (as Gorraeus says) it follows not that they are like. For the
cataract is a collection and an heap of other humors, then of those which
are naturally in the eye, flowing unto it from some other place: but glaucoma
is properlye used when the Cristaline humor is dry and thick, The difference
between glaucoma and hipo^himc.
and the color of it is green vvhereupon the eyes seem green or pale.
Moreover, the cataractes are alvvaies so great that they ouerspreade and cover
the whole apple of the eye, and hinder the vvholesight: but glaucoma
possesses all the Christaline humor, and it is dry in every part, and by
reason of the dryness it grows so thick. Besides these, cataractes may be
cured, but Glaucoma is incurable, when it has once attained to perfection as
Aegineta writes concerning the opinion of Rusus. Aegineta.
When this affection is only found in one eye, Heteroglaucosis
it is called in greek Heteroglaucosis, as if that party had unlike eyes, and
of two parrishes. There is incident to the Christaline humor, an other malady,
named in greek Argyrias, in latin, Argirias.
albedo in Christilloide, which is a white spotte growing upon the
Christaline humor, which is easily perceived if you look upon the ey: it
hinders the sight more or less, as it is greater or smaller, and may be
accounted the beginner and messenger of glaucoma. In old time, and even in
these days also, green or gray eyes, called in greek glauci, in latin
coesii, were much commended in women, whereupon in Homer Minerua is always
surnamed glaucopis, that is, having green or gray eyes. The diversity of
opinions.
Although Aegineta assign the cause of this disease unto moisture, yet Galen
and Hippocrates impute it to dryness, for which cause old folk are subject
unto it. Arist. 5. lib de generat animal.
Some have imagined that a green color intermedled with the Crystalline
humor causes this disease, and makes this gray or azure color called
glaucoma. The cure is to be taken in hand in this order. When you perceive
this malady beginning, which is evident in the Crystalline humor appearing
some-vvhat gray, first use your general cure, then such medicines as may
comfort and stay the Crystalline humor, least it wax dry and be frosen: as
moist and comfortable fomentations. R. of the tops of mallovves, holyhocke,
violets, ana. m. i. ey-bright, selandine, an. m. s of camomill flowers, and
melilot, an p. s line-seeds, ii. faenel and ani-seeds an i. sees them for a
fomentation. This collirium shall be put into the eye. Take of the mucilage of
quince, and line-seed drawn in water of pellitorie on the wall, ana. i. of
faenell and eyebright water ana s dissolve herein of myrrh and aloes, ana.
s, of benjamin and storax calamit, ana. ii. make a salve of all these. This
aforementioned ingredience may be distilled, and the water of it will be very
profitable. Those medicines which have virtue to dissolve cataractes and vvebbes
in their beginning may be in this case discreetely used, as also hoate bread
taken out of the oven, wherein is baked the powder of ani-seedes and faenell,
may be well applied in this order. Divide the bread in the midst, and lay
it upon the eye so hot as the party can abide it and let it so remain upon
the eye a good space. The breath of a sound and clean person which has
chewed faenell or ani-seede is not unprofitable in this case. The distilled
water of faenell and any seeds is most singular, if it be vvisely used and so
are the mucilages of quince, Fenegreeke, and Linseedes drawn in the aforesaid
waters. There happens to the eye an other affection called in greek,
Ae^hemoma, ^themoma.
in latin, raui oculi, in French the wolves eye, or evil boy, and I think
we call it in English, the cursed eye, or evil eye, or sometimes greedye
eye, which is, when the humors are all black, and thereupon the whole eye
is black. In curing of this seeing it differs little from glaucoma, you
shall have recourse both to general and special medicines set down for
that disease. Fernellius vvriteth of an other affect incident to the eye,
called in Latin, Occulusleoninus.
Leoninus oculus the Lions eye in french, the brazen eye, when the eye is
read, cruel, proud, resembling sparks of fire, as we behold in a Lion,
and in them which have the leprosy. Seeing this affection is joined with the
leprosy, before you adventure the helping thereof, you must cure the leprosy
it self.

The eight section, containing the diseases incident to the corners of the eye.
CHAP. I. Of an Aposteme in the great corner of the eye, called in greek,
anchilops, in Latin, abscessus ocularis.
ANchilops and aegilops are sometimes used for one self same disease, The
difference of anchilops and aegilops.
but they are most commonly distinguished in this manner. Anchilops is a
swelling or aposteme betvveene the great corner of the eye and the nose
which is not opened, but aegilops, is a fistula procured by means of this
aposteme. Causes.
The cause is an heap of thick gross humors like to honey or pulse, which is
sometimes wrapped in a little skin increasing by little and little,
Predictions.
but without any pain. This disease is hardlye cured, because the
delicateness, and tenderness of the bone, vvhereupon the swelling grows,
and because it is so near unto the eye that the medycines may endanger the
same. Concerning the cure, as soon as the aposteme begins, with all speed
apply medicines which have great force to beat back, and may bring little
astonishment: of this kind and nature is emplastrum contra rupturam, vnguentum
de bolo, comitiss. desiccatiuum rubrum, where unto you may add a little opium.
For these medicines will quickly dissolve and disperse that, which is gathered
to that place. But if you see the course of humors and inflammation remaining,
then such medicines shall be applied, whose property is to resolve without
sharpnes least by molesting the eye the inflammation be increased. Aetius.
Aetius appoints this remedy. R. thuris sviij, mirh. sviij. ladani si. cerae
sviij. alumin. sciss. siiij. spumae nitri, siiii. ^oaguli leporis, siiij beat
these together, and with the grossest part of oleum Ir^num make them soft and
fit to be used. If in despite of all these medicines the tumor comes to
suppuration, when this aposteme must be opened.
open it speedely, that the humor may run out, which if it be in a bag or
skin, take the same away cunningly: and if it cannot be taken away without
danger or hurt, consume it with pure powder of Mercury, or rather mingle
with it some cleansing medicine, or such ike. To make the cure perfect, and
to prevent the returning of this malady some use to sear the edges of it. The
remainder of the cure shall be accomplished with this medicine: R. olei
hipericonis i. gum. Elemi s. thuris, mirrh. an ij sarcocoll j. melt them
together and make a salve. If you perceive the ulcer does not heal, you must
have care to observe, least it turn to a fistula, if the bone be corrupted and
rotten: and for this cause, the cure shall be changed as the condition of the
disease does require.

CHAP. II. Of the weeping fistula, called in greek, aegilops in Latin,
fistula lachrimalis.
AEgilops is a little fistula, in the corner of the eye near to the nose,
Definition.
out of which issues continually fleume or a thin humor, arising of some
former disease, as of anchilops suppurated, but either not speedily opened,
Causes.
or negligently dressed: or rather it is procured of slymie matter, or moist
medicines, or the air which has altered, and rotted the bone in that part.
Signs.
This malady vexes the eye without ceasing, being sometimes red, and pearcing
thorovv cue^ to the nose. It has in some, the nature and properties of a
ca^cer, and in those the veins at stretched forth, and crooked, the color pale
and bluish, the skin hard. If it be touched as gently as is possible, it
stirs up infla^ation in the parts adioining. Praedictions.
It is dangerous attempting the cure thereof, when it is of a cankrous or
crabbed nature: for it hastes the death of the patient. And it is lost labor
to take in hand the cure of it when the aposteme touches the nose, since it will
never be perfectly healed: those which are in the corner of the eye are curable,
but yet the nearer their hole or mouth is to it, the greater difficultye is in
the cure: that which is of short continuance may be most easily healed* these
things thus considered, and the bon corrupted through long continuance of the
disease, and the cu^e set down in the former chapter be not auailable, it
behooves the chyrurgio^ to enter into an other course. Let him make wider the
mouth of the fistula either with the point of his lau^cet, Cure.
or some other instrument, or with a sponge prepared fitly to open and enlarge
the same. This don, let him place the patient conveniently, and defend the eye
either with a plate made for that purpose whereof you have a discriptio^ in
Ambros Pares book, the kings chief Chyrurgia^, Ambros Pare^.
or with any other thing co^modiouslye serving thereunto. Afterward with an
actual cautery (as it is called) sear the bon and the parts which go cross
within the fistula, and especially the over most parts of the^, because in that
place there is a straight hollownes whereat issues a thin humor like tears into
the ulcer from the higher and overthwart part: If this place should not be
dried by searing, it would make the ulcer to short, and thereby hinder the
perfect closing up of the same. I have seen Ambrose Pare heal many with good
success, Experience.
in short time by whose example I have most happily practiced the like. When
this part of your work is ended, you shall use a disgestiue made of turpentine,
and oil of eggs: apply within the eye the white of an eg beaten with rose water
and plantine, whereupon lay a defensive, and continue the use of your
digestive until the eschar be removed. Not long after nature will cast of a
little scaile from the bone where it was touched with the fearing iron,
which, whether it be with matter or without matter, let not the Chirurgian
suddenly and rashly pull any part of it away, Nature must be followed.
but wait the leisure of nature in disburdening it self of the same. For
whosoever will hastily and by force draw it away, especially before nature
have brought forth flesh between the sound bone, and that which shall be cast
off, he shall cause a new rottenness in the bone. In the mean time, let the
ulcer be kept clean, then use means to increase flesh, lastly, close it up
when it shall seem expedient.

CHAP. III. Of the outgrowing of flesh in the great corner of the eye, called
in greek encanthis, and according to Auicen additio carnis lachrimalium.
Definition.
ENcanthis is a tumor, or addition of flesh to that which naturally grows in
the great corner of the eye near to the nose, or rather when the natural
flesh grows beyond his compass. Of this there are two sorts. The one is
most commonly tender, loose, Two kinds
without pain, red in color, yelding easily to medicines. The other is
malicious, hard, rugged bluish, having pricking pain, not relenting by
medicines but is only curable by the hand of the Chirurgyan. There are three
principal causes of this malady, The first is a flowing, Three causes
and an heap of melancholicke humors, which make the flesh in the corner of
the eye gross, as we see it in warts. The second is, when the flesh grows
out through ill handling of an ulcer which has been in that place. The
third is the remainder of a nail or vvebbe, which was not fully taken
away, and therefore has grown and increased unto a more gross nature.
Concerning the cure, that which is little, Cure.
gentle, not malicious may be healed with only drying medicines, as with
this, Aetius.
commended by Aetius. R. aluminis vsti, mysi Combust. vitriol. an parts
aequales: make your medicin in this case that Colliriu^ is most singular which
we have set down before, for the disease called miocephalon. I have seen the
trial of oleum vitrioli, vvherevvith the part affected hathbene touched, but
first of all the eye has been sufficiently defended. Now if this flesh which
grows out, The manual operation.
be great, and malicious, but not of the nature of a cancer, it shall be taken
away by Chyrurgerie in this manner. The Chirurgian must put thorovv the midst
of it a thread, vvhervvith it shall be lifted up, then with his rasour or cisers
he shall cut it, being provident least he cut any part of the natural
flesh adjoining unto it. Otherwise he shall bring into the place of it a
worse disease named rhaeas, which causes the eye to weep continually. When
you have finished this work, you shall lay upon it dry medicines to prevent
the growing of the flesh again, proceeding in perfecting the rest of your
cure according to that, which is written before in dealing with the web in the
eye.

CHAP. 4 Of the weeping eye, called in greek, rhaeas or rhaeades ^pthalmou,
in latin fluxus oculi.
Definition.
RHaeas is a diminishing or consu^ptio^ of the flesh which naturally grows in
the corner of the eye with continual grievous weeping. It arises either by
ill curing of the web, fistula, or encanthis, Causes.
when too much of the glandulous flesh or kernels which grovvin that place is
cut away or consumed by medicines. For hereuppon the tears cannot be stayed,
but the eye seems to vveep alvvaies, yea the cheeks are continually wet
with the tears. A double use of the glandulous flesh.
For seeing there is a double use of this glandulous flesh or kernels, whereof
the first is to stop the hole in the corner of the eye which has passage
into the nose* least the excrements which disce^d from the forepart of the
brain upon the bon called as cribrosum because it resembles a sieue should run
into the eye, and it preuenteth the violent carriage of air into the eye
thereby, when we blow or snuff, or any way cleanse the nose of that filth which
is in it The second use is to cover the little corner conduit in the corner of
the eye, by the which the excrements and natural superfluities are conuayed
into the nose. This excrement is a thin liquid humor which flows out in
weping, or laughing, and whenever the brain does disburden it self of these
superfluities. If this humor be not much in quantity, and commendable in
quality, then the kernels do receive, retain and keep it, The eye must be
kept moist.
to sprincle it upon the eye (as is the office of other glandulous flesh or
kernels placed at thee root of the tongue) to keep it moist, and make it move
more easily, which it could not do if it were very dry, and it could not but
be very dry, since it is moved continually, whereby it is made hoate. But if
this humor contained in the kernels offend either in quantity, or quality, it
brings forth ulcers, tears, and other diseases before set down. Now when
too much of the flesh is taken away, either by cutting, searing, or corrosiue
medicines, there is made not only a scarre in the place, but also the hole
entering into the nose remains open, thorough the which the excrementes of the
brain fall without any hinderance upon the eye, which procures continual
weeping. Cure.
In curing hereof some use binding medicines to the end they may stop the
hole, and cut of the passage: others scarrifie the skin, round about, with
incarnatiue medicines (as they call them) laboring to restore, and engender
new flesh in place of the former which was decayed: and when it is grown
sufficientlye they close it up and make it dry. But because this kind of
cure is both hard and dangerous, An hard and dangerous cure.
many content themselves with closing up of the hole, not regarding the
restoring of new flesh. These men force not the manifold disco^modities which
spring by stopping of the eye. For first the passage of ordinary excrementes
unto the eye is debarred. Secondly, Aninconuenient cure.
since the cicatrice is none other thing but hard dried flesh, by reason of the
thickenesse thereof it is not able to receive and drink up these superfluities:
hereupon ensues continual tears dropping from the eyes. Therefore in regard
of this inconvenience it is more expedient to adventure the generation of new
flesh, then only to close up the ulcer.

CHAP. V. Of fretting and itching Ulcers in the corners of the eyes called in
greek Peribrosis, and Epinyctis, in latin Angulorum Erosio, or Pruritus
Lachrymalium
PEribrosis is taken for a little itching Ulcer in the corners of the eyes,
Definition.
and there is itching sometime without appearaunce of any ulcer. Causes.
This disease comes of a salt humor flowing unto that part, and there staying:
vvhereupon they which are troubled therewith, put their hands often to their
eyes, take delight in rubbing them, and suppose often times that there is sand
or some other such like thing in their eyes. Epinictis.
Epinictis is used generally for little ulcers growing of their own nature,
resembling in the beginning redd wheales, wherein is found blouddy matter: On
the day time they are not much painful, but in the night season, their
torments are more vehement then could be immagined to come from so small a
thing. At what time this pain begins.
This pain begins vsuallye about three or four hours before night, and
continues until midnight, at which time it cease, in such sort, that on
the morrovve the party feels either very little or no grief, neither does
their remain any thing, but dry tough matter wherewith the eie-lids are tied
and joined together, which you must help by anointing the edges and borders
with vngue^t de tutia. Pliny.
Nevertheless we according to Pliny: do take epinictis in this place for an
ulcer in the corner of the eyes wherout islueth vncessauntly slimie matter.
This ulcer it more grievous then the former, because it is more filthy,
malicious, and painful especially in the night, whereof it is named. Cure of
Peribrosis.
After the general cure, these local medicines may be used in peribrosis.
Take of the mucilages of quince seeds and linseeds drawn in the water of
Plantine and Pellitory of the wall ana. i. of white coporas dissolved in
rose water i. s mingle them for your use. Water of coporas.
This water of white coporas only I have proved with very good success
being provident least it were too strong. It is a conterpoison against great
itching, An history reported by Ambrose Pare.
which does so much vex the party, that Ambrose Pare the kings counsailour
and chief Chyrurgian reports he savv a woman constrained to wash her
eyes with strong vynegar, findyng in it more ease and comfort then in any
thing which she could use. Concerning Epinyctis, Cure of Epinictis.
because it is a more filthye ulcer, it must be dyligentlye cleansed, to the
which purpose you must dissolve into the aforenamed salve a little sirrup of
wormwood, and honey of roses, or else touch the ulcer with this collyrium which
will not offend the eye. Take of rose water and eiebright water ana i. Myrrh
and Aloes ana.i. vnguenium egiptiac.i. s. dissolve the^ all together and make
a salve, dippe a linen cloth in this salve and touch the eye therewith, and
put upon the eye immediately a medicine which may delay pain and cool, as
the white of an egg beaten with plantine water, or rather in place of it, wash
it with strawbery water When these ulcers are thus cleansed the Chirurgian must
have wise consideration in closing them. For otherwise, there is great danger
least the eie-lids stick together, in that manner which is spoke of in the
disease named prosphysis, since both of them are vlcerat. To prevent this, How
to prevent prosphisis
you must use vnguentum de tutia spread upon a fine linen cloth and laid
between the eie-lidds to withholde one from an other. In this doing that which
is vlcerated and kept clean shall heal a part, and the other in like manner.
But if this inconvenience do grow, then you must have recourse to the chapter
entreating of anchiloblepharon, or the joining together of the eie-lidds.

The ninth section comprehending the diseases incident to the sinewe of sight,
which is called ^n latin Nervus opticus or visualis.
CHAP. I. Of the stopping of the sinewe of sight, in greek amaurosis, in latin
obfuscatio, guita saerena: also of the deceiving or dim eye, called in greek
parorasis, in latin halluctnatio, or calltgatio.
AMaurosis most commonly is a hinderance of the whole sight, Definition.
without any appearance thereof in the eye: for the apple of the eye remains
sound, and unchanged the sinewe of sight only is stopped. Sauonarola seems
to name the beginning of this disease in greek parorasis, in latin
hallucinatio, Causes.
or caligatio, which we may name in english the dim or deceitful sight, when
we take one thing for an other, which thing is a forerunner and messenger of
blindness. These defaultes befall to some suddenly, to others by little and
little, but so, that either they see nothing, or very little. The difference
between ambliopia and lamaurosis.
The causes of this which comes by little and little are like to that malady
which is called in greek ambliopia, in latin, b^be^udo. And some have thought
the difference of these two to consist only in this, that the causes of
ambliopia are less, but the causes of amaurosis are greater and stronger. Now
the cause of that which comes altogether suddenly, and (as we say) at one
push which is rightly called amaurosis is when the sinew of sight is filled and
stuffed with thick slimy humors falling into the hollownesse of it, which will
not suffer the spirit of sight to be conuayed thereby into the eye. How to know
if the sinew of sight be stopped.
The way to know the stopping of the sinevv of sight, and that no spirit can
pass through it is this Shut the other eye, and the apple of that eye which is
stopped will not appear to be enlarged, which it would be if the spirit of
sight were conuaied thereto by the sinewe: for this spirit does as it were
with a blast make the apple of the eye broader. Therefore where this is not
apparaunt, you must judge either the sinevve to be stopped, or rather that the
brain is not able to send spirits to this sinevve which may happen by
weakness thereof, growing of long sickness trouble, or old age, whereby
the spirits are waste and scattered. Praecedent causes.
The forerunners and as it were outvvarde causes of this disease are much
ravvnes or ill disgestion, drinking of pure wine, great heat of the son, or
cold on the head, continual reading, bathes after meat, vomiting, immoderate
company with women, holding in of the breath as we see in trumpeters: for
all these things fill the head with vapors. Before this effect do plainly
appear the party perceives great heaviness in his head, Cure.
specially in the root and botom of the eyes. In curing those to whom this
disease has befalen through fulness it is necessary to let the^ blood on the
arm, then on the forhead, to use cupping upon the shulders with scarrifiing,
to purge to observe good order of diet, to eschew strong vvines, to abstain
from fuming meats, to rub the lovver parts, Aetius most excellent salus
is much commended we have this salve (says Aetius in great admiration and
honor Take of Safron i. mirh i. pepper gra. xv. spicknard ob. ij juice of
Fenell.xvi. ammoniac. thimiamat. i. honny v. When they are all beaten finely,
power into them the juice of Fenell, then beat them again until they be dry,
afterward put the honnye unto them, and keep this salve in a brazen box for
your use. Before you do use this Collirium you must have a fomentation of Sea
water hot, wherein dip a sponge and often bathe the eye. This Author
approves the applying of a causticke behind on the head, as also to dry the
head. There has been seen great fruit and profit by the use of bags and
coyfes put upon the head, when the hair is shaven. Take of the flovvers of
staechadis or both sorts of Lauander, Hysope, Betony, Camomill, Ana P. i. red
roses P ii. calam. aromat lign. aloes ciperi an.. i bay leaves, maioram ana. P
i. nutmeg, the root of the flovver deluce, A coyfe to were on the head.
excellent cinnamon an. ii. s cloves i. s stiracis Calamit i. ambargrise gra
vi. musk gra. iiii. beat all these to powder and sow them in a linen cloth
with, bombast made to the fashion of a coyfe. But before he use it he must rub
and stroke down his head with a little bra^, putting unto it a little salt,
which must be made moist with a little wine. This electuarie is commended to
comfort the stomach, A comfortable electuarie.
and to prevent the engendring of gross fleum in the brain. Take of fine
cinnamon. i. and i. cloves ligni aloes, mace ana.. s. ginger s. aniseedes in
powder i. take the equal weight of sugar to the^ all, and with vvormewood
water make losinges in weight iij. let him use these in the morning three
hours before dinner. Or rather let the patient use this singular electuarie.
R. electuarii human. descript, Mesuae i. s. aromat ros. ana. s. mingle them
together, and let him take thereof evening and morning before meat the
quantity of a chestnut. I have not set down here any eye-salues, which have
none use in this case, since the default is not in the eye.

CHAP. 2 Of the depression or weakness in the sinew of sight, called in greek
simptosis in latin, concidentia.
SYmptosis is when the sinevv of sight, Definition.
is so flat, vveak, and pressed down, that there is not any hollownesse
remaining in it, because the inside of the skinns do touch each other. Causes.
This thing proceeds of abundance of humors which fall not into the
hollovvnes, but upon the mere substance of this sinevv which is so much loosed
and softened that it falls down, and one part lies flagging upon an other.
It may also come of drines, vvherby it is withered and gathered together,
and becomes vvrinckled, as may be euidentlye s^ene in old men, whereby the
holes and poorie passages thereof are stopped This default may grow in like
manner from weakness, Celsus. 7 book chap. 26.
albeit the sinevv be neither too moist, nor too dry. This we may behold in
old folk, which have the conduit of their urine so depressed thorovv
weakness and feeblenes of the part, that no water can pass that way. So
we may judge of this sinevv of sight, which being feeble and decayed cannot
give entrance and a free course to the conuaying of the spirit of sight into
the eye, whereupon the party must of necessitye be deprived of sight. Now, Cure.
although there be small hope of cure* yet let not the Chirurgian leave the
sick party destitute of all help. For if he perceive the disease does grovve
from abundaunce and fulness, In old folk incurable.
the general and particular remedies set down in ambliopia vvil be fit and
agreeable in this case. But if old age bring this infirmity, then it is to be
accounted incurable.

CHAP. 3. Of the breaking asu^der of the sinevv of sight, called in greek,
aporrexis in Latin abruptio also of paremptostis or coincidentia.
APorrexis is when the sinevve of sight is broken assunder. Definition.
by a stroke, or fall in such sort, that presentlye upon it does ensue
most desperate blyndenesse because the spyryte of sight cannot be carried
unto the eye. Paremptos^.
Paremptosis is when the sinevve of sight is stopped by means of sum
humor which flovveth into the same, because the sinevve gapeth and seems
as it were cloven or chincked. The way to discern and distinguish one of
them from the other is this. If it be utterly broken as in aporexis, and
separated from the brain, now to discern aporrexis from paremptosis.
by a stroke or fall on the head, first the eye is thrust forth, afterward it
sinketh in deep, then it receives no nourishment as it should, the sight is
wholy lost without any recovery: and if one of the second pair of sinevvs be
broken, the eye has neither sense, not moving, but abides fixed in the
circle. But when this sinevve of sight does only gape seeming to be cloven,
and as it were rent, the eye remains in the place, and the sick party
sees (as we say) by fits, especially in short time after, when some part of
the humor which was entered into the eye is resolved and dispersed, the sinevv
is strengthened, and in some part joined again. Concerning the cure, Cure.
the Chirurgian shall have more care to maintain and preserve the beauty of
the eye, then to endeavor the restoring of the sight which is utterly lost.
And it is to be feared least some great course of humors, pain, or
inflammation, do come unto the eyes, whereby they may be constrained either
to fall out of the head or to burst asunder, as we have written before.
Therefore to avoid and eschevve the returning again thereof, you shall have
recourse both to general and particular medicines which are able to stay and
heal the aforesaid inconveniences whensoever they shall happen.

WHen I had finished this my treatise to be printed, I received a letter from
Mounsieur le Ieune Chirurgian to the king, and to my Lord the Duke of Guise, a man much travailed and experienced in Surgery: the Copy whereof I have
thought good to add in the end of this my book because the disease of the
eye whereof he has written unto me is very strange and rare.

The Copy of the Letter.
FOR as much as I understand that you have written a little treatise touching
the diseases of the eye, wherein you have comprised not only whatsoever the
au^tient writers cold afford, but also what by your own observation your
self has learned: I thought it expedient to advertise you, that in this place
not many days past, one of our house came unto me troubled with a disease in
the eye in this order. There are upon the membrane coniunctiua or white of the
eye little beasts, like unto little lice, or great worms in the hands, which
cause so vehement itching, that when the party is troubled therewith, he
become impatient, rubbing his eye without ceasing. I labored to cure it by
those means which the old writers have set down in Ptheriasis, but I
prevailed either nothing or little. Therefore the aforesaid patient addressed
him self to go to a woman dwelling about Ioynuille, who in my presence with a
silver needle took away very cunningly and with small pain the worms or the
nits from the membrane: And unless I had seen them go, I should scarcely have
been persuaded that such vermin could be engendered on the white of the eye.
The woman avouched to me that she had taken the like from many others at
diverse times without any hurt ensuing, and that many in this part the country
were subject to the like malady, which thing by diligent inquisition I have
proved true.

Fare you well.

FINIS.
To the courteous and careful Chyrurgian.
THis Treatise of the Scorby, has been a long time prepared for thee, but it
wanted a prosperous gale of wind. Perhaps delay may b^^ some disgrace to it:
for erst other Treatises of the same matter have here arrived. Surely, others
gain, is not my grief, but I am sorry that I cannot also present them to thee.
I hope a better furnished leisure and skill will shortly impart to thee this
benefit. In the mean time, have Wyers pains, in high price, which are not
inferior to others. Ronsleus and Langius wade into deep difficulties, fitter
for a learned censurer, then a plain practiser. Ecthius paynteth out the
signs, and poynteth to the cure* but affords not the pith and marow of
special medicines: The other Treatise which is of the canker, was painfully
weaued by Textor: who (in mine opinion) discovers the deceit of Penelopes
web. For the crabbed ulcer craves help, hut accepts none, as the matrone
ever labored, never ended her work. Nevertheless as her web deluded her
suitors, and supported the hope of Ulysses return: So this crooked Caecilius
may receive often ease of pain, though none end of grief. The authors deserve
commedacion, the interpreter, desires friendly acceptaunce, the Printers
discourage, both.

Farewell.

A discourse of the Scorby translated out of Wyers observations.
I He Scorby is a stopping of the spleen hindering thereby the course of
Melancholy, which mingling with the rest of the blood infecteth all the body
with vile vvasting corruption, the gross part whereof falling down,
staineth the legs with spots like unto pomgranats, and the thinner part being
carried up defiles the tender gummes with sharp fretting and loathsome
growing out of the flesh. It is lawful for Physicians to define and lay open
so largely the nature of things for the better understanding of them, although
I know that amongst Logicians, these things will be more narrowly sifted. The
name was invented by the Duchmen which dvvell nigh to the German Sea. For
Scorbuc in their language signifies bursten belly, as if the sides and belly
(as it comes to pass) were affected. In high dutch when the gummes are
infected, it is called Scormunt, that is bursten cheeks or mouth, but when the
signs and tokens thereof appear in the legs they name it Scorbem, which is
broken legs, the Holanders of the spots resembling pomgranates call it
blanschuit. It seems to be stomacace and sceletyrbe whereof Pliny makes
mention in the 25. book of his natural historye and third chapter in these
words: Neither do beasts only hurt but sometimes water and the soil where
men live. When the Emperor Germanicus pitched his tents beyond the River
Rhene in Germanye there was upon the sea coast one only spring of sweet
water, whereof whosoever had drunk within two years space his teeth would
fall out, and the joints of his knees would be loosed. The Physicians did
call it stomacacen and sceletyrben, to the curing of the which they have found
out, an herb named britannica, which is not only wholesome for the sinews,
but also for diseases in the mouth, against squincyes and serpents, the leaves
of it are long and black, the root black, the juice of it is pressed forth
both of the leaves and of the root.

The people of friesland amongst whom they camped, showed it. This disease has
hitherto grown worse and worse amongst them, and the near inhabitauntes of
the sea, specially amongst such as dwell toward the North. But in these
latter years it has begun to creep into the countries adjoining (wherein it
was never heard of before) either through ill diet, or contagious infection, so
that it is now known almost in all low Germanye: notwithstanding it is
unknown in the dominions of high Germany, as in Italy, France, and Spain. If
this infection may perhaps be in any place of Asia, or Africa, either that
bordereth on the sea, or there is want of sweet water, or their diet and the
Air nourishes it. Therefore this disease is proper to that Region, as to the
inhabitaunts of the North parts, and not familiar to all places in the world,
as is the crevve of other maladyes. The Nabathaeans which dwell in that part
of Arabia, which for the fruitfulnes is called Arabia Faelix, that is happy
Arabia, and the Romans also coming thither in the days of Augustus Caesar
seem to have been troubled with this disease. For when at his commandment
Aelius Gallus had leadde the Roman Army into Arabia, he was constrained
in the voyage to leave it in Albo vico which is the greatest market Town of
the Nabathaeans, where they remained all Summer, and winter, that they which
were weak, might recover their strength.

For the Hoaste was aflicted with diseases in their mouths and Legs, and
other sickenesses incident to that place, in both which disseases there was a
dissolution and looseness of the Legs, and jaws, which proceeded from
the water, and fruits as Strabo vvriteth near to the end of his sixteenth
Book, who lived in that same time. I find not any proper name, for this
disease amongst the Arabians: but either the Greek Physicians which then
practysed amongst the Romans, or such as understanding Latin and being
also cunning in the Greek tongue folloed and vvayted in the Roman Army
invented Greek Names, from the signs and accidents which appeared in the
mouth and Legs, calling it Stomacaece, of hurting the mouth, and Sceletirbe
of hurting and infecting the legs. For the Physicians which then attended on
the Emperor Germanicus received not these names from the Hollanders, which
seem at that time to have been destitute of learned Physicians, and such as
were cunning in strange languages, so that they were not able to give fit
names in Greek unto diseases: but if they had any Physicians they were of
their own Country, and very meanly learned. Neither received the Physicians
which follovved Aelius Gallus these names from the Arabians or Nabathaeans.
Moreover that disease which is named Scelotirbe by the Author of the
definitions which bear Galens name, is not our Scorbie, seeing he vvriteth
that it is a kind of Palsy, which suffers not them which have it to
walk straight, but sometime they bow to the right hand, sometime to the
left, sometime they dravve their legs after them, not unlike those which
go up steep places: his his words are these: Scelotirbe is a kind of
Palsy wherein the Patient cannot go straight, but now vvritheth to the
right hand, now to the left, and draws his leg after him, as they do
which ascend into high places. I suppose that Marcellus called this disease
Oscedo because it eats into the mouth and gums, it is called of others
Gingipedium, as it were hurting the feet and gummes. Here now arises a
question, whether this pestilence were known and written of by the old
ancient Greek and Arabian vvriters of Physic. Albeit some do affirm it to
be true, yet I incline to the contrary, for Auicen Chapt. 3. Fen. 15. tract.
2. Chapt. 2. of the tokens of Apostemes in the Spleen rehearses a number of
such signs and accidents as may be seen in the scorbie: Nevertheless he
describes not our scorbie though he come near unto it. Hippocrates vvriteth
of great Spleanes in such sort, that in the second book of his Praedictions
he points out certain marks of the scorbie, but our scorbie is not laid
open with a fevve signs and tokens which appear in the diseases of the
Spleen. For he says, they which have great Spleanes are subject to soar
gummes, and a stinking breath, again whosoever have great Spleanes without
bleeding, or a stinking breath, they have ulcers and black scarres in their
legs. Let us now vvaigh and examine Hippocrates words. He affirms that
such as have great Spleanes have infected and stinking gummes, that is one
token: then he adds. If in such as have great Spleanes there is neither
rotten gummes, nor bleeding, then there arise in their legs malignaunt
ulcers, and black scarres. By this it is plain that Hippocrates judged both
these tokens could not jointly happen in a great Spleen, but that ulcers
vvoulde be then in the legs when the melancholy sharp humor was either
not carried up to the gummes, or was diminished by bleeding, and when it
settleth into the Legs it breeds filthye Ulcers, and leaves behind it
black Scarres. But in the Scorbie, ioyntlye the Gummes do rotte and stincke,
and great blewe spots appear in the Legs, which very seldom come to be
an Ulcer.

The spots go before the Ulcers, which are very malignaunt, and also very
rare, neither is there any mention of these spots which are always evident
in this disease, but Hippocrates only speaks of such scartes which remain
after all melancholyke Ulcers. It is true they are most hardely cured:
Wherefore P. Aegineta, 3. Book. c^ap. 49.
affirms they cannot be cloased together when the spleen is hard.

Mine answer is the same to Celsus, who has translated into Latyne these
words of Hippocrates, in his second book and seventeenth Chapter. And in
this manner I answer to Celsius, and all the ancient aucthorityes which are
alleged to this purpose.

Furthermore I have found out by long experience that the Scorbie differs
from the black Iaundes, and from the third kind of Volvulus, called by
Hippocrates Haematites: and Balduinus Ronsseus, an excellent Physician, and my
familiar acquayntaunce shows the same verrye learnedly, in his excellent
Book entitled De magnis Hippocratis lienibus. Amongst the new writers Olaus
Magnus, borne in Svvizerland, somewhat sets out the Scorbie, in his historye
of those Nations which dwell under the North Pole, in his siixteenth book and
fiftye one Chapter, albeit in many places he is full of forgeries. There is a
disease amongst Souldyers vexing such as be besieged and shut up, in such
sort, that the fleshye parts wax gross and senceles, consuming under the skin
as wax melts, and when they are pressed down with the finger they yield.
The teeth are set on edge, and ready to fall out, the white skin has blewe
spots, there is a heavy sluggishnes with loathsomnes of medicines, this disease
is commonly called in their tongue Scorb^k, in greek cachexia, peradventure of
the soft matter which rotteth under the skin. It seems to grovve by eating
of salt meats being not well digested, and to be fostred and increased by
the cold exhalations and vapores arising from wales. For it is not so full
of force and strength, where their vvalls are bourded with any kind of
vvood, whatsoever it be. If this maladye wax more fierce and continue long,
they drive it away by the continual drinking of vvormevvoode, as they use to
take away the roots and relics of the stone by drincking old Ale sodden
together with Butter.

In his 9. Book and 38. Chapter he says: At the first they steal away by
force, but when their Soldiers are lost by continual skirmishes, by craft
and subteltye the victuals of such as do besiege them, especyally their
Cattle, which they put to feed on the tops of their houses which are
full of grass, least vvanting nevve and fresh flesh they should fall into
this sickness of all other the most grievous, called in their natural tongue
Scorbuck, that is to say, a vvounded or vvearye stomach which pineth away
with horrible torments and daily sorrovve For cold meats and not digested
being greedyly devoured do cause a disease not unlike that which the
Physicians call Vniuersalem Cachexiam, that is an ill disposition or state of
the whole body. Also Alberrus Coraniz, in his Saxonia, and Euricius Cordus in
his Bonaetologiens do by occasion speak of this pestilent disease.

The causes.
THe first and nearest cause is a gross, ravve, cold humor contained in the
veins, whether it come only from melancholy, or be mixed with fleame.
Causes far of are those which are commonly called in Physic, the six
things which are not natural, as corrupt Air, evil and vnholesom diet,
which is usual in the North parts, chieflye amongst Marryners, as svvines
flesh even smelling as soon as it is sodden, Bacon stuffed and dried with
smoke, being sometimes restye, and at the kylling of it unclean, and showing
manifest tokens of infection, which oftentimes they eat raw: also other
flesh, and fish salted, then hardened in the smoke, or powdered to keep
longer, also such as are of a groasse substance neither have any juice,
stinking flesh taken in hunting, fowls living in the water, all things
which have been sowsed a long time in Vinegar, Coolewortes, Cabbage,
Garlic, breadde twice sodden and somewhat hoarye, Pulse, drink thick and
full of dregs, use of stinking waters when sweet fail, from whence grievous
diseases do spring as Hippocrates, and Pliny do witness.

Moreover, fasting with a little meat, in which is ill nourishement whereunto
may be added watchings, untimely labors, immoderate affections of the mind,
great and daily cares, and studyes: Causes going before, Fevers, hinderance,
or staying of the usual and due purging, as of the emroodes, or flowers, and
such like.

The Signs.
THe signs in the beginning of the disease are heaviness of the whole body,
sudden grosnesse, straitness about the sides, and belly, weakness in the
legs, and some coldness with little pain, soreness in the jaws, with an
itching reddenesse altered from the natural color, the face from palenesse
changing into blevvnesse: In the increasing appear a loose svvellyng, and
flowing of blood from the gummes, rottenness with a styncking breath,
sometimes the flesh is consumed to the roots of the teeth, and they shake
ready to fall out, there are spots in the legs, not unlike the
spryncklinges of blood, and almost resembling flea-bitinges, yet somewhat
greater, which may some-time be seen in the thighs, and dispersed over all
the body, proceeding of the less grosser blood: commonly the spots are great,
colored like to lead, blew, purple, darker then black violets, begotten of the
grossest corrupt blood, which falls down that way, wherefore they seldom
spring in any other places, except the legs And whenever these appear,
they foretell most certainly, that the Scorby is there, albeit other marks
are hidden and secret. Sometime this blewnesse shows it self in the jaws,
but that is in such, whose whole body is drowned in this corruption, that
death is nigh at hand. When the disease grows worse and worse, then there is
coldness in the sinews of the legs, inability to walk, the crampe,
straightnes of breath, especially when the sick party sits, moves or is
lifted up: for then he either sowneth, or is near unto it, but when he lies,
he does breath more easily, and is much refreshed. Some do often desire meat,
others have their appetite decayed. The grieuousnes of it is observed in many
on the fourth and fifth day, in the most on the third day, in very few every
day, yet without any evident fever. Notwithstanding there is no doubt, but at
the same time some have a fever. For in this disease, some are troubled with a
lingting and changing fever. It so falls out, that there go before it
burning pestilent fevers, double tertians and I have seen when the Scorby not
being perfectly cured, a most pestilent quartaine has ensued, and in the
decay of the quartaine, the Scorbie has again appeared, which by sound advise
and council has been ouercomed. So those fevers seem not so much to be
ended in their separation, as to cause new diseases worse then the former, by
the weakness of the bowels, want of nourishment, and the great and filthy
corruption of the blood. Some have their bellies bound, some loose. The
blewnesse does so compass all the legs with swelling unto the feet, that
it might be accounted a token of leprosy. Again, some have their legs so
small, that there seems to be nothing but the simple skin covering the bones,
with great heat most commonly, yet sometime without heat. Some men have
their spots, turning and consuming into scales, as for the most part it falls
out in Erisipelas, others have them remaining light, smooth, and shining,
leaving a little print when they are pressed with the finger. And sometime
(albeit but seldom) there appears a fullness and swelling of the veins,
such as is to be seen in the disease varix, and under the tongue are little
veins not unlike to that, and they are also evident in the nether lip.

The pulse, as in the quartaine fever, is inconstant, slender, hard, swift,
weak, altering with the time of the disease. The urine or water is read,
troubled, thick, and like the lees of nevve red wine, as also it is usually
seen in a hot quartaine, having also a strong smell and savor.

The Prognostications.
THe Scorbie is sometime perceived to be common in the same house, because they
all have used the same diet: therefore it is accounted infections, which
contagion partly proceeds by drinking of the same cup, when the mouth and
gummes are infected, partlye corrupt spirits are drawn in by continual
handling of the sick. Sometimes it is received as it were by inheritance from
the parents. Fevers many times do cease and change into this disease. A
consumption is a most common companion of it. Sometimes the dropsy, or flixe,
but alvvayes Atrophia, that is, a languishing of the body, for want of
nourishment waits on it.

If ulcers arise in the legs (which are very rare) they are hardly joined
together, because they are stinking, pestilent, and sometimes change to a
gangrene, so corrupt, that they feel not a launcet thrust into them. Some
have sound gummes, albeit fifthy and spotted legs, and such do bleed
either at the nose or mouth. The spots are hidden in many that dye, in others
they budde out abundantly after they are dead.

Their Diet.
Let his diet be of such things as may be easily disgested, having good
juice some-vvhat hoate, thin, piercing, and clensing, whereunto ad such as
have some force to bind and strengthen. Fried barley, or oats, or barley husked,
and sodden in pottage, or water, then strained with wine, small corains
sodden in some broth agreeable thereunto, or in water, or wine, and so
strained, whereunto you may put sometime the yolke of an egg. If the sick
party be thirsty, he may eat of those raysens: also svveet almonds, and a
fevv bitter, prepared in a decoction made with wheat, is very profitable.
Sometimes spices, in regard of the feebleness of the body, and state of the
disease, are to be mingled with his meat, as cynamon, mace, nutmegges,
ginger. It is not unprofitable to eat sour grapes. Let his sauce be capers,
with great rasyns steeped in oxisaccharu^, or oximel, which are not to be
swallovved before they be chevved very small. Let his drink be good ale well
clarified, specially with vvormevvood, and vvormvvood wine, which is
marucilous profitable, if he be declining to a dropsy. Let him use with
discretion the vvhey of milk: also goats milk, or the milk of kine when it
is nevve, in which let there be sodden vvater-cresses, or garden-cresses,
which some call winter-cresses, whose leaves are broader. Many use with good
success Scorby-grasse, such especially as have been accustomed to eat milk.
Let him be kept in a dry, warm, clean, and light chamber, and let him avoid
sorrovve. You shall begin your cure with bloodletting, if the body be full of
blood, and the age and strength of the patient can bear it, but let him not
bleed much It is best and fittest to procure the emroodes, to be purged that
way. If the spleen be specially affected, open the spleen or middle vein in
the left arm, but if the liver be more or as much grieved, then open a vein
in the right arm. Now seeing the Physician is seldom called, except the
malady have taken deep root, and prevailed much, and spots do appear in
the legs, my counsel is, to abstain from bloodletting. Purge the body
gentlye with the leaves of sena Alexandrina, s, or iii or less if you put
thereto a little epithimum, with a fevve great rasyns, fenell seed, and
ginger, of each half a dram, which when you have put into a sufficient
quantity of whey, and made hot, let them stand soaking a whole night in the
same: In the morning after you have again made it hoate, strain out the
clearest part, and give it to him to drink. Half an ounce of this powder
follovving, may be in the same manner steeped and strayned, and then drunk.

R. foliorum senae Alexandrinae ex purg i. epithymi, tartari albi, ana. s.
cinamoni, gariophil. galangae, seminis a^isi, ana. i. diagredii i. s. fiat
puluis. The pylles of fumitorie, and diasene, are much auayleable. Although
some give pills de lapide lazuli, and armeno, yet I allow them not. If any
will give confectionem Hamech, they must have singular regard to the
quantitye, since this disease cannot receive vehement purging vvythout danger,
because the heart is so quicklye hurt The body being thus gentlye purged, on
the days follovving in the morning when many sweat, and at four of the
clock in the afternoon, he shall take iiii. of juice of the herbs
follovving, putting there to some sugar, and a little cinnamon. Take Scorbye
grass, vvater-cresses, vvinter-cresses, of each equally being green, and
half as much as of one of them, of brook lyme, stamp them with a wodden
pestill in a stone mortar, and then strain out the juice. For these have a
singular privilege, and prerogative in reason, to pull up this disease by the
roots, since the three first do cut, make thynne, and purge by vryne, the
fourth brings the other to a just temperature which therefore in respect of
the body, and heat of the disease, may be increased or diminished. They may
be stamped and sodden in goats milk, or covves milk, and so strayned out and
drunk.

It is most forcible, being nevvlye made every day. I have had good success
when I did sees the herbs in vvhey, yet the drinking of the juice is to be
preferred. But these may be changed at the discretion of a learned and
expert Physician. I remember they have been sodden not unfitly with read
wine. And forasmuch as the herbs are full of juice, you must not put into
them much lyquor, but so much as may cover them, when they are sodden.

Otherwise you may stamp and strain the juice with other liquor, wringing
them strongly. Common wormwood put unto it is exceeding profitable, and I have
with no small fruit and benefit added fumitorie, and germander. When the
bowels are weakened, and the joints loosed, then put to it tvvopenny-grasse.
Other men delight to have a mixture, or a hodge-podge of many other things, as
of Indyan myrobolanes, mother-vvoort, mayden-haire, selandine, betony, hyssope,
agrimony, scabious, roots of valerian, enula campana, sortell, parsely,
pimpernel, cychory, borrage, bugloss, ash, fool-foote, fenell, elder,
broome-flovvers, aniseedes, fenell-seeds, lichoras, dodder, time, rasyns,
bistortae, corticum radicum capparum, phillitidis, ceterach, tamarices, senae
Alexandrinae, seminum frigidorum, and many others, but I have had happy cures
by using a fevv herbs in good order I understand many have been cured with
this medicine. Take of the tops of common vvormevvood dried, juniper berries
beaten to powder, an. m.i. of goats milk lib.iiii.let them be sodden
until the third part be consumed, then strain it, and put thereto a dram of
saffron in powder, and boil them again a walme or two, and after strain
it, give him a draught of this vvarme thrice in a day, in the morning, at
three of clock in the afternoon, and when he goes to bed. I knew a woman
famous for curyng the Scorby, which after the body was purged, gave to the
patient this drink. Take of brooke-lime, watercresses, of either three or
four hand-full, when the herbs are bruised, put thereto of rockat-seed, of
the root of the garden flower-deluce, of each half an ounce, ginger two
drammes, long pepper one dram, with two pound of red wine, strain them.
She gave them of this drink stirred together, every day in the morning warm,
and covering the patient with clothes procured sweat, so bestowing 9. days in
this cure. In the cuntry of Marchia, the noble matrons drink brooke-lime,
watercresses, and aloes beaten together, and strained with milk. A certain
Countess did give this potion to a tender infant often with great success. R.
rhabarbari, centaurii minoris, rhapontici vulgo dicti ana s anisi liquiris ana.
ii. made in powder, let them be strained with a hand full of damask flowers
sodden in water, vvhere-with putting to it sufficient sugar, make a syroppe
thereof let the patient drink evening and morning a spoone-full. I will
here set down an unpleasant and abominable drink used in the East parts
of Friezeland, as a most certain cure of the Scorbye, that every man may
behold what force is naturally in excrements, which nevertheless we approve
not to be used, because other which are more pleasant and less loathsome,
may be more safely used, and there is found out a more delightful way of
curing.

Take six quartes of Rhenish wine, (every quart must weigh four pound) four
ounces of the radish root nevve, and beaten to powder in a stone mortar, let
them steep in a little earthen pot with some of the wine, by the space of
an hour, then put this being strayned again to the rest of the wine: after
into an other portion of this wine, put the quantitye of three filberdes of
Ox doonge, and goose doonge, and let it remain an hour, then vvryng it
forth, and put it to the other wine: This being done, take nutmegges,
cloves, of each ii. beaten seuerallye, and bynding them in a lynnen cloth,
hang them in the fore-saide wine, and let this drink stand xxiiii hours.
Let the patient drink hereof so often as he is thirsty, neither let him
use any other drink until he be fully sound. If need so require, this
drink may be prepared the second time for him. But he may not eat salt
meats, nor rye bread, during the time of his cure.

Because Friezeland is full of Bulls and Oxen, and plentiful in geese,
therefore they prepare their medicines of such things as may be most easily
gotten It is not to be doubted, that there is so great heat in goosedoonge,
for it burns the grass where it lies, and therefore infused in a fit
liquour, it helps to procure vtyne, the flowers in women, and second birth.
The aforementioned purgations may be repeated often in the cure.

After-ward on other days, let him take in the morning the conserve of
Scorby grass, or germander mingled together, or severally, to the which ad a
borrage, buglosse, or enula campana root preserved. Here must be noted, that
al sharp plants which have force to cut and make thin corrupt matter, do
help to drive away this malady, least any man should imagine that either of
their hoate substance, or by secret property only these herbs were so
effectual, (whereof we have spoken before, and which are so familiarly
known, I mean Scorby grass, vvater-cresses, brook lyme) to expel this
disease. Of this sort (beside the aforenamed) are taragon, scordiu^,
stone-croppe, all herbs appropriate to the spleen, opening roots, hot
seeds, bay berries, juniper berries, and other of this sort. Annoint the sides,
the left with this, or the like. Take oil of capars one ounce, the ointment
of bryonie against the spleen half an ounce, mingle them. Anoint the right
side with the oil of wormwood, wherein, if need so require, you may sees
the juice of the former herbs.

In the mean time let the loose stinking gummes be vvashed with a
decoction made of the leaves and bark of barberies, Scorby grass, water and
vvinter-cresses, red roses unripe, prepared in water, in which iron or
steel has been quenched, to which being strayned, you may put a little
allome. In regard of the taste and cleansing, mingle with it either
vnclarified honey, or honey of roses, or for the surer preservation and
strengthening of the gums, and delaying of heat conserve of mulberies. To this
purpose are profitable the leaves of the vvilde olive strayned with plantaine
water, and the bark of the sloe tree.

Another water to wash the mouth, may be thus made. Take a pound of water,
salt, and allom, of each two drammes, boil them together. Also take the
citron pylle, sumach, the citron flovvers, of each half an ounce, an ounce of
raisyns, sees them in four pound of rayne-vvater till half be consumed, and
when the lyquor is strayned, put to it two ounces of honye of Roses, two
drammes of allome.

Let the loose and bloody gummes be rubbed with salt burned, wherewith the
powder of pomgranet flovvers is myngled, or the ashes of Vyne-braunches,
burned with oyster-shelles or muskle-shelles. In the mean while suck and
spitte forth the bloody matter. After wash the gummes with a decoction of
radicum bistortae, which is in strength not inferior to britannica, press out
the juice of it, as you were taught to do in your cresses, and mingling with
it the double quantitye of conserve of Mul-berryes, annoint the teeth. Or take
the juice of bistorta, and honye of roses, of each three ounces, sees them
until the juice be spente, put thereto a dram of allome, make of it a
liniment. Use this confection.

Take of bistortae s salt i. with conserve of mul-berries, make a conserve of
them together. You may make the like of allome, pellitorye of Spain, and not
clarified honye myngled together, adding to them a little sage and olibanum
made in powder.

The Woman of whom I spoke before used this washing water, of byssope,
betonye, Ambrosia, roots of enula campana sodden in water, putting to it when
it was strained in quantity two pound, half an ounce of allome, seething it
with honey, and taking off the scum. The Fryzians make an other water of two
pound of ale vyneger, half an ounce of bole armoniake, ii. drams of allom,
iii. ounces of honye, boiling all together. The Saxones for the most part put
to it sauin. If the rotten swelling of the gummes grow too rank, cut some
part away with your scissers, and consume the rest with vnguentum Aegyptiacum,
or burnt allome mixed with honey of roses, or stay it with oleum vitrieli.
This water excels against their rottenness, as also against all pestilent
ulcers, if vvetting a sponge in it you rub your gums. Take of Arsenicum
prepared a scruples, burnt allom, ii. s, beat them to powder, and boil them in
a pound of plantayne water, by the space of an hour in a double vessel. The
spots in the legs must be vvashed, or as we use to speak, fomented
with a decoction of Iunyper berries lightly bruysed, watercresses,
winter-cresses, Scorby grass, vvhere-vnto you may add if you will, camomill
flowers, motherwort, balm, wormwood, rosemary, maioram, time, hyssope, and like
herbs to be sodden in the water. If you wring out of it vvarme sponges, and
apply them to the lovver parts of the legs round about, you shall dravve out
such spots as lie hidden under the skin, that the manifest signs of the
Scorbye may seem to flourish. Also annoint them with this.

Take two pound and an half of May butter, six drammes of iunyper-berryes
bruysed, two ounces of pure wine, sees them in an earthen pot, until the
wine be consumed, strain it, and annoynte the legs evening and morning.

Or make an ointment with cream gathered from the milk, wherein have been
sodden water and garden-cresses, brooke-lyme, worm wood, iunyper-berryes
bruysed. Dip clothes therein, and lay them to the legs. There is
consideration to be had of heat, that such herbs as are over hoate may be
diminished, and brooke-lyme increased, and that the decoction be prepared in
milk without butter. The curdes of milk, wherein is no butter, may be alone
applied, or the cheese newly made.

In hard tumors and svvellinges, lay to it a Cataplasme of milk, wherein
has been sodden great comphrey, vvorme-woode, both sorts of selandine,
bryonie roots, bread crummes, bean or barley flower, or lupines, as the
quality and state of the diseased part does require. If the sinevves,
ligamentes, and tendons have sucked into them great plenty of this gross
heavy matter, and are thereby stiff, and unfit to move, either before the
fomentation, or when there is none, let them be anointed with goose or
duckes grease.

If there be ulcers in the legs, things that are to be applied, must be
altered as the condition of the ulcer requires: to cleanse it, prepare an
ointment or liniment of Scorby grass, parsely, worme-wood, stamped and
strayned, and with sufficient honye brought by seething to an unguent, to which
(if the filthiness do so require) you may ad a very little powder of
aristologiarotunda, or burnt allome, or praecipitat. In this case the plaster
named diacalcite^s, or diapalma, which may be melted with oil of roses is
of great virtue, and the sooner to bring it to close up, the plaster de
minio, or vngu^ntum de rutia, or some of such nature is to be applied.

An Addition.
FOrasmuch as amongst the causes of this disease, unwholesome water is not the
least. I have of purpose adjoined the discommodities that grow hereby for the
fuller declaration of this matter out of Hippocrates his book, entitled De
Aere, aquis, l^cis, that is, of the air, waters, and region wherein men do
live, in which he vvriteth in this manner. The waters which are frozen
cold, and troubled, through snow and ye, are full of slime and filthiness.
They which drink of them, have great splenes and swelled, and their bellyes
are hard, slender, and hoate, their shoulders, neck, and face, are thynne and
small. For their flesh wastes into the spleen, vvhere-vppon they become lean.
Such cannot but eat and drink much: and since they have both their higher and
lovver bellye exceedingly hoate, it is requisite they should have stronger
medicines. Therefore this disease is familiar unto them in vvynter and summer.
They are also subject to many and incurable dropsies. For summer brings
forth many flixes laskes and quartaine fevers. And by long continuance
these diseases lead them into dropsies, and kill them.

These are the diseases of Summer: but winter causes in young men inflammation
of the longes, and maddenesse, in old men hot fevers, because they are bound
in their bellyes: but women are svvollen, and stuffed with fleume, they
conceive hardly, and bring forth paynefully: their children are great and
svvollen, and thorovve their ill nourishment, they become deformed, and pyne
away. They are not sufficiently purged after their travail.

Ruptures are incident to children, and svvollen veins called varices, and
ulcers in the legs unto men.

Wherefore it cannot be that such should live long, but before their time
they seem old. Moreover women think they have conceived, but when the time
of their deliverance is now present, that burden and fullness vanishes
away. This proceeds from water vvhere-vvith the womb is troubled. And
truly I suppose these waters to be utterly hurtful.

He means marrise and fennye water, which stands in pooles and dytches,
whereof he had spoken a little before. And whereas they sees their herbs
in milk, and the patientes drink the juice of them, when they are strayned
with good success, I think it falls out rather in regard of the vvhey,
then in respect of the whole substance of the milk, vvhylest the butter and
curdes of it does stick and remain in the linen cloth, or strainer thorovve
which the juice is pressed, and if any of it run thorovve, that delayeth
the sharpness of the juice by his hoate and fat qualitye. This vvheye is in
virtue like unto the thynnest part of the blood which is the urine, and
therefore it is sharp, hot, thin, clensing, opening, moving urine, and most
profitable to the abandoning of this disease by the testimonye of old writers.
For Aetius Amidenus writes thus out of Galen in his second Book and 94
chapter. Every one uses stronger wheye to those bodies and diseases which have
need of stronger remedies specially in old blisters and wheales, and blew
swellings in the veins, and in all corrupt humors which pierce thorough the
skin, as leprosy, and such like, also in old untamed ulcers, in running
soars of the head: Moreover in continually watering eyes, in scabs on the
eye-liddes, in spots on the face, yea in the continual course of fevers, and
in them which from a former sickness fall into a dropsy. Mesues gave the first
place to that whey, which is separated from goats milk, then next to wheye of
sheep milk, saying thus: the watery part of milk is fit matter wherein any
thing may be steeped and soaked, and it is of it self a safe medicine without
danger. That is esteemed best which is gathered from the milk of black goats
feeding in good pastures which have lately brought forth their young. It is
hot and dry perfitely in the first degree and unto the second. Moreover it
has virtue to make thin, to wash away, to cleanse, and to purge the belly
gently thorough the saltnes which is in it. It expels both black and
yeallovv choler begotten of dried and burnt humors, whereby it is marvelous
profitable to mad and melancholicke persons. It is available in the stopping
of the intrels, and helps the diseases that grovve from thence, as dropsies,
yeallovv and black Iaundies. It may be conveniently given in Agues
proceeding from choler, and in the stoppings of the vessels and bovvells. It
serves also in diseases proceeding from burnt choleric humors which arise
out of the skin, wherefore it is fitly and agreeably used in tettars,
messels, scuruines, morphevve, leprosy.

CHAP. I. Of the nature and diverse kinds of Cancers or Cankers.
A Cancer or Cancker is an hard, unequal, round tumor, with swelling edges,
loathsome to beeholde, blakcker then an inflammation, but less heat, somewhat
blevve resisting greatly when it is pressed, having Veins svvollen round
about with melancholicke blood, standing forth like the feet of the
Crabfishe, yet rather reached forth, then stretched by inflammation, Gal in his
book of tumors. Aegineta 6. book. chap. 45
because the humor which is as it were the the mother of this tumor, is
over groasse to fall out of the vessels into the flesh adjoining.

Tagault. I. book.
Neither appear the veins red as they are seen in an inflammation, but
black, resembling the color of the noisome humor. In the beginning this
tumor is obscure and hardely known, not unlike chich pease or a bean growing
suddenly* at the first with small pain, but in process of time intolerably
tormenting the Patient continually, afterward having an outward pricking heat
which sometime brings astonishment: sometimes it is painful and grievous
if it be handled sometime not.

Aetius 16. book. chap. 44.

Aegineta 4. book chap 26 Tagault 1. book.


THis disease borrowed the name of the crabfish which it represents many
ways: First of all, the veins which compass this malady are stretched forth
like the feet of a crabfishe: Secondly as the crabfishe is hardly pulled away
from the place where it has catched hold with the cleys, so is it in this
disease: Moreover it resembles the crabbe in blackenes, roughnes, and hardness:
and to be short, it stands forth like it, it yealdeth not when it is
touched, and it will scarce endure handling. There are two differences of
cancers, one is not vlcerate, commonly named an Aposteme, and called almost of
all antiquitye an hidden cancer, the other is vlcerated. Again, one possesses
the superficial or uppermost parts, Aetius book 16 chap 44. Aegin book. 6.45.

Gal. in his book of unnatural tumors.


the other lies hid within more secret, as in the bowels, matrice,
fundament, roof of the mouth. This kind is specially called the secret cancer
by Philoxenus whom I follow. Also, some cancers are new, some old, some little
some great, some gentle, some stubborn: all which kinds we will in order
prosecute hereafter.

THe cause of this disease is black choler remaining in the place, Gal. in his
book of unnatural tumors:

In his 2 book to Glauc^ Aeginet. 4. book. chapter 26. Guido. 2. book. Tagault.
1.1. book.


which if it be not boiling heat, but only somevvhat sharp then it
ingenpreth a cancer without vlceration: but if it be sharp and malignant it
brings forth an vlcerated cancer, even as when it is exceeding sharp it
procures a carbuncle. It happens in many parts of the body, as in the
face, eyes, ears, but especially in such, which are more loose, spungye, full
of kernels, Gal 2 book to Glauc.
receiving naturally the grossest matter of black choler, as ate the
nostrells, lips, and breasts. Aegineta. 6.45. ^ Tagault. 1.
But it is most usually incident to the matrice and breasts in women.

They are undoubtedly subject to this disease whose constitution is
melancholicke, Aetius 16.44.
or which use a melancholicke diet, or inhabit a melancholicke place, Guido.
but women more often then men especially such as have large fleshy breasts,
or too hoate a liver, or a weak spleen which is not able to dravve those
melancholicke dreggs, or which want the usual course of their flovvers or
Emroodes: they (I say) are subject hereunto, which have either all or some of
these things.

CHAP. 2. The Cure of the Cancer in general.
EVery Cancer almost is incurable, Guido. 2. Tagault 1.
or hardly cured, since it is indeed a particular and vvorst kind of Leprosy.
It is therefore very expedient speedely, even in the beginning to meet with
this disease, before it have taken root. For that which is very great (as you
shall hear hereafter) is not removed with that incision, and most commonly it
remains incurable, because this juice being exceeding thick, obstinately
resists all medicines, whether they beat back or disperse, or purge the
humor. The part must be gently handled, Aetius 16.46.
not receiving any trouble from the things which are applied. Plasters and
seareclothes which are much wrought must be eschevved, because their hardness
presses and grieueth the part. There must be gende, and svveet ointments,
whereof I will set down many hereafter. Aetius. 16.4^
The belly must be kept soluble with fit nourishment, and either aloes or
hier a picra, or rhubarb, or cassia, Preservatives against poison must be daily
used, as treacle, or mithridate, or these things which are more simple, to
vvit^ to drink the blood of a goose or duck newly killed, or to drink one or
two spoonefulls of claper which is called trifolium bituminosum in three or
four spoonefuls of water: or an ounce, or a dram of vvilde rue, or a dram
of peniroyall sodden with Mallovves: or the broth of Creuisses given with
Asses milk by the space of five days, and the crabbes in like sort eaten:
this is marvelous profitable. If this order be continued 7. days the cancers
in the breasts become gentle, and then with easier medicines health may be
recovered.

CHAP. 3. Of the new Cancer, not secret, but superficial, that is to say:
consisting in the outvvard parts, and not vlcerated, which Galen sometime
calls the hidden Cancer.
Galen. 2. to Glauco and Alakia.
GAlen did often cure the new, or green cancer, especially if the
melancholic blood were not very thick, but gave place to often used
purgations, until the part returned to the natural temperature.

vnfined, read vvines, Vinegar: brannye bread, lentills, colovvorts, old and
corrupt cheese, the flesh of old beasts, or flesh long powdered. bief, goat,
heart, hare, vvalnuttes, too much abstinence, watching, immoderate labor
especially in the heat, sorrovves, cares. He must use barley cream,
mallovves, spinach, Gal. 2. to Glauco. Aegineta. 4.26.
lettuce, sorrel, porcelaine, endive, hopps, violettes, buglosse, gourdes,
cucumers, vvhey mutton, kidd, veale, all kinds of birds, except those that
live in marshes fishes living on rocks, rear eggs, white or claret wine not
strong.

Secondly let the party be let blood

Then let the flovvers be provoked

Afterward let him be purged with

Consequently use the preservatives

Lastly local medicines must be applied to the affected part which may
strengthen it. The humor abiding in the diseased part is to be dealt with all,
either with repelling or digestive medicines, yet so that neither of them do
much provoke nature: In the beginning both before and in the time of purging,
repelling medicines are to be used: after, reasonable purging repelling and
digestiues jointly together: but after full and perfect purging only
digestiues, observing in all these great moderation, and avoiding biting
medicines. In this cause the juice of nightshade which is cold and repelling is
most profitable vvherin a folded linen cloth is to be dipped, and lay upon it
soft wool, which at sundry times is to be sprinkled with that juice. Or use
a medicin of pompholygos which is of force to beat back, and is also
profitable in vlcerated canckers, or that which is made of bras oate commonly
called chalciteos which has property to discuss, or else a medicin made of
litharge, and white lead bete^ together in the sun in a leaden mortar, with a
leadden pestill with oil of Roses, until the ointme^t be in color like the
lead. This also repelleth and digesteth. Take of burnt lead washed,
pompholygos, frankincense, of each ij s of sea wormwood. s. oil of Roses iij.
wax. vj. and so much of the juice of nightshade as will bring them to the
form of an ointment, you must beware of a cataplasme made of bread, and
comfrey, Aetius 16 49.
least the greatness of it may hurt and grieve the part. This plaster in the
beginning delayeth pain, digesteth, and strengthens. Take roses, melilot,
poppy-seedes, first bruise them, then sees the^ in wine, and putting to the^
the yolks of eggs, bring them to a perfect form or a plaster made of holihocke
alone, or mingled with bread is fit to digest, an other which repelleth
digesteth and assvvageth pain is this. Take plantine the heads and seeds of
poppy, fleaseed, of each equally beat altogether without the fleaseed, and
then scarce them finely: with the fleaseede, and wine make a mucilage which
work with fat dates, then mingle them with other things which are dry
putting to the^ a little goose grease: this plaster may be safely applied
warm. Or if the nature of the disease do rather require it cold, then make
it thus.

Take the aforenamed plantaine, poppy, fleaseede beaten fine, and searced,
bring them to a form with the flesh of dates and a little bread, apply this
cold. A plaster made ex sen^ne crisimi cum aesipo and mulsu being applied
vvarme dissolueth the Cancer.

This medycine following asswageth the pain of a malicious ulcer, which
being daily continued for a long time has marvelous force to dissolve. First a
cataplasme made of ash leaves sodden in water until they be very soft,
afterward bruised and applied vvarme. Also of the same water wherein the
leaves were sodden is made a most excellent Fomentation. Afterward apply a
plaster of Planteine, or that which is called hicefion, or panaceon, which
is most gentle and easy to the sense.

Theodoricus diapompholygos preserves a cancer from vlceration, repelleth, and
dries. Take oil of Roses, and wax of each. ij. s the juice of the red
berries of nightshade. ij. white leadde vvashed. i. leadde burnt and vvashed,
tutia or pomtholygos of each s. franchinsence ij. Apollonius ointment for
cancers, or a scald head is this. Take oil of Roses.ix. or else half as much
put it into a leaden mortar, with a piece of leadde, stir it in the same
until it become thick, and black like unto the leadde, then beat severally
lytharge and white leadde of each one pound or an half, mingle them with
the oil and frame an ointme^t. Paulus and Auicen make a plaster, and
Archigines a powder ex cancris fluuiatilibus and cadmia.

But if every Cancer is naturally so rebellious, that it cannot be cured in the
beginning as it is plain by Galens confession, what shall be thought of that
which is old? It is therefore sufficient (if an old not vlcerate Cancer be
in the outvvarde parts) to stay it from growing greater, since there is no
hope of perfect Cure. Auicen vvoulde have it taken away by incision, if so be
it be not dangerous to the part where it is.

CHAP. 4. Of the great, old, rebellious, and vlcerated Cancker which is only
cured by manual operation.
FOr as much as the nevve cancer being a disease of his own proper nature so
evil, is not for the most part amongst the best practiced Chyrurgions
found alvvayes to be curable, it seems not then a thing very much to be
maruailed at, if the old and great canker be so rebellious, that it is not
tamed with the most strongest medicynes, no not with cutting and searing,
but rather is sometimes made far worse thereby.

Notvvithstanding, since this only remedy remains to the perfect Cure
thereof, then if the Patient be so tormented that he crave the Surgeons
helping hand, and the cancer be in those parts which may be cut and
seared safelye, to the bottom and roots of it, then (though happily it be
found exceeding great) yet is it to be cut away from the sound parts, and so
plucked up by the roots. I call the roots the Veins abounding with
melancholicke blood stretched forth round about the place.

But although we grant this manner of Cure to be greatly commended of
Auicenne and Galen, yet because it is dangerous in a great and old Cancer,
we allow not so rash proceeding. For that in such kind of incision, it is
many times much to be feared, that an excessive flux of blood may follow
because there are large veins and Arteryes in the place: and in scaring of
them some noble part of the body thereunto adjoining is hazarded, and so both
vvayes the life of the party is in peril. Mine advise is rather to stay the
malady from growing both by the diet before set down, and also by gentle
medycines wherewith many have continued until old age, vvythout further
vyolence offered to the disease. At the leastvvise if no other remedy at all
be thereby attained, this one good property thereby yet ensues, that by such
means it is kept clean from filthye matter.

To be short their gentle dealyng with this disease is more safe, and free
from slander: on the contrary, rough and sharp medycines exasperate the
maladye and hasten death.

For experyence teaches, that after a cancer has been thus healed, it has
shortly after become more fierce not without danger, yea with loss of life.
Nevertheless some are not afraid to adventure this manner of Cure, but with
what success they see. But if cutting be requisite, there must purging go
before it, by which means whatsoever is hurtful and noisome may be removed
utterly. After the incision if there be flux of groasse blood a cauterye is to
be used to disperse and consume the rest of the matter, to strengthen the
member, to stay the flux of blood. This done, the Cure is to be finished
according to the order in other Ulcers.

CHAP, 5. Of the secret Cancer in the Matrice, or such like place which
cannot receive incision.
Tagault 3.
A Secret Cancer which is in a place where can be neither incision made
nor cauerye applied, or being near to a principal part, or in a vveake
body or fearful, and discouraged, or where after there Cure by cutting and
searing greater danger is suspected, and yet there is none other means of
Cure but by incysion, which yet is not safe must be thus handled.

You must stay it from further increase by good diet before set down, which
ought to be cold and moist because the hoate and dry liver engenders groasse
and melancholicke blood also the party must bevvare of sharp things, or
earing much. Then must follow purging, and bloudletting at sundry times,
except the age of the party will not bear bloudletting. The flovvers are to
be provoked in vvome^, and the emroodes in such as have usually had them.

Afterward gentle medicines must be used, and not sharp and vehement least
you stir up an hornet. Apply therefore those whereof mention is made before
to assuage the pain, and strengthen the place, that no more humors flow to
it Let them be cold and dry as the juice of nightshade, or in default of the
juice the stilled water leadde burnt and vvashed, vngnentum album vnguentum ex
lithargyro etplumbo vsto, medicamentum ex pompholyge and chalcite. Camphyre
water. Plates of leadde, which has great and incredyble virtue against an
vlcerate Canker. Now these medycines assuage the pains of Cancers:
Mallovves, or Holyhocke, stamped with Muscadell and oil of Roses: or a
Cataplasme made of dry figs, Melilot, Rue, Frankincense, Nape, beaten
together dilligently with oil of Roses: or Dates, sodden in wine with the
yolks of Eggs and husked barley, or Poppy, Coriander, and knotte-grasse
sodden together.

Guido says a piece of Scarlette, or the flesh of Chickens, or hens do
stay and mittigate the greediness of Cancers: or man's ordure with Anifeedes
burned in the fire, and finely made into powder: or these follovving severally
applied, to vvitte: Scabious, or common Clauer, or mullein, or herb Robert.

CHAP. 6. Of the secret and hidden Cancer.
IF you cure not this the Patient will live longer, if you do Cure it,
Aegineta. 6.45.
it, becomes worse, and the party will soon dye according to the saying
of Hippocrates in his sixth book Athoris. thyrtye eight. It is best not to Cure
secret Cancers. For when they are cured, the parties die sooner, but being
uncured they live longer For as Galen in his Comentarye affirms. It has bin
found by experience, that by cutting and fearing these Cancers have been made
worse, and have shortly procured death. Here therefore we must be content
with most gentle medycines.

CHAP. 7. Of the vlcerate Cancer,
I Will let pass, pain, hardness, swelling, and other notes which this
kind has in common with the not vlcerate Cancer.

It is an Ulcer, frettinge unequal, filthye, with svvollen, hard knottye,
turned, high, hollovve, edges loathsome to behold, abounding with black
putrified matter, blevve, sometime read and bloody from whence flovveth
continually a thin, vvaterish, black, yeallovve, stinking humor. It is named
malignaunt, and fierce of vvilde and fierce beasts. For it is a stubborn
disease made worse by healing and handling. It must be thus Cured. Tagault. 3.
First the black cholor must be purged, and other things observed whereof
mention is made in the Cure of the rebellious old Cancer. Then if the place
will suffer, Aetius 16 44. Aegmeta. 3.67
the whole body of it is to be cut away from the roots and the blood must
be suffered to issue out, yea the parts adjoining must be pressed, because
the blood is gross. Afterward the cure is like as in other ulcers. Otherwise
when the cancer is cut away, and the blood pressed out, the place must be
feared with an hot iron as some use to do. Or if the place will abide it,
first cut it, then fear it to the quick, and afterward put upon it
cantharides beaten to powder with allome, and oil of cypress, as some do
use. Moreover of vlcered cancers those only are cut and seared, which are in
the uppermost part of the body, and do so torment the party that he
necessarily requires the Surgeons hand, and also may be cut away with their
roots. Some omitting cutting and searing with hot iron, eat away the soar
with consuming medicines (which way I mislike) as with arsenicum siblimated,
which medicin Guido and Theodoricus do maruelously commend as most safe and
excellent, defending the parts adjoining when the causticke is applied with
medicines resisting inflammation and flux of humors, with bole armoniack. In
three days space the effect of arsenicum will appear. After the removing of
the arsenicum the pain is to be assuaged, and the falling away of the crust
or eschar to be hastened, when the cancer is taken away the ulcer which
remains is to be cured after the order of other ulcers. The signs that the
cancer is quite gone are these, good and sound flesh, no filthye stink of
matter in the place, no loathsome smell. Archigines appoints this medicin for
vlcered cancers. Aetius. 16.48.
Take litharge, new swines grease, white wax of each one pound, of good oil
eight pounds, xij yolks of eggs, it must be thus made. The lytharge must be
beaten with a little water, then power in a little oil and also mingle the
eggs, the swines grease having the skins taken away must be beaten in a
mortar, then mingle it with the wax, and when they are melted strain them.
After they are cold pour the rest of the oil by little and little, and beat
the^ thoroughly in a mortar, this ^one, and the rest being well prepared. This
medicin is to be applied like a linament in soft wool. If the ulcer be not
paineful put to ^ryreos, myrthe Anstolochy of each. iii. this is also very
good for Cancers not vlcerate, this medicin following is good for vlcerate, and
not vlcerate cancers: take good wax, turpentine, Bulls foot, marrow of Heart, or
Calfe, oil of gourdes, oil of Roses, new goose-grease, pure honnye,
frankincense diphrigis of each equally, aesipi thrice as much, this is more
gentle without frankincense, but with it, it does more discuss and ripen and
is more agreeable to not vlcerate Cancers.

An other gentle medicin to delay pain in malignaunt ulcers is mentioned by
Theodorus, take the ashes of cypress washed, and dried, white lead burnt and
washed, juice of roses of each s. frame it and use it with oil of roses: this
medicine following is of wonderful force, to root out a malicious gnawing and
fretting cancer. Take of coriars sumach 3. pintes. pillul cupressi. iij. vripe
galls, cassia of each a j s. beat them together, then steep them in 5.
pintes of old red wine, and after boil them continually stirring them with a
cypress slice, till the third part be consumed: this done strain them forth,
and cast away the dross, but sees the juice til it be of consistence like to
honey, and so keep it in a glass. This is to be applied alone to the cancer,
but if it wax thick, you may put to it a little wine. If it be applied to the
cancer in the nature, it must be often washed in wine. If it be dissolved in
asses milk it asswageth pain, and is profitable for all eating ulcers
without inflammation. It has property to dry filthye running ears, and
loose consumed gummes, and all ulcers will hardly be cycatryzed. For how
should gentle ulcers resist it, since fierce and untamed yield to it. I Textor
did thus prepare it. R. rhu. lib. ij. pillul. cupress. lib. s. gallar.
immaturar. cassiae ana ij. vini astringe^tis lib. viij. In the declining of it,
treacle washed in milk and oil of Roses in soft woll is to be applied to the
ulcer. And it may be drunk with wine very profitable against this disease,
as other counterpoisons and preservatives used against the stinging of beasts.
I think it is not meet to cloase up a cancer until all the hardness be
consumed by ointmentes and cearceclothes. But to say the truth touching an
vlcerate cancer, whether it be so by nature, or otherwise, seeing it refuses
gentle medicines, yea scarcely at any time abides them, and is not to be
cured, but with strong medicines: which nevertheless make it worse and more
fretting, is not to be deemed incurable? Certes if any such be cured, it
lies not deep but only is in the uppermost parts, from whence it may be
removed by incision, or searing, if the part will suffer it, and the roots of
it may be pulled vppes and the grief of the patient causes this extremity to
be adventured. Aetius in his sixteenth Book and fortye four Chapter says
thus: An vlcerate Cancer gnaweth continually, and diggeth deep vvythout stay,
it sends forth a thyn corrupt matter, more vile then the poison of any
vvilde beast, most abominable both for abundance and smell, and the pain is
continually pricking. Tagaultius with many others says thus: An vlcerate
cancer, whether of it own nature, or by medicines applied, is worst of all
others, and utterly refuses all sound cure. For whereas it needs sharp
biting medicines to cure it perfectly, by these it becomes worse. I have
said heretofore, that I did utterly mislike burning medicines, commonly called
caustickes and ruptories, as hurtful to be used to any kind of cancer, which
is near to the heart, of which sort is that which is in the breast, because
they procure extreme pains, watching, abstinence, agues: and this stinking
sincke being once raked, there follow more cruel torments, and the strength
decaying by little and little, at the last the whole body languisheth and
consumes.

CHAP. 7. Of the cancer in the head, neck, shoulders, breast, arme-holes,
flank.
ALl these are desperate and incurable. For besides that they cannot be cut
away, it is to be feared least the party dye in the Surgeons hands by too
much effusion of blood. That cancer which is in the top of the teat, may be
cured by putting away that part. A cancer not vlcerate in the breast is an
exceeding great swelling, not yielding when it is touched, unequal, cruel,
like a savage beast, piercing and sticking fast within. stretching his roots
very broad, bound as it were with veins swelling like varix round about:
the color is ashye, somewhat declining to purple, of a dark blew, soft to the
sight, but in feeling most hard, having pricking pain every where so largely
stretched, that by consent thereof it has procured pestilent buboes in the
arme-holes, which have reached unto the shoulders.

Aetius in his 16. book, and 46. chap. sets down out of Leomidas, how a
Surgeon is to deal in curing a cancer in a woman's breast Let the patient lie on
her back, and first cut the sound part of the breast, and presently after the
incision sear it, to procure a crust upon it, which vvil stay the flux of
blood: Not long after make incision again to the bottom of the breast, with
often scarifiyng, then also scare it Both cutting and searing must be often
used. After all is cut away, sear the parts until they be dried. For the
first searing is to stay blood, the latter to abolish the relics of the
disease. In the apostemous swelling of the breast, which threateneth a ca^cer
to ensue, cutting without searing to the sound part will suffice, when there is
no danger of great issue of blood. After the incisio^, liname^ts must be
applied to bring it to suppuration, then must a dry cure be continued as the
manner of ulcers requires. When there is searing with incision, these things
are to be applied immediately: a cataplasm of plantain, or knot grass, or
sesamine finely beaten, putting sometimes to them crumbs of bread. Lay upon the
cataplasme a linen cloth wette in water, which only remedy for the most part
is sufficient. Also milk mingled with honye, applied like a liniment, remoueth
the crust. Her diet must be such, which may be safe from cold when the ulcer
is cleansed, least any convulsion ensue: Therefore the patient must be kept in
a warm house.

On the second or third day unloose the medicine, and vvash the place with
warm water, then make an ointment of lentils with a little honey, and upon it
lay a vine leaf or lettyce, which you must continue until the crust fall away.
After-vvard your linimentes must be made of women or asses milk, wherewith
oil of roses is mingled. Let your lynnen cloth be single, and very fine,
which must be vvette in the milk. Beware of sharp and fattye medicines, both
which recall this disease. Many cloths are grievous to the sore. When you
would bring it to suppuration, let your oil be most, when to cleansing, let
your milk more abound.

If extremity of pain do so require, apply melilot with oil of roses and
water, or woman's milk above the cataplasme. If there be need of dry medicines
to close up the ulcer, the ashes of pompholygos washed and dried, or cadmia
thrice burned and quenched in oil of roses, afterward finely beaten, must be
applied dry. Her diet mus^ ^ee this: In the time of the cure, she must
refrain from wine, meats which are hardly digested, and drink cold water.
While the ulcer is in cloasing, the whole body must be strengthened, and
nourished with good juice, to which purpose serve commendable meats, and
exercise, and other meet means.

CHAP. 8. Of the Cancer in the matrice.
A Not vlcerate Cancer in the matrice, Aegineta 3. book.
is a tumor in the entrance of the same, as appears in the vlcerate cancer
before mentioned. For it is needless to repeat the same thing often. The
signs are great pain in the flank, in the bottom of the belly and loins:
if it be handled, or many medicines applied, it rages more. The other signs
both of the vlcerate and not vlcerate cancer in the matrice, must be learned
from the former treatise. Since this affect of the matrice by the judgment of
Hippocrates cannot be removed, it remains to ease it only by all means of
fumes, suppositors cataplasmes, and such like. A cataplasm^ much asswaging it,
may be made o^ mallows, or holyhocke sodden in water and honey, and made
smooth with oil of roses, fenygreeke or linseed, or dates sodden in wine: or
else a seare-cloth of roses or mirtilles, or baulm, or woman's milk, or only
oil of roses dropped into the place. In like manner may be used oil of
violets, or sweet almondes, or lineseed, either by themselves, or with goose
grease or capons grease. Also a mucilage of lineseed, holyhocke, or rasyns, or
a decoction of lillies. An excellent asswaging suppositorie is made of saffron,
woman's milk, juice of poppy, capons greale, or the oil in the wool of sheep
called aesypum. If the ulcer be very hoate, or bloody, drop into it the juice
of plantaine, or knotte grasle, or nightshade warm, putting to it sometime
milk, sometime a grain of frankincense: which juices, and the like (as Galen
says in his 9. book of simples) are to be beaten in the sun along time
together in a leaden mortar, with a leaden pestill, putting unto them, if you
will, oil of roses, or milk, or both. And this kind of medicine is
marvelous profitable against al kinds of cancers. This plaster following is
most effectual against the cancer or other maladies in the fundament. Take
Litharge vj. Frankincense, aesip. nevve svvines grease, fresh butter, wax, of
each ij. oil of roses iiij. beat the Lytharge with the juice of garden
cichotye, and mingle it with the rest melted together, or you may make it
more easy and gentle, especially for cancers in the breast. Take saffron, juice
of white poppy, frankincense, of each j Lytharge lead burnt and vvashed, of
each ij of white lead prepared s. of white wax ij. goose grease, fresh
butter of each iij. of good oil of roses iiij beat the dry things with juice
of night shade, and mingle them with the other when they are melted.

Sic textor telam contexuit.

FINIS.

