THE French Chirurgerye, or all the manualle operations of Chirurgerye, with
diverse, and sundry Figures, and amongst the rest, certain nuefovvnde
Instruments, very necessary to all the operationes of Chirurgerye.

Through Iaqves Gvillemeau, of Orleans ordinarye Chirurgiane to the King, and
sworen in the City of Paris.

And now truly translated out of Dutch into English by A.M.

IMPRINTED At Dort by Isaac Canin. M.D.xcvij.





TO THE MOST HIGH, MIGHTY, ROYalle, and Victoriouse Princess, the most
Christian, and Virtuose defendresse, of the sincere, and true Christian
Religione LADY ELISABETH By the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and
Irelande. etc.
MOst graciouse Queen, your Royalle Mtye. is not ignorante (I trust) of the
great services, which through, the hands, of expert Chyrurgians,
operatinge on Man's body, are offerede as svveete smellinge sacrifices, up into
the nostrells, of the omnipote^t, and Longevalle Emperioure of the Caelestialle
influences. VVherof also all renoumnede, and providente Caesaristes, have
dilligentlye providede, and furnishede themselves, when as they are vvounded,
by their means, and aid (next unto God) to be curede, and have of there
health restauratione. I could not therefore (being also incitatede, and
councelede thereunto by diverse and sundry of my friends, and vvellvvillers)
omit this boocke, composede by the most expert, and very learnede
Chyrurgiane Mr. Jacques Guillemeau, addictede Chyrurgian to the King of
France, of the which (without doubt) the French natione, do reap great
service, and commoditye thereof, and therefore I have for the service and vtility
of your Renoumnede Maiestyes subjects, and poeple, and also to the commoditye
of our contrye (being vnitede in the bond of amitye together) with all
expeditione possible for me causede it to be translatede both into English,
and Lovvdutch because that all younger, and junior Chyrurgians, might heerin
behold, and vievve, (as in a resplendente Lookinge-glasse) the most part, and
principalle Instruments of Chyrurgerye also with a very excellent method,
and doctrine, for all the especialle operations, which a Chyrurgiane (or any
other man being in necessitye) other by land, or by water, might have any
use for. And seeing that there is noe King, nor Prince on earth, which with
such fervent desire, and fidelitye endeavors by all means possible, to
maytayne, and protecte, the health and wealth, both of body and soul of
their subjects, and poeple, as your (most Illustriouse Mtye.) does for your
peculiare inhabitants, being of God thereunto constitutede, and ordaynede. The
excellence of this boocke, has therefore, incitatede, and as it wear
co^pellede me to use this audacitye (in sign of gratitude, for so many, and
innumerable benefits, which next after God, of your Royal Mtye. through your
continualle aid, and opitulatione we reap) humblelye to present, and
dedicate this very necessary boocke, unto your most Magnificente Mtye.
firmelye trustinge, and assuredlye hopinge, that your renoumnede Mtyes.
subjects, not only within, but also far without your Mtyes. Realms, and
dominiones, shall heerebye be greatly aydede, and thereof also reap great
commoditye. I have effected this vvorcke, partelye to demonstrate the sincere
love, and affectione vvhervvith (through the good acqvayntance of your Mtyes.
Gentlemen, Capitaynes, and valiant Sovldiours, which your most Royal Mtye.
has vouchsafede so many years to send us) I affect your Mtye. as also to
cause all men together with me gratefullye to acknovvledge, the ineffable
mercy of God, which has imbuede, and adorned your renoumnede Mtye. with so
many noble, worthy, and excellent virtues, and very miraculouslye has
defendede, and protected, your Grace, against all the slye, and vvylye
practices of your Maiestyes enemies, by this means to continue, and by your
hands to protecte, not only your dominion, and other nations, your
neightvours and vnitede subjects (amongst the which we account our selves,
most bounden to your Mtye.). But also heerby to cause the florishinge of all
spiritual, and corporalle arts in the midst of your Realm, and Kingdom.
Amongst which, the Art, and Science of Chyrurgery is esteemede, and
accoumptede (as the first, and most vvorthieste, and necessary part of
Physic) vvherof I here present your Mtye. one of the most exquisite, and
perpolite boockes touching, and concerning the same. Most humblye in
treatinge your Mtye. that it vvoulde vouchsafe your Highness not to miscontrue
this my temeritye, but take, and construe my audacitye, which I have in this
my dedicatione used, to noe other end, then that with all my heart, and mind
I endevoure to gratifye your most renoumnede Mtye. and be at the command
according to my bounden duty) of your most Royal Mtyes. subjects, as much as
is possible for me. Thus fearinge least I might be some interruptione, and
hinderance unto your Highness, I heervvith, commit your Royal Mtye. into the
divine protectione, and hands of the omnipotent King, and Father of Heaven,
whom incessantlye I pray, to give ominouse, and fortunate event to your divine
attemptes, to the furtherance of his holy word, and reformede church, being
congregatede together under the shaddovve of your Highness wings.

Your Mtyes most humble, and vvellvvillinge subject, who in sign of
gratitude addicteth himself vvholye to the service of your Highness and your
subjects. Maximiliane Bouman Chirurgian at Dort.

TO THE KING
MAn being allianced, both with Heaven, and earth, is through his corporal
necessityes constrained, to conterate, and spend the best time of his Life, in
Sleep, and repose: notvvithstanding being resuscitated, and erected out of a
profounde, and deep somniation, through the best part of himself, which is
his Soul, he pursues, only and favors very soberlye, the most vile and
abiecte things, the concupiscence, and apetite vvherof, he communicates, and
participate the, with brute, and irrationalle beasts. For man is not only
this mask or vizard, and this figurated and articulated Massa in certain
members, which with our eyes we discover and behoulde, and with our fingers
we may touch and sensiblye feel: but is rather, the virtue, and internalle
for me, which effectuateth life in him, vigor, agilitye, and temperature, the
same being as it wear, a radiant beam a little sparckle, and parcel, of
the Divinitye, transmitted, and descended out of the most gloriouse Empire of
Heaven, to effectuate, and bring to pass in this vvretched world, in our
body, a short, and brief ligatione: For who is there which doubts, that
the Soul, remembringe, and calling to mind her first originalle, vvoulde not
address, and endevoure her self to learn, yea and if it wear possible to
relerne, all those things, which be honorable unto her Creator, and might
also be profitable to all other creatures? and for this cause it is, why we
have not our countenances declined toward the earth as the brute beasts,
but have them elevated toward Heaven, because through such contemplacione,
and by readinge of the true book of life, we might dravve therout, and
practice on the order, and imitate, the constance which the caelestiall corpse,
do observe, and one their perpetualle, and profitable agitatione thereof. Let
us therefore consider on the Sun, which is as it wear a Prince, and
moderatoure of all other caelestiall constellations: what does she otherwise
effect through her environing round of the earth, then light us, calefye, and
vvarme us, vivisye, and administre life unto us? but what commoditye, and
profit is it unto us to search the sun on high have we not the earth it
self which with our feet we inculcate, and tread one, and accuse the same
to be brute, and insensible, does she refuse, to receave, and conceave, and
again continuallye, and without cessation superfluouslye procreate, and
liberally imparte unto us, all that which is necessary, unto our vesture
aliment, and nourture? It wear also indeed great shame, perfidiousnes, and
execrable disloyaltye, and treason for us, whom God has adorned with so
livelye, vigorouse, and fruictfull a spirit, that as all things which are
inanimate, doc travayle, and labor for our proffite, we should shevve our
selves stupidouse, and involuntary to help the one the other in all things
possible and advaunce them: for as the wise, and sage men heertofore have
said, that even as all the mundayne, and terrestrialle things, are created
for man, and his use, in like sort also are men created for God, and the one
man for the other. This consideration most illustriouse, and mighty King,
has urged, and impelled me, after that I next unto your majesty, have
discharged my duty, and function, which I was ovvinge unto your Highness, and
that especially in curinge of my Lord, the Earl, of Montpensier and my
Lords of Buhy, and of Montigny, to peruse, and revolve certain rescriptiones,
and memorialles, which I had compiled, and collected together, when I served
the disceased King, as well touching the manual operations, as also the
comparisone, and conference of the aunciente instruments of Chyrurgerye, with
the nue inventede, because through the discourse and rehearsal of the same,
and by the discriptione and defiguratione of the foresayed instruments, to
demonstrate, what commodity we might hope, and reap out of the one more then
out of the other: All which, havinge according to mye possibillirye, and as
much as this pitiful time vvoulde permit and allow of finished, I have
embouldened myself, to consecrate, and dedicate the same unto your most
renoumned Majesty: whom supliantlye and with all humillity I desire,
request, and entreat, benignly to receave it, as a gift, or present, which
is not disagreeing unto the present time, nether will be discommodiouse to
your highness. For because this Kingdom of France, is blinded with rage, and
error, through the fatalle censure of the most fearful God, does ruinate it
self, into his own spoil, of what art I pray (saying that all other arts
do decrease, under this fear of vvarres) might it rather implore comfort and
secourse, the^ of Physic or Chyrurgerye? And what is more Royalle, and more
magnificall here on earth, yea and more divine, then to recreate the afflicted,
to relevate, and consorte the depressed, and humbled, and to restore health to
all men, without which all dulcor, and pleasantnes of our life is nothing
else then amaritude, and Gaul? Wherefore most magnificent, and renoumned King,
permit^ pray and humblye entreat your highness, that under your Heroical
name, this Pamphlet may be published, because through the same, as also
through your most illustriouse acts, of the which the posteritye,
perpetuallye shall not be silent, may be revealed, and known, how fayn your
Highness savve this poor Kingedome of France florishe again: which now
seems to respire, and in short time exsperateth to have an ominouse and
happy end of her miseries, and calamityes, through the prudence vvhervvith
your Maiesticall valor, and vigilant valiaunce is accompaniede, and
associated. From Paris, the 15. of Septembre, 1594.

Your most humble, and most obedient subject, and servitoure GVILLEMEAV.

The Epistle to the benevolent Reader.
THere is a common saying, and is now taken for a common proverb: that all
things have their time, their place, and their sayson: by which occasion
diverse, and sundry interprises, which indeed of themselves are good, do
leese their grace, and decorum, only because in their condecent time they
wear not practiced, and put in ure. But it is not so with the vtilitye,
which the common wealth expects, through our industrye, principallye, and
especially, through the studyes of good arts: such fruictes are never
importune, nether at any time out of season, nether abortive: but are at all
times very vvellcome, and profitable, on what time soever, on what manner, or
of whom they might be brought: In which fact, the maxim, or proverb may
very truly be spoken of Maximo Fabio, who sayede, that all intentions,
which to the publiqve profit of the commonevvealthe wear assayede, and
intended is always well hopede of, to have a good evente, and is esteemede
to be a happy intent, or praemeditatione: And contrarily those are esteemede
infeliciouse, and unfortunate, and are of a funestalle, and sorrovvfull event,
which are intendede, and attendede, unto the damage of the commone wealth.

Wherefore I need not doubt, of that which I praetende to maintain, and
publishe into light, shall of any one whatsoever, be taken in badde part,
because I have conceavede, and publishede the same in time of iarres, and
vvarres: For what time might I have elected more convenient, and propre, and
more profitable to meditate one this Chyrurgerye, which compraehendeth her
operatione, and propre Instruments, then at this time, France being in all
qvarters, and in all parts, armed, and in weapons? and animated against her
own entralles, and we having our own minds exvlcerated as it wear, and
hardened the one against the other, by which occasion we to our great
grief, and sorrovve, must behoulde, at all hours, so many poor vvounded,
and mutilatede persons, their corpse being vvou^ded through the rage, and
malevolence of their foes, on the which we are constrained to employ our
hands, and instruments to reduce again the same to their former, and
accustomed health again? Or what might they otherwise hope, and expecte of
me, then that which is according, and agreinge unto my vocatione, and
calling* For as the Poet says* The Neptunist of winds, of storms, and of
tempest
Discoursinnge on the shore, to his mates can talk best;
The Cerialist, of Oxen, Horse, and Plowes
The cruel Martialist, of wounds, and of his blows.


Therefore havinge seen, and also with my own hands practiced the space of
tvventye years the operation of Chyrurgerye, in most of the famous, and
renoumned Cities, of France, and the Low Countries, as well one great, as
small persons, and that with such diligence, and method, that I couplinge,
and comparinge, the use of the aunciente Chyrurgians, with the practice of the
modern, and latter Chyrurgians, I then endeavored my self, as much as the
disease, and the Patient also would permit me, to temperate, the rigor, and
severitye of the first Operatours, or Chyrurgians, through the supple, and
gentle or svveete dexteritye of those which follovved, to assimilate the^ the
one with the other, supplyinge in the counterchang, of that which was
vvantinge in the one, through the dexteritye, and industriouse curiositye of
the other, reducinge the same unto the best form of being, and also the
writings, or scriptions, of the most expertest Chyrurgia^s, of this present
time, with the writings and judgment of the whole, through the
controulinge of the writings of the one and of the other: So that I have
intended to make a collection: in form of a Manual for my self, to
opitulate, and address my memory, in time of need, and promptly to
effectuate, any manualle, and not vulgar operatione: but the liberalitye
through the which I am so voluntarye, to communicate the same unto certain
of my good friends, who are studiouse, and desiruose of Chyrurgerye, has
precipitated me into this present prodigalitye, of the which I suddaynlye
retired and drew my self backvvarde, blushing and as it wear ashamed,
considering the mea^nes thereof, as being unworthy to come into light (although
notwithstanding everye one has a vain imaginatione, and affectione, unto
the same which is proceeded from him) so that I omit the hardines which I
might have had, to publishe the same unto the printe, I could very
difficultly contain my desirouse, and covetuouse hands, of that which I
with great labor, diligence, and through long experience had collected
together, to have in one moment abolished the same, if I had not purposed to
reserve the same for my own particulare, and peculiare commodity. But my
foresayed fre^des debellating against my timorous and fearful defensions,
through certain experience of time passed: to wit, that my book of the
diseases of the eyes, after certain days he was co^mited to the press, was
unto all Ch^rurgians very necessary, and profitable: and that my first, and
second Tables of Anatomye, had administered unto all men such great service,
and promptitude of the Anatomy, and cognizance of the parts of man's body:
They have in the end resolved me of my doubtful fear of prodigality, addinge
also therbye that this fear of prodigalitye, could be dammageable unto noe
man then unto me, and that it could make noe breach into my credit at all.

Through these foresayed remonstrations being convicted, and persvaded, under
the pretexte of great furtherance, which younger Chyrurgians might heerby
reap, and not being possible for me any longer to resist, the importunitye
of certain sproutes, and beginners of Chyrurgerye, who wear of opinione,
that this present piece of vvorcke, with all the deformityes thereof, might be
profitable for them, and being certifiede, that if by any means they could
attain them into their hands, they vvoulde commit the same to the printe
even such as it wear. So that I am constrained to employ my self certain
hovvres of the day, in correcting of the same and a little more imbellishe, and
adorn, the same, with 4 portrayctures of man's body because the same entringe
into the world, might be effected with more favor, and credit, vvherof
the two first, do demonstrate all external parts, as well anteriorlye, as
posteriorlye, and in the other two, all the superficial Veins, are evidently
laid open unto us, which as little rivers do run through the face and
through all other external parts of the body extend themselves as well
behind as before, because the same being of the young Chyrurgians noted, they
with less danger might open any of them.

Farther I have enriched this vvorcke, with diverse defigurations of
Instruments, not of all Instruments, but of those only, which I esteemed to
be most necessary: For even as the sage, prudent, and wise Nature, has
instituted such an order, to man's body, that she with fevv parts, can
accomplish, many great and excellent actions, In like sort must the
Chyrurgiane, an imitatoure, and administre of Nature, endevoure, and
constraygne himself, with fevv Instruments to execute, and effect, many,
and great Operations. And to speak the plain truth all this great company
and treasure house of Engines, Molitiones, and of other Chyrurgicall
Instruments, are more for curiousity, and oftentatione, then for any
necessitye, and use. I am also very certain of that which our Hippocrates
says, to wit, that we ought not to constraygne, or restraygne, the liberty
of our corpse, and the Operations, unto the penurye, and deficience of
Instruments: but much more amplify, and enrich the same, unto the commoditye
of the body, and ease of the Operations: but I vvoulde rather exoptate, and
desire, that this vanitye, and superstitiouse bravadinge of Instruments,
wear ruled with more religiouse mediocritye.

Also I have made, a great and ample Table, or Index, in the end of the Boock,
vvherin through Alphabeticall order I have illustrated, the most notablest, and
difficultest things, which in the inqvisitione might be an impediment, unto
the vnexperte in the art of Chyrurgerye, in seekinge of their farther
commoditye. And if so be any man obiecte unto me, that this my discourse, is
only compilede together of certain rapsodyes of the antiqve Chyrurgians: I
vvillingely here confess, and acknovvledge, that in this Treatise, there is
very little, or nothing at all of mine own Inventione: For I am not the man
which lives by an other man's mutuated supellectilles and I rather publiqvely
confess, that I have collected all this out of ancient Chyrurgians, being
great shame for me to be repraehended, and surprised, of a secret theft. For
what noveltyes are under the Sun? as the wise man says: And as the
Comicus says, what should we now adays say, which has not before bin
spoken? But I may at all times with veritye say, that I am not entered into
this matter to sovve, and feminate the same in an infertille grovvnde: For I
have added thereunto great amendmente, and have eradicated, and vveeded out all
spinosities, and thistles, vvherof they wear replenished with great
difficultyes, seqvestringe on the one side malevole^t herbs, which choacked
the good fruictes of the truth, composinge all things in good order, to add
thereunto cleernes, and facilitye: through the which excellent, modern, and
aunciente Aucthors may be understood of those, which can attayn to the
klovvledge of noe strange langvages. Nether have such Personages, out of which
I have taken any of their operationes, observed in all their treatises one
order, perfectlye, and one manner of operatione, but one diverse places, and in
diverse Books they have discribed them: wherefore they are not to be
reprehended, who with a conseqvence, have redacted them together, because
they might the easyer be compraehended, and understood. And although those
which heretofore have written of Instruments have co^tentede themselves
only withdraw the representation, of the simple Figures: In have here endeavored
to present dimensions, and proportiones, their longitude, and crassitude, and
so naturallye, that nether the Chyrurgiane, nor the Smithe which we cause to
compose the same might have any occasion of hesitatione, or doubt, nether
fall into any error, of their commensuratione appropriatinge unto everye
one of them his name in Greecke, Latin, and French, and report also his own
opportunitye, and usage thereof.

name in Greecke, Latin, and French, and report also his own opportunitye,
and usage thereof*

I know right well, that in this vvorcke there will be some operations of
Chyrurgerye vvantinge, and that it is not vvholye perfect: But I assure my
self, that everye man of a good spirit, and judgment, will acknovvledge,
that I of purpose have omitted the same, and that especially because certain
operations, thereof are not now a days in use, and practice: as is the manner
of inscisione of the skin of the Head, which the Greeckes call
Pericuphismos: Also the extirpatione of vvoemens breasts which hang toe long:
of the Cauterizinge of the Liver, and of the Mil^e: of the extractio^ of a
stone out of the blather, because I my self am not therein instructed: Al
which operations, I permit to practice the right worshipful Monsr. Collo
Chyrurgiane at Paris, a personage so rare therein that all France has not his
like, with all dexterity to effectuate such an operatione: In like sort also
Mr. Pineau, also Chyrurgiane at Paris, which is the resplendente star of
Light unto all the Anatomistes of these times. Nether do I doubt, that he
which dilligently searches this vvorcke, that he shall find any diffaulte
therein: for I doubt whether that any curiouse poeple should accomplish,
the same, saying the Aucthor himself could not sufficientlye accomplish the
same: But I hope, to receave of the benevolent Reader, some excuse, he notinge,
and consideringe, that such operatio^s which are very titillouse can not at
one time be begun, and also at the same time finished, and that it is
sufficient, with great difficulty rightlye to imprinte the same. Wherefore
if this enterprise seem alienate, and strange unto any body, and they mocked
therewith, I certifye unto them, that I envye noe man, which can meliorize the
same: And as touching those which seem not to be in the world for any
other use, then to censure, and repraehende others without vvillinge yea and
being able to effectuate ought themselves, let them iovise, and joy themselves,
of their privileadge, as long as pleases them, vvhervvith I do not much
molest my self. Otherwise, I have written only for the junior, and younger
Chyrurgians, and not for those, which are vvholye and completlye edoctrinized,
and search for nothing else then for a perfection of all things: I have not
exalted my heart so hight, as those severe censurers vvoulde require, and I
suffice my self with my accustomed manner, and with the behouldinge of the
commoditye of the French iunioritye, of that which my small vvitte, could set
forth: I only desire this one thing of them, that they vvoulde vouchsafe to
meliorize the same, as I certaynlye know they well can, and do not retain
their own commodity thereof. And it will be a great joy, and peasure unto me
that therein they surpass me: and I shall very well know to apply the same
to my profit, and commoditye, which they through their great labor, and
industrye, have brought forth, nether will I conceal that which of them I
shall have learned.

And although it be the opinion of the Sages that we ought not to lightly,
thereveale secrets, of Physic, unto the common, and vulgar poeple treating
of such matters, in their maternall, and motherlye langvage, because it might
be esteemed of little vvorth, and be of all men little accounted of: And
although I could easily, have uttered, and expressed my intent, in latin,
yet I rather published the same in our French language: And that first of all,
because all annciente Learned men, whether they be Greeckes, Arabers, or
Latinistes, have written al their doctrine, and experience in the maternall
language. The primates, and princes of Physic, Hippopocrates, and his
faithful, and fidele interpreter, and commitatoure Galen, Paulus Aegineta and
Oribasius do witness of the same. Avicenna, and Averroes, have also done the
same, writing in the Arabiane Langvage. Celsus and Plinius, the first and
they which have only written in Latin, have also done their endevoure, and
have also disired to imbellishe, and eternize, their Latin langvage, and
contrye, through the terms, and theoremes of Physic. Farthermore also, by
how much the more a thing is more commone so much the more is it better, and
by so much the more may this science of all men be known, lauded, and
extolde. The Physic of Hippocrates, and of Galen, the Phylosophye, of Plato,
and of Aristotle, are they therefore obscured or less esteemed of, because they
wear vvrittene of the Auncientes in Latin, and Arabicke langvage? And those
which of our time, have written, in French Dutch and Italiane, as many
renoumnede me^ have done, who in all sorts have indevoured, to do some
service to the common wealth, hade they here in committede any thing
worthy of repraehension? they which write in unknown langvages, besides
that they are profitable unto strangers, and to their onre native soil
discommodiouse, are assimilated and resembled unto farmers, which would
rather till, an other man's feelde, then their own propre grovvnd, to the
great dishonor, shame, and detrimente, of their country, and inhabitants.

VVherfor I most humblely entreat, and obsecrate all men, to receave
gratefully, and thanck fullye this my labor, and divine desire, which I have
to see the junior Chyrurgians, with all their minds industriously labouri^g
to follovv and imitate me: and if so be it pleased and that any more learned
man the^ I am vouchsafede to perlegate with pleasure, and imploye a small of
their time in the readinge, of my scriptsons, and writings, I most
courtiouslye desire the^, that they would more with good will, then with a
spirit, which to narrovvlye espyeth, to repraehende the faults, vue and
circumsplectlye note the defaultes which might be therein: Least that through
to great curiositye, and to seriouse subtilty, that same happen to me, as in
times passed, happened to the Philosopher Theodosio, who turning over the
precepts of Philosophye with his right hand from his Anditors, they who
with their left hand could also reach him, through malice, and impuritye
of spirit, turned, and misconstrued the same in badde sort. Which if so by
any means I can attain unto, and know that this my vvorcke, (published
through the importunitye of the iunioure Chyrurgians) shall be aggreeable, and
acceptable, unto many, it will then administre courage, unto me, to pursue,
and address the remanent of my studyes, vvherin I am entered: that is, to
medidate, and to publishe for the younger Chyrurgians, all those things,
vvherby Gods honor might be increased, and be profitable, for the common
wealth.

Candidus imperti meliora, vel vtere nostris:
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
Some men do read, to reap some good thereof,
Others to mock, and hovvlde thereof a soffe,
It is more ease heerin to reprehende,
Then any thing therein, for to amend.
To the gentle, and curtiouse Reader.
SOmetimes with my self co^sideringe, and in the balance of my cogitations
vveighinge, how perrillous, and daungerouse an attempt it is (most
benevolence, benign, and curtiouse Reader) in these times, and ages, I omit
either to write, or divulgate any vvorcke, but to translate it out of one
language into an other. Yet I vvoulde not, nor indeed could not partly to
satisfye the great importunitye of certain vvellvvillers of the English
natione, and poeple, but especially of my reverente master, who although
noe English man, yet I assure thee one who through certain acqvayntance of
English Captains in these Lovvcountryes, does affect all English men, and
vvoulde heerby show himself grateful not only unto them, but to the whole
society of our Maiestyes subjects, by incitatinge, and as it wear
compellinge me his poor servant here unto, obiectinge unto me my inconstant
levitye, who havinge receavede so many, and so great benefits of the
poeple, and students in England vvoulde not imparte this excellent,
exquisite, and perpolite piece of vvorcke unto them, saying that also the
Printer, was so vvillinge to incitate me here unto, here by also
expressinge his affectionated good will both to our most renoumnede Majesty
(whom God long praeserve) and her subjects. I standinge in a dumpe, and
being with these objections mute, Nesciens quid agerem, aut quo me verterem,
not knovving vvher to hide my self, at the last as one being erectede, and
suscitatede out of a svvound, I feeblely made this answer, that it fitted not
nether was agreinge to my harshe, rude, and illiterate style to begin such a
piece, of vvorcke, and I being noe English man borne might chance (as
without doubt I have) to take Sissiphus his labor on me, in not writing
good English. And which is more, least I should attribute any occasion of
offense to my most reverent brother who being a Doctor of Physic, and I
but an illiterate, and ignorant youth applying my mind unto Chyrurgerye, might
suppose me to be so pratchante, and highminded that I sought to aequall my
self with him who through his affectione he bears to England has also
translatede an excellent book of Physic. But at the last I being fully
resolved of my doubts, and of the^ persuaded, that it would of all men be
taken, and construede to a good end, I could not any longer resist their
importunate assaults on the imbicille wales of my answers, but they havinge
therein made a breach I was constrained to yield my self a captive, and
acknovvledge them victors in consentinge to their requests, by taking this
labor of Atlas on my shoulders. Therefore I vvoulde not vvillingelye, have
that this light inconstancye should be objected against me, for not
impartinge unto thee (most gentle Reader) these my obliterate lines of this
expert, excellent, and perpolite Chyrurgiane Iaqves Gvillaemeau, whom for
his excellentie of his manuale operations I assure thee such a one has never
in English binne translated: Behold now therefore to show my self
greatefulle for those benefits which vvhilome I have receavede in this
florishinge, and blessed country of England, both in the Vniversitye, and in
the other Cities thereof, I here humblelye praesent unto thee this my first
attempt, who although indeed no Englisheman borne, yet bearinge a true
English man's heart unto our Majesty endevouringe continuallye to show my
self grateful unto her, and her subjects. And although it be more gross,
and impolite, then decent, and convenient, to answer the fine, and scoffing
heads, and vvittes of these times who almost can do nothing else then
scoff, mock, and floute, at other men's industryes, and labors, yet I pray
the (gentle Reader) not to eesteeme them all vain, indecent, and invtile, for
Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum, everye man can not have a nose
like a shooing horn, that is everye one has not such a fertile vvitte as they
have for I acknovvledge my self to have but a barrane, and vnfrictefulle
grovvnde and that there does nothing then Filix innascere agris meis, and how
is it possible then to reap good Fruictes thereof? And know (curtiouse
Reader that I take it to be a godly thing to publishe such a piece of vvorcke
for the aid, and succoure of all young Chyrurgians to operate, and vvorcke on
ma^s body, for what more praeciouse thing is there on earth then man: and if
then we endeavor to praeserve, the health of our bodies it is then necessary
to have such boockes out of which we may learn the means vvherby we might
do it, and I have the more vvillinglye translatede the same into the vulgar
and English tunge because everye one has not the gift of langvages, and
although it be not so exqvisitelye done as it wear convenient it should,
tamen est laudanda voluntas, I have done my best indevoure thereunto, for there
vvher abilitye lacks, my goodvvill notwithstanding is to be receavede, and
not to be repugnede, and rejected. Nether shall thou here (gentle Reader) have
any exquisite method, nor the flowing style of Demostlenes, and eloquence of
Cicero, but a plain common, and vulgar style for it was not of the Aucthor
composed in the first for such me^ as are expert in these operations, but for
the commonaltye, and younger Chyrurgians, that they heerbye might learn the
true operations of Chyrurgerye. If my boulde audacitye, or audaciouse bouldnes
shall administer occasion of offense to any man, I recurre to that common
refuge, which promises remissione to him which gives his first assault.
Wherefore if the learned will vouchsafe to read this my first beginning
without envye, or malice against me, I shall think my industrye very
vvellimployede and not to have bestovved all my labor in vain: but if through
the harshnes of my illeterate and rude style they are caused to lay it out of
their hands, and sight, yet I humblely request them to take him up again not
for my sake, but for his own, who although defilede, and poluted with my
impolitede style, yet they may gather in the garden of his exqvisite vvorckes,
as fragrant gillovvfers of Chyrugicall operations (I dare avouch) as any ever
wear in English. And if there be any of Momus his partakers, which do
revile, scoff, and floute me, who are so scrupulouse, and praeiudicialle,
that with noe Physic they can be cured of their critical dissease, tell
them I pray thee (gentle Reader) from me, that it is far easyer for them to
repraehende, then to correct or meliorize, and that they dare not for the best
cappe they have take such a thing in hand, least they peradventure should
fall into the pit which for other they had made, for there is an oulde, and
inveterate proverb as I remember in Latin Quod tibi fieri non vis, alterine
feceris, let them (I say) read this proverb and I trust it will be a purgatio^
for them. What shall I say more? for indeed I can say nothing as the Comicus
says quod non fit dictum prius, If therbe any which with their Argus eyes,
will vue, and so narrovvlye princke, and look, for faults in this my labor
without doubt they shall find faults sufficient, but I vvoulde request them
to leave their eyes at home with Lamia, when they loock for any faults here
in, and spitt in a box, the spittle of quippes, and quiddityes, and cast them
behind some chest of oblivione that they never may any more be spoken of, and
let them not despise this my poor farthing, for it may be hereafter shall
find my self doing with some other piece of vvorcke more excellent. If
therefore (benevolent Reader) we find this vvorcke to be acceptable unto thee,
my master shall thinck his motion to have binne blessede and happy, the
Printer his irritatione commodiouse, and I my labors, and industryes well
bestovvede, and it shall be as it wear a Calcar unto me thereafter to employ
my self with the translatione of some other excellent piece of vvorcke. If
not I vvoulde friendly desire such as scoff heerat, to read, and dilligentlye
consider these two verses which the Aucthor recites, and are these.

Candidus imperti meliora, vel vtere nostris:
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
Thus being loath to interrupte thee any longer with vain, and illiterate
speeches I commit thee to the tuition of God thy Creator, and his son Ihesu
Christ who with his effused blooredeemed thee, and of the holy ghost, who
inspireth thee with his spirit, continuallye vvishinge increace of all
virtues, and long life unto thee.

Thyn as his own, or else not worthy of vital breath. A. M.

THE THESAVRARYE, OR STOREHOVSE of Chyrurgerye: wherbye are also added Four
figures, or portrayctures of man's body: Two of the which do demonstrate unto
us, all the external parts of the same: and the other two, the most
visiblest veins fit for phlebotomye, which lie dispearced under the skin
Through Iaqves Gvillemean of Orleans, Ordinatede Chyrurgiane to the King, and
sworn in his Chastelet at Paris.
The Praeface.
WE say in France for an aunciente, and verified proverb: That it is not
sufficie^te enoughe that we do any thing, but that we do the same
exquisitlye, and profitablelye. Which can not with any convenience be
excuted or accomplished, without knowledge of the causes, which do lead,
and conducte us, to the perfectione of the effect: So that according to the
sayings of the Philosophers, Science is nothing else, then the knowledge of
that, What Science i^
which we have in hands, through his proper causes. Unto the which all
Artificers must endevoure to attain: through the which Chyrurgerye, although
notvvithstanding, we can not attain to the knowledge, and cognizance of the
present subject, and the accidents thereof, through such occasions as we
have discribede, the same being as it wear an inferioure science, and
dependinge, on the Naturalle, and Physical sciences: we ought
notwithstanding to know at the least this poyncte, and to observe, and
follow the same, and that through the most sensible, and apparent causes,
which are Materialle, and Instrumentalle.

Which has movede me to represent, Wherefore the Aucthor has collocated the
Instruments in the forefrontutes of his book.
and as it wear evidentlye unto all men's eyes demonstrate, not only the
materialle, and formalle principles, vvherof our subject, of man's body, is
created, and compilede together, but the Instrumentalles, through the which
we as by such means maintain the same in his natural health, as long as
there is any health before hands, and also again restore the same, being
imbecillede, and debilitated, through the combat which we have against the
dissease, or sickness.

Nether to speak truth is it a thing conveniente, and seemlye, that any
great, or worthy Captain, should assail his enimye, before he
apparantlye know him, and have for his own commoditye, and advantage made
electione, and choice of the place, and feelde of co^bate, has ordrede and
also armed his soldiers: noe less also, must he besiege any strong, The
office, and duty of a good Captain.
and fortified City, without first having advertisemente, and knowledge, of
the most feebleste place of the same, and vvher in storminge his soldiers may
least of all be endamagede, he havinge sufficient admunitione, to make a
breatch.

In like sort also wear it great temeritye, and rashenes, for any
Chyrurgiane, to take in hand any operatione, of Chyrurgerye, without first
of all considering one the subject, The office of a good Chirurgiane.
one the which he intends, and purposes to operate, or vvorcke,
convenientlye to situate, and collocate the same, and being fournishede of all
his Instruments conveniente for such an operatione, therbye to attain unto
his pretended intent. I humblye reqveste, the most benevolent, and gentle
Reader, to have me excusede, although I have not collocatede, them in such
number, as I vvillingelye could vvishe and desire I had, havinge
notvvithstanding causede the same to be representede: but through the iniuryes
of this most disturbede, and molestede time, there are some of the Plates (unto
my great molestatione, and sorrovve,) lost, and could not by any means
possible so suddaynlye be again pourtrayctede, and engraved: the which
notwithstanding in the next editione I hope to collocate them.

Explication of the Characters which are contained in the first figure of man's
body: wherein G. signifies a Greecke word, and L. a Latin word.


















































^The yard, or virile membre, G, Caulos, L, Coals, Penis, Mentula, Virga: The
Head, G, Lalanos, L, Glans, the concavitye of the yard, G, Ourita, L,
Vrinarum iter: the topp thereof, G, Posthi, L, Praeputium, the end of the top,
G, Acoposthion, L Summum praeputij.



(...)

Declaratione of all the parts of man's body



This conseqventlye ensues on the second leaf.











































The Declaration of the Characters which are compraehe^ded one the posteriore,
part of the body.




















































Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the first, and second figure,
of the externalle Veins, which we use to Phlebotomize.






































(...)

Demonstration of all the externalle veins



Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the Table of Instruments, where
with we extracte, and draw out the Bulletes, and all other vnnaturalle, and
alienate things, forth of the body.


















































There is noe Chyrurgiane, which has any bullet dravver of his fashone, or
manner vvherevvith he contenteth himself: but I have here placed, and
collocatede, those which are fitteste for use, omitting, and lettinge pass
many other fashons, to prevente, and evite all confusions whatsoever.

(...)

Sundry Instruments to draw out Bulletes



Declaration of the Characters contaynede in the Table, of the Instruments of
the Head.


















































I have here endevourede, to present, the most convenienteste sorts of
Elevatoryes, which now a days are most in use, in such magnitude, and
greatness of form, as might be most conveniente for the Chyrurgiane,
consideringe all other small instruments or ferramentes of the Head, as are
the Raspers, which of set purpose I omittede, least I should cloye the
Chyrurgiane with to many Instruments, because by those in place of others he
might content and suffice himself, because that such an infinite, number of
instruments do serve more for ostentatione, and pride then for any
necessary use.

(...)

Diverse Instruments for the Head



Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the portrayctures of sundry, and
diverse sorts of Trepanes, and nipinge tongues.






















































The Declaration of the Characters contaynede in the capitalle Instruments, or
Pinsers.


















Declaration of the Characters, which are contaynede in the Trepanes with vises.
















Declaration of the Characters, which in the Cranio are contaynede, being in
two places Trepanede.
















(...)

The portrayctures of diverse sorts of Trepanes, and Tongues



Explicatione of the Characters contaynede in the figure of the Hare mouth.
















Explanatione of the Characters notede on the side of the throat, in the
portraycture of the Haremouth: which demo^strate unto us, a wound receavede in
the Ingulare Vain: and the means also how to circumligate the same.












Declaration of the Characters, which are contaynede in the dry Suture, or
stitchinges.












The Declaration of the Characters which are contaynde in the Instruments of a
little portable case.












Explanatio^ of the Characters contaynede in the Description of the Needle
pipes, cases or Canons.
























(...)

Declaration of the Dry suture

Portraycture of the Haremouthe

Canons and Needles

Instruments for a little case



Explicatione of the Characters contaynede in the table of these Instruments
which are propre and necessary to the extirpatione of members.
























































The Finger which is spoylede, and corruptede.

How we ought restraygne the blood after the extirpatione of a Ioyncte,
without vsinge any hot Iron, only through ligature, which is of two sorts,
either with the Crowesbille, or with the Needle.






















(...)

Instruments fit for the extirpatione of any Ioynete



Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the Instruments, which are apt
to opene any Apostemations.


The use of those sayede plates, is only to hallucionate, and deceave, those,
which will not permit an apertione to be made in their Apostemationes, and
are to timorouse, and fearfulle of the hand, or lancet of the Chyrurgiane, as
commonly are women, and little children: and to open the Apostemation beside
their expectation, and intelligence: you must have in preparation your
Caraplasma, and before the application thereof you must have in a readiness a
plaster of Diapalma, or some such like, which must be somvvhat larger then
your plate, on the which plaster you must apply the plate, which in like
sort also, with the acuity thereof must be coverede with the salve Basilicon,
which being finishe de, you must apply this plaster being in this sort
preparede, on the place, where you conjecture the foresayede Apostematione
must be openede, and therone the Cataplasma, on the which you must the^
stiflye crushe, and by that means make and apertione at one crushinge in the
Apostematione, through the poyncte of the Lancette, which is one the plate
fastenede, into the concavitye vvherof the matter as then will issue out: I my
self have oftentimes vsede this same manner of apertione, which although it
seem to be but a simple shifte, it is notwithstanding an hallucionatione
which oftentimes is very necessary.



























































The use of this foresayed Instrument is this: to vvitte, that in those fistles
in the which are two apertio^s, as in those in the which is made a counter
apertione: and vvher it is necessary, and requisite, to make of these, two,
holes or orifices one apertion it is first of all reqvitede, that we sound
the depthe of the fistle, with this sounding irone which is here defigurede
unto you: which at the one end has a little buttone, and at the other end is
pearcede, and eyede like a Needle, where with we make our Seton: which
being thruste from the one apertione to the

(...)

Diverse Instruments to open Apostemationes



Declaration of the Charcters, which are contaynede in the Speculo oris,
Matricis, and other more Instruments for the Mouth.














































There are some which can not very well suffice themselves with this plate,
by reason that the gould smithe can not so conveniently make the same, that it
aequallye of all sides do touch the Palate of the Mouth, so that in stead
thereof they use, a tente made of linte, or of Sponge, to the which intent
there are diverse which are providede of them, because that if the one fell
out, they incontinentlye have an other in a readiness, and preparatione to put
therein, because otherwise they shoude speak through the Nose.















These artificialle teethe are sometimes made of Ivorye but because Ivorye by
reasone of the spittle waxes immediately yellovve, and fulvide, they are more
fitter to make of any other bone, the same being very hard, and thick and
dence, or solyde, as is the bone of a fish which in French we call Rovart.
Farthermore any body by at may make teeth of white wax which being
meltede, and liquefactede with as much gum Elemni, or a little Masticke,
white Coralle, and preparede pearls and there of a paste being made, of the
which we may form as many teethe as we please. This paste is also very
commodiouse to replenish therewith a hollovve toothe, because there might noe
viandes remain therein, through which the teethe do more corrupt, and more
intolerable pain is here bye suscitatede.

(...)

The Speculum of the Mouthte, and Womb



Declaration of the Characters which are contaynede in the figures of the
Hoockes, and Knives which are necessary, and conveniente, to draw forth a
dead Child out of the Mothers bellye: also of the Pessaryes, Plates and of
other things necessary to the Ligatione of the fistles of the fundament.








I have diverse and sundry times binne sent for, to diverse Woeme^, which
wear in difficulte labor and Childebearth, notwithstanding I never vsede
any hoockes, or other ferrealle Instruments thereto, for which occasion I also
council all Chyrurgianes, to use none of them, then in extreme necessitye,
for if so be there happen any other accidente there unto, as excoriatione, or
any effluxione of blood, we must then attribute the same unto the
Instrumente, which the Chyrurgiane vsede thereunto: Nevertheless I have here
causede them to be set down unto you, to use them in the extreameste
necessitye: and here is to be notede, that the Insculptor, or Ingravere to
adorn, and imbellishe his labors, has participatede some propre, and
perpolite fashone to the handle, which indeed is thereon invtile, and
needeles, because it is better, that they be plain, and smoothe because they
faste^ themselves on nothing.

The first which I have seen use such manner of Pessaryes, was the right
vvorshipfulle Mr. Rousset, on of the Kings Chyrurgians, and of the Lady of
Nemours, which has learnedlye, and excellentlye written, of diverse sorts of
the Woomens parturio^, where this form of Pissaryes are defigurede, and the
manner also of his use.







This plate, or this invention has oftentimes binne vsede, of Mr. Girart Raber
Chyrurgia^ at Paris, which was a very inventive, and perquiringe man, in
searchinge out of Chyrurgicalle Instruments, and also the most experteste
practitionere of his time.







Explanation of the Characters contaynede in the figures of the Instruments to
draw, break, and cut of teeth.


























(...)

Diverse Instruments to draw and cut of Teeth

Haeckes to drane forth a Child



The Declaration of the Characters which are contaynede in the table of the
actualle Cauteryes.
















































































It is impossible for the Chyrurgiane to present in this place all the
figures, and portraytures of the Cauteryes, vvhervvith he must co^tente
himself: for he must sometimes cause them to be forgede according to the
reqviringe of the Operatione, and the part, where on he intends to use the
same, wherefore I in this place have done my endeavor to place and collocate
together such Cauteryes as are most necessary, and novvadayes in use,
wherein I only have co^siderede, and observede their magnitude, and
crassitud: And as co^cerninge their branches, and the handles of the same,
have only binne observed in two, which are notede with A, h, the Exsculptor
havinge ingravene the same, somvvhat shorter, and smaller then he ought: I
most co^monlye use such Cauteryes which be reasonable short, because those
which are of to great a longitude, and bigness, do affrighte the Patient, as
also those which are too long can not so easilye be conductede, and rulede,
because they do most commonly vacillate, and turn this way, and that way
in the hand.

(...)

The figures of Diverse Actualle Cauteryes.



The Declaratione of the Characters which are contaynede in the Table of those
Instruments which are propre, and conveniente, to the executione of all
manualle operations which in the Eyes may be by any means vsede.
Although that I in this Chyrurgerye have not discribede the manualle
operation, which may be vsede in the infirmityes of the Eyes: Yet
notwithstanding I vvoulde not, nether indeed could omit in this
storehouse and treasurye of all Chyrurgicalle Instruments, the portrayctures,
and figures of those Instruments, which are necessary, and commodiouse unto
such an effect of deliberate, and set purpose omitting the operations of the
Eyes, because at large I have discribede, and amplely set forth, everye
severalle operation, in my Treatize of the Infirmityes, and diseases of the
Eyes, which I committede to the Press in the year M.D. Lxxxv. to the which
I commit the gentle Reader, there to behold the practice, and severalle use
of all operations of the Eyes.

































































We must here note, that this pipe, or canulle, must have a little ringle,
where by we might hold fast the same, for if so be with a buttone we
houlde it, we might then chance to burn our fingers, because the cauterye
internallye passinge through the same, it should not so completlye be
effectede, as it ought to be.









(...)

Sundry Instruments necessary for the Eyes



The Declaration of the Characters, contaynede in the Figure, which
demonstratethe unto us the means how we ought, and should make a
restauratione of a humeralle dislocation, by the means of an Instrumente
callede Glossocomium, which Hippocrates calls Ambi.












Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the Glossocome, or Ambi, the same
being taken a sunder.




















Declaratione of the Characters contaynede in the Cassolle, or Case necessary
to lay a brockene leg therein.










































Declaration of the Characters, which are contaynede, in the brokene leg,
with the bandages there of.














All these foresayede dubble Ligatures, are revolutede, first the one, and then
the other, smoothlye and evenlye situainge of the same: and then they are each
aparte, with the poyncte of a needle fastened, according to the situatione, or
collocatione of the Leg.

The end of the four portrayctures of man's body, and of the Veins, which
are most commonly phlebotomizede: and allsoe of the the saurarye, or storehouse
of the Instruments of Chyrurgerie.

(...)

Canalle which is open and shutt



The summary of the principalleste, and most especialle poynctes, which are
cotaynede, and spoken of in the operationes of Chyrurgerye.
The Preface of the Chyrurgerye. Contayninge four Chapters. Definitione, and
originalle of Chyrurgerye, with the operatione of the same. Chapter. 1. The
prognosticatio^, and judgment of wounds. Chapter 2 Signs to know vvhate
parts of the body are hurt. Chap 3 Adverticemente to give assurede report
before the Iusticiaryes. Chap 4
The first Treatise, of the Operatio^s of Chirurgerye, wherein is
discoursede, the means to dravve out all strange, and alienate things out of
the body. Contayninge five Chapters. The vitilitye, and necessitye of dravving
out all strange, and alienate things. Chap 1 How that the Chyrurgian with
all dexteritye to dravve forth a bullet, must considere on the differences
thereof, and on the nature of the part, vvherin the bullete is contaynede.
Chap 2 The bullets, and all other alienate things, must in the first
dressinge be drawn out of the body, if it be possible, and the means which
we must therein use. Chap 3 How we ought to dravve out the bulletes if they
stick fast in the bone. Chap 4 The Chyrurgiane ought not to be to curiouse in
extractinge the bulletes. Chap 5
The second Treatise of the operatione of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede
the means, to Trepane the pan, or Craniu^ of the Head. Contayni^ge six
Chapiters. The signs by which we may discern the fractures of the sculle.
Chap 1 The Cou^trefissure of the bones of the Head. Chap 2 What fractures we
ought to trepane. Chap 3 How long we ought to defer the trepaninge. Chapter 4
What quantity of bones we ought to take away. Chapter 5 The method, and manner
of trepaninge. Chap 6
The third Treatise, of the Operations of Chyrurgerye, of the sutures, and
sovvinge of vvou^des. Contayninge six Chapiters. What suture, or stitching is,
and the vtilitye there of. Chapter 1 What we ought in stitchinge of a wound, to
considere. Chap 2 What is necessary unto suture, and the manner of doing of
the same. Chap 3 The Species, and differences of suture, and how long we must
suffer them to continue without resectione thereof. Chap 4 The means to
thrust in again the guts, and the Epiploon hanginge out of the bellye. Chap
5 The Gastroraphia, or suture of the inferioure part of the Bellye. Chap 6
The fourth Treatise of the Operations of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede
of the apertione of Apostemations. Contayninge five Chapters. Of the generalle
apertio^ of all Apostemations. Chap 1 Of the vlcerations, Ateromata,
Steatomata, and Melicerides. Chap 2 The means how to cauterize, and inscide
the Empiemata. Chap 3 The manner of doing the Paracentese, and to dravve out
the water of the Dropsye. Chap 4 The means to cure the Hernia aquosa^. Chap 5
The fifte Treatise of the Operations of Chyrurgerye, of the disseases of the
Nose, and Mouth contayninge seven Chapters. Of the Polypus, Chap 1 The
Haremouthe, or clovene Lips. Chap 2 The tumefaction, and superfluous flesh
of the gu^mes, called Paroulis, or Epoulis. Chap 3 The retractio^ of the tung,
called of the Greec Kes Anchyloglosson, and of the tumefactio^ Batrachos. Chapter
4. Means to tie the palate of the mouth, and to cut of the same. Chap 5 The
tumor of the Almondes, and the Apostemations thereof. Chap 6 How to dravve,
break, and cut of teethe. Chap 7
The sixte Treatise of the operations of Chyrurgerye, contayninge nine
Chapters. What we ought to considere, before phlebotomye. Chap 1 How we
shall convenientlye open a vain. Chap 2 What we ought to considere the vain
being opened: and the blood issuinge out. Chap 3 The number of the veins, and
Arteryes, which are commonly phlebotomizede. Chap 4 Of the apertio^ of the
Arteryes, or Arteryonomye. Chapter 5 The Aneurisma, and the manner how to ligate,
and inscide the same. Chap 6 The Cirsotomye, which is the manner how to
inscide the Varices. Chap 7 Horseleeches, and their use, and manner of
applicatione. Chap 8 Of boxes, and applicatione thereof. Chap 9
The seventh Treatise of the Operations of Chyrurgerye, containing six
Chapiters. Of Caries, and corruptione of the bones. Chap 1 The fistle of the
fundamente. Chap 2 How we should dravve out the Childrene out of their
mothers body, which can not of themselves be borne. Chap 3 Why we ought to
extirpate Arms, and Legs vvhate and place we ought te to make choice of.
Chap 4 The executinge of the extirpation, and means to restraygne the fluxione
of blood, the patiente being situatede. Chap 5 The extirpatione of the
corruptede, and superfluouse fingers, and the separation of those which are
ioynede, and combinede together. Chap 6
The eight treatise of the operations of Chyrurgerye, touching the Cauteryes:
contayninge five Chapters. What a Cauterye is, the species, and differences
thereof. Chap 1 The inventione, and use of the Cauteryes, and on vvhate parts,
and diseases they must be applyede. Chap 2 The potentialle Cauteryes, and
means to make them. Chap 3 The applicatione of the Cauteryes. Chap 4 Of the
Seton, and applicatione thereof. Chap 5
The ninth Treatise of the Operatio^s of Chirurgerye, of the ba^dages, or
Ligatures, contayninge six Chapters. What a Ligamente is, matter, quallitye,
form, and quantitye thereof. Chap 1 Difference, and kinds of Ligamentes. Chap
2 Generalle rules to be considerede, in all bandages, or Ligatures. Chap 3 How
we should solve, and dissolve a Ligame^te. Chapter 4 The manner to involue, a
broken Arm, Leg, or thighe. Chap 5 The situation, and collocatione of those
parts, whereon these operationes must be effectede. Chap 6 Apologye for the
Chyrurgians, wherein is evidentlye demonstrated, which be the occasions of
death, to certain vvou^ded Persons, although their vvou^des are small: where
the Chyrurgia^s are defended from all calumnies, which oftentimes iniuriouslye
they are sclaundrede with. The treatise of the Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe.

Deo sit Laus.
THE FRENCH CHIRVRGERYE OVT OF ALL the aunciente professors of Physic, and
Chirurgerye collected, and compacted together, with sundry, and diverse
figures of instruments, very necessary to the operatione or vvorcke of
Chyrurgerye.
Through Jacques Guillemeau of Orleans, public Chyrurgiane to the king, and
sworene in his Chastelet at Paris.
The praeface. To the Chyrurgerye, contayninge four Chapters.
The discriptione, and originalle of Chyrurgerie, and what the operatione of
Chirurgerye is. Cap. 1. Of the prognosticatione, or foreknovvledge, and of the
judgment of the wounds. Cap. 2. Of the tokens and signs, how to know,
what parts of the body are hurt or vvounded. Cap. 3. Of the instructione
how to give assured demonstratione, of all manner of wounds whatsoever,
before the iusticiaryes. Cap. 4.
The discriptione, and originalle of Chyrurgerye, and what the operatione of
Chyrurgerye is. Cap. 1.
HAvinge with my self resolved, The inve^tion of sciences.
and purposed to discribe the operation of Chyrurgerye, first of all it seemed
expedient unto me to observe these three necessary things. Namelye and
especially, what Chyrurgerye is. Secondlye, how, and from whence, she has
participatede and taken her originalle, and beginning. Thirdlye what the
operatione of Chyrurgerye is. Concerning therefore her beginning and
originalle, unto all me^ is it apparent and we rightvvell know, that the
inventione, and findinge out of all arts, and sciences whatsoever, has bin
by all men in such great estee^, and admiratione (which Hippocrates in his
boocke of auncie^te Physic witnesses) that the inventors or aucthors of the
same, have bin extolled even unto the clovvdes, by the which is witnessed,
and testified, this inventione te have bin so perpolite, that it was adiudgede
to be a thing impossible to be discovered and brought into light, by any
other, the^ through some God, or at the least, by such a person which has
bin infused, with divine inspiratione: In so much therefore, Chyrurgerye is
auncie^ter then Physic.
if this may be testyfyede of any arts with aeqvitye and right, it may
truly and bouldlye be sayede of this art of Chyrurgerye, the inventors, and
aucthors of the which, have bin canonisede, esteemede and extellod as Gods, as
for example there has bin Apollo, Aesculapius, and Hippocrates, who have had
divine honor and reverence of all me^. The two first of these aucthors, have
allonelye leerned, that part of Physic, which through externalle
medicame^tes, and by inscisions cured the infirmityes, and diseasses of men's
bodies. By the which plainly is to be understood and judged, that Physic
at those times was not as then inve^ted created, or fovvnde out, when that
Chyrurgerye, was sufficie^tlye practiced and known in all places: the which
Homer testifyeth and witnesses unto us in the second book of his Iliades,
where he affirms that the sonns of Aesculapius, Podalyrus, and Machaon, in
the besieginge of Troy have with there hands handelede and cured many and
diverse vvou^ded persons without molestinge or troublinge of themselves with
any internalle diseasses or sicknesses, as with agues, or with the plague,
the which notwithstanding praedominatede and vexede sore the whole host or
camp of the Greeckes: and conseque^tlye Physic and the use thereof being
known, and in practice, Chirurgerye was very confusedlye ha^deled amongste
Physic. But for as much that it is very difficulte and a hard thing to
excel in diverse, and sundry arts, and because it is impossible, the vvorcke
of Physic, Chyrurgerye, and Apothecarye for one man to do, therefore the art
of Chyrurgerye is secluded and separatede from the other two, havinge also
her own professors and practitioners. The which because that it may
berightlye understood, it is to be noted and observed, that in the oulde and
ancient times, by Chyrurgerye, the third part Therapeuticae was not
understood, even as we in these times take it, and as consequentlye shall be
shevved: Diverse misconstrvinges of this word Chyrurgerie.
But they understood by this word Chyrurgerye nothing else, then that only,
which through the operatione of the hands is finishede and brought to pass
wherefore it is yet manifestlye written by the ancient professors, that by
Chyrurgians was nothing else understood then certain servantes, which in
those times wear callede Chyrurgians, not because they had the perfect
science, or knowledge of Chyrurgerye, but because they earned there sustenance
and livinge through the vvorckinge of there hands. Now to conceave aright
what Chyrurgerye is, it is expedient and necessary, that we asce^de somvvhat
higher, and industriouslye seerch and try what Physic is saying manifestlye
that Chyrurgerye is thereof separated and secluded.

Descriptione of Physic.
Physic therefore is nothing else (as Hippocrates in his book De art
vvitnessethe) then a knowledge, or science, which teaches, how to cure any
sicknesses to frustraete, and annihilaete there impregnable forces, because of
themselves they are incurable.

Parts of Physic.
This Physic again has sundry parts, of the which the first is
Physiologia, which handelethe and treatethe, of the structure and situatione
of man's body, vvherin is to be regarded and noted on the seven vnnaturalle
things. The secode is Hygiena, that is a Nource, and fosterer, or praeserver,
of our health, which instructs, how we shovvlde continuallye preserve our
present health, and keep the sovvnde body liber, and free from all
diseasses, and sicknesses: and this consistethe in six vnnaturalle things.
The third is Pathologia, which treatethe of the cause, and occasion of the
sicknesses and of the accidents unto the same, the which three things are
against nature. The fourth is called, Simiotica, and treats of the
demo^stratinge signs or tokens, not only of that which is all ready passed,
but also of that which is as yet to come, in respect as well of sickness,
as of health. The fifth is Therapeutica, that is the curinge or sanable part
of Physic, which instructs, and learneth, how to repelle and cure
sicknesses, and diseases, The parts of Therapeutica
and restore again to former health: This praenominated Therapeutica is
redivided and again dealed in three parts, the first vvherof is called,
Dietetica, which teaches, how to observe a sober and good diete: The second
part, Pharmacia, which instructed us, how to compovvnde our medicaments. And
the third part is callede Chirurgia, which cures or helpethe the affected
patients through manualle or handlye operation for Chirurgia has his
derivatione of a Greecke word, and is compovvnded of Cheir which signifies
a hand, and Ergo^ which betokens operatione: nether may we by this word
Chirurgia not on lie understand, all operations which are only effected by
the hands, but most of all and especially, all that is done, or may be done
one man's body tovvarde the curinge of all external diseases.

And as co^cerninge this word operatione, What this word operatione
signifiethe.
it is nothing else, then an artificialle and normaticke applicatione, which
is brought to pass, and wrought by the hands, one man's body, vvhervvith the
decayed health is reiterated, and again restored. And if we wear desirous
to know what the office, and duty of a true chyrurgiane is, or what his
operations are, how and in what manner he must work, and effect them, and
what conditions are expected, at a chyrurgians hands, I have discribed them
fullye, and at large in my general table, and discriptione of Chirurgerye,
wherefore I vvil make in this place noe more me^tione of them.

Of the prognostication or judgment of wounds Chap. 2.
IT is certain that the praedictione, or judgment of vvou^des, The use of
judgment.
yea also the generalle knowledge of all disseases, is a thing most
necessary and expedient for a good Chyrurgiane: therefore Hippocrates also
esteemed it very conveniente, and profitable, that a Chyrurgiane must excelle
in the fore knowledge of things, and be apt and redye to give judgment and
his opinione of all disseases, because by that he may attain, and at chiue
unto great credit, and fidelitye by all men, and havinge on this manner set
forth, and published his knowledge shall be irrepraehendable, and of all men
admired, and so much the safer, and, with more providence finishe his
vvorcke, and the boulder illustraete the operatione of his art, and give
judgment there of without any scoff, or check, and be able to give a true
report, when that by the aucthoritye of some learnede chyrurgiane, or by the
aucthorytye of some Potentate, he shall be therein imployede, and ordained to
report his opinione, either of the vvounded persons life, ordeath, haultnes or
criplenes. Even as also the foresayed Hippocrates says in his Porrhet that
the Chirurgiane must end voure him self to have a wise and grave gesture,
Hippocratesin his Porrhet.
because that if it so chance as he adjudged it should, he might reap
honor, and goodvvil, not only of the patient, but alsoo of all the
circumstants, and behoulders: Contrarilye if that otherwise it happened or
chanced then he said, and judged it should, and that his judgment fail
him, he shall not only of all me^ be hated but also be esteemed as an
ignorant, and sottishe fellow. Beyond all this Galenus says, and
testifyeth unto us, that by our upright, and sincere judgment, by the friends
and Kindrede of the patie^te, although he come to dye, we shall be liberated,
and freede from all badde reports and sclaunders, because that through the
death which consequentlye follovved, nothing shall be alleagede against us.

What a Chyrurgiane ought to know in giving judgment
And for the givinge of such a perfect, and complete judgment, it is necessary
for the chyrurgiane not to be ignorant, which parts of the body being
vvounded, easylye, or difficultlye may be cured, which of the^ are praesent
death, and in fine, the tokens how to know what parts are vvounded or
hurt, because that out of there natures, quallityes, and dispositio^s, we may
certaynlye hope, or mistruste of their health, and safetye.

Such judgment therefore ought to be taken, out of the very being, and
substance, or essence of the vvou^ded part, also of the use, the action, and
situatione of the same, there must also be noted, the proportione, and figure
of the same wound, and the accidents or other chances, which are incident
unto her, consideringe also the complexione and temperature of the body, the
sex, the age, on his handelinge, and trafiqve, manner of livinge, the contrye,
the constitutione of the time then praesent, and one the time and season of the
year.

All great vyoundes are dangerous,
To conclude, all men that have received a great vvou^de, are either in danger
of death or in danger of being mutilate. We eesteme and accounte the wound
to be large, for three occasions: A great wound is taken three manner of
vvayes.
The first vvherof is, because that through her latitude, or vvidnesse, and
circumiacente places, she has a threefoulde survayinge and measuringe to
wit, in length, bredthe, and debthe, as some there are which be deep and
broadlye carvede: or right overthvvarte or cross wise vvholye perci^ge
through the principalle muscles of any part, by the which also sometimes
the bones are hevved and cut quite through, and broken, wherefore some times
they must be stitchte, bound and ligated together: or because that the veins,
the arteryes, or the sinneus themselves, come to be squised and plettered. The
second, co^cerninge the vvorthynes of the vvounded part, for although the
wound be but little, in her meatinge yet notwithstanding we esteem her to
be great, because that the strength and action, of the vvounded part or
member, is very necessary for the whole body 'and for the whole life of
man, which part havinge left his natural use and action, it consequentlye
follovveth that the person, must immediately discease and dye, as we may by
experience see that daily chances in the wounds of the Brains, of the
Heart, and in the wounds of the Liver.

Thirdelye, because that some wounds are of a vvorser nature, and
dispositione, as being venoumede, rebellious, and entermingled with some
badde and dolorous accidents, which sometimes far surpass and excel the
wound it self, as it is evidentlye and planlye to be seen in the wounds
of the Ioynctes, which immediatlye, may fall into a very exceedinge badde
estate, because that those parts and places are circumligatede or clothed
with very small store of flesh, being only decked and co verede with the
Tendones, with sinnues, with Ligaments, and that very tender, and sensible
pellicle Perioflium, by the which these parts or members are in more danger
of fallinge into a convulsione of sinnues, into Phrensye, pain, and
inquietude, as much as a far more greater wound in any other part of the
body.

Those wounds are accounted incurable which do happen in the Brains,
Wounds which are esteemed incurable.
or in the ventricle of the same, in the Heart, entrance of the stomach, in
the Vena Cava, the entrance of the Liver, the back bone, quite through the
Lunges, in the small guts, or entralles, the stomach, the Kidneys, or in
any great veins, or arteryes about the throat. Wounds that be difficulte
to cure,
But these vvou^des which vvil difficultlye be curede are they by the which
the Longes, the Liver, the me^brane of the Brayns the Milte, the Matrix, or
womb, the blather, any of the great guts, or the Middelriefe, are
vvou^ded with very small wound. Also are those vvou^des dangerous,
vvheras the great veins, Wounds that are dangerous.
and Arteryes, under the Emunctoria or arm pittes, and in the Hockes or
be^dinge of the knees are vvounded: and indeed all wounds are suspicious, in
all places vvheraboute any great Veins, or Arteryes are situated and placed,
because that through their effusione of bloede, the vvounded person is
berefte af all his abilitye and forces: the wounds of the Secret parts or
privityes, and the wounds of the Testicles are also by this reasone very
perilous and dangerous, as also are these which happen and chance to light
betvveene the fingers.

The figure or form of the wounds
There is also great heed to be taken one the manner and form of the
vvou^de: for those vvou^des which chance, or come by crushinge, or
pletteringe, are far worse, then those, which are only hevvede, so that it
is much better to be vvou^ded with a sharp edgede or cuttinge svvorde, the^
with any other blunte vveapone which is not sharp.

The round or circle wounds are vvorste and difficultest to be curede, but
the certayneste and easyeste to be cured, are those which pass by the le^ngth
of the fibers right like a linye or line.

The wounds of the Hippe, which are received in the membranous muscle, What
the wounds of the hippe are,
are very exceedinge dangerous, and especially if it be a thruste or
stabbe,or else when the apertione of the same is very small, and has noe
issue, but it is so much the worse if it so chance there be any fracture or
separatione of bones, it be where it vvil in any place of the hippe: and so
far forth as if the wound be in any internalle part of the Hippe, about
the great veins, then the wound is passinge and exceedinge dangerous, for
there ensuethe out of hand some great inflammatione there unto, and
conseque^tlye thereafter a Gangraena, or mortificatione: he that happens to
receave a wound in the foremoste part of his arm, is also subject unto
the same danger of inflammatione, and mortificatione, and causes great pain
and trouble, because that those wounds most commonly are praesente death.

What we ought to judge out of the accidents of vvou^des.
Now as much as belongs unto the judgment and opinione, which is to be
considered and noted out of the accidents of all vvou^des, Hippocrates teaceth
us: in so much as in the great and badde wounds, as are the wounds of the
Sinues, of the Te^dones, of the Ioynctes, and of the bones, little or not
svvellinge or inflammatione at all apperareth, and illustratethe it self it is
a very evell and badde sign, for why, it signifyethe unto us that those
humors which consideringe the pain should have assembled, and packed
themselves that way and have circumcinglede themselves rovvnde about the
vvou^ded part, have retracted themselves into some principalle and especial
part of the body.

Accide^tes of a de parted svvellinge.
Those wounds in the which there appearethe any svvellinge, or tumefactione
very seldom or never fall into any Phrensye, or into co^vulsione of Sinnues,
because that the venomous humors, which might, ascend and dravve tovvarde the
Brains or into the sinuishe parts of the boddye, have congregate and
gatherede themselves together about the wound: but if that one the suddayne
the svvellinge without any evidente reason, as in example, in the applyinge
of any remedies, through purgations, or through phlebotomisinge or blood
lettinge, came to depart and with dravve it self into some other place and
that in such, as are vvounded behind in there back bone, that person is
troubled with convulsione of synnues, through the with dravvinge of the
matter, into the sinnuishe parts of the backebone:and the wound being in
the foremost parts of the body, and the matter of the svvellinge, asce^dinge
vpvvardes, through the great veins, tovvarde the Brains, the patient
strayghtvvay fallethe into a madness and Phrenesye: or if so be that the
matter dravve tovvarde the breast, then there ensue great and intolerable
stitches, or Apostemations, because that those badde humors can not by any
means possible be consumed or vvastede, but descend and sincke down into
the co^cavitye of the breast. And if that the svvellinge now departinge be of
a very high and read colloured, and that thervvas store of blood therein,
which is descended and suncke down tovvarde the guts, then it necessarylye
and co^sequentlye fellovveth that the patiente falls into the Blodye flyxe,
or Dysenterye.

As far forth therefore as there procedethe any convulsione of synnues out
of a wound, The convulsione in wounds is very dangerous.
and especially from any great inflammatione, that is a sign of death, for
therbye we may plainly, note, and mark that the synnuishe parts of the
body, must needs be hurt, and that the Brains are in some, or other
passione.

If that into any vvou^des, which have fiercelye bledde any Spasmus happen,
that is a bad sign.

All thrustes of the sinnues, and Tendones, Thrustes in the synnues are very
dangerous.
are very dangerous, and especially, when as the skin and the flesh
chance to shutt together, for therein engenderethe a sharp and corrodinge
matter, which resuscitatethe and causethe great and intolerable pain,
because she can not by any meannes get issue, out of the which procedethe and
follovvethe convulsione of synnues, inflammatione, and a Gangraene, or
mortificatione. The Organicke parts, which are vvholye cut of can noe more be
restored again.
In so much as any especial and principalle, or Organicke part, or any
instrumentalle part, totallye and vvholye is hevved of, and sequestered and
separatede from the body, it can not by any means be restored and cured,
because that the blood, and the vitalle Spirits are vvholye exhalated,
through the great veins, which are clean a sunder, and that by the which
the cure must be done, and the foregoinge health again restorede.

The temperature of the boddye, the time of the year, the age the handlinge
and trafique, and the manner of the patients livinge, the knowledge of the
co^trye are a great help and aid for the prognosticatione of wounds: a
child, or a yongema^, which as yet is in-his growth vvil better and with
more ease be healed or curede, then an aged person: and a strong man, a
great deal sooner then a feeble, and debile person. A lean and sclender
person, will be curedevvith more facilitye, then a thick, and gross lived
man. And a sound body far sooner, then a sick and corrupt body. That man
which labors, easier, then a stillsittinge and idle person. A soberman,
far sooner, then a bancketter, and one that haunte the hoores. The most
conveniente time of the year, to cure and heal a vvou^de, is in the fore
summere or Vernall time of the year, or at the least in such a time, in the
which it is nether to hot nor to could, because that extreme heat, or
extreme could,are the enymyes of all wounds, and especially the changinge
of heat, and of could, wherefore also the fore vvinter or Autu^nus, is very
unprofitable for the same. In some regions and countries, Other co^sideratio^s
to be his in prognosticatinge.
the wounds are either easyer, or difficulter to becurede: for at Rome, the
wounds of the head are difficulter to be curede, then the wounds of the
Legs, the which notwithstanding at Avignon we find clean contarye.

As far as the vvounded person keep and continue his perfect Sense, and
memory nether gettethe any agues, we may then assure our selves, that the
wound vvil quicklye and easylye be curede. We ought not thetfore to
discourage the patiente, although, he have an ague by the great vvou^de, as
long as the inflammatione is yet before hand, and as long as there
engenderethe any matter. But an ague is very dangerous, Signs to the
contrary.
when she issuethe from a small wound and especially, when she has long
continuance, after the inflammatione, and supuratione, or when she incitateth
the patient unto Phrenesye. When the patient parbrakethe against his vvil,
green galle, or immediatlye when he has received the blow, or at the time
while the inflammatione is as yet duringe, that is also a badde sign,
especially in these which are vvounded in a synnue, or in annye sinnuishe
place: But the parbrakinge, or vomitinge, which comes by the frevvil of the
patiente. is nothing suspicious, especially in those, which are used to
vomitinge, if that a man praesentlye after meals, or after that the
inflammatione is come, or the wound being in the head, Consideration for the
vvonds of the head.
do not come to vomit. The Chyrurgiane must use great foresight, in givinge
judgment of the wounds of the Head, for the aunciente Chyrurgians, have
alvvayes esteemed the^ doubtfulle and suspect, because of other badde
accidents until the Fifteenth day, and the modern and, ionge professors,
until the hundred the day.

The Iurists, or lawyers, have constituted and ordained fifteen days, for
the judgment of the wounds of the Head, to know of a certayntye, whether
the patient by occasion of that vvou^de came to dye or not or by reasone of
his own fault, or by any other occasion. Because therefore, that the younger
Chyrurgiane, shall not be over rash, in givinge of his judgment, least he
come te glyde and fall into any badde reports, or in any repraehensione. As
much as appartayneth unto me, I have known some, which have continued in a
very good estate unto the thirteenth, fourteenth, or until the fifteenth day,
and then have fallen into agues, and many other accidents, by the which they
in the end chanced to dye. We must also note, that all naughtye and badde,
accidents most of all publishe themselves, at the full Moon, more then at
other times, because as then all manner of moisture grows and increases
more, then in the decreasinge of the Moon, and also more in the summer, then
in the VVinter.

The signs and tokens of the deadlye fractures of the sculle, are agues in the
VVinter, The signs of the deadly fractures of the sculle.
before the fourteenthe day, and in the summer before the seaventhe day: Item,
a naughtye and badde colloure of the wound: little matter of the same:
mortificatione of that which is inflamed: slimye or viscouse consistence of
that which is corrupted: dries ariditye in the skin of the head, as it is
in a piece of pouldrede flesh, with a brouvvne, leadishe, and black
colloure, which signifies the beginning of the corruptinge and putrifyinge
of the sculle, which the^ waxes ravve, as we may see, when it is rotten,
and grown black: vvheras before it was even and smoothe. Finallye we see
therein, a pale, and yellovvishe colloure, to wit when the foresayede bone is
vvholye corrupted and rotten, through the purulent matter, which was suncke
to the grovvnde of the wound, and was there gathered together.

The patient begins to rage, he has little pimples one his tongue, he
gets also convulsione of synnues, one the contrary side of the wound:
some fall inte an Apoplexia whereon follevvethe death. The Practitioners of our
times, have observed in all wounds, whether allreadye therein wear a
Paralisis, or else thereafter happened thereunto: and onethe contrary side a
Convulsione, or sometimes also in the vvounded part a Convulsione, and in the
other side a Paralisis, sometimes also in both the parts, either a Co^vulsione,
or Paralisis, and sometimes one each side either a Convulsione, or a Paralisis,
without the contrary side being in any sort therewith infected. The good
signs of healinge, in the fractures of the Head, after that it is trepanede,
or else after that the broken parcells of bones, are taken out of the Head, are
these namelye when that the Membrane of the Brains has her naturalle
colloure, and her naturalle motione and stirringe: when the engendringe and
grovvinge Flesh is read. When that the patient may easylye turn about his
Neck, and also easylye vvagge his lovver chavve bone. But in so much as the
Membrana has noe stirringe, Badde signs.
and is black, leadishcolourede, and lividouse or with any other badde
color taynted and defylede: Then the patient ragethe, vomiteth exceedinglye,
falls into a Paralysis, or in Spasmo, if that the Flesh of the wound be
leadishe colourede the neck and the chavvebone both of the^ stand stiff all
these are very bad signs. And when the vvoo^de, is at a good estate, the^
begins the flesh of the Membrane, or of the sculle to grovve, and to wax
dubble, and fills all the void places with flesh, that have binne open
betvveene the bones, yea and sometimes covers even as it wear with
pomgranate Kernells the scull it self.

The tokens how to know which parts of the body are wounded Cap, 3.
TTe wounds most commonly are known by there first aspecte, also sometimes
the place of the vvou^de certifyeth unto us, what parts are internallye
vvounded: But saying that it often times chauncethe, that these vvoundes',
which to our estimatione be not profounde or deep, penetrate unto the
internal parts, we vvil here therefore recite the signs, by the which we
may know, what internal parts, within the body are vvou^ded, because
there by we may know, whether the patie^te may be cured of them or not.

Signs wen the brains are hurt.
If so be that the Brains or else there Membrane is vvou^ded, the^ there issues
blood out of there Noses, with some also out at there Ears and commonly
there follovveth a vomitinge of choler: some lie almost out of the memory and
beside themselves that although you call and cry unto them, they give noe
answer: others see^ in there faces as if they wear afrighted and feared:
some turn and vvinde there eyes, this way and that way, as if they wear
touched and stricken by Gods hand, the third or the fifth day most commo^lye
they fall into madness and Phrenesie: other get the Spasmu^, before they dye:
some there are which pluck the medicame^tes from there Heads, so that the
wound comes to lie bare, and waxes could.

When as the back bone is hurt, Signs when the back bone is hurt.
or vvou^ded, the^ beginnethe the patie^t to be feeble and lame in his sins,
or else he gets co^vulsione of synues, which is called Spasmus: leeseth the
sense of feelinge, sometimes the patie^t can nether retain his urine, Sperma,
or Stole, but of it self departs from him.

If the Heart be vvou^ded, Signs when the heart is vvou^ded.
there issues out of the wound, great store of black, dence, or thick
blood, and especially when the right side of the Heart is hurt: But when
the left side of the Heart is hurt, then issuethe out of the wound fine and
subtle read blood the pulse of the patie^t is very debile and feeble, and
variable, and is very pale colored in his face: The could sweat in all his
body bursteth out, and has a very vnsaverye smelle, eve^ as we may note in
other sicknesses of long continuance. His hands and feet begin to be
could, out of the which present death ensues.

When the Lunges are hurt, the^ breaths the patie^t with great
difficvltye, The vvounds of the Lungs.
and diverse times reiterateth, and draws anevve his breath as if he there by
sought and indevoured to do him self some solace and comfort: he voydeth of
ten times through his mouth frothye blood, and through the vvou^de fair,
read, and vitalle blood, with peepinge and hissinge breathe: he endeavors
for the most part to lie one his vvou^ded side: others often times erecte them
in there bed with out any occasion: Some lyinge one the vvounded side, can
speak, but turninge themselves one there sovvnde side are quite deprived of
there speech: sometimis they are bloesinge in there faces, and sometime clean
pale, and at the last issues out of the mouth of the wound great quantitye
of filthye matter,

The signs of a vvounded Liver are these; The Liver being hurt.
na^lye that out of there right side they avoyde a great qua^titye of blood:
Both sides of the body, are as it wear plucked tovvarde the back bone: The
patie^t is very pale in his face as if he wear half dead: His eyes are
fallen invvardes, and has intolerable pain, being ignorant through his
impatientie what he shall do: he is it best at ease when he lie the one his
bellye: he has a very prickinge and stinginge pain, which draws tovvarde
his breast, and also toevvarde the sides of the same. Heavinge and contractinge
his shoulders together must he breathe, and sometimes through, parbrakinge he
avoydethe choler. Has a very violent, and fervent pulse, he is easylye
ince^sed to ire, and sorrovve: sometimes he has an ash colored face, his
urine also so^tymes very bloodye: his stoels like matter, and dye most
co^monlye, with the Hickcoughe.

When the kidnyes are hurt, then desce^deth and as it wear by degrees
co^methe the pain into the flanckes, Of the vvounds of the kidneys.
and so forwards unto the testicles: the patient can very difficultlye be
released of his urine, he pisseth blood, or at the least his water is
bloodye. Sometimes his urine is quite retaynede, by the which occasion, the
patie^te being extreamlye svvollene dies.

The milte being hurt.
If the Milte be hurt or vvounded, then the blood issues out of the left side
of the pacie^te, and is blak of color. The same side, and also the stomach
begin to be indurated, and hard: the patie^t waxes thirstye and the pain
retracteth it self toward the breast, as in the wounds of the Liver.

The vvo^be being hurt.
Now the Womb being hurt the vvoma^ has great pain in her flanckes, in
her Haunches, and in her hippes: she avoydeth blood partlye through the
wound, and partlye through her privityes, after the which sometimes
follovveth a parbrakinge of Cholera Others ca^ not speak: some lie out of
memory others which do not rage, say that they are troubled with great
pain in there sinnues, and in there Eyes: and when they dravve tovvarde
death, they are troubled with the same accide^tes, which we have recited of
the Heart.

The Middle reefe,
When the middle reefe or Diaphragma is vvou^ded, the^ are the sides of the
patie^t drawn, and shruncke vpvvardes: they have exceedinge great and
violent pain, internallye in the back bone: they have very retardate
breathe, and there issues out of the wound frothye blood.

The entrance of the stomach,
The entrance of the stomach being hurt the patiente beginnethe to have the
hick up, and avoydeth choler: when as he eats or drincketh, he casts it
strayghte way from him again: he has a small, feeble, and obscure pulse: he
gets a little could sweat, with a coolinge of all externalle parts.

The stomach and the gutts,
The stomach, and that gutte Ieiunum, have hoth of them one manner of token,
because that there meat and drink issues out of the mouth of the wound
sometimes being half digested, and altered in Chylum: they feel a pain, as
if a man vvoulde rent and tear there Heart out of there bodies: they get
hardness in there sides, so^times also parbraketh the patient Cholera,
vpvvards through the mouth, and his spittle is bloodye: betveen these two is
noe other difference, then that the gutt Ieiunu^ has his place and situatione
somvvhat lovver then the stomach.

The bladder bei^ge hurt, we feel pain, Hurtes of the bladder,
in the flanckes: that part of his bellye a little above his privityes
extendethe and stretchete it self: in stead of urine the patie^t pisseth
blood, or else the urine issues forth of the vvou^de: the entrance of the
stomach is perturbed and out of order, wherefore the vvounded vomit Cholera,
or at the least are afflicted with the hick cough: they begin to wax could
in hands and feet, and consequentlye ensues death.

Instructione, how to give a certain report of all wounds whatsoever before
the magistrates. Cap. 4.
ALl such which before any magistrates, Codsideratione to be had before the
giuinge of report,
of any vvou^ded or sick person, vvil and are disposed to give report and
instructione, shallby noe means intrude themselfves, before that of the
magistraete they shall be requested thereto, and sent for, saying that most
commonly proferede witness is repraehe^dable: and he that takes such a
thing in hand ought first of all to visit and see the patient, because he
might ripelye and dillige^tlye consider of al things, namelye and especially
one the greatness of the dissease, one the situatione, and place of the same,
not only, as the^ may give good instru^one, but also, one all occasions, and
on the praedictione and fore saying of the wounds, without havinge
vnadvisedlye therein hasted him self: for it is a hard and difficulte matter,
to give a perfect and co^plet judgment of the end of all vvou^des, or other
sick perso^nes, because of the accidents which might chance thereunto, for
those vvou^des, which we do not esteem of so^times are occasion of death,
and co^trarylye those of the which we expected nothing but death, are yet
notwithstanding cured. We know, that some there are cured and healed,
notwithstanding although they wear vvounded in the Membrane or pellicle of
the Brains yea and some which wear hevvede in the substance of there
Brains: as I also remember some to have bin cured, which wear hurt in the
luges, in the Middlereefe, in the Liver, in the small guts or e^tralles, the
Bladder, the Kidnyes, or in the Matrix or womb. Although we according to
the judgment and reason of the aunciente professors, esteem such wounds to
be deadlye and incurable. Contrarylye we se some me^ men dye of small and
vndiepe wounds: we must therefore in such things make a distinction among
the vvounded for some there are which are of so good a temperature, and state
of body, that of a great and large wound which in any other man's body
vvear praesent dea the, they are cured: contralye there are others which
being vvounded in any externalle parts, which are nothing noce^te or
dangerous to the life of the patient, without any penetratione, of the
which, notwithstanding they chance to dye, either of the badde
co^stellatione, or constitutione of the time, or by the refluxione of any badd
humors unto the vvounded part.

Some me^ dye of a small vvound.
Although therefore, that some wounds are curable, and also of a good
constitution and dispositione, without any badde or contrary sign therein to
be marked, but for all that we may not give any absolute judgment or report
of the same, but must only say that the wound is curable, so far forth
as there be nothing praetermittede, which consists and belongs as well
in the patient as unto the Chyrurgiane which has him inhandes, it belongs
also unto the circu^stantes, and unto other external things.

The judgment must be provident lie given.
We must thefore suspe^de our judgment, and keep it in secret for a season,
without givinge any absolute report the first day, because that the good or
badde signs ca^ not so sone reveal and disclose themselves: we must also
consider that all wounds must have there originalle, there increasinge, and
there estate, and duringe this time, seek by all means possible to repress
the vntemperatenes, which is fallen into the vvounded part, through the
blow, through the external air, which striveth with nature, against the
which nature strengthenethe and fortyfyeth her self, to expel and drive
away the foresayed vntemperatenesse, duringe the which time, we can not
certaynlye know, which of the^ shall obtain the victory, the^ only some
time thereafter, whenas the foresayed vntemperatenesse makes her self
known, through any signs which she reveals in the concurringhe humors
because nature, through certain signs, does demonstrate that she has
obtained victory, and is become the mistress of that vnte^peratenesse. These
signs and tokens are especially known, by the matter before hand: and
because that the purulence or matter, is not engendered the first day, it
necessarilye follovveth that on the first day, we give not any absolute
report of a wound, but must first consider, whether it is bent, because
that nature one the days of Crisis demonstrateth her self, by the which we
may judge of the end of the sickness. The first, and certanest day of the
Crisis is, the seventhe, for the fourth, is not indeed the day of the Crisis,
but well the demonstratinge day of the seventh, which is the upright and
true day of the Crisis. After the seventh, follovvethe the eleventh, of the
which the seventh is the demonstratinge day, then the fourteenth day
follovveth, after that the tvventithe, and then the last is the fortithe: For
if that before the fortith day, we perceave noe badd signs, it is then
evide^t and plain enoughe, that the wound will be easylye cured.

It is best therefore that we do not report or give any judgment before the
seventh day be passed by, in which time, When that the report must be done.
the accide^tes begin to reveal the^se (...) ^her on as the^ we must have a
specia^ (...) ^de and care, whether there be more good, then badde accide^tes
before hands, or the contrary, we must consider one these signs, three
manner of vvayes: For they reveal themselves either in the qualitye of the
body, of the vvounded part, or in the livinge, and vitalle in the animaele,
or naturalle actions: Or in the excreme^tes, which are common, or in the
whole body, also in the particulare excrementes, which the wounds reiecte
and repelle from them. The signs which reveal themselves in the qvalitye of
the body, are considered, when we regard on the figure, and one her
color: the animaele, and spirituale actions, consiste in the stirringe, in
feelinge, and in reason. The vital, or the livinge actions, consist in the
pulse: and the naturalle actions, co^siste, in the appetite, in the digestinge,
and in the expellinge and drivinge forth of the excrementes. The common
excrements of the whole body are the filthynes of the Nose, the tears out of
the Eyes, spittle out of the mouth, or the substance and filthye matter of the
guts, the urine, or that which we opvvards parbrake: The particulare
excrementes, are filthe, matter, and the blood: in which excrementes, we
must mark and note the quantitye, the consistence, color, smelle, and
sometimes also one the taste: saying that if there be more good, that is so
much the better: we must also note, that through the actions we may best
judge of the forces. Havinge thus therefore togethere considerede and noted all
these things, the Chyrurgiane shall be able to geve his sentence and report
certaynlye, either of life, or of death, of lamnes or criplenes.

THE FIRST TREATISE OF THE OPERATIon of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede and
handelede of the means and way how te extracte and dravve forth any
alienate thing out of the body contayninge five Chapters;
Of the profit, and necessitye that comes to dravve all alienate things out
of the body. Chap. 1. How the Chyrurgiane, convenientlye and fitlye
extractinge and dravvinge forth the bullet, ought to consider and marcke
their diversityes, and in what parts or places they lodgeor are collocated.
Chap. 2. We ought to extracte and dravve forth the pellet, or any other
things, if it by any means, be possible, at the first dressinge. And
praemeditate, one the means, how we should best and convenientest effect
the same. Chap. 3. After what manner we shall dravve forth those bulletes,
which stick fast in the bones. Chap. 4, That the Chyrurgiane ought not to be
too curious, in extractinge or dravvinge forth of the bullet. Chap. 4.
Of the necessitye, and vtilitye, of the extractione or drawinge forth of all
strange things. Cap. 1.
The excellentie of Chyrurgerye.
AMongste all operatio^s of Chirurgerye, the aunciente Chyrurgians of oulde
times, have especially considered, one the ha^dlinge, vvher with all we most
convenientlye, and aptlye, drew forth out of ma^s body all manner of
strange and alienate things, as are Bullets, Arrows, and all other sorts
of weapons, or all pieces of brokene bones, and many other such like things as
being most necessary, for this foresayed operatione.

It is a Chyrurgiane full of craft,
That out of the body can pluck shafte.
An excellent similitude.
And even as in the vvarrelike affairs, those Capitaynes are esteemed to be
most courageous and valiant, which one the suddayne can best discern and
know there enimyes. and allure and as it wear dravve them, forth to their
own furtherance, to battle: oras in chasinge, those hunters are esteemed
fittest and expertest, which suddaynelye can discover, or disclose, the
harbor of the persecuted dear, and knovveth how he may with al foresight
chase the same: Even so have the Physicians also, had those Chyrurgians in
great estimation, which first of all, have found out that part of man's
body, in the which the bulletes, or Arrows, or any other alienate things
have binne hidden and lodged, and which have had knowledge and science
fitlye and convenientlye to dravve them therout: consideringe that through
there continuance in the same, above al things they are clean contrary unto
us and insufferable, as that which is dead, and livinge: so it is a
hinderance unto us, and especialye to that part, vvherin the foresayede
vveapon, stickethe, and that as well of it self because that it vvholye,
hinderethe the curinge of the wound, or else because it bringethe to gether
many and heavye accidents, the which is cause of lamnesse or criplenesse in
the vvounded part: or else causes the health which we suppose to have gotten
not to be perfect, and sure, but is subject unto a far worse return and
renueinge of the same. Yet for all that I know some which are cured, Some
me^ are curede contayninge the bullet in the body.
in the which the bullets as yet tarryae in some parts of there body wit
hout being necessary to have searched for the same to curiouslye, or to pluck
it out although that we might easylye have attained there unto, and touched
it, because of the danger that thereof might ensue: as for example, a violent
bleedinge through laceratione of some vain, or arterye: any great and
violent pain, through the stretchinge or dravvinge for the of some synnue, or
Membranes: An especially it is not necessary, curiouslye to search after such
things, or to dravve them forth, which ca^ not rott, or corrupt, as that
which easylye, or in time can come to rotte. But yet it is always better,
that all which is strange and alienate unto man's body, and is contained in
the same, be dravvene therout, then to let it tarrye therein, because that the
health (as we have al ready said) is far surer, concerning the danger,
that is then present, to cause the cured wound again to burst open, when as
the bullet, or any such like thing, comes to repraese^t himself: or that
we should not be constrained to make an apertione any where, whether the
fore said bullet through his ponderousnes might chance to be descended.

Which are the strange things,
The Strange things of the which in this place we have spoken, are of two
manner of sorts, for they are, either external, as Iro^, wood, bullet,
stone, or vvolle: or they are any substance of our bodies, as any splinters or
parcells of bones, and the co^gealed blood, which we notwithstanding
esteem it strange, because they are separated from our bodies, and are noe
more partakers of our life, or vital spirits, as they wear before when
they as yet wear all one with them, wherefore they are now become strange.

The inte^te of the Aucthor,
My intent and purpose is nothing else, then to describe unto the young
Chyrurgiane, the practice, of all bullets, and of al other strange things,
which might therewith enter mingle themselves, or therewith might be crushed
to pieces, how to dravve the^ out of the body: Because in th^se our days
here in France there is noe other shot used: saying that the knowledge of
the extractinge of the same, may easylye lead us unto the knowledge, how to
dravve forth shaftes, and Arrows out of man's body, of the which the
aunciente professors have very copiouslie written.

How that a Chyrurgiane aptly and fitlye to draw a bullet out of the body,
ought to consider their difference, and the nature of the part, in the which
it is shot. Chap. 2.
THe Chyrurgiane being requested and desired to dravve forth the bullet,
Wherein consists the danger of dravvinge forth of bullets.
havinge pierced and penetrated some part of the body with least trouble,
and hinderance to the patient fitlye, and finelye to accomplish the same,
because that sometimes they are drawn forth with insufferable pain, shall
first of all consider and mark, that the danger consistes, either in that
part, in the which such bullets are shot, or in the species forms, and
difference, of the bullets: it is therefore first of all necessary, that he
observe, and know, the nature and qvallityes of those parts, for some parts
vvil more gentlye and softlye be handled, then others: wherefore he must
consider, on the substance, qvantitye, figure and form, compositione,
vnitinge, originalle, temperature, and one the necessitye and use of the same
part. To the which end and purpose, he must note what vvou^des, in the
which the bullets have binne shot, are incurable, or difficulte, or easy to
be cured, because that we may admonish, the friends, and kindrede of the
patiente, of those accidents which might happen unto the vvou^de, the bullet
being drawn therout, also of the certayntye or fear, which through the
danger, we are to expecte, of the healinge of the same. Advise of Celsus.
For first of all Celsus says, that a prudente, and wise Chyrurgiane, shall
not at any time take in hand, such a patient, for whom it is impossible to
be curede, and escape death, because he administer noe occasion unto others to
suspecte, and think, that he has berefte the patient of life, which
otherwise through the bad fortune of his vvounds is disceased. And saying
that the danger is great, but yet notvvithsta^dinge entermingled with some
good hope, the^ he shall admonish the friends of the patiente, that the matter
is heavye, and suspecte, because if so be the art and science, be suppressed,
and overvvonne of the dissease, that they should not as then think, either
that he has not known thereof, or else that he has sought to abuse the
friends. But that such is the office, and the duty, of a wise and prudent
Chyrurgiane, also is it the fact of a Runnagate Qvacksalver and deceaver, to
make any thing, seem to be very dangerous, which of it self is easy,
and light, because we should think, more art to be in him, then indeed
theris. It is also seemlye, that the Chyrurgiane co^fessinge, the cure to be
easy and light, do paune his credit, and reputation, because as the^ he might
the more vvillinge, think one that, which might be most commodious and
profitable, to the curinge and healinge of the patient, and that the dissease
which of it self is small, through the negligence of those, of the which
the patient is kept, be made noe greater.

To this end Paulus Aegeneta counceleth us, Opinione of Paulus Aegineta.
that if so be, the bullet continue, or tarrye, in any of the vvorthyest
parts of the body, as in the Brains, Heart, Liver, or throat, in the
kidneys, bladder, or Matrice, and the signs, and tokens of death revealinge
themselves we cannot by any means possible convenientlye without great
pains, and dilaniatione of the vvounded part dravve forth the foresayed
bullet, that as the^ we may not offer to touch it, because that without
doing any good or furtherance, we do not administer unto the ignorant and
common poeple, any occasion, of evell speakinge or blaminge us.

But allthoughe the issue of the wound, be as yet uncertain, havinge
admonished and fortoulde the danger, Many men preserve there lives above the
opiin of the Chyrurgian.
we may with Gods help take the cure in hand: because that some havinge an
Apostematione, in any of the vvorthyest parts, against the opinione and
certayntye of the Chyrurgiane, have as yet beheld and praeserved there life:
yea we have also seen and beheld some, in the which a parcel of there
Liver, one part of the Epiploon, the whole Womb has from them binne
separated, or hevved and cut of, the patient for all this has binne cured,
and praeserved to life. We have also at some times in a veheme^te and great
squinantie, perced and made an apertione in the throat. But if so be that we
suffer the bullet to continue in the body, or in any part of the same,
without extractinge of the same, when that easylye he may be drawn forth,
it necessarylye follovveth, that the patie^t must dye therofe, it might also
bring the Physicion, or Chyrurgiane into the name of bei^ge cruel, and
mercylesse, vvher other wise the bullet bei^ge drawn forth, it might be that
the patient might as yet be curede, wherefore the Chyrurgiane must alvvayes
endevoure and do the best he can, when he has forttoulde, and admonished the
friends of the patient, of the danger, because some times great and fearful
vvou^des beyo^de the expectatio^s of all me^ are cured, wherefore we ought not
at any, time to permit or suffer the patie^te without help or succoure,
where there is any small hope of being cured. We must not at any time
leave the patient.
And all though that all things of this our operatione fall not out
according unto our mind, yet notwithstanding, must not we leave to
effect that which this art and science reqvireth, and that which our
conscience witnesses unto us.

Consideration of bulletes,
Above all that the Chyrurgiane must considere, on the vvounded part, he must
also farther consider one the difference, and varietye of bulletes, which
consists, in the matter, form, qvantitye, number, and facultye of the same.
As concerning and touching the matter, although that the foresayed bulletes,
most commonly are of lead yet for all that sometimes the besieged, and they
that skermishe in the feelds are constrained to use tin bullets, Copper,
pieces of iron, steel, peasen, yea and also little stones or pebles. As
concerning the figure or form thereof they are most commonly rovvnde,
although there are some shot with three corners, some four corners, and some
of other fashons. Touching the qvantitye, there is great difference concerning
the greatenes of the pieces, by the which the bullets are shot. As for the
number, and constitutione of the foresayed bullets, there are some which
shoot, with more. the^ with one bullet, with some which are fastened the
one, with the other, with little chayned Bullets, with hayle shote, which
spread themselves, in the body of a man. Speakinge of the forces or
facultyes, of bullets I have not as yet geven any credit unto them that said
the bullets might be poysened, because as yet there has binne never a famous
Chyrurgiane which ever had a venomous shot wound in hand in these our
times which has made any me^tione therofe, as is plainly shevved, in the
discourse of the disceased the right worshipful M Ambrosius Pare, chief
Chyrurgiane to the king his majesty which has very learnedlye discussed
and as it wear grovvnded this questione in his boockes of Chyrurgerye.

The bullets, and all other strange things ought in the first dressinge to be
drawn forth, so far as it is possible to be done: and of the means how to
effect the same. Chap. 3.
WHen that the Chyrurgiane shall have considered, one the part, and also a
little observed, one the varietye, and difference of bullets, he shall choose, a
certain number of instruments which co^tinuallye he ought to have by him,
especially those, which he supposes to be most fittest to dravv forth the
fore said bullet with most facilitye and ease. We must endevoure to dravve
forth the bullete at the first dressinge.
The which he shall at the first dressinge, without any longer delay, unto
the next day, put in ure and practice: for the bullet being drawn out,
shall the patie^t, and Chyrurgiane also be freed from great danger, the
which both of them with all right ought to desire and long for. The bullet
may also praesentlye, while the wound is fresh and green, be felt with
the finger, or most fitlye with the privet or searchinge iro^ without
tarryinge until the next day, because that the vvounded part, through any
concurringe humors, svvelleth out of hand, through the pain of the wound,
by the which the entrance of the wound comes to svvelle, as also through
the force of the bullet, any of the Me^branes or Te^dones, being bruised the
foresayed entrance of the wound, stops: because most co^monlye shotten
wounds do not enter right, or liniallye into the body, but turninge, and
also with any Membranes, or tendones rovvnde about wound, and even ^^ngled,
as also the bullet through his ponderousnes, runninge this way or that way,
chances to fall into some hollovve place, which sometimes frustrateth, and
annihilateth the knowledge of the Chyrurgiane, so that by any means
possible, he can nether touch nor find him: above all this, the foresayed
wound, is the second day more sensible, and tender, then when she is
fresh, as the patient allsoe while that the wound is fresh and vvarme, is
better able to abide the sovvnding or searchinge iro^, or privett: and that
which is more, the vvounded havinge obtained noe time to think, The vvou^ded
feels not his vvou^de at the first.
and consider of his vvou^de, his heart being as yet puffed up with vayn
glory, is not as yet at the first dressinge, posessed with any timorousnes
or fear, as he is in the second or third dressinge: wherefore in his frist
dressi^ge, with more courage, and patience, is able to bear the pain, and
dravvinge forth of the bullet.

First of all therefore, if so be that by any means we ca^ nether find nor
feel the bullet, to acomplisshe and effect this work, fitlye and
convenientlye, with the least trouble and pain of the patient, we are
constrained to cause the patient to sit or stand, in such a form, and
posture, or, collocatione as he sat or stood, when as the bullet was shot
into his body, yea also with the same gesture, and behavioure, One what
manner we must set the patie^t
which he used: for the chainginge of the form as when we fight, or when
we are laid alo^ge, or when we stand upright, or being set down,
causes a great alteratione, in the being, and situatione, of these parts of
the patiente, because the veins, arteryes, synnues, bones, and muscles, may
one so many vvayes and fashons be turnede and vvou^de, as they have diverse
uses, and actions unto the which they at fit, it be either in the erecti^ge,
or in the stoupinge, or in the turni^ge: which often times is the occasion,
that altough we search, and feel for the bullet, any muscle lie any other
way turned, then it did, when the foresayed muscle was pearcede with the
bullet, the vvou^de in that place most commo^lye being stopped, so that for the
most part the searchinge iron can not enter that place vvher the bullet lies:
But when we shall have set the patient on such a manner, as he stood, or
sat, when he was shot, the^ come all the parts into the same situatione, as
they wear when he was shot, wherefore, as the^ the proof or searchge
iron, may pass very easylye, without any let, eve^ into that place vvheras
the bullet lies. And so far forth as the patie^t, co^sideringe his great
imbicillitye and weakness, has not the strength to stand in that order, we
must as the^ at the least, either sittinge or lyinge, turn, and vvinde him on
such a manner, whether he sitti^ge or lyinge, in as much as is possible, as he
was when he received the shot. Why the vvound must bedilated.
Now being in such a situatione, we are first of all counceled, if so be
the vvou^de be narrovve, as also all auncie^te Chyrurgia^s teach 'vve must as
the^ dilate the vvou^de, because the bullet, or that which is therein, may have
a free passage: for there is nothing, that causes more in flammatione, then
dilaceratione, or tearinge of the flesh, when as with violence we seek to
dravve out any thing out of the vvou^de, wherefore it is better to make the,
dilatatione with a little rasore then with violence to tear op the vvou^de:
further we must note, that in the dilati^ge of the vvou^de, we chance not to
hurt any synnues, veins, or arteryes: the which if you perceave, you shall
eschevve and avoyde the^, or with a little and blunte hoocke pluk them one the
one side, and proceed betrvvixt them, as Celsus in his 5 cap. of his seave^th
book teaches us.

After that we sufficie^tlye dilate the vvou^de we must them search for the
bullet or that which is shot in the wound, The second instructione.
and feel first of all with your finger, if it be possible, as with out
doubt it is, the best searchinge iron and in feelinge we must consider what
way the bullet has taken, and if it be deeper the^ the length of your finger,
as then we must use there unto the common searchinge iron, which must be
reasonable thick, and at the lovver end very rovvnde, for if so be, it be to
sharp pearceth, and goes betvveene two muscles, with out follovvinge that
way which the bullet vve^t.

When as therefore we have certaynlye fovvnde out the bullet, The third
instruction.
the third instructione is that we dravve him forth to the effectinge of the
which, there is nothi^ge surer, the^ to dravve him through the same place, by
which he entered, and especially when he has not penetrated to deep, or
passed through any great vain, arterye, or synnue because the way is
allreadye made, wherefore we need not make any other inscisione.

Amongst all instruments which ever I have used, I have contented my self
best, In scisione one the contrary side.
with that instrume^te, which we call, the spoonevvyse, or spoonefashoned
bullet dravver, because this instrument, may both be used fore a searge iron,
and a bullet extractor also, so that as soon as we heervvith feel the
bullet we may also at that time, pluck him out: but pearcinge very deep,
and one the contrary side is little substance, and without great veins, and
we with our fingers may feel the bullet, it is the^ better, and rather
cou^celed, there to make an apertione, namelye, on the contrary side, of the
entrance of the bullet, then to dravve the same by the way which he entrede,
consideringe the great distance, and space, through which he being drawn
backvvardes, must of necessitye pass bye, as also the pain is far
greaater, when with the bullet, and with the instrument, the vvou^de
internallye comes to tear, and bruise the Flesh, the^ when by inscisione
we dilate the vvou^de, by which she is also sooner cured, because that
which is cut, more re easier and sooner is healed, then that which through
dilaniatione is vvounded: and if it be possible, the foresayed inscisione must
be made right under the bullet, but so^vvhat greater then the bullet, because
the^ we need not dravve him forth with any violence, and do not chance to
lacerate the vvou^de: This being in this sort finished, we shall find the
bullet a great deal nearer unto us, and more easyer to be drawn therout,
without passinge by to great and tedious a way, in the dravvinge forth, of
that way by the which he entered, Vtilitye of inscisione.
yea which is more, the wound vvil a great deal sooner be cured, and with
less danger, the wound havinge two issues, to wit the one under, and the
other above, partlye because she may receave the remedies the better, as also
co^sideringe the matter, which one both sides has her issue, which
otherwise might be retained, and collect or gather it self together in the
bottom of the wound.

As soon as the bullet is dravve^ forth, we must shevve it the patiente,
because he may be joy full and glad, to be released of that which was such
a molestatione and trouble unto him, and was cause of so great pain, and by
the which he might have gone so lange a time with pain, without being
thereof cured: we must endevoure by all means, either by dravvinge him forth,
through his entrance, or else through the contrary side of the wound,
well knovvinge how to effect this dravvinge, with all fitnes, and
convenie^ce, because we should not forsake the vvou^ded, nether discourage
him, through our long operatione, or vvorkinge: and effect that also with
the least pain possible, because that the pain of the vvounded patient
therbye, which is great might not be increased, Instructione how to work
vvyselye.
for it is to great a shame, to bring a vvounded person which bath enoughe
to suffer, into greater suffera^ce and pain: we must also dilligentlye note,
that we do not bye any means hurt any particulare part, and especially
the great veins, arteryes, or synnues, or any other vital parts, one the
which we must have an especial eye, and care: for it vvoulde be to great a
disgrace, and shame, thinckinge to dravve forth the bullet to do more harm,
the^ if the bullet had stayed therein.

What so^times deceaveth the Chyrurgyane.
We are often times deceaved, nether ca^ we also find the bullet, because he
is clothed, with cotton, with vvolle, or with any other parcells of
apparel, which the f^re said bullet, carries into the body with him: or
else because the flesh, or the Membranes which are bruised, or with violence
of the bullet have binne re^te, cover the foresayed bullet. It is also
sometimes evident, that the foresayed bullet, erreth from his right way, and
chances to come somvvhether a side, into some other part, and yet
notvvithsta^dinge, havinge in the passage met with any bone, is for all that
removed into some other place, as betvveene any muscles, betvveene any
Me^branes, or betvvee^ any ligame^tes, wherefore the Chirurgiane not findinge
of the same, and searchinge for him accordi^ge to the rectitude of the vvoude,
must turn, and vvinde the instrument one all sides, and feel with his hands
one the out side not only the vvou^ded part, but also the circumiacent
places, because therbye he might know whether that the bullet might be
su^cke: which he shall discern, and mark, either co^sideringe any pain,
spa^ninge of the skin, hardness, or through any blevvnes or cerulitye,
which co^monlye, is noted and seen about that vvou^ded part, vvher, the
bullet is co^vayed, and suncke. We must also dillige^tlye note, that when as
we think to have found the bullet, we do not rashelye make an inscision,
before wea are certifyed of the place of the bullet, and so dravve him forth
of the same: for that Chyrurgiane wear worthy to be laughed to scorn,
which ca^ not acco^plishe his praetended purpose after that he has so
intolleratlye tormented the patient.

Albove all this, we must note, and mark, The bullet sometimes carries
so^thinge with him in to the body.
whether the bullet have trayled nothing with him into the wound, as
paper, vvoole, cotte^, linne^, or any thing else of the patients clothinge, or
apparel, or also any parcel of the patie^tes armor, or harnas, or any
pieces of wood, stones, or iron, which the bullet mightby any means have
carried with him into the vvound: as such a thing might well chance, when
the bullet any where against a wal, or against ons harnas, on the which the
fore said bullet chances to rebounde, breakinge, and receavinge some small
parcel of that on the which he plettered, carries it with him into the
body: If so be there be any such like thing, carried, into the vvou^de with
the bullet, we ought to have noe less care of that, yea rather more, the^ one
the dravvinge forth of the bullet, for such things are vvholye contrary unto
nature, because they corrupt and rott in the wound, out of the which
needs, must follovv some great Infla^matio^s, or Apostematio^s, and so
conseqve^tlye, the wound in a long time ca^ not be cured, which otherwise
might easylye be cured, and much sooner, although that the bullet as yet
tarryed therine, and especially if that the bullet be of lead, because that
lead, vnitethe and makes it self all one with our nature. Means how to
know whether the bullet have taken any thing with him.
And perfectlye to know, whether the bullet have carried any such things
with him, we must consider, one the harnas, if that be any vvheare torn, or
broken, and if it be a mayled doublete, how many mayles there are vvantinge,
the which one that makes mayle doublets easylye ca^ tell you: we must also
note, the patie^tes apparel, his shirte, whether there be any great or small
pieces thereof torn and re^te: or whether there be one, o^lye hole fovvnde there.

How we ought to draw forth those bullets which stick fast in the bones, or
in the iunctures or ioynetes of the same: also what we ought to note whenas
the foresayed bones are crushed, and beaten to pieces. Chap. 4.
Those bullets which stick fast in any bones, are very difficult to be
drawn out.
THe greatest davnger that consists in dravvinge forth of a bullet is, when
the fore said bullet sticks fast, in any bone, or in any ioyncte
betvveene the bones. If so be the bullet, stick fast in any bone, it is
most convenient that as the^ we dravve him forth, with that instrument which
we call Extractor, or Grovvnde dravver vvherof we must set the point one the
bullet, and vvi^de it very fast in the same, and when it is therein fast, we
must softlye and easylye try, if he will not follow, turnige the hands,
this way and that way, the better to make him loose, and stir. But if so
be that we can not so soon get out the bullet we must then suffer him, to
continue therein some certain days, with in the which time, the external
flesh will begin to rotte, through the which the vvou^de will be somvvhat
dilated, and vvyder, and the bone will somvvhat disclose and open, duringe the
time, we must everye day stir the bullet, and with the instrument lift him
up because that thus doing, the foresayed bullet might by little and little be
removed and Loosed: and if that we perceave that the bullet sticks to fast,
and can not by any of the fofsayed means bedravvne out: then is this the last
remedy, that we quite, and clean pearce and boar through the bone, with
the Extractor or elsi with the point orpiramide of a Trepane, pearce and
boar, against, and rovvnde about the bullet in diverse places, Elevatorium or
vpheaver.
because there may be made some place for an Elevatorium, on that sort to lift
up the bullet and drew him therout, if that with all gentleness it may by
any means possible be brought to pass for we are in noe wise counceled,
with violence or vehemence to effect it. And if it be a little and small
bullet, and that he stick in any place fast, as in the middle of the greatest
focile of the shinne bone, or in the middle of any ribbe, or in the sternon,
or in any bones of the head, we are as then counceled, to trepane that bone,
settinge the Trepane on the bullet, so that the fore said bullet, be rovvnde
about compassed vvithinthe circkle of the Trepane, and that then the trepane
might abolishe and take away all that, which retained and held fast the
bullet.

On what sort we must dravve forth a bullet out of a ioyncte.
But when the bullet is any where, in any ioyncte pierced and penetratede
between two bones, as for example, in the knees, we must then as easyely as
it is possible, endevoure with the instrument to stir the bullet hither, and
thither, hut always straight forevvarde, now tovvarde the hippe, and then
tovvarde the leg because that therbye we might the better, vnshutt and make
loose, with the least pain that may be, the ligame^tes, and te^dones, which
co^tayne and houlde the ioyncte so close together: by the which apertione,
and dravvinge forth the space, and distance betvveene the bones, will be a
little dilated, so that at length, with less pain and trouble, and with
the little spoonevvyse bullet dravver, we shall be able to dravve forth the
bullets. But if we feared, least we should put the patie^t to some
intolerable pain, through the distendinge of the ligamentes, and te^dones,
my council is as the^, that the young Chyrurgiane, endevoure, to follow and
use the same, which I did or have used on my lord of Floyon: which in the
skirmishe of Maestricht, A notable Historye.
got a shot in his knee, the bullet lyinge fast, and occulte in the iovncte
betvvee^ the bones, the which nether I, nor any chyrurgianes, of Do^ Ihon of
the Eeaste, could find, at the last it seemed good unto me, against the
opinions of all the rest, we should shutt and foulde together the knees of
the patient: which he doing with some pain, the bullet, through the
fouldi^ge of the Knees, and the bones which placed and pressed themselves
together, was drive^ therout, and revealed it self externallye, under the
skin, and one the sides of the foresayed ioyncte, vvher I havinge made a
little inscisione, my self have taken the same forth of that place.

In like sort, if so be the bullet, We must dilate the wound if the bone be
dilacerated
have rebovvnded against any bone, and the bone through the violence thereof
be broke, and crushed to diverse pieces, and the bullet as yet remayninge
therein, or else havinge pierced quite through, it is as then the surest way
to dilate the wound, as far forth as the vvounded part is able to suffer,
it, and that either in the entrance, or issue of the wound, at the least if it
have an issue: the which being finished, we strayghtvvayes with the finger,
or with any other instrume^te, must search for the spli^ter, and finelye
dravve forth, those parcels which vvholye are separated from the bone, and
also in like sort, the bullet, if so be as yet he sticks therine: and if
that there wear any great pieces, or parcells of the bone, which as yet are
not vvholye separated from the bone, but are yet fastened withdraw the
Periostium, or the ligamentes, we must not with any violence dravve the^
forth, because through such violence we might urge great pain and
convulsione of synnues, wherefore it is far beter to place and situate them
by the bone, on the which as yet they are half fastened: For nature,
expellethe them most co^monlye withdraw the matter forth of the wound, without
any pain, they separate also from the bone, through the increasinghe of the
nevve flesh, the which repelleth the same from him, or else in time they
conioyne themselves together, and are so again cured, as I have of te^ times
known the same to chance, and as yet in fresh memory, Monsr. de la Tour,
ordinated and chosen gentleman of the kings chamber of presence, which in the
Baricades, or Tre^ches of Parris, got a shot in his left leg, the entrance
vvherof was in the oppermoste part of his shinne bone, breakinge the least
focile, in diverse pieces, of the which also one piece of the same focile came
forth, through the apertione, which the foresayed piece, through the
violence, and blow of the bullet, had made himself, which cleanlye pierced
througe the Muscles called Gemini and Solores, wherefore m'Habricot, Barber
Chyrurgia^ at Parris, made an inscisione in the foresayede muscles partlye to
extracte and dravve forth those splinters forth of the same, and partlye, to
restore again those broken pieces of bones, into the wound, which as yet
wear not separated from the Periostium: and is in the space of two months
again cured, the foresayed pieces of bones being therein very sovvndelye
healed, and I also have treated him until such time as he was vvholye and
fullye cured.

The bullet sometimes pearceth through the grissles.
So^times the bullet pearceth clean through, some cartilage or grisselye part,
or through some Tendones, which being softer the^ the bone, does not break,
but only splitteth asunder or bends it self, and as soon as the bullet is
passed bye, erecteth it self again, and occludeth, the passage, vvher under
the bullet hide the himself, the which, al though we endevoure to search
for with our fingers or searchinge iron, it for all that is impossible we
should find him, which co^monlye chances in the vvou^des of the breast,
when as the breast bone is pierced. As I remember such to have chanced, in my
lord of Malicorne being vvounded, and hurt before Maillezes in Poittou.

How that the Chyrurgiane ought not be to curious in searchinge out the bullet.
Cap. 5.
Good doctrine for a Chyrurgiane.
ALlthoughe, the bullet be of any strange, and alienate, substance, yea also
as intolerable for nature, as is the livinge with the dead, the principalle
intention, to cure all wounds is, that we must first separate that, from
the wound which oppugneth nature, yet notwithstanding ought not the
Chyrurgiane be too curious, in seekinge all contrary things in the vvound or
to too boulde and audacious, in dravvinge the^ out, except he lightlye or
easylye, can find them, and withdraw small pain and grief to the patient ca^
dravve them out. Because that often times, in the first, we can find
nothing, but the vvou^de being come to good suppuratione, and matter, the
bruised flesh rovvnde about the bullet corruptinge and rottinge, at the last
makes him an apertione, through the which nature in the end, expellethe the
bullet without any pane, as is the nature and qvallytye of the vital and
livinge parts, to expel from them the mortifyed and dead parts: the which
we ought to understand of all other contrary things, which are retained in
a wound: as sometimes being the surest and best way, that we recommende
such things unto Nature, The Chyrurgiane is the servant of nature.
and follow her instructions, then that we in vain tormente, and moleste
the same, saying that it is she only, which curethe the disseased, when as
she through the Chyrurgiane, as through her serva^t is opitulated and helped:
For I have known many, and diverse, which being shot, the bullet has
continued in the body, are yet for all that perfectlye cured, and that in
short time also, without at any time thereafter to perceave any impediment
thereof: which especially chances the bullet being of lead, the which in
time by little and little comes to unite it self and with our nature
agrees: wherefore for a renoumned example I will allege, the wound of
Mo^sieur of Chardon, the first gentleman, of my lord the Cardinalle of
Bourbo^, who being the Chapelayne, of my lord of Angvie^, has gotten a shot
in the skirmishe of St. Laurent, in the midst of his leg, of the which
shot the bullet, remained fast stickinge therein, the wound being vvholye,
and compleatlye cured, without perceaving in 28 year any hi^derance or
molestatione of the same, wherefore he reqvested mr Pare, and me, Example.
that we should remove and take a way the fore said bullet from his leg,
fearinge least that the same, in time, might be any hinderance or molestatione
unto him, the which we also effected, findinge the bullet united and
coalited together, as well with the bone, as with any Me^branes, and so
fast grown, and joined together, as if the bone, the membrane, and the
bullet, had all of them binne but one substance. It happens also sometimes
that the bullet through his ponderousenes, and heavyenes by degrees,
dessendethand sincketh dovvnvvardes, toward the exterior skin, The bullet
through his ponderousnes sincketh dovvnvvardes.
that part notvvithsta^dinge being cured, through the vyhich he desce^deth
or sincketh, without the perceavi^ge of the patie^t, vvher, without any
great trouble or molestatione of the patie^t, he may be cut out, which one
this manner is far surer, the^ if in the first we hadd tormented him
heervvith, and brought him into danger of his life, consideringe the great
dilaniatione or tearinge of veins, arteryes, and synnues, which the
hardnecked and obstinate Chyrstrgiane, in searchinge and in dravvinge forth of
the bullet, might be the cause of: wherefore I, in all sorts do council, that
when the bullet, can not by any means possible fitlye or convenientlye,
without any great torment of the patie^t be drawn forth, we as then
quietlye suffer him to tarrye therein: In thus doing we shall follow the
practice of the aunciente professors, yea also of Hippocrates, An example of
Hippocrates.
which recites to have cured a certain personage, which had received a shot
with an arrovve, in his flanckes, vvher of the head, or iron, tarryed therein,
and yet against the opinione of all men, is thereof cured and helped: which
foresayed arrovve head or piece of iron, six years thereafter he took from
him. Paulus Aegineta alleges, Paulus Aegineta.
that he has of ten times seen, that the arrows have binne lost in men's
bodies, and that the same, in a long time thereafter, the wound being cured,
are through apostematione of that part come again to light and revealed
themselves. Albucasis says, that he also has seen one, An example of
Albucasis
which was shot with an arrovve into his shoulder, of the which shot, the
foresayed arrovve, therein stuck fast, and yet for all that is cured, but that
the arrovve, seven year thereafter at the length through the bone Coccix is
come forth and taken out. Wherefore we must not be to curious, in dravvi^ge
forth the bullet, with great danger, and torment to the patient, and to our
utter shame and disgrace.

THE SECOND TREATISE OF THE OPEratione of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursed,
of the means, how to Trepane the Cranium, of the Head, Contayninge six
Chapiters.
Of the signs and tokens by the which we may know when there is a Fracture
in the Head. Chap. 1. Of the counterfracture, of the sculle. Chap, 2. Which
Fractures we ought to trepane. Chap. 3. How long, we ought to tarrye,
before we proceed with the trepane. Chap. 4. How great a quantitye of
bone, we ought to take therout. Chap. 5. The manner, and method of
trepaninge. Chap. 6.
Of the tokens, through the which, we shall know the fractures, of the sculle.
Cap. 1.
Chyrurgerye must not rashelye be effected.
THe operations of Chyrurgerye, which with great prudence, and
consideratione, will be effected, we must not all to rashlye or overbouldlye
begin them saying, therefore that it is dangerous, to open the Cranium of the
head, before we may attain unto the operatione, we must dilligentlye and
truly consider, whether it be very necessary, or not, which is revealed
unto us, by those signs and tokens which the ancient Chyrurgianes have
beqveathed unto us: For the sign or token, is the demonstratione unto us,
which discovers, that which before lay occulte, and hidden: The which
fore said tokens, of the vvounded part, must be taken, and observed, either
of the accidents which chance unto the wound, after the blow, or fall, or
allsoe of the instrument, vvhervvith the wound was made.

We must therefore first of all note, Discriptione of the signs
which part of the head, has received the strok and namelye, whether the
Cranium, one this place be thin, or tender, thick or strong, because the
bones of the head, are not in all places of aequalle crassitude, or of aequall
tenuitye: (...) there we must mark, whether the vveapo^s, vvhervvith the
blow was given, have allsoe cut of the hair, and that it shows it self
right in the wound for if it be so, it is to befeared, that the bone is
bared or uncovered, out of the which we may easylye judge, the Cranium to be
hurt, because that it is all most impossible, the hair to be cut through,
the which for the most part slippeth aside, with out hurtinge of the Cranium
or breakinge there of. Havinge thus considered and noted all this we must
interrogate the patient, whether he have parbraked and vomited any Cholera,
whether he lost not his sight, and his eyes darckened, whether he lost not
his speech, or has voyded any blood through his nose, through his ears,
or through his mouth, whether after the blow he fell not down to the
earth, and there lay still, without any reason, as if he hadd bi^ne one
sleep: For it is impossible that all these fore said signs chance unless
the scull were dilaniate, or broken. In like sort if the patient, lie
without his memory or reason, if he rage, if he be vexed with Paralisis,
Diverse accide^tes of the wounds of the head.
or with Spasmo, or with them both together, it is then credulous, that the
Membrana called Dura Matter, is hurt, and suffers great pain. And although
that none of these accidents have happened unto the patient, yet
notwithstanding all vvayes theris somthinge doubtful, whether the Cranium
be hurt and broken, or not: and to be thereof certifyed we are to note, with
what instrument the vvound was made, as either with a stone, with a stick,
with an iron, or with any other weapons: also whether it vvear great, or
reasonable great, light or heavye, smooth or rugged, whether the blow was
smitten violentlye, or easylye, with greath ire, and furye, vpvvardes or
dovvnevvardes: of all the which we may be certifyed of by the patie^te, when
as we ask him on what manner he was stricken, or from whence he is fallen,
and vvherone, to wit on the earth, or on the pavement, whether he have great
pain, and in what place, for how easyer the blow has bin stricken the
less fear there is of a broken scull: yet notwithstanding, there is nothing
surer, Celsus.
as Celsus says, the^ that we search the wound, and give judgment
through a more surer sign, wherefore, if so be, the wound be great
enoughe, we must as then search it with the finger, scrapi^ge the bone with
your nail, one that manner to perceave the re^te, and dilaceratione, and if
so be we can not effect that with the finger, we must as the^ try it with
the searchinge iron, which must not be to gross and thick, nether to sharp
and thin, because, if that per adventure we perceaved any natural
hollovvnes of the sculle, What form the searchinge iron must be of.
we should not think and esteem it to be a dilaceratione, or fracture:
nether must the privet or searchinge iron be to thick, or gross, because it
should not praetermit and overrune a little or small dilaceratione, without
perceavinge it, and stayinge there at. When as therefore we lead and
perfricate the privet or searchinge iron over the sculle, and perceave noe
vnsmothnes, then all even, and smothe, then we say and esteem the sculle to
be with out danger, and not dilacerated or torn. But if so be we perceave
any thing, which is rugged and uneven, and that the searchinge iron stands
thereat fast, if so be, it be not on the sutures or commissures, and ioyninge
of the sculle, or any natural co^cavitye hollovvnes of the Cranium, it is
then a sign, that the head is broken, or lacerated, and rent wherefore the
Chyrurgiane must dilligentlye mark, that he do not in steed of the fracture,
take the suture, because that those co^missures, The Chyrurgiane may easylye be
deceaved.
often times do deceave the sight of the Chyrurgiane in his judgment, and
that as touching the similitude, which the commissures, are participati^ge
with the fractures: And we are to note, that in some persons, the futures
have no natural situatione, or place, A suture, or commissure, is the ioyninge
together of the bones of the head.
but to the contrary we must also note, whether that there be any
dilaceratione one the fracture, or not: for it might chance, that the natural
similitude of a suture, might well be a rent or dilaceratione, which is not
so easylye to be perceaved, and known, because that a suture consideringe
her nature is vnsmothe and rugged, even as a dilaceratione is wont to be.
Wherefore Hippocrates, Hippocrates has binne deceaved.
acknowledges to have binne deceaved, in the person of Antonomus, of Omilos,
who being thrown with a stone in the midst of his foreheade, and a
boute the sutures, died within the space of fifteen days thereafter, because
that he was not trepayned, and because also the foresayed Hippocrates,
thought and judged the skull not to be dilaniated or torn. Wherefore, it is
the surest, and certaynest way, and principallye, when by, or in the wound
there are these foresayed accidents, with agues, that as then we denudate,
and uncover the sculle, because the sutures sometimes have no certain place,
for sometimes we espy the^, in the midst of any bone, which a man vvoulde
think to be a fracture or dilaceratione: it might also chance that the
foresayed sutures, or the next parts, unto the same, The futures of the head
are variable.
might be dilacerated and torn, the which we can not certaynlye espy,
without making denudatione of the Cranium, and to our sight uncover it: when
as therefore we doubt, whether there be a fracture or fissure, and can not
certaynlye espy it, because of the smallenes of the vvou^de, as then there is
less danger, and the cure thereof happens so much the sooner, and the surer,
when as therein we make a reasonable vvyde apertione, rather then being thereof
uncertain, we as yet proceed with such a small apertione, in curinge of the
same vvou^de, because that it is vvholye impossible, otherwise to know any
certayntye, of that which thervnder lies hidden, as we easylye see in the
great apertions, which thereafter, may very easilye be cured. It sometimes
also chances, that the Cranium being sufficie^tlye denudated rovvnde about
the fissure, yet for all that with the tacture, or with the searchinge iron,
or with the eyes, we can not by any means possible espy the fissure or
rent, because it is as subtle and fine, How we shall espy the hayrye
fissure.
as a hair, wherefore it is allsoe called the hayrye fissure, or re^t: to the
which purpose we must above on the sculle or bone, vvype a little incke, or
any other black medicamente, because that the nigreditye or blacknes, may
imprint in the fissure some sign of his blackenes, if so be that there be
any, which bare bone, we must there after scrape with an exfoliative
trepane: For that which is burst or rent, notwithstanding retayneth his
blackenes, by the which means, we shallbe certifyed of the largenes there of
and profunditye of the same.

Of the counter fissure, in the bones of the head. Chap. 2.
THe ancient Doctors, and all so certain professors of our time, make
mentione, that we sometimes find a counter tear or fissure in the sculle, as
if we had received a blow in the occipitialle part of the head and had the
tear or fissure in the antereore part of the same and there revealed it self,
or in any other part of the head also, vvheras the blow did not alight.
Signs of a counter fissure.
The conjecture which we ought to have of a counter fissure, is, that we
surely know whether the patient wear roughlye stricken, and whether after
the blow, any bad accide^tes have follovved, as if through the blow he
fell to the grovvnde, has there lien impotente, has vomited Cholera, is full
of agues, although it so be that we can find noe fissure in the Cranium in
the place of the wound, and there vvher the scull is denudated. We must also
farther note, and observe, weather the patient often times lay his hand, on
any other place of his head, then vvher the wound is, complayninge of any
pain or heavines of his head: we must one that place which we suspecte
apply some Cephalicke plaster, which when we remove, the same, we must
then note, whether any one certain place of the applicatiane, be moyster
then in another place, or else any vvher under the payster, the skin be
softened and a little more svvollene, then the other, which findinge it to be
so, it is the^ a sign, that in the sculle there must needs be a fissure, and
that it is necessary, there and in that place to denudate the Cranium: for
sometimes we find the bone there to be broken: The aunciente Chirurgians have
beyond all this written, Opinione of the auncie^te professors touching
inscisione.
that although we have inscided the skin, without any reason or occasion,
it easylye and lightlye will be again curedand if so be that the sculle be
dilaniated and torn, and we havinge forgot to detecte and denudate the same
there immediatlye follovveth a great imflammatione, which very difficuttlye
can be cured. But I as yet could never attain to the knowledge of such a
fracture, nether can I perfectlye adhibite any credit thereunto that there can
by any means chance to be such fissures shutt up, and closed or joined on
with the other and so grown together, or being missinge of the broken bone
unto that, which finds it self in the fracture of the other side, right
over against it. I have seen, that with the shot of a gunne, that the first
table was unhurt, and yet not vvithstandinge the second was crushed and
broken, and when I perceaved that the patient, had gotten many bad
accidents, namelye, that through the blow he fell to the grovvnde, had
vomited, forth at his nose voyded blood, was vvholye abashed feelinge pain
about the wound, havinge also an ague: and fearinge least the patient might
have dyed, I trepaned him, vvheras when I had pierced the first table I
found, that the second was burst, yea and that reasonable vvyde: wherefore
thereafter I was urged to believe that the counter tear or fissure, in the
other side of the sculle, which by the aunciente professors was discribed,
must be understood in the same bone, for the first table, is right against the
second situated. It might also chance that nether the first table nor the
second should be hurt, or broken, yet notvvithstanding the Diploe, that is
the porositye which is betvveene them both, An observatione of the auctor.
was so plettered and crushed, that the little veins, vvhervvith it was,
replenished, wear broke and burst and avoided blood from them which in time
corrupts and rotteth and also corrupts the bone internallye, the which in
some time thereafter we perceave, for the bone waxes leadishe colored, on
the which the Chirurgiane must well note.

It may allsoe chance, that the sculle, be safe and sound, yet through the
violence of the blow, any veins which contain that membrane which is
called Dura matter, Veins which burst within the brains.
as well of those which pass through the sutures as througe any of the
other small holes internallye are situated with in the brains, might come to
break, out of the which there will issue blood, which thereafter co^gealeth
and with great pain changes in to matter, with many other fearful
accidents. In this dissease theris all vvayes pain about that vain which is
burst, and if so be we chance to open in this place the skin, the bone
there under has a pale and dead Color: but it is a difficult matter to
judge, and know it, wherefore consideringe often times of the impossibilitye,
to do any remedy or cure therine and by want of knowledge, death
suddaynlye ensues thereon. The which Hippocrates recites of the daughter of
Nerius, A historye must of the daughter of Nerius, described through
Hippocrates.
which was but 20. years oulde who in playinge being smitten on the bone
Bregma, with an outstreched arm, of one of her playfellovves, strayghtvvayes
without any respiringe is, fallen into a Vertiginem who as soon as she was
brought into the house is fallen into a violent ague, with pain in the head,
and rednes of face: and one the seventh day she voyded a goblet fulle of
reddishe matter filthylye stinckinge out of her right ear, by the which she
seemed to be somevvhat lighted and easyed but when the ague again returned
unto her, she was then vvholye abashed, and almost lay without any reason
or understanding, with Spasmo, in her right cheek, or side of the face,
without being able to speak vvherone the foresayed Spasmus has possessed
the whole body, with shakinge, and qviveringe, with the tongue tiede, and
with irremoveable eyes, and dyed on the ninthe day.

What Fractures of the head we ought to trepane and wherefore we must trepane
them. Chap. 3.
We ought not at all times to trepane.
Although that in all fractures and fissures of the sculle, the yo^ghe
Chyrurgians take there light or refuge straight unto trepaninge: it is
notvvithsta^dinge better, that in the first we try, with playsters, and
with many other remedies, and inventions thereto constituted, and ordained:
consideringe one the consequence and importance, of the foresayed Fracture,
whether, it be needful or necessary, to take away any parcel or piece of
bone, consideringe the excellentie, and worthiness of the brains, which are
such worthy parts: wherefore we must vviselye and dilligentlye consider and
mark, whether the wound give a good digestione forth of her, and purifieth
her self, and whether there begin in the wound to grovve, any read
pomgronate Kernel wise flesh, or whether the ague which consideringe the
suppuratione in the wound, be abated or asvvaged, or has left him which so
in tollerablye vexed and tormented him, whether his apetite be again
restorede, and whether the patient reasonablye takes rest or sleep, without
havinge any troublesome accidente chance unto him, vvherbye we might
suspecte, that the membrane called Dura matter, or the brains, are molested,
affected, or suffer any pain, either through a splinter, or through any
blood, or through any matter, which might be come and situated it self
therone: And the matter luckylye and ominouslye procedinge, The fissures
recollecte then selves so^times.
we may continue the fore said remedies, and the use therofe, because that
sometimes by this means the fissures, are replenished and filled up with some
obdurate substance and callositye, which agrees and may be likened unto the
callositye or cicatrice of other bones.

Sometimes only the first table of the sculle breaks and renteth without
pearcinge or penetrati^ge the Diploe: Diploe is the porositye betvveene the
botables.
Some times allsoe is the fore said diploe crushed plettered, and broken and
yet the second table^ safe and illaese or vnburte, wherefore as then it is not
necessary to detecte and make bare or to trepane the membrane Dura Matter, yea
and as then we may perceave the manner as it wear of a splinter, of the
sculle therein lyinge erected. The fracture at sometimes also is so great,
with such a huge quantitye of massacred, and crushed bones, which lie half,
and half separated, or else for the most part clean beaten theroute, that we
may plainly with our eyes behoulde the membrane Dura matter, so that the
blood which drives therone, may very easylye flow out of the wound, in
like forte allsoe may the remedies therein easyly be applied: To the which
fractures, the trepane is nothi^ge behoovinge or needful: And if so be in any
sort you perceave any skilfers or splinters, by the which that membrane
might be pricked, or crushed, you must take them very easylye therout.

It happens also some times, not only in the little children but in aged
poeple, The bones of the young Childrene are bent invvardlye.
also in who me the bones are so thin and tender, that with any rude
blow they are invvardlye bente, (as we see a tin or a copper pot to be
bruised) without the external skin being any where externally hurt: To
the which disease of the bones, we must only take our refuge and flight unto
our extractive, and dravvinge plasters, vvherbye that the depressede bone,
might by any means be elevated, and heaved again into his right place.

Hippocrates, comprehendethe in very Short words in his blooke De Locis in
homene, The opinione of Hippocrates tou-
the whole cure of the fractures of the sculle demonstratinge those unto us
which we ought to trepane, The opinione of Hippocrates touching the curinge
of fractures.
or not. As far forth therefore (says he) as if the bone be broken, or
massacred, there is as the^ noe perrille, or danger at all, and with
moysteninge medicamentes must it be cured and helped, which quiet, and take a
way the inflammatione, and soften and mollyfye the bone, because that without
pain we might take the broken pieces of bone therout: but insomuch as the
bone only chau^cede to be burst, it is then very dangerous, and must of
necessitye be trepaned, because that the matter which distilleth through the
rent, or fissure one the membrane, do not in any sort corrupt and rott,
the foresayed subiacent, or subiectede membrane: for as without havi^nge any
issue again, she come to sincke through this angustnes, and narrovvnes, as
then she causes an ague, and sometimes allsoe distemperatenes of mind:
wherefore we must needs trepane, and make a large apertione because that the
sanious matter may not only have an entrance, but an issue also: and when as
we do not in any sort suspecte that the membrane Dura matter, sufferethe any
thinghe, or is in any sort crushed, or pricked with any pieces of the broken
bones, and that there is noe matter run therone, by the which she might be
troubled, it is not the^ necessary that we trepane, or open the sculle. For
what occasion we ought to trepane.
The Chyrurgiane is constrained to use the trepane for diverse occasions, and
take therout the broken bones: First of all to give an issue and passage to the
congealed or not congealed blood, which was suncke on the membrane Dura
matter, through the effluxione of those veins, which are as well situated in
the flesh of the head as betwixt both the tables, and under the sculle,
which as there do restrain that membrane fast unto the sculle. Secundaryly,
because the matter, which continuallye soacketh through the fissure on the
membrane do not chance to spoil, or inflame the same, because that through
such an anguste passage she can have noe issue, the which in the end might be
the cause of the patient his death. Thirdlye, to dravve forth the broken bones
and splinters, through the which the foresayed membrane might in any sort be
pricked or lie crushed:

Fourthlye, according as the work reqvireth, to apply convenient and
necessary remedies into the wound: Fifthlye, because it might serve in
steed of a repercussive, and defensive ligature of inflammations, which
otherwise may be used in all other broken parts and ioynctes, The head may
not to strictlye be bovvnde, and the reason why.
exceptinge only the head, because that this, consideringe the rotunditye and
rovvndnes there of can not by any means possible therone be effected: for a
ligature, which must be stifflye and fast vvou^de, rovvnde about the
fracture, to praeserve and keep the broken bones one by the other, might in
the head be the cause of pay, and inflammatione, it vvoulde also hinder the
agilitye of the arteryes, and the ascendinghe of the fuliginous excrementes,
which through the futures of the sculle, do evaporate: it vvoulde also
repelle the external blood of the vvou^de, and send it tovvarde the brains,
and membranes thereof, out of the which might ensue very bad accidents.

How long we ought to tarrye, before we begin to trepane, and of the places
which in trepaninge we must choose, or eschew. Chap. 4.
HIppocrates charge the Chyrurgiane, Opinione of Hippocrates.
in his book concerning the wounds of the head, when as in the first he
has binne theru^to fetched or sent-for, havinge together noted, the fracture
of the bone, with the molestinge and troublesome accidents thereof, that
without any longer delay, he shall within the space of three days begin
to trepane, and especially the weather being hot, thereby to prevent the
inflammatione: but not to the membrane, least she lie bare, and so the
external air chance to distemper her, and cause therine some corruptione and
rottinge, least also that in so doing we might chance to tear the membrane,
in boaringe through the sculle which cleaves unto the same, or any of the
other fasteninges of the membrane: or in placinge of the instrument thereon, she
might thereby be hurt or vvou^ded. Wherefore, (as he says) it is far better,
when as there is but a little more bone to pearce or boar through, and the
barede bone begins to stir it self, that as then we desiste, until such
time as it of him self falls out. The Chyrurgiane is sometimes to late sent
for.
But if so be that the Chyrurgian has not in the first binne thereat present,
and the patient has of some idiote or ignorant fellovv binne dressed, which
has not know the fracture, and because there was noe apertione made in the
bone, to give air or light, unto the matter, there are chanced thereunto (as is
a fore recited) great inflammations, and many other fearful accidents: we
must then (if it be in the summer, and the putrifactione one the suddayne
reveal it self) within the seventh day treparte the patie^t, before the
brains are vvholye infected, and chance to mortifye: But in the vvinter when
as the corruptione proceeds and goes somvvhat tarder ofsloer forwards, we
must then effect it with in 14 days: because these days being passed, as
well consideringe the imbicillitye of his forces, as the greatness of the
dissease is incurable, although as then we trepane the scull, it is then to
late, wherefore in noe wise must we effect or do it.

Opinione of Avicenna.
Avicenna vvil have that we straight vvayes begin to trepane, and if so be
we must needs defer it, that we should defer it noe longer then two or
three days at the most, and that especially when as the Dura matter is
pricked or lies crushed, of any broken bones.

Celsus says, that he which tarrieth any longer from trepaninge then three
days, are not to be excused, because that such delay causes a concursione of
humors, on the Dura matter which findinge noe apertione, or issue, disordereth
the foresayed membrane, and spoyleth it, out of the which necessarylye must
follovv great inflammationes.

But our use and practice in these days, is that as soon as we are sent for,
whether it be in time or out of time, earlye or late, and we espy, either
through searching with our, fingers, through the searchinge iron, or by our
sight, that the scull is broken, rent, or torn, and that the Dura matter
suffers any thing, we out of hand proceed with the operatione, and that
so much the sooner, when as we note, that there accidents demonstrate
themselves, without any longer delay and especially, in debile
aegritudinous, or corpulent bodies, because in them there are revealed far
worse accidents then in others, wherefore to tarrye or defer the trepaninge
any longer it would be small commoditye unto us, but better that altogether
we deferred it.

And although the Chyrurgiane wear not in the first sent for, and that the
seventh day of the summer, and the 14 of the vvinter wear praetermitted, and
let pass, he shall not therefore refuse to do his utter most endevoure, with
trepaninge, for it is yet better somvvhat to late them never, consideringe the
good hope which we must have of doing the patient any good, help, and
comfort, which otherwise without trepaninge of the broken bone, or the
elevatione of the same, can by noe means be done, which we only understand
of those, which are not clean without hope.

What places may bear the trepaninge.
Saying therefore that we have the time and day limited unto us, in the which
we ougt to trepane, we must consider what places, or parts of the sculle
are able to abide the trepaninge, and which not. We must first of all there
fore consider, that the bones which vvholye are in pieces, or being crushed,
or at the least a great part of the same being separated, can not easylye be
trepaned, because he might chance to crushe the trepane one the membranes,
how easylye soever he lean thereon. We must also note, that we do not
chance to set the trepane one any suture, because in so doing, we should
with great pain, and with great blood sheddinge, cut of the veins,
arteryes, and synnuish filamentes, which have a unity and fasteninge, with
the Pericranium, and the membrane Dura matter, We may right well trepane one
the sides of the future.
which have the free passage through the foresayed sutures, to retain the
Dura Matter, and administer life, and nurture unto her. But if it so chanced
that the fracture chanced to be one the suture, we must then apply the
trepane, on both the sides of the suture, with out in the least touching of
her: for if so be we trepane but on the one side only and not at the other
side of the suture it wear then impossible that the blood or matter, should
have at that hole any issue or passage, the membrane being betwixt them
both: nether may we trepane on the fontanelle, or openinge of the head in
young Children, because that there tendere imbicillitye as yet is notable to
suffer and abide the trepane. The inferior, or descending parts of the sculle,
are not convenient or fit to be trepaned, because the brains through there
ponderousnes, might chance to sincke therout, or the membranes through the
apertione might chance to be extruded: But if so be we wear urged there
unto, we must make but a very small apertione.

We ought in noe wise to trepane the temples of the head, We may not trepane
the temples of the head.
because we should not hurt the temporalle muscle, consideringe diverse
synnues, arteryes and veins, which are therein divided and entermingled
through the which there might be caused to great pain, fluxione of blood,
agues, Spasmus, and the patient might chance to dye: Because that there under
the bone called Os petrosum is situated, and that consideringe, the movinge and
stirringe in the temporal muscle, which happens in speakinge or eatinge,
the vvou^de might be far more dangerous, and Hippocrates also says, that
the inscisione of the same muscle, might be cause of a great, and villanouse
distortione out of the which one the same side, a Paralisis on the other a
co^vulsione of synnues might chance to ensue. Nether ought we to trepane that
part of the sculle, a little above the eye brouvves, because in this place
there is a great concavitye, fylle of air, and white slimye, mye, humiditye,
of nature, in that place co^stituted and ordained, to paepare the air, which
asce^deth up to the brains, the which indeed is worthy to be known and
observed, because that the Chyrurgiane, might not in any sort be deceaved,
taking the foresayed concavitye to be, a depressione of the bone, which
needs must be trepaned: and if it so chanced, that any of these foresayed
parts wear broken, as are the temples of the head, we ought then to apply
the trepane, a little above the te^porall muscle: We may not trepane that bone
above the eyebrovves.
if so be that the part or portione of the sculle, be broke a little above the
eyebrovves, we must as then make choice of that part of bone, which boundeth
on the fracture, as above in the fooreheade: it is right true, that if so be
the foresayed bones, wear depressed, and crushed, that as the^ we ought to
elevate them, and if they be clean separated we as then must pluck them out
in like sort as we must do in the sutures.

The sutures and temples of the head may sometimes be trepaned.
Yet consideringe all this, we are oftentimes compelled and constrained, to
trepane in all places of the scull: The which a renoumned, and expert
Chyrurgiane called Andreas a cruce, confesses often times to have done,
without any danger. And I dare my self bouldlye affirm, that I in the
years, of 1591 and 1592 have my self trepaned, and have seen others trepane,
in the foresayed prohibited places, as one the sutures, and one the temples of
the head. Notvvitstandinge I would council the young Chyrurgiane, that in as
much as is possible he avoyde and eschevve, the trepaninge of these places, but
rather make choice of any other part, which part, may be a little
descendinge, because havinge made the apertione, the blood, the matter, and
all impuritye might therout have there free passage. Consideringe in the days
which go before and which conseqventlye follow after the trepaninge, on
the singularitye, and worthiness of tvose parts, we must command the
afflicted and vvounded person, that in all things he will be sober, and
observe a good diet, both in etinge and drinckinge, abstayninge especially
from wine, and phlebotomye, as much as is needful, because that the humors,
should not concur unto the vvou^ded part, and that also we keep his
head vvarme, with light coveringes of the head, because could is a great
enymye unto the brains and all synuis he parts.

What qvantitye, or what bigness of the bone in trepaninge we must take out
Chap. 5.
WE must in the first, according unto the quantitye, How great the
apertione must be for to trepane.
and bigness of the bone we purpose to take out make an apertioin the skin
and denudate the foresayed sculle: Therefore if so be there be noe wound nor
any apertione, and the skin externallye as yet unhurt, this shall as the^
be the convenientest apertione, which with hands may be made, which we
shall make with two crossevvyse overthvvarte inscisiones, in such a form as
this in the margin, demonstrateth unto you, or else in form of a borghondiane
cross, which in his middle praesenteth four corners. In so much therefore, as
if the hurt, have made a wound, and inscisione, in the skin, we must
suffice our selves therewith, with such as it is, if so be she be thereunto
fit and apt, making an other transversall inscisione, namelye overthvvarte the
wound, because these two as then may present one. But if so be, the wound
be very ample, and large, we must as then only cut the skin one the one
side, begi^ninge the same in the middle of the wound, because so the wound
may present this letter T, in the which will be but two corners.

These foresayed inscisions, are cenvenientest done for the inflammations. The
inscisione must be done before the inflammatione.
But if so be we perceave the wound to be large enoughe to give place unto
the trepane, or any other instrumente, whatsoever, vvhervvith we might
endevoure and seek to elevate, and restore again the broken, or depressed
bones, in so much as if there be any, we must therewith content our selves,
exstendinge the foresayed wound at the first with linte, and with little
plumaceoles, thereof being made and therein crushed, on allsydes, and corners of
the wound.

But in what sort or fashone soever, we make our inscisione in the skin,
we must always note that we do not suffer any portione of the
Pericranium to remain one the sculle: which under the skin, decketh and
covers the whole sculle: because if so be the foresayed membrane
Pericranium, wear per happes, torn with the teeth of the trepane, might be
the cause of great inflammatione, pain, and agues, vvher fore it is better
that we clean, and vvholye separate it from the sculle, which being done,
we must then damme and stop up the wound with white linte, by the which
the next day ensuinge we shall find the wound vvide open, and if as yet
there wear any parcel of the skin, or lip of the vvound, which might be
a hinderance unto the trepane, the which in the turninge about might chance
to touch, we shall with the scissors clippe it of, without deferringe it
until the next day.

When as we havinge considered, one the place vvher to set the trepane, we
must then note, how much, and how broad, we ought to boar the sculle.
What qva^titye of bone we ought to trepane.
First of all therefore, we must vvholye take away all the broken and crushed
bones, which vvholye are separated from the sovvnde part, and also from the
Pericranium, consideringe that they can never therewith be united and joined
again. But when as the broken bone is depressed, and any part thereof as yet
thereon wear fastened, with the sovvnde parts thereof, which crushed the
membranes of the brains, or any acuitye of the same, as yet stick theri^, we
must not therefore for all that cut it of, and vvholye take it away. But must
by all means endevoure, easyly to lift and elevate the same, and situate it
next unto the borderinge bones, exemptinge only out of the same the small
pieces, which might hurt the membrane, and prick it, because by this curinge
and remedy, the bones again renevve, unite, and join themselves together
with the circumiacent bones. In so much as if there be any more rentes or
fissures before hands, which from the one side, disperse themselves this way
or that way, we shall not need to pursue the^ unto their end, but we shall
only take some part thereof away, because most commonly they join, and
saulder as it wear together again, the which is a far more better opercle
for the brains, the^ that nevve incarnated flesh, which after the trepaninge
grows therein, where we have taken the whole broken bone therout,
wherefore we must take noe bones therout, then with great discretione, and
then as fevve as is possible, The scull is the natural opercle, or cover to
the brains.
so that they do not prick, and trouble the membrane, with there acuitye and
edge, and that there remain distance enoughe, to give passage unto the blood,
and the matter which is therone gatherede, to depart, for as well the
membrane as the brains, shall be better defended, through the bone which as yet
they Keep, which is there natural defense, as if we qvite and clean took it
away, through which discoveringe, the foresayed brains might be hurt or
hindered.

The Diploe is the distance between the two tables.
It chances often times that the first table comes to be broken, and rent
unto the Diploe, yet for all that the second table remayninge untouched,
wherefore it is not the^ needful to apply the whole trepane therone, to boar
the bone qvite out, but in this case we must o^lye use the exfoliative
trepane, When we ought only to use the exfoliative trepane.
thereby to administer any passage or apertione unto the blood, which, being
suncke betvve^ the foresayed Diploe, through continuance of time beginning to
corrupt, might in the same time change and altar the second table also,
and cause any accidents thereof to ensue. If so be in the wound we perceave
any splinter, which exalts it self with some high eminence, we must not
be so curious, to take the same immediatlye a way, or cut it out sei^ge that
it is any vvher fastened, but rather commit it unto the work of nature,
which vvil deminishe and separate noe more therofe, then shall be necessary and
need full, because she is wise and prudent in all her works. It might also
chance that the bone, not being broken or rent has only binne above
contunded, hurt, or externallye denudatede, which bei^ge so, we must only
above scrape it even, and grate it.

Of the manner and method how to trepane well, and artificiallye. Chap. 6.
So many and diverse species and forms of fractures, as there are even so
are there diverse means vvher by we may succoure the vvounded patient. When as
therefore the fracture, is nothing else, then a right runninge fissure, we must
then consider whether it pearce or penetrate through both the tables: the
which me may know through the Raspatoriu^, or through the exfoliative
trepane, vvher with we must grate the first table, unto the Diploe, and if
that the foresayed fissure, Diploe is the space betvveen the two tables.
as there does not depart or vanishe out of sight, nether the accidents
desist, findinge allsoe the fore said Diploe plettered crushed, or broken, and
any matter which through the second table comes to distille into this
place, it is as then a sign that the foresayed fracture pearceth, unto the
second table, and stretches it self one the Dura matter also: Method how
to trepane.
we are as then counceled to apply the whole trepane therone: and
ordinarylye to effect this, as it is needful to be done, we must cause the
patie^t to sit, one such a manner as the part which is broken reqvireth: we
must stop his ears with cotton, and decline and lay his head one a company
of pillovvebeares, which must be indifferent hard, and cause his head of one
or two men to be held fast, because he stir it nether this way nor that
way: then we must cover the lips of the wound, with any plasters
spread vppen fine linen cloth, least that of the air, of the turninge round
of the trepane they might be hurt or vvou^ded, Al-this being in such sort
fineshed, we must situate and settle, the perforative trepane very fast or
steadfastly, on the broken bone, on such a place vvher as we desire to have the
acuitye or point of the trepane situated, there to make a perforatione, which
being effected, we must therone situate the whole trepane vvherof the
poyncte, must be set in the hole or perforatione, the which before was made
with the perforative trepane, and so easilye turninge it, the bone first of
all shall raceave the poyncte, and by and by the crown, or the teeth of the
trepane, without either glidinge this way or that way, or remove out of there
circkle, because of the acuitye or poyncte of the trepane which must
restraygne the trepane, with out slippinge out of his place. There is a
certain industrye in the depressione of the trepane, so that it both turns
round, and pearceth or cutteth also: for if so be we lean to lightlye
therone, it then pearceth and cutteth little, or nothi^ge at all: and if it so
chanced that as then we depressed is somvvhat to hard, it will not then
turn round, wherefore heerine we must use a medium between them both, or
mediocritye, and lift it some times out, to purifye, and brushe it, and then
annoynte it with oil of roses, because that it might the betre pearce and
enter in. The trepane having now made a reasonablve deeped circle, as then we
must take away the point out of the middle thereof, for if it pierced deeper
the^ the crown or teeth of the trepane, he should be sooner passed by or
through the bone then the trepane with his teeth, by the which the membrane
called Dura Matter might chance to be hurt, the foresayed poyncte therefore
being taken therout, we must again set the trepane in his hole, or circkle,
and markinge that the trepane has pierced the Diploe, Signs to know when
the trepane is entered into the Diploe.
and passed therbye, the which me may perceave by the blood which vvil issue
therout, through those little veins which there are openede, we must then
finnishe the trepaninge with more discretione and heed taking there unto,
unto the concavitye of the sculle, turninge the foresayed trepane very easylye
and vvyselye, layinge the left hand very lightlye therone, that therbye we
may the better espy, when that the sculle shall be pierced qvite through, that
we do not in any sort hurt the membrane: because thereof might ensue,
inflammatione, and the danger of death. Note the form or figure of your
trepane in the sculle.
Now to mark this, we must often times lift up the trepane, to try the
thicknes of the bone, through the which the trepane has passed, which we
must with a little privette or searcher try, or with a propre instrument
which here to fore is only for this intent discribed. By which means, we
must also note, whether it be in noe place clean perced, for although we
rightlye and aeqvallye turn the trepane, it may never the less happen, that
the foresayed bone be one the one side clean througe, unto the Dura Matter, and
one other side not so deep: when we therefore perceave this, we must
proceed with turninge, and depresse the trepane one the other side where the
bone as yet is not through somevvhat more, because the bone may aeqvallye be
pierced, or if it vvil not so be, we may then with the same turn of the
trepane, pearce the bone one the one side, and denudate the Dura Matter one the
other side, which sometimes I have known to be done. Such an in aeqvallitye,
comes partlye as well consideringe the head, which is round, as
concerning any concavityes or furrovves which are situated in the second
table, which touches the Dura matter, wherefore the bone is in one place
thicker then in an other.

In like sort we must also plant the little groundedravver in the
perforatione, the which in the first was made with the poyncte of the
trepane: Or we must, stick that Elevatorium which is at the poyncte of the
little foresayed grovvndedravver in that circkle, which by the trepane is
made, therewith to lift out the little piece of bone, or make it loose, by the
which we shall easylye espy, whether it yet hold very fast, and whether
it need any more to be boared, and if we see that it has pierced unto the
Dura matter, we shall then with the foresayed Elevatorium, After what sort
we ought to lift out the perforated bone.
or with the groundedravvere, vvholye lift it out, with out breakinge of it
or doing any violence therone, because there through we do not chance to
hurt the membranes but give it rather one turn or two, because that so much
the easyer we might lift it out, at one ti-time. This being done and the
round bone being taken therout, we must then smoothe and make plain, the
edges of the perforatione, and grate them, and take away all his acuitye and
ruggednes, from him, for if so be there remain any small splinter therone or
any other vnevennes, the which not being clenlye taken thereof, it might be
agreat hinderance unto the membrane: and if so be that through trepaninge there
chanced any of the poulder of the bone to fall one the membrane, we must
endeavor by all means to get it out: If so be it is sufficient to remove the
first table, without touching of the second, we shall not then plain and
scrape the edges only of the pierced hole, but allsoe the whole bone, because
that thereafter without any trouble to the patient the skin may grovve
therover: for if so be that it come to grovve over the rugged and vnsmooth
bone it vvil be a great hinderance to the patiente, and cause a nue pain,
because that the flesh will not be so good, vvhervvhithe the rugged bone
shall be covered.

And this is our practice, Manner we to trepane unto the membrane.
and manner of trepaninge unto the membrane Dura matter, and the manner allsoe
how immediatlye to lift the bone out of the perforatione, although that
Hippocrates, in his book of the wounds of the head, strictlye prohibiteth
to boar the hole unto the membrane, and presentlye to take it therout, because
the external air, suddaynlye alightinge one the same, might chance to hurt
the same, by the which occasion she might thereafter chance to rotte: and
more also if that we take the bone out of the same the which as yet might be
fastened with the foresayed membrane, we might chance to tear the same, or
any small veins therone fastened: or if that we stuck the trepane unto the
membrane, we might hurt the same: it is therefore the surest way, says he,
that when as the bone is all most clean through, and begins to stir,
that we then desiste, and tarrye until such time as it of it self falls
out: But our trepane with the crown, or teeth is such, that unless the
Chyrurgiane be very ignorant, might in any sort therewith, hurt or crushe
down the membrane.

Nue inve^ted trepanes.
We have inve^ted other forms of trepanes, which we have in this book also
set down there form which we call Terrebellum alatu^, the vvinged trepane,
which takes noe pieces of bone with it but diminishes, and consumes them,
vvhervvith by noe means we may hurt the membrane: there are some which
havinge used them, find them far surer, and expediter in there operationes,
then those with the hoode. But if so be there be any great massacringe of
bones, or depressinge of the same, the^ the membrane is there through
depressed and crushed, and is also sometimes pricked with the splinters, of
the broken bone. In these two dangerous matters, we must help, and succoure
the patient or vvounded person one some other sort, and that as soon as it
may be possible, in the extractinge of the same, if so be they be vvholye
separated: What we ought to do when as the Dura matter is crushed through
the broken bones or splinters.
To which purpose, it is oftentimes necessary to trepane, and cut away some
part of the sovvnde bone, which bordereth and is situated next unto the
plettered bones, because that our Elevatorium, might in the elevating of that
which is depressed dovvnvvardes have sufficient place, and rest it self one
the sovvnde bone, with out in the elevatione to depresse the brokene bones any
more dovvnevvardes: for as Hippocrates says, the bones which are broken, and
depressede, can not without great danger be boared or perfotated, because
that the depressinge of the trepane, or Elevatorij, by any means of them can
not be suffered. It often times happens that the second table is more
depressed the^ the first, wherefore to that intent we must let the Elevatorium
pass through the perforatione of the trepane, betvveene the second table,
Elevatorium is an instrument vvhervvith we use to lift up any thing out of a
vvound.
and the membrane Dura matter, because in that sort we might lift up the broken
bones and splinters again, and take them out if they lay loose or separated.
And if so be there wear noe hole, and above all this, the place of the
fracture, could by noe means suffer, to have therein made a hole, it is as then
my manner to take my grovvndedravvere with three feet or poynctes and set
therone, Practice and inventione of the aucthor.
and then make choice, of the greatest, and which is most fittest for me,
consideringe the fracture which is in the bone, to intrude the same therein,
and easylye vvinde the same therein, houldinge your hand alvvayes hanginge, and
not depresse the same to hard, because he vvil easylye enough enter therein,
and when he has a little pierced we must as then with a certayntye, and the
easyest way possible endevoure, to lift up the broken and crushed pieces of
bones. But if so be, there be any piece of bone so far shoved under the
sculle, that it lay above the membrane, and the same consideringe his
greatness, and the angustnes of the apertione, could not by any means be
taken therout, either by Elevatories, or Pincets, we must the^ take our refuge,
(if so be we vvil not through the trepane make the apertione any bigger) to
the cuttinge pincers, and to the Parrates bille, with the which we may cut
of as much bone as we please, with out any pains, or danger, making one
this sort the apertione somvvhat vvijder, to take out of the same the
foresayed piece of bone, which drives one the Dura matter. Touching the
inflectione or bendinge invvardes, without fracture, which commonly
chances in young children, or in these which have a vveake and tender
sculle, when this is crushed, or bendt invvardes, as is a copper or time
pot, those ar better to be cured with extracti^ge plasters, then with the
trepane or with the grovvndedravvere.

The French Chirurgerye THE THIRD TREATISE OF THE OPERATIon of Chyrurgerye,
wherein is discoursede and handelede of the sovvinge or suture of wounds.
Contayninge six Chapters.
What the suture, or sovvinge together of avvounde is and the use thereof.
Chap. 1. VVherone we must note in the sovvinge of a wound. Chap. 2. What is
needfulle, to the sovvinge, and of the means, how to do the same. Chap. 3.
Of the species, or differences of sovvinge, and of the time to remove the same.
Chap. 4. How we ought to repose again the guts, with the net, whenas
they hang out of the body. Chap. 5. Of the Gastroraphia, or sovvinge of the
bellye- Chap. 6.
What sowinge is, and the use thereof, and in what impedimentes she is
necessary, and in what parts. Chap. 1.
Six things which in sovvinge must be considered
THe Chyrurgiane ought to consider six especialle things, which concern the
sovvinge of wounds: First the use thereof, that is, in what impedime^ts it is
necessary, and in what parts: what we must therein consider: what there is
vvantinge to effect the foresayed sovvinge: after what manner we ought to
do it, and how many fashions, and differences there are of the same.
Descriptione of sovvinge.
Therefore sovvinge of a wound is nothing else, but a vnitinge, and couplinge
together of the dissevered parts: which wear contrary to nature, separated
and parted one from the other, which fore said vnitinge must be effected
withdraw a threded needle.

Inventione and use of sovvinge.
The occasion, why we in any wound, or separated part, use this sovvinge,
is to unite again, and join them together, vvherof the convenientest means
is, this sovvinge, and the use of this combinatione, and that especially in
all such parts, which we can not conveniently oraptlye bind together, even
as we may plainly see, in the great wounds of the arms, and legs,
which are overthvvartlye vvounded, in like manner also in the body vvvich
happen in the length thereof, for the lips or edges of the same, are so much
separated one from the other and causes the vvou^de so to gape, that she
could not without great danger be cured, unless that in any place we
sowed it, to bring them together and unition: because that all incarnate, or
fleshye parts of the body, are drawn through with certain sinnuishe
fibers or filame^tes, the which being overthvvartlye, or contradictorylye
separated the one, from the other, the one lip of the vvou^de is drawn
opvvarde, and the other dovvnevvard or the one on the right side, and the other
one the left, all according as the vvou^de or the separatione is more or
less, overthvvarte, co^tradictorye, long, deep, or vndeepe. In like sort is
the sovvinge, very necessary in a vvou^de, vvherin a piece or parcel of
flesh hangs one the one side, and one the other end as yet connexed, even as
it commonly chances most commonly, in a great hevve or slashe, through the
which the ear, hangs by the head, or in any other part, as in the nose,
the which held fast but at one end only.

It happens also some times, Sovvinge in a separated place, is unprofitable
and needeles.
that the whole part is clean cut of, vvherin the sovvinge is nothing
profitable, wherefore therein we must not use any sovvinge at all, to cure
the^ again, for then in the separated part is noe more life, and therefore can
noe more be nourished of the body, by the which the curinge ought to come.

And although that all those parts, which against the course of nature are
separated from the other, might behove to be healed again, ca^ not bear or
suffer to be united or coalited, even as are the synnues, Tendones, and
Cartilages or grissells, because after the opinione of aunciente professors,
and as also the use and practice teaches us, there must consequentlye follow
of one prick, or thrust with a nedle, in the synnues, or tendones, great
pain of all sorts, infla^matione, convulsione of synnues, and some times
also death it self, through the sympathye, or compassione, which they have
with there first originalle, the which Galenus, has shevved unto us, in a
vvou^de, belovve the Hockes in the which, The te^dones are dangerous to sovve
and why.
consideringe the greatness thereof, it was very needful that there should
be a profounde suture, and that not only to bring the supersituated places,
together, but also the profou^de lyinge parts of the wound: the which he
endevouri^ge to effect, has separated the te^dones from the muscles: for
because there is great danger consists in the hurtinge of the synnues, even
in like sort is there danger in hurtinge of the tendones, and that
consideringe the synnuishe fibers vvhervvith the muscles of the bellye are
connectede, which in time change themselves into a tendone, which we
commonly call the great synnue.

What we ought to consider in the suture, and so winge of a wound. Chap. 2.
Why we may not in the resovvinge of a vvou^de dravve the lips or edges close
together.
WE must not at any time sovve up a wound, least in the first she be well
purifyed, and cleansed, as well externallye, as internallye, if at the least
with out any great danger or perrill it may be effected: extractinge and
taking therout all that is contrary unto the said wound, as is congealed
blood, which coming to corruptione, might cause great infla^matione, and
often times also a convulsione in that part, through which the sovvinge
breaks, and teareth, and so conseqventlye hinderethe the vnitinge and
healinge of the vvou^de: wherefore in the resovvinge of a vvou^de, we must
deligentlye note, that we do not contracte and dravve together on all sides)
the lips or edges of the forsayed wound (except it wear in the haremouth,
and in the cleaved or severed lips of the mouth) but must leave some distance
betvveene the one and the other lip or in any place some or other apertione,
because the matter which gathers it self together, in the bottom of the
wound, may issue therout, and by that means the medicamentes may be therone
applied. In like sort the Chirurgiane must in sovvinge consider, and use
medicoritye, and not take to great a qvantitye, either in the length, or in the
depthe of the flesh, and of the skine, through the which there might ensue
and follow great pain, which we ought not to esteem for small, and
thereof allsoe vvoulde remain an illfavored and vnseemlye cicatrice or scarre:
As to the contrary the not deep sovvinge of the wound, might easylye break
and burst again, and then in vain it wear sovvede. For if so be, that the
needle, be to near thrust through the edges of the vvou^de, the^ the threde
because of his tenuitye teareth through the skin or flesh, and when as we
thruste the needle to deep and far, from the lips or edges of the wound,
then there rests and remains a great part of the skin, Flesh with
Flesh comes far sonner to unite, the^ skin with skin.
which will not be united: wherefore indifferentlye we ought to pearce
together as much of the skin as of the flesh, because the flesh far sooner
and easyer comes to heal and cure, with the flesh then the skin with
the skin, and that is consideringe the natural temperatenes of the foresayed
flesh, which is vvarme, and moist. And as touching the distance of the
stitches, and soovvinge, we ought not to lay them to close one by the other,
nether to far separate and sequestered one from the other, as the^ they can
not retain the wound: And when all to nigh the other they are laid, cause
pain, through all the stitches, and dravvinge together of the same, through
the which pain is caused a concursione of Humors unto that place: we must
therefore use a mean therine well consideringe, the largenes, and length of
the wound: but above all we must mark, that we thrust not, through or in
any synnues or tendones, consideringe the pain, the Spasmus and many other
fearful accidents, which thereof might ensue, as allreadye we have said.
Sovving of a wound may not be effected with any violence, in those parts
which we endevoure to unite and bring together, but the^ is sovvinge
laudable, when as the skin stretches it almost together, of it own
accord, and vvheras in this sort it will not be effected or brought to pass
easylye, and that the lips of the vvound with violence must be joined, it is
as then most convenient, that we relay the stitches some distance one from the
other, and lettinge them be somvvhat looslye sowed: for if it chanced we
drew them somvvhat stiflye together, the skin might then easylye rent or
tear, and so burst a sunder through the tumefactione which thereof ensues:
If that therefore, Sovvinge may not by any violence be done in the lips of
the wound.
we disire perfectlye to cure a wound, we ought as the^ so to dispose of
the sovvinge, because that in thus doing, the humors, blood, matter, and the
external air might be repelled, from the lips, or edges of the vvou^de,
because such things, may hinder, or at the least defer, the curinge of the
same: and in so much, as the lips of the wound are not well united the
one with the other, and kept in that stature, and vnitinge, the vvound can
verve badlye and hardlye be cured.

And also if the lips of the wound, We may in noe wise sovve the lips
of an inflamed wound.
do greatly chance to swell, and inflame, and theye shrinck in themselves,
or else if they be to much bruised or plettered, we must not the^ in any sort
resovve it again: for the suture would straight way break, and so
consequentlye the inflammatione increased, but must delay it so long until
the foresayed inflammatione be seaced and the wound be come to good
suppuratione and matter, and is prepared and ready, to be united and brought
together.

What is necessary unto the sowinge of a wound, and how we ought
convenientlye to do it Chap. 3.
WHen as the Chyrurgiane desires aptlye and convenientlye to sovve a wound,
he must first of all have in his hand a needle, and thereto a threde, and a
canulle: Co^cerninge the needle, she must be of a reasonable length, sometimes
right, and sometimes croocked, according as the parts reqvire, nether must
she be made of to hard a steel or mettle, vvher of they easylye might
chance to break, but of gentle steel, because they might rather bend then
break: although she ought to be stiff, smooth, and infrangible, havi^ge a
sharp triangled poyncte, because that in her entringe she might both cut and
prick, and so the easyer perce or go there through, and because that in her
govvinge through, she might make a long little vvound or hole, and not
round, because those little rovvndes, are more difficulte to be cured, What
form the needle must have.
then the long holes. In the head she must be one both sides hollovve, in
form of a gutture, because the threde might therinne be hidden and buried, and
not hinder the percinge or entrance of the needle, in the dravvi^ge through
thereof, because she then touches the body in that sort more easyer and
softer: It will not also hinder according to the sayi^ge of Avicenna, that
we somvvhat anoint the needle with oil, vvherbye the pain of the prick
night be somvvhat easyed, and the foresayed needle enter the easyer.

What form the threde must have.
The threede must be smooth, soft rovvnde, and without any knott, all
eqvivalent with the thicknes, and greatness of the needle, but not in any sort
to thin, least he chance to break or cut through the lips of the vvou^de.
We may rather take a threde, the^ silk, because the knott of the silk
easylye vnlooseth, through his weakness: it is right true that the foresayed
threde, must not be to hard, because there through he might hurt, the
vvou^de, and not to soft least he break nor chance to corrupt, before the
time the wound be fullye healed, vvherthrough the lips of the vvou^d, might
again dissolve and wax loose yet notvvithsta^dinge now a days we had
rather use a thread of carmosyne silk, the^ a hempen threde, or of flax,
which Galenus disprayseth and misliketh, in his third book of method, where
he best likes of a threde of vvollen which may be likened unto, a brown
threde, or a white silk threde ravve, without being dyede, or colored: Why
the threede may not be dyed or colored.
because that in the dyinge sometimes is entermingled poysen, as in the scarlet
dye there co^methe Arsenicu^. The fore said Galenus uses stringes made of
small guts, as are lutestringes, but co^sideringe there moisture, they
quicklye begin to swell, and rotte, wherefore we had rather use a strong
brown threde, which we must dravve through wax and wax it because so
much the less he might corrupt and rott, and houlde the faster. And to effect
this and surely to sovvea vvou^de we must have a Canulle which one the one
end must be round, splitte, and with a hole, partlye because the edge or lipp
of the vvou^de, which with the needle we vvoulde pearce, and because that
the fore said lip may stay, and rest it self, on the pype, without
stirringe this way or that way, and through the whole to espy, when the
needle is half perced through as then to dravve her through with her threde,
without either the nedle, or the thread to dravve the lips of the wound
tovvard, them, and because through the splitte of the pype, it might the the
easyer from thence be removed, to rest thero^ the other edge thereafter, when
she allsoe must be thrust through. And convenientlye to effect this sovvinge
of a wound, How to sovve a wound convenie^tlye.
we must first thrust through the upper lip of the same, situatinge at the
first the holed end of the pype with the left hand, internallye within the
lip of the foresayed wound, because she may rest therone, and not stir
this way or that way, then with the right hand we must thruste the needle
through the externalle part of the lip, invvardes, and then set the Canulle
on the external part, of the nether lip of the wound, and thrust the
needle internallye outvvardes, of the foresayed lip, and gentlye dravve
through, the threde, because as then we may couple and join again the lip
together: and if it be needful to lay more stitches, we must lay them as is a
fore said: some me^ hold the lips with there fingers in steed of a Canulle.

The kinds and differences of sowinge, or sutures, the the time, and the
method, or rule to take the^ away. Chap. 4.
THe ancient Chyrurgianes have invented and fovvnde out diverse and sundry
vvayes of sovvinge of a wound, Diverse forms of sovvinge, accordige unto the
diversitye of the wound.
co^sideringe, and markinge one the vvou^ded part, and nature or qvallytye of
the disseases: for the wounds of the arms, or legs, as in those places we
may better and with more co^venience use the dry suture: the vvou^des of the
bellye, are also on an other fashone sevved, then the wounds of the guts.
The profounde and deep wounds are sowed, on an other fashon, the^ the not
deep vvou^des: Also are the debile and imbicille persons sowed one an other
fasho^, as are vvoeme^, the^ those which are robuste and strong, and by great
pains taking and labor have a hard skine, there in to eschevve and fly the
deformitye which after the sovvinge will be seen.

All ancient professors have used, Three sorts of sovvinge by the ancient
professors.
and have had in estee^, three sorts of sovvinge of wounds, as naemelye, the
incarnative, the blood stoppinge, and the conservative sovvinge. The
incarnative suture is so called because that through her vnitinge, she
joins together the separated parts, Incarnative suture, and her use five
manner of vvayes.
if so be without violence and co^venie^tlye they may be brought together:
we use this manner of suture in all fresh vvou^des, or in these, which are
renewed. And this sovvi^ge is effected after five manner of vvayes. VVher of the
first is called, Incarnative or knotted sovvinge.
the knotted suture or sovvinge, because that in evetye stitche, which perceth
through both the lips of the vvou^d, is every time cut of, and with both
the ends of the thread above the wound is knitte together: betwixt the
which stitching, we lay as yet other. This suture is done with a waxed
threde, as is all ready said, notinge that both the lips must aeqvallye be
joined the one with the other, with out that either the one or the other,
yield it self more this way the^ that way, placinge the first stich in the
middle of the vvou^de, with a perforation of both the lips of the vvou^d, by
the which the threde being passed, shall one the one side of the lip be
drawn together, and above dobblelye knitte to gether, cuttinge both ends of
the threde short of, because they should be noe hindera^ce, unto the remydyes
which we shall apply: The which in the renuinge of the dressinge might be
the occasion of pain, or brekinge of the stitches, when as with the
plasters we chanced to pluck them. If the vvou^de he great, we must as yet
lay more stitches, in the middle of the Spaciu^, and one both ends of the
wound, so proceedinge forvvardes until the whole wound be laid with
stitches or sutures, everye stich a fingers breadth the one from the other,
because at the least the lips of the vvou^de might be brought close together,
consideringe, and duelye perpendinge the general observatione above mentioned,
and especially that the stitches be not laid the one to near to the other,
or the one to vvyde from the other because as here tofore we have said,
through the great multitude, and through so many pricks, they bring and are
cause of vehement pain: and co^traryly they lyinge to fare the one from the
other, the vvou^de as the^ being not sufficientlye occluded, or shutt up, do
little profit, and co^moditye, therefore they may not be laid to close by on
another, nether to far separate the on from the other, they also which are
laid to looselye, suffer the vvou^de to gape to vvyde, and they which to
fast, and strictlye dravve together the wound, cause inflammations, and
compel the vvou^de burst open, wherefore heerine we ought te observe a
mediocritye. The second incarnative suture.


The second incarnative, or flesh making suture, is done with one, or with
more needles, as if so be the wound be great, and deep, as the^ we begin
to stick and thruste the needle in the lip or edge of the vvou^de, without
dravvinge of the foresayed needle qvite through, although she be threded, but
must suffer her to continue therine, and vvinde the threde about her, in form
of an S as the Taylers do, when as they are minded safely to keep there
threeded needle, any vvher one there apparel, as you may see in the figure or
form of the haremouth: and so put as many needles therein as shall be needful,
according to the greatness of the wound, and vvinde the threde there about,
and let them continue therein until such time as the vvou^de shall be healed and
joined again. This sovvinge or suture is used, in such wounds as stand
vvyde open, and in those in the which the lips are separated the one
so^vvhat vvydlye from the other, and they which with the common stitchinge
might not be contained, or Kept together.

The third incarnative sovvinge, is called, The third incarnative suture.
the penned stitchinge, because most commo^lye it is done with little quilles,
or shaftes of a pen, not that the foresaved qvilles, do effect the
sovvinge, but because they contain it, and also are a let and hindera^ce
that the threde does not cut the lips of the vvou^de clean through, which
if with al expeditione and with the least pain we desire to make the^ we
must do as hereafter follovvethe. We shall first of all take a strong double
threde which is separated in two, at the end having a knotte, which with
the needle we must thruste through both the lips or edges of the wound,
redoinge the same so often, and in diverse places, as the greatness of the
vvou^de shall reqvire, always reme^bringe that everye stitch must be a
fingers bredthe the one from the other situated and laid, or therabout.

This being in this sort finished we must as then one that side of the vvound
where the knott lies of the threde, betvveen everye dubblethrede stick a
little shaft or qville, or else a little stick of wood, which is wound in
linen clothe, and must be as long in the wound it self: which
afterward with the threde, we must dravve close unto the lip of the
wound: and one the other lip of the vvou^de, we must through that same
dubblethrede, in like sort also put a qville, or a little stick, vvound
about with linne^ which in the first must be drawn with one of the
foresayed thredes, and with a dubble knott be knitted together, bringinge by
this means the lips of the wound as close together as is possible, in this
wise proceedinge with dravvinge together and knittinge, all the thredes
which there are, in such sort as the first was drawn together and knitte.
Such sovvinge, is used, in great, and deep vvou^des in the which we fear
least the common sovvinge or stitchinge might chance to break, and cut
through the edges of the wound.

The fourth is called the dry stich, or sovvinge, The fourth incarnative
suture.
because this may be done without pearcinge of the skin or flesh: which
we are wont to do with two strong pieces of linen cloth, which are cut
of the side or edge of the clothe, and which in the ends are cut sharp or
picked, as here before in the figure we may see, on the which other end we
must spread a very dravvi^ge and fast houldinge plaster, which qvicklye may
be dried, which must thus be praepared, we shall apply this same one both
sides of the vvound, a little higher then the foresayed wound, and in such
sort that both the sharp ends of the pieces of cloth, may be situated close
unto the edges of the wound. This being cleaved very fast to the skin,
we must as then sovve both there ends close together, without touching of
the skin, and dravve them together with the threde, through the which
means, we may compacte the lips of the wound as close together, os we
please. Such a manner of stitchinge is very vvillingelye used in the wounds
of the face vvhe^as we desire to have noe great cicatrice left therein.

The fith kind of sovvinge is noe more in use.
The fifth incarnative sovvinge or stitchinge, is effected with iron hoockes,
which one both there ends wear crooked, with the which we must hold
both the lips of the wound, bringinge the foresayed lips close together:
but because they co^tinuallye prick and are never without causing of pain,
and moreover might chance to stick in any membrane, which might suscitate
and cause pain, concurringe of humors, and inflammatione, in the vvou^ded
part, it is now a days noe more in use. The second general suture
The second suture is, the bloode-stoppinge suture, so called, because she
stencheth and stops blood, and hinders that the air can not enter into
the vvou^de, when as in manner of revolutione we turn the needle, (as the
furriers are vvo^te to do, when as they sovve together the skins, and lay
the stiches, reasonable close, hard, and on by the other. Some use this
suture, or stitchinge, when as the great veins or arteryes, are hurt or cut
of, co^sideringe the great sheddinge of blood, through the which they are
compelled to do so, and so the more easyer to join and bring together and
shutt the lips of the wound.

But this stitchinge, is nothing to certain, because the one stitchbrekinghe,
all the other break and go loose, moreover the blood which is therein
contained causes that part to swell, and leeseth as it wear himself
betvveen the muscles, which also thereafter by continuance of time corrupt and
are mortifyed. VVherfor I vvoulde council the young Chirurgiane, that he
should rather tie or bind the mouth of the vain or arterye, or with a
Cauterium cauterize it together, the^ to use such a stitchinge, which is far
co^venienter, in the wounds of the small guts, or entralles, of the
blather, or in the vvou^des of the stomach to be effected, if at the least in
the two last it may any way possible be brought to pass.

The third sovvinge, The third Stitchinge.
or stitchinge we call the conservative, or the praeservinge suture, because
she praeserveth, and Keeps, the lips op the wound which are very vvyde
separated the one from the other, or else because they are plettered, and
crushede, or else because there is any part of them lost, through the which
they ca^ not by any means be brought and joined again, the one with the
other, reqviringe only to be defended, and mayntayned in that estate, till
such time as the wound be come to a good suppuratione and incarnatione:
vvher through the vvou^de, is so much the the sooner cured and cicatrised,
without any great, or deformed cicatrice, remayninge in the place. This
stitchinge is also used when we suspecte, that there is any thing contrary
to nature in the vvou^de, which we vvillinglye would have therout, wherefore
we do not bring the lips of the wound so close together, as in other
sutures, contentinge our selves, that in such sort we may continue it.

Touching the time, when we ought to cut a sunder the stitchinges, there is
noe certayntye thereof, because in some bodies, the vvou^des are sooner cured,
then in others, also the one part heals sooner then the other, wherefore
we ought not to cut loose the stitches, before the wound be so far come,
that she has noe more need of the stitches, which cuttinge, must also be
done one diverse manners, as the stitchinges are diverse: for the knotted
stitchinge, must be done, by cuttinge everye stitche aparte, right at the
knott, liftinge up the threde with the privette or searchinge iron, havinge in
this sort cut of the knott of everye stitche, we shall as then with the
pincet or pinsinge iron dravve them out by there knot layinge the one finger
one the stitch, to hold that fast that the one lip of the vvou^de, be not
dravve^ out wards. Sovving of haremouthe.
That stitchinge which happens to be done with one or more needles, as in
the haremouthes, in these we cut a sunder the whole threde, which is vvou^de
round about the needle, the^ gentlelye taki^ge the same away, and thereafter
the needle also. The pe^ned suture, The penned suture.
is taken away through the discidinge or cuttinge away, as is above said,
that we ought to cut everye stitche above the knotte, and there gentlye dravve
forth the thredes therout. The dry stitch is taken away, when as either with
water or with any oil we moysten the same. The furriers fashoned suture.
And the suture of the furriers fashone, is very difficulte to be taken
away: in this stitchinge, we must first of all begin to cut, the first
stiche, and so proceedinge forevvardes, with the scissors, or sheares, unto
the end, if at the least it be to be done, and then easylye and gentlelye take
every stitch out apart, always houldinge fast the lips of the wounds
with pour finger, least that they in any sort lift up them selves because if
it so chanced we could not easylye resovve them again.

How we ought to thrust in again the guts, and the nett, which is suncke out
of the bellye. Chap. 5.
Gastroraphia or bellye suture.
IN the great wounds of the bellye, which enter into the concavitye of the
same, therein is used an other manner of sovvinge, which the ancient
professors call Gastroraphia, that is as much to say, as the bellye suture or
sovvinge. But because in such vvou^des, most commonly the guts and the net
come to sincke out, it is therefore first of all necessary, that we handle of
the means, through the which we might again restore in to there former
place the guts, or the nett, for otherwise can not the sovvinge be effected,
or brought to pass.

The small guts being hurt, and clean cut a sunder, can not by any means
becured.
When as therefore it chances, that the guts are suncke out of the bellye,
we must then first of all dillygentlye consider, whether in noe place they
are vvounded, or hurt, secondly, whether as yet they retain the natural
color, for if so be the small guts are clean cut of, and especially
that emptye one, which we call Ieiunum, it is then impossible that he may be
healed again, because of a great company, and diverse great veins, which
are therein, allsoe consideringe his subtyle and synuishe tunicle or koate, and
because he continuallye receaveth the Cholera, and is situated more nearer the
liver, then any other. But the great guts being hurt, we may rightvvell
sovve them, yet not without a steadfast hope that we are able to cure them,
although in respect of the small guts, by the great ones, which are
hurt, it is always better to have a doubtful confidence then a certain
despair, as much as belongs unto there curinge. If so be any of the^ be
black, or pale, (which is a certain sign they have lost there feelinge)
there is nothing to be done unto them, or at the least very little. But if
so be as yet they retain the vitalle color, we must by all means
endevoure to bring them in again, and that with all possible expeditione,
because the external air, in the which they are not vvo^te to be, does
straight vvayes change and spoil the^. And first of all if they be vvounded,
we must stitch the^ with the furriers suture, which above we have
discribed, and when they are sowed, bring them into there natural place or
situatio^, dilligentlye notinge that we do not let the end of the threde
hang in the vvou^de, because when as they are cured, we may dravve the
threde there out, and not let it sincke into the bellye, for the which
occasion he ought be reasonable long, without cutti^ge of him from the
sovvi^ge.

But when as we will begin or take such a thing in hand, After what
manner we must set the patie^t
we must as then convenie^tlye set, or lay the patient: even as if the wound
wear in the bottom of his bellye, we then lay the patient one his back,
with his thighs and his buttockes alofte: if so be the wound wear in the
upper part of his bellye, the patie^t must lie one his back hyghlye situated
all most sittinghe, because that the vvou^ded parts may suspend and hang in
the bellye: if so be the vvou^de be in the right side, we must the^ situat
the patient one his left side, and if in the left side he be vvounded, he must
then lie one his right side: when as the vvou^de is so narrovve, and so
small, that the svvolle^ gutt, which ha^geth out, cannot again be put
therein, it is then necessary, either that by art we drive away, and consume
the vvyndes which cause the tumefactione and svvellinge, or that we dilate
the wound: but it is always best that we try first of all to repel the
svvellinghe of the guts, which must be effected with some resolvinge and
strengtheninge medicamentes, What we ought te do when the descended and
svvollen gutt can not be put in again or restored into his place.
amongst the which must be entermingled some mollifyinge and softeninge
medicamentes: as when the guts are to dry, we must then bath the^, in
vvarme water, in the which must be done a little quantitye of oil of roses,
or else with some gross black wine, because it strengthens and vvarmeth
the guts more then water: and if so be the guts with these remedies,
will not as yet relaye there svvellinge, and tumefactione, it was then the use
of Mr Pare, chief Chyrurgiane to the king, in diverse places to prick them
through, with a needle, through the which the vvyndes as then depart.
Havinge thus finished all this, if so be there be such a quantitye of guts
suncke out of the bellye, that they can not in any sort be put in again at
the same entrance, or vvou^de, because she is to little, we must as then
dilate it with a crooked La^cet, which cutteth but one the on side,
dillige^tlye noti^ge that in any sort we do not hurt the entralls, which
being finished, a co^venie^t person thereunto shall with his fingers, hold a
sunder the edges of the vvou^de, and the Chirurgiane impose foresayed guts
again into there places, first of all intrudinge of those which wear last,
in the coming or sinckinge out, exactlye notinge, The entralls must everye
one be brought into his natural statione.
that everye circumvolutione of the guts, or everye revolutione of the same,
may obtain there own place, intrudinge the same therein with the fingers, and
one such a manner that the one may follow the other: otherwise that which
is allreadye thruste in, the finger being taken away, might chance retire
and come forth again, unless that with any other finger we retained the
same, vvhylest that the other finger is finishinge his operatione or work,
with bringinge an other portione or part, into his place, and vsinge this
manner,they may easylye be reduced into there former places. Which being done,
(imposing or layinge the hand one the wound) we must as then a little
stir and iogge the body of the patient, where through the entralles, will
situate, settle, or place them selves everye one in his natural and propre
place, even as they wear, before they wear removed out of the same. After
what sort we ought to put in the net.
If the net, issues out of the wound, and the same be not hurt, or without
any wound, and as yet sovvnde, we must genttlelye cause it to sincke one
the guts, but if so be any part there of or portione is become black or
leadishe colored, we must as the^ a little above the blackenes bind it, to
praevent the bleedinge, and cut it of under the foresayed succincture, and
immediatelye reduce that into the bellye again which is not as yet black,
and is yet sou^de, layinge the end of the threde hanginge out of the wound,
because thereafter we might easylye extracte and dravve it forth, when as it
shall be thereof loosened, and the wound be come te good suppuratione and
voydinge of matter.

Of the stitchinge of the bellye which we call, Gastroraphia Chapter. 6.
The sovvinge of the bellye must not be done as the other sutures.
THe guts or entralles, and the nett, being brought into there several
places, we must as the^ sovve, and stitch up the wound: but because such
suture, according unto the opinions and sayings of diverse, may not be done in
that sort, as other stitchinges, or sovvinges, to wit the ioyninge together
of that, which is of one nature and dispositione, the one with the other, as
the Peritoneum, with the Peritoneo, (and so forth of the skin and the
muscles) but we are willed and councelled that we join and stitch the
Peritoneum, which is a membrane, with the muscles, and with the skin
Epigastri, because the same being very synuishe, will very difficultlye be
cured or healed, with the other part Peritonei, which oppositelye is
situated against it which is allsoe of the same synnuishe substance. In fine
we are councelled, to sovve up the edges of the vvou^de which is in the right
side Peritonei, with the muscles, which are in the left lip of the wound,
so that one this manner the musculous flesh, of the right lip Peritonei,
which heals with the left lip of the foresayed Peritoneum, with the
musculous flesh one the one side, and the muscvlous flesh with the Peritoneo
on the other side. Because that Peritoneum, with the Peritoneo, can not be
healed, vvherthroughe the wound only above in the fleshye part might
chance to heal, out of the which might ensue a tumefactione, as if it wear
a roushing, or issuinge forth of the navel, consideringe the foresayed
Peritoneum, which through erectione and heavinge up of the guts, could not
in any sort conioyne together: and such a meaning must be done one this
manner. The wound being great, we must have a convenient minister or
serva^t, which must with his hand one the exterior part of the vvou^de
depresse it down, because as then she may be shutt and closed, and nether
the guts, nor the nett, roush therout sufferinge only a small portione of the
vvou^de uncovered for the Chyrurgian, who with his threded needle, must
begi^ne his first stitch in the end of the one lip of the wound, thrustinge
through the external skin, and the musculous flesh of the wound, without
touching the Peritoneum, which is there under situated, dravvinge the needle
from outvvardes, invvardes with her threde, and thrust the second stitche,
clean through the whole lip of the wound, which oppositelye is situated
against the first stiche, to vvitte, the Peritoneum, the muscles and the
skin, first bringinge the stitch clean through the Peritoneum, and dravvinge
the foresayed needle, from invvarded, outvvardes: And the same being dravve^
out, with her threde, he must then lay his third stitche, as he did the
first, beginning the stitch in the skin, and in the musculous flesh, of the
first lip, without touching the musculous flesh, of the first lip,
without touching the Peritoneum, dravvinge the needle from out wards,
invvardes, the^ he must bring his fourth stitch, as he has done the second,
thrustinge clean through the Peritoneum, all the musculous flesh, and the
skin, dravvinge out the needle from invvardes, outvvardes, and in this sort
he must proceed, and go forvvardes, until the whole wound from end to
end be clean sowed up, thrustinge through on the one side, only the skin
and the musculous flesh, and one the other side the Peritoneum, the musculous
flesh, and the skin: because the sovvinge of the Peritoneum only, with the
other part Peritonei, is not sufficient, nether the suture of the flesh
only, but this suture must as well be done in the one as in the other,
endevouringe always to unite the Peritoneum with the musculous flesh.

An other fashon of sovvinge of the bellye, according to some men's sayings.
Some there are which effect this suture on this manner, follovvi^ge, being of
opinione, that those parts, which are of one nature and propertye, very
easylye unite them selves the one, with the other, as the skin with the
skin, the flesh with the flesh, and the membranes with the membranes,
wherefore they bring there first stitch, quite, and clean through the skin
and the musculous flesh, from the first lipp, without touching the
Peritoneum, which is thervnder situated, dravvinge there needle from
outvvardes, invvardes, with her thread, layinge there second stitche, in the
lipp right opposite against that, thrustinge then only through the
Peritoneum, and through a little flesh, dravvinge the needle, from invvardes,
outvvardes, the^ they bring there third stitch, in the first lip of the
wound, thrustinge through the Peritoneum, and a little flesh, without
either thrustinge through the muscles, or the skin, dravvinge there needle
from invvardes, outvvardes, and then they bring there fourth stitch in the
opposite lyinge lip, and thrust through the skin, and through the
musculous flesh, without touching the Peritoneum, and in that sort proceed
forevvardes, until the whole wound be sowed, so that through one edge of
the lip, but yet at diverse times they thrust through the skin and the
musous flesh, and allsoe the Peritoneum.

The manner of sovvinge of the bellye out of Celsus-
Among all other sorts of sovvinge the wounds of the bellye, or stitchinge
of them this which we have taken out of Celsus is the least dangerous and
the best also, and easyest to be done. That we must have two threded
needles, By the left lip we must not ondersta^de the left side of the
patient for it is the right side of the wound, but rather the left side of
the Chyrurgiane.
with one threde, the one needle at the one end, and the other needle at the
other end of the threde, vvher of we must take the one needle in the right,
and the other in the left hand, we must begin in the end, of the superior
part of the wound one the left side, first of all pearcinge through the
Peritoneum, then the musculouse flesh, and the skin, dravvinge the needle
with the threde out, unto the one half, from invvardes, outvvardes, then we
must with the other needle of the left hand, make the second stitch, right
opposite against the first, in the right side of the wound, beginning with
Peritoneo, as we have said of the first stitch, on this sort the acuitye or
poyncte of the needle is far enoughe from the entralles or guts, and yet
notwithstanding the head close unto the forasayed guts: When as therefore
the needles have pierced and passed through from the one side to the other,
we must as the^ change hands, in receavinge again of the needles aforesayed,
and take the needle, of the right hand, in the left hand, and the needle of the
left hand in the right this permutatione or changinge being in this sort
effected, we must then again thruste through the lips of the vvou^de, as
al ready has binne done, to wit, from the internal part, toward the
external, and so proceedinge forevvardes, as much as is sufficient, and
always consideringe that the one stiche be always laid right opposyte
against the other, in this sort proceedinge, until the vvou^d be vvholye
sevved up, always remembringe to leave a little apertione, in the bottom of
the vvou^de, through the which the congealed blood, and the threde may be
avoided, which apertione, we must alvvayes keep aperte or open with a
little leaden hollovve pipe, which in the end must be tyede and bovvnde with
a threde, because that by chance it do not come to slip into the bellye of
the patient. And we must well and dilligentlye note, that this suture or
sovving always bedone with a good strong threde, What manner of threde
and needle we must have.
and with a needle, somevvhat crooked at the poynct, layinge the stitches,
somvvhat closer the one by other, then in other wounds of the body, because
the stirri^ge of the bellye, far sooner causes the stitches to burst and
break a sunder, then in any other parts of the body, and because also the
wounds of the bellye, are not so subject unto inflammation or incensions, as
other although that often times the bellye is thrust through.

Chirurgerye THE FOVRTH TREATISE OF THE OPERATIon of Chyrurgerye, wherein is
discoursede and handelede of the openinges, and apertions of Apostemations,
Contayninge five Chapters.
Of the general way to open any Apostemations whatsoever. Chap. 1. Of the
tumefactions, which we call, Ateromata, Steatomata, and Melicerides. Chap. 2.
How we ought to cauterize, and make any inscisione in the Apostemations of
the breast. Chapter 3. How we ought to make the Paracentese, and take away the
water from them which have the Dropsye. Chap. 4. How we ought to cure the
Hernias aquosas, or water burstinges. Chap. 5.
Of the general way te open Apostemations. Chap. 1.
What we ought to consider before we make the appertione.
WHen as we endevoure to open any apostematio^s, to let the matter ru^ne
therout, we must first of all before we com to the inscisione, or apertione,
consider, whether the matter might not in any vvayes be resolved or consumed,
through the forces of the natural caliditye, or heat, or else whether needs
and of necessitye be changed into matter. When as an Apostematione, must
needs be brought to suppuratione of matter and can by noe means possible be
consumed or resolved, the signs thereof are these, namelye a burninge heat,
erecti^ge of the tumefactione, or svvellinge, more rednes, Signs of
suppuratione.
and which is also harder the^ before, prickinge, knockinge, or beatinge
pain, ponderousnes, as if there did hang any heavye thing at that ioynte:
And if so be this apostematione be situated in any principal part, then
there is a chillnes and shiveringe therewith associated, the ague allsoe is
more violent by day, then by night: sometimes also the next kernells which
are in the body situated thereunto come or chance to svvel, and be
distempered. Signs when the matter is fullye ripened*
But the suppuratione, or resolutione to matter bei^ge finished, or
accomplished, the tumefactione as the^ diminished, we the^ sensiblye feel
prickinge, with a little itching therbye, also a little deafnes or numnes,
vvherbye also some times is felt a great prickinge, especially the matter
lyinge very deep: For the matter lyinge close under the skin, there the^
demo^strateth it self a little head which in feelinge is soft, and when as
we depresse with the finger it glideth a side, vvher of the skin, in the
superior part of the same head opens it self, and separeteth it self from
the inferior parts of the same.

When with the lancet we ought to open an Apostematione.
When as therefore all these signs reveal themselyes, we may the^ bouldelye
and freelye, open the Apostematione, with the la^cet, with out tatryinge any
longer, that it might of it self break through, because the matter may the^
issve forth thereat, and because that through to long tarryinge, with the
openinge thereof, she do not come to diminishe into the circumiacent parts,
and make other concavityes. Although Celsus says, Opinione of Celsus.
that very seldom we ought to make any inscisione, under the armepittes, or
in the flanckes when the matter is ripened, and come to a full and good
suppuratione, in like sort also, when the Apostematione is not to great and
is placed under the skin, but that as the^ we make the apertione with
Cataplasmes, and let them of themselves break through, unless through the
intollerablenes, and great dolor or pain of the patient, the Chyrurgiane
wear compelled, to open the same, because says he, that if with out
inscisione or cauterisatione we make the apertione, noe deformed cicatrice, or
sign, thereof, may remain. When the matter lies deep we must the^
consider, When the Apostomatione must be opened with a hott Iron.
whether the part be synnuishe, and if so be that it is so we must as then
open the foresayed Apostematione with a hott Iron, which is thereunto very
convenient, because that apertione, although we make it somvvhat small, it
tarryeth a long time open to make issue unto the matter, through the which
also the cicatrice continues very little. We use now in these days
potentialle corrosives. If so be about the place of the apertione any synnues
be situated, we ought then to fear when we must make the apertione with a
hott iro^ that then the patient might fall into Spasmo, or else the ioyncte
might be criple, and tarrye lame, therefore we ought rather to use the lancet.

It happens also sometimes, that although the apostematione be not yet ripe,
What apostematio^s will be opened before there co^plete ripenes.
and without great store of matter, yet notvvithstanding reqvireth to be
opened, especially, when as it is situated by, or next unto some worthy
part, the foresayed matter being venomous or pestile^tialle, which if we
suffered them to continue until there complete ripenes and maturitye, might
dravve invvardes, and through there venomous dampes, might infecte some of the
vvorthyest parts, out of the which, as then follow most fearful
accidents. And although Celsus counceleth us, that we must stay until such
time as all apostemations, are come unto an accomplished maturitye, which are
situated in the synuuishe parts, because the skin being grown thinner,
and the matter nearer approchi^g thereunto, we might then the easyer and nearer
attain thereto, notvvithsta^dinge our best practisioners council us, that we
should open such apostemations: as they also council us, to open all
apostemations, which are situated close to the ioynctes, bones, synnues,
tendones, and to the ligamentes, yea and before the time of the accomplished
maturitye, because therein, they might not cause any great rottennes, or
corruptione of other parts.

In like sort must the apostemations of the privityes be opened, before they
be come to there full maturitye, because there chance noe corruptione in that
part, as all such parts through there great, moystnes, are very much
inclined unto corruptione and rotte^nes, as also beyond this, the matter
through to long being therine continued, causes the Intestinum rectu^, or
the gutte of excreme^tes, to corrupt, and rotte, which is far softer, the^
the external skin, vvherthrough the foresayed matter oftentimes internallye
bursteth out, by the which commonly follovveth a Fistle, which is all most
incurable.

When (...) therefore we see that there is any matter in the Apostemation,
which has noe issue, and by her self can make or effect any either
consideringe her crasitude, her crudetye and viscositye, as thereby not being
possible for her to attayn unto complete maturitye, or else because the skin
is hard, or that the foresayed matter lies to deep, through the which there
remains a great thicknes betvvee^ the skin and the matter, or else
consideringe certain inconveniences, we may not delay so long, until it
be fully mature, and ripe, as are the Apostemations, which are situated next
unto some worthy part, as by any great veins, or synuishe parts, which
are inclined to great corruptione. The Chyrurgiane must without any longer
delay, make the apertione with his la^cet, rather the^ to expecte any of these
dau^ngers above rehearsed. The fittest time therefore first of all to do an
operatione, is in the morninge by time, considering that in such a time, the
person is far better qvieted and better animated and encouraged, except the
great danger reqvired otherwise the contrary Secondly we must note, that
the apertion be made in a convenie^t place, which co^venie^t place, is known
by the tumefactione, Secondly
of the part, in the which there reveals it self a little head, and there
is great weakness and softenes found therein, which glideth under the
feelinge of the finger, and where the skin is thinneste: it is right true
that such an apertio^ might bedone in the inferior parts of the tumefactione a
foresayed, because the matter might the easyer issue out, Four principalle
conditions, which the Chyrurgiane must consider before he open any svvellinge.
with out dravving of the medicametes, or through the hard depressione of the
same because all evacuations which chance in the hanginge sores, ca^ far
better avoyde the matter, the^ any medicame^tes, especially in such parts, of
the which we ca^ not change the situatione, as in the whole Chaos of the
body: For although, in the arms, or legs, any apertione is made in the
superiore parts of the tumefactione, through the situatione, such a fault
may be remediede.

The third condition is, that we must consider, one the rimpelinge of the
skin, The third co^ditione
and one the fibers of the muscles, and because the muscles almost run
through the length of the body, the apertione must the^ be made in the length
of the body, and according unto the right concurringe of the muscles.
Notwithstanding although, the rimples, or forefro^te of the head lie
thvvarte over, yet the inscisio^ must therein be made according unto the
le^gthe, follovvi^ge the fleshye fibers, of the broad muscle: otherwise the
skin being cut according to the ru^ninge of the rimples, might chance to
fall on the eyes, In the head we must observe the grovvinge of the hair.
Under the armepittes, and in the flanckes, we must consider the shuttinge, or
one the rimples of the same places, because the deformitye of the cicatrice,
under the fouldinge of that part may be hidden, and to praeve^t the
imbicillytye, which is an occasion, of the receavinge of the co^curringe
humors: The^ to praeve^t, that we do not chance to touch, any synnues,
Te^done, Vain, Arterye, or any other parts of esteem, and that the apertion,
may be done without ane danger, we make now the inscision in the length as
the^ overthvvarte, according as every part reqvireth: which ca^ not rightly
be done then of those which have a complete knowledge of the Anatomye:
otherwise they ignora^tlye might chance to touch a synnue, or a vain, or
might chance to cut an arterye, vvherthroughe the Spasmus, the Paralisis, or
any great sheddinge of blood, yea also and at sometimes might because of his
death.

The fourth condition is, The fourth co^ditione.
that we must remember dilligentlye to make as small an apertione as we may,
survayinge the apertione, with the magnitude of the Apostematione: For if so
be it be little, we may as then make therine a mean and reasonable
inscisione, which also must not be deep, but the apostematione being great,
we are the^ sometimes urged, to make two inscisions, or more then two,
being therein made, that one of them all vvayes, be in the inferior co^cavitye
of the fore said Apostematione, because the humor do not chance here or
there to make any more co^cavityes, eve^ as the humors, always internallye,
corrupt and eat through the circumiacent parts, and there in diminishe.

An admonitione consideringe all great Apostematio^s
And if so be that any apostematione, with great concavityes came into our
hands, and the skin there over might as yet becured again with the flesh,
we must as then make but one apertio^ or inscisione, through the which the
matter may issve: but if so be the flesh internally is eaten, and corrupted
away, we must as then cut through with a right cut, the whole
concavitye, according unto the length thereof, which being done, and the
edge of the wound in all places being very skin, and bereft of all there
flesh we must clippe or cut them clean away: because such skin
restrayneth and keeps back the matter, which causes the circumiacent
parts to corrupt, and hinders the applicatione of the medicamentes: but
when as we cut the skin, we must do it tria^gle wise, or in form of a
myrtle lease, because the apertione so much the sooner, might chance to
heal, because all rotu^ditye in vlceratio^s is difficult to be cured.

From vvhe^ce we must take our indication, of the greatness of the wound.
And touching all great apertions, which may be made in the apostemations,
must be made, according to the abundance, or the qva^titye of the matter, and
accordi^ge as the subject parts thereof require. As also we must consider,
on the depthe, and mark that we thrust not the lancet to deep therein, but
reasonable deep: for when as we thrust to deep, it is the^ great dolor,
and pain to the patie^t, and causes also much bleedinge: and thrustinge not
deep enoughe, we effect and bri^ge nothi^ge to pass.

The fifth co^ditione, must be observede, according to the apertio^ of all
great apostematio^s, that at one time we suffer not all the matter to ru^ne
out, but rather by little, and little, especially, the patient being debile,
oulde, young, or any vvoma^ with child, because all suddayn evacuatio^s, do
cause great imbicillity and fayntnes because there through the vital spirits,
evaporate and fly away, which in the co^cavitye of the Apostemation with
the matter wear shutt therein, although they are against nature.

An other condition vvherone we must consider after the apertione of the
swelling.
The apertione being done, we must handle the vvound, according unto the
diversitye of those parts, vvherin the Apostematione was situated, and also
according unto the time and season of the year. The Chyrurgiane ought
especially to eschevve the great te^tes, which Celsus prohibiteth to use in
the vlcerations of the arm pittes, and flanckes, and that because of the great
veins, arteryes, and synnues, which in those places are situated, layinge
only there one a sponge which is madefied, and vvetted in wine. We co^monlye
lay thereon a flat plumaciolle or tent made of linte, and therone a plaster,
levinge so the solutione apert, because that the remayninge matter might issue
and come forth thereat which otherwise through a great long thick tente,
might therein be retained, and kept back. This being done, we must then
dress that part, and vvinde it beginning to vvinde from the sovvnde part,
unto the bottom of the co^cavitye if there be any, endinge at the apertione
because the matter may be pressed and crushed therout, without being therein
retained, any longer, because by to long tarryinge therine, it do not cause a
great hollovve fistulous concavitye to come therein: then we must lay that
part in such a sort that the apertione may depend or hang, because so the
matter may the better issue out thereat.

Of the tumefactions, or swellings called, Ateromata, Steatomata, and
Melicerides. Chap. 2.
THe ancient professors, The difference of these three Vlcerationes.
have always noted, only the species and forms of vlcerations, that they
only differed the one from the other, in the matter, which is found therine.
For in the vlceration Ateroma, Signs to know them.
is a kind of matter like unto thin pappe: the vlceration Steatoma, a kind
of fat matter, like suet. In Melicerides, is a matter like unto honnye: So
that by the form of conjecture we may say, what matter therein lies
enclosed, but for a certayntye we can not say it, before such time as we have
fetched some of the matter therout: and one this manner they are always
known the one from the other. when as we chance to touch the vlceratio^
Ateroma, it spreads abroad, in that place vvhero^ we chance to depresse
it, and does not so suddaynly, join it self together. The vlceration
Meliceres, differs from the Ateroma, in his form, and substance of his
humors for his figure is much rou^der, and the substance of the humor which is
therein, far subtiler. so that it spreads more abroad, then the Ateroma,
when with the finger we depresse it, it separateth it self far soener,
and also joins much sooner, when we take the fingers thereof. The
vlceratione Steatoma, is much harder, then both the other, and in the touching
of it, it stirs not, but resists the depressinge of the fingers, and
commo^lye in the bottom is it somvvhat broad, and very seldom or never may
we se any which are under narrovve and broad above.

We oftentimes find hard matter in these vlcerations.
These foresayed vlcerations, are in there beginning allvvay little, but in
continuance of time, they grow to be greater, some are very hard, and we
find sometimes therein vvondrous matter, as if it wear little stones, bones,
rovvled hair, mixed with any matter which is thick.

The matter lies enclosed in a little blather.
Philexomus says, he sometimes has fovvnde, in the matter which therein lay
enclosed, little creatures, as if it had bi^ne gnattes, we must note that al
those foresayed humors, and al these vvonderfull things, are enclosed as it
wear in little blathers.

But as much as concernethe the apertione of the same, it hinders nothing
whether the matter be like pappe, or like honnye, or like suet, or what
matter soever it might be: for we have but one only intention, to wit that
we extracte and dravve out the blather, or little bag, vvherin the matter is
enclosed, for the manner how to open it is this.

The operatione to cure the vlceratio^s is nothing different.
We must first of all lift up the skin from the bottom, and then cut it of,
making inscisione according to the greatenes of the vlceratione, dillige^tlye
markinge least we cut the blather or purse vvherin the the humor is enclosed,
because the matter do not chance to issue out: For the matter being issued,
the whole remane^t operation is perturbed, and annihilated, because also
there by the operation falls flat down: so that as then we may or can
very difficultlye flea, peele or separate the foresayed membrane of the
matter, from the flesh, vvherthroughe the whole curatione, consists
without reciduitye.

When as in this sort, we shall have cut the skin, the^ the little bag
demonstrateth it self white, and outstretched, which with great
diligence, we must endevoure to separate thereof, with a Spatula, to wit,
from the skin, and out of the flesh, or with any other instrument, which
is thereto serviceable, vvher with we must take it out, with all that which
is therein, without sufferinge any iott thereof to remain in the bottom,
because it chance not to increase again: And is it so happened that there
chanced to tarrye any thing thereof in the wound, we must not as the^
heal together the apertione very soon, but with puryfyinge medicamentes,
purifye that therout which as yet remains therein.

We must in the operatione dilligentlye consider, that we do not chance to
break any Veins, synnues, arteryes, or tendones.
We must also here note, that some of these vlcerations, are rotede betvveene
any veins, arteryes, synnues, and te^dones, which eradication, reqvireth a
great and long continued and convenient manual, operation, because,
thinckinge qvite and clean to take away the little bag or purse from
thence, we might chance to burst any vain, arterye, synnue or Te^done,
therefore if so be therebe any part therone fastened it is then be^tter to
desiste from our operation. When this operatione is thus finished, in any
small svvellinges, there is as the^ noe more danger, wherefore there rests
no thing for us to do, then with any curinge medicamentes, to heal op the
inscisione, layinge therone a Compresse, madefied in some defensive or other,
because that in the dressinge, all infla^mations may be praevented, and the
separated parts the on again conjoined with the other. But if so be the
wound wear great, and could not be cured, one this manner, it will not
then seem discommodious, that we stitch it up, layinge the stitches somvvhat
vvyde the one from the other, to let any medicamemt or other drop betvveen
them, and to give passage to the matter which engenders therein: and then we
must vvholye cure these vlceratio^s as all other vlcerations.

Touching the curing of Quee^s evil which is also done through manual
operatione, is also one this manner effected, taking the foresayed Queens
evil vvholye therout, if so be it be possible dilligentlye markinge, that we
chance not to hurt any veins situated there about, and especially of those
which are divided amongst the muscles, which are serviceable to the speech,
or voice, as are the recurrentes, or retrogradinge muscles, and those which
are situated, abute the Laringa as well the principalls as common: For it has
often times happened that some have had this dissease of the Qveenes evil cut
out about there throt, which all there life time thereafter have remained hoarce
and without speech.

The manner how to cauterize, and make an inscisione in the vleerations of the
breast, called Empiema. Chap. 3.
BEtvveene the ribs, Hippocrates in prognosticis and in his third book of
diseases.
and betvveene the intercostalle muscles and betvveene the me^brane Pleura,
concurrethe and gathers sometimes certain blood together, which chau^geth
it self into matter, although the Physician, as well through Phlebotomye,
through purgations, through fome^tations, or through any other appliclations,
has done his best, This tume factione externallye sometimes demo^strateth it
self.
to resolve and consume that. This foresayed matter, sometimes externallye
demostrateth her self causinge a tumefactione under the skin of the breast.
Then the foresayed membrane Pleura, The vice-ratione of the breast, which we
call Empiema often times de^monstrateth it self.
always most commo^lye breaks, and and bursteth a sunder, to give passage
unto the matter, which thereafter sincketh into the co^cavitye of the breast,
and is sometimes voyded through the urine, or through the mouth, the longes
dravvinge the same unto them, and then through the throat is coughed up.

The signs, if any matter be retained in the breast, are these, to wit,
difficultnes in breathinge, stinckinge breath, heavines in the side, Signs of
the matter which is retained in the breast.
a dry cough, with great prickinge in the breast, a co^tinualle ague, which
against night redoubleth her forces, svvetinge in the end of the digestione,
little sleep, and noe appetyte at all. Sometimes in the place of matter, there
is water gathered in the breast, which we espy when as the patient through
great thirst, has druncke great store of water: when he continuallye
cougheth, without spittinge, with Shortness of breath, with svvellinge in the
feet, and when we stir the breast one the one side, vvherin the water
contains it self, we hear a shogging, as we ar vvo^te to hear in a pott
half full of water: and this dissease may be called, the Dropsye of the lo^ges
and of the breast.

Dropsy of the breast and her tokens
When any of these disseases have continued any time, and noe remedies have
helped, and noe hope left, that the water, or the matter might by any means
be expelled out by the mouth, or else be purged through the urine, 40. days
being passed, we must as then come to the manualle operatione, and endevoure
to open the breast, and make a passage for the matter to issue forth, because
the longes do not in any sort chance to corrupt, or rotte. Which may
bedone through the inscisione, or through a potentiall, or actual Cauterium.
We must first of all consider, whether in any parts of the breast, How we
ought to make the apertio^ in the Empiema with a lancet or with a corrosive
we espy noe svvellinge or tumefactione: which havi^ge espied, we must then
make the apertione, with the lancet, or with the Cauterio, and that in the
fittest and convenientest place we can find. But our common use is, to apply
the potentiall Cauterium, because the apertio^, which we made therine,
through the Cauteriu^, may the longer be kept open and apert, without
troublinge of the patient, with the impositione or puttinge in of great
tents, to keep open the inscisione. And if so be we perceave noe
tumefactione, or svvellinge, externally in the breast, we must then betvveene
the third and the fourth true ribbe, beginning to account from under, about
the midest of the one side, The place of the apertione.
six, or seven fingers bredthe from backebone, make an apertione with the
crooked lancet, into the concavitye of the breast, not all at once, but by
little and little, or by degrees, beginning from vpvvardes, dovvnevvardes,
thrustinge, the poyncte of the foresayed lancet, from under the fourth ribbe,
the cutti^ge side of the same, reachi^ge, to the upper end of the third ribbe,
least that we should cut in any vain, arterye, or synnue, which lies
occult and buriede under the inferior concavitye of the ribbe. We may in the
same place set a Ruptorium, vvherof the Escara being made, we must cut it
through, into the concavitye of the breast, settinge again the foresayed
Ruptoriu^, or corrosive thero^, if so be at the first tim it had not made his
operatione sufficient deep enoughe. This apertione may also be made withdraw
the actual Cauterium, here before discribed, which we may crus he as deep
therine, as is necessary, to pearce the matter.

When as therefore the apertione is in this sort effected, Admonitione of
lettinge the matter or water go from the breast.
we must not as then suffer the matter all at once to decurre out, because
that to many of the vital spirits, do not chance to fly away, which
therein lie included, or enclosed: so that when as one part of the foresayed
matter is run therout, we must then put therein a tente, and lay therone a
plaster of Gratia Dei, or of Betonica, Hippocrates cou^celeth, that we should
make the apertione, Opinione of Hippocrates.
one the third ribbe, when as we have discovered, and bared the ribb, of her
skin, and membrane, vvhervvith externallye she is clothed, settinge there
one, a Forret, or Trepane, vvhervvith we must bore her clean through the
water which is enclosed in the breast: the which easy lie may be done, in
those, which have an vlceratione under the ribs, the foresayed ribs,
being broad enoughe, to set a trepane therone, betvveene the Mediastinu^,
under the brestbone, may also gather water, The trepninge of the breast bone
through the advice of Columbus.
which Columbus witnesses, that we trepaning through the self same bone,
let forth the water thereat. But we must note, that there are some ancient
professors, which houlde this apertione to be very suspicious, because they
pearcinge into the co^cavitye of the breast, might chance to cut also the
membrane there under situated: fearinge least the patie^t, immediatlye after the
suddayne apertione, through the evacuatione of the animale and vital
spirits, might chance to dye, which with the matter fly away, or also
consideringe the in curable fistles, which might thereof ensue: but now a
days we find the contrary because there through are cured, vvhithout
havinge retained any fistle thereof. In stead of such an apertione, they place
in the breast certain actual Cauteries, or potentialle, The manner now a
days to make an apertione
to the number of 7. or 8. yea also sometimes cauterizinge only the skin
14. times without pearcinge any deeper, making the Escara reasonable brood
but not deep, vvherof they kept the vlceratione so long open until all the
coughe and all other impedimentes are, clean gone.

How that we must make the Paracentese, to draw away the water out of the
bellyes of those which are troubled with the dropsye. Chap. 4.
Descriptione of the Dropsye.
THe Dropsye, is a tumefactione, or inflatione, against nature, or Phlegma is
engendered, or also of some certain vvindes and ventosityes. This svellinge
sometimes also, spreads herself through out the whole body: sometimes
allsoe only in the inferior part of the bellye. The first kind is engendered,
of a phlegmatic humor, and the second kind of Dropsye, Three sorts of
Dropsye.
is engendered of water and vvinde tohether: wherefore the au^cie^t professors
have thought that there have binne three sorts of Dropsye. VVherof the first is
called, The first kind.
Anasarca, Hiposarcidios, Leucophlegmatias, when as the universal body is
through soaked with water, through the which, everye part of the body
seems to be tender, or vveake soft, pale, and vnseemlye to the sight, so
that crushinge therone, the printes of your fingers for a little continuance
tarrye therein: The second.
The second, is called Tympanitas, and of Hippocrates the dry Dropsye. when
as the inferior part of the bellye is full of inflation, or vvindes, and
stiflye stretched out and spanned, so that smitinge therone, it gives from
him a sovvnde like unto a Dromme, it is right true that sometimes there are
also a fevve humors mixed theramongst, because by continuance of time the
vvindes come to condence them selves, and change into some vvaterye substance.
The third kind.
The third kind of Dropsye is called, Asites, which is an inflation, and
strectchinge out of the bellye, because of the aquositye vvhervvith it is
replete, havinge vnparted her name of Ascos, which is to say, a lether
vessel, vvherin in former and ancient times, they used to keep any moisture
in, as we do in the hydes, and in the buckes skins: when this dissease
increases, and grows, Accide^tes of the Dropsye.
sometimes the hippes, and the Scrotum begin to sveelle, which is a sign of
Leucophlegmatica, as differinge, from the self same being or essence of
Ascites: as in the contrary it is not so, when as any aqvosytye ascends
up to the breast. Ascites is subject to Parace^tese.


Amongst all these three species, and kinds, there is but one of them subject
unto our manual operatione, to dravve forth thereof all that water which
lies enclosed in the concavitye of the bellye: In what persons the dravvinge
of of water must be used and in what persons it must be left.
but before we come to the apertione heerof, we must first know, which of
the^ are curable or incurable, because in vain, and to the hinderance of the
patie^t we take it not in hand, in those which through age are grovve^
debile, and feeble, or in those, which are corrupt and not sovvnde of body,
the intestines or entralls, being very ill disposed and ill at ease, without
any hope of amendment, and in those, which vvholye are grown impotent, or
in those which are there withdraw borne, we must not in any wise through this
operatione lay hands one them. But in those which as yet are young, strong,
and are of a good constitutione, nether have any agues, havinge all there
entralles sovvnde, and tempered, and in these, in the which the water as yet
has made noe co^cavityes, vvherby the liver, the milte, and the guts, might
chance to be altered, in those remains as yet some hope, ominouslye to
effect and bring to pass this operatione: and in this manner we must with
the same proceed. Namelye, How we ought to effect this openinge
and especially, if the Dropsye, resume his original from the liver, the
patient lyinge one his bed, we must gentelye lay him one his right side
because we may make the inscisione one his le^^ side: and is so be this fore
said Dropsye proceed, through any dissease of the milte, we must then
turn him, one his left side, to make the inscisione, in his right side, so
that the inscisione, must always, be done one the contrary side, of that
part, from whence the Dropsye takes her original, and that because the
patiente must lie one that side, from whence the original of the dissease
comes, for if so be he lay otherwise then so then the obdurated part,
through the ponderousnes thereof, might chance to sincke and descend
dovvnevvardes, and making internallye any solutione, migt there through be the
occasion of great pain and doloure.

And the patie^t lyinge one the obdurate liver or milte, might through the
vvarmeth of the bed, be eased and stengthened. And if so be, the patient
chance to lie one the open side, the vvou^de would then be a great trouble
and hinderance unto him, and the which he mervaylouslye might be debilitated,
The place where the apertione must be made.
and in feebled. Morover it wear inconvenie^t that the debilest side of the
obdurated liver, or milte, through inscisione, as yet should be more vexed.

The patie^t being in this manner situated, we must note, in what place the
inscisione might easyest and with most convenie^ce be do ne, to wit three
fingers breadth under the navell, dravvinge either toward the left side, or
tovvarde the right, but not lineallye right forth, betvveene the navell, and
the privityes, be cause we must eschew, and avoyde, the vvhyt line which in
this place is situated, and the ends, of the muscle Epigastri, and also the
synnuis he te^donousnes, of the right muscle: Excellent consideration.
because these vvou^ded or hurt, might suscitate, and cause great pain, with
many other dangerous accide^tes, vvherfor they difficultlye will be cured,
when as feign we would heal up the wound. Havinge noted all this, the
Chirurgiane must with his left hand, and his servant, which assisteth him,
nype in the length, the one, on the one side, and the other, one the other
side, first of all the skin, and the incarnate or fleshye pa^nickle, of this
side, to lift it up, and cut it clean through overthvvarte, unto the muscles,
which being effected, they must let the foresayed elevated ski^ne, and
pannickle fall again: And to finnish the rest of our operatione convenientlye
and fitlye, after this first in scisione, (because the fore said skin may
fall again, one the inscisione, which inscisione must also bedone, in the
muscles, and in the Peritoneo, to stop them, and to prevent the runninge
forth of the water, then we shall lift up the foresayed skin) we must
again lift up with the hand the skin, and the fleshye pannickle, and then
as high as is possible follow the fibers of the muscles, we must easylye
thruste in the crooked lancet, and cut through the muscles, and Peritoneum, as
broad as we are wont to make the apertione in blood lettinge, or
phlebotomye, dilligentlye notinge, that we nether touch any veins, noe
guts, or any other part which is situated in the co^cavitye of the bellye.
Now therefore to effect this, we may with great co^venie^ce, and dexteritye,
in stead of the crooked lancet, use our punctual instrument, here before
discribed and defigured, the inscision now being done, we must thrust clean
through the inscidede skin, the fleshye pannickle, the muscles, and through
the through cut Peritoneum, in to the concavitye of the bellye a goulden, The
use of the pipe.
or silver, pipe, as thick as a qville or shaft, which must have a broad
end, that nothing chance to slip betvveene into the concavitye of the
bellye, and therone a little string, or threde tied, by the which foresayed
pipe, the water must be tapped as it wear, and drawn out, but not all at
once, but by degrees and not to superfluos at one time, but on diverse days, to
wit, so long till nature, being released, and lighted of her pack or
butthe^, which mitigatinge this evacuatione, and governinge of the forces
accordi^ge to the fortitude of the patient: which we may know, by feelinge
of the Pulls. Because there are some, which havinge made to great an
evacuatione at one time, have also evacuated the vital and livinge spirits,
which wear therein enclosed, and finally have caused the patie^t his death.
When as therefore we shall have drawn water enoughe of at one time, we
must then stop the pipe, with a tente of linne^, or with a tent of sponge,
to retain the rest of the water, and lay thereon a great plaster of
Diacalcitheos: some there are which dravve out the pipe, and let the wound
which is in the muscles and in the Peritoneo, the skin, and the lip of the
vvou^de, which before the inscisione was niped, and lifted up, because that
the foresayed wound, might thervv^ be stopped, and covered.

Now certaynlye to retain and keep back, the water Mr. Floris Phillippes,
Practice of Mr. Floris Philippes, a renoumned Chyrurgian at Orleans.
a very renoumned Chyrurgiane, at Orleans, sticks his needle qvite through
both the lips of the vvou^de, comprehendinge sufficient qva^titye of skin,
vvherin he lets his needle stick, as we are wont to do in the har^
mouths, and vvindeth his threde rovvnde about the needle, vvhervvith he
contains and houldeth the lips close together, so that there may not one
drop of water pass forth, and when he desires to dravve, or tappe more
water therout, he then vnvvyndeth his needle, and opens the lips of the
wound, without dravving the threded needle there out. VVhilest that these
things are this doing, we must strengthen the patient, with good cibaries
and food, which easilye may be changed in to blood, and let him so rest
until the next day: on which day, if so be he be strong enoughe, we must
yet dravve of some more qvantitye of water, either through the dravvinge out of
the tente, vvhervvith the pipe is stopped, when as we put the pipe therein, or
with the elevatione of the skin, vvhervvith the apertione is covered, with
out puttinge the pipe any more therein, if so be there can issue any water
out, always egallinge or proportioninge the qvantitye of water, with the
forces and strength of the patient, and in this manner must we proceed in
the dravving, or tappinge of, the water.

Others there are which in the opening of the belly lay there one a carrosive,
Corrosive with inscisione in the Escara.
vvher by the skin is bitten and corroded through, the^ they make an
inscisione through the Escara, unto the concavitye of the bellye, making a
very, small apertione, through the which the water shall droppingly
distill forth, and havinge drawn therout sufficient water enoughe, the^ they
stop it, with scraped linte, which when they are desirous to dravve more
water therout, they the^ remove, and take it of. Yet there are others, which
after the inscisione of the foresayed Escara, thrust therein a little pipe
therebye to dravve the water out, as we have above said. Others set there on
diverse, and sundry, corrosives, on the place of the liver, Applications of
diverse corrosives.
and of the milt, penetratinge nothing deeper then the skin in^tatinge therein
the doctrine of the ancient professors, which wear vvo^t sometime, to apply
nine at once. Others make small inscisions, like unto little scarifications,
one the sides of the bellye, or else they lift up the skin, and thrust there
through a needle with a silk thread, which threde they suffer to continue
therein.

The navell which heaveth up it self may be pricked thorough
And consideringe that oftentimes, in those which are troublede with the
dropsy, there navell heaveth up it self, yea and sometimes as big as an egg,
which stands as clear, as if it wear a blather with water, there
through I have seen to be drawn, a silk or vvotle^ threde, by the which
the patient perceaved great ease, consideringe the great qvantitye of water,
which through this apertione, is droppinge wise run out.

Allsoe beyond all this are the legs, the hippes, and the Scrotum often
times, svvollen: for the which there is noe better remedy, the^ that we
scarifye them through the skin, once as broad, as the apertione is in
phlebotomye: Some there be which do this by the innermost anckle or four
fingers above it. In what places the scarifications may be made.
I have sometimes my self very luckylye and ominouslye done the same, above
the knees, and in the insyde of the hippes, in the bag of the testicles, out
of the which first of all issues a little vvaterye blood, but immediatlye
thereafter the water superfluovslye issues therout without any inflammatione,
so that the foresayed scarifications, can not shutt, or heal, before all the
water thereof be issued, and run out, and the patient all most grown
smaller, and the bellye evidentlye waxed thinner, which in short time will be
effected, with out any troublesome accidents, happeninge thereunto, and
without any inflammatione in the foresayed parts. More over we are not to
expecte any danger heerof as we might well do, when as we open the bellye
of the Dropsy Ascites, because one this manner, the water with great
qva^titye, at one time is not drawn of: and if so be the patient, after that
there is a great qvantitye of water drawn of, began to be vveak, we may as
then restrain the droppinge of the water, when as we cover the
scarifications, with scraped linte, or with a fevve burned pieces of linen,
and so stop it, and bind it. Out of the which scarificatio^s, if so be
we are disposed to dravve more water therout, we as then untie the foresayed
place, and take away the linte from the same cause the patie^t somvvhat to
walk, or ride in a vvaggen or koache, if it be possible, and with the leg
hanginge out, To cause the water, Council of Hippocrates, to dravv of the
water.
very superfluouslye to run or issue out of the legs, Hippocrates
comma^^eth us, to rub the foresayed scarificatio^s with saulte, and
thereafter stue them, and with any ferve^te or hott medicame^tes we must
always and continually keep open the same, to wit, with medicamentes
which are sharp and bitinge: because in such scarifications, the ancient
professors, as Aetius, Asclepiades, Leonides, Hippocrates, and Archigenes, have
always had great confidence therein.

But before we must come to these scarifications, we must consider one the
strength, and one the age. of the patie^t: for these apertions, are to noe use,
or co^modytye, to those, which are vvholye overcome of the sickness, nether
those which are very oulde, and macile^te, because that as well the one as
the other, of these scarified parts, might easylye out of hand be mortifyed,
without being able in any sort to retain and keep back the same, vvhero^
immediatlye follovveth death, and by the which often times, the Physicions, or
the Chyrurgia^s, are iniuriouslye and without right blamed, and of all me^
hated and had in little worth, as I my self have known it happen unto
some, for the which I was not a little greeved.

How that we shall cure the water burst, called Hernia aquosa. Chap. 5.
IN the Scrotum, which we call the bagg vvher in the testicles are contained,
is co^gregate and gathered together a certain, vvaterishe moisture, through
the which the fore said bag comes to svvel, which tume factione, or
inflatione, of the Greeckes is called Hydrocele, Hydrocele.
which seems to be a particularre ki^de of Dropsye: and must here note that
this svvellinge, sometimes comes but in one side only: if so be that this
dissease proceeds out of any antecedent or foregoinge occasions, it
necessarilye follovveth, that the blood, which into all parts of the body
is sent as nurriture, is permutated and changed. into some vvaterye substance:
and if so be of any blow, or fall, it produces his originalle, then is
contained in the svvellinge a blooddye kind of moisture. This aqvositye,
remains not, The signs of a water burst.
in one certain place only because sometimes she is congreated and situated
betvveen the first and second membrane of the testicles: we may know this,
when as we depresse the svvellinge, because as then the foresayed moisture
again by little and little runs therein: the bag as then is more safter,
nether can we perceave any hardenes, or tumefaction therein as the vvaterye
moisture, which is situated, within the concavitye of the Scrotum, because
the foresayed aqvositye, is not drive^ therein: yea also in the same side, vvher
the moystnes demonstrateth her self, there lies the svvellinge in form of an
egg, or in an ovale figure, nether as then can we either through the sight
perceave, or through the touching thereof feel, any part of the testicle,
because the foresayed testicle lies therein hidden, and when we assemble and
liken them both together, he appears somvvhat greater, and more svvollen, and
when as this svvellinge or inflation of the testicles is great, the^ is the
bag of the testicles, vpvvardes somvvhat long stretched out, and elevated,
so that the upper end of the yard, partlye also under the tumefaction lies
hidden, and occulte. Sometimes also is this vvaterishe humidty secluded in a
several membrane, as in a little blather, the which only for that purpose is
constituted and ordained, as co^monlye chances in the tumefactione Ateroma,
and when it is so, then is the svvellinge rovvnde, and closelye compacted
together, so that it seems to be a third testicle.

There is also oftentimes, a ventosytye gathered together, in the bag, or
Scrotum, as if it wear a vvaterye humiditye or moisture, which rightlye to
discern and know the one from the other we must consider that the vvindye
Hernia, Whereby we may know the vvindye Hernia.
or burst, is partlye hard and light, and is at one time engendered, on the
suddayn, and subitlye ca^ it leese it self, and depart: where to the
contrary, the vvaterye Hernia, does not vvholye depart, but waxes sometimes
a little smaller, consideringe any small ague, or else consideringe the great
abstinence, and that especially in young childrene. If so be therefore that
there be noe great qvantitye of moisture, or humiditye, then is the tumefaction
soft, but if that there be great qvantitye, it causes then such a
renitatione, or stretchinge out, as a bottle which is full, and closelye
stopped, and is heavye in elevatinge, or liftinge up: such a svvellinge by
little and little increases: the veins of the bag of the testicles swell,
when as with the fingers, we thrust thereon: the humeditye flies before the
finger, and spreadethe her self rovvnde about the finger, and that whereon we
do not crushe, bears up it self: and this vvaterishe humiditye, reveals
her self over thvvarte, as in a glass, or in a blather: as easylye we may
espy, when as we houlde a ca^dle close thereunto, one the side of the
svvellinge, and look then one the other side: And so farreforth as the
humiditye, therein contained, and occluded, be vvaterishe, then the inflatione
or svvellinge glistenneth, and is of such a color, as the circumiacent parts
therabout lyi^ge are: if so be it be blodye, or like the wine mother or
dregs, and faeces of wine, then is the svvellinge reddishe of color, or
purple colored: To know vvheter the Hernia be one both sides.
and if so be we find all these signs, and tokens, in both sides of the
Scrotum, or bag of the testicles, it is then a sign of two kinds of
Hernia, to wit, in everye side one. All these svvelinges, of themselves,
cause noe pain, unless it wear great spanninge, of that part might chance,
through the great tumefactions, and that especially, whereas the vvatery
moisture lies enclosed, betvveen the membranes of the testicles. Now to
abolishe such aqvositye, there is nothing more profitable, and commodious,
then to make an apertion therinne, on this manner as follovveth and succedeth.

Havinge shaved away the hair, How we ought to make the apertione.
rovnde about the privityes (if so bo the patient be noe child) we must then
cause him to lie one his back, either one a bed, or benche, being well
stored of linne^, then we must cause a servant, or helper, to stand one the
one side of the patient, and on the other side of the^ vvherin we will make
the apertione, which foresayed servant, must dravve the yard tovvarde him:
then must the Chyrurgian with his left hand crushe, on the inferior part of
the bag, because that part which he will thrust through might shevve it
self the more stretched, and fuller of substance, and prick with his right
hand, vvherin he must have a strong crooked lancett, from vpvvardes,
Inscisione of the Scrotum.
dovvnevvardes, unto the concavitye of the bag of the testicles, because that
the aqvosity may ru^ne out. And if so be the foresayed humiditye, lie enclosed
in the me^branes of the testicles, we must as then most gentlye, and
artificiallye, once again thrust therein, dilligentlye notinge, that we
chance not to touch, the foresayed testicles, nether any of the spermaticke
vessels: and if the humiditye wear enclosed in a blather, the Chyrurgiane
must then with his left hand, crushe one the inferior part of the bag, on
this manner to drive vpvvardes the svvellinge, and the svvellinge being there
retained and kept, we must continue it in this place, least that she sincke
dovvnevvardes again, and with the crooked lancet, cut in the nethermost part
of the foresayed Scrotum unto the blather, or bag, vvherin the humiditye
lies enclosed, and let it run therout, as much as is possible: And if so
be, it be able to be done, we must take therout, some part of the bag, or
blather, because it should not heal again, and other water therein be
engendered: then we must put therein a great tente made of linte, which must
not be to hard wound, therewith to keep open the vvou^de, and not so
quicklye heal it: for if so it come to be too soon healed, and shutt there
might then chance to be an other collectione, and gatheringe together of
water, so that it might be right needful, to be sure of the curinge of the
same, that as much as we ca^, we cause the membranes, to be purified, and
cleansed, of all the humiditye, and moisture vvhervvith they are throughlye
soaked.

Some there are which apply also in the superior part of the Scrotum, a
potentiall cauterye, the operatione vvherof being done, they the^ make an
inscisione in the Escara, unto the concavitye of the Scrotum, vvherin the
foresayed water lies enclosed, and then suffer the foresayed Escara of her
self to fall out and separate. Such an apertione, which is made with
corrosive, can not so easylye be cured, so that in the mean season the
water has time enoughe to issue out thereat. Apertion by the thrusting through
of a silk threde.
Others, dravve through the svvellinge, with a strong needle, a silke^
threede, in stead of making an inscisione, or applyinge of the corrosive, in
place of a Seto^, or transforatio^ vvher through the foresayed water by little
and little leaketh out.

But the apertione which is least dangerous of these three foresayed, is, the
inscisio^, vvherof noe, or at the least, very small accidents, can ensue, if
so be she be done expertlye, and one a convenie^t place. It appears
according as we have above tought, in the openinge of Apostemations, that the
apertion of the Scrotum, or bag, reqvireth to be done in the inferior parts
of the same: The apetione is better to be done above (...) under.
notwithstanding experience teaches us, that there happens far more
pain, and inflammation, unto it, when the inscisione is made belovve, the^
when she is done and made above, toward the fla^ckes: for there is less
danger of hurtinge of the testicles above, or there membrane, because it is
situated more inferior, vvher all the fibers, of the foresayed Scrotu^, do
finishe and end, wherefore, they are very sensible and paynfull. So that
Celsus, and Paulus, counsel us, that we should make the inscisio^ close by
the flanckes. A dubb^^ inscisione in a ^^^ble Hernia.
When as therefore this species, and kind of Hernia, is double, we must then
make and do such an operation one both sides, and especially when we se,
that they do not in any sort assuage.

THE FIFTH TREATISE OF THE OPERATIon of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede and
handelede of the disseases of the nose, and of the mouth, contayninge seven
Chapiters.
Of the Polipus. Chap. 1. Of the Haremouth. Chap. 2. Of the vlcerationes, and
of the excresce^ce of the flesh of the gummes, called Paroulis, end Epoulis,
Chap. 3. Of the tunge tyinge, or of the shortness, or brevitye of the tunge,
which the Greeckes call Anciloglossum, and of the vlceration Ranula, which is
allsoe called Batrachos. Chap. 4. How we ought, to cauterise, and cut of,
the Uvula, or pallaet of the mouth. Chap. 5. Of the svvellinge of the
almondes, and of the vlcerations of the same. Chap. 6. How that we ought to
dravve, break, or cut of teethe, Chap. 7.
Of the Polipus. Chap. 1.
Root, and original of the Polipus.
SOme men there are, which have a certain excresce^ce, of flesh in the
nostrells, which resumeth her originalle, out of the bone, Etmoidis, or
Chribleus, and out of the bones of the nose. This excrescence happens or
comes to a man, by little and little at once, and at the last, she waxes
so big, and huge in qva^titye, that she stops the whole nostrells, and
sometimes also hangs down to the lips, by the which the patient, is
mervelouslye molested, as well in speakinge, as breathinge. Sometimes also
she grows in the entrance, or conductione, through the which the air, and
the breath, are drawn into the throat, the which we may easilye see, when
as the patie^t opens his mouth, behind the pallaet of the mouth, and in
such a greatness sometimes, that she stops the throat, vvherthroughe the
patient comes in the end to be cho^aked, if that in time we do not prevent
it, And because such an excresce^ce of flesh, most commonly is soft, and
pale, havinge diverse small sproutes, not mislike unto the feet, of the fish
Purpura, it is therefore of the Greeckes called Polipus, and also in our
langvage Polipus.

There are noe sorts of Polipus which being venoumous, Noe sorts of Polipus,
can through Chyrurgery be cured.
have need of the operatione of Chyrurgerye, because we may not touch the^,
in like sort we may not touch those which are infected with the Cancer,
because there nature is therewith polluted, and they there through spoiled. The
yo^ge Chyrurgiane, may know them by there sensiblenes, Signs of a venomous
Polipus.
because they are very dolorous, and full, of pain, and extreme hard, being
almost purple colored, with a very stincki^g odoure, or smelle, on the
which the Chyrurgiane shall do nothing, but must be handled as if it wear
the Cancker, to wit, through koolinge, dryinge, and through mollifyinge
medicamentes, through the which her excrescence may be praevented.

Signs of a tractable Polipus.
That Polipus, which is insensible, or where there is little, or not pain,
which is vveake, loose, tractable, without bei^ge irritated, pale, or which
is of a reddishe color, those we may through the operation of Chyrurgerye
take in hands.

How we ought to cure the Polipum.
To the effectuatinge of which, the auncie^te Chyrurgia^s, and those which
have follovved there doctrine, have effected this operatione cruellye enoughe:
for some there are which with an instrument cut rovvnde, or circkle wise
this Polipum, which to that end and purpose, thereto they have caused to be
made, and is called in greek Polyticon Pathion, without touching of the
cartilage, or grisle, which being effected, they dravve forth the foresayed
descided Polipus, with an instrument much like unto an ear picker, or else
with some kind of hoocke, and then they cure and heal the vlceratio^, as it
reqvireth to be don. And as commonly there remains some little piece of
root, in the bones Etmoides, and of the nose, the which they scrape of, also
from the foresayed bones turninge, and thrusti^ge therein, with an instrument,
to fetch all therout, that by any means possible might tarrye, and remain
therein.

An other manner.
Others endeavor to consume, and annihilate the foresayed Polypum, with
certain causticke, or vstive medicame^tes, as with Aqva fortis, with oil of
vitrioll, or with the liqvefacted, and moulten corrosive, in the which they
dippe, and madefye little small tents, which they lay therone, with or
through a little pipe, because they should not hurt the nose one the
internalle or inner side. Others there are, which with an actual cauterye,
cauterize it, which through a pipe they thrust therein. Others, after the
example the four famous Chyrurgians, An other manner to cure the Polipum.
which not being of opinion, that in noe wise, or in any sort we wear
able to cauterize the Polipus, unto his root, because he is so deep
ingraffed, they the^ make an inscisione, one the one side, of the cartilage of
the nose, unto the bone of the same, and havinge in this sort discovered, and
denudatede the Polipu^ unto his root or first ofspringe, and originalle, then
they there cut, and cauterise him, and stitch together again the said
inscisione, as we are commonly used to do in the hare mouths. The wise,
and Learned man Guido de Cauliaco, likes and commends this, or such like
operatione, but in noe wise, counceleth, to stitch up the inscision, before
the foresayed Polipus, be wholy eradicated, and rooted out, because if so be,
that any parcel thereof remain, it again increases, which happening he, to
be so, all the trouble, and pains of the patient, has binne done for
nothing, and to noe purpose. All which operations, being as sufficiently and
completlye effected as they possible may be, yet for the patie^t they are
tedious and trouble some, as often times, we have with our eyes beheld,
which to speak the very truth indeed, they have never attained unto there
perfect, and former health again, but rather far worse, then better:
vvherby we wear moved, to try. and make experiment of a far more ominous,
and more convenient operation, to the curinge of this dissease, which
consistethe in the whole eradicatione of the same. The manner how to drovve
out the Polipus, more certayner, and convenienter, through extirpatione.
To the which end and purpose it seems unto us convenient, that we situate,
and dispose the patient, on the most convenient manner we may, in a seat,
toward the light, and the Chyrurgian, with his left hand openinge the
nostrell, vvherin the Polipus is situated, shall with his right hand, thrust
therein the flat to^ges, as deep as possibly he may, (which tongues must be
so^vvhat broad, and like a Duckes) bil vvhervvith he must nipe the foresayed
Polipu^, and gentlelye with both his hands turn and vvinde the same, and
therewith also dravve toward him a little, and not at one pluck, because
the root which is fast settled in the foresayed bones, might also follow,
and the foresayed Polipus at one time be drawn forth, and extirpated: which
I my self may with the truth allege to have done, with very little
pain. Mr. Sourlin, a very expert Chyrurgian, has assured me, that he also
diverse times has done it one the same manner, without any inconvenience.
Admonitione for the Chyrurgiane.
But the Chyrurgyane must consider, that he do not adve^ture on such an
operatione, then in that Polipus which is tractable, and not canckerouse, and
which is great enough, to be griped, and with out breakinge to be
extirpated, wherefore, if it be not great enoughe, we as then let him grovve,
and increase. And so far forth as the foresayed Polipus, drew himself
vpvvardes, avoydinge the nipinge, of the little to^ges, we must the^ dravve it
dovvnevvardes, with a little hook, because as then we may the better, take
houlde therone: the operation being finished, there ensues an effluxio^ of
blood prese^tlye, thereafter, which we shall permit, and suffer to bleed,
because that part may be thereof released, and unburdened: we must then cause
the patie^t, through his nose to snufle up redd wine, and that as oftentimes a
day, until such time as it be internally cured, without applyinge any
pingveditye, or oils thereunto.

Of the haremouthe, or splitted and cloven lips. Chap. 2.
Coloboma, Curtum.
THe cleavinge, or splittinge, which daily we see, in the lips, in the
ears, and in the nose, is of Galen called Coloboma, and in Lattin Curtum,
when as these parts through any natural dissease, are splitted, or
clovene, as if there wear a piece cut out. To regenerate any substance is a
work of nature and not of the Chyrurgiane.
It is impossible, that we should ingendre, any other matter, and restore,
the substance, which therein is vvantinge, because it is the work of nature
and not of the Chyrurgiane: but he may bring the separated parts the one, by
the other, and cause such a substance, which in that part is deficie^t, and
vvantinge shall seem as it wear there in engendered, so that very hardlye
we shall espy, and mark such an vnseemlines, and deformitye, especially if
the slitte have binne but small: for these disseases might per adventure be so
great, that they should be incurable, and wear not conveniente for us to
lay hands one them, and if so be we endeavored to cure them, we might
chance to make them far worse, and more vnseemlye, then before they wear.
Wherefore the Chyrurgiane ought dilligentlye to consider, that one such kinds
of fissures or splittinges, he impose not his hands, and especially in those
which are to vvyde separated the one from the other, and where there is to
much substance deficient or vvantinge, betvveene them both, for when a
Chyrurgian endeavors to cure such a dissease, then must necessarylye the
seiunged and separated parts, either ioyn, and heal together again, or else
not: if so be they grovve, and ioyn together, the lip the^ is merveylouslye
stretched, and lies close to the teethe, and one the gu^mes: And if so be
they ca^ not souder, and ioyn the on with the other, the fissure, or
splitting, will be much greater, then before it was, because and co^sideringe
that, which one both sides was taken and cut away, through which
occasion, the patiente, as then can far and much more difficulter eat, and
also speaks worse, because that a co^plete, and whole lip, is very
co^venie^te, and necessary, as well to the commestione, as to the loquution,
and speech.

In what persons this operatione is dangerous.
This manuale operatione, is very dangerous in aged persons, and in those
which are vnhealthesame, of body, or in those, which (as we commonly say)
have noughtye healinge flesh, because, that in ma^s body there is noe part
or place, where in the Ca^cker ca^ sooner come, and being therein, vvherin he
may be worse cured, and with more difficulty healed. The means to cure such
a dissease, is on this manner: VVhe must first of all situate the patie^t
toward the light, and with our left hand, lift up the right side of the
cloven or splitted lip, and as then cut with the crooked lancett, in the
middle or upper end of the foresayed side of the lip, through the skin, and
also betvveene them both beginning as high, and as near the nose, as
possible might be done, dravvi^ge the foresayed la^cett, unto or toward
beneath or end of the lip, How we ought to cure the cloven lips, or
haremouthes.
because that the whole interiace^t skin, might be clean thereof separated
and severed: then we must change hands, taking in our right hand, the other
side of the clove^ lip, which is situated in the left side, and then we
must cut with the left hand, even as before we have done with the right,
because the clove^ lip, may on all sides be cut, and on the edges be brought
to raw flesh, without leavinge the least part thereof untouched, which is
not cut, or made raw, either in the infierior, or superior parts thereof, and
that nothing differinge from a green, fresh, and bloodye vvou^de, before we
assay to stitch them the one with the other. We must let that part somvvhat
bleed.
This being one such a manner effected, and that part havi^ge somevvhat
bledde, we must as then contracte and join together both the cut parts, as
close, and as smoothe as by any means possible we may, and thrust a needle
through both the foresayed reunited parts, thrustinge deep enoughe through
the flesh, and suffere the needle to remain therein, one the which we must
rovvnde about vvi^de the threde, as the Taylers are wont to do, when any
where one there apparel they stick there needle there to keep it: As far
as the fissure or splittinge be great, we may as then stick two needles
there in, the one under, and the other above. If so be the separated parts,
of the foresayed lip, can not with any facilitye, or ease be brought
together, we must the^ make two inscisions, in each side of the lipp one,
inform and likeness of a halfemoone, both the korners thereof toward the
vvou^d, Vievve the figure before.
as here before in the figure we may see, which inscisiones must only
penetrate the upper skin, because that the edges of the wound being
drawn together, might the better join the one with the other, for with
any violence they may not be compelled, but rather, with gentleness, and
without any force, because that, they being brought and joined the one with
the other, be not again vvithdravvne backvvardes.

It chances also sometimes, that the skin one the on side of the fissure,
can not completlye unite her self with the other, where through, that place
of the wound, is deformed and mishape^, because it is not vvholye cooperte,
and coverede, saying therefore that this so chances, we must as then cut
this said part halfemoone wise, without in any sort touchi^g the other
side. We must nipe of the poyncte of the needle.
If so be the acuitye or poyncte of the needle which sticks in the wound,
or lip, sticks somevvhat long through the other side, we must nipe, or
break it of with certain pinsers or tongues because it should not prick or
hoocke in any other place, and we must apply thereon, a plaster of Betonica,
and in those inscisions which are made in the form of a halfemoone, we must
apply therone only dry linte, because the lips, or edges thereof, might not
heal, and because that the flesh which therein increases, do not replenishe
the wound, and the lip there through be made broader.

The foresayed suture, is commonly healed together the seventh day, and
soudered the one with the other, when as therefore we espy and mark that it
is so, and that they are joined the one with the other, we must cut of the
threde which is wound rovvnde about the needle, and pluck the needle
therout, and cure the remane^t of the vvou^de, and also the stitches of the
needle, as necesitye reqvireth the same to be done, and effected.

Lips which are cleft in two places.
The lips are some times splitte, or cleft in two sundry, and diverse places,
but thero^ is not so much consistinge, if they be not so far separated the
one from the other, as if there wear a noteable pieces cut therout, because
otherwise it is as well and easilye to be cured as the single fissure. If so
be there be any excresse^ce of flesh, or any cartilage, fovvnde about the
lips, or in any place, which necessarilye is to descided we must also cut
that out, because, in all places it might be of an aequalle smoothenes.
Cleaving of the ears, and nostrelles
As co^cerninge, and touching the fissures, of the ears, or nostrelles, we
must therevvith proceed, on such a manner, as heertofore we have said of the
splittinges and fissures of the lips.

Of the vlceratione, and excrescence of the gummes, called Paroulis, and
Epoulis. Chap. 3.
AFter the inflammation, or inscensione of the gummes, commo^lye succeed the
and follow the an excrescence of flesh, which of the auncie^te professors
was called Epoulis, and that especially about the check, or hindermost
teethe. Such a humor, and excresce^ce encreseth by little, and little, till at
last it increases as big as a hens egg, so that sometimes the teeth
there through fall out, and the patient not able to open his mouth. We may
not provoacke the Canckerouse.
If so be these excrescences be black, and Canckerouse, we must not apply
there one any sharp, or corrodent medicamentes, nether with byndinge
separate, and root them out: but must entreat, and handle them, in such
sort, as before we have spoken of the Cancker, and like all palliative cures.

If so be this excrescence be tender, soft, The manner to cure Epoulis
and tractable, we must vvhilest it is small, descyde and cut it away, if
so be it be great, we must the^ bind it of, with a strong threde, which
we must alligate, and tie under at the root thereof, and by degrees knitt it
closer, till that in thus doing, the root by the threde be cut through, and
the excrescence fall out of the mouth. Such a ligature is more certain the^
inscisione
Such a ligature or byndinge is far surer, the^ the discidinge or cuttinge
of, the same, because that therthroughe, we need fear noe superfluous
bleedinge, and the root better one this manner be taken out, and allsoe the
patient have less pain, and fear to expecte, then of the inscisione, or
cuttinge, and cauterisatione, which after the inscisione co^seqve^tlye
follovvethe.

When as therefore througe byndinge, How we ought to handle the Epoulis that
returns
we have discided this carnositye, or excrescens, and that she reverteth and
comes again, as often times chances, we must as then religate and bind
again the same, or cut it, and cauterize the root thereof, it be either with a
little actual Cauterium, or with a little oil of Vitroll, with Aqvafortis,
or with any other liqvefacted corrosive, which we find thereunto most
convenient. A part of the aunciente professors, wear vvo^te to apply
therone, some or other corrosive poulder, on the same, where of the
excrescence might clean be corroded away, which in mye opinione is very
inco^veniente, especially in these parts.

There is as yet an other kind of vlceration, Paroulis, and the means how to
cure it.
or tumefactione incident unto the gummes, which of our praedicessors was
called Paroulis: which perseavi^ge it to be come to his full maturation, and
ripnes, we must immediatlye make therein an apertione, and inscisione, with
the crooked lancett, which must be of an indiffeferent latitude, because it
might not again chance, to cause a revlceratio^ or svvellinge, and so
chance to change it self into a fistle: being aperte, and open the patient
must wash his mouth with some gross read wine, which must be so^vvhat
vvarme, to exsiccate, and dry, to confort, to repelle, and drive back and if
need so reqvire to stop, and restayne blood: the next day follovvi^ge he
must wash his mouth vvithhonye water, to the purginge, and purifyinge of the
dissease.

This vlceration, must immediatlye be openede, because the matter, chance to
make noe more concavitye, and the cheecke bone therthroughe chance to be
polluted. If so be there chance any corruptinge, and rottenes in the gummes,
we must then annoynte them with a littie Aqvafortis, A remedy against the
corruptinge of the gu^mes.
but with due consideratione, and discretione. And because that oftentimes
immediatlye after the disseases Paroulis, or Epoulis, there commonly
engenders, and comes a fistle in the gummes, which penetrateth, and
pearceth unto the cheeckebon, we must note, if the root of the tooth be not
rotten, and corrupt or altered, for if so be it wear so, (as oftentimes it
happens) we must dravve forth the toothe, and correct the place, vvherin
the tooth has stood either with a cauterye, or with oil of Vitriolle, and
if so be there be any part of the cheecke bone corrupt, by this means, nature
will expel and drive from her the corrupted piece of bone, without with
violence to dravve forth the same.

Of the retentione of the tu^ge, which of the Greeckes was called,
Anciloglossum, and we now call it tungetyed: And of the vlceration under the
tunge, which of the Greeckes is called Batrachos, and of our modern Physicions
Ranula. Chap. 4.
The dissease of a hortened tunge.
THe tunge in some persons, or children, is shorter then she ought to be,
vvhervvith they are borne, and by the which occasion, they must with
difficulty utter the words which they vvoulde speak, the tunge being
intercepted, and hindered, by a certain ligament, which we call the spa^ned
vayn, vvherthroughe the tongue, is restrained, and as it wear, seems to be
brydeled, or through any membrane thervnder situated, whereon the tunge
rests, and because she can not so move her self, and turn, as it wear
convenient, she should. The children are very long time before they begin
to speak, and when as they begin, they as the^ speak very festivouslye
and hastilye, and without any hinderance, except in vtteringe of those
words, which are difficulte to pronounce, as are those, in the which many
R. R, R. and L. L. L. come.

This dissease, is also sometimes accide^talle unto a man, The dissease of the
tunge after a callouse vlceratione.
when as after any vlceratione under the tunge, there remains a hard
callousnes, and anguste cicatrice, vvherof the tu^ge sometimes, inspeaking must
dubble and redubble her self, and they which are troubled with this
imperfection, do speak with great pains and difficultye, wherefore the
ancient professors of foretimes, have called the^ Mogilaous. The fore said
dissease must be cured only through the manualle operation. To which end
and purpose, we must situate and place the patiente as the matter is
reqviringe, How we ought to cure the tunge tyinge.
the serva^t of the Chyrurgiane havinge both his fingers wound with fine
linne^ (to wit, the thumb, and the first finger) vvherevvith he must take
the foresaid tu^ge by the end, and lift her up, toward the roof of the
mouth: which being done, if so be the membranes vvherone the tunge is
fastenede, be cause, of the difficultye of speech, the^ must the Chyrurgian
vvitth a small hook, as is before describede, houlde the same therewith fast,
with his left hand, and when indiffierentlye he shall have stretched out the
same, he must as then either with the poyncte of his scissors, or else with his
crooked lancet, cut, and discide it of. If so be the shortness be caused
because the ligament of the tunge, is to short, and stretches it self more
then is needful tovvarde, the middle of the tunge, or else because of any
cicatrice: we must then also in like sort take houlde on all that with the
hook, and pluck or dravve it, and cut it of, which is obdurated and hard,
also all that which with the natural flesh of the tunge is not moved, or
stirred. This operatione then being effected, the patie^t must was he his
mouth, with a little water and vinegar, and dilligentlye stir the tunge,
and often times thruste her forth of his mouth, and rub or wipe his finger
thervnder, and often times with his teethe crushe her up toward the roof
of the mouth, because that the foresayed ligament, or me^brane, do not chance
to join and grovve fast again thero^: How we may hinder the healinge.
for as the stirringe, and removinge up and down, are a hindera^ce, unto the
healinge of the same, so is all so qvietnes, and stillnes, an occassion of the
vnitinge, and co^binatione of the same: yea he must also in the night season
lay a compresse under his tunge, there by to hinder, and delay the curinge of
the wound, which easilye sleepinge might chance and come to pass, and that
because the tunge, nether by eatinge, nor by speakinge is in any sort stirred
or moved.

Some of our ancient professors, Membranous ligament or tunge tyinge.
to prevent the danger, of bleedinge in such an operation, thruste through the
membranous ligame^t, or through the cicatrice, vvherby the tu^ge is kept bound
and tied, a needle with a threde, which by degrees they dravve and pluck
together until such time the membrane heervvith be cut a sunder.

When as we would cut the tunge tyednes in young children, which are nuely
borne, How we ought to cut the tunge tyinge of young children.
we must first of al with the finger lift up the tu^ge, and with the poyncte
of the scissors, descide, and cut of the membrane which is situated under the
tunge, and the^ with the finger wipe a little sault therein and rub it,
without doing any thing else there to, commaundinge the nourse, to do the
same once, or twice more.

The vlceratione Ranula, and the orginall thereof.
It may also chance that the speech is impedited and hindered, by reason of
some vlceratione, which comes under the tu^ge, called Batrachos, or Ranula,
in which vlceratione, there lies a vvaterishe humiditye therein enclosed,
which often times is not dislikinge unto the white of an egg, as well
consideringe the consistence thereof, as concerning the color, always
commonly being included in a little membrane, like unto the vlceratione
Ateroma, and many other could vlcerations or svvellinges. In have seen such
manner of svvellinge, and tumefactions so great and so often times (after
they have binne thruste through to let out the matter) return again, that the
patie^t, by reason of the greatness could not speak, yea allsoe in davvnger
there through of styfelinge, or smotheringe, so that I have known them to
have binne opened four times in one day, and at everye season a ha^defull of
matter to issue therout, like unto slime, and the white of an egg. The which
has binn so difficult to be cured, that in the end we have binne compelled,
to apply there one an actualle Cauterium, in which large and vvyde apertione,
we have imposed and laid in linte, being madefyed and made vvett in oil of
vitriolle, by the which at the last the patie^t is sovvndlye, and completlye
cured.

Now to cure this dissease, we must first of all make an apertione, with the
crooked lancet, according to the length of that part and not thvvart or
crosseover, to give issue and passage to the humiditye and matter to run out,
which is the occasion of this tumefactione, or vlceratione: and if so be
this swelling return, the surest remedy, as the^ is the actual cauterye.

How we ought to cure this vlceratione and his return again.
To which intent, we must well, and convenie^tly situate the patie^te, and
cause his head to be stayed, and held by his servant, with the one hand one
his head, and the other under his chinne, there about where the foresayed
vlceration is situated, because partlye there through it may be elevated and
lifted up, for the Chyrurgiane with more ease and facilitye to attain to his
purpose, when as with the la^cet or with the cauterie we will make there in
an apertione: For those parts being tender, and soft, how little soever
they be crushed yet notvvitsta^dinge yield themselves invvardes vvher through
the apertion might be hindered and failed, and all our labor be lost, and
bestovved in vain. The patient therefore in this sort being settled and
disposed, and being by some serva^t held fast, must open his mouth, then
shall the Chyrurgiane with his left hand lay a piece of lattinne or a silver
plate under the tunge of the patient, which has a hole in the midst thereof
right on the place, where we desire to make the apertione, then must the
Chyrurgiane take in his right hand a glovvinge or read hot Cauterium,
which he must sittuate right one the hole of the foresayed piece of Lattinne
and thrust the same into the concavitye of the foresayed vlceration: in so
doing are the circumiacent parts defended from all combustione or burninge,
and the vlceratione very convenientlye opened. This apertion being on such a
manner effected, and brought to pass, we must cause the patient to vvash his
mouth, with a mouth-vvater, or gargrise, which must be made of
barley-vvater, of Plantine, and of honie-vvater.

How we ought to cauterize, cut of, or bind, and tie, the palate, or Uvula
of the mouth. Chap. 5.
NAture has in the posteriore parts of the mouth created, a spongiouse, and
carnal or fleshye dugge, as thick, and rovvnd. as is the end of a shaft, or
qvill as easilye we may see, when as we open the mouth. This reservinge his
natural proportione, the Greeckes as the^ call it Gargareon, the Latinistes,
Gurgulio, Gurgulio
and we the palate of the mouth: but the same being amplifyed, and grown
greater, then naturallye it is, through the discendinge of any superfluous
humors, being of one crassitude above, and beneath, it is as then of the
Greeckes called Chiou, in Lattin Columella, Columella.
as if we vvoulde say, a little pillaer: but if so be it be belovve rovvnder
it is as then of the aunciente professors called Staphila, of the Lattines,
Vva, Vva.
and of us, the sincking or fallinge of the palate. It has sometimes such a
longitude, depending one the tunge, that the patient always supposes, to
have somvvhat in the throt, which very willingly he vvoulde svvallovve.

That which is black, Wen we ought not to cut away the palate.
we must not in any wise meddle with, or take in hands, in like sort
also the same being vvholye inflamed, because as then with out danger we
can by noe means possible, descide and cut it of, because of the superfluous
bleedinge which conseqventlye follovveth, wherefore as then we ought rather
to use all such medicamentes as still, and assuage pain, which moysten and
madefye, and gentlye fortifye and strenghthen the patie^t. But if so be that
there be noe inflammatione, and the palate be thoroughe soaked with humors,
and is waxed very long, white, pale, and sharp, Three means or vvays to
cure this dissease.
we must as then cut it of: as we must also do when it is above thin,
and belovve thick.

This dissease may be cured, by taking away that, which in the palate is
oppugnant unto nature, either through dissectione, or through cauterizinge, or
else through bindinge of the same. If so be we fear any superfluous
bleedinge, it is then the surest, shortest, and easiest way, to discide it,
because the patie^t there through might be freede from many more miseries,
calamityes, and mischau^ces, vvherine otherwise he might in time chance to
fall as is the cough, through the co^tinuallirritatio^ of the forefayed long
hangi^ge palate, omissione, and loss, of sleep, and sometimes also the
choackinge, so that we notinge and observinge all these things, are of te^
times compelled, for the succoure of the patient, to effect our extreme, The
first way to cure the sinckinge of the palate.
and last remedy, to preserve and keep him from greater danger ensvinge.

And aptlye to bring this to pass, we must cause the patient to sit in a
very lucent and lightsome place, and also to set apert and vvide open his
mouth, and depresse his tunge with the Speculum oris, then take houlde one the
foresayed palate, with a litte instrument, or to^ges made only for that
purpose, leavinge as much hanginge of the palate under the foresayed tongues,
or instrumente, as is to long, naught, and as must be cut of, pluckinge of
the same a little toward him, because that with the poynct of the scissors,
he may convenientlye cut of, that which hangs under the foresayed
instrument or tongues but not that which is above the foresayed instrument as
easylye it may be done, for wen as this palate, is tender, spongious, and
covered with a me^brane, Accide^tes which may ensue through cuttinge to high
of the palate.
we as the^ easylye take houlde thereon when as we vvoulde pluck him,
wherefore some Chyrurgians have oftentimes binne deceaved, supposinge him to be
much longer, wherefore they have cut him to short, and almost clean away,
where through allsoe very troublesome, and difficulte accidents have
follovved: because this bei^ge happened, all the pectorall parts, are
haynouslye and merveylouslye therthrough offended, with great difficultye of
well speakinge, yea and sometimes allsoe with want of speech, or dumnes:
wherefore we ought not only to leave the root, whereon that this dugge, or
this palate is fastened, but somvvhat more, and only cut of that, which
above his natural constitutione seems to be toe long. Others there are
which take houlde on this palate, An instrument or tongue, called Staphilagres.
with an instrument called Staphilagres, vvhervvith they vvringe it rovvnde
about, and havinge vvrunge it rovvnde, it waxes crooked, and purple colored,
and in the sectione thereof issveth little blood therout. Being now descided
and cut of, if so be there follovved a great effluxione of blood, we must
as the^ cause the patient to gargrise his mouth with water and vinegar, and
then with some constringent decoctione which has bi^ boiled with gross
read wine, or else touch the place, Remedy agayst the bleeding of the
descided palate.
orvvype it with some strong cauterisinge water, vvhervvith the opened
veins might be seared together.

The second manner, of effectinge this same, is done with an actual, The
second manner to cure the sinekinge of the palate throug cauterisatione.
or a pote^ciall cauterye: as concerning the actual cauterye, we must
thereunto have in a readiness and praepared, a sylver, or copper pipe, which in
the one end thereof must have a little apertione in sorme of a little vvindovve,
to receave there in that part of the palate, which you resolve to cauterize,
then you shall put into the pipe your glovvinge actual cauterye, which with
his end will abolishe and take away that, which shall ha^ge there in as if
it wear with a little cheesell stroke^ of, and one this manner we must
cauterize, and cut of the palate eve^, and smothe. Touching the potentiall
cauterye, or corrosive, we must first receave, into the apertio^ or vvindovve
of the foresayed pipe, that part of the palate, which we desire to
corrosive, and then with a privett or searchi^ge iro^ thrust into the
foresayed pipe, a piece of corrosive, aganst the foresayed piece of palate of
the mouth, and continue the same therone a certain time, dilligentlye
consideringe, that not any part of the corrosive, fall one the tunge, or the
throat, when as through the humiditye of the palate it begins to
liqvefye. This corrosive is discribed before among the instruments.
And when we desire to take away the foresayed pipe, we must the^ first of
all lay the Speculum oris, one the tunge, because as the^ noe part of the
foresayed corrosive, chance to light or fall one any of the subteriace^t
parts, nether touch any part, but the palate only because thereby they might
be indammaged, and hurt. Thus havinge brought this to pass, we must annoint
the palate with a little oil of roses, with a little cotton or linen there
in being madefied, and made fatt, then shall the patient wash his mouth
with a little roosevvater.

A sort there are which do not use the foresayed pipe, but they dippe, and
moysten, a little cotton, or linen, which is tied to the privet, or
searchinge iron, in oil of vitriol, or Aquafortis, with the which they
touch the palate, and cauterize it, the tunge before being laid down
with the Speculo oris, and the^ a little season follovvinge they wash it
with Pla^tinevvater. Others take a little kind of spoone, Staplulocauston, a
certain kind of spoone so called
(which of our praedecessors was called Staphilocausto^) full and implete
with poulder, of corrosive, full Aquafortis, or oil of Vitriolle, vvherin
they cause the end of the palate to depe^de, allvvay before havinge laid
down the tunge withdraw the Speculo oris, and by this means they cauterize,
and consume, the palate which before was to long: it is right true, that
some of this corrosive in the spoone might chance to fall one the tunge,
wherefore I vvoulde rather council to use that corrosive which is thick and
of some crassitude, as that is which may be pulverisated and beaken to
poulder, because without being pulverizated it can not shevve his forces one
the palate. When as therefore, through the applicatione of any of the fore
said corrosives, or cauteryes, the place of the palate begins to be
black, it is then a sign that it is sufficie^tlye cauterised, and if so be
the color thereof be not, as yet changed, we must then yet once again
apply the corrosive thereunto, and then cause the patient to gargrise his mouth
with Oxicrate or with vvarme redd wine.

A tried remedy.
I have known the suncken palate to be lifted up again, with a little
povvnded pepper and saulte, by a spoone, being therone fastened: others use
there to some astringe^t poulders. The third means, to cure this dissease, is
effected by ligature, because of the timorousnes which the patient conceaveth
of the cuttinge of, or cauterizinge the same, or effluxion of blood. The
tyinge, with the third means how to cure the palate being suncke.
Which is effected and completlye brought to pass, when as with a strong
threde we tie the fore said palate underneath, in that place vvher it
surpasses his natural length: through which ligature, the inferior part
can obtain noe nouriture, because the veins by the threde are suffulced and
stopped up, so that in a short time the threde cuttethe of, and causes to
separate that which has binne bovvnde, the superior part being almost
cicatrized, with out any fear of any superfluous bleedi^ge. The means how
very neatlye, and convenientlye to effect this operatione, and allsoe the
instrument thereunto servinge, is described unto you before among the figures
of the instruments.

The use of the foresayed palate of the mouth, Use of the palate.
shows unto us, that we ought to observe a mean, in cuttinge of the same,
when as it surmountethe the naturalle longitude, or else the use thereof is
brought to naught, and lost, because therthroughe, the voice of man is formed,
and retained, as the mouth or apertione of a Citerne, when as we touch the
stringes thereof, she as then geveth a sovvnde, even so the breath of man,
which is the substance of the voice, issuinge forth of the longes being
divided, and spread over, and throughout the whole roof of the mouth, there
and in that place to receave the articulatione, and by the tunge, teethe,
lips, and nostrelles, in the utterance thereof to be formed. Wherefore those
which have the same surpassinge the naturalle length, or in any other sort,
troubles them, have such a feeble, and imbicille voice, that very
difficultlye we may hear them, or at the least speak through there noses:
and if so be it be clean cut of, they leese there speech, and wax mute and
dumme. Above all this it has as yet a tvvofoulde use, viz the one to
prohibit, the duste, and any other substance, to enter into the throat, by
our breathe, which constinuallye we must dravve invvardes, and hangs as it
wear dilated and spread abroad like unto a tapistrye, over the throat. The
other, and second use of this pallatis, that it vvarmeth, and temperethe, the
could air which we dravve in through the nose and through the mouth to
the lunges, because through the extreme could thereof, it might not chance
to indammage the foresayed tunge, wherefore they which have no palate, find
themselves always very much altered, and changed, and a great could
always one the breast.

Of the swellinge of the Almondes, and of the vlcerations of the same. Chap. 6.
ONe both sides of the palate, and in the hi^der parts thereof, in the
angustnes of the throat, which of the Greeckes is called Isthmos, has nature
created and formed, two Almondes, the one right opposite against the other,
which are therefore called Paristmia: which be cause of the form, figure, and
qvantitye thereof, are vvholye likened to an Almonde, and are for that occasion
called Almo^des: there functione, and office is, that they retain in them, a
certain sputaminous humiditye, which sincketh and descends out of the
head, therbye not only to refreshe and moyste^ the mouth, and the
circumiacent parts of the same but also the throat, and the entrance of the
stomach, because the tunge in speakinge might not vvholye be exsiccated and
dried, and that the continual speech might not thereby be hindered, and
interrupted.

These foresayed Almondes, are situated, The use, situatione and compositione,
of the Almondes.
in a moist, and vvarme place, and consideringe there spongious, nature, are
subjected to all co^cursions of humors, and all inflammations, vvherthroughe
oftentimes they wax harder, and greater, the^ naturally theyought to be out
of the which, procedethe an vlceratio^ or tumefactione, called of us Antiades,
A tumefactione called Antiades.
vvherthroughe the passage of eatinge, drinckinge, and breathinge is stopped,
and interrupted, so that those afflicted patientes, can not without great
difficultlye, svvollovve, or respire and breathe, and even as the patie^tes,
here through are come into great peril, and danger, so they must
immediatlye be succored with excellent and good remedies.

Remedies against the tumefaction Antiades.
The assuredest and most convenient remedy is, that we cause the^ praesentlye
to be phlebotomised, after that they shall at the first have used a glister:
and the^ in like sort cause him to be let blood under the tu^ge: that we
box the^ behind in the neck, that they use gargrises, which are
indifferentlye frigifyinge, and astringent.

Signs how to know when the tumefacted Almo^des, exvlcerates and there
remedies
This tumefactione oftentimes is of such a magnitude, that it exvlcerateth:
which easilye we may espy, when as we perceave it to be rumpeled, and
vvhytishe, and when as before there has binne any pricki^ge therein. Which
havinge espied to be so, we must with an instrument, which only to that
intent, and purpose was made, open the foresayed vlceratio^, or else with a
lancett, which round about unto the poyncte is wound with linen. The
apertion must be reasonablye dilated, because theris noe especial great vain
situated in that place, which we might hurt, except it wear in the bottom
or root of the foresayed Almondes. We are sometimes constrained to open this
vlceratione, before it be fullye mature, and ripe, to unburden, and release
that part thereof, because the blood which issues out of the foresayed
vlceratione, diminishes and intercepteth the pain, and inflammatione thereof,
adminestreth better passage unto the meat, and drink, and finallye,
prolo^geth the breathe. It is right true, that we always in the first,
ought by all means endevoure to mitigate the pain, and cool the caliditye of
the vlceratione as much as is possible.

If so be these said Almo^des, are groovve^ so long and hard, with out
any hope to reduce them again to there former and natural estate, and being,
we must as then use the manual of Chyrurgerye thereunto, either by cuttinge of
the same, or else through inscisione: if so be there be nothing to hinder or
be a let here unto, then the ligature wear most convenient thereunto, and
especially, when as we fear any superfluous bleedi^ge. Which very
convenie^tlye may be done, Ligature, or inscision in the almo^des, when they
are grown to long and hard.
with an instrument, one the same form and fashon, as before we have
rehearsed, in the tyinge of the palate, ever observinge, that we cut thereof
noe more, then is needful, contentinge our selves therewith, not to cut thereof
any more, then that which surpasses his natural magnitude, and greatness:
because that through the largenes and romthe of the throat which by this
dissectione might chance, there be not irritated and occasioned to follow,
all such accidents and inconvenie^ces, as before we have discribed, of the
palate which is to short cut of, or any daungerouse bleedinge, if so we
descide and cut it of unto the natural, and sovvnde flesh, of the
forerehearsed almondes, because of the great veins which there under lie
dispearsed.

But before we proceed unto this operatione, we must consider, The
canckerouse almondes may not be tied, not cut of.
whether they be not of some canckerouse nature, because those which are
canckerouse may not by the manualle, operation of Chyrurgerye be cured: they
are most easyest known, when as they are hard, of a purple color, rugged,
full of pain, and have a great root. But if they be pale rovvnde, tender,
smoothe, and belovve thin, we may as then without danger tie, and cut
them of. And in as much as concerns this operatione, Historye of Albucasis.
the historye of Albucasis shall at this time suffice, to instruct the younger
Chyrurgian, to imitate the same, which affirmethe to have had a woman in
hands, with such an vlceratione vvherbye her throat was almost occluded
and stopped, that with great difficultlye she respired, and breathed, nether
could she any more eat, or drink, being in great peril, and danger of
death, if so be that in that estate she had continued but one day longer, in
whom this vlceratione was so extreamlye svvollen, that it had yet spread
it self abroad into two branches more, into the nostrelles. In which great
necessitye, and perplexitye, with al expeditione he took, a little hook,
vvhervvith he laid houlde one the one branche thereof, which was come into
the nostrelles, vvhervvith he drew forth thereof a reasonable qva^titye, and
then as deep as he could, he cut it of, and havinge done the same, in the
other nostrell allsoe he has aperted and opened her mouth and depressinge the
tunge dovvnevvardes, has taken houlde on the svvellinge and tumefactione,
with a hook, and allsoe cut a great qvantitye therofe, without any great
store of blood issuinge out of it: This being finished, the miserable and
poor vvoma^ has immediatlye opened her mouth and began to eat, and
drink water. At other seasons also thereafter he has cut away there from
other pieces, but yet notvvithsta^dinge, as often and as much as he descided
and cut thereof, is increased again and grown thereunto: which when he had
marked, he cauterised the same, and by this means in the end has praevented
the excrescence of this tumefactione: but being constrained to take his iourny
to some other place, could never hear, or by any man understand, how it
happened thereafter with her: and it may right well be thought, that the
cauterisinge of this dissease unto his root, could not in any sort increase
again, as before it had done.

It happens allsoe sometimes, that the Almondes so chance to svvelle, that
there is noe hope left, that we should perforate, or thrust them through, or
to bind and tie the^, because sometimes it is impossible for the patient to
open his mouth, and not bei^ge able in any sort to respire, must of
necessitye dye: which perceavinge to be in such an estate, we are then
constrained in our extreme necessitye, to take our last refuge, unto the
maki^ge of an inscisione in the throat, or Trachea arteria, rather the^ with
our eyes behoulde the patie^t to smother and choke. When as therefore we
vvoulde effect this, we must cause the patient to lie, and lean on his back,
and hang his head backvvardes, because the throat, or Trachea arteria, may
evidentlye shevve it self, then we must with our fingers, take hold on the
skinn, of the third, or fourth ringle of the throat, vvher with the foresayed,
circles, or rovvndes of the throat are covered, and lifted up, now this
being, so heaved up, we must according unto the lo^gitude thereof make the
inscisio^, which being cut through, and again let fall, we shall as then
perceave the throat bared, and if so be therone we espied any vayn, we must
detrude it one the one side and eschevve, or avoyde the same. Which being
effected, we must with the poyncte of a croocked lancet, make our inscisione
thvvarte over, betvvee^ the third or fourth rotu^ditye or circle, qvite
through the me^brane, vvhervvith both the foresayed cartilages, or circles are
the one with in other united, and holden together, of which betvveen the^
both is situated, without touching either of both these cartilages, or
rovvndes, into the concavitye of the foresayed Trachea arteria, or throat,
which easyly we may perceave when as the breath issues forth of the
wound: in the which vvound, immediatlye therone, we must impose a silvern,
or goulde^ pipe, because there through duringe some short space the patient
may breathe. This said pipe must in the one end be somvvhat broad, with a
threde thereon fastened, because that through the dravvinge of breath, it do
not chance to be drawn into the throat. Now the danger of choakinge
being passed, we must as then take it therout again, because that the
vvou^de, with conve^nient remedies may be cured.

How we ought to draw, thrust out, and cut, of the teeth. Chap. 7.
Diverse Chyrurgicall operations.
THere are diverse disseases inscidente unto the teeth, which through the
manual operation of Chyrurgerye must be cured: as by cauterisinge, of the
same, and by dissipation of the gu^mes from the toeth, by filinge, by cuttinge
of, by dravvinge by settinge, by cuttinge in therofe, and by allegation and
bindinge together of the teeth. Those teeth which are slimye, and thero^, a
black, yellovve or white tough matter, and so^times like vnslissed lime, or
as it wear some putaminous substance, chanced to be thero^ obdurated, and
hardened, we must with a little scraper, or instrument, for that purpose make
the^ clean and purifye the^, without hurtinge of the gu^mes, and looseninge
of the same, because that such teeth which are heervvith polluted, are not
most co^monlye very fast: the aged poeple, and the rheumaticke, they which are
trovbled in the lu^ges, or which have any dissease in the stomach, which in
times passed have binne infected withdraw the pox, are commonly subject unto
disseases of there teeth: when as this incresce^s is not as yet obdurate or
hard we may then with more facilitye remove the same, and in the first we
must wash the gu^mes as well of the one as the other with a little alume
water vvherby the increasinge of this matter is so^vvhat praevented, and
retarded, Practice and inventione of the aucthore.
and it fasteneth allsoe the gummes unto the teethe, when as they ha^ge
looselye thero^. Some there are which esteem this a great secret which
heertofore I my self have used, to wit, that we take a little Aquafortis,
and a little stick, as thick as a quille, the one end thereof being dipped in
this water, with which end of the foresayed stick, we must well rubb the
tooth therewith, dillige^tly observi^ge, that noe drop thereof chance to
fall one the lips or gu^mes, and immediately the tooth being heervvith
rubbed, we must as then with a linne^ cloute wipe the toothe, the linne^
clothe being madefied in could water therbye to dissipate from the tooth the
tartenes thereof, which the Aquafortis has left behind it, causinge the
patient immediately to spitte, and thereby the toothe vvil be exceedinge white
as snow. For rotten hollovve and stinckinge teeth.
If there be any tooth corrupted, foraminous, concavous and stinkinge, and that
cavseth sometimes great doloure, and pain, yet notvvithsta^dinge we alvvayes
endevoure to praeserve him, either because he is commodious for chavving, or
serviceable for the speech, or else is for a decoru^ or grace unto the mouth: to
the repelli^g of which pain, we must use a little oil of Sage, of rosemary,
of cloves, or any other oil, of aromaticalle spices. And if so be therewith
the pain, and the corruptione be not seized, we must as then with Aquafortis
cauterise the teeth, or with oil of vitroll wherein we must dippe and
moyste^ a little cotton, which neatlye we must thrust into the co^cavity of
the toothe: and if so be all these remedies be not sufficient, there is as the^
noe surer, or better remedy, the^ is the use of the actual Cauteriu^, which
must be proportioned very little, and according unto the concavitye of the
tooth.

Other Chyrurgians there are which hovvld in great esteem the fili^ge of the
teethe, Why we file the teeth.
vvher they be corrupted, which I also esteem to be commodious, when as
convenientlye it may be effected, and when the tooth is corrupted but on the
one side thereof: for by this means we shall intercept, and hinder the
corruptione of the next toothe ioyninge thereunto, that he be not thervvithe
polluted above other commodityes, which therthrough we shall effect.

Teeth which grow forth with an acuitye.
There grows oftentimes a tooth higher, then the other of the teeth, either
vpvvardes, outvvardes, or invvardes, the poyncte vvherof is so accute, that in
speakinge it either hurts the tunge or the lips. Also sometimes the teethe
ar rugged and vnsmoth above, wherefore they, one the tops and summityes
thereof be filed, by this means to make them smoothe, as the other. And
convenientlye to use the file thereon, and to cause that the toothe do not
chance to stir in the filinge, we must hold fast with our fingers the
foresayed too the, layinge certain pieces of linen on the gummes, Teeth
which stand out of there order, which are broken and vvherin as yet remains
some little piece.
unto the roots of the toothe. We must file of all such teeth which extrud
them selves externally, will not be contained in the semicircle of the other
teeth, or they which are broken, and a little piece thereof as yet remayninge
in the place, least they might chance to hurt the tung, or the mouth.
Conserninge the supernatural teeth, because it wear to great pains and
labor to file the^, it is also sometimes dangerous to dravve the^ because
co^mo^lye they are grown, and stick very fast in the cheekebone, we cut
the^ of with our cutting pellicane, Supernatural teeth.
or instruments which only for that purpose are composed and made, and are
before figured and set down in there forms: we all so breack the^ sometimes
i^ place of cuttinge of the^, with such instruments as here before are
praefigured unto us: but the best way is to cut the^ of, if by any means
possible we ca^ effect it. For great pain and doloure in the teethe.
The pain of the teethe is at sometimes so vehement and in tolerable,
because that the tooth, is corrupted unto his synnue, pierced, and is
hollovved, that the person, is almost phre^sye, and co^sideringe that there is
sometimes noe remedy to be had, for the quallifyinge of this pain, he is as
then constrained to cause the said tooth to be drawn, which as then is the
certaynst way.

How we ought to dravve a tooth.
When as therefore we vvoulde dravve forth a tooth we must cause the patie^t
to sit in such a sort as is most co^venie^t, and the^ make choice of the
corrupted and rotten tooth, because we do not mistake the one for the other,
which we must make loose from the gumes, and fill up the co^cavity or
hollovvnes of the tooth with a little piece of lead, or with a little lint,
or cotte^ stick it full, because in the Pellicane he chance not to break,
through the hard shuttinge of the same: havinge houlde thereon, we must ge^tly
and easyly crushe the tooth dravver together, least the tooth chance to
break, and the^ dravvinge the foresayed tooth a little a side pluck him out,
because that if to rigorouslye we vvaggle the tooth up or down that part of
the cheek bone vvherin the root stood so fast, might easylye be broken,
wherefore he will not with to great violence be drawn out, as also by to
violent dravvinge, we might disioyne, and pluck out of ioyncte the nethermost
cheekebon, and cause great perturbation in the uppermost chavve eve^ to the
eyes. The tooth being drawn, The bleedinge of the gummes when as the tooth
is drawn out, is not to be little esteemed of.
we must with both our fingers shutt, and ioyn together again the gummes and
cause the patie^t to wash his mouth with a little Oxycrate, vvherin we must
also put in a little sault. If so be there wear any effluxio^ of blood, we
ought not to esteem it to be a small matter because I have known some to
bleed themselves to death.

The assuredest remedy which I ever have known to be used, is this, that
diverse times, we must thrust therein some cotte^, which has binne madefyed in
juice of le^mones, which always we must put in that place, out of the
which the tooth was drawn.

And touching the convenie^ce of the ligatione, or tyinge of the teeth, After
what sort we ought to tie the teeth, shutt, and set them fast which are
loose, and also inserte those which through art are made.
to ioyn the^ together, and to inserte and set fast those teeth, which are
loose, and grovve^ to be moveable and may be vvaggled up and down, and also
to inserte any therein which by art ar made, all this may very convenie^tlye
and fitlye one this manner be effected, with a fine goulde^ vvyer of fine
oriental goulde, which we may easylye bend and bow, betvveen the
foresayed teeth without any violence. First dubble the vvyer, laying the same
with his duplication, betvveene two sovvnde teeth and then bring both the
ends, to that tooth which is loose, whether it be one or more, until such
time as we shall have drawn unto the second sound tooth one the other
side, then we must reduce the vvyer unto that tooth whence we took our
originalle, gentlye dravvinge the foresayed vvyer together, close to the root
of the tooth least that he go loose: This being done we must with a pare of
sheares cut of both the ends of the foresayed vvyer which are to long, and
vvinde the rest thereof rovvnd about the sovvnd tooth, as close to the root
that the foresayed goulde^ vvyer, may very difficultlye be espied, nether in
any sort may perturbe, or hinder the tunge. The teethe not only being loose
but also vvholye fallen out, we may for all that inserte them in there place,
and tie them, with a goulde^ vvyer, as is before rehearsed, or else we may set
other teeth in there places, which are by art made of Ivory, Look before in the
figure or forms
or of any other matters, as here before we have set down the figures and
discriptions thereof.

The French Chirurgerye THE SIXTE TREATISE OF THE OPERATIone of Chyrurgerye
Contayninge nine Chapiters.
Of that, vvherone we must consider, before we make an apertion in avayne.
Chap. 1. How we ought to phlebotomive, or open avayne. Chap, 2. VVhero^ we
ought to consider, after we have opened the vain, and when she bleedeth.
Chap: 3. Of the number of veins, and arteries, which are used most co^monlye
to be opened. Chap. 4. Of the apertione, of the Arteries. Chap. 5. Of
Anevrisma, or broken arterye, how we ought to make an inscisione therein, and
after what manner we ought to bind them. Chap. 6. Of the Cirsotomia, which
is, how we ought to make our inscision in the Varices, or bursten veins.
Chap. 7. Of horseleeches, and of there use, and how we ought to apply them.
Chap. 8. Of boxes, and how we must apply, and use them. Chap. 9.
Whereon we must consider, when as we desire to open a vain, or phlebotomize.
Chap. 1.
Intention, and porpose of the aucthor.
MYe purpose, and intent, is not in this place to discrib unto you, what
sicknesses reqvire phlebotomye, in what age, in what time or season of the
year, in what country, in what co^stitutio^ of the body, it must be done,
and of what occasion, namelye and especially, whether it be for any simple
evacuation, or for any deprivatione, or derivatione, or for any revulsione. In
like sort also in what vayn we ought to make the apertione, what qvantitye
of blood we ought to detracte out of the same, in what sort, and how much
at one time, how often after the other or in what time of the sickness we
must make the apertione in the vain.

But my purpose, and meaning is, only to shevve, how we ought to open a
vain: whereon we must thinck, and dilligentlye consider, before we make the
apertione therein, after we have opened her: and vvherone we ought to not,
when the blood issveth out of the same. This doing, shall the Chyrurgiane, be
noe less worthy of praises, because he ca^ very excellentlye phlebotomize,
then the physitione is praise worthy, by his perfect knowledge, whether the
patie^t have need of phlebotomy, or not: Why phlebotomye is difficulte, and
dangerous.
For although, that it seems to be a small science, to phlebotomize aright,
and very well, yet notwithstanding is it oftentimes, a difficulte matter and
very dau^gerouse, because the veins, ar situated sometimes close to the
Arteryes, yea also thervppen, as also are the synnues, Accidents which are
caused, and take there original of there hurtinge of any vain, synnue,
arterye, or tendone.
and the te^dones. If so be therefore we chance, with the lancet to hurt a
Tendone, thereafter most commonly issues a Spasmus, or a Gangrene and
mortificatione, vvherthroughe the patie^t pitifullye and ruefullye, and with
great torment ends his life. If there be then any arterye touched, and opened,
she very difficultlye vvil be cured, vvherby the patie^t bleedeth to death:
and when as we descide a vain qvite asunder, both the ends thereof are
immediatlye retracted, and drawn invvardes, the one end this way, and the
other end that way, so that under the flesh both of the ends are lost, and
noe blood ca^ possibly issve therout: if she be then with to great
timorousnes and fear pricked, the skin only vvhervvith she is covered is
as the^ inscided, and the vayn not opened: or else if she be only pricked
with the poyncte of the lancet, the blood as the^ issveth therout
droppingevvyse and the subtilest blood only comes out, vvher co^seqvently
thereafter she exvlcerateth.

Sometimes also lies the vain occulted so deep in the flesh, that we can
not with the la^cet find the^, without great pains, yea also and although
we espy them, yet through there perpusillitye, and rotu^ditye, they avoyde,
and eschevve the poyncte of the la^cet, how accute and subtle soever the same
be. So that there are oftentimes diverse occasions, wherefore phlebotomye is
difficulte, which to an other which never has done it seems to be very
easy.

Before the Chyrurgian makes his apertio^ in the vain, if so be the patie^t
be restringed and bovvnde in his belly, and has in a long time not bi^ne at
stool, we must the^ first of all cause him to use a Clistere, because through
the phlebotomye, the veins bei^ge evacuated, and emptied, do not attracte,
and dravve unto the^ out of the guts or entralles, any corrupted, and rotten
humors, vvherbye any of the vvorthyest parts might be offend, and hindered.

Nether is phlebotomye expedient, Whereon we ought to consider before
phlebotomye.
when as the stomach, is burdened, either with any cruditye, of undigested
meat, or drink, or with any other viscositye whatsoever, as also it is
vvholye dissvvaded to do after any great evacuatione, or any other
occasion, vvherby the patient might be debilitated, as is superfluous
parbrakinge, a great laske, great abstinence, continualle vigilatione, and
great conversation with women. When as therefore the Chyrurgiane in the
absence of the Physician, has on all these foresayed things dilligentlye
considered, he must as then defer the phlebotomye. And if it so chanced,
that any person to praevent any dissease desired to be phlebotomized, he must
then cause it to be done, when as he is best of courage, as being freede from
all care, of sorrovve, of ire, and beside all this, we must not phlebotomize
any person, which is to timorouse, and fearful of phlebotomye, because the
afrightednes, and the fear, causes the blood to withdraw it self
toward the internal parts of the body.

How we should convenientlye phlebotomize.
And the patie^t as yet being lustye, and strong, we must then cause him to
sit in a stool, but if so he be feeble and debile, and is subjected unto
fayntnes and sovvndi^ge, as those are, which are of a hott nature, we must in
the first let him suppe in a soft dressed egg, or a morsel of bread sopped
in wine, and then cause him to lie one the bed, half sittinge upright, and
stuff him under with cushe^s as if he sat. And above all we must
dilligentlye note, that the light of the air, or shining of the candle, do
rightlye shine one the vain, because that through the shaddovv therofe, the
knowledge of the vain, and of the place where she must be pierced, be not
vanished out of your sight: then must the Chyrurgiane, with his right hand,
take the right hand of the patient, or with his left hand, the left hand of
the patie^t, out of the which he means to dravve the blood out depressinge
the arm so^vvat down wards, and then with his left hand, or with a
vvarmed table naptkinne, rub the insyde of the arm vvher he intends to
make the apertione: Dubble band in Phlebotomye.
And then bind the arm dubble a little above the elbovve, with a little
narrovve list of vvollen clothe, not to stiff nor to loose, because to
looselye bovvnde, or to stifflye tied do both of them hinder the bleedinge:
the^ must the patie^t, shutt his hand close, vvherby as well through the
binding, as through the closinge of the hand, the veins lie fast and
stedfastlye in the flesh, and not move this way or that way when we should
pearce them, vvherthroughe also they raise themselves, and swell the more,
through the blood, that by this means is dravve^ thither wards, by the
which also we may the easyer see, and feel them.

How we ought convenientlye, to make an apertione in the vain. Chap. 2.
HAvinge dillige^tlye considered all these things if the Chyrurgiane,
Continvance of the manner rightlye to phlebotove.
determine to phlebotomise in the right arm, he must then take houlde one the
foresayed arm with his left hand, by the bendinge of the arm, or about that
place, vvherin we purpose tO make the apertione, and lay his thumb one the
vain, a little belovve the place, vvher we vvil prick, because that so he
may hovvlde the vayn stedefaste, without glidinge this way or that way
because sometimes the vain being, spanned like a little cord, might chance
to rovvle, and glide under the lancet. And because the foresayed vain is
oftentimes implete with vvinde, and ve^tosityes, she therefore yields, and
slideth away under the lancet, vvherthroughe we can not fullye pearce her,
and by this means the apertione falls to small: all this being in this
sort noted, we must with the first finger of the right hand feel where
with most convenience we might make the apertione, setting an impression on
the skin above the vain where we purpose to prick, with the nail of
your finger, and then immediatlye, take the lancet in the right hand, which
betvveene our lips we must have in a readiness, with the which we finelye
must make our apertione, in the vain, causinge the poyncte, and acuitye of the
same, gentlye to enter into the concavitye of the vain, and not abruptly, and
rudely, with a hastye thrust. And to make this apertione with more
certayntye, and without tremblinge of the hands, the Chyrurgiane must take
the lancet in the middle, with his thumb and his first finger, sufferinge his
hand with three of his fingers to rest on the arm, and so lay his thumb and
his first finger which hold the la^cet one the thumb which houldeth fast
the vain, on this sort to hold fast his hand, and with out any
tremefactione to use the same. Some there are which annoint the place vvherin
they intend to phlebotomise, with a little oil, or with fresh butter,
therewith somvvhat to mollifye, and soften the skin, and so with more ease
and with less pain, to pearce there through. To mollifye the skin.
Others annoynte the acuitye of there lancet with oil because she might the
easyer perforate the same, and cause less pain, the perforatione, or wound
might better contain it self apert and the blood if so be it vvear gross,
might the subtiler, and with more ease have his passage.

If so be then that the apertio^ be made with one thruste, it is the^ good,
but if not, we must immediately give an other prick, either a little belovve
the same, or else a little above the sam, if the vain sufficiently
demo^strateth her self. If therefore the apertio^ be to small, and the blood
issue out of the same to subtilelye, so that we fear that we shall not
dravve sufficient blood enough therout, then immediatlye we must thrust into
the same hole, or apertione again, and a little dilate the same: because that
oftentimes through to small an apertion, the gross blood congealeth before
the apertione, and there conseqventlye exvlceratethe.

Why we must give a staff to them in there hand which we Phlebotomize
Havinge convenientlye brought to pass this apertione, we must then give the
patie^t, in the hand of that arm vvherin he is phlebotomized, a round staff,
partlye thero^ to rest his arm, as also to turn rovvnde the foresayed staff
in his hand, because by this means the blood might the better shoot out:
the which if it do not rightlye issue out, we must the^ mark, if the
ligature be not the cause thereof, as if it wear to hard tyede, which as
then we must a little districte and make it loose, without vvholye looseninge
of the same.

Broad, and narrovv lancets.
The Chyrurgiane must also have diverse lancets, vvherof the one must be a
little broader then the other: The broad lancets are very necessary when as
the veins lie high exalted, and when we desire to make an ample apertion.
The small narrovve lancets are very necessary, when as the veins lie
profou^dlye occulted in the flesh, and also when as in the high exalted
vain, we desire to make a small apertion: because sometimes the sick
person, reqvireth a great, and festivous phlebotomy, to the which end, we
must make an ample apertione, as we must also do, if we conjecture the
blood to be gross, and de^ce, and when the patient is lustye, and strong.

Contrarilye, if so be we retract, and dravve back the blood, which
supernaturallye has issued out of any part of our body, as in those which,
spitt blood, or those which bleed much out of the nose, as then we must
make our apertion small, because that great evacuation of blood is not
necessary for them, because through there noses they have avoided sufficient,
then only in such accide^tes, vvher in is only reqvired a regressione of
blood. Besides, it is necessary and expedient, that in the foresayed
evacuatione, and sickness, we suffer the blood to issve long enoughe out of
the apertione of the vain, which the patient should not be able to suffer,
if the foresayed apertione wear ample, because there would issue to much
blood otherwise therout.

In the Phrenesy we ought to make but a small apertione.
We are also in phlebotomye urged to make a small inscisio^, in those, which
are troubled with Phrenesye, and in those which are grown mad, because
that little wound might with all expedition be cured again, because that
such raginge* and frantic persons will all vvayes make loose the ligature or
dressing before vvear thereof aware, vvherof they might com in danger of
bleedinge to death, but the apertione being small, although they loosen the
arm, yet notwithstanding they can not violently bleed because in such a
small apertione, the blood congealeth, and occludeth, and stops the
wound. We ought to make in small veins, a small apertione, and in great
veins an ample apertione: for if so be we make in a great vavne a small
apertion, the^ should necessaryly follow, that the blood, which coagulateth
in the small veins, be a hindera^ce unto the issuinge or runninge out of the
blood.

Touching the form, and figure of the inscisione, it is effected in three
sundry sorts, and fashons: vvherof the first is made overthvvarte, the second
according unto the length of the vain, vvherthroughe the vain is cleft or
splitted, and not pricked: the third is the mean betvveene them both, which
we may well call the contradictorye apertione, because co^tradictorilye she
is made. Three forms of inscisions in phlebotomye.
We make the apertione overthvvarte, when as we are not minded to reiterate
the phlebotomy: for when we bend the ellbovve, the^ both the ends of the
vain join together again, This figure or form is necessary, when as we
desire to make a large apertione. We must make the apertione sydelonge or
contradictorye, when we purpose to iterate the phlebotomye: and we making
the apertione in this manner, very seldom or never miss the vain: and
which is more, it is better for the circumstantes, and standers by, when the
blood in this manner issues therout. That inscisione, which is made
according to the length of the vain, is very expedient, when we intend to
renew the blood lettinge, and that not only the same day, but one the next
day also, because that when we bend the elbovve, both the labia, or lips
of the vayn, do separate and devide themselves.

But in what form soever we make the inscisione, The vain must be inscided
in her middle.
yet notvvithsta^dinge the vain must be pierced in the middle, without
vvholye cuttinge a sunder of the same. Because her lips, might chance to be
inverted invvardes, and the blood could not resulte out of the apertione, but
run down a long by the arm, or both the ends of the vain, are dravve^
invvardes, without delivera^ce of any blood from her, or at the least, in the
first very little.

Whereon we ought to mark, after the thruste, and apertione of the vain, and
when the blood issues therout. Chap. 3.
Although the vain be well opened, yet she droppeth through the afrightednes
of the patie^t
WE may know, that the vain most commo^lye is well opened, as easily we may
perceave by the blood, when as in the first, it rousheth and as it wear
leapeth out in great haste, but immediately alters unto droppinge, which
through the afrightinge of the patient is caused, for which reason the blood
is drawn invvardes. Which when it chances unto us, we must with
patience abide, and and unbind it somvvhat, and encourage the patient,
causinge him to move his fingers, and turn, Gross blood does nothing but
drop.
and crush the same in his hand. The apertione in the vain is sometimes ample
enoughe, but because the blood is gross, it can not issue out thereat, to the
which end we must put a little oil therine, which to that purpose is very
profitable.

If so be therefore the Chyrurgyane, in absence of the physitione, finds the
patie^t very feeble, and yet notwithstanding, follovvinge the rule, and
ordinance of the physitione, is very necessary to be well phlebotomized, we
must them do it providentlye, that although, at the first we have not
drawn so much blood as the sickness or dissease reqvireth, we must then,
some certain hovvres thereafter again renew the phlebotomye for the second
time, and if it be needful yet once again, for the third time, without over
charginge of the patient with to great phlebotomye at one time.

It might also chance, that before we could detracte such a qvantitye of the
patie^t as was ordained, and reqvired, the patient might chance to be
debilitated, and in danger to fall in great fayntnes, and sovvndinge, whereon
the Chyrurgiane must dilligentlye consider: as he may easyly perceave it, when
the patie^t waxes pale, and oppressed at his heart, his pulls diminishinge,
and when the blood runs down by his arm. What we ought to do when
we perceave the fayntinge to approach the patient.
Which when it chances, the Chyrurgian must then immediatlye sease the
bleedinge, layinge his thumb, one the apertione of the vain, and lay the
patiente on his back, with his head one a cushen, sprincklinge could water
in his face, and give him a little wine in his mouth, and cause him to smell
at some vinegar, and then have a little patience, until that again he
reviveth, and comme to himself: for as soon as he shall be come to his former
strength again, we may as the^ finishe the phlebotomye.

The patie^t lying fiat on his back ca^ very well suffer phlebotomye.
Some there are which in any sort can not endure phlebotomye, how low
soever they sit, although it wear on the bed, or although we continually
held vinegar before there nose, or gave them wine to drink, yet
notwithstanding they lyinge prostrate on the bed, with there head
reasonable high, they can as the^ very well suffer and abide the foresayed
phlebotomye, although we dravve a good qvantitye of blood from them: As of
late I my self have known to happen, in an honorable, and coragious
gentleman.

After that we have detractede a reasonable qvantitye of blood out, we must
then dissolve and make loose the ligature, and crush out the blood of the
vain, least that the blood chance to congeale therine, and coagulate, and
so exulcerate: and if so be there appeerede any little parcel of pingvedity,
or fat, we must the^ gentlye thrust it in again with the head of a pin,
and not cut it of, and then wipe of the blood which cleaves and is dried or
exciccated to the arm, lay a little co^presse, one the apertion, which is
madefyed in could water, and vvinde the ligature, twice or thrice about the
elbovve, like a borgondian cross, without tyinge both the ends fast, before
you have caused the patient to bend his arm, to lay the ligature thereafter.
The Ligatione of the elbovve after phlebotomye.
This ligatione may not be to stiflye bovvnde, because the cicatrice by this
means, may qvicklye be sitvatede on the apertione of the vain. The arm
being thus fouldede together if so be the patiente be able to walk he must
wear his arm before on his breast in a scarf and if so be he lie on his
bed, he must gently lay the same beside him, with out much movinge of the
foresayed arm, nether must he lie therone: for there have binne some, which in
there sleep have had there arms violentlye to bleed, with great danger of
there lives. How we may stopp and restraygne blood
The blood issues sometimes with such violence out of some parts of our
body, that with noe co^presses or ligatures we can restraygne the same:
which happeninge, we are the^ constrained to lay above one the top of the
apertione, the one half of a great bean, and the compresse therone, and in
this sort bind it together,

There remains sometimes a nigreditye or blacknes, Danger that happens to
phlebotomye.
and viriditye or greenes about the apertione, but thereof ensues noe evell,
unless any other accident chanced thereunto.

When as therefore we desire to renew the phlebotomy, To renew the phlebotomye.
we must then lay one the inscisione saulted oil, because that hinders the
curinge of the wound, and the sault keeps the blood from coagulation,
vvherthroughe the apertione of the wound is stopped, And if so be the
wound wear so stopped, that the blood would difficultlye issue therout,
we must not then rigerously stretch out the arm, which the patient has
carried on his breast dubbed, nether depresse the vayn with to great violence,
to get the blood therout: Because such violence might cause great pain, and
inflammatione, To renew the phlebotomye.
but we must rather with a small privett or searching iron, remove that blood
which therein is exciccated and dried, or rather once again make an
inscisione, after that we have bovvnde the arm somvvhat higher, then the
elbovve, as before we have said.

How we ought to open the veins or arteryes of the temples of the head.
When as we desire to make an apertione in the veins or arteryes of the
temples of the head, of the foreheade or under the tunge, we must then cause
the patient gentlye to wring about his neck a table naptki^ne, or a tovvell,
thereby to cause the blood to asce^de, on high, and the veins to svvel, which
we intend to open. How we ought to open the veins of the hands and feet.
And when as we desire to open the veins of the hands or feet we must
bath them in vvarme water, because through caliditye and vvarmethe of the
water, the foresayed veins might erect themselves, and the blood, the vain
being opened, might the better issue out thereof.

Of the number of veins, and arteryes, which commonly, use to be opened in
man's body. Chap. 4.
THe auncie^te professors of Chyrurgerye, have observed, certain veins,
which in man's body must be opened, according as everye diverse dissease shall
reqvir: vvherof the Chyrurgiane must not only know there situatione, and there
divisione or separatione, but also the names of the sam, because that he do
not mistake the one from the other. Vain of the foreheade.
They which most commonly are opened, are 41. vvherof there are in the head
17 even: the first vvherof is called the vain of the foreheade, which is
situated in the midst of the foreheade, and is opened when as we have any
inveterated pain in the occipitialle parts of the head to trouble, and molest
us. The second is called Vena Pupis, Vena Pupis.
which is situated right in the midst of the occipitialle, or hinder parts
of the head: this vain is opened, against the soporiferousnes, and pain of
the head, which is situated in the foreheade. The temporal vain.
The third is called the temporalle, or vain of the temples, vvherof in each
side there is on, which in diverse branches asce^deth in the temples of the
head: we open those veins against the superfluous lachrimation of the eyes,
against vehement pain in the ears, against the Hemicrania, which only
comes in on side of the head. Eeare vain.
The fourth is called the ear vain, one each side one, and have there place,
and situatione behind the ears: this vain is opened against surditye, Eye
vayn.
pain, and vlceration of the ears. The fifth is the eye vain, the which in
the great corner of the eye, close by the nose, we may perfectlye see: she
is opened, against all disseases of the eyes, and eyeliddes. The sixth is,
Nosevayn
the nosevayne which has her place in the midst of the end of the nose,
betvveene the two grisles or cartilages: she is opened, against the heavines
of the head, and against all reumes, of the eyes, and eyeliddes. The seventh,
Lippevayne.
is the lip vain, vvherof one each side are, two, in the internal parts
of the opermost, and nethermost lip: we open them against all tumors, and
excrescenses of flesh, against all vlceratio^s of the mouth, and against the
vehement rednes of the face. The eight is called Ranularis vena, Ranularis.
which is situated under the tunge, one each side on, we make therein an
apertion, against the Sqvinantie, against the incensione of the Almondes, of
the palate, and more other disseases of the throat. The ninth is very
public, lyinge in the neck, and is called the Iugularis, Iugularis.
vain, and of the Arabians Gvides, on each side of the neck one. She may
very convenie^tlye be opened, against tht Sqvinantye, and against all rheumes
of the throat, which bring us into great angustnes, and trouble.

In the arms are six, in every arm three which in the fouldinge of the
arms are phlebotomized. The first is the head vayn, Headvayne. Cephalica.
which is situated highest and most outvvardlye, in the arm, which we open
against the pain of the head, eyes, ears, and pain and svvellinge of the
throat. The second is the nethermost in the insyde of the arm, and is called
Basilica, Basilica,
being the foundatione of both the other veins, and is also called Hepatica,
or liver vain: Hepatica or Liver vain.
We open this vayn, against the stoppinge of the Liver, and against all
infla^mations of the whole body, and all disseases, which are situated under
the head. The third, is the Mediane, The Mediane or Mediana.
as well concerning her situatione, as original, because she takes her
beginning out of the Head and Liver veins, as also considering her
conditions, because we open her as well for all disseases, which are
situated in the upper, as undermost parts of our whole body, and there
trouble, and molest us.

In the hands, we have six, in each hand three. Eye vayn in the hand,
The first descends a longest the Metacarpion of the hand, and passethe
betwixt the thumb, and the first finger, we call her allsoe the head vain,
or the eye vain. Wherefore she is only opened against pain in the head,
and eyes. The second is called Salvatella, Salvatella,
or Liver vayn, betwixt the little, and third finger, she is phlebotomized,
against the yellovve gaundise, and in all disseases of the liver, on the right
hand, and one the left against all disseases of the milte, wherefore of some in
the left hand she is called the miltvayne. Black vain,
The third, is also called the Mediane, Black, and Common vain, and
descends by the finger called Medicus, Black vain
or third finger, which vain we may open, when we can find nether of the
other two.

In the belly are two in each side of the bellye one, Vena Illiaca.
which we call Venam Illiacam, or Titillarem, and demonstratethe her self
betvveen the hippes, and the flanckes. She which is opened in the right side,
against the Dropsye, and other disseases of the Liver: she which lies in the
left side, against the disseases of the Milt.

In the fundament, or privityes of a man, are one each side two, the one
vvherof we call the Hemorrhoidalle vain, Hemorrhoidall vain.
and is only opened in melanckolye disseases.

In the legs are eight, in each leg four: vvherof the first is called Vena
poplitis, Vena Poplitis.
situated in the hockes, or fovldinge of the knees, and is opened against all
disseases of the nethermost part of the bellye. The second Saphena, or mother
vain, Saphena or Mother vain.
which we open one the insyde of the leg under the anckle, in all disseases
of the kidneys, and of the womb, and to provoacke in the women there
monthlye sickness, or mestruousnes, in all runninge of the raygnes, and in Venus
botches, or as we call them in lattin Bubones. The third is the Schiaticke
vayn, which externallye demonstrateth her self, above the a^ckle, which is
only opened agynst the dissease called Sciatica, The vayn Sci^tica. The kidnye
vain
and against all pain, and doloure of the hippes, and flanckes. The fourth is
the mediane, or kidnyevayne, situated belovve the foot, and is phlebotomized
against all disseases of the kidnyes.

Amongst all the other which are most co^monlye opened, are those three which
in the foulding of the arm are phlebotomized: to wit the head vayn Basilica
and the media^. Basilica, or liver vain is dangerous to be phlebotomised.
We must dillige^tlye consider that when we make an inscisio^ theri^ that
under the Basilica or Liver vain lies an artery or great heart vain: under
the Median a synnue or tendone of the muscle Biceps or both of these together,
but under the Cephalica is nether synnue artery or tendone sitvated, Cephalica
or head vain is opened without danger.
wherefore amongst all other veins, there is none which with less perril and
danger may be opened.

If so be that through mischau^ce in opening of the vain Basilica we chanced
to hurt the artery which there under is sitvated as I have knoovvne to have
chanced, we must praese^tlye for the stoppinge and restrayninge of the
blood, and to the curing of the arterye, without leavinge any Aneurisma,
Remedy for a vvou^ded arterye.
cleave a bean in two pieces, and lay the one half of the bean, one the
apertione of the vain, with a co^presse therone, gentlye tied, without
visitinge of the same in three or four days, or once offer to touch it. If so
be in the apertion of the mediane, we chanced to prick the subter situated
synnue, or tendone, we must then immediately phlebotomize the patient in the
other arm: and we must drop in the wound of the pricked synnue, a little
hott oil of Terpentin, and a little vvoolle, being dipped therein upon the
same, thereby to keep the apertione aperte, and then lay a plaster of
Diacalcitheos, rovvnde about the vvounded part of the whole arm, which
has bi^ne liquefacted, with oil of roses, and vinegar.

Of the Arteriotomia, or apertion of the Arterys, or hartvaynes. Chap, 5.
COncerning the Arteriotomia, or apertione of the Arteryes, the praedicessors
and ancient professors wear wont to effect it especialle behind the ears,
and in the temples of the head, against all continual, and rebellious
fluxions, and Rheumes of the eyes, in like sort also, against all diseases of
the head, which have taken there original, from hot, dampishe, or subtle
rheumes: as yet now a days we do, but not who lie as they wear wont to
do, in openinge of the same: for so far forth as if the Arterye be small
they then cut her clean a sunder, and they also cut a piece thereof away, and
both the ends are drawn invvardes, vvher by she as then bleedeth noe more.

And if the Arterye, be great, and violentlye beats, it is the surest way,
that we tie her under and above and then betvveen both those ligations cut her
of, but the thredes vvhervvith we bind her, must be strong and closly tied
because that through the continvall beatinge of the arterye, the thredes
loose^, and the arterye opens, if so be it be not stiflye bovvnde: and
because that she should not chance to corrupt, before the inscision be replete
and grovve^ full of flesh: vvher through the mouth of the foresayed artery is
stopped. How we use now adays to to open an artery
But now a days we only make a simple inscision in the artery in such a
manner as we make an apertion in the veins, without cutting of the same
clean of and having drawn as much blood therout as we desire, we the^ lay a
little plaster of masticke on the apertion, and a little compresse tied thereon
rovvnd about the whole head as close as is possible. I know right well that
there are some which houlde this apertione of the arteryes very suspecte,
because it ca^ hardlye be stopped again, and in doing this, there remains a
cicatrice, in those parts which are situated rovvnde about the foresayed
arterye, before the same is fullye cured, and there through often times an
Aneurisma caused, which is very troublesome, Aneurisma is a dangerous
dissese.
and dangerous for the patient. But I may with verity affirm it to be true,
that oftentimes I have seen opened the arteryes of the temples of the head,
without any of the foresayed accidents being happened thereunto, the which I
counsel the young Chyrurgiane to do it only in this place, because such an
inscisione, is more fitter, and less daungerouse, the^ the whole cuttings of,
and ligature of the same.

Of the swellinge Aneurisma, and of the means how to bind, and cut of the
same. Chap. 6.
Description of the tumefaction Aneurisma.
THis tumefactione Aneurisma, is caused most commonly, through the dilatation
of an arterye, which only we must understand of the small Aneurismata,
being impossible, that the arterye, should so dilate, and as it wear
vnshutt in the great Aneurismata which oftentimes we see: vvherfor we will
rather say, and houlde with the opinione, of the ancient professors, that
Aneurisma is then caused, when as the blood, and the vital spirits, are
repulsed out of the arteryes, through the apertion, or orificia of the same,
which we call Anastomosin, or else when as the tunicle of the arterye is
burst, it be either through a wound, or by any other occasion: as we may
se, when as the Chyrurgiane, purposinge to opene the vain in the elbovve by
chance prickethe the arterye which is theru^der sitvated and the ski^ne
which is thero^ lyinge, cicatrizeth it self and the perforatio^ of the
artery, through her co^tinvalle reverberatio^e, tarrieth uncured, and open and
is not stopped, or with any carnal substance replete, as being unprofitable
for any use and in noe sort can be bound so close as the arterye of the
temples of the head, but through the blood and vitalle spirits, which by
degrees issue therout, and are congregatede under the skin, and so
conseqventlye cause the svvelli^g supposinge they very well did know,
therein to be matter, or any other slimye substance, or viscositye, for which
reason, they have made an apertione therein, vvhervppon a little time thereafter
death has follovved, because of the blood, and of the vital spirits, which
in great have have rushed therout, without any remedy how to restraygne
them. Now perfectlye to know such a svvellinge, and to discern it from
other tumefactio^s, Signs of this tumefactio^.
we must observe, that in this tumefactione there is, a continual
reverberatio^, the foresayed tumor, being of one color with the skin,
how great or small, the inflatione be, it is also tender, and soft in the
touching of the same, glidinge away under the finger when as we depresse
it, yea and almost through the foresayed depressione vvholye vanishes out of
our sight, considering the blood of the vital spirits, which through the
foresayed depressio^, are crushed in the arterye, wherefore they also, as
passinge through a little apertio^ which violence, do make a noise, or
sovvnde, which havinge taken away, and removed the finger immediatlye shoot
again in there foresayed concavitye, as also again in there forth coming, of
the foresayed angust apertione, we may hear a certain sovvnde: which
co^monlye chances when as this Aneurisma, is caused through an Anastomosis,
and not of any wound, because, the Orificium being apert, the vital
spirits, as being most subtle, are before the blood driven out, so that the
whole tumefaction, is almost replete with vital spirits. But if so be the
Arterye be burste, there as then issues much blood therout, which brings
in the tumefaction more blood, the^ vital spirits, wherefore also it is more
obdurate, and harder, and the said blood coagulateth, and therein rotteth, and
corrupts.

As much as concerns the curatione of this tumefactione, it consists only,
Curation of Aneurisma.
in the bindinge of the foresayed arterye, and especially the same bei^ge
somvvhat thick, for they which are great, and especially the arteryes of
the neck, the arm pittes, or of the flanckes, may or can in noe sort be
tied, because it is impossible to find them, and make them bare, and if we
allsoe make an inscisione therein there then follovveth such a quantitye of
blood, and of the vital spirits, that most commo^lye the patient, dies
under the hands of the Chyrurgiane.

That artery, which is situated in the bendinge of the arm may easilye be
cured, Of an arterye which of the Author was tied above the Aneurisma
as out af this subsequent historye we may note. My lord of Maintenon,
desired me to visit the son, of my lord, of Belleville, which through
phlebotomy in the bendinge of his arm, had gotten a little Aneurisma, which
through continuance of time, is grown as great as a fiste, vvherin, in the
end the blood which therein was included, coagulated: so that in the
foresayed tumefaction Aneurisma, there came a corrupting and rottennes, which
he one the out side of the foresayed skin, of the svvellinge he espyede,
which from the vital and livinge color was changed into a black, and
purple color, vvherebye also there was an apertione caused in the skin: To
the remedyinge, and curinge of the which, especially the superfluous
effluxione of bloede, which might thereof ensue, and the loss also of the
vital spirits, if so be the apertio^ as yet wear dilated: I as then
councelled, the Physicians, and Chyrurgians, to praevent farther evells, that
we ought to tie, and bind the Arterye, (which was situated, and his place
in the bending of the arm) somvvhat higher then the Aneurisma, to the which
opinion, and propositione, in the end they all consented, and agreed: The
which also with happy successione of all causes was brought to pass, in
the praesence of the vvorpshipfull master Drovet, Doctor of Physic, at
Beauvais, and of the Chyrurgiane dvvellinge at Avet, which wear come thither
to cure him.

On what sort the Aucthor tied this Arterye.
First of all, I considered, on the arterye, in the uppermost, and inner part
of the fore arm, as she from above desce^deth under the armpittes, unto the
be^dinge of the arm, three fingers breadth therabove, on the which place when
I had seen, and fixede mine eyes therone, I made an inscisione, in the skin
according to the length therofe, which lay opened right above the Arterye
where by tacture we might feel her, which when I had found, and discovered
her, I thrust a crooked needle thervnder, vvherin was a strong threde, where
with I tied the foresaeyde Arterye, with a dubble knott: this being done, I
took away, and purifyed, all the congealed, or coagulated blood, and all
other impuritye out of the wound or svvellinge, and have vvashed the same
with Aqvavitae, Remedy against the putrefactione.
in the which I mixed a little Aegyptiacum, by this means to cleanse it the
better from all putrefactions: and the patient, is within a month thereafter
ensuinge, vvholye cured, and grown sovvnde, with out retayninge any lamnes
in his arm: vvherin I my self have wondered. If so be that in any other
external part, there chanced to come any Aneurisma into the Chyrurgians
hands, he must then know, that always for certayntye, he shall find the
arterye in her uppermost part, or discover, and bare her, and so bind, and
tie her with out any more ceremonies.

Of the Cirsotomia, that is, of the manner, how we ought to cut of the
varices. Chap. 7.
Discriptione of a Varice.
VArices, or burstene veins, are troublesome, because of there greatness, their
extracting, thicknes, and their gibbositye above there nature, and property.
VVherfor, either because they cause pain, and hinder the action of that part,
or else because they soacke in some certain vlceratione, with some humiditye,
(vvherby she can not be cured) we are urged to open them, and cut themof,
Curation of a Varice.
or else with some actual cauterye, to cauterize them, and so consume, and
bring them to naught. To which purpose, the ancient professors, Council of
the ancient professors for the curinge of the Varices.
have ordained, that we should cut out, and clean take away, those which
lie croockedlye and dubbelye foulded, in diverse rovvnde revolutions, or else lie
entangled the one with the other. But before we proceed to such an
operatione, it is necessary, that first of all, we bath that part with hott
water, to cause the gross blood somvvhat to separate, and vvexe or grovve
subtle, and the veins to svvel and exalt themselves.

But the most gentlelest remedy, is that which daily we use which is the
simple apertione, and inscisione of the foresayed Varices, at one, two, or
three places, as if we intended to phlebotomize, making the apertion somvvhat
greater and larger therein because of the gross, melancholicke blood, which
we desire to let therout: Through which foresayed apertione, we extracte as
much blood, as we suppose to be good, and sufficient, or else as much as the
patient ca^ abide, one which foresayed apertione, we must lay compresses,
which therone we must bind, as we are commonly used to do one the veins,
when as we have phlebotomised, prohibitinge the patient, not to stir, or
go, which said Varices, if so be they chanced to swell again we must as
before a little distance there after make therein an other apertione.

But if so be we intend wholy to discide, and cut them out, we must first
of all, How we ought to cut away a bursten vain.
denotate the same with incke, one the skin, which is placed one the Varice
or burste^ vain, the skin bei^ge annotated, we must with two fingers of
both the hands, lift up the same, the one this way and the other that way,
when we have fast houlde therone, then we must make an inscision, in the
midst of the elevated skinn, on the self same place, which before we had
denotated with incke, of such a magnitude, and greatness, as is reqvired and
necessary: the inscisio^ being effected, we must suffer the skin again to
descend, through which inscisione, the Varice, or bursten vain which is
theru^der situated, shall be discovered, an denudatede of the skin: VVhervnder,
as then we must thrust, a crooked needle: because thereafter we may with both
the ends of the foresayed threde, The place where we may cut the varice, or
burst ^n vain.
dravve the one vpvvardes, and the other dovvnvvardes. This being effected,
we must make an apertione in the varice, according the length, of the same
betwixt both the thredes, which must be separate and aparte the one from the
other a thu^bcs bredthe, through which apertione, we may dravve as much
blood, as we please: and the^ dravve and bind together very fast the
foresayed thredes, and the^ also cut, the foresayed varice, or bursten vain,
clean away, which is situated betvveen both the thredes, if so be it seem
expedient unto you, sufferinge the thredes, by continuance of time, putrifye
and rott out of themselves, without with violence to dravve them out, because
that nature, may have some respite, and time, to close, and replenishe the
cut, and ligated veins.

The auncie^te Chyrurgians have cauterized the Varices,
That bursten vain, which runs right, although she lie overthvvarte, if
she be simple, and small, we wear better tie her then to cauterize her: But
first of all we must purge the patient, and phlebotomize him either in the
arm, or in the varice, or else in both places at once. Our praediscesors and
ancient Chyrurgians, make me^tione of the actual Cauterye, but before they
applied the same, they first in scyded the skin, vvhervvith the varice is
cooperted, and covered, in such manner, and form, as we do when we bind
the same: the varice therefore being bared, they then imposed thereon, a small
stamped Cauterye, which was well glovvinge, and redd hott, which reasonable
stifflye they impressed thereon, but yet not so violently that the advstione
penetrated any deeper, the^ through the vain, with out touching the lips,
or edges, in cauterizinge, of the foresayed inscisione, wherefore they with
vvett, and madefyed cloutes or with some certain playsters, recincted, and
defended them. Use and practice in these times,
This operatione being after this sort finished they applied therone, some
certain remedies, to the qvallifyinge of the pain and doloure, and profitable
for the combustione. And because it is incident unto all me^, to fear the hott
iron, and also the inscisione of the skin, which first of all must be done.
Our use therefore now a days is, that we (without making any inscisione in
the skin) apply on the self same place of the varice, a great, and strong
pote^tiall Cauterye, because it should not only combure qvite through the
skinn, but also through the whole varice, or bursten vain: but we may not
in any sort touch the Escara, but gentlelye of her self suffer het to
separate, vsinge at this season those remedies, which for that use expresslye
amongst the cauteryes, we have discribed. The which I have seen to be used,
of Mr. le Ieune the kings Chyrurgiane, and of the Duke of Gvyse, which was a
very expert man, in all operations of Chyrurgerye.

Of the Horseleeches of there use, and how we may apply them. Chap. 8.
THe Horseleeches are little, Descriptione of Horseleeches,
and perpucill creatures, like worms, of the longitude of a finger, or
theraboute, nether are they of any great crassitude, or thicknes, unless, it be
when they with suckinge of blood are grouvven thick. The end of there head
has a rovvnde hole, much like unto a little lamprell, vvherin are to be
beheld, and seen three stinges, or acuityes, proceedinge out of three corners,
which so violentlye, and stronglye prick, that therewith they can pearce the
hides and skins of all creatures whatsoever, and vvherone they depe^de fast
hanginge, until such time as they have sucked themselves rovvnde, and fall of
with there one accord. They live, and are inge^dred in the water, and
especially in all stagnes, and standinge waters, because they delight, and
are solaced, in filthye, and muddye places. I esteem, and suppose, that there
is noe Chyrurgiane, but very well knovveth them because of all men they are
known, but everye one does not know which are the venoumous, or not
venoumous, which notvvithstanding, is very necessarve to be known,
considering the accidents, and mischaunces, which might thereof ensue, and
follow, as in example, great tumors, Inflammations, Messalinus dyed of the
bytinge of a venoumous Herseleech,
and venoumous vlcerations, through there venoumous momorsiones and bitinges,
yea also and death it self, as the history of him, which of a venoumous one,
was bitten in his knee, and dyed thereof, is vvitnessinge unto us.

The vonoumous, are as well known, and discerned by there greatness, as there
color, Signs of a venoumous Horseleech,
and also by the place vvher they are caught. For those which are thick, and
have a thicker head then the rest of there whole body, shininge, like unto
glistninge worms, and are greenish, and which have on there back, blevve, or
black strokes, or lines, and wear caught in standinge pooles, vvher all
manner of foetide, and stinckinge Carrions, with more other filthiness is
thrown in, they are all venoumous, wherefore in any sort we must not use
them.

But those, which are small, rovvnd, Signs of good Horseleeches.
and have a little head, and are of color much like unto a liver a rovvnde
belly, and the back stripped, stroked with gouldeyellovv strokes, which live
in clean runninge waters, they are not venoumous, we may safelye, and with
all securitye use them. And yet notvvithsta^ding, those which ar so as is
before said, may we as soon, as we have caught them, apply them to the
body, but must first of all, keep them two, or three weeks in a glass of
fair water, because therein they may avoid the viscositye, and impurenes,
refreshi^ge the foresayed water everye three days once, vvashinge the said
horseleeches, What we ought to do before we use the Horseleeches.
with your hands from all there viscositye and slimishnes. Galen councelleth
us, that the first day we should give them a little blood, and then, put the^
in fresh water. We may praeserve, and keep the^ a whole year, or longer
if we please, to use the^, when the necessitye so reqvireth.

The use of Horseleeches, was invented in place, Use of the Horseleeches.
of scarifyinge: we apply the^ most commonly one such places of the body,
where we can not set any boxes at all: as in example in the privityes, one
the gummes, one the lips and sometimes also one ravve flesh of any wound,
on the nose, above on the hand, and fingers, and when the patient too much
fears the boxinge, or else when as we desire to dravve and extracte any
venoume, out of a thrust, or bitt of any venoumous creature.

Before therefore we apply them, and because they might be hungrye, nether
retain any thing in there bodies, and because they should the sooner take
houlde, we must take the^ out of the water, and suffer the^ three or four
days before we use them to lie in a nue little vvodden box. Horseleeches are
enimyes unto all fatnes.
Which being in this sort praepared, to apply one the body, we must first
wash that place vvher we purpose to apply the^ very clean, and if so be
the place, by reason of of any salve or plaster, vvear fattye, we must also
wash that place and vvype it very clean, because they are enimyes unto all
pingveditye and fatnes: this being effected, we must the^ take them the one
after the other, in there middles with a white clean clothe, (for if so be
we touch them with bare fingers, they as the^ vvil not bite) and praese^t, or
place there heads to that place vvher we desire to have them suck. If so be
the Horseleech will no^t at the first byte, and take houlde, we must then
annoint the said place with pigeons blood, or hens blood, or cause the
place either with the poyncte of a lancet, or with a pinn, to bleed,
vvherthrough immediatlye she will begin to suck. To make a Horseleeah
violentlye to suck.
And so far forth as she sucketh not strong enoughe, or if so be we desire
to have her to suck violentlye, before she leave, and is not vvholye full, and
satisfied, we must vyith a pair of scissors clippe her a sunder, about the
third part of her body: vvher by, she begins to suck far stronger and
with more violence, and the blood as fast as she sucketh de parts from her
through the hindermost parts which are cut away. How we we shall cause
the^ to fall of.
As soon as the one Horseleeche is fallen of, if we please, we may apply an
other thereon: for they being replete and satisfied, praesently of themselves,
fall of: and if so be we desire to have them fall of, before they be
satisfied, we as then straw a little saulte, or ashes of wood on there
heads and immediatlye they fall of. There as yet droppeth blood out of the bitt
when as they are fallen of, which is a sign and token, that they have
drawn and suckede the blood from far, which blood, we must not one the
suddayne restraygne, and stop, because that part may the better purge, and
purifye it self, from all venoumous humors, if so be there be any at hand:
wherefore some there be which to that end, apply some small boxes, on the
bitinge of the Horseleech, or else they wash that part with hott water,
bei^ge saulted, and cause it to bleed somvvhat longer, if so be that part
require the same, and the patie^t be able to suffer the same: If so be the
blood run therout somvvhat to long, and vvil difficultlye be restraygned,
through any compresses, we must then apply thereon a little adusted, or
burned linne^, or a splitted or cloven bean, retayninge the same with his
finger so long therone, How we shall restrain the blood
until such time as she cleaves fast thereon, whereon thereafter we must lay a
small compresse, and bind the same therone, if so by any means possible it
may be done.

Of Boxes, and how we may apply them. Chap. 9.
A Box, is an instrume^te, of Chyrurgery, the magnitude vvher of, must
aeqvallye be proportioned, according to the greatness of that part, whereon
we purpose, and intend to apply them, and also diverse forms, and figures:
Difference of Boxes*
for some there are which are short, and thick, others which have a long
neck, and belovve vvyde, which commonly dravve better the^ any other. Others
are of diverse substance, for there are some of Copper, others of Horn, of
Tin, and of glass, which we most commonly use, because through the
glass we might see, whether they dravve much blood or not. There are also
some which are made of wood, and some baked of earth: yea for want of
Boxes, we may use little vvoodde^ dishes, or little earthen pottes. Touching
there form, they must have a vvyde mouth, and a reasonable broad bellye,
thick and rovvnde edges, because in the applyinge thereof they should not
chance to hurt.

And if so be they are very great, they must the^ have a little hoale on the
one side, which with wax must be occluded, before we apply the^ that we
may give the^ air, when we will take of the same, some there are, which lay
a little stick, cross over in the mouth thereof, on the which they impose a
little piece, or inche of a candle, which in the application thereof they
incende, and light.

How we shall apply the boxes.
The manner of applicatione is this. That we first of all, perfricate, and
rub the place Vvherone we intend to apply the^ situatinge that part of
applicatione, in the right form thereof, because the muscles, may lie in there
right situatione, and places, and not be recurved this way, or that way,
because the boxes being thereon fastened, might not withdraw the reflection of
the part, or ioyncte, fall thereof, when as the foresayed recurved muscles,
should reverte again to there accustomed locationes, and places. This being
done, we must impose therone a counter or any other piece of coin, with a
little, flock of flexe, or tovve incended in the midst of that place,
vvherone we desire to apply the Boxes, least that the fire chance to touch
the skin, whereon immediatlye, we must vvhelve the Boxes, turninge the same
a little rovvnde, because he should the better fasten thereon: the which as
then we must cover, with a dubble vvarmed cloute. Some there are which in
the bottom of the Boxes apply and lay a plaster, and therone a little tovve,
in place of an inche of candle, which in the application, theyt set one fire,
with a candle.

Discriptione of the horn Boxes.
As touchinghe the horns, they are vvyde above, and narrovve belovve, havinge a
little perforatione in there midst, and internally, a little leatherne tu^ge,
which is very thin, which stops the foresayed hoales. They are applied
without fire, and sucked with the mouth. To wit with a little pipe, or
with a quille, which we impose in the foresayed perforation, vvhervvith the
foresaid tunge is thruste backevvardes, which stops the horn, when it
has drawn and sucked sufficient, and dravvinge the pipe therout, the
foresayed tunge, internally shuts, and cleaves it self so close to the
hole, as we may see in a kind of ballon, when he is blovven up.

Those which are ignorant of this secret, stop, and occlude the hole with
a little wax, which in deed is not so necessary, and needfulle. Those
little Boxes which are laid in vvarme water, are aplyed, after that we have
putt the flame of the candle, therein and must then with all expeditione be
thereon imposed.

The use of small boxes.
The use of these small Boxes, is three fould: Namely therewith to withdraw,
and repel, the blood, and humors, which are concursed to any place: to
dravve forth any particulare thing which nature ca^ not expel from her: and
to dravve, out or cause to consume, any occluded ventosityes, in any parts of
our body: wherefore we apply them one diverse, and sundry places: they are
very good and commodious to be placed behi^d in the neck, against all rheumes
which are incident unto the eyes: behind in the midst of the neck are they
necessary to be applied, for those which are short of respiratione, and
troubled with the cough: one both the shoulder blades, against pain, and
doloure in the head against Hemicraniam, against ophthalmye, and pain in the
teeth: we apply the^ also in place of phlebotomye one the right hippe,
against bleedi^ge at the nose: in like sort also close to vvoemens breasts,
when as there menstruositye, too superfluouslye flovveth from them, and when
there lie included any ventosityes in the Liver: on the left side, when as
there is any vvynde retained in the Milte: on the Navelle aganst the vvynde
colicke: on the Vreteres, to cause the gravel to desce^de, which is
contained, in the kidnyes: on the rumpe, against the vlcerations, and the
Hemorrhodes of the fundament: on the hippes, against all vesicall disseases,
and of the womb, and provocation the monethlye sickness, or menstruositye.

To conclude, we may apply them, The Boxes may be applied one all parts of
man's body.
on all parts of man's body, yea allsoe one the self same place where the
pain is, which we endevoure to cure, to retract and dravve therout all
humors, which are theri^ secluded, as when we desire to dravve any humors
outvvardes, which lie profoundlye and deepelye occulted, and hidden, or else
also, any ventositye, which in the foresayed part lies enclosed, as on any
bitt, or prick, of any venoumous creature, least that the venoume might
chance to penetrate and pearce, into some of the vvorthyest parts: one the
Venus botches, or Bubones, one the venoumouse, and Pestilentialle Parotides.
But desiringe to apply them against any superfluous efluxione of blood, we
must then situate them on the contrary side consideringe the alliance, and
communitye of the veins which is betvveene them, through the which the
blood is retracted, and drawn back. It chances also sometimes, that we
nether apply the Boxes, on the disseased, or dolorouse place, nether one the
contrary side thereof, but one that part which next, and proximately
thereunto is situated: as when we desire to suscitate and provoacke, the
retained and kept back mestruosityes, we as then place the Boxes, one the
bone Pubis in the flanckes, and allsoe one the flatnes of the hippes.

The Boxes, or horns, are so^times applied with scarificationes, and sometimes
without: If so be we apply them without scarificationes, they then only
dravve certain dampes unto them: but if there be any badde humors, in those
parts, we as then scarifye it: And the dissease proceedinge out of vvindes,
and ventosityes, we then apply them without scarifications, but when we
are minded to scarifye any part, we first set the Boxes therone, and
havinge again removed, and taken the same of, we the^ prick, or scarify
therein, either with a lancet, or with the poyncte of a rasor, whether it be
deep, or not deep, according as we suppose, and judge the blood, to be
gross, or subtle, but always we must note not to scarifye deeper then the
skin: touching the number of the foresayed scarificatio^s, if so be we are
not intended to dravve much blood there out, we may not as then make many
scarificatio^s: but if we intend to dravve much blood therout we must then
make many scarifications: vvhero^ we must again apply the boxes, so that
when we desire to dravve much blood therout, we must apply the foresayed
boxes two, or three times thereon, and everye time scarifye the place, and
especially when there is contained in that part any venoumouse ventositye, or
gross, and corrupt blood. In delicate, and dayntye persons, which are tender
of flesh, and have an aperte or open skin, in such persons we must scarifye
but once, notwithstanding must apply the boxes two, or three times after
other thereon: which being finished, and havinge wiped, and dried the part,
we must then apply one the scarlficatione, the Cerotum Galeni, or else the
Vnguentum Rosarum.

THE SEVENTH TREATISE OF THE OPEratione of Chyrurgerye, Contayninge six
Chapters.
Of the Caries, or of the corruptione and rottinge of bones. Chap. 1. Of the
fistles of the Privityes or fundamente. Chap. 2. How we ought to dravve forth
Childrene out of their mothers body, which of themselves can not be borne.
Chap. 3. Wherefore the externalle parts or ioynctes of the body, must be
extirpatede, as Arms and Legs and vvheraboutes the same must in the fore
said ioynct be done. Chap. 4. How we ought to effect, the extirpation, or
dissection of any ioynct, and restraynge the blood after we shall have laid
down the patient. Chap. 5. How we ought to extirpate the spoylede, and
superflvous fingers, and how we shall separat those fingers which are
combinede, and grown together. Chap. 6.
Of the Caries, and corruptione of the bones. Chap. 1.
Disctiption of the natural bones The bones are as well subjected unto all
manner of disseases, as is the flesh.
THe bones, not being spoylede and corrupt, are of nature vvhyt smooth, and
solid. They are according to the sayings of aunciente Chyrurgianes and our
daily experience, subjected unto all evell dispositions, which the flesh is
subjected unto, yea also unto apostematio^s. Celsus avouchethe, that all bones
which have any impediment, are either hurt, corrodede, corrupted, burst,
broken, crushed, plettered, or out of ioyncte. We may praeiudice the bones to
be altered, To know the corrupted bones through sight.
or polluted, through our sight feelinge, matter, and impuritye, which
therout issues: when we perceave it to be yellow or purple, and at the last
black, and as very learned lie, and discretlye the said Author, vvriteth,
first the corrupted bone waxes fattye then black, Through feelinge.
or putilaginous, that is corroded: when as in touching with the privet or
searchinge iro^, we feel the bone to be rugged, and not plain, and the
privet, enters therein, as if it wear a piece of corrupted, and worm eaten
wood, and especially we knovvinge the same not to have binn bared of his
flesh, nether has binn of the air illuminated: because that sometimes the
altered bone, for that it has a long while lain bare, is grovve^ to be so
hard, and thick, thar without great pains, we can not fasten thero^ with
the grating iron, through the matter, which is thin, Through the matter.
and subtle, clear, faetide, stinckinge, and blackishe: when as rovvnd
about the vlceration especially, is regenerated a tender and viscouse flesh
vvher through the vlceration can not, be cicatrized, and although she be
cicatrized, thereafter redubleth herforces, and breacketh open again. Occasion
of the corruption of the bones
Such alteration proceeds of some co^curre^t humors, that desce^de on the
bared bones, as appears when they are through soackede with any
pestiferouse humors, or else because they are of their flesh and pellicle, or
me^brane Periostio, denudatede and barede vvherthrough they corrupt and wax
dry for want of blood vvhervvith they should be nourished, or else because
they are to full of humiditye, and moisture, through the purule^t matter,
which co^tinuallye thereon distilleth, and corrodeth: either because they are to
much a^noyncted with oil, and to much fatty salves thero^ applied, vvherby
the vlceration is corrupted, and putrified: Or because she is polluted, with
the matter of the vlceratione, which supernaturallye, and from above is
descended and thereon distilled.

VVhe^as therefore for certaynty we know that there is putrefactio^, and
rotte^nes in the bone we must then do our devoyr to know how lardge, and
profovvnd the same is, because thereby we may the surer know, how with most
convenie^ce we should remove and abolishe the same and cause therein a
separatione, because it is necessary that the vivifice^t part, expelle and
drive from it the mortified, or else the mortifiede also cause mortificatione
in the vivificent parts.

Magnitude of the putrefactio^.
Concerning the magnitude thereof, we may discern it through the sight,
unless it be operted with any viscoufe or slimye flesh, and we supposing and
doubtinge to be more putrefactione of bones, that is patefiede and evidente
unto us, through the circumiacent parts of the vlceraration, which as then
are purple colored through the spongiouse flesh, through the elevatione of the
edges of the vlceratione and through the diuturnalle continuance of the same
in one estate: Hippocrates.
For as Hippocrates affirms: In the venomouse vlcerations, which for the
space of a year have continuede, or longer, it can not otherwise be, but
necessarilye in the bone under the flesh of the vlceratione, must needs be a
corruptione, putrefaction and a corrosione, and some pieces thereof come out,
the Cicatrises also will continually be co^cavouse, and hollovve. To cure the
putrefacted bones.
We therefore certaynlye knovvinge this, we must as then dilate the
vlceratio^ denudate the bone, and dilligentlye marck how large the foresayede
putfactio^ is: which must be effectede with causticke medicamentes, by the
which the spongiouse flesh, mvst be co^sumede, according as the foresayede
vlceratio^ reqvireth. Celsus councelleth us that first we make an inscisione
in the ski^ne, to denudate the bone, if so be the putrefaction of the bone, be
greater then the vlceratione, discidinge and cuttinge of all the flesh rovvnde
about, unto the sovvnde bone: touching the depth of the putrefactione of the
bone, we may know it through the privet or searchinge iron, when as we
feel thereon, the which pearcinge deep or not deep in the same, shows unto
us that the foresayede corruptione of bone is great or small. But if vv see
the bone to be black and dry as it happens bereft of blood the privet the^
will not enter therein, wherefore the depth of such a corruptione, can so
certainly be known, as through the perforative Trepane, or else through the
little ground dravver, vvherevvith we must perforate the foresayede bone
through which perforatione of bone, we easily shall perceave, whether the
bone be black, white, or read, and whether there issuethe blood out or not
if it be so, it is then a sign that the putrefaction, of the bone is not deep.
And if so be we perceave, the perforated bone to be black, it is then a
token, that the putrefactione is deep, because the corruptione of the bone,
pearceth so deep, and when we perceave that the bone is white, and read,
so far is it then incorruptede.

To the which Caries, or corrupting of bo^es we must use the actualle
Cauterye, or else also the potentialle or the Raspatorium: If so be the
corruptione of the bone penetrateth not very deep, How long we ought to
raspe.
we must then grate the foresayed bone with a peculiare Raspatorye, and in
raspinge of the same, stiffly crush thero^, that we may qvicklye penetrate
through the corruptione, and the operatione, vvih all festinatione be effectede
and done. All danger being now passed, and we perceavinge the bone to be
white, smooth pure, and solid, it is then sufficient: For it is impossible,
that the foresayede corruptione of bones may have an end, as long as we do
not liberat, and free the same, by one mea^s or other, from all danger, and
corruption. When we perceave, in raspinge the bone to give blood from it, it
is then a sign that all corruptione is therout, and that the bone is well
disposed, because that no corrupt or alterede bones will give from the^ any
blood. This being done, we as then use the poulder of Aristolochiae of
Mirrha of Ireas and of Aloe to liberate the foresayed bone from al corruption
and praevente the same to be any more putrefacted and corrupted. If we
suppose, that the Raspatorium, be not sufficient enough, to remove the
foresayed corruption, as when she is deeply corroded invvardes, The fire is
the surest remedy to repel all corruptions out of the bo^es.
and when as there is a peculiare corruption imprinted in the bone, the same
also being fatt, and oylye, and if so be the patient wear not timorouse of
the fire, the afsuredest remedy as then is, that we cauterize the foresayed
coruption, with an actual Cauterye, which conforteth that part, and
consumes all venoumouse humors, and with all festinatione causes the
corrupted bones to separate, and causes little, or not pain at all, because
the foresayed bone is insensible, and does not communicate his vnhemence unto
the other circumiacent parts.

When as therefore, Manner how to apply the Cauterye.
we desire to use it according to the depthe, and greatness of the coruption,
or Caries, we must therein use a mean, of applyinge the foresayed Cauteriu^ on
the bone, to wit until through the porositye of the bone there comes out, a
frothye matter, and noe longer: for if we held it longer thereon, it should
through his great callidity, and through the exsiccatinge virtues thereof, not
only consume, the humeditye of the putrefaction of the bone but also the
natural humiditye, and moisture through which occasion, the flesh ingendreth
and increases betvveene the sovvnde and the corrupt bones: This doing,
nature in a certain time thereafter, will separate the corrupted bone, from
the sovvndebone, engendringe betvvee^ them both, a tenerouse flesh, which by
little and little hardens, as if it wear Pomgranate-kernelles, which
foresayed flesh, we oftentimes may see, grovve clean through the corrupted
bone, and that in such sort, as the small tender grass, grows through the
grovvnde, and as the^ is the suppuration, and matter good and laudable,
white, or reddishe colored, and without stincke. And we must here also
farther note, that the Chyrurgian, may sometimes gentlely move, the corrupted
bone being cauterized, and stir it, because nature there through may be
opitulated, unto the separatione of the cauterised bone, and the foresayed bone
lyinge so^vvhat raised, may be lifted on high, because as the^ it houldeth
fast noevvhere, but we may not with any violence take the same thereof, for in
so doing, the sovvnde, bone, before co^pletlye it be covered with flesh
might chance of the air, to be again infected, and corrupted.

The Cauterization must be reiterated
Nether is it sufficient, that once we apply the Cauterye thereon, but must
diverse and sundry times do the same, nether must it be glovvinge or red hott,
but reasonable hott, removinge of the forsayed cautery from one place of the
bone to the other, or houldi^g of the same in one place, until the place be
throughlye vvarmed.

What we ought to do in a deep Caries.
The corruption, therefore or Caries being very deep, we must them trepane or
boar it with a perforative Trepane, unto the sovvnd bone, or with the small
ground dravver, make diverse hoales therein, the one close to the other, of an
aeqvall depth also, as the corruption of the bone is, in which trepaned
hoales, we must as the^ apply some little hott actual cauteryes because the
foresayed bone, there by may be throughlye dried: By this operation, the
corrupted bone will separate it self from the sovvnde bone, as heertofore we
have said. If so be that the whole substance of the bone be corrupted, and
corroded, we must then vvholye remove, and take the same a way. A historye of
Albucasis.
As Albucasis, to this purpose, recites a memorable history of on whom at
three sundry times he took away almost the whole shinne bone, dividing also
the operation, in three sundry and aeqvall times, because the patient was not
able, to tolerate so great pain, because of his great imbicillitye, and
also because Albucasis feared least that under his hands he should have
diede, because through certain evacuations, he always fell into great
fayntnes, but in the end was perfectlye cured: and in place of bone, there
engendered in the place, a hard carnositye, which so miraculouslye fortifyed
from day to day, that he during some continuance of time thereafter, could
again couragiouslye go one that leg.

When as therefore it is reqvisite, to apply the foresayed actual Cauterye
one any certain place, we must dilligentlye consider, how we might
liberate, and defend, The circumiace^t parts of the vlceration must be freede.
the circumiace^t parts of the Vlceratione, least they be touched of the
cautery, which we may with most convenie^ce do, with some certain
plasters, because nether the fatt nor any other ebullient humiditye, which
through the calliditye or heat of the cauterye might chance to run therout,
one the self same circumiace^t parts, of the vlceratio^, and that thereby they
chanced not to be burned, and seared, which would be the cause of great
pain and doloure.

Now therefore to correct and cure the Caries, or corruption of bones, there are
diverse Chyrurgianes of our times and age, in place of the actual Cauterye use
the potentialle: Diverse remedies against the Caries.
amongst the which the oil of vitrioll is in the most cheifest, in like sort
also the oil of franckinse^ce, which of diverse Chyrurgians is highlye
commended, and esteemed.

Of the Fistel of the Fundament. Chap. 2.
ANd because we have not here intended generally to write of al fistles, and
to discourse of their matter, and conditions, what parts be thereof polluted,
of their occasiones, signs, prognosticationes, and of the remedies, of their
cures, it seemed expedient unto me, breefelye to shevve, the means, to cure
those which reveal, and demo^strate themselves in the Fundament, and that
especially through a convenient handlinge, Intention of the Aucthor.
or operatione of Chyrurgerye when as shortly and breeflye I shall have
taught, in what sort we may best and easyest know them.

Those Fistles which are inge^dred in the fundament, are of diverse and sundry
sorts: for some of the^ are occulte, others patefyede, the occulted are so
called, because we noe vvher externally espy them, and internally in the
foresayed fundament, The fistles of the fu^dament, are ether-hidden or aperte.
or excrementall gutt have their apertio^, and issue in the muscle Sphincter,
whether they be situated vpvvardes or dovvnvvardes, or any vvher one the side,
adioninge unto any of the two buttockes. Which allthoughe we can not
evidentlye perceave them, yet may judge, that the foresayed parts, are hurt
or hi^dered, through the pain and through the stinckinge matter, and
humiditye, which issues out of the foresayed fundament, and through the
which commonly, the shirtes of the patient are polluted, and through
certain vlcerations also, which before times in that part they have had,
or through certain internal hemorrhodes, or through any inveterate vvou^d,
which was badly cured. We may also sometimes see them withdraw our eyes,
through the Speculum Any.

The patefyed Fistles of the sudame^t.
The patefyed Fistles, are therefore so called, because immediatlye without any
danger we may evidentlye see them: Of the which there are some which lie
croocked, and curved, and although they have but one apertion, which visiblye
we may see, yet they have diverse vvayes, branches, or cubicles, like
Conyeburrovves, which of their patent Orificium, in the body, run this
way and that way, which with the searchinge iron sometimes we may find,
when as we thrust it this way or that way, vvher we feel it of his own
accord to enter, together also, out of the great qvantity of matter, which
daily issues therout, we may easylye judge, that the foresayed Fistle, must
needs have more concavityes, then by the external fistulouse apertione we
can judge, which at sometimes is not great.

There are also some Fistles, which externallye have but one issue, and do
not pass through the concavitye of the external, or arsegutt, or through the
muscle Sphincter, as easyly through the privet or searchinge we may perceave
when we thrusting the same therein, we ca^ not any vvher perceave it against
our fingers, to the which intent we must thrust the same middle finger of the
left hand in the fundame^t, for if it so be that we betvveen our finger, and
the privet feel any thing it is then a sign that it does not pearce
through but if we feel it against our finger, it the pearceth through.

And now as concerning the curation of the same, A three foulde means to cure
the Fistles of the fundament.
we will not here treat of any things belonging unto the medicamentes,
but only speak of the Chyrurgerye to the curing of this dissease: the which
on a threefoulde manner is taught unto us, as well in the curatione of the
internalle, as externalle Fistles: to wit, either through ligature,
inscisione, or through Cauterye.

Although Avicenna, with more others are of opinione, that with any of these
foresayed remedies we ought in noe sort to meddle there with unless, they
wear too intolerable, and molestiouse unto the patie^t, but that with
clean linen, with Cotton, and with decent and convenient lavamentes, we
ought to sustain them. But for all this not vvithstanding, I will here
discribe unto you, our use and customs of the ancient Chyrugians.

Now therefore as well to cure the publiqve, and patent Fistles, as the occult
and hidden, we must cause the patient conveniently to lie, namelye that the
patient must lie one his back, with his legs on high, retayning and
houldinge the foresayed legs, close unto his belly, and this is the manner,
and customs of ayncient Chyrurgians. But we now a days, cause the patie^t
to stand on both his legs, with his head, lyinge on a bed, disioyninge
and separati^ge the foresayed legs vvyde the one from the other, which also
of two servantes or sta^ders by must so be held, least that he again might
chance to shut them. The patient being thus situated, toward the light, we
shall then thrust the middlemost finger of the left hand into the fundamente,
havinge with some certain oil anoyncted your finger, and pared close your
nails: and in our right hand we must have a privet or searchinge iro^, in
form of a needle, in the which at the on end there of must be a threde, which
foresayed needle, or Privet we must thrust into the Orificium of the Fistle
until we sensibly feel the same on our finger, and then with our finger
recurvate, the end of the foresayed needle, and neatlye, and conveniently
reduce the same unto the fundame^t, and then dravve the same therout,
dilligentlye observinge, that internally we hurt or vvou^de nothing, How
we must bind a public, or patent Fistle.
and the threde also being passed through the fundament we must then cut of
the foresayed needle from the threde, and tie the ends of the foresayed threde
both together, dravvinge the same reasonable fast, and close together, and
with a slidinge knott bind the same together, because daily we might knitt
the same closer, and continuinge this same so long in this sort, until such
time as we shall have cut away all the thread which was remayninghe
betvveene, both the Orificia, and both the apertions become to one, and the
threde conseqventlye, without any more dissectione of the same, shall be taken
thereout.

But we perceavinge the Fistle to have no issue in the concavitye the
arsegutt, and the needle does not come out against our finger being in the
foresayed arsegutt, and that there as yet is some pellicle, or membrane
betvveene them both, the needle havinge a reasonable sharp acuitye or poyncte,
we must thrust the foresayed threded needle, or Privett, bouldlye, and
audaciouselye therthroughe, into the foresayed concavitye of the Arsegutt,
because we might also dravv the foresayed thread therout, as already above we
have mentioned.

We must also here farther note, that this privet, or needle, must either be
of goulde or silver, because she may the easyer internallye in the foresayed
gutt be recurved. We use hereunto a silver plate, which thereunto expressly,
we caused to be made, as this same plate, and the foresayed Privett, or
needle, before amongst the figures of the instruments, are also defigured, and
set down unto us.

The threde must be of course thread, the same being tvvisted three or four
times dubble. And because that unto some, the dissectione of this simple
threde, falls somvvhat tediouse, they annoyncte the same with some Causticke
medicame^tes. Gvido, Opinion of Gvido.
effects this dissection, with a rescindent actual Cauterye, and to
praevent the same that it pearce noe deeper, then it ought, he thrusts in the
fiistle a hollovv Privett, on the which concavitye, he with the foresayed
Cauterye pearceth the skin, and in like sort also cutteth through the
fistle, brings, and dirimateth away with it the callositye, and praeventeth
also the fluxione of blood.

It is surer to make an inscision in the fistle, the^ to tie it.
Others vvil not in any sort, have the fistle cauterized, nor bovvnde, and
tied, but will only have that same to be inscided with a croocked lancett,
which is betvveene both the Orisicia, to wit of the fistle, and the
excrementall, or arsegutt, and that also which internallye is grown
callouse, they will have it to be crudifyed and made raw, or excoriated, as
we are used to do in the haremouthes: yet daily experience teaches us, that
the ligature is more certain, the^ the inscisione, vvherin we need not to
take away the callosity, because it oftentimes chau^ceth, that we
endevoringe to remove, and take away this callositye, we discide, and cut of
any of the Fibers, of the muscle Spincter, which being vvounded, or hurt,
the patient there after can in no sort restraygne his stools, or excrementes.

It may seem admiraculouse, and strange unto some, that I write that, the
fistle may be cured through the ligature only, without removinge the
callositye, because it seems oppugnant unto reason, because all combinatione,
and healinge together, is caused through the ioyninge or touching of vveake
things together: yet I dare affirm, that all those, which I have seen tied,
have bin perfectlye and sovvndlye cured without in any sort to have touched,
or removed the callositye.

Now to come to the operation of the hidden fistles, havinge situated the
patient as before is said, we must then apply therein, the Speculum Any,
opening the fundame^t therewith, with the least pain we ca^, as vvyde as is
possible, always annoynctinge the foresayed Speculum with oil, through
the which said apertione, the Orisicium, of the vlceratione may appear and
be appare^t unto us, be-tvvixt which concavityes or branches, we must thrust
in a privet, which must be of a reasonable thickenes, or crasitude, like unto
a small and little needle vvherevvith we are wonted to make our stitches,
which must be blunte, and in the one end must with a threede be threded,
which foresayed needle, or privet, we must thrust unto the bottom, or
grovvnde of the fistle, which penetrateth unto the skin, as we easily may
feel with our finger, on the which, with the croocked lancet we must make
an inscision, and the needle being in this sort passed through, and the
Speculu^ Any being taken away, we must then dravve out the needle, and cut
her from the thread, and tie both the ends thereof together.

Other say we ought besides the privett, internallye to make an inscisione
through the whole Fistle, unto the other hole, which is made on the other
side: but there is most certayntye in the ligatione, to avoyde the effluxion of
blood, whenas there is sufficient flosh enough betvveene.

There have binne certain ancient Chyrurgianes, which could not agree unto
the Speculum Any, but have only thrust there finger into the fundament, to
dilate the same, and besides the same a thin and pusille privett, vvhervvith
they have so long felt therewith this way and that way and up, and down,
till such time as they have fovvnde the Orificium, of the fistle, which is
felt as if it wear a thing rent, or torn, and now having fovvnde the
foresayed Orificium, An other practice or inventione.
they then close to there finger thrust in the privett, conducinge the same
alonge the finger supernallye, or vpvvardes, or thither vvher they suppose the
bottom, or ground of the fistle to desiste, and end: which through feelinge
of the finger of the other hand we may easylye discern: and havinge fovvnde
the end thereof, and perceavinge the skin or the flesh not to be very
thick, instead of ligatione, we violentlye thrust the privett there through,
vpvvardes, the privett being passed therthroughe, they then cut open all that
which is situated betvveen the two Orificia of the Vlceration, or else they
thrust a threde there through, and so bind it through.

Amongst those which are of opinione, that we ought to cure the fistle
through an actual Cauterye Albucasis discribeth unto us the means, Albucasis
vvillinge us to use a Cauterye of iron thereunto, which must be very subtle,
and glovvinge, or redhott, and that it be proportioned according to the
greatness of the fistle, thrustinge the same twice, or thrice therein, until
such time as all the callositye is taken away there from, laudinge the fervent,
and glovvinge Cauterye, above the cuttinge or rescindent Cauterye, because the
glovvinge Cautery, as he says corrects and amendeth the vnte^peratnes of
that part and there follovveth noe effluxione of blood the callosity thereof is
burned away, and the superfluouse humidity is exsiccated, which was
concursed, and assembled together unto that patte.

How we ought to extracte, and draw forth little infantes out of their
mothers body, which of themselves can not be borne. Chap. 3.
Admonition for the Chyrurgiane.
BEfore we offer to employ our hands, on such on operatione: it seemed
expedient unto me to admonish the Chyrurgiane what vvoeme^ may escape this
danger, because we should obtain great blame and discredit, unto our
selves, if so be the woman being in childebearth, should chance under our
hands to dye, she supposinge, by our help, and council to be released out of
this danger, The signs vvher through the Chyrurgian is hindered, to dravve
forth the child out of his mothers body, vvhic of it self ca^ not be borne.
Wherefore those which we suppose to be in danger of death, we must not in
any sort lay hands on them* because the countenance and cheer of those
women which are in labor, or childebearthe and also there face,
administreth sufficient knowledge unto us, what event, or success the matter
shall have: for those which are in any great danger, of their lives, have a
strange and vvonderfull behavior over them, to wit that she troubles, or
molesteth her self with nothing, has a fearful sight, which is clean
contrary to her naturalle being, is debilitated, has hollovve eyes, a sharp
nose, a feeble Pulls, which beats obscurely, and without time: She is
wholy co^victed, as if she had the soporiferouse dissease, with out all
strength, clean laid alonge, and although we speak unto her, yet we can
not avvake^ her, and if we do long trouble, and pluck her, she speaks
very feeblelye, and with noe strength, and then again lies, as it wear in
a great sleep: the air also flies out of her throat. Those in the which is
any strength left, they fall into Spasmo, or convulsion of synnues. Others
after they have continued a long time in their labors, as are those which
have bin troubled and molested therewith the space of five, or six months,
they are vvholye decayed, grovve^ lean, and wholy consumed, for want of
food, and because also that which she has eaten, is not changed into any
nouriture, the whole boodye being thorough soacked with humidity, and
especially the face, vvherof her sweat most commonly, is fattye, and
axungiouse, and smearye.

But those which can suffer the manual operatione, and are fit, to have the
child drawn out of their body, have none of these fore rehearsed accidents,
wherefore vvithall festinatio^ also they must be opitulated, and helped, on
this manner as hereafter follovveth notvvitsta^nding without rashlye, or
temorously to begin the same, without being certifyede, of the Midvvyfe,
what the reason or occasion might be, why the woman can not be delivered,
or bring forth her child, There are three things which make Child birth
difficulte.
being certifyed hereof, as well of the parturinge vvoma^, as of the
Midvvyfe, in as much as is possible, dilligge^tly considering the same, and
having well perpe^ded it, therout to know the just occasion of this
heavines and sorrovv, considering, whether it takes his occasion of the
parturie^t women, or else out of the child, because thereby we might know
how to rule, and govern our selves

If so be this danger consists in the mother, The mother.
it happens then, either because of her mistruste or small hope, or because
she is fearfulle, and fayntharted, havinge the womb, and the neck or
entrance of the sam, small and anguste, because she is young and small of
body, tender, and delicate: Or else because the entrance of the foresayed
Womb, lies recurved, or is occluded with some tumor, or else there is some
Apostematione vlceration, or any Carnositye there in, which oppugn themselves
against the bearth of the infant: Either because that the mother, has a stone
in her Bladder, which therein also being oppressed, seeks by all means
possible to come therout, and being come into the mouth, or entrance of the
Bladder, crusheth there the entrance of the Womb, vvher through she is
angust, or else because therein is some cicatrice, vvher through she is narrovver,
then she ought to be, vvher through she ca^ not in any sort stretch forth her
self.

Child bearth also in some vvoeme^ is hindered above all these foresayed
accidents, because they are to fearful, and are to much affrighted, of the
parture, or Childbirth, as yet not being used unto the laboring of child,
and do not yet know thereafter to govern themselves, as wear condecent,
and needfulle. Others are grown impotent, through any praecedente
sicknesses, and having noe strength at all to deliver the conceptione or
fruicte from them.

The child also may be occasion heerof, The child.
because it is to feeble, and ca^ not help it self, in the deliverance of his
mothers labors, and that especially when it is dead, and svvolle^: in like
sort also the same being to gross, and great, either in any part of his
body, as havinge two heads, four arms, being dubble, or else if there be more,
then one, to wit, two, three, or four, vvherof the one might praesent his
arm, and an other his leg, or any other part, all at one time.

Afther the infa^t praesenteth himself, the childebirth falls easy, or
difficulte: because, that follovvinge the natural Childebirth, the child
always praesenteth first his head, havinge his arms stretched out alo^gest
both his sides: or when it praese^teth it self with both the legs
forwards, vvherby it may easylye be plucked and drawn out: and when it
praesenteth him one any other manner, it is as then not natural, but very
daungerouse, vvherin we must use our remedies as herafter shall be shevved.

The external occasions.
Touching the external occasiones, they are violent heat, vvherthrough the
strength and forces of our bodies are convicted: contrarilye, there is great
could, vvherthrough, all the conduictes are stopped as allsoe are those persons
which we fear, or hate.

The child also as long as it lies dry, and the water as yet is not
broken out, vvherthroughe it can have no passage, because the vvayes and
passages are dry, and not slippery, not smoothe, as in the water streams we
may see, that the stones, through the slipperishenesse of the water, The
operatione.
are carried away. In like sort also all sorrovve, and tribulation, stops
and occludeth the entrance of the womb: as co^trarilye the mean, and
reasonable iucunditye, opens the same.

All these foresayed occasions, must be compared, unto there co^traryes, as if
so be that through the imbicilitye of the mother it be occasioned, she must
the^ be conforted, givinge her a little wine, or Hipocras, conforting, and
ioyinge her in her necessitye, as much as is possible: and if so far forth as
the passage, be to narrovve, or anguste, to exsiccate, or dry, or else to much
shru^cke, we must then, endevore with decoctiones, with vvarme infusions,
and with pingvefactio^s, to soften, moyste^, and make supple the same: If then
there be any carnositye, which in terrupteth the passage therofe, we must
depose, and detrude the same one the one side: or if there be a stone in the
entrance of the bladder, we must thrust the same on high: and if so be the
Child otherwise praesent it self the^ it should, as first with the head,
we must then turn it in the best sort we may: or if it thrust one arm, or
leg out, we must not therewith dravve it out, but must gentlelye retrude it
back again, and again bring it into his place: or if there, be more the^ one
child, we must dilligently consider how we ought to take hold therone,
notinge that we do not take the one by the foot and the other by the foot,
and so both at once pluck the^, wherefore we must thrust one foot on high,
and dravve toward him the foot of that which is next, How we ought to
situate the woman.
and most rediest unto the passage.

But before we come to the manual operation, we must first of al situate the
vvoma^ convenientlye: and although there be diverse ma^ners of situationes, (for
some set the^ in a stool, others set the^ leani^ge, on a table, or one the
edge of a bed, with the legs separated the one from the other: others set
them one their knees) yet the best and fittest way is one a bed, causinge
the vvoma^ to lie one her back, thvvarte over the bed, close to the edge
there of, with cushe^s or pillovves under her back, to rest her head thero^,
layinge her heels close to her buttockes, which must lie also somvvhat
exalted, and the hippes spanned the one from the other, which of two vvoeme^
must so and in that sort be held, least that she do not chance to dravve,
and shutt them together: the vvoma^ lyinge in this sort, the Chirurgian as
then may the easyer obtayn his will, and com close unto her, to drive, and
detrud the child tovvarde the entrance of the womb.

The vvoma^ being thus settled, or laid, the Chyrurgia^ must lay one the
knees, and one the belly of the vvoma^ a clean linne^ clothe, partly to be an
opercle, or coveringe to the woman, and partlye there through to be freed from
the external air: the^ he must gentlely thrust his hand being annoyncted
with fresh butter with Sallatoyle, or with hogs suct, in to the entrance
of the womb, first of all co^sideringe whether the child be alive, or
dead, and how it is therei^ disposed, or turned, whether also there be more
the^ one, two, or three children a fore hands: and how soever it be
situated, The child must with his head be drawn out or with the feet if
it be possible.
or disposed, either alive, or dead, curved, or croocked, if it be possible we
must dravve the head first out, but if not, with both the legs, dravvinge
the same aeqvally dovvnevvardes, and cause, one of the arms, to be stretched
out, alo^gest the side of the head, because there through may be hindered,
that the body being therout the womb do not chance to shutt, and the
neck of the Child be not therein enclosed, which through the arm which
lies stretched out by his head shall be praevented and hindered. If so be the
one foot praesenteth it self, and the other tarrye theri^, we must tie the
foresayed foot with a ribbon and gentlye thrust in again the foresayed foot,
sufferinge the end of the ribbon to hang out, and inqvire, and seek after the
other foot, thrustinge the hand, along by the foresayed foot, and leg
until such time, as we feel the buttocke of the other foot, and then
reducinge your hand close to the buttok shall immediatlye find the other
foot, which ge^tlely you must bring forevvardes, and dravvinge by the ribbo^,
the other foot, vvil come forth again, which having the^ both aeqvally
together must ge^tly dravve^ the^ out with, the rest of the whole body of
the child: by this means we may know whether they be both the legs of one
child, on this manner dravving out the same, first the one and then the other.

Signs of a dead Child in his mothers body.
But if so be the Child be dead, it will not as then stir it self, and in
the feelinge also thereof it will be could, whenas we thrust the fi^ger in
the mouth thereof, it stirs nether lips, nor tunge to suck: The mother as
then has a stinckinge breath, hollovve eyes, and a svvollen bellye: we
therefore out of all these foresayed tokens, perceavinge the Child to be dead,
we must then dravve it out as already we have said with the feet
forvvardes: As far forth therefore as if the Child had one arm or one Leg
hanging forth of the vvo^be and it wear impossibleto reduce the same again
into his former sitvation, because that through the body of the Child, the
entrance of the womb is stopped, we must then pluck the foresayed arm or
leg and dravve it to the ioyncte of the shoulder, or of the hippe: How we
ought to dravve forth a dead Child.
and then discide, and cut of the same in the foresayed ioncte. And if so be
the head did first repraesent it self, we must then thrust both our fingers
into the mouth thereof in place of a hoocke, toward the roof, and so as
gentlye as is possible dravve the same toward you. If so be the belly
thereof be svvollene, or has to great a head, and the same fulle of water,
we must then with our finger, a little crush thereon, because the aquosity
might soacke therout, and the svvollen parts by this means be diminished and
vnsvvollen: and if so be that our hands wear not sufficient to dravve out
the Child, or to find the belly, to let out the said Aquosity, which either
is retained, in the head, in the Breast, or in the bellye, we must then gently
with our right hand bring therein, a little curved and croocked knife, which
within the curvednes thereof is sharp, and cutttinge, the acuitye or povncte
thereof being closely enclosed betwixt his fingers, After what fort we may
dravve forth the aquositye out of a dead Childs body.
which he must houlde very close together, vvhervvith we must make an
inscisione either in the Head, in the Breast, or else in the Belly, by this
means to dravve forth the water which is therein contained: And then we must
take, a hook, which on the same fashon as is before said we must bring
therein, vvherof we must fasten the poyncte, either in the eyes, or in the
mouth, or in the Clavicles, whereon we must then dravve as violentlye as the
cause reqvireth to be done, dilligentlye co^sideringe that the hook breack not
through and let his houlde go, and through the violente pluckinge of the same
do not chance to ha^ge and take houlde in the Womb, to the which intent
we must with as much judgment, and consideration, dravve the same as is
possible, only with one hand which must be within the Womb. Now if the
Child, be so thick, and so gross, A monstruouse Child.
that wholy to dravv it out is impossible for us or else if it be a Monster, or
two Childrene fast together, we must as then by parcels dravve them out,
cuttinge the Head thereof in pieces, and then pluck out first the the one
piece, and then the other, then the Breast the Arms, and the legs, and
always making that it be cut in the ioynctes, without breakinge any bones:
for although they be tender, yet the splinters thereof might chance to hurt
the womb, so that it is always the surest way we cut of the Arms, and
legs in their ioynctes.

It chau^ceth also so^times, that we dravvinge forth the Child by the
legs, that only the head tarrieth therein which thereafter without great
difficulty we ca^ not get it out, the^ with extreme danger, because the
same rovvleth up and down in the concavitye of the vvo^be: this therefore being
happened, there must as then a servant, or one of the stande^rs bye which is
experimented in such affayers, sitti^g one the left side of the woman, crushe
with both his hands one the bellye of the vvoma^, being covered with a
vvarme cloth on this manner to depresse dovvnevvardes the head of the child,
and there in that place to contain, and keep the same. How we may dravve
forth the head of the dead child as yet remayninge in the vvo^be
And the Chyrurgiane which sits on the right side of the woman must with
his light hand bring the hoocke therein, as is already said, which he must
fafte^ in the head, either in the eyes, in the mouth or in the apertione of the
head, and dravve the same by little, and little therout, as if, as yet the
whole body remayend therein: If so be the foresayed head wear to great, we
must then in like sort also cut the same in pieces, and dravv therout the
pieces first the one, and then the other.

The Child being drawn therout, we must dilligentlye consider, that we
do not break a sunder the navell, because it may serve for a conductor, and
leader, which we must always feelinge the same, and suffering it to glide
through our right hand must follow until we be come to the matrice
vvhervvith the Child was covered in the foresayed vvo^be: and having found
the same, we must gentlye rovvnde about separate her vvher we find her to
befastened, and then dravve her forth with all the co^gregrated blood theri^,
if therbe any, least that there it might chance to putrifye: havinge thus
finished all this, the woman as then shall join, and shutt her hippes
together again, and must then circumligate the bellye, as is required, and
necessary.

In this forerehearsed danger, is oftentimes incident unto the woman a far
more lamentable and pitiful accident, to wit, a discendinge, and sinckinge do
vvnvvardes of the womb, which betvveen the hippes sincketh out, through the
which the woman, can not go. The manner to elevate again the suncke and
disce^ded Matrice.
If so be therefore this chanced, we must gentlye, and easilye by degrees
thrust in again the same, as we have said of the guts, or entralles being
sunck out, vvherof we must cause the disseased and sick woman to keep her
bed some certain continuance of time, with her buttockes a little exalted,
and if so be the Matrice in her risinge chanced again to sincke out, we must
then again, thrust in the same.

And to praevent her that she do not again sincke out of the body, we must
the^ thrust in the Matrice a Pessarium, like a rovvnde Apple, which must have
a hole in the middle therofe, as here before amongst the instruments we may
see it defigured unto us vvher we shall also find, the form, the figure,
and the manner of vsinge the same.

Upon what occasion, the external parts as Arms, and legs are, and must
be extirpated, or cut of and in what place it must be done. Chap. 4.
When, and why the external part, must be saved of.
THe externalle members of ma^s body, as are Arms, and legs, are cut, or
savved of, when as they are sqvised, plettered, and broken, the Veins,
Arteryes, and Synues, wholy be lacerated, and cut of: Or else when they
concerning any externalle occasion are hurt, or indammaged, vvherby they
so^times wholy come to be mortifyed, and that suddaynlye, or else sometimes
also by degrees, so that sometimes there ensues such a Gangraena, or
mortification, that not only the flesh, and all the other mollifyed parts, of
the foresayed ioyncte, do mortify and corrupt, but also the Bones
themselves, so that there is noe hope at all, of any health, then only
through the extirpatione of the same, fearinge least that the foresayed
Gangraena, should farther infect and pollute all the circumiacent parts,
vvherethroughe the patient might suddaynlye chance to dye. Notwithstanding
the Chyrurgiane may not in any forte aproch unto his exstreame, and last
remedy, before he have tried all other remedies, to ease and appease this
forsayed mortificatione, and to save the ioyncte: because that such an
operatione, Extirpatione of any ioyncte, is effected with great danger.
can not be done, then through extreme danger, as oftentimes the patientes
themselves, do dye under our hands, because of the great effluxione of
blood, or else some great fayntnes. Others immediately after the extirpatione
fall into a Phrensye, in extreme, and intolerable pain, in Spasmo, in a
could sweat, whereon praesentlye, follovveth death. Wherefore first of all
we ought to admonish the friends, and kinsfolk of the patient, and certifye
unto them that this operation is full of danger, and is as well lamentable
for the Chyrurgiane as for to patient: and that we ought not thereof the make
any great matter of vvorth, or estimation, saying there is no other hope, nor
any other success to be expected, and that it seems more convenient, and
necessary, to extirpate the mortifyed ioyncte, and so to avoyde and fly
death, which is more terrible, and fearful, then the loss only of one
ioyncte.

And before we begin this operatione, and that we must extirpate, the
foresayed ioyncte, it is necessary that first of al we know, the place vvher
it must be done, Reason, how to make choice of the place, vvher we should
extirpate the ioyncte.
because of diverse opinions which are had thereof: for some are of opinione,
that in the ioyncte we ought to do it, because in this place it vvoulde fall
easyer for the Chyrurgiane to execute the same, and is also more tolerable
and easyer for the patient, bebecause there it may be done with more
festinatione, with a simple inscision of a well rescindent and cuttinge
knife, if only the Chyrurgiane be agile, and expert, in findinge of the
ioyncte.

Now as touching those which suppose all vvou^des of the ioynctes, to be
more subjected, Reason for those which extirpate any member in the ioyncte.
unto deadly, and dolorouse accidents, the^ those which happen to be three
fingers above, or under the same, yet for all that they are noe less
davngerouse, because of the Tendones, and al other sunnuish parts, which as
then are also cut of, which are round more thicker there then in the
ioynctes themselves: VVherfor we need not to fear, that there will follow
more pain, or convulsione, although the extirpatione which is done, three,
or four fingers belovve, or above the same, because the Te^dones, and the
synnues are as well in the on place as in the other aequallye cut of. And
which is more, if we extirpate a membre in the ioyncte, the marrovve, of the
pipe as the^ is not denudated, because of the Epiphysis, vvhervvith it is
covered, and contained: But contrarilye if we savve through the focille, or
pipe, the marrovve as the^ is denudated, for the praeservatione of which
Nature with great difficultye, must have a long time, to enge^dre a Callum
thereunto, and to cover it, because nature must separate that end of the savved
bone: And besides all this, there follovveth noe superfluous effluxion of
blood, as Hippocrates in his boocke of Hemorrhoidibus, witnesses unto us.

Although that all these foresayed reasons, Reason, for those which extirpate
the membre above or below the ioyncte.
are sufficient enoughe, to persuade the young Chyrurgian, to extirpate the
members in their ioynctes and Hippocrates, allsoe commands and councelleth
the same, yet al PractisionerS of Chyrurgerye, do here in agree, and unite
their opinions together, that we ought to extirpate the membre, Reason, for
those, which extirpate the membre above or below the ioyncte.
three, or four fingers under, or above the ioyncte, according to the
dispositio^e and reqviringe of the mo^tified ioynct: For first of all the
opratione is done with such festination and so certain, because of the
facility thereof, for we may right well know that the whole infectede, and
spoylede part, most commonly svvelleth, and the finitimate parts also
thereunto lyinge, that without great danger and difficultye, we can not
know the ioyncte or the place thereof in the which we ought very warily to
enscide: Farther also the ioynctes are most co^monlye very difficulte, clean
to cut them of, or extirpate them, because of the bones, which are placed the
one in the orher.

Touching therefore the certayntye thereof experience teaches us, that an
inconvenience may as well come of the one, as of the other: And such wounds,
are noe less mortalle, then the wounds of the ioynctcs. Secondlye, there much
sooner follovveth a cicatrice, because of the great qvantitye of flesh,
vvhervvith the bone on all sides is circumcinglede, and covered and which in
that place is not of such a crassitude, and spongiousnes, as in the ioyncte.
And although the Cicatrice can not so soon be effectede, the patient
nevertheless needs not abstain from going, and that without pain also,
layinge his knee in a stilte, vvhervvith he shall as then abide the time of his
complet sanatione: The which he in that sort should not be able to do,
before that the cicatrice we are vvholye curede, and obduratede, if so be his
leg had binne extirpatede in the ioyncte, because the whole body resting
thereon, through the confricatione, or rubbinge together of the same might
chance to breacke open again. Experience of the Author.
As touching my self, I have always found that the cicatrice has ever
binne very difficulte, yea and almost impossible to be curede and effectede in
the ioynct, but i^mediatlye thereafter is openede again, how little soever the
body restede therone. Conclusione.
Wherefore I also am of the same mind, and opinione, with all other common
Chyrurgianes that as well consideringe the festinatione, and facilitye of the
operatione, as also the brevitye of the generatione of the cicatrice, that we
ought to do our extirpation or savvinge of, of any membre, three, or four
fingers breadth above, or under the ioynct, to wit, of the Leg, if it be
under the knee: For allthoughe the Gangraena, or mortificatione of the Leg,
wear only below in the foresayed Leg, and the middle of the Leg as yet
illaef unhurt, and sound, vvherfor it is all vvayes better to make the stumpe
short, then long, because withdraw his length, it is associated with a certain
deformitye, and might cause great impediment unto the patiente, with
thrustinge of the same, here against this thing, and there against somvvhat
else. Which in the Arm is contrary because there it is better, that we suffer
him ^o keep as long a part thereof, as is possible to be by any means done,

It is right true, if so be the Gangraena, Exception.
or mortificatione of the Leg, do end in the ioynct or, close thereunto, and
noe higher then to the beginning of the hippe we must then always rather
do the extirpatione in the ioyncte, then above the same, and especially in
the hippe: Because the accidents might always be worse, consideringe the
great Veins, Arteryes, and Synnues, which by how much the more we pluck,
and dravve them vpvvardes, so much the greater we find them: Nota.
And then the cicatrized part, should be constraynede to rest on the
artificial, feigned leg, as if we extirpatede the same in the ioyncte: Be it
therefore what place you will choose, we must note, that always we rather
take away some of the sovvnde part also, then leave any of the corruptede,
or mortifiede part behind. Because that such a part of mortificatione, might
also corrupt, and mortify, the finitimate sovvnde part, so that the patient,
should have suffered all the davvnger, and pain in vain, and for naught, and
to continue his life, we should be constrained to make an other extirpatione.

How we ought to do the extirpatione, or sawinge of, of a ioyncte and how we
may stopp the blood, after we shall have laid down the Patient. Chap. 5.
HAvinge noted the place, where we intend to do the extirpatione, we must
situat the patient as it is reqvirede, not only consideringe the nature,
disposition and qvallitye of the part, which we intend to extirpate,
Situation of the patient in the extirpation of a Ioyncte
but also one the Chyrurgiane his commodity, that the patient sit not against
the day, and ligt of the Chyrurgian, not to high, nor to low, nor on a place
vvher he might slip as it oftentimes has chanced, the patient sittinge to
far in the bed. Some are of mind that we ought to set the patient on a
stool because he may sit the faster, and convenienter: Others effect this
operation, the patie^t sittinge on the edge of a bed, fearing least he should
grow faint, or syncopize, and might the^ with more ease be gotten into his
bed and resti^g place the extirpatione beingedone.. But my use is, to cause
the patie^t to ^itt in a reasonable low chair, because all beds are not of
one hight, nether are so ready, and fit for our purposes nether so well
toward the day, vvheras we may set the chair vvheare we our selves list:
farther the patient is more surer in such a place, and may also better, and
with more convenience be held, and better toward the Chyrurgians hand, as
well to cut through the flesh, as to savve of the bone and restraygne the
blood: the servantes allsoe shall have more better oportvnity to houlde the
patient fast and in more safetye.

How we may well and convenientlye extirparte a Ioynct.
Therefore to effect and finishe this operatione, the Chyrurgyne must stand
betvveene the legs of the patient, and must cause a servant, or sta^der bye
as much as is possible with both his hands to strippe up the skin and the
muscles which are situated above the extirpatione, after he shall have caused
the patient to bend the ioyncte, and that as well for the longatione of the
skin, as lengtheninge of the Veins, and Arteryes, which after the
extirpation of the Ioyncte, the ligature being taken away, will more easyer
as then demonstrate them selves, and be more easyer taken houlde of withdraw the
Crovvesblil, and they tyen or cauterized: Then we must immediately one the
place, vvher we intend to make our extirpation, lay a strong ligatvre of
strong linen, the same being reasonable closelye drawn together and that
because of diverse occasions: First of all because the Ioynct may be praese^ted
the stedyer and faster to the Operator, and because the flesh should the
better bear, and receave the inscione of the croocked, or curved knife:
Secondlye, because the sensibilitye of the foresayed Ioynct, in the scissure,
might partlye be therthrough benumbed, and somvvhat mitigated: Thirdlye,
because after the inscision, in sovvinge of the bone, the blood might be so
long through the foresayed ligature restraygned, and kept back.

Farther more, by this means we keep the skinn and muscles on high, which
after the operation, the ligature being dissolved, and made loose, sinck
again dovvnvvardes, and cover the savved bone, by which means the Cicatrice
the sooner grows therover, and serves the foresayed bone thereafter, in
steed of a Cushone.

There may not be any flesh one the bone when we inte^de to savve it of.
All which being finished, we must then with a croocked knife, which is
very sharp, cut through the flesh close unto the ligature round abovvte, unto
the bare bone, without leavi^g any thing betvvee^ the bones vncutt, if there
be two, scrapinge of with the back of the knife the membrane Periostium,
vvhervvith the bone is covered, because we do not chance to tear the same,
with the teeth of the savve, which vvoulde cause an intolerable pain unto
the patient, and also in serratinge, or savvinge might be some hinderance: In
like sort also we must remove the flesh as much out of the way as is
possible, and then with a well cuttinge savve, savve of the whole leg as
close to the flesh as may be, dilligentlye notinge, that with the teeth of
the savve we do not in any sort touch the foresayed flesh.

The leg now being extirpated, The Ioynct being extirpated, we must the^
make loose the ligature.
we must the^ dissolve and make loose the ligame^ts, which wear tied above
the vvound, and strippe dovvnevvardes the skin, and the muscles, because the
bone of al sides may be well covred: which being done, if so be there be but
little blood issued therout, we must not then (especially where there is a
Gangraena,) so soon restraygne the same, but as yet let it a little more
bleed, and that as long, as you suppose it may without any davnger to the
Patie^t be done, because that part there through might the better ease her
self, and be disburthened, and so much the less be subject unto any
inflamationes.

The blood havinge indifferentlye and reasonably issued therout according to
the strength of the Patient, we must as then stop, Instruction how we shall
koovv whether it must be stenched, or let bleed.
and restraygne it, which we must do through the imposition of the fingers
one the mouths, or apertio^s of the Veins, which we must either bind or else
cauterise the one or the other according as the same shall be needful, and
requisite, it be either through binding, or cauterizinge, as the ancient
Chyrurgians of former times have done, and we have committed it to the memory,
of those of our times.

For as in example, Virtves of the actual Cauteryes.
if there be any member corrupted, and mortified, which must be extirpated,
after which extirpatione, the fluxion of blood, must be far more stopped,
through the applicatione of glovvinge cauteryes, on the appertio^, or mouths
of the veins, the^ through the ligation, or binding of the same, because the
glovvinge cauteryes, make one the foresayed Orificia of the veins an Escara,
vvherthrough the foresayed Orificia of the veins are occluded and the blood
stenched, because it ca^ noe more issue out, by which means it draws unto
it self, and also consumes all the venoumouse evaporations, and dampes, and
brings the^ to naught, which as yet through the foresayed veins, have
bi^ne retained in the supersituated parts, although, it seems not that the
foresayed part is in any sort corrupted, or putrifyed, then only soacked
through with some certain venoumousenes, vvhertroughe sometimes that part
has binne prepared as it wear to some mortificatione, or Gangraenatione:
that we supposing to take houlde one the veins with the Crovvesbill, and so
to bind them, do most commonly chance to break betvveene the Crovvesbill,
or else how gentlelye soever we knit the threde together, one that sort to
tie them, are through the tyinge of the threde notvvithastndinge cut a
sunder: vvherthroughe we are in the end constrained to use the actual
Cauterye.

Galenus.
And not without occasion, Galenus testifyeth unto us, to be a thing very
expediente, and necessary, to stench, and restraygne the blood through
actualle Cauteryes, which through any corruptione, has corroded through
the veins, because they, nether are able to suffer the Crovvesbill, thereby to
be drawn out, nether the tyinge, and bindinge. It is also the most surest
way, to cauterize all that, which through the Gangraena is corrupted, or
else, that we apply thereon any Causticke medicamentes, as we are used to do
one the originalle of al corruptions.

Wherefore if so so be the Chyrurgian have any suspicione, of any
venoumousenes, which after the extirpation, might be drawn invvardes
toward the finitimate parts theraboute, it is as then the surest remedy,
that to the restraygninge, and stenchinge of the blood, he have in
praeparatione, and readiness, three, or four fervent, and glovvinge cauteryes,
vyhich he must apply on the Orificia of the descided veins, How through
cauterisatione we should restraygne, and ste^che blood.
without houlding, or depressing the same to hard thereon, because thus doing
there may be left behind a good Escara: And if it chanced that the blood
through the applicatione of one cautery wear stenched, it is then
sufficiently cauterized, nether must we any more cauterize the same Vain,
prosecutinge of the same, on the other veins.

Instruction how to restraygne blood through ligature.
Contrarilye, we being constrained to extirpate any membre, being very much
plettered, and broken, and which through noe Gangraena,, or corruptione is
putrified, it is as then most convenie^t, to restraygne the blood, through
taking hold of the Veins, or Arteryes, with the Crovvesbill,
compraehendinge allsoe some part of flesh therewith, which with a good and
strong threede we must bind together, as allsoe the flesh, which with the
threde is tied, is an occasion, that the ligature must be the more certayner,
and surer.

And as Galen finds it good, to stench the blood, through actual
cauteryes, vvherby is any corruptione, or putrefactione, in like sort also
he commends the ligature in the effluxione of blood, vvherby is noe
corruptione, Accord to agree, the right worshipful Mr. Gourmelen, and Mr.
Pare.
or any venoumousnes. Which right well may be an agreement betwixt to great
personages of our time, vvher of the on is a Physicione, and the other a
Chyrurgiane, because of a certain dispute, which they had, concerning this
matter, of the means, which we ought to use, in the restraygninge of blood,
as they have agitated most inmicisiously this disputatione the one against the
other without the one, understanding the other.

The blood therefore through the foresayed means being stenched, and
restraygned, we must as then strovve some restringe^t poulder one that part,
and apply therone diverse dry plumaciolles, or flatt tents, and therone an
ordinarye restringent, or defensive plaster, layinge rovvnde about the stumpe,
a plaster of Refrigerans Galeni, because that the foresayed defensive, should
not chance to cleave too fast therone, and so bind the part, as it
requires, and then curinge the same as a simple wound, always
dilligentlye consideringe that we do not take away the Escara, which
through the foresayed Cauteryes is made, nether the threedes allsoe vvher
with the Veins have binne tied, if so be at least there be any.

It happens allsoe sometimes, Of the dressinge after the blood is stopped.
that the Veins after that they have binne cut of do dravve themselves
invvardes, so that with the Crovvesbill in noe sort we can take houlde
therone: It might allsoe chance, that the tied Vain, might chance to untie,
vvherthrough the patiente is charged with a nevve effluxion, of blood.

If so be any of these accidents chanced, and come unto your hands, and it
seemed best unto you, to Cauterize the Vain, then to bind her, or else rather
to bind, then to Cauterize her, and such a mischaunce, or accident happened
into your hands unexpected, and not being therone provided, without havinge
any Cauteryes in are adines, the right worshipful Mr. Pare councelleth us
very fitlye to stench the blood. The which if in two or three or four Veins
it chanced, or Arteryes, at one time then must the servant, of one of the
circumstantes, lay the ends of his fingers, one each vain one, gentlelye
crushinge the same, one the Orificia of the Veins, because as Galen says the
Chyrurgiane may have time, to restraygne the blood: And then take a needle of
a fingers length, or longer, and of a reasonable crassitude, which is very
sharp, and rescindent, as here before is defigured unto us, being threded
with a strong threde, vvhervvith the vain after this sort follovvinge must
be tied.

Havinge first of al considered, where the bleeding Vain is situated, How
we should do this ligature to stenche the blood
you must the^ thrust your needle therthroughe, beginning on the skin a good
fingers breadth higher then the wound, one the side of the Vain, making the
same to come contradictorilye out of the vvou^de, to wit one the side, and
also somvvhat lovver then the Orificium of the Vain, because the threde may
be thervnder, there to circumcingle the same, sufferinge the end of the threde
to hang one the skin, without extractinge, or vvholye dravvinge out of the
same: Then you must again, thrust the same needle inter nallye in the wound,
one the other side of the vain, because in so doing, the threde, which
with both his ends is come forth externallye on the skin may take houlde on
the foresayed vain, with some certain portione of flesh, and so through
both the stitches of the needle, and passages of the threde, may stifflye be
bovvnde together, through both the ends of the foresayede threde, layinge
betvveen the thredes a little compresse of lether, twice, or thrice dubbled,
as thick as a little finger, because there through the pain might be
praeventede, which through the foresayed stiff bindinge, might be caused, and
because the knott, through the continuance of time should not cut through the
skin.

A certain ligature.
When as this ligature is convenietlye done, she as then is very certain,
which also may be done in all parts of the body, vvher there is any
fluxione of blood, as in great wounds of the Arms, of the Hippes, or of
the Throat. Here before amongste my Instruments of Chyrurgerie, you shall
find them defigurede unto you.

How we should extirpate, the superfluous, and corruptede fingers, and
separate those which are grown, and conioynede together Chap. 6.
The hand is an instrument, of instruments.
THe hand, which is an instrumente, of instruments, is dividede in five
fingers: And it sometimes also chances, that besides the thumb, or the
little finger, there grows a sixte finger, which is all carnal, or fleshye,
or else composede of some small bones: Yet is nether the one nor the other
complet, whether ye consider either their figure, or their magnitud, and
greatness, as being against the course of nature, vvherthroughe they are an
impediment to the actiones of the hand. It may also well chance, the one
finger of the hand to be pletterede, without being able to keep the same
from Gangraenatione. Besides this there commethe in the ends of the fingers,
sometimes a certain vlceratione, Curation of the Panaris, or Paronichia.
which is callede Panaris, or Paronichia: The which cause such vehemente
pain, through the venoumouse matter, that therthroughe the bone corrupts,
and rotteth, yea and the inflammatione also begins most commonly in the
bone: The which to remedy, before that the bone be corruptede, we must make
an inscision in the end of the finger according to the length thereof, begi^ning
at the extreameste end of the ioyncte, unto the bare bone, because the
venoumouse matter, which lies inclosede between the bone, and the pellicle,
which covers the same, might have some or other issve. The inscisione being
done, we must suffer it to bleed as long, till it of it self restraygneth
and stops, the^ thrust the finger in good Aqvavitae, vvherin we must before
dissolve a little Treackle: And if so be notvvithstandi^ge all these remedies
the finger as yet corrupted farther, and must be extirpated, we may the^ very
aptlye effect the same with our rescindent, or cutting pinsers, vvhervvith,
without great pain, we may with, How we may remove the superfluous
fingers.
one nipe clippe it of. There are other, which lay the finger on a little
block of wood, and as the^ with a rasor hevv it of. On this manner also we
may extirpate the superfluouse finger vvherin there is any bone.

And so far forth as if the fingers, wear from the nativitye, and birth,
or through combustione, or else through any vlceratione, healed and joined
together, we must then with a rasor, separate them the one from the other,
and according to the length there of cut them asunder, and then with an
exsiccating plaster, being separated cure the^, and so skin them, by which
means every finger will separatlye heal. If so be that there came any
vlceration in the finger, after the which there follovveth a deformed
Cicatrice, vvherthroughe the finger, grows croocked: We must then try
thereon some mollifying remedies, to cause the finger therewith to rectifye, and
grovve straight:

And if so be by noe means it will be so, as it sometimes chances, when
the foresayed Cicatrice is great, and inveterated, and either the sinnues,
tendones or skin have binne hurt, we must not therefore proceed with the
same as a thing which is incurable, for if so be we cut, either the one or
the other, the finger thereafter should nether be able to bend, nor stretch
out, yet is it necessary that the bendinge, proceed before the stretchinge
out, and the stretching out, or rectifying of the same, before the
recurvatione, so that he should always be right, and very inconvenient,
as being better that he be reasonable croocked, then right, because of the
inconvenience, which there through we receave: For we supposinge to shut,
and close the hand, and to fasten on any thing, this finger as then should
stand right out: But when it is only the skin which makes the Cicatrice,
through the which the finger is recurved, we must then clean cut of the
same for as it being hard, and callouse, can not be through the finger
erected, and stretched forth. Curation of a croocked finger.
Havinge therefore now rectified this finger, by this means, we as the^ make a
nve Cicatrice therone, and must note that in the generation of the foresayed
Cicatrice, the finger do not chance to be again recurved, or shrincke up
again: A finger-case of lattinne, or of silver.
to the praeve^ti^g of the which, I know noe better means, after he be
cured, that there one we wear a finger case, of lattinne, or of silver, one
the plaster, and one the combustion. This fingercase must be covered with
Taffatye, or with any other decent substance, and conveniently, with a
band, fastened above on the hand, which fingercase shall do more
commoditye, and help, the^ all the splintes which we might apply thereon.

The thu^be or the finger being vvholely lamed.
There happens also a dissease, clean contrary, unto all other disseases of
the fingers, especially in the thumb, having received therone a blow on the
Tendones, vvherby the same is erected, and again the foresayed Tendones being
cut of, can in noe sort be again elevated, nether stretched forth,
vvherthroughe he lies in the hand immovable, and can not be stirred. The
same chances also in the hand, havinge received any wound in the hand
one the Tendones, or also above the hand, where through the hand hangethe
and falls dovvnevvardes, as is she wear paraliticke, and of her self is
not able to be lifted up. As touchi^g therefore the thumb, and the fingers: we
must either have a thumbcase, or a finger case vvherthroughe they must be heaved
up: And for the hand, a glove, vvherthroughe the hand may be held up. Which
in the boocke of Mr. Pare, are discribed.

THE EIGHT TREATISE OF THE OPERATIone of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede and
handelede of the Cauteryes, and of the Setonne Contayninge five Chapiters.
What a Cauterye is, the Species, and differences thereof. Chap. 1. Of the
inventione and use of the Cauteryes, and in what disseases, and one what
places we may apply them. Chap. 2. Of the Potentialle Cauteryes, and how we
should make them. Chap. 3. On what manner we ought to apply the Potentialle
Cauteryes. Chap. 4. Of the Seton, and how we ought to apply it. Chap. 5.
What a Cauterye is, and of the Kinds, and differences thereof. Chap. 1.
HAvinge with my self resolved and purposed, to write so^vvhat, of the
Cauteryes, it is first expedient and necessary that we know, what a
Cauterye is, and how many kinds, and Species therbe thereof: what their
use is, on what bodies, on what disseases we ought to apply them, and the
manner how we shall apply the same. The name of a Cauterye may be under
stood in two sorts.
Therefore to understand their nature, we must first know, what we by the
name Cauterium understand: For it may be understood one two sorts or
vvayes, Simplely, and not Simplelye: Symplely, consideringe the instrument, and
the Causticke matter, which adureth in any part, as Galen, in his sixth of
the simples in his 27 Chap. describes: Not because of the sign which
remains in the Cauterized part, that is because of the little Vlceratione,
which remains, therein, when as the Escara is fallen therout: So that this
word Cauterium, in properlye being understood, can noe otherwise be
understood, then a little Vlceratione, in any external part of the body,
which through the art of the Chyrurgiane, is made therein, through some
comburent, and adustive medicamentes, to give issve, and passage to some
certain matter, of some dissease.

VVherfor the differences, of these Cauteryes, The differences of the Cauteryes
not properlye taken.
or Vlcerationes, are as it wear drawn, from their place, and being,
whereon they are applied, and also from their efficient cause. The essence,
and being of these Cauteryes, consists in their form, and figure, vvherfor
some there are which be rovvnde, some contradictorye, others right, great,
small, deep, or not deed: All the which have but one only apertio^, or
sometimes also two, and is the^ called a transforatione, or Seton: And also of
all other places, whereon they may be possiblelye applied, as on the Head, in
the Neck, Arms, Legs, and finally in all parts of the body, vvherone they
might be applied, when only the agilitye, or action of the part can not
there through be hindered, or hurt: Of their efficie^t cause, which is taken
out of the diversitye of the matter, which is applied one any part of the
body, or engendered in the same. The matter which continuallye is applied on
the body, actuallye combureth, Actual Cauterye
or potentiallye, wherefore they are called actual, or potentialle Cauteryes:
That which in our body is engendered, can come through any sharp, corrodent,
or bitinge humors, vvherthroughe the skin is corroded, bitten through, and
exulcerated, of which vlceratione, may be effected and made a Cautery, or
fontanelle, which may be called actual Cauterye.

Differences of the cauteryes simply taken.
Here of we may conjecture and suppose, that the Cauteryes, and fontanelles,
wear invented, follovving nature therein, there through to give passage, to
that which is contrary, and opposite unto her, and vvherof she is perturbated,
and molested, it be either in quallity, or in qvantitye, as hereafter we will
farther speak of. And as touchi^g the Cauteryes, which we call instruments,
their principalle, and especial difference, is taken, of their substance,
form, and figure, and of their tarditye and slovvnes, or festinatione, of
adustion, of their depth, and shallovvnes, and of the manner of their
applicatione: touching their matter, or substance, because they actually, and
in deed do combure, and burn, or potenciallye, they are therefore called
actual, or potencialle Cauteryes.

The substance of the actual cauteryes
The form of those which actuallye burn is almost innumerable, which are
made hott, and glovvinge. The antique and ancient Chyrurgians, have commonly
made their Cauteryes of mettles, as of gould, of siver, of Iron, and of
copper. Archigenes.
Archigenes has cauterised the lachrimall fistles with liquefacted lead,
which through a little pipe he dropped therein. They wear of opinion, that
the cauteryes of gould caused less pain, Substance of the cauteryes which
the ancient Chyrurgians used.
and wear far more easyer to be suffered, that also the Cauterized place,
should not avoyde so much matter, and the adustio^ is not so daungerouse,
because gould amongst all other mettles is the most temperate, wherefore it
burns not so violently, as Iron, because it is not so co^densated of
substance: wherefore in like sort also the Cauteryes which are made of
Copper, do not so closely burn, or cauterize, as those which are made of
Iron, because the copper, is not so solid of matter, wherefore we desiring
stro^gelye, and violentlye to cauterize we must take such cauteryes, which
are made of the conde^sest, A kind of spongiouse matter full of dust grovvinge
on the mountains vvhervvith we use to stench blood.
and most firmest matter, and substance. Sometimes have also the auncie^te
professors as Hippocrates,, recited, to have cauterized, with tents, which
they dipped in ebullient, and seethi^ge oil, or with dry incended puffes as
we call them or with the root Aristolochiae, being madefyed in seething oil,
or with the roots of Strutium, as Caelius Aurelianus, Dioscorides, and
Attilus, which have cauterized with incended Goats dunge. Aetius has
cauterised the corrupted gummes, Aurelianus, Dioscorides. Attilus. Aetius.
Albucasis Guido.
with ebullient oil, which he applied thereon with vvolle being therein
madefyed. Albucasis in like sort, has cauterized the hollovve, and concavouse
teeth with seethinge butter. Guido has cauterised the bones, with
liquefacted Brimstone, to wit of the Caries. So that out of all these we
may sufficientlye understand, that we may make as many sorts of cauteryes,
as there are substances, which may be incended.

The foresayed cauteryes, Differences of the cauteryes co^cerninge their
figures.
and especially those, which are made, and composed of any mettle, are also
differinge in their figures the one from the other: For everye cauterye must be
proportioned, according to the dissease, and that whereon we will apply the
same: so that some are like heads of great nails, and triangled, others
rovvnde, like unto a butto^, others cutting, some not dislike unto a half
moon, and others circlevvyse: As we may behoulde, and see, the circles of
Albucasis, other in form of a rapersblade, as Celsus discribeth, there with to
cauterize the fissures in the lips.

They are also differinge the one from the other in their depthe, or
shallovvnes: for we need sometimes to cauterize the skinn only, as Hippocrates
wills us to do, in the pains of the shoulders: We must also sometimes
cauterize the flesh, as in the Sciatica: Cauteryes to cauterize deepelye.
Some times also to the bone, and crushe the same reasonable close thereunto as
we must do, when as we must cauterise above on the head, we must
sometimes cauterize, into the concavity of the body, as when we must
cauterise into the breast, to let there out any matter, and sometimes we do but
only scorche or singe above one the place.

And because that amongst the cauteryes, Differences of the cauteryes taken
out of their action.
(considering the matter vvherof they are composed) there be some which are
quicly heated) and some which continue longer hott, then others even so there
are some, which consideringe their po^derousnes, or levitye, tarditye, or
festinatio^, either in violence, or pain of their operation, are differinge the
one from the other.

The Cauteryes are also differing, Difference in number.
in their number, for at sometimes we apply but one, sometimes two, three,
four, yea also fifteen at one time, as Aetius commands us, to the curing of
the vlcerations of the Breast.

They differ also in their manner of applicatione, for some are applied
alone, Difference taken out of the manner of the applycation
others in little pipes, which at one end are aperte, and open, or have any
appertio^s, or windows in the sides thereof.

Of the Invention, and of the use of the Cauteryes, and to what disseases, and
one what places, they must be applied. Chap. 2.
IT may rightvvell be said that nature has shevved unto us, The inve^tio^ of
the cauteryes is dimonstrated unto us through nature.
the inventione, of the Cauteryes, and fo^tanelles: For as so^times the parts
being overlade^ with to many humors either their tartnes, or venoumousnes are
troubled, they in the end, discharge, and unburden themselves, in some part
of the body, of that which molesteth the^, as in one of the Arms, or legs,
causinge there to there solace, and ease, some excoriatione, or apertione. So
that the Physitiones, and Chyrurgianes, to help heerin the nature, have there
through fovvnde out the use of the Cauteryes, and Fontanelles, effectinge by
their art, that which nature oftentimes, through her own commotione
thereunto endevoreth to do, wherefore we also use the Cauteryes, as
oftentimes as we desire to make any derivatione, revulsione, interceptione, or
evacuatione, of any matter, the which either consideringe her qvantitye, or
qvallitye, or with both of them together, might in any sort be occasion of
any harm. We also use them, not only when as we desire, to transpire, and
cause to evaporate any venoumouse vapors, but also, when we would cause
any concurrent matter to exsiccate, and consume, endevoringe to dravve the
same from vvithine externally, as well through the extractione, which it here
makes, as through the vlceratio^, which thereafter remains, as through
certain little open fistles, or small ru^ninge issues vvhervvith we dravv the
matter from invvardes, outvvardes, there to evacuate the same, and cause to
digress from the one place to the other.

Cauteryes are profitable says Galen, and Hippocrates, in all corrosive, and
ambulative vlcerationes, against fluxions of the eyes, in the tumor Aegylops,
Vtilitye of the cauteryes
when as the fore arm, is suncke and descended under the Armepittes: In the
Sciatica, and pain of the hippes, for they retracte and dravve back the
humors, which trouble and in that place hinder those parts: In the Gangraena:
in the extirpatione of the me^bres, to stench, and stop the blood, and so
forth in all fluxions of blood, and in all other internal disseases what
soever, as in the Consumptione, in vlcerations of the Breast, Albucasis
and in the Dropsye. Abucasis avoucheth the Cauteryes generallye, to be
profitable, in all disseases, and sicknesses, which take their original, of
any matter, or without matter. They are also profitable, and commodiouse, for
all bitinges, and stinginges of any venoumouse creature, in the Carbuncles and
Venus botches, because through their heat, they consume the venoumousnes of the
humors, and annihilate them and out of the depth dravve the^ vpvvardes. They
are also very profitable, in all critic Apostemations, which are could, and
vvaterye, and which are very slovve in maturatione because that through
their caliditye, they opitulate, and help to ripen, the could, and toughe
humors, which are in that part. They are also good, against all corruptione
of bones, because they exsiccate the venoumousnes of the same, and consume it,
and cause the corrupted bones to separate from the sovvnde.

We may apply the^ on all parts of our body, and especially, being
needfulle, to make any apertione, to give issue and passage, to any matter, or
vapoure, which therine is assembled.

There are some which have applied the cauteryes one the upper part of the
head, In what parts the Cauterye must be applied.
about the sagittal suture, vvher she joins her self with the Coronalle
suture: Which with great and good success I have see^ to be done of Mr.
Pare, Mr. Pare.
against the Hemicraniam, or pain of the one side of the head, and against
many other sorts of inveterated pains of the head, because that through
such an apeatione, many and diverse humors, and vapors, which are
congregated in the head, by this means are exhalated: also against the
fallinge sickness, to give transpiratione to some venoumouse humor, and vapoure,
which are often times the occasion of this dissease: Against shortness of
breath, and difficultye of breathinge, which have taken their original, of
the superfluitye of humors, and descend out of the head dovvnevvardes to the
breast and there hinder and molest the parts of the breast, and bring with them
the shortness of breath, and oftentimes allsoe are cause of vlceratio^s in the
breast through corruption, and putrifyinge of some pituitous humors: and also
in the Ophthalmia, or inflammation of the eyes, which is there through caused,
through any fluxio^, which is sent through the veins, which lie scattered in
the Pericranio, and so run to the external tunickle of the Eye: Against
reddnes of the face: Against pain in the teeth, of the Eyes, in the
Sqvinancie, and in many other disseases, which come in the mouth, and in the
throat.

We Cauterize also the Eyeliddes, which are relaxated, in like sort also
the Cilia which stick in the Eyes, and also in those which in number are to
many: Also in the Arteryes of the temples of the Head: The tumefactio^
Aegylops, the Polipus, and Ozena, the cleaved lips, the Ranula, the Teeth,
and the palate of the mouth when it hangs to long, and also the Almo^des:
The Thorax, or Breast, on diverse places, sometimes shallovvly, and so^times to
the co^cavity of the fores. yed Breast: the inferior part of the Belly: the
Scrotum, or genitalles, and especially the hippe against the Sciatica: and the
bone, under the knees, on the insyde of the leg.

Some there are which set five cauteryes one the head of those which we
suppose to be infected with the lazarye. Cauteryes for such as are troubled
with the lazary
VVherof we must set the first cautery, one the Coniunctio^, of the sagitalle
suture with the Coronalle: The second above the forheade, vvheare the hair
cease: The third in the Neck: The other two the Ossa Petrosa above the
ears, somvvhate afterward, tovvarde the end of the Lamdoidalle Suture, to
avoyde the end of the temporalle muscle: to wit one, one the right side; and
an other, on the left side: All which Cauteryes are applied, to separate those
humors, which cause the nose to exulcerate, and the internalle part of the
mouth, in those which have the lazarye, and which externallye have their
face corroded, and deformed, and fearful to behoulde. These Cauteryes are
applied one some, because we should not see that they have binne cauteriyed,
only behind in the neck, and one both the Arms.

Of the Potentialle Cauteryes, and how we ought to make them. Chap. 3.
The pote^tiall Cauterye, and the matter thereof
THe pote^tiall Cauteryes are those, which through their intolerable, and
extreme heat, being with their forces set to work together with the
benefits of our natural caliditye, burn as it wear a fire in that part,
vvherone they are applied, leavinge behind them an Escara, or crust: Of the
which the matter of the Corrosive is in great number, and hot, unto the fourth
degree: Amongst the which there ar some, which are extreme hott, and a little
gentler, according as their operatione is tardive. Amongst them are numbered,
the Cantharides, the Tartre, the common Vitrioll, or the calcined, the
vnslissed lims, the Auripigment, the Arsenicvm, the sublimate, the Aqvafortis,
the Oil of Vitriolle with more others) the which we novvadayes, do seldom
use, in such sort as they are, with out praeparinge, or mixinge of them, to
make any Fontanelles, because that experience, has taught us some, which are
far more convenient, and less daungerouse.

The use of the actual Cauterye.
The actual Cauterye, is much convenie^ter* then the Potentiall, whether it be
we consider on the nature and substance, on the healthfullnes festinatione,
and certayntye, in operatione: for the fire, is a simple element, havinge noe
other forces then by the heat thereof, and exsiccation, without havi^ge
associated unto it any venoumousnes, wherefore the operatione thereof is
festivous, certain, and healthful, pearcing deeper therine when we please,
without causing any accidents in the circumiacent parts, although, that
therewith we chance to touch them, and that because of the subtilenes thereof,
and consideringe the virtues of his substance. It is an enimye unto all
corruption, vvherfor, it freethe also from all covruptione, and putrefactione,
yea it consumes all venoumouse matter, and qvallityes, which in that part
might lie occulted, and hidden, consumes also all superfluouse humidityes, and
corrects also all intemperate could, and moisture.

VVher on the contrary, the matter, The use of the potentiall Cauterye the
matter, and virtues thereof, and vvherone we ought to consider.
vvherof the Potentiall cauteryes are made, are oftentimes venoumouse: And how
soever they be praepared, yet there operatione, and action, is uncertain,
retardate, and slovve, and sometimes also dau^gerouse, without simplye
knovvinge the vittues therofe, and how to limite his operatione: Because
sometimes it spreads it self broader, then our meaning is it should, and
causes more detriment, and harm in corrosione, then vvillinglye we vvoulde,
it should, because it does not only combure and burn the place vvhereone it
is applied: But being united, with our naturalle caliditye, it extends, and
pearceth also deeper in the flesh then is necessary it shovlde,
vvherthroughe that part being by little, and little calefyed, and vvarmed, it
imprinteth not only one that place his venoumouse nature, but extends it
self farther, through the circumiacent veins, and Arteryes, and Synnues, in
the worthy parts, spoylinge, and oftentimes burninge, the good, and well
disposed complexion of that part, out of the which commonly follow very
badde accidents, and vlcerations, which thereafter very difficultlye will be
cured, yea also some times a Gangraena.

Notwithstanding although the Chyrurgians novveadayes, are boulde enoughe in
the application of actual Cauteryes, novvithstandinge most commo^lye they use
the potentialle consideringe the fear, and affrightednes, which the Patientes
conceave therofe, so that the actual Cauteryes are almost therthroughe
relapsede into oblivione: It is right true, Velvet Cauteryes.
that the Potentiall Cauteryes which now adays we use are indeed of
velvet, and very excellent, and where of I never as yet knevve any badde
accident to follow, through the long use vvherof, we have learned the
certayntye how to make them.

We must note, that in the Potentiall Cauteryes, or Ruptoryes, we add
nothing, which has any venoumouse nature or qvallitye: Because they,
considering their virtues, are through our natural calliditye compelled to do
their operation, which by little, and little suscitateth, the redormitinge,
and soporiferouse forces thereof, so that it is not possible, but that of
necessitye, this venoumouse nature, must imprint some parcel of her
venoumousnes in that part, if so be at the least there be any venoumousnes
mixed therewith: wherefore most commonly one this sort we praepare it, that
immediatlye it might shevve forth his operatione.

We make now adays Cauteryes in form of Trociskes, of diverse ki^des of
Ashes, Saultes, The matter of the potentiall Cauteries which now adays are
in use.
and limes. The ashes are made of Oacke^ vvood, of Figgetreevvoode, of
VineBranches, of Beanestravve, of Cabbage stalks, and of Titimallo: The
saultes are Alcali, Salpeter, Ammoniac, Sault of glass, Vitrioll, Tartare, or
Pottashes, vvherof we, either of any parts of the same make lie, out of the
which we extracte a Corrosive sault, which may be made strong, debile, or
extreme strong, and acute, according with all that which comes in the
foresayed lie.

Mr. Pare.
Amongst all Cauteryes which are made that is one of the best, which Mr. Pare,
calls the Cauterye of Velvet, when it is only sodden, and made, as it
reqvireth to be done: notwithstanding it seemed convenient unto me, here to
discribe certain other Cauteryes, vvherof I my self have seen diverse good
operations. Receipte, of the Velvet Cauterye
Take sault of glass, Potashes, vnflist lime, of each a povvnde, ashes which
are burned of the inveterate sides of a vvynepipe, two povvnde: Put all these
together in a great earthen pott, and infuse thereon 18, or 20, povvnd of clear
water, and let it so stand soackinge 8. or 10 days, or as long, till one
your tunge you feel, the lie to be very sharp, and tarte, or until that
there may drive an egg thereon, with a stick daily stirringe of the same, and
then we must let it to clarifye, and sincke, vvherof you must defuse the
uppermost thereof, and either straygne it through a thick close cloute, or else
through a Felt, without stirringe of the bottom or foeces thereof, of which
aeqvall part, you must make Trociskes, as here after we will demonstrate.

An other Cauterye, of the disceased Monsr. Cheval, Chyrurgiane.
Of Monsr Cheval.
Take sault of glass half a povvnd, Sal gemmae six ovvnces, Sublimate which
is smally perfricated, half an ovvnce, Ashes of Vinebranches half a povvnde,
10 povvnde of common water, let all this stand and soacke, as is above said,
and thereof make trociskes, addinge in the end thereunto two dragmes of Opiu^,
which is liqvefacted in Aqvavitae.

An other of Monsr. Rasse Desneux.
An other of Rasse desneux.
Take two povvnde of potashes, Saul^ ^f glass and Sal alcali, of each half a
povvnd^ (...) povvnde of common water, and heerof make a Lixivye, as is above
rehearsed, and also make thereof Trociskes,

An other of Mr. Iaqves de Vile neufve, a great practisioner at Mompeliers, as
I have in the same cittye seen him make.
An other of Iaqves de Villeneufve.
Take Sopemakers lie two pound, Vitriol three ovvnces, Sublimate one ovvnce,
make heerof Trociskes addinge in the end thereunto two dragmes of Opium.

An other of Monsr. de Iovine.
We may also make good Lixivye, only of Oacke^ ashes, or of Ashes of
Vinebranches, when as the same is well sodde^, with potashes, and of
Beanestravve, addinge thereunto a little vnslissed lime, vvherof we may make
very excellent good Cauteryes.

An other which qvicklye can be made.
We may in one day make very good Cauteries taking thereto a povvnde of
vnslissed lime, half a povvnde of Potashes, An other which with all
expeditio^ can be made.
Sal alcali pulverizated very small, four ovvnces, commone ashes of wood
two povvnde, infuse here in 15 povvnde of common water, let it stand and
soacke three or four hovvres, and then sees it a little, if you take it to be
convenient, and then let it stand and purifye, or sincke, and then let is
straygne through a Felt, and heerof you may make good Cauteryes.

Allthoughe that we have all these foresayed things in a readiness, An
observatione in seethinge of the saulte to the Cauterye.
thereof to make a lie or lixivye, unless that you ebulliate your sault, very
short, and dry, it will as then have noe great forces, and will qvicklye be
liqvefacted, and again dissolved. Therefore to sees a right your lie you shall
infuse it in a Basen, and let her there seethe, and ebulliat, or evaporate,
till such time as she be very thick, like unto honye, mix, and stir it
well together, with an iron Spatula, and then the foresayed sault, will
sometimes present diverse colors, as blevve, and by little and little, will
grow thicker, yet not vvithstandinge, we must yet make greater fire
thervnder, Liqvefactinge fire
with violente flames, as if it vvear a liqvefacti^ge fire, because the
foresayed sault might be melted and liqvefacted, as Butter, and changed into
water, of the which you must take a little on your Spatula, and lay it on a
stone, and if so be it immediately vvex hard, it is the^ a sign that it is
sufficientlye sodden: For if so be as then you keep it longer one the fire it
will as then burn, and again be changed into ashes, as being needful that
there be some humiditye thereby to keep it in his wonted thicknes: which
being done, you must then remove your Basen from the fire, and with the
Spatula, take out the sault, or your Cauterye therout, vvhilest as yet it be
hott, least that it cleave therone to hard, vvherof yon must then make great
or little Trociskes, which immediately you must put, into diverse little glasses
violles, least that through the air they chance to be altered, and changed,
and stop the same very close, How we must praeserve the cauteryes
and use the^ whensoever it shall please you.

And to praevent, that the Escara, of the cauteryes, or ruptoryes, be not to
hard, a certain friend of mine for certayntye imparted unto me, that in the
end of the ebullitione of your lixivye, when she is about the thicknes of
honey, we infuse thereunto a little Aquavitae, or spanishe wine, or else any
other strong wine, as Malmasye. And to make them so, that they should not
cause any great pain, we must as the^ add unto it a little Opium, which is
liqvefacted in Aquavitae, but I never tried it.

The manner how we ought to apply these Cauteryes. Chap. 4.
Now therefore condecentlye to apply all cauteryes as well actual, Whereon
we ought to consider in the application of the Cauteryes.
as Potentiall, without expectinge therein any reproach, we must first of all
consider, one those, which are able to tolerate them: In what places they
may be best set, and applied: and one what manner we may apply them: for
commonly, the withered, and lean persons, can not tolerate them, unless it
wear one the head, because their bodies, are nothing else then Membranes,
Veins, and Synnues, vvherthrough so^times great pain might be caused, or any
vayn, or Artery might chance to be through corroded, one al which things we
must note, when as we must apply any Cauteryes: we must also consider, one
the nature of the Patient: Diverse considerations.
for a strong gross body as a Laborers, or country clovvne, may far more
easyer tolerate, and suffer a Cauterye, then a tender delicate body, or of a
woman: nether can any obdurate part, as is the skin of the head, so
easylye be corroded through, as any other soft or tender part, wherefore we
must houlde the Cauterye longer one the one place, then one the other. A little
actual Cautery, or a little parcel of a pote^tiall Cautery, vvil work as
forciblye, one a tender, and soft body, as a great cauterye would do, one a
strong gross, and obdurate body.

If so be, it be a replete, and corpule^t body, or an vnhealthsame body, we
must then first of al Phlebotomize, or purge the same, because in the
cauterized parts there chance not to come, any concursione of humors. When
we desire to apply any Cauteryes, or make any Fontanelles, we must consider
that we apply them not one any synnuishe part, nether on the ends, or
beginninges, of any muscles, nether any great Vain, Arterye, or Synnue.

Places whereon we apply the Cauteryes.
We apply them most commonly on the Head, one the Arms, and one the legs,
and betvvixte all corners of the head, for the curinge of diverse disseases,
which here before we have recited, the aunciente Chyrurgia^s have made
their choice of that place, where the Sagittalle suture, joins and unites
her self with the Coronalle, which place is like unto a threfould way of
the head: the which plase because we should not miss of the same, is
shevved unto us, of Albucasis: To wit, that we cause the Patient, to put
forth the one of his hands, How we shall find in the head the place
whereon we must apply the Cauterye.
and lay the end thereof, (which is the vvriste, or be^dinge of the hand) one
the original, and beginning of his Nose, betvveene both his Eyes, and the^
stretch forth his middlemost, or longest finger, toward the crown, or
superior part of his head, and one that place where as the foresayed finger
shall have his endi^g, there we must apply the Cautery, because that there is
the place where the sagitall suture unites her self with the Coronall
suture: and if so be through the application of this cauterye, we desire to
do any vtilitye, and profit, we must the^ suffer the same to penetrate unto
the bone: for by this means the bone being denudated, it will exfoliate, and
peele, through the which, the apertione continues the longer open.

Wherefore, diverse, after they have applied the pote^ciall cautery, and the
next day follovvinge have cut of the Escara, do apply thereon an actual
cautery, without any danger, as oftentimes I have seen to be done of Mr.
Pare.

We may apply also cauteryes, of corrosives, in the posterior parts of the
Head, in the end of the suture lambdoide, behind under the Ear, therthroughe
to avoyde the muscle Crotaphite: To the surer findinge of the which place
therefore, we must cause the patiente to open, and shut his mouth, and so to
feel the motion of the said muscle. Monsr. Martel chosen, and ordinarye
Chyrurgian to the king, which was an expert man, he applied cauteryes
behind the Ears, in the co^cavity which is situated behind the little
flappe of the Ear, called Fibra, Cauterye in the Fibra.
and that against all inveterate disseases of the Eyes, vvherof he certifyed
me, to have always had ominouse and happy success, we allsoe sometimes
apply the Cauteryes in the Neck, in the hollovvnes, or concavousnes thereof,
but we must consider that they do not penetrate to deep least that we
chance to adust, or corrode, the eight small musckles, of the Head, which
are in this place situated, which might cause daungerouse accidents, as I
oftentimes have known to chance.

The most commonest now in use, Means how fittlye to apply the Cauterye on
the Arm.
is to apply the Cauteryes, one the arms, where most curiouslye, and with
great care we must make electione of the place: the most fittest place is in
the midst of the arm, toward the inner side thereof, right betvvee^ the
brachialle musckle, and the musckle Biceps close to the side of the head
vain. And convenientlye to make choice of this place, we must lay the first
finger one that place, stiffelye crushinge the same, and with the other hand,
foulde and shutt the elbovve, and again strech him out, and also lift up the
Arm, because through this motione of the Arm we might perceave, whether
there be noe synnue or Tendone situated thervnder, to wit under your finger,
and whether you find in that place noe concavity, or interstitiu^ of muscles,
which is very fit, for a Pease or little pellet to be therine, to keep
open, and apert the foresayed Cauterye: havinge now with your finger fovvnde
out the most fittest place we must there apply the Cauterye. Means how to
apply the cauteryes convenientlye on the leg.
And touching the same which we desire to apply one the legs, the most
co^venie^test place there unto is two, or three fingers breadth belovve the
knees, where we are used to tie our garters, whether it be internallye, or
externallye one the leg: But those that are much used to ride on horseback,
and also to cause better abscessione of humors, vvherthrough the Sciatica is
caused, for the^ it is better to apply them in the external parts of the
legs, in like sort also for women.

Admonitione in the applycation of the actual Cauteryes.
Havinge therefore well, and dilligentlye considered on the fittest places, and
those which are also the surest, you must the^ first race away the hair, if
at the least there be any. Which being finished, we must then situate the
Patient on a convenient place, being held of some other person, if so be it
be needful, and the^ you shall take your Cautery, which must be proportioned,
and fashoned according also unto that part which you intend to cauterise,
and must be glovvinge, and redd hott, or at the least as hott as is required,
because your operatione may at one time be finished, if it by any means be
possible, which according as shall be required, you must imprint the same
deep, or shallovve in that part, consideringe, and taking heed, that in noe
sort you chance to hurt the circumiacent, or finitimate part thereunto, to
the praeventing vvherof, there are invented, and found out diverse defensions
for the foresayed Cautery, as certain pipes, and little cases being composed,
and made of Iron, least that we should chance to combure, the finitimate,
and approximate parts, whether it wear through the fault of the patient,
or else through temerousnes, and timorousnes of the Chyrurgian, as in other
places we more at large have spoken of, and also thereby have placed the
discriptione of the foresayed Cauteryes.

For the reiterated Cauteryes.
Being therefore necessary, oftentimes to reiterate the Cauterye, as in any
great Gangraena, or in any Carry of legs, we must then cover, the
approximate places thereunto vvher we intend to Cauterize, with Compresses,
being madefyed in Plantine-vvater, or any other humiditye, yea and also
vestite the edges of the vlcerationes, with plasters of Infrigidans Galeni, or
else with some linen cloutes, being madefyed, and dipped in any distilled
Aquosityes, or waters.

Now being sufficientlye Cauterized, we must then by all means indevoure to
qualifye and ease the pain, and doloure thereof, and to cause the Escara to
separate: To ease the pain, and Separate the Escara.
which must be effected through any vvarme, and moist remedies, which is
aequallye proportioned with our humiditye, and calidity, because through the
humiditye, or moyster thereof it may soacke through the Escara, and also the
finitimate parts thereof, which are obdurated, and dry, and because through
the caliditye thereof, it might suscitate, and dravve unto him, the naturalle
caliditye, out of the internal parts of the body into the external parts of
the same, and by this means expel that from him which is mortifyed and
combured. Amongst all remedies there is none better, the^ that which is made
of Oil of Eggs, of insulsed, and fresh Butter, and of Venetiane
Terebebentine, addi^g in the end thereunto a little poulder of Ireas,
Aristolochiae, and a little Beanemeale, vvherthroughe also all the purulente
matter, which hangs therone as lime, and an Escara is purifyed. Some use a
Digestive made of yolckes of Eggs, of oil of Roses, and of Terebi^tine: But
that is not so necessary, as the formest, because it does not so califye,
coagulating as the yolcke of an Egg is wonted to do, and also immediatlye
waxes dry, and exsiccated.

The potentiall Cauterye, How we must apply the potential Cauterye
which makes an Escara, or scabbe, being as it wear a Vicarius, of the
actvall, is in this manner follovvinge applied. We must first of all make a
plaster, of Diacalcitheos, or some such like, as great as a large piece of
twelve pence, in the midst vvher of we must cut a little hole, as great as
the nail of ones little finger, or a little greater, according to the bigness
as we desire to have the apertione: and if you desire to have the apertion
somvvhat long you must then also make the hole in the plaster somvvhat long,
and then lay the same on that place which we desire to open: And in the hole
of the foresayed plaster, vvherthroughe we perceave the skinn denudated, lay
your potenciall Cauterye, or Corrosive, whether it be great, or small
according as you desire to make the apertion great, or little deep, or
shallovv: Which being done, we must lay thero^, a small dubbled clovte,
which must be so^vvhat greater the^ the Cautery, The cauterye makes a far
greater Escara then the hole of the Plaster.
therewith to cover the same, and thereon as yet an other plaster, which must
be a little broader then the first, and one this plaster an other co^presse,
which must be of two fingers breadthe and again thereon an other which must
be yet greather, and then tyinge the same with a ligature, acordi^g as the
part shall the^ be requiring.

The Cauterye therefore having done his operation, which most commonly in the
space of two hovvres is finished, if so be the said cauterye be strong, and
violent enoughe, we must as then take it of: and presently to cause the Escara
to separate, we must make a crossevvise in scisione therein: Other suffer her,
of her self to separate, without inscisioue: Some inscide her rovvnde, and
then lift her up, and so cut her loose from under. But we desiringe through
the application of a Cauterye, to make an apertio^, for the evacuating of any
matter, we must not only the^ inscide the foresayed Escara, but also pearce
somvvhat deeper therein, until such time as we have sovvnded the matter, to
give her passage.

Diverse means to keep, open a Fontanel, which through a potentiall cauterye
is made.
If so be the Cauterye be applied to make a fo^tanelle, we must then cause the
Escara through the said remedves to separate, and keep open the hole, or the
foresayed vlceratio^, as great as the rotunditye of a bullet: to the
effectuatinge of which, some use a great Pease, which through the great
humiditye vvhervvith she is soacked svvelleth as thick and as big again, as
she was before, by the which means we may keep open the apertione, as long
as pleases us: others make little pellets of elder pithe, of Rhabarber, of
Agarico, of the black neesinge root, of a Gallenut, of Ge^tian, and some of
goulde, or of sylver being hollovve, and concavoyse, but the most convenient,
and fittest which I have experime^ted, are made of white wax, amongst the
which is mixed, verdegriece, Cantharides, hermodactilles, and a little
auripigment, adding thereunto a little pirosin. This kind of little Balls,
wear invented of Monsr. Hubert, Chyrurgiane to the king, one of the most
expert Chyrurgians of our times.

What continuance we may keep open the vlceration.
Touching the time, of keepinge open these Fo^tanelles: Celsus teaches us, in
his fourth boocke and 22. Chap. that it is oftentimes necessary for the
Chyrurgiane, to exvlcerate the parts of the body, with a glovvinge Cautery
being, as it wear, an aeternall prohibitione, that we should not suffer
such vlceratio^s so quicklye to close again, as of themselves they vvoulde, but
that we must sustayn and keep them apert and open, till such time as the
dissease, which through this apertione we intend to cure, be vvholye
finished, and cured.

Of the transforation, or seton, and of the manner how we ought to apply it.
Chap. 5.
Seto^ Properlye taken.
THe transforation, or the Seton, may in two sorts be understood, properlye,
and improperly, we simplely understand it, considering the threde which we
dravve clean through the skin, with the needle, which threde in ancient
time, was made of, course hair, as of horsehayre, or any other such like,
which of the latinistes is called Seta: But we now a days make our threde
of silcke, of Cotton, Seto^ improperlee understood.
or of Course yarne. Improperly, we understand by the Seto^, a logestretchinge
vlceration, in any external part of the body, which is clean thrust
through the dubble skin, and that through agilitye, and dexteritye with a
glovvinge Cauterye.

We apply especially the transforatio^, In what parts we ought to apply
the Seton.
or the Seton, in three parts of the body: to wit behind clean through the
Neck, although some to follovv, the direct concurrence of the fibers, apply
the same in the length therofe: In the Navle, and in the Scrotum, when as it
is full of matter, and ventosity, as it oftentimes is wont to happen in the
Dropsye.

This transforatione, is used, either for any regressione of humors, or for an
evacuation, The use of the Seton.
or expulsione of the same: For we applyinge the foresayed transforatione
behind in the neck, it then revelleth, and dravve the back again those
humors which concur toward the Eyes with those allsoe which run
tovvarde the Mouth, and the Breast, and retayneth allsoe those humors, which
descend, and sinck, behind in the Backebone, and in the Hippes: He being
drawn through the Navle, or Scrotum, he then draws there through all the
Aquositye, and ventositye which is therein contained.

It is now adays also applied on two manner of vvayes, namelye with
Pinsers, Two sorts of applycation of the transforation.
and with an actual Cauterye, or through the Needle only. The transforation
which only is laid in the Neck, must be applied betwixt the second and
the third Vertebram. Which conveniently to effect, we must cause the patient
to sit on a little stool, and least that the transforatione should co^praehend
more one the one side then one the other we must denotate a line with Inck in
the middle of his neck, or else on the same part vvher we will apply the
tranforatio^, How we ought to apply the transforation behind through the
neck.
causing the patie^t to hold his head on high, and leene backevvardes over,
because thereby, the skin might be the looser, and stretch the farther
commanding then one of the servantes, or standers by, that with one of his
hands he take hold one the skinn, close by the hair, as deep as he ca^,
either according the length, or thvvarte over the skinn, follovving the line
which theri^ is made, lifti^g the same in the middle on high, which the^ the
Chyrurgian, with his left hand shall take hold one in the midst of the
same, and elevate it, because that he with his right hand, and with a
round, and well cuttinge threded needle which must be threded with a thick
threde, may thrust clean through the same, the foresayed thread being in this
sort thrust therthroughe we must cut him of close to the Needle. The
transforation with an actual Cautery.
But if rather you desired, to effect the foresayed transforatione with a
hott Iron, the skin being lift up on both sides, through some servant, or
through the Chyrurgiane with his Pinsers, which he must houlde fast in his
left hand, dilligentlye consideringe least he take houlde therewith of any
Muscles of the Neck, which are situated under the foresayed skin, as to
that purpose, and intent he must cause the Patient to bend his neck, hold
his head up, or on high, and right by this means to know, whether any of
the foresayed, Muscles are compraehended of the Pinsers or not. Which being
done the Chyrurgyane must nipe, and shut close together the foresayed pinsers
thereon applied, thereby to benumme and dissipate the senses and feeli^g which
through the hott iron might be caused, and as the^ with a tria^gled glovving
cautery thrust through the hole of the pinsers and so through the elevated
skin also: The which foresayed skin being in this sort perforated, and
immediatlye again being drawn therout, without suffering the skinn to fall,
we must thrust through the perforatione, a needle with a thick dubble
threede which threde must be soacked in the remedies above rehearsed for the
Cauteryes, or else at the least being made fatt in some Digestive, and then the
said threde being dissected, and cut of, we must suffer him to remain
therein, as is above rehearsed, and apply therone a Plaster of Refrigerans
Galeni, for the first or second day, and then a Plaster of Betonica.

This foresayed threde, or Seton, we must suffer it to continue therein, as
long as it shall be needful, as we have said of the Fontanelles.

As concerning the transforation, A transforation applied in the Scrotum.
which in the navle, or in the Scrotu^ may be applied it vvil be sufficient
when we take the Scrotum, and the extremest end of the navle, and so
perforate the skinn being doubled, with a reasonable great or gross needle,
which must be threded with a vvoollen, cotton, or silcke thread, and applyinge
therone, the self same remedies, of the which we have in the transforatione
of the neck rehearsed.

THE NINTHE TREATISE OF THE OPERATIone of Chyrurgerye, wherein is discoursede
and handelede of the Ligatures, or vvindinges, and circumvolutions, and of the
convenience or the situation of the parts, Containing six Chapiters.
What the Ligamentes, or Circumvolutiones are, their matter, qualitye, form,
and quantitye. Chapit. 1. The Kinds, and differences of the Ligamentes. Chap.
2. Rules, and general instructions, vvherone we must consider, in all
circumvolutiones, and Ligamentes. Chap. 3. How we ought to tie the Ligament,
and again make loose the same. Chap. 4. How we must ligate, and tie, the
broken Arms, Legs, and Hippes. Chap. 5. Of the placinge, and situatione of
those parts, one the which the operatione, is set one work. and employed.
Chap. 6.
What the Ligamentes or Circumvolutiones are their matter, quallitye, form,
and quantitye. Chap. 1.
HAvinge therefore spoken, and treaated of the combinationes, and sutures,
vvherthrough al vvou^des, and divisione, or separation of the whole is
inserted and combined together again, and the lips or edges of the foresayed
wounds are kept close together and shutt, we vvil now treacte, and handle
of the Ligamentes, or bindinges, of the vvounded parts vvherin we ought to
consider, what their matter, their qualitye, form, quantitye, and
differences are, What Ligamentes are.
how we ought to vvind, and again vnvvinde the same.

The vvindinge therefore, or dressinge of a wound is nothing else, then a
vvindinge about, or circumvolution, of the Ligatures, which is as much to
say, with a broad and long ligame^t, vvhervvith not only, the vvounded
part, butt allsoe the fin itimate, and circumiacent parts, are involved, and
circumvestede by this means to restore them to their Former estate, and
natural being.

Matter of the Ligamentes.
Those Ligame^tes according to the affirmations of ancient Chyrurgia^s, are of
diverse matter, as of Linen, vvoolle, or Lether: the linen Ligamentes are the
most commonest of all the other, which at that time they used, when as they
vvoulde stifflye compresse, and bring close together any part: they used
vvoollen rovvlers, in the fractures with wounds, gentlye in that sort to
retain together the broken bones, and to cause noe pain, or inflammatione at
all. Hippocrates used the Ligamentes of lether, Hippocrates.
in the fractures of the Nose, and the nethermost chavv bone: But of what
matter soever we make the^ they must not be too much worn out, because that
they may be strong enough, to be drawn close together, and stretche stifflye
out: Farther more they must be even and smoothe, nether must they have any
silvages, nether must it have any hard seames, and must be cut aright the
threde, according the length of the linen, and not co^tradictorily: because
they may tie smoothe and evenlye, without the one side being hardre tied then
the other, as oftentimes it chances, when the rovvler is cut
contradictorryelye: It is right true, that the ligature vvhervvithe after
Phlebotomye we tie the arm, yields it self better being so cut, but it
chances heerin, because in that place it yields it self better for the
bending of the arm.

Touching their qvallity, they must be clean and white, least that through
their impuritye they be a hinderance, or interruption unto the part, and
because by that means they may the better receave the humidityes, as Oxicrate,
and wine, or any such like, vvherin we chance to madifye, and vvett them.
They must also be fine and light because through their ponderousnes, they do
not overburthen the part, suscitate, and provoke pain, and cause
infla^mation. Thirdly they must be soft, and flexible because through the
obduratnes thereof, they might chance to hurt that part. Fourthlye, of
li^nen, which must be very white, and not to closely vveaved because so they are more better to be placede, and the matter, and the evaporationes might the
easier therthroughe transpire, which being therein occluded, cause
infla^matione, and itchinge.

Form and figure of the Ligamentes.
Concerning their form, and figure, we must know, that these foresaede
Ligamentes, or rovvlers, are either rovvled up, or involved, si^plelye, or
dubblelye, unto the midst of the foresayed ligature and of an aeqvalle
latitude in all places, as are those which we use in the fractures of the
Arms, Hippes, and Legs: In like sort also in the wounds, and vlcerations
of the same parts. The dubble ligament or rovvler is either of on piece of
linen, on the ends being diverselye cut, or on an other place, in other
ends, as are the ligame^ts of the Head, which are cut into four, or six
ends: And in four ends for the Scrotum: Or in the ligament, which is sowed
together, and made of diverse pieces, as are those which are used for the
flancks, for the Breasts, for the Testicles, and for the Fundament, and that
especially we desiri^ge to spare, and be chairye of the linen. And as much
as concerns their longitude, and latitud that cosisteth on the
consideratione, and judgment of the Chyrurgiane, which before hand must see
the figure, and know it, and must thereby also be able to know, the
conformatione, and sitvatione of the part, and the diversitye of the dissease:
for when as we are vrgede to make a great circumvolutione, we must then
consider on the length, and make it as long as is reqvired: co^sideringe the
breadth, we must make the^ according to the longitude, and latitude of the
dissease, The Ligame^t must be^ broader then the dissease.
so that the foresaid ligament must be greater the^ the dissease, because
with on circu^volutione do not only involve the wound but also both the
ends thereof as well on the one side as the other: for if so be the ligamente
wear small, he must the^ crushe the dissease, vvherthrough great pain, and
inflammatione might becausede.

And to speak of the qvantitye of the foresayed ligamentes, Quantitye of the
Ligame^tes.
that is nothing else then the mean, and measure which we must use and
observe either in stiffly or loosely bynding, as in respect, of the person. For
as the one man is grosser and more corpulent then the other, so there are also
disseases, vvherof the one is more paynfull then the other, wherefore we must
consider, that the ligament be nether too stiffly nor loosely tied, for all
ligatures which are too stiflye bovvnde, cause pain, and concursione of
humors, with infla^mations, yea and sometimes also a Gangraena: And those
ligamentes which are too loose, they are profitable for nothing, and cause
that the restauratede parts, which are sitvatede, move therout, as the broken
Legs and the dislocatede members, yea and also the lips of the wounds
which are insertede, and brought together through the loose ligature do
again separate the one from the other. And finallye in one word to conclude,
the mediocritye of ligatione, is a great solace, and comfort to the Patient,
as he will then with his own mouth testifye.

We must note that all ligatures must not in a vvou^d so fast be ligatede,
Wherone in Ligatione we ought to consider.
as in a Fracture and less in a Fracture which is without a wound, then in
a simple wound: We must also harder, and more violenter bind and ligate on
the vulneratede part, and one the fracture, the^ on any of the approximate,
and next adioyni^g parts, thereby to repel, and drive back again the humors,
which do thereon sinck and also crushe out, those which are suncke into the
finitimate parts, which is least shut: for in so doing, we keep those
parts occludede, and liberate, and free from all inflammations. Farther more
in the end of the ligatione we espy a tender tumefactione, out of which we
may judge that the part is reasonablye shut: if so be the tumor be hard,
and obduratede, and blackishe, it is then a sign that the part is too stiflye
tied. And vvheras at all we perceave any tumefaction, it is a sign that the
ligament is too looselye tyede.

Of the kinds, and differences of the ligamentes. Chap. 2.
Two sorts of ligaments in general.
HIppocrates gennerally has made two sorts of Ligame^ts: vvher of the first
is, that which of it self, and by his virtues did prosper, First kind of
ligature.
and opitulate the curinge of the disseases, and without the which they can
not be cured because that with out the same, the part can not be contaynede in
his statione, or form, vvherin she must be contained, to be cured, and to be
praevented that there happen noe fluxione unto the part, nether the matter
being therein congregatede, without the sayede ligature could not be driven,
and expellede therout. As we may note on the ligamentes, which in the
wounds of the Head we use, which also in all concavouse vlcerations we
use, in Fractures, in dislocatio^s, recurvatione of Ioynctes, in the
separatinge of those parts, which against nature lie the one above the other,
in the reductione of the separatede parts, in the apertione of the parts,
which are to closelye occludede, and shut and against the mind of the
Chyrurgiane, will combine themselves together.

The second sort of Ligament.
The second ligament, is that which is ordaynede, not only because of it
self it is commodiouse, and profitable, but Per accidens, and bye chance, and
it is but only used, to contain, and keep the remedies, and compresses, on
the disseasede part, as on a great, and dolorouse inflammatione, on a great
Apostematione, or on any other dolorouse part.

Redivisio^ of the first kind of Ligature.
And touching the ligature which of it self is profitable, and commodiouse,
there of there are two kinds, which of the use, vvher unto they are ordaynede,
are taken: which is either to co^tayne the parts as close in their natural
being because therthroughe they may be combinede and vnitede, wherefore this
ligatione is called, the agglutinative, or incarnative ligatione: Or else to
praevente, the fluxione which might chance to come to that part, and expel
the same therout, which is molestiouse, and troublesome unto him, wherefore he
is called the expulsive, or repellinge ligature.

The incarnative or conglutinating ligation, Icarnative Ligament.
is commonly used in this form on the vvounds. To wit, that we roll up the
rovvler, or ligature on both his ends, unto the midst thereof, vvherof in
each hand we must take the one end being rovvled up: laying that part of
the ligame^t which is not rovvled up, on the other side of the wound,
reducinge both the ends of the ligatione, which we have in our hands above
on the wound, that there through, we might adioyne, and bring together, the
separated parts, and lips of the wound, crossinge the foresayed ligature,
in form of a Burgundiane cross, or in form as in the margin is set down
unto you: Then we must reduce both the ends to the part, bringinge one end,
toward the superior part of the membre, because thereby the fluxione may be
praevented, and the other end, on the inferior part, that the blood
therthrough, which is suncke, and descended into that part, might be
depressed, and crushed out: and the fore said Ligature must be of such a
breadthe, that when as he is rovvled up, and applied on the vvounded part,
may not only compraehende the wound but also both the ends, of the same.

If so be the vvou^de wear ample, and great, and the ligature, considering
his latitude, Nota.
could not be accommodated, we must as then compraehende but the one half of
the wound, and the other half thereafter.

Such a Ligament therefore must be reasonable closelye wound, but always a
little stiffer one the vvounded part, Hippocrates.
as Hippocrates wills us to do, yea also, in the wounds with Fracture,
because there through might be expressed, and crushed out, the blood, which
in that part is suncke, least that there should happen any inflammatione
thereunto, and then an Apostematione.

The expulsive, or repellinge ligamente, Expulsive Ligame^t.
is very much used in Fistles, and in concavouse vlcerations, therewith to
expel the matter, which is discending to the grovvnde or bottom of the same,
and which through the long retentione, internallye corrodeth that part.
Admonitione.
This ligature is also very commoeiouse in the Varices or bursten veins, and
in tumefacted Legs, but we may not use it in Fistles, nor in any concavouse
vlcerationes, unless first of all they be putrifyede, and their callositye
taken therout, nether in inflammationes:

This ligamente is imposed, How we may make the expulsive ligament.
with the one end being revolvede, and rovvled up, begi^ning with the sovvnde
part, which is sitvated close to the bottom of the Sinus, where he must be
somvvhat more drawn together, and shutt, and then is reduced again tovvard
the vvounded part, and tovvarde the mouth, or apertion of the concavitye,
with out bindinge the same to stiff, and consideratione, of the inferior
part.

As if the Sinus be in the leg, and the bottom of the same under the Knees,
and is also higher, and has his issu in the crassitude of the calfe, we must
them begin to bind, one the Knees, and finishe in the inferiore parts
thereof. Contrarilye if so be the inferior part of the Leg, and the issue
thereof be by the Knees, we must the^ beginn the ligatio^ by the foot, and end
the same close to the Knees. But if we desire to use this Ligature in great
Arms, and great Legs, which are Varicouse, we must then begin from
below the leg, or Arm, vpvvardes, which is the most farthest, from the
original of the Veins and supernallye end the same, to wit, about the
Heart, and the Liver, which are the originalls of all Veins, and Arteryes,
heerby to repel the humors which are in that part, and to praevent that
there concur noe more unto that place.

As far forth therefore, as if that part be rugged, and vnsmoothe, as is that
Leg, which is far more thicker in the Calfe thereof, then in the lovvermost
parts thereof, we must the^ from palm, to Palmebreadthe, a little more the^
half through cut the same, and fovvlde both sides co^tradictorilye the one to
the other, and so looslye sovve the same, by which means the said Ligament,
is made to be recurvated, and croockedlye wound, like a Bow. Having
therefore stifflye rovvled op this foresayed ligature, or rovvler, An attractive
Ligature.
we may therewith as smoothlye vvind and involve a Leg, without making,
therein any inaeqvalitye, or furrovves causing that side which was cut of,
and the^ again sowed, aeqvallye to agree with the thi^nest part: and the
whole part which is the longest, to agree with the greatest part. Above
these two foresayed Kinds, and differences of Ligamentes, we may as yet add
thereunto a third Kind: The which we call an attractive Ligame^t, which we
may use when we desire to retracte, any blood, nourishment, or any other
vital Spirits into that part, the which, the part of it self can not
dravve, and attracte unto it, because her attractive forces are debilitated,
and very much feebled.

The second kind of Ligament above rehearsed.
We will somvvhat also speak of that ligament, which of it self is for noe
use profitable but accidentallye cures, through his continuance of the
remedies, which are applied unto the dissease, wherefore we may call it the
retentive Ligament: vvherin we must consider three especial things. First in
what disseases it is commodious: Secondly on how many fashones, it may be
composed, and made: Thirdly, Ligame^t for the dissease.
and lastelye, how we ought to use the same.

Touching the first, we either use the same, consideringe the part, or the
Dissease, which can tolerate noe other: Consideringe the Dissease, as any
wound, or vlceratione, accompanied and associated, with any great pain, or
inflammatione, or when we disire an Apostematione to be matured: Consideringe
the part, as when a wound is in the Head, in the Neck, in the Bellye, or
in the Testicles, which parts ca^ not indur to be stiffly tied, or bovvnd,
and therefore need noe ligatione, but only to retain the remedies therone,
because that the other stiff ligatures, bring with them great discommoditye.

Concerning the second poyncte: Ligame^t for the part.
The retentive Ligame^t, must have two, three, or four ends, according to
the form, and situatione of the part which we vvoulde dress. Touching the
third poyncte, that must be begun in the dissease, and ended on the other
side of the same.

Of the Rules, and general Instructions, whereon we must consider, in all
Rowles, and Ligatures Chap. 3.
Therefore convenientlye, Two things to be considered, when as decentlye we
desire to vvinde any part.
and decentlye to vvinde, or involve any part, or member, we must note, and
consider on two especial things, vvherof the first is, the vvounded part,
which we will vvinde: the second is the aegritude, or dissease. Touching
therefore the disseased part, we take this for a general Rule, that she must
be tied, and that in such a form, and figure, as we vvil have her to
continue, and lie: For if so be we vvind a foulded, and curvated part,
which thereafter must be situated right, and extented, there will as then
conseqventlye ensue such or the like Accidents: to wit, that the Ligature
will dissolve, and loosen, that there will be caused great pain, and doloure in
the part, because the Muscles, Veins, Arteryes and Synnues, and the very
bones also have an other situatione, being erected, and extended, then when
as they are recurved, and croocked.

As in example: If so be a broken Leg, Example.
being recurved, and so on that manner be circumligated, and wound which
ought otherwise to be tied, being stretched and extended right forth,
without doubt all the Ligature will go loose, when as we desire to
extend the same, out of the which will follow great pain, because the
brocke^ Bones, Veins, Arteryes, Synnues, and Muscles, do not as the^ keep
the same place, as they have done, the part being bovvnde, and tied.

Contrarilye, we desiringe to dress a fracture in an Arm, he must then be
shutt, and foulded together, for if so be we dress him being extended,
when as thereafter he shall be recurved and bended, then the Bones in therre
lyinge, with the other parts, be turned into some other fashone,
vvherthroughe the Ligature, vvil in one place be loosened, and in another
spa^ned, which also suscitateth pain in that part: For it must necessarilye
follow, that when as a tied part be changed, and then either shutt and
bended, or extended, the^ there are some of the Muscles extended, and crushed,
as in the rotunditye, in the abbreviatione, and others vveackened, and united:
And when they are exrected, they must needs then be crushed through the
Ligature, out of the which must necessarily follow intolerable pain,
because of the Compresse, which in ferreth with it in that part great
fluxiones, and other accidents, and mischaunces.

The dissease.
Now for as much as concerns the dissease, we must circumligate, and involve
an Arm or a broken Leg with a wound, on an other manner, and fashon, then
a Fracture with out vvou^de: and on an other fashon a Leg, which has but a
simple Vlceratione, then a Leg, which has a concavouse, or Fistulouse
vlceratione: And a Ioyncte which is full of pain, must one an other manner be
tied, then that vvherin is noe pain.

Dece^tlye to vvind.
Therefore co^venientlye, and decentlye to ligate or vvinde, the Ligature must be
right, and closely rovvled up, because we may houlde him the faster, and
stedyer in the hand, without stirring, or glidinge this way or that way,
as he might chance to do the same not being stiffly rovvled up, because that
through his hardenes he may the better be handled, and conduced, so that all
ligationes, far co^venienter, and more dece^t and to more contentment of the
Patient, and the circumstantes, or standers by may be effected, then other
wise, when as the Ligature is laid dubble, croocked, curved, and uneven.

How we ought to tie the Ligament and again make loose the same. Chap. 4.
Wherone we ought to, consider in the fasteninge of the ligature.
THe Chyrurgiane must consider, and note, that there be no seames knottes, or
any vnevennes, in the Ligament, which might chance to crushe the vvound: and
the Ligatione also being finished, consideringe that the end of the Ligature,
be not fastened, one the wound, nether one any place vvher there is any
pain, for unless with a pin, we fasten it, or else with a Needle sovve it,
it always infers pain with it: wherefore we must faste^ the said
Ligature, either higher, or lovver, or one the side of the same, one the end of
the rovvler, and one such a place of the Ligature, vvherone the Patient does
not lie, as behind one the Head, in the Temples of the Head, one the Back,
and on the Buttockes, nether one the Flanckes, or Armepittes,

And concerning the dissolutione, or vntyinge, therine we must consider two
things: Two things vvherone we must consider in the dressinge of a wound
Namelye one the time, when the Patient must be dressed, and one the
co^venience of doing the same: and heerin disagreethe the practice of the
aunciente Chyrurgianes, from us: For touching the dressinge of wounds (
Celsus wills) that we ought not to dress the vvou^de, but in three days
once, suffering it two days* Celsus.
to continue without dressing: And then wills he us, that we dress it but
once in five days. And as touching the simple fractures, Hippocrates.
Hippocrates councelleth us, that in three days once we dress the^ But now
adays, we do not observe this man's, for we dress the Patie^t after the
first dressinge 24, hovvres, unless we feared any great fluxione of blood,
wherefore we suffered the Patient to lie longer with out dressing, to wit,
two, three, four, or five days long: It is right true, that we sometimes
make loose the ligame^t in two, or three days once, without touching of the
plaster, only to give air to the part, and to note, whether there be
nether Infla^matione, nor any other Accident come there unto: But when as the
wound is come to very great suppuratio^, and that there is much matter,
pain, or Inflammatione at hand, we as then dress the wound two, or three
times in the space of 24 hours, to wit, all eight hovveres once, if it be
possible.

And touching the simple Fractures, For simple fractures.
we keep the^ sometimes, six, or seven days undressed, unless that there
wear any Accidents, at hand, but always we tarrye as long as is
possible: for how little soever we touch a broken leg, the ends of the
bones, of the fracture are nevertheless, stirred, and dislocated, and the on
rubbed against the other, vvherthroughe is caused pain, and the combinatione,
or together healinge is hindered, because that all conglutinatione, can not be
with out continual coniunctione of the one part with the other.

The redressinge, or dressinge, How we may ge^tlelye take of the Ligament.
must be done one this manner: to wit, that we easilye make loose the band,
or rovvler, now with the one hand and then with the other looseninge of the
same, alvvayes houldinge the whole Ligament in the hand. But because most
commo^lye the first dressinge of the wound, cleaves so fast, as if with
glevve it wear thereon fastened, because of the blood and matter, which is
therone dried, and baked, we must first of all therefore, madefye, and moysten
the same with a little vvarmed wine, and therewith soacke the same because
the ligament may be taken, and revolved thereof without pain, yea or else also
in the vvindinge of, of the same coming on the wound, we might there everye
time cut it of, because in so doing, we might by peecemeale take away the
same, without in any sort hurtinge of the Patient.

How we shall dress the broken Arms, hippes, and legs. Chap. 5.
Our manner of dressinge of al broken legs may be assimilated, and compated,
with the manner of the ancient Chyrurgianes.
AL though that our common practice, of the dressinge of all broken Legs,
seems to be alienate, and to differ, from the manner of doing, of the
antique, and ancient professors, and Chyrurgia^s, it is notvvithstanding in
such sort, that we easyly can compare them together. All the ancient
physicians, and Chyrurgianes, have binne of opinion that in the Fractures we
ought to use a dubble kind of Ligament: Namelye inferiore ligamentes, which
they called Hypodesmidas, and superior ligatures, which they called
Hypodesmous: they have these names because of their situatione, because some of
them are tied, and bovvnd under and some again above. And as touching the
inferioure ligame^tes, Hippocrates makes mention of two sorts.

Two sorts of inferior, or vnderligame^tes.
VVherof the first, and the shortest, begins one the fracture, layinge
alvvayes the one end contradictorilye therone because it should not wholy lie,
on the place of the pain, which ligament must be tied round about the
fracture, and then be reduced vpvvardes, where he as the^ ends: This
ligament must closelye be wound together, because so the fluxio^, which
might chance to sincke into the disseased part, might the better be kept
therout. The second ligament, which almost, must be as long again as the
first, is also begun one the same manner, to wit, on the fracture, layinge
only therone, a turn, or two, vvinding dovvnevvardes, to crushe therout the
blood which might chance to sincke into the fracture, with circumvolutio^s,
which must be laid a little more a part the one from the other, then in the
first ligament they wear: for we must take heed of making to great
expressiones of blood, in the ends of the Arms, or legs, that without
imflammatio^ they can not receave much thereof, and the ligament being come
down, must vvinde the same vpvvardes again, to come again to that place
vvher we did beginn, because both these ligamentes might hold fast, and the
muscles be brought into their natural situation, which through the two
foremost ligationes might be brought therout.

Subdivisio^ of the second inferior ligature.
Other ancient Chyrurgianes make of this nethermost ligature, two ligationes,
vvherof the one is the surest the second for the fractures, which begins
one the broken part: having thereafter, made one, or two circumvolutiones,
then is the foresaved ligature reduced dovvnevvardes. The other which may be
the third for the fractures, must be begun, on the beginning of the part,
endinge supernally vvher the first ligatio^ is ended passing over the Fracture:
So that they impose therone three ligationes all which three we may call
inferior ligame^tes. The first which ascends from the fracture one high, as
from the middle of the leg tovvarde the knee. The second which desce^deth
from the fracture dovvnevvardes, as from the middle of the leg toward the
foot. The third, which from the extreameste part of the Ioyncte, ascends
superiorlye as from the the soul of the foot toward the knees.

But novveadayes and following our common practice, An astringent plaster on
the fracture.
which we use before these three ligamentes, we apply first of all, one the
place of the fracture an astringent Plaster, which is made of Bolus, of
flovver, or volatill meal, of vvhytes of Eggs, of Oil of Roses and of a
little Terebentine, (in stead of Cerotu^ Galeni, which the ancient
Chyrurgians used:) After the first dressing we use the Plaster of
Diacalcitheos, or of Diapalma, liquefacted in oil of Roses, with vinegar. The
ligature now being dece^tly vvou^d, because the legs, the hippes and the
Arms, are thinner belovve then above they are, we must therefore one such
slendernes apply some certain co^presses because the foresayed ioyncte may be
in all places of an aequall crassitude, and thickenes, and the splinter, which
must be made of stiff paper, of lattinn, or of any other substance, be very
evenlye, and smoothlye applied therone, and tied under the inferior ligatures,
or rovvlers.

These splinters must be three in number, which must be excavated like a
gutter, vvherof the first must be a little broader, then the other to by
applied under the fracture, and to compraehende all that, which is belovve the
fracture, and be as it wear a fundament, or foundation thereunto. The other
two one both the sides of the fracture, being somvvhat separated the one from
the other, least that in the ligatio^ they chanced to glide the one over the
other. They must also be of such a longitude, as the broken part requires.

These three foresayed splintes being thus imposed, one the inferior rovvlers,
Applycatione of the inferior Ligatures.
we must then tie the fracture that it may lie fast and steadye and the part
be contained in a good quallitye and disposione. With the first of these two
ligatures, we must beginn, at the extremest part of the membre, from under
vpvvardes. The second must beginn from above and end below: we must allsoe
note that the one of those rovvlers, must take his beginning internally in the
membre, and must proceed from the left to the right side, because they may
cross the one over the other, in such a form as in the margin you may see,
or in form of a St. Andrews Cross, because it may be involved very
closelye thereon.

It seems that Hippocrates has used noe other ligature, in the Fractures
with wound, but that he rovvled the same somvvhat loose.

Ligame^tes for shot vvou^des, with crushing of bones.
But in those fractures which wear shot, or with any other such like
instrument, or engine, be done, vvherin is great crushinge of bones, because
we should little need to handle this part, which is thus broken, and
crushed, least the acute, and sharp ossicles, or bones, and frustles, the
which in the pertractatione of the same, might chance to prick the Flo^he,
Te^dones, Synnues and the Peritoneum, we must there fore use hereunto great
Co^presses, being foulded three, or four on the other, and so sowed
together in the middle, being in two places cut through, the compresse being
of the breadth of a palm, of ones hand, or theraboute, which we revolve the
one toward the other part, as if we desired to circumligate the part.
These, or such like Compresses, we must by little and little shove under the
crushed part, or member: and the same being immu^difyed, and impure, and we
desire to lay an other thervnder, we as then sovve a clean white Compresse,
one the impured Compresse, and as then we dravv away the impure compresse
from under the Fracture and then subseqve^tly follovveth the mundifyed, and
clean compresse thervnder, in the stead of the immundifyed. I have
constituted the defiguratione, of these Compresses, here before amongst the
figures of the Instruments, in the table of the Glossocomium, which of
Hippocratis is called Ambi, on which place, and in the forsayed leaf, is
defigured unto you, a broken leg, with the Ligamentes of the same.

Of the situation, and of the constitutione or collocatione of those parts,
one the which the forsayed Operatione must be effected. Chap. 5.
NOe man is ignorant, how necessary, and requisite these operationes are, to
the resanatio^, of the disseases, vvhervvith ma^s body is daily, and
continually oppugned and opressed: and indeed, this operation should in vayn
be used, if so be that not only the whole body, but also the forsayed
disseased parts, vvhero^ we effect our Operation, wear not thereafter,
constituted and situated, and with most convenience collocated.

Therefore decentlye, and with most couvenience to collocate the same,
Vitilitye in constitution of the part.
the Patie^t must first of all lie on his bed, (if so be at the least the
magnitude, and largenes of the dissease require the same,) and that in such a
form, that the vvou^ded, or vulnerated part; may be with most ease, and
co^venie^ce collocated, as it is reqvisite, for they are not al together
situated in one fasho^, and manner: It is right true, that there are some
certain rules, as are in the ligatures, which must only be used one disseases.

First of al therefore, and generally, Three things to be considered in the
collocatio^ of a part, or membre.
to collocate and rightlye situate al vvounded parts, we must consider three
especial things: to wit, that the situation, be Soft, Smooth and High:
Soft, because a hard situatio^, sometimes might chance to disturb, and
irrequiate, not only the vulnerated part, but also the approximate parts there
unto, by the which means great pain, inflammation, and consequentlye also an
attractione, and a fluxion must necessarily follow in that part: and which
is more, the Patient is constrained not being able to tolerate the obdurate
collocatio^, to ease and yield solace to that part, by oftentimes turninge,
and revertinge of himself, which is very unprofitable for him, because that
part, requires nothing else then quietude, without being much disturbed,
and molested.

Even, and smooth, because that the vneve^, Plain, and smoothe situation.
and implanitude collocation, infers pain and recurvatio^ in the Ioyncte, to
wit, the one part resting on somvvhat, and the other part, dependinge
without restinge one any thing.

On High, because that therbye, High situatione.
al concursione of humors is praevented, which otherwise through the lovv
situatio^ of the Iovncte, might be therthervvardes drawn.

Considering this occasion, have the Chyrurgians alvvayes caused the broken or
vvounded Arm to be dependently worn one the breast and the leg to be
collocated on high, to wit so^vvhat higher then the body, the Patient lyinge
on bed, because he may nether be erected, nor sit.

Nether is it only necessary that the membre, or part be collocated softlye,
smoothly, The aperon of a vvound must all vvayes be recurvated dovvnevvardes if
it be possible.
and highlye, but it is also requisite, (if so be there be any wound, or
vlceration, which especially is fistulouse) that the apertio^ thereof, if so be
it is possible, recurvate it self dovvnevvardes, because that the matter,
might have the liberater a passage, to enter forth at, without making any
greater co^cavityes, and do not chance to ince^ce, or inflame the approximate
parts, nether to corrode them, which would bring with it diverse, and
sundry accidents: and praeposterate the resanatione of the same.

Secondarilye, The situatione of the Ioyncte must be natural, and accustomed.
the Ioyncte must be situated in such a form, and fashone, which is agreinge
with the naturalle disposione of the Ioyncte, and alienated from all pain:
which two observationes, are well agreinge the one with the other: For all
fashons which cause noe pain, that is the naturalle, and accustomed figure,
and collocatione thereof: Even as the paynefull, and vnnaccustomed figure is
against nature, so that the natural, and accustomed figure, or fasho^, is
wholy without pain: which happeninge, the Patient must a long continuance
keep his Ioyncte in that being, because so he shall feel noe, or at the
least very small pain at all which is very co^modiouse, to the resanation
of all wounds, vlceratio^s, Fractures and also for all dislocatio^s, as it is
in like sort profitable for all other disseases whatsoever,

The aunciente Chyrurgians, have called, this form of situatione, the right
and true collocatione, because all the Veins, Arteryes, Synnues, and muscles,
as then are right, nether are they extended, nether lie they recurved.

The natural situatio^ which of the ancient professors, is called the right
situation.
And although that the Arm have binn anglevvyse collocated, notvvithsta^ding
we esteem it as then to lie right, because that all the foresayed parts, are
accounted to lie right, and not extended, nether recurved, and that this
collocation of the Arm is naturalle, as here after we will more largelye
speak of.

An example of the situatio^ of any disseased part.
And by degrees to specifye, the situatione of each, and sundry part, we vvil
here discribe some of them for an example: when as there is any wound,
Apostemation, or dislocation in any Ioyncte, we must then with all diligence
note the situation there of: for through a badde situatione, not only
immediately are caused many accidents, but after the sanatione thereof, the
Ioynct sometimes tarryeth right out extended, which ought to have binne
croocked, or else abides croocked vvher it ought to be exte^ded or else
combineth it self, and joins with some other thing, which ought to have
binn separated, and seioyncte. An excellent observation
Wherefore if the wound be in the uppermost part of the shoulder, we must
then impose under the Armepites of the Patient, a great linne^ balle, and hang
the arm one the Breast, and somvvhat bear, out his elbovve, because that the
head of the arm, may be somvvhat elevated, and the separated parts, may
again be inserted the one with the other and so much the better be cured
together again: The contrary vvherof must be observed, if so be that in the
inferior part be any wound, as under the Armepittes: for the vvound being
cured, and we do not lift up sometimes, the Arm and let him fall down
again, and stir him otherways, without causinge any pain, and that the
Arm is not held from the Breast, the Patient thereafter, because of the
Cicatrice shall not be able to lift up his Arm because through the same the
Arm is grown stiff. As thereof we have an example, exemplifyed unto us of
the throat, and in the Neck also of many and diverse, which being vvounded,
or burned, the cicatrice has remained so obdurated, that they there through
have either held their Heads, to much on high or to much stoupinge, or ha^ging
backvvarde, or to much dependinge either on the right, or one the Leftsyde.

If so be that there be an Apostemation, The anglevvyse figure, is the natural
form of the Arm.
in the Elbovve, or else that the same be dislocated, or vvounded, we must the^
situat the Elbovve angle, or cornervvyse: for such aforme is very necessary
for the same, and natural, and accustomed unto hi^: and although, the
cornervvyse figure is that which makes an accute corner, notvvithsta^ding we
mean thereby through the anguled figure* with the ancient Chyrurgians, that
which has his corner right but yet not so clean, and wholy erected, but
that which attaygneth somvvhat tovvard the rectitude, so that it comes
somvvhat bluntlye, and such a figure is not as yet truly the mean, betvveene
the inflexione, and the extensione, but is the same which yields her self,
tovvarde the extensione: If so be the Arm be inserted and combined, with
being able to be recurved, or exte^ded we may yet as then better, and with
more facilitye help him self, then if he wear vvholye recurved, or vvholye
extended.

We may also observe the same in the hand, The hand must be shutt.
for we must keep the fingers shutt, and half bended, and if so be the
dissease wear in one finger only, it wear then better that the same
continued either inflected, or incurved, the^ that he wear straight, for the
property of the hand is to gripe and take houlde, the which she can not
effect, and bring to pass, then through the recurvatione of the same.

If so be above in the Hippe there chance to come, an Apostemation, or
vvovnde, The hippe must be stirred.
we must then in the consolidatinge of the same, observe that which in the
shoulder we have seen, as being necessary to stir the foresayed part, on
diverse fashons, because the head of the bone, do not insert it self, and
grovve fast in the pan.

We observe in the Ioyncture of the knees the contrary, for if so be, The
leg must be kept right.
that there be a wound, or an Apostemation, or else in the finitimate part,
the Patie^t must the^ hold his leg right, without havinge the heels
drawn in toward his buttockes, as it in diverse persons happens, and that
to the hinderance of the Patientes, when they are cured.

And we must dilligentlye note, that the leg be collocated as right, as is
possible, and if so be by chance it lay recurved, we must then as gentlelye,
as is possible stretche and extend the same again, otherwise the patient
being cured, might chance to be mutilate, and without great indecoru^, or
deformity should not be able to go, as we have knovvene the same to happen
unto two great personages, of our times.

Now as concerning the foot, and the Toes, they must allsoe be extended, and
not recurved, or inflected, as we have spoken of the hand, and fingers:
Discommoditye of having the Leg croocked
For if so be they continued so croocked, the body as then should not be
able to rest, or stayede thereon: So that the situation of the Arm, is
contrary to the Hand, to the Leg, and to the Foot: because the one must be
recurvede, or croocked, and the other extended right out.

The end of the French Chyrurgerye, contayninge the manual Operations.
Methodicalle discourse, or rehearsal, of the Originalles, and occasiones,
Signs, and Tokens, Accidents, and chances, Prognosticationes, and Remedies,
against the Bloodyeflixe, or Dysenterye.
BY all other miserable and pitifulle disseases which do commonly vex, and
trouble the Entralles, and run through the same, as is the Cholicke, the
restrictione, or constipatione, Ileus, Lyenteria, Diarrhea, Tenasmus, the
worms, and many other such like yet me thincketh the Dysenteria, or the
Bloodye flixe, of all these to be most intolerable, Bloodyeflixe.
and most mortal: And also amongst the Commonaltye, amongst our French
Martiallistes or vvorriours, amongst the Svvitsers, Countryemen, Englishemen,
and farther amongst all sorts, and Kinds of vvarriours, it is so common,
that it seems this dissease, as soon as they are gone out of their houses,
that there nothing else follovveth them, the^ the shaddovv of their body,
vvherthrough in all leagers through this dessease at sometimes there are more
poeple deprived of their lives, then through all the inqvietude, through all
povertye, through the Plague, yea and more also then of the enimye are
Killede: And touching my opinione herein, I take this sickness to be a
pestilentialle spirit, and a certain essence of the Plague: So that
necessarilye there under must be occulted, and hidden, a secreate, and ineffable
venoume, or poison, which through defilinge, and infectione, spreads it
self from the one body into the other, Because the intestines or entralles,
of a sovvnde, and vvelfaring man, through some inclinatione, or Sympathye, are
made partakers of such venoumouse vapors, of him whose guts are polluted
with this dissease, and by that means also are imparted with the
bloodyeflixe: As in the co^sumptione we may see, which proceeds out of some
vlceratione of the Lunges, and also in the Ophthalmye of the Eyes, the same to
be as infectiouse, that the on body, may obtain the same of an other: Which
comes to pass, Reason of Aristotle.
as Aristotle says, because that the Lunges, and the Eyes, are continuallye
contained in a perpetualle motion, vvherthrough the venoumousnes is the easyer
imparted to an other body: Health being, as it wear a continual rest, and
an assured estate.

And as the entralles, have also their perpetualle motione, the which in
Greek we call Peristaltica, in like sort also may they imparte their
dissease unto other entralles, as the eyes unto the eyes and the Lunges do
unto the lunges.

Of the Causes, Signs, Accidents, prognosticationes, and remedies, I will
somvvhat discourse, consideringe more the necessitye thereof, thereby to
instruct the young Chyrvrgian, the^ because of any pleasure, which I take
therein, or any ostentatione.

The Dysenteria, or bloodyeflixe, Description of the Bloodyeflixe.
is a sangvinolent excrement of the Bellye, with great doloure, and as it
wear scissure which the Latinistes, call Tormina: And this dissease may be
taken properlye, or improperlye.

The improper Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe, Dysenteria Improperlye taken.
is a fluxione of blood, with out any great pains, or travayle, vvherof
there are two sorts, or Kinds, either when we avoyde pure, and clean blood,
which we call Sangvinolenta, and Cruenta or else when we avoyde unclean
blood, and impure.

The pure clear blood issveth forth of the Mesenterium, vvheare a long time
it has lain occulted, and co^gregated, as it oftentimes chanced, in those
which are gross of Belly. And sometimes also it proceeds out of the Liver,
of the Milte, of the Hemorrhodes, and sometimes also out of some great veins,
and out of other parts, yea and also out of the whole habitude of the body:
All which differences, must through their own signs be known, because
the resanatione of the same may be the surer.

As for example it happens commonly, Those which are deprived of any
Ioyncte, are very subject unto the Bloodyflixe.
through any great superfluitye of bleeding, in those which have lost an
Arm, or a leg, that on certain times they have the bloodyeflixe* In which
kind of Mysenteria, we need not much to fear, nether need we to use those
remedies heervnder discribed: But must restraygne such Patientes, from great
comestiones, and superfluouse drinckinge of Wine, and cause him to be well
phlebotomised: vvherof we in this place endevoure to advertice, and instruct
the young Chyrurgiane, because that without making any great delay, he might
be adiuvable and helpefull to the patient with these remedies which
consequently follow: the which in passinge by, it seemed convenient unto me
to rehearse: Because it is not my intent, in this place, only to speak, of
the improper Dysenteria, and curatione thereof, but of the true, and proper
bloodyeflixe, or Dysenteria, which in all Leagers is common, and familiare,
and infectiouse.

The impure Bloodyeflixe, is the truest, and assuredst, and is assimilated unto
water, vvherin nue slaughtered flesh, has binn vvashed: the vvaterye
Bloodyeflixe, Fluxus Hepaticus.
is called Fluxus Hepaticus, the Liver laske, which is caused, through the
imbicillitye, of the retentive forces of the liver, through the which the
vital spirits and the naturalle calliditye do exhalate, and the person, is
vvholye bereft of all his forces and therthroughe also the stomach is feebled,
that it can not any more compraehend, any meat, or drink, to feed one,
nether digest the same, so that by this means the whole body consumes and
vvithereth.

The black, heavye, and thick bloodyeflixe, proceeds especially out of the
Milte, which is, as it wear a Poole, or receptacte, of al melancholicke,
thick, and blackebloode.

Dysenteria properlye taken.
But that which properly, or uprightly is called Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe,
that is a common vlceration of the entralles, out of which first of all the
viscositye of the same is driven, and expelled out, then the Axvngiousenes
therofe, with a little read blood intermingled: Thirdly, the internalle
membrane of the intestines, of the which the pellicles, and the little fibers
are in the stools seen, thervnder to be mixed: finallye the vlcerrtio^ as yet
proceeding, and more, and more growing worse, as the^ consequently follovveth
the carnositye, and the very substance, of the corroded, and corrupted guts:
all which ki^des, are accompanied, and associated with those common
accidents, to wit, with bitinge, or mordicante pain, with continual
punctio^s, with continualle concupiscence of goinge to stool, with
intollerabilitye, and with a continual co^motio^. Which foresayed
Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe, either happens to the small entralles or to the
great intestines, the which we first espy out of the situatione of the
pain, and out of the diversitye, and mixture of the matter,

When as therefore the upright Bloodyeflixe is in the small guts, Signs
when the small guts ate hurt.
as then we see blood, and certain membranouse pellicles, intermixed with
the excrementes, there is also great pain above on the Navle the time betvvixte
the pain and the deiection is slovve, and there associateth it most commonly a
vomitinge, and a great oppressione of the heart, and the Hick coughe, in the
entrance of the stomach, through community which the forsayed entralles have
therewith: For as Galen says, the Harmony, and coniunctione, which the
parts of the body have the one with the other, is vvonderfull, and to be
admired, because as soon as the action of one part is hindered, or suffers
any thing, all the other parts of the body do thervvithe conspire, and
sympathise.

If so be the said vlceratio^ be in the great guts, or entralles, Signs
of the great* intestines
there as the^ drives one the deiectiones, or excrementes certain drops of
blood, and some little parcels of flesh, and the dolor of the vvounded, or
hurt entralies, not so pungent and sharp, but somvvhat more surde, and benumde.

The occasion of the bloodyeflixe is the venoumouse puissance and force,
Occasion and cause of the Dysenteria.
Dynamis of the acute, saulte, and mordicant humors, which being as it
wear on the iournye, to descend right to the guts, but they come
recurvared, and in form of this lettre S. as in the situatione, they must pass
by many recurvationes, and co^cavityes* vvher they cleaving fast, first of al
crudifye, and excoriate the foresayed guts, and in the end through their
acuitye corrode the same: as is the choleric humiditye, the melancholycke
humors, and the saulte Petuita, the which is either inge^dred internally in the
guts, or else congregate together in other place and are so driven that way,
as it happens commonly in the Pestilentialle agues, in Causo colliqvanti,
Phthisi, Athrophia, in the Cacochimia, in the inflammatione, and in the
colliquation, of the vvorthyest parts. The humors are also irritated, and
provoacked, through causticke and venoumouse medicamentes, as through the
Coloquintida Scammonia, or through the Sublimated poulder of a Diamante. Ravve
fruicte causes the Bloodyflixe.
Also through any viciouse, acute gross cibaryes and those which are apt
unto corruptione, or else is not sufficientlye dressed: Also through any
fruicte, as by cherryes, Blackecherryes, Plumbes, Peatches, Coucoumbres,
Milions, and such like, which we call Hotatij Fructus, which more, through
the constitutione of the air, which either is to moist, and pluviouse, or
raynye, to could, or to hott, in others through intemperature, and other
inordinate victitatione, or debacchatione, by the which it inseparablelye
happens as well in the VVinter, as in the Summer, that this dissease of the
bloodyeflixe, afflicts man kind.

It is right true, that this dissease, Indicati^ how we may easilye, or
difficultlye attayn to the Bloodyeflixe.
oftentimes reagneth in the Prime, or vernall time of the year, and especially
in the Harvest, or Autumn, in the which time the humors, do most impeach,
and hurt us with the qvallityes. Havinge observed all these things, we must
consider one the quantitye and quallitye of the dissease, as on the greatness of
the vlceratio^, and the superfluitye of blood, and one the great corrosione,
and one the violence of the dissease, therbye to judge, whether the dissease
with any facilitye, difficulty, or impossibilitye may be repelled, and cured.

We esteem the cure of the Dysenterya to be of more facilitye, the same
being in the great guts, or intestines Caecum, Colon, and Rectum, the^ it
being in the small entralles, Duodenum, Ieiunum and Ileum.

We take also the same to be less daungerouse, in young persons, and in the
men, then in young children, and women.

In a longevalle, or long continuing Dysenterye, it is a badde sign when the
appetite is departed, and yet a far more worse sign, when as there are
associated unto the same Agues, or Imflammationes.

They which are of most experience may judge of this poyncte.
As is that which is caused, out of any Apostemation, being burst out of the
Liver, or of the Milte, which very rarelye happens, and yet more rare out
of the pulmonicalle Apostemationes, vvherof the matter disgorgeth it self in
the left ventricle of the Heart, and so into the Artery called Aorta, the
truncke, or body of all other Arteryes, from thence into the Veins of the
Mesentery, which are exte^ded to the entralles, the which passage or way we
can not then through imagination compraehend, and which is very obscure. And
if so be there follovved any peculiare thing therout, besides the causticke,
and venoumouse matter it might the^ infer fearful, and daungerouse
accidents, to the heart of the Patie^t, (which is the vvelspring of life) and
the only original, of vital spirits, which are diffused over the whole
body, and are occasion of the action, motione, and also all other agilityes
of the body.

The evomitio^ of the choloricke humors, in the beginning of the dissease, do
bear witness also of the danger follovvinge.

The bloody flixe, which is caused out of any mela^cholicke humors, is
esteemed to be without any hope.

The convulsio^ of synnues, the Hickough, and the parbraking, are forerunners,
and as it wear, embassadoures of death.

In like sort allsoe when we espy, a black spott behind the left ear, as
big as a Vetche, vvherbye is great alteratione, that also is a sign of
Death, as Hippocrates vvithnesseth unto us. If so be this dissease, through
negligence, or through malice, or aulteration, or by any other means, came to
be inveterated, the Patient as then will vvholye consume, and vvexe so feeble,
that without great difficultye he shall not be victor thereof.

This therefore is the cause, or occasion, the species, and kinds of this
dissease, and the afflicted, and opressed part being aperte, and known, we
must now proceed to the resanatione of the same.

The final end of the curatione, is either generalle, or specialle.

The general end is to be noted, either on the dissease, or on the Physitione,
as on both the especiallist, and most principal personages, which act and
set forth the Historye of this dissease. In all the kinds of Dysenteria, Cure
of the Dysenteria.
the patient must keep himself reposed, and quiet, because all vlcerationes,
desire to be quietlye kept, and in ease: Notwithstanding, Hippocrates in his
third boocke de Diaeta councelleth, that we should cause the Patient which
has the bloodye flixe to walk, and also cause him to stir his body,
vvherby he means, that we ought to do the same, before the foresayed
Dysenteria become, and because of the Prophylactica, therthroughe to prevent,
the procreatio^ of all badde humors, and to defend the same out of the
intestines, and cause them to withdraw themselves into other external
parts of the body.

Farthermore the patient must always retain his stools as long as he
possibly may or can, without constraygninge himself thereunto,

The Chyrurgian must first of al consider on the use of the astringent
medicamentes, What astringent medicame^tes the Patient must use.
which before repast, or comestion are used: for he co^tayninge the viandes,
or cibaryes, they help also to the digestio^ of the same: but by the
astringent things I understand, and mean, which are reasonablelye
fortifyinge, and confortative, and those which are helpefulle to the
concoctione: For it wear the greatest, and absurdest error of the world, if
so be in the first, and especially in an vnhealthfulle body, to use violent
stopping and astringent medicame^tes, for it wear nothing else, the^ to shutt
and keep our enimye or thief within doors.

Wherefore his viandes, or meat and drink, What his meats, and drinckes
must be.
must only be Diureticke, and astringent and causinge to void urine, because
through the urine especially, all aquositye of the blood is evacuated: but if
so be you perceave, that the great toughenes of the acute and sharp adusted
Pituita, or aquosity, which is very retardatelye expelled and conglutinateth
with the guts, or entralles, is a cause of the bloody flixe, with pain and
with corrosio^, you must the^ with discretion use the urine expulsors, or
urine provoki^g remedies because through the use thereof, it expels the
aaquosity through the which otherwise the forsayed viscouse and tough Pituita,
might by chance have binne driven out, so that therewith it is made more
viscouse and tougher, then before for by how much the less any thick viscouse
matter, has adjoined unto it any thin humiditye, by so much it is the
worse. We permit some consideringe the imbicillitye of their stomachs, to
use and drink a little astringent wine.

Medicamentes which we must eschevve.
Farthermore we must bevvare, and take heed, of all sharp, and mordicant
medicamentes, as Arsenicum, Auripigmentum, Antimonium Sal Gemmae, and many
other such like things, and that because of their, to great, and suddayne
evacuationes, and because they irritate and provoacke the dissease.

Thirdlye we must consider on the Liver, and especially on the stomach,
because all those which are afflicted with the bloodye flixe, can digest noe
viandes. The specialle end must be the fluxione, or the dissease it self.

The Scopus of the fluxione is, to stop, and to diverte the concurrent
humors, but we must in the first gentlely, and easilye reserate the same, and
with such, consideration, as before we have said, least that in reseratinge
of the same you increase the ague, the which with reason, and experience may
chance.

Remedies which may be taken out of the reason.
The remedies which may be taken out of the reason, are either external, or
internalle.

The internal are, either simple, or co^povvnde. Simple, as Covvemilcke, nue
Eggs, with Masticke, or with Ambergreece, Poulder of sour Mulberryes,
flovvers of Peatches, fine Bolus, Terra sigillata, confited Nuttes, Nuttmegges,
being therewith intermixed: Rhabarbarum so acked in Pla^tine-vvater is also
had in great estimatione, or in the decoctione of Mirobalanes, Syrope of
dried Roses, and Iulep, of Roses.

Amongst the compounde Remedies are the Trociskes of Diacorallum, Dialectrum,
De Spodio, with the juice of Endive, of Cicorye, and more other.

We must also content our selves, in this dissease with sudoriferouse
medicaments, and with easy vomites: because through diversityes, we may
reserate, and retain the fluxione.

This subseqvent poulder, is oftentimes with great success administered, and
used, the vvayght of a Crown, with the yolcke of an Egg.

rum Boli Armeni, terrae sigillatae, lapidis Haematites, ana drachmas duas,
picis navalis vnciam semis, Coralli rub. Margaritarum elect. cornu Cervi vsti
and loti in aqva Plantaginis, ana scrup. duas, Sacchari rosati vncias duas,
fiat omniu^ pulvis subtilis: capiat drachmam semis, vel scrupulos duos mane.

Admonitione.
But to commit noe error at all, we must before the reseratione, or before the
use of this poulder, administer an ounce of Cassie, by it self, or with half
a dragme of Rabarber: or with an ovvnce of the double Catholicon, with a
decoctione of Plantine, of Agrimonye, Flovvers of Nenufarre, Infusio^ of
Rubarbe.
with Tamariscus, to the refrenatione, or bridlinge, of this furiouse humor.
Or else we must take, a gentle infusione, or expressione of Rubarbe, made with
Rosevvater, addinge thereunto six dragmes, or an ounce, of Catholicon. But
besides all this, we may not reserate, and restraygne this laske at the first,
as the common poeple suppose.

But amongst the external remedies, Phlebotomye is very commodiouse for the
same, but must alvvayes be effected with Knowledge of the cause, for that
sometimes is more necessary then all the other remedies, and especilye, when
as the intemperature being caused out of the Liver, urges us thereunto but not
heerby to debilitate the forces and strength of the Patient, which in this
dissease reqvire to be firmed, and comforted, Phlebotomye must be done with
discretione.
the said phlebotomye must with all discretione be done, because the Patient,
through the deprivatione of to great a qvantitye of Blood at one time, might
chance to be vvholye superated, and overcome, and fall down dead under his
pack, or burden: For it is known unto all men, that the blood is the
treasure of life or the domicille, and habitatione of the soul: Secondly we
may not in Phlebotomizatione be to timorouse and fearful, for in place of
Phlebotomye, and yeeldinge air to the Veins, the ague chances sometimes to
continue, and increase also, the blood also gettinge noe air, is the^
polluted with some sharpenes, or venoumousnes, which thereafter corrodeth, and
consumes the entralles.

The Patient is praeserved by his strength, through good nouriture, and
feedinge, which is easy of digestione, and through the Cordialle
corroboratinge medicamentes.

Amongst the astringent Medicame^tes, Astringe^tia.
there are the oils of Quinces, of Roses, of Masticke, and oil of Mirtles,
being intermingled with a little astringent poulder, in like sort there are
also confortative Playsters, amongst the rest, is the co^fortative Plaster of
Vigo, which with co^sideratione, must be used, as before we have said.

We may in this dissease also use some certain fumigationes, and exsiccating
Lavame^tes.

Those things which are most belonginge, to the dissease, are the
mundificationes, and the co^solidationes of the vlcerationes: For the
mu^difyinge of all vlcerationes is nothing else, the^ to cure, to exsic^te, and
to co^solidate the^. VVher fore first of all we must elavate the vlceratione
with a clisterye, and if the same be profovvnde, and deep, a little absterge
the same, mixinge thervnder some confortative things, to fortifye, and
strengthen the intestines.

Whereunto as the^ we may use, mellifyed, or Honyed-vvater, Barlye-vvater,
with the yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Honye of Roses, and with many other such
like things being mixed thervnder: and if so be we as yet desire more to
mundifye the same, we must then use the decoctione of vvheaten branne, and of
Vetches: and if so be there be calidity adjoined theru^to, we must the^ add
thereunto Sap of Roses, of Plantine, or juice of Night shade, or Solatri.

Remedies to consolidate the vlceratio^s.
Touching the co^solidatione, that is effected through the providence of
nature, or with any incarnatinge medicame^tes, which we call Sarcotica. Unto
co^solidatione are four things necessary, to wit, the clisteryes of
Plantine, of Hogs grass, and of VVillovvleaves, unto the which we add
Goats suet, Butter, oil of Roses, or oil of svveet Almondes, vvhervvith the
vlceratio^s be internally annoyneted, the punctione, and acuitye of the
vlceration is somvvhat diminished, which continually soacketh theri^.

We may also very fitlye mix theramo^gst, the sealed earth, Franckinsence,
Sangvis Draconis, and amongst many other this one incarnateth very much, to
wit the Lachrima Thuris, but we must note that all these Poulders, be very
diminutlye pulverisated, least that in the vlcerationes of the entralles, they
chance to corrode, and bite.

Clisteryes made on diverse fashones.
As touching the Clisteryes, we must at the first use, pain assvvaginge
clisteryes, as there are those, which are made of fresh milcke, vvher in we
must contunde some yolckes of Eggs, oftentimes reiteratinge of the same: and
the^ vsinge the absterginge clisteryes, which gentlelye vvil purifye the
intestines. We make also diverse other of diverse fashons, and forms: vvher
unto this shall serve, for an example of one.

rum Rosar. rub. Tapsibarbati, Furfuris Hordei, ana P.j. fiat decoctio in
Lacte, in colatura, ad lib. j. vel, ad quartastres, dissolve oleiras. colati,
Sacchari albi ana ij. Syrupirosar. siccaru^ ij. fiat Clyster, additis duobus
ovorum vitellis.

We may use this clister, and reiterate the same as often as we perceave it
to be necessary: but when we must use some astringent Clisterye, which we
may not do, unless that the repeccating humors, be cleanlye purged out, and
then we may use this subseqvent clisterye, or any other such like.

rum Furfuris macri, paleae Hordei, tapsi Barbati, Centinodiae, Chamemillae,
and summitatu^ Anethi, ana M j. fiat decoctio in aqva Chalibeata, velin Lacte
vstulato, in colatura, ad lb j. vel ad quartes tres, dissolve sir: rosar.
siccarum, vel mirtillorum ij. Vitellorum ovoru^ iij. pulveris Mastiches, and
sang. draconis, ana iij. fiat Clyster.

We may also co^stitute, and exordinate, to this end diverse and Sundry
potiones, and Electuaryes, also the Kinds of Diacorallum, nature of a Heart
fine Bolus, sealed earth, juice of Berberis, Ribes, conserve of Roses.

The Empiricke medicame^tes, which the Methodicall Physiciones, do so
disdain, and esteem of little vvorth, are those which we through
experience, and through the divturnall use have fovvnde to be most excellent,
which being used with judgment, are not vvholye to be disdayned, saying that
Galen testifyeth, that the Physician, must be established one two fundame^tes
or foundations, to wit, on the reason, and on the experience, vvherof the
Reason is, as it wear the Soul of the same, which measures, and
ponderateth all things: and the Experience the body, as a provide^t, tutor and
Schoolmaster.

Experience teaches us, that the Rubarbe, on what manner soever we
administre the same, (but especially the infusione thereof) is very commodious
and profitable in this dissease, as in like sort also is the Spiritus
Vitrioli, with Rosevvater, and withdraw Plantinevvater, and also being
administered with Cynamomevvater. There is a sugerye dulcor, or sweetness,
extracted out of Lead, which never deceaved the hope of the right
worshipful Mr. Duion, Monsr. Duion an expert Physician
which is a very expert, and learned Physician, and vvherof I have attained
the best, of this discourse. The Tincture of Coralle, and of yellovve Ambre,
extractede with Aquavitae is in his operation admirable, also Crocus Martis,
Flos sulfuris being administered with co^serves of the betryes of the Cornus,
Co^serve of Roses, Marmalade, Citronpeelinges, with many other such like
things, are all together very commodiouse. Because amongst natural things,
I know nothing that exsiccateth more, and oppugneth it self more against all
corruptiones: And to conclude there are an innumerable sorts of remedies,
which we must so compounde, that they may have one similitude, or one
Analogye with the dissease.

Finallye, we must in an extreme Dysenteria, for the last remedy, endevoure
to mitigate the pain, with Narcoticall things, as is the Oleum Iusqviami,
Mandragora, the could seeds, the Philounium. Reqvies Nicolai, and many oaths
such like compositiones, which are unto this dissease used, and which may not
be administered the^ with great judgment and advice had therone.

The end of this Treatise of the Dysenteria, or Bloodyeflixe.
An Apologye, for the Chirurgians, where through is apparantlye, and evidentlye
demonstrated, and showed, which be the occasions, or causes of death, in diverse
and sundry, wounded Persons, although notwithstanding, their wounds wear
small: where by the Chyrurgians may be liberated, and excused, from all
calumnes, and sclaunders where with falsely they are accused, and reproched.
THe common discourses of Chyrurgery, are now adays far more mean, and
idle, more fabulouse, and uncertain, the^ the Nativityes of the Gods, the
Historyes of the Giantes or the doctrines of the Philosophical stone yea and a
thousand other fantastical sommationes, There is but one expert
Chyrurgiancinal France-
and dreams.

There is novvadayes in all France, but one expert Chyrurgiane, whom everye
potentate and great Lord, endeavors to retayn by them, vvherthrough they are
wont to say I have the best and expertest Chyrurgian which is living,
wherefore they also laud, and extol him, to have a million of knackes which
wear never before herd, or known. The one boasts that his Chyrurgia^, in
a very short time, has cured one which has binn shot clean through his
head although the very substance of the Brains, Diverse fictions, and Lies.
issued therout: the other stedfastlye affirms, that his Chyrurgiane, has
again imposed the Eye of a man, which from the earth he took up, without
being deprived of his sight in that Eye, or else that he cut of a piece of ones
Liver, or Milte, and yet has praeserved the life of the man. Farthermore an
other will bouldlye periure himself, and say, that they are but nugationes,
and Childrens play for his Chyrurgian to cure, a harqueboushed, or shotten
wound of the Heart, the Liver, the Milte, the Blather, and the stomach, and
the Intestins and of the great veins, yea and is noe more molested therewith,
the^ wear the Sold lours of Julius Caesar, which never interrogated how
forcible, and strong their enemies wear, but vvheare they wear: nether one
what place of the City the breach was bartered but whether i^deed it we
are shot or not. Comparasion.
So that novvadayes, the Chyrurgianes also do not any more ask, nether do
any more endevoure, to know the nature, the condition, the necessity, the use,
or the worthiness, or excellencye of the vvounded parts, but ask only
whether the man be vvouded, and although all the ossicles of his Leg,
wear crushed, yet vvithi^ the space of 14. days, at the farthest, with
their water of shotte^ wounds they are able to cure them, although I my
self do not disdain the same, the same being administered, and used with
discretton. And breefly to conclude each lord supposes that he has by him an
Hippocrates, an Aesculapius, a Podalirus, a Machaon.

Out of which ignorance, and persuasion, as not to know, what wounds are
mortalle or curable, what vvou^des are little, or great, which are of an
easy, or difficulte resanation, there must then necessarilye heerout follow,
that vvhe^as any body seems to be little hurt and dies under the hands of a
most expert Chyrurgia^ either because of the greatness of the vvound, through any
vnhealthfullnes of the body, through any concursione of humors, or else
because of any unexpected accidents, he is then without all compassione,
blamed, disdayned and diffamed, notwithstanding all his great pains or
diligence, according to the art he in curinge of the foresayed Patient has
done and that, because they are ignorant of the causes of his death, and
always persuade themselves, A foolish persuasio^
that if the Patie^t had binne in hands of their Chyrurgiane, he without al
doubt had not dyed, although that their Chyrurgian, have experimented and
tried little or nothing at all and is wholy inexperte so that by continuance
of time we find the^ to do, or vvorck noe more miracles the^ a common or lay
man, and also with noe more certayntye, doctrine, nor experience and
oftentimes in their practice, being at their vvittes, or councels end, are
constrained to sue for succoure, and aid of their companions, or partakers.
Because therefore that in conseqvente times hereafter, these fellows, should
not vndeservedlye reap such honor, and the aunciente Chyrurgianes might
liberate, and free themselves from all calumnes, and of being ignorant which
is laid to their charge, and to reqvite, and resolve the opinions of those
mighty, and pote^tat Lords with reason, because thereafter they do no more
blame, and sclaunder the Chyrurgianes, I will here breeflye recite, Some
wounds are esteemed to be small, which indeed are great and dangerous.
the occasions of Death, causinge them plainly, and evidently, to understand
that there are some which of a vvou^d, which we esteem to be but small, and
of little regard, do notvvithstanding dye, and yet of expert, and learnede
men the same was esteemed, and accounted for a perillouse wound. And
contrarilye, some are cured of great wounds, which indeed we esteem to be
but small, and of little regard, and which with all facilitye may be cured.
They can not cure all men.
Notwithstanding being impossible for the Chyrurgiane, how erudite, and
expert, soever he be, to cure all men, although at sometimes they be
vvoundede with very small wounds.

Now therefore to return to our discourse, What is required to the resanatione
of wounds.
we must first of all know, that to cure a vvoundede part, and to restore
again that person- into his former, and accustomed estate of health thereunto
are many things reqvired, which I here normallye, and rightlye will
prosecute. First of all there is the integrity, force, and vigore of the
vulneratede, and hurt part, or membre: As evidentlye do demonstrat unto us,
the aucthoritye, reasone, and experience: For according to the opinione, and
sentence, of divine Hippocrates, It is nature which cures all sicknesses, and
disseases sect. 5. Epid. 6.

The vvounded parts are infeebled, either considering the nature of their first
conformation or through any accidents, chauncinge to the dissease, or else
because of any hurtes, or shottes which happen unto the same: we may through
their nature know the^ when as the head is to little, for as then it is
whole inconvenie^t: Or else to gross and so vaste, and ponderouse, that because
of the dissease, the patie^t is not able to bear up the same right on his
shoulders: If so be it be perfectlye, and completly round for in such a Head
is either vvanting, the anterioure, A Head noughtily formed
or the posterioure future, or both of the^ together which are the
suspiracles, through the which nature disburseth her self, of all
superfluityes, which being therein contaynede, they retardate the curatione of
the wound. And if it so chanced, that the Head of your vvounded, wear
indecently formed, the vvound seeminge to be small, (allthough indeed noe
Capitalle wounds are to be esteemed small) and the curation thereof be
tardife, and the Patiente chance to dye thereof, we ought not as then in any
sort to attribute the fault unto the Chyrurgiane but to the badde formatione
of that part which is hurt, or vvounded.

We must also understand the same of the Breaste, which being anguste, and
stricte, sufficiently demonstrateth unto us, that the heart and the natural
calor of the same are very feeble be cause the domicille of the heart, and the
Lu^ges is to angustlye formed: which might be the cause that if any body,
being vvounded in such an angust and stricte breaste, shall with great
difficulty receave again his health, because the natural caliditye, being in
these parts feeble, and la^guide shall not be able to surmount the Accidents
which ordinarilye happen unto such parts, as difficulty of respiratio^,
through the oppression of the effuded blood in that part, which ca^ not be
digested, nor expelled, either by the Mouth, or through the vvou^d, and that
for want of natural caloure, which commonly in such a stricte and anguste
Breast is very small. Abadde formed Back, or Backebone.
The like may also be said of the Back, and of the Spina Dorsi or Backebone,
which being so^vvhat to long as those which co^tumeliouslye, and diridingly
we call Elevenribbes, because they have such huge and vaste long sides vvherof
we need not doubt, but that such a Back or Backcbone, is far more debile
then others, and therefore more apt, and prone to receave any unnatural
humiditye, vvherfor also in such vvou^des there happen great fluxio^s betvveen
the Muscles, and the skinn and betvvixte the dista^ces of the same, because of
the great quantity of excreme^tes, which have their accourse out of the
Brains, and other parts of the body, vvherby, betvvee^ the Muscles and the
dista^ces of the same, there sincke many superfluous humors, which by
consequence of time are changed into some venoumouse humiditye, and matter,
through the which we are so^times constrained, to make some great apertione,
which require a long continuance of time to the mu^difyinge thereof, and wholy
to be cured, yea and so^times also altar and chau^g into fistles, because of
the tenderness and softenes of the part, which ca^ not be shut, nether through
ligamentes reserated, or co^pressede, as an arm or leg. Hippocrates has
observed, and noted that betvvixte feeble, A notable sentence.
and diseased flesh there alvvayes desce^deth and si^cketh a vvaterishe
humudity, which easily can corrupt. The small, thin, Hippes which are
baddly formede
and Hern fashoned hippes and legs, vvherof we commonly say they go one
VVayghtes, and are under, and above all most of aequall crassititude and
thicknes, contrary to those which we say, to be hipped, and legged, or have
a payere of good, and steadfast stiltes under the^, which are well
proportioned, vvher of daily experience teaches us, and that to our great
grief, and sorrovve, that such persons, either being vvou^ded in hippes, in the
legs or in the feet, are subject unto many, and diverse accidents, and the
wounds also difficult to be cured and mu^difyed, Legs which are of a
difficulte resanatio^.
in the which oftentimes above the ordinary fluxio^s therein enge^dreth proud
flesh: and now being as it wear almost ready to be Cicatrizede, can very
difficultely be brought thereunto, and being cicatrized, through any small
occasion bursteth open again. And if so be the bones be offended, or broken, as
then the Ioyncte most commonly consumes, and vvithereth and the health very
retardately can be again restored.

Now all this which has binn said, The most truest, and assuredst sign of
the imbicilitye of any part
is sufficientlye known, with all the diseases of all other parts. But we
must generallye note, that the most assuredst sign, of the imbicilitye of any
part, chances through, the vntemperatnes, and badde formatio^ of the same:
for if so be that the Temperamente, had binne good, and by consequence, the
formative virtue had binn strong, she should as then exactlye have formed that
part: for by the operation is the operator thereof known. VVherfofe Aristotle
is of opinion, that the incomplete creation, has her deformity, through the
want of the frigide, and could nature, and the imbicillity of the Sperma:
Similitude.
for even as we see, that the Mechanical operatours, or handyecraftes men,
can not make any piece of work so perfect, and so neat, of a badd piece of
stuff as, they might well and easily do, of a good, and apt and tractable
piece of stuff, which is not spoiled, nor corrupted.

All which is before approvede by the third rule, sect. 1. of the sixte
Epidemioru^ Hippocratis, and founded, on an excellent Axioma in the
comme^taries of Gale^, where be says, Imbicilla membra multum pravumque
excrementum colligere consueverunt.

Such a congregation, and excrescence of venou^ous excrementes which chance
to congregate themselves together in such deformed parts do drounde, choacke,
Suffocatio^ of the natural calidity.
and oftentimes corrupt the naturalle caloure, first of all of the diseased
part, and then of the whole body, after the which must necessarilye
follow death, without the Chyrurgiane being able to remedy the same or with
any aequitye might thereof be blamed although notvvithstanding oftentimes the
Princes and great Lords, which of these matters have small knowledge,
without occasion do blame, and reproache their Chyrurgians: yea and some
times also accuse them, and require of the magistrate to have punished, and
themselves also vndeservedlye punish their Chyrurgians. Accidental
imbicillity.


Touching the accide^talle imbicillity, which has binne from the beginning of
the first creation, it is certain, that as we have said of the momorsions, or
Bittes, even so in like sort we may say of the diseases, that the first are
very nocent, unto the last: For Quae non possunt singula, multa nocent: and a
little thereafter, Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi, sed saepe cadendo. We do not
through sickness a mende, and the pitcher goes so often to the well, till
that in the end he return broken home again. For all diseases are of so
venoumous a nature that although they are clean cured, yet they relinquishe
some badde relics in the part, vvherthrough they may the easyer return
again, wherefore of our Divine Hippocrates it is called Philostrophes, The one
disease follovvinge the other is very troublesome.
which signifies, noe return again or at the least, such parts are as then
most subjected to receave some nue disease: also the said Hippocrates says
farther, in his Book of internal diseases, that all aegritudes, which
follovv any other disease, are always most co^monlye mortal: because she
finds the natural forces debilitated: which we allsoe must understand of
the wounds, which are received in any parts of the body, which before
have once binn vvounded. An ague being cured commonly leaves an Empirema
after her.
These dispositiones are of our Physiciones called Diatheses and are esteemed
to have great forces, for the generatione of diseases or for an incurable
confirmation of the same: In like sort also relinquesheth an Empirema after
her, vvher by that Person is made more subicte to receave more agues, and
that in such a sort as a hott ove^, which has once binne heated, is more
apt again to receave the heat: as in example, there be any on which has once
binn vvounded, again being vvounded, and especially in the same place, vvher
before he was vvou^ded it is impossible that the said part should have, the
same force, virtue, or vigor, to repugme and to resist for the curatio^
which before she has had, before ever she was vvounded: and that in such
sort as in a Corselet or harnas, vvherone has binne a shot, and having
gotten a crushe, or bendinge in, allthoughe the same be beaten, and malleated
smothe again, yet it will never be beaten so smoothe, nether so plain and
strong as it was before it had the shot. Nether can can I here praetermit,
to recite those which have itenerated, and traveled through the Sudatorye
regione, and passede, through the driveling, or sputaminouse climate, and
being again ready to travel the same way, being grevouslye vvounded, vvher
there is one which is safelye returned from the iournye with good fortune,
there are three, yea and four which by the way do faynte and so dye:
vvherfor as the^ we admire, why they are not cured, or why their resanation
is so tardife, not considering that the vvounded was half before corrupted,
The vvou^ded which have binn in the drivelinge climate can very difficultly
be cured.
and that his humors have wholy binne aultered through the venoumousnes of
the foresayed disease: or havinge binne cured thereof, have as yet retained any
aulteratione in the Liver, or in any other internalle parts, which gathers
continuallye many venoumous excrementes, which the foresayed part without
any cessation, discharges into the vvounded part.

And so most commonly the occasion of death comes through the inordinate
state of life, in eatinge, Gluttony is the occasion of much evel.
and drinckinge without observinge any rule of victitation, hauntinge also of
women, and not suffering themselves to be handled, of the hands of the
Chyrurgian, as the cause requires, it be either in tenting of the wound, by
inscisione, by cauterisatian, and by keepinge himself quiet which all
aunciente Chyrurgians so highly and exactlye commau^de, Ease is good for all
wounds.
to the furthera^ce of the curatio^ of the vvou^de, follovvinge the sayings of
Celsus, that Optimum Medicamentum, quies, and abstinentia, is: So that I am
intended, as of a thing that is of all men known, not much in this place to
speak thereof although notvvithstanding, it is oftentimes the occasion of
death, how lightly soever they be vvounded: yea allsoe and of great wounds,
being clean out of danger through their inordinate manner of life,
especially in eatinge, and drinckinge, do again fall therein, and come to a
far more worse estate then ever before they wear, yea and sometimes allsoe
dye thereof: for it is most certain that.

More there are which of Gluttonye dye here,
Then of blows, or shottes to death come near.
So that we will now, handle, or treacte, Consideration on the time of the
year.
of the times of the year. There is nothing more manifest, then that many
vvounded persons might of their wounds be cured, if so be the time of the
year, wear such, as it wear requisite it should, that is, if so be the
four seasons of the year, reserved their natural temperature and quallity:
It is also apparent that the intemperature of the air, the disordre of the
time, the astrolicalle venoume, and other funestall influences, do make the
wounds incurable, or else very difficulte to be cured, and changes the
habitude, and complexione of men, through the chaunginge of the time, and
through the Astronomicall constellation, which over us is praedominating. As
if so be the vvinter, which ought indeed to be could, The irregulatede
season of the year aultereth our bodies.
wear vvarme, and the summer which ought to be vvarm, is could: Also when
it is now hott, the^ could, now dry, the^ moist, without the time of the
year requiringe the same to be otherwise then he ought to be: who ca^
doubt thereof but the same must be prejudicial, to the vvou^ded patie^t?
because our bodies, here bye receave mervaylouse, and suddayne alterations and
chaunginges, vvherthrough out vital spirits, and humors, are vvondrouslye,
and with great danger aultered, observinge the saying of Hippocrates, which
avoucheth that all repentine and subite permutatio^, how soever the same may
be are unto our bodies very preiudicialle. All repentine, and suddayne change
is daungerouse.
The divrnalle experience demo^strateth the same unto us, for if so be in the
vvinter, instead of a dry could vvinde, there respire a southvvest vvind,
with vvarmishe shovvres of rain, there then co^monlye follow great
corruptiones in our humors, vvherthroughe the wounds do putrifye, and
gangraenize. The infected air, may also be an occasion, of the death of many
vvounded persons, how little soever they so^times are vvounded: because
without air we can not Live, which always such as it is we must
receave, We can not live without air.
and that not only through the mouth, and through all the conductes of our
body, and poro^tyes of our skin, and through our Arteryes, which are
situated under the porosityes of our skin, from whence the foresayed air
does dravve toward our Lunges, so^vvhat to cool the heart, and refreshe it
and be as it wear a nouriture unto the same, from whence the said air is
farther spread and divided through our whole body, vvherby it the^
chances, that if so be the same be corrupted, and infected, consequently also
the foresayed Heart, with some other of the noble and worthiest parts are
polluted, in stead of being praeserved, and mayntayned, in their form and
virtue. The malignante air polluteth the heart.
Galen in the ninth of his Methodes, attributes so much to the air, that he
says that the especiallist, and principalist demonstration to cure any
dissease, must be observed out of the air: because we ca^ in noe sort, be
vvanting or missinge the communitye, and use thereof.

Besides al these occasiones, there are yet certain times of the year, which
are irreprehe^dable, and yet clean contrary to certain disseases: for who
is he that doubts that the star Canicula does not disturb the vvynes,
Virtves of the doggedayes.
and causethe the same to boil, where he lies in the fellers? as by
experience we find and in Plinio we may read, that the same also causes
our blood to boil within our veins, Lib. 14. Chap. 18.
that so^times there follovveth such a superfluous sangvinatio^, that by noe
means it can be restaygned, by the which means the same also flovveth
tovvard the vvounded part, which before was tormented with sufficient pain
enoughe. In like sort also we perceave the Autumn, The Autumn is enimye to
all pulmonicall wounds
or Hurvest to be an enimye to all wounds of the Lunges, as is appare^t by
the 10. rule, the 3. of the Aphorisms, because they oftentimes change into
fistles or into pectorall Apostemationes. The penetrable could is allsoe a
sore enimye to all vvou^des in the Head, Aphor. 3. lib. 5. Farthermore
Hippocrates dissuadeth us, Lib. de aere, We must not purge in the dog days.
aquis and locis to administer any physic unto the patientes in the great
constellation of the stars under the Solsticium, nor under the
Aequinoctialles, because of the great perturbations, and alterations, which
as then are in our bodies, by the which means the wounds as the^ are far
more molestious and mortalle: which must al so be understood of the great
vvyndes and thunderinges, the effects vvherof are so admirable, and tirrible,
in inanimate things, vvherbye we may the less admire at the great
alterationes, which they do cause in the wounds, and disseases of men's
bodies, which body is the most sensiblest, and the most dilicatest, amongst
all the animate bodies.

Besides this we have spoken of the times and saysons of the year, An
excellent observation.
we may also add heeru^to that the Carpenters, and the Architectors, do
also observe a choice of the fellede, and cut down wood, which at this
time, or at that saysone of the moon has binne felled: esteeminge the wood,
to be more moist, and replete with worms, and more subject to corruption,
which is felled in the full Moon, and that more durable yea and all most
incorruptible, The inanimate things do feel the effects of the Moon.
which is felled in the decreace of the Moon, as in Palladio we may read,
in his Treatise of January, and Nove^bre, Caesar also says the same, in his
commentaryes, on Arat: that the Moon has not only power over that which
has received se^sibilitye, but that also the stones, the bones, and the
Wood do perceave the effects of the Moon, which being of the
Moo^infected, vvexeth full of worms: vvherfor the common phraise of the
Lawyers, or Iuristes is as yet observed, de Lignis sua Luna caesis:: which
being so wherefore should not we also esteem a wound, to be more moist
in a fulle Moon, and more subjected to putrefactione, then in the decreace of
the Moon, saying that man is tender of flesh and far more subjected under
the domination, and subiectione of the Moon, and the influences thereof, then
those things, Man is subject unto all inflvences.
which are inanimate and have nether life, nor sensation: Above all these
praecedente, reasons, and experiences it is manifest, and a common axiom, that
all terrestrialle corpse, are ruled, and governed by the caelestiall, or
supernall influences.

Through all which foresayed occasions, the humors oftentimes being so
corrupted, and polluted, after death there are certain apostematio^s four in
diverse places of the body, yea and sometimes also, in some of the vvorthyest
parts of the body, as in the Liver, in the Brains, in the Milte, in the
Lunges, or in any ioynctes, according unto the imbicillitye of any of the
parts of the body, which have binne debile, and apt to receave such impurity
of the body, which being therewith, out of all measure charged, expellethe
from him the forsayed impure humors, in any of the said feeble parts, which
thereafter is changed into purule^t matter, the which there possessinge more
place, and making more concavitye, the^ is requisite, do expel from them
certain faetide and venoumous vapors, and participate the same unto all the
other worthiest parts, out of the which insueth, Inquietude, Agues,
Convulsio^s, or Spasmus, Phrenesye and in the end necessarily must follow
death perceaving the vvou^des to wax black and dry, without being able to
judge thereof, or to know the occasion, vvherof this might proceed,
notvvithsta^ding how erudite, Corrodinge matter causes many accidents.
and expert soever the Chyrurgia^ be, nether being possible for him how
small soever the wound be to save the Patie^t, havi^g noe sign vvherbye he
may know, whether that venoumouse matter, has implanted it self in any of
the said vvorthyest parts, or not. Nether.

Can the physicione cure all those,
Which are incurable, and without repose.
Co^stitutio^ of the vvou^ded.
Let us therefore now consider, and search out the pecvliare, co^stitutio^s of
the vvounded: some there are which have little blood, toward the resanatio^
of their wounds: others have to much which notvvithsta^ding, is nether to
the curation good enoughe, nor pure enoughe.

Hippocrates speakinge of those which have to little blood, in the 24. rule
of the fourth section, in the sixth Epid: says that those which have their
entralls hott, and as it wear burninge, their flesh could and have binn
badlye nourished, Which are vnhealth same poeple.
which commonly we call vnhealthsame poeple, who having received in their
bodies some great vvou^d, are most commonly alvvayes very difficulte to be
cured, for want of materialles: which also we may see to be in aged persons,
when as they are any vvhear vvounded, or by chance break their legs. We
have also an excellent rule in Hippocrate which is, the 6. Aphorism, of the
sixte sectione where he says Hydropicorum, A notatable sentence.
and lentiginorum on other places he addethe theru^to Vlcera non facile
sanantur: of those which are troubled with the Dropsy, because their blood
is to clear, and vvaterishe: of the lentiginouse, because their blood is to
sharp, or tarte, and for that occasion can make noe good combinatione, or
healinge: and whereby this might be occasion, to wit, whether it be through
nature, or by the inordinate manner of life, of eating, or drincking, it
becaused, as by the drincking of strong vvynes, or by eatinge of garlic, of
Onions, of Porrhy, of pouldred, or saulted meat, or of spices, as the
suldiours wear wont to do, that is little belonging to our purpose. Nether
can I here praetermit to speak, Perturbation of mind.
of the perturba^ce of the mind vvherthroughe most commonly the Martialistes
are very much afflicted, which through the generosity of their courage, if so
be that in any assault, battle or skirmishe, they have not valia^te enoughe
born themselves, or at the least not to the co^tentatio^ of their Captain,
and have not as Caesaristes behaved themselves, and fought and are therefore
blamed, of those which are their, enviours and such as hate the^, vvheri^ they
do so veheme^tlye vex, and greeve themselves, that it ircketh the^, and do
so melancholize themselves therein, that they do wholy neglect themselves,
desiring and vociferatinge for death rather the^ to live so miserablelye in
dishonor. Wherefore also it may happen in the same, (being greevouslye
vvou^ded) that which happened to the Lord of Aussun, which was one of the
most valiant, and most magnanimouse, gentlemen of all France, of whom it
was commonly for a proverb said, Hardines of Assun.
the hardines, and valor d'Aussun, causes us to adhibite credit thereunto,
who, through I know not what mischaunce, and suddayn astonishme^t in the
first charge of the battle at dreux, there arrived and as it vvear
overvvhelmed him such a disgrace, for the which he so greeved him self, and
sorrovved that within fevv days thereafter with sorrovve he died: havinge
solemlye sworn, that he would never any more eat, or drink, with which
resolution hedyed. Contrarily the soldiers so^times, do so valiauntly
co^bate, by the which they vvexe so courageous, and do so joy themselves
therein, and thereby do so exalt themselves, that their heart of te^times is
inflamed, and puffed up with pride of their victory, and honor which they
reap, and enjoy. Which causes great alteration, and change as well in the
body of the one as of the other.

And to speak truth, The perturba^ are of g^ate effect and forces in our
bodies.
such motions and turbatio^ of the mind, are of great forces, in the body of
man, they cause therein either great aegritudes and disseases, or else death: for
if to be the motions, and perturbations of the mind, have pover to increace
the natural caloure, or to diminis he the same, of causing the same to dravve
in wards, or to expel the same outvvardes and to spread it self by the
whole body: and such motions of the natural calour, which do reduce with
the^ the vital spirits, and the blood, is an occasion of all disseases, and
of health: there must then certaynlye subseqvute, that the said motions, and
perturbationes of the soul, and mind, have all power in their hands of our
health.

So that it is even as Aristotle, Lib. de motu animalis Chap. 5. says, that
the motions, and turbations of the mind, do cause such a remotio^ and
alteration of the natural caloure: as Hippocrates also testifies the same
unto us sect. 5. of the 6. Epidemiorum, and Galenus Cap. 5. secundae de
Symptomatum causis and Chap. 5. of the second of Methodes; Through
pertubations of the mind, a man may dye.
where he demo^strateth, that there are many which through motione, and
perturbatione of the minds have died: Wherefore Galen also, on the 14. rule,
of the 4. section, of the sixth Epidemiorum, those which internallye, have a
sharp corrodent caloure, (wherefore by by so much the more we must prohibit
the vvounded) to abstayn from ire, and choler, and from all turbations of the
mind, vvherbye the humors might be moved. The said Galen in his book de
sanitate tuenda demonstrateth, that all turbations of the soul and all motions
of the mind, do ingendre great quantitye of Cholera vvherby are caused great
infla^matio^s and fluxions in the vvounded part and per conseqvence a
Gangraena, and sometimes in the end a suddayne death.

Amongst all other turbations of the spirits, Joy is that which ought to
cause the least accidents unto our bodies, notvvithstanding was the same so
immoderate, and violent in Chilonio lacedemonico, Suddayne death of Joy.
and in Diagero Rhodiano, both the which so ioyed themselves, perceavinge
their children victoriouslye to return over their enemies, that of joy they
both immediatlye, and suddaynlye died: for through such immoderate joy, the
blood and the vital spirits of the Heart, are with such veheme^cy reverted
from the Heart, and diffused and disperced, through the universal body that
the Heart, is vvholye destitute of his natural caloure, and the person must
necessarilye fall into syncopizatione, or fayntnes, out of which commonly
follovveth death: Virtues of moderate joy.
But if the joy be moderate, it fortifyeth, and strengthens the animale, and
the naturalle virtues, stirs up the vital spirits, and suggerateth the
digestione, and is consequently commodious for all the constitutione of man's
body, vvherthrough the Ioynctes, are throughely soacked, and moystened,
because of the humiditye which is disperced through the whole massa of the
blood, so that by this means, the wounds are better mundified, and
incarnated and those parts do increace, and pingvifye.

Effects of Cholera.
In like sort also does Cholera, or anger, and yet also more, then the
immoderate joy: because heerby, besides all this that in the spirits and
humors of the body is caused great corrvptione and they through their
great heat, and caloure chance to inflame, and by this means consequently,
the whole habitvde of the body is replete with putride agues, how little
sick soever the person be, which foresayed agues, if they chance to afflict
the patient unto death as it oftentimes happens, we most commo^lye then
attribute the same unto his vvound, Accidents of sorrovve.
as if of the Chyrurgiane he had not binne well handled, and not to the ague.
Is it not evidente enoughe unto us, what accidents are caused through
sorrovv, and grief, how healthful, and sovnd soever the person be which
is therewith intrapped? for she so reserateth, and as it wear strictly
occludeth the Heart, that by noe means there can engendre any vital
spirits, and how fevv soever there are, yet they may not be dispercede with
the blood through the whole body, because the same is gross, and tenebrous,
by the which the vital virtues, and al their acco^plices, are debilitated:
so that in the end a man is in his mind vexed, and hebede, The mela^cholicke
do hate themselves.
the Heart omitteth all joy, and pleasure, he odiously hates himself,
fallinge into desperatione, and raginge, havinge lost his livelye color in
his face, consuming the body, vvherby oftentimes must follovv death.

It will not also be alienate unto our purpose, to the a poroving of my
sayings, that I here recite that which the father of eloquence has vvritte^
ad Atticum, the words vvherof are these: It wear an excellent matter my
good friend Atticus, that man could live, without meat, or drink: but yet a
far more excellelle^ter matter if so be without any envy, and hate we
could Live: because those viandes which we eat, do corrupt nothing else
the^ our humors, but the traiterous envy, and sorrovv, do consume us eve^
unto the bones: Envye, and malice consume the bones, and corrode the entralls,
as we plainly may behoulde: for man sickeneth, through some certain envye,
and malice, of the which he by continuance of time dies. Do thou not know
by experience, that two torturors, which will deprive a man of life, that
the torturer of grief, and sorrovve is the most cruellest, yea then of the
Gluttonye? Effects of stupefactione.


Nether may we here omit to recense, and speak of the obstupesce^ce, and
fear, vvhervvith the covvardes, and faynte hearted are oftentimes touched, and
taken: This stupor causes in us, the same accide^tes which the sorrovve
causes but somvvhat greater for the time: for this fore said stupefactione,
and fear, expulseth from him, and retracteth tovvarde the heart (but with
more festination, and more raptnes, then the sorrovv) the blood and the vital
spirits, vvherfor we may perceave, that the face in the time of
stupefactione, and fear, waxes pale, and the external parts could, with
tremblinge of the whole body: the Belly relaxateth, and the speech fails,
with a great reverberation of the heart, because that through the great
quantity of blood, and of the spirits, which suddaynly do retire
thethervvardes, being almost suffocated can very difficultlye move it self,
but greatly desires to be refreshed, and discharged of such a sarcinatione, so
that oftentimes there follovveth death, because the blood being drawn
toward the Heart, suffocateth it self there, and by that means the
natural calor and the vital spirits being extingvished, Error of the
vulgar, and common poeple.
without the which the life of man can not be preserved.

If so be that any body being vvounded, through perturbatio^s of the mind
do chance to dye, the vulgar and common poeple, will not attribute the
occasion of death unto chose praecedent, or praenominated occasions, but far
more to the negligence, and ignorance, of the Chyrurgian, which has not
intreacted him, as it wear convenient he had done, Fear and nicenes do
impeach health.
although that those which have a more sovvnder judgment of such occasions,
will judge clane contrary thereunto, and others. The like also may be said of
those, which will not allow of the will, and intent of the Chyrurgian,
nether of any other remedies which wear commodious, and proffitable for his
health, being either to timorous, or delicate, to suffer any apertion, which
for his disease had binne necessary, to administre issue, and passage to some
corrodent matter, or parcells of bones, that lie there praepared and ready to
be taken out, which by their remansione in that place, do also corrupt the
finitimate parts, do alter and permutate the remanent part of bone, and
corrupt the Marrovve, vvherby the health, can not suddaynlye follow, as the
Chyrurgiane is exoptatinge, and vvishinge for the same, yea also and by this
means oftentimes remain incurable, by which occasion the Chyrurgiane, The
Historye of Duke d'Aumalle afterward Duke of Guyse.
with his Patient must hope for that which his Patient will not suffer, and
yet notwithstanding is required of his disease. And to this end Du Bellay,
recites in his memoryes, that the Duke d'Aumall, son to the Duke a Gvyse,
being mortally vvou^ded, with a spli^ter of a lau^ce, which pierced his Eye,
said to the Chyrurgians, entreat, or handle not my son as a Prince, or
mighty Lord, but as a Pioner, or servant: which was also an occasion of
his resanation, because he suffered, Contemplation of instruments.
that the tronchone of the Lance, which stuck clean through his head, to be
with force, and violence drawn therout.

And if therefore we desire to enter into the conte^platio^ of the diversityes
of instrumeme^tes vvhervvith the vvou^des are made, we shall then find
sufficient occasion, to establishe the unexpected death considering only the
matter vvherof the wounds are received, as well of the small, as great
wounds. Those which have written of Agriculture, Whervvith the wound is
made must be considered
or tillage, and Gardening, as Cato Plinius, and Columella say, that theris
great difference, whether a tree be with an Iron knife engraffed, or with a
knife of Bone. And we make little or not difference, whether our bodies are
vvounded with Lead, Iron or Brass, seeing that brass being mixed withdraw the
matter of our wounds resolves it self into viriditye, which corrodeth the
flesh, and causes sometimes such an inflammatio^, that death thereafter
follovveth. Nether is it sufficient, that in short time, we have accommodated
this mettle unto our ruin, but now by little and little we make it four
cornerde, which is far more daungerouse, the^ if it wear round, because
through the quadrangulatenes thereof, it rescindeth, cutteth and breaks in
pieces all that vvhero^ it glaunceth, without any small hope of resanatione:
as also sometimes the bullets are fastened together with coppervvyer by which
means they cut a sundre all flesh, veins, arteryes and Synnues, which are
in that part.

And because that those men, which co^monlye we must give account of our
cures, A notable Historye of the daughter of Nerio.
ar far more stirred up through examples the^ with any reason, what example
is it of the daughter of Nerio which is discribed in the fifte book of
Epidem: Hippocratis, which being but of the age of 20. years, and being
smitten iestingly, of one of her playfellovves, and friends, with the palm of
the hand, on her forehead, Note the circumstances of the blow and the death
will seem more admirable.
is thereof grown mute, asthmaticke, or short of respiratio^ and fallen into
a convulsione, and tremblinge, and so the ninthe day thereafter died. True will
the backbiter or sclaunderer say that chanced through the commotio^ of the
brains: what answer? of such a little blovv, which with the palm of the
hand was done, and of a maiden, friend and playfellovve, iestinglye strikinge
a maid of tvventye years? Why should not then the same commotione of a
varice, or bursted vain, not only in the Brains, but in the Breast also,
which happens to a souldioure, who has ridden the space of ten, or twelve
hovvres long on a hard trottinge Horse, and who before has taken great
pains, and travayle, and has led an inordinate manner of victitatione, the
veins of the Lunges, and the Heart spanned, and extended, or svvollen, with
wine which is as it wear a corselet unto them, Wine is necessary for
soldiers, and combatates.
vvhervvithe they adorn, and arm themselves, when as they assault their
enemies, and especially in Battle, vvher they do straygne themselves with
lovvde clamors and scritchinges, and with fightinge, and furiouslye
assaultinge, not dallyinge, or playinge with their enimyes, but bouldlye
incountring them with Lances, on their bodies, and thvvacking the on the
other with courtelasses, and with Pistolls, and Muskettes, shootinge each, at
other, by that means to murdre on another, yea and they also which are
completelye harnassed, being lifted out of their saddles lie one the earth
for the other Horses, Discommodityes of vvarres
to trample one which not only one or two days have binn in great trouble
but the whole before vvinter have suffered in tolerable could, and marched
through, rain, vvind hayle, and Snow, or else have travayled the whole
summer, through extreme heat of the sun, and have received all the iniuryes
of time have bin hardlye lodged yea and sometimes under the resplende^t
stars, living on his pray which he has gotten, sometimes half dressed, or
ravve, hott or could not tarryinge the time, of the meals sometimes being
replete with, filthye, stinckinge and corrupt viandes, and for his drinck
harshe, noughty and tappi^ges of wine, or else foul and impure puddle, yea and
stinckinge water, havinge consumed most of his time with nocturnall
vigilations, labor, fear, stupor, anger, and melancholye.

Many there are which for want of succoure do dye.
Others dye because in time they are not dressed and succored, which as yet
not long a go is happened, unto our great sorrovv, and lamentatione, to
Captain Roux, who was shot in his cheek, and rising, to avoyde a
clistery, which was administered unto him, had such a fluxione of blood out
of his wound, during the space of eight hovvres, without finding any
Chyrurgiane which could restraygne the blood, so that in the end he was
constrained to yealde his spirit, my partakers, or compagnions, Ponget, le
Gendre, and Hubert, and I, being charged to tarry with the King that night in
the trenches: therefore the Chyrurgians ought noe more to be blamed, then when
the disease is so deeplye rooted, that there is noe more remedy or cure for the
same, for as we say by the common proverb, or oulde adagye.

To serotine does Doctor then begin,
When the disease to deep is rooted in.
Many things are oftentimes vva^tinge unto the vvou^ded.
There are otherwise many things vvanting by the vvou^ded, vvhervvith we might
succoure the^, and solace the^ as it is requisite we should. We see
oftentimes great Lords lodged in an aperte place vvher the vvyndes blow on
al sides, being destitute of oulde linen to dress them with, and have very
small store of victualles, and drinck, I here omit the poor soldiers, who
being vvounded must lodge on the earth.

Objection.
Thereto may now be ansvvered: I confess that sometimes of the year are
intemperate, and inordinate, that the air also is infected, and corrupted and
that the vvounded also have want, and are destitute of many things, and
breefly to conclude, that many of the above rehearsed things do fail:
notwithstanding there are many cured without any accidents chauncinge to
their wounds, and for whose sake take little pains, and have noe great
expenses, although they are very sorelye vvounded and contrarily, other of
little and shallovv vvou^des do dye. Answer.
To this object I answer, that all wounds which seem to be larg and
ample, are not therefore mortal or perilous, as are the great carnal or
fleshye dissolutions or wounds, vvherin none of the worthiest parts are
touched which are necessary to the life of man, vvherin are nether hurt
great Veins, Arteryes or synnues, but which are only great, and cut in the
flesh, as in the Buttocke, in the calfe of the Legs or in an Arm and yet
notwithstanding be called a great wound, not being so dangerous, as the
least punctio^ of a synnue is, or the hurt of a great Vain or Arterye, or else
a little fissure of the Cranium, or any small thrust in the Breast, or the
inferior part of the Bellye, percinge into the concavitye of the same.
Daungerouse wounds
And if so be there wear any which of such wounds wear cured, being
great wounds, not consideringe the apertione, but because of the vvou^ded
part they ought to be well disposed, to buste and strong, to resist such an
evell, and impeach the accidents which happen thereunto, that they must also
be rightlye disposedand tempered without any of the worthy parts, or those
which are necessary unto life being thervvithe polluted or corrupted, and such
may easilye be cured: Necessary things a good curatione.
So that those which are not vvholye sovvnde of body havinge received such a
wound, are in great danger of death, as others considering the difference of
the time and of the difference of the body, and body, and of parts thereof:
there are some, which are of so good a temperature, that they with great
facility are cured of such vvou^des, the which in others bodies vvear mortal:
Contrarily there are some persons, which have received a vvound in some abiecte
and not necessary part or Ioyncte, without profoundly penetrating the same,
vvherof notvvithsta^ding they died, either through the constitution of the time
or through the disposition of the body, the humors vvher of have their
deflue^ces toward the vvounded part or else through any other occasions,
here before alleged: but the vulgar poeple, can not compraehend all these
circumstances, and considirations, as the Chyrurgians do in such persons.

For to speak truth we look on the time, The vulgar, and common poeple, ca^
not so deeplye judge and consider any thing as the Chyrurgiane.
one the year, and day, number of poeple, all which have binne the one as
sorelye hurt, or vvoundede as the other, yet for all that, those which we
esteem most daungerously vvou^dede, and we judge to be out of all hope, are
so^times first of all cured: VVher of we do not so much admire, after we
have after death anotomizede the dead corpse: for besides there wound we
find, an other apparente occasion of death.

As it is as yet in fresh memory happened to the Lord of Bellay Barron of
Tovarce, Historye of my lord of of Bellay.
King at d'Ivetot, who having received a shot before Rove^, or Roane in his
left Arm, vvher of the focille of the Elbovve was broken and the wound
being in good suppu^atio^, and yelding good matter, and the flesh very
rubicund, and grayned as we vvoulde desire, and the Arm remayninge in his
natural dispositione, as well above, as beneathe, without any pain, or
inflammatione, very fevv, or not agues at all adioyninge thereunto,
notvvithstanding al which being brought to his house, twenty days after his
vvound received, is he fallen into a hot, venoumous, or furious ague, which
accompagniede him unto the thirtith day, in which day he died, how great
pains, and labor soever the expertest Doctors of Physic, and Chyrurgians
and amongst other the right worshipful Mr. Amboyse Dr. of Physic, an
ordinary Physicione to the King, have therein taken, whose experience is
sufficientlye knovve^, the foresayed Arm with the vvou^d always remayninge
is his former estate, The occasions of the death of the King of d'Iveror.
and disposition. Now the corpse being Anotomized, we perceaved his Lunges to
be clean corrupt, and replete with obdurate schirrouse vlcerations, his right
Kidney also wholy polluted and much matter in his blather: which was the
occasion of his death, and not the wound it is a thing therefore most
certain, that if so be his entralls had binn sou^de without doubt he might
have binne cured of his wound, because the same nether of it self, nor of
any other accidents was mortal.

An other Historye of my Lord of Gyuri.
The contrary heerof chanced, to the great contentation of all the Nobility,
to my Lord of Gyuri who having received, a terrible shot, in his sinistre
shoulder, the entrance vvherof was right in the ioyncture, the bullet havinge
touched a great part of the apophysis of the bone of the Arm, pearcinge a
long the Omoplate, and remaining, in the inferiore angle of the foresayed
Omoplate, which bullet was happily extracted and drawn out by Mr. Lavenot,
svvoren Chyrurgiane to the King, which very excellently has dressed him the
first time: notwithstanding, he is of this great vvound (I say great
wound consideringe that part of the body) wholy cured, without perceaving
therein any bad accidents.

Nature cures all diseases.
The which we must attribute, partly to the good Temperature compositione,
and nature, (which must cure all diseases,) when as she is evel entreated of
expert, and learnede Physicions, and Chyrurgians, and thereof aided, as very
excellentlye has done amongst others, the right worshipful Mr. Portaile,
Counceller, and chief Chyrurgian to the King, which as now is chief amongst
us: and of Mr. Gillis des Rus, his Chyrurgiane, which dressed him: and we are
here farther to note, and observe, that there may be an other which being
vvou^ded in the same place of his body,and shall be treacted of the self same
Chyrurgians, and shall yet for all that dye.

And for the confirmatione, of all that which is before rehearced, I will
conclude this my Apology, through my Lords heerevnder nominated, beginning
with my Lord de Hallot de Montmorency, who being on Horsbacke by the City
of Rovan, received a shot of a canon, of the which his Horse died, and he
being prostrated on the earth, his Leg being in dives pieces broken right
under the Ioyncte of the Knee, notwithstanding all which, with his good
disposition and nature has co^bated against all the malice of time, and
magnitude of the wound, being very successivelye cured of the right
worshipful Mr. Martel, Chyrurgiane to the King, A^o the History.
who is very expert in all the operations of Chyrurgerye. Contrarilye, my
Lord the Baron of Salignac, being vvounded only with a simple shot of a
handgunn, without any fracture of bones, in the end dyed thereof, al though
notwithstanding he was assisted by the right worshipful Mr. Pouget, also
one of the Kings Chyrurgians and chieffe in Montpelliers havinge seen the
hour, in the which the Gangraena chanced to his wound, many fluxions
oppressed him, by which means he very difficultlye could be cured: Which
we must only attribute unto his te^perature, which was not so good as in
deed it wear to be exoptated it had.

The most happy cure which Mr. des Hayes has effected, A another History.
one also of the Kings Chyrurgians, which is a very wise man in the art of
Chyrurgerye on my Lord de Vic, gouvernoure for the King in St. Denis, who
with diverse wounds was vvounded, and especially in his head by the
crown of the head, and one the sagittalle suture which was rescided clean
overthvvarte, and is thereof very ominously cured vvherby is demo^strated unto
us, what the good dispositione of the body can do, which co^bated against
the iniuryes, and malice of time, and many other more, inquietudes, wear
clean contrary unto him: vvherin the foresayed Mr. des Hayes, has used great
consideration, to his perfect resanatione.

The same allsoe happened, in my Lord the Duke of esperno^, An other History.
who being vvounded with a greateshott, which dilaniated a part of his
inferior lip, had deprived him of certain of his teeth, and a part of his
chavvbone, penetratinge, and taking his issue close by the vain Iugularis,
was cured of Monst. le Gendre, and Surlin, Chyrurgians to the foresayed Duke:
out of the which we may plainly note, that not only the iunioritye, or youth
and good temperature, are not only profitable unto the resanatione of
wounds, but also the good constitutione of the time: For a little before
(which was about the besieging of Chartres) the^ died most of all the
vvou^ded, The constitutione of the time is commodious to resanatione
how sound notvvithstanding soever they wear, and how little soever they
wear vvounded: which partlye we must attribute to the badde constitution of
the time, as in deed at that time it was a disordred vveather: because in a
short time thereafter, all the vvounded wear of their wounds cured: and
amongst others my Lord the Earl of Flex, An other History.
who in the end of the besieginge, received a short of a Canon in the
inferior part of his Bellye, vvherof it was vvholye plettered even unto the
Peritoneum, the vvound being almost the length of a foot, in longitude, of
half a foot, in latitude, as Mr. Portayle and Samboyse can witness, which a
long time administered help unto them. An other History.
On the same time, my Lord of Favolle was cured, of a shot, which brake
both the focilles of his Leg, a little above the anckle, which allsoe was
cured of the right vvorshipfulle Mr. Portaile, and d'Amboyse, and of the most
ominouse, and dextrous hand of Mr. Billarde, ordinarye Chyrurgiane to the King,
and of Mr. Biron.

And for an inventio^, or practice, which we might say to be wholy against
reason, amongst many others more which chanced at Chartres: there was the
Chamberlayne of my Lord the Earl of Chiverny, An other History.
called the Pietmontois, who was vvou^ded, on his head with a raper,
vvherby his Parietale was clea^ rescided through, yea and clean through the
Dura, and Pia matter also, pearcing the depth of ones finger into the substance
of the Brains: vvherof in the second dressinge, clean through the
dissolutione of the Craniu^, there issued out as much of his Brains, as the
quantity of the little finger in lo^gitude, and crassitude thereof:
notvvithstanding all this is he in the presence of the right worshipful Mr. Le
Febure, and Duret, sworn Physicions to the King, and other Doctors of this
profession out of Paris, which are very expert in Chyrurgerye, which wear
also assistantes in this disease, and was of me completelye cured, without
havinge retained any accidente, or impedimente thereof: Diverse Chyrurgians of
the city of Chartres stood heerby, and amongst the rest was Mr. Fransoys
Cheaureau, and Michel Fauveau.

At the same time trepanede M Gabriell du Tertre, An other History.
a very expert Chyrurgiane in all his operationes, a certain vvomane which
was threescore year of age, or more, who had a fracture in her
occipitalle parts of the head: he had besides her a little page, or lackye
in hands, who had his Os Petrosum brokene and splitte, and some part of
the Parietale. In like sort also trepaned Mr. Gillis Pillier, a most expert
Chyrurgiane, a Tripeseller, called Mr. Laurence, who had his membrane Dura
matter cleft a sunder: all which foresayed patientes have received their
complete resanatione: we must here also farther note, that within the space
of two months therbefore all those which wear vvounded in the Head died,
notwithstanding all the secourse we could do them yet for all that they
dyed suddaynlye.

All which being noted, we must attribute the deaths of so many valiant
Capitaynes, Conclusione of the Apologye.
and worthy Lords, and brave soldiers, on such occasions, and disorders,
and not on the fault as if they wear inconvenientlye treacted, and
solicited, whether either it wear through young, or oulde Chyrurgians. Or
else we will conclude it rightlye, with the Aphorism, and common proverb,
it is always good Luck, as long as a man falls not and breaks his
Neck.

As Hesiodus said, sometimes is the day our mother, and sometims our
stepmother.

End of the Apologye for the Chyrurgians.
THE INDEX OF THE MOST ESPECIAL, and notablest things contained in this
work of Chyrurgerye, vvherin the F denotateth the lease.
A
A Bullet sometimes, carries somethinges with it into the body. Fol. 7. A
bullet sometimes pearceth through the grissles. Fol. 8 A bullet through his
ponderousnes sincketh dovvnevvardes. Fol. 8 A Chyrurgian may easilye in
searching a broken scull be deceaved. Fol. 9 A certain Ligature. Fol. 39 A
Chyrurgiane is the servant of Nature. Fol. 8 A dubble inscisione in a dubble
Hernia. Fol. 22 A dissease being cured, most commonly leaves some relic
behind it. Fol. 51 A fingercase of Lattinne. Fol. 39 A great wound is taken
three manner of vvayes. Fol. 2 A historye of the daughter of Nerius. Fol. 20 A
head noughtilye formede. Fol. 50. and 53 A monstruose Child. Fol. 36 A
notable historye. Fol. 7 A notable sentence. Fol. 50 A remedy against the
corruptinge of the gu^mes. Fol. 24 A suture, or commissure what they be. Fol.
9 A thumb being vvholye mutilate. Fol. 39 A tryede remedy, for sinckinge of
the palate. Fol. 25 A true sign of the imbicillitye of any part. Fol. 50
Accidents of a departed svvellinge. Fol. 2 Accidents of the Dropsye. Fol. 20
Accidents which may ensue through cutting to high of the palate. Fol. 25
Accidents proceeding out of badde phlebotomy. Fol. 27 Accidentalle
imbicillitye. Fol. 51 Accidents of sorrovve. Fol. 52 Actualle Cauterye. Fol.
39 Admonition concerning all great Apostematio^s. Fol. 18 Admonitione for the
lettinge of water or matter go from the Breast. Fol. 29 Admonitione for the
Chyrurgiane concerning the Polipum. Fol. 22 Admonitione for the Chyrurgiane,
concerning the extraction of young Children out of their mothers body. Fol.
35 Admonitione in the applicatione of the actual Cauteryes. Fol. 42
Admonitione concerning the bloodye flixe. Fol. 49 Advice of Celsus. Fol. 5
After what sort we ought to list out the trepanede bone. Fol. 12 After what
manner we must in sovving collocate the patiente. Fol. 16 After what sort
we must thrust in again the Net. Fol. 16 After what sort we ought to tie
the teeth. Fol. 27 Against rotten, hollovve, and stinckinge teethe. Fol. 26
Agreement of Mr. Gourmelin and Mr. Pare. Fol. 38 All great wounds are
dangerous. Fol. 51 An excellent similitude. Fol. 5 An other fashon of sovving
of the bellye, according to some men's sayings. Fol. 17 An other condition,
whereon we must consider, in the openinge of a svvellinge. Fol. 18 An exellent
consideration to be had of the Paracentese. (20 An other means to cure the
Polipum. Fol. 22 An instrument called Staphilagres. Fol. 25 Antiades. Fol. 25
Aneurisma is dangerous. Fol. 30 An artery which of the Aucthor was tied
above the Aneurisma. Fol. 30 An other practice concerning the Fistles of the
Fundament. Fol. 35 An astringent plaster on a fracture. Fol. 46 An excellent
observatione. Fol. 47 Anglevvyse figure the natural situation of the arm. (47
An ague being cured, commonly leaves and Empiema after her. Fol. 51
Applicatione of diverse corrosives. Fol. 20 Applicatione of Boxes. Fol. 32
Applicatione of the superioure Ligature, in a broken Leg. Fol. 46 Apertione
in the Scrotum, by the thrusting through of a silk threde. Fol. 22 Apertione
in the Veins, and arteryes, of the temples of the head. Fol. 29 Apostemations
found in the vvorthyeste parts of the body. Fol. 52 Archigenes. Fol. 20
Ascites is subject to Paracentese. Fol. 20 Astringentia. Fol. 49 Attractive
ligature. Fol. 45 Ancient Chyrurgians cauterized the Varices. Fol. 31 Autumn
enimye to all pulmonicalle wounds. Fol. 51
B
Back badlye formede. Fol. 50 Badde signs. Fol. 3 Basilica. Fol. 29 Basilica
is dangerous to be phlebotomized. Fol. 30 Black vain. Fol. 29 Bloodyeflixe.
Fol. 47 Bones of young Childrene are bent invvardlye. Fol. 12 Bones subjected
to all manner of disseases. Fol. 33 Boxes may be applyede on all places of the
body. Fol. 32 Breast baddelye formede. Fol. 50 Broad, and narrovve lancets.
Fol. 28
C
Canckerous almo^des, may not be tyede, nor cut of. Fol. 26 Cauterizatione of
the Caries must be reiterated. Fol. 34 Cauteryes to cauterize deepelye. Fol. 40
Cauteryes for those which are troublede with the lazarye. Fol. 40 Cauteryes
of Mr. Cheval. Fol. 41 Cauterye of Mr. Iaqves de Ville neufue. ibidem Cauterye
of Mr. Rasse d'esneux ibidem. Cauterye which in all haest can be made. Fol. 41
Cauterye in the Fibra. Fol. 42 Celsus. 9 his manner of sovvinge of the Bellye.
Fol. 17 Cephalica. 29 openede without danger. Fol. 30 Chirurgerye is
auncienter then Physic. Fol. 1 Chyrurgerye must not rashlye be effectede.
Fol. 8 Choice of the place where we should extirpate any ioyncte. Fol. 37
Circumiacent part in all vlcerations in cauterizinge must be freede. Fol. 34
Cleavinge of the Ears, and nostrelles. Fol. 23 Clisteryes made in diverse
fashons. Fol. 49 Coloboma, curtum. Fol. 23 Columella. Fol. 24 Comparison. Fol.
50 Conclusione of the Apologye. Fol. 54 Consideratione for the wounds of the
head. Fol. 3 Consideration to be had before the givinge of report. Fol. 4
Consideration, of Bullets. Fol. 6 Consideratione in fasteninge of the Ligature.
Fol. 45 Consideratione on the time of the year. Fol. 51 Constitutione of the
wound. Fol. 52 Constitutione of the time, is commodious to resanatione. Fol.
54 Contemplatione of instruments. Fol. 53 Continuance of the manner rightly to
phlebotomise. Fol. 28 Continuance of raspinge of the Caries of bones. Fol. 33
Continuance of keepinge open an vlceration. Fol. 43 Convulsione in wounds is
very dangerous. Fol. 2 Corrosive with an inscisione in an Escara. Fol. 20
Council of Hippocrates to dravve of the water. Fol. 21 Council of aunciente
professors, for the curinge of the Varices. Fol. 31 Corrodinge matter causes
many badde accide^tes. Fol. 52 Cure of the tunge tyinge. Fol. 24 Cure of
Ranula, and reversione thereof. Fol. 24 Cure of Aneurisma. Fol. 30 Cure of a
Varice. Fol. 31 Cure of the putrefacted bones. Fol. 33 Cure of the Panaris.
Fol. 39 Cure of a croockede finger. ibidem Cure of the Dysenteria. Fol. 48
D
Daungerouse wounds. Fol. 52 Descriptione of Physic. Fol. 1 Descriptione of
the signs, of a dilaniated Cranium. Fol. 8 Descriptione of sovvinge. Fol. 23
Descriptione of the Dropsye. Fol. 20 Descriptione of Aneurisma. Fol. 30
Descriptione of a Varice. Fol. 31 Descriptione of Horseleches. Fol. 31
Descriptione of horn boxes. Fol. 32 Descriptione of naturalle bones. Fol. 33
Decentlye to vvinde. Fol. 45 Descriptione of the bloodyeflixe. Fol. 47
Difference betvveene these three vlcerations Ateroma, Steatoma, and Meliceres.
Fol. 18 Difference of Boxes. Fol. 32 Differences of the Cauteryes not properly
taken. Fol. 93 Differences of the Cauteryes simpletye taken. Fol. 40
Differences of Cauteryes concerning their figure. 40 concerning their
action. ibidem Number. ibid. and manner of applicatione. ibidem Diverse
miscostruinges of this word Chyrurgerye. Fol. 1 Diverse accidents of the
wounds of the head. Fol. 9 Diploe what it is. Fol. 12 and 10 Diverse forms
of future according to the diversitye of the wound. Fol. 14 Discommoditye of
havinge the leg croockede. Fol. 47 Discommodityes of wars. Fol. 53 Diverse
Chyrurgicall operations. Fol. 26 Diverse considerations of cauteryes. Fol. 42
Diverse fictions. Fol. 50 Dressinge of an extirpated membre the blood being
stenchede. Fol. 38 Dropsye of the breast and her tokens. Fol. 19 Dubble band in
phlebotomye. Fol. 28 Dysenteria improperlye taken. Fol. 47 Dysenteria properlye
taken. Fol. 48
E
Ear vain. Fol. 29 Ease good for all wounds. Fol. 51 Effects of Cholera.
Fol. 52 Effects of stupefactione. Fol. 52 Elevatorium. Fol. 7 Elevatorium
what it is. Fol. 13 Entrance of the stomach being hurt. Fol. 4 Entralls
being out of the Bellye, must everye one be again restorede into his former
place, and natural statione, if it be possible. Fol. 16 Error of common poeple
Fol. 53 Example. Fol. 8 Example of Hippocrates. Fol. 8 Example of Albucrasis.
Fol. 8 Example of the situatione of any disseasede part. Fol. 47 Excellentie
of Chyrurgerye. Fol. 5 Experience of the Aucthor in extirpatione. Fol. 37
Expulsive ligament. Fol. 44 Extirpation of a ioyncte is very daungerouse. Fol.
37 Eye vain. Fol. 29 Eye vain in the hand. Fol. 29
F
Fear and nicenes do impeach health. Fol. 53 Fifth incarnative suture. Fol.
15 First way to cure the sinckinge of the palate. Fol. 25 First kind of
ligament. Fol. 44 Fissures recollect themselves sometimes. Fol. 10 Fistles of
the fundament are either occult, or aperte. Fol. 24 Fitlye to apply the
Cauterye on the arm. Fol. 42 Flesh, with flesh unites far sooner the^
skin, with skin. Fol. 14 Fluxus Hepaticus. Fol. 48 Foolish persuasione.
Fol. 52 For what occasion we ought to trepane. Fol. 10 For great pain, and
doloure in the teeth. Fol. 27 For simple fractures. Fol. 45 For reiterated
cauteryes. Fol. 42 Fourth incarnative suture. Fol. 15 Four especialle
conditions, which the Chyrurgiane must consider, before he open any tumor.
Fol. 18 Form and figure of ligamentes. Fol. 44 From whence we must take our
indicatione of the greatenes of a wound. Fol. 18 Furriers suture. Fol. 16
Fire, the sureste remedy for corruption of bones, (33
G
Gastroraphia. Fol. 16 Gluttonye the occasion of much evell. Fol. 51 Gross
blood in phlebotomy does nothing else then drop. Fol. 40 Good doctrine for a
Chyrurgiane. Fol. 8 Gurgulio. Fol. 2
H
Hand, an instrumente of instruments, Fol. 39 Hardines of Aussun. Fol. 52
Hepatica. Fol. 29 Hemorrhoidalle vain. Fol. 30 High situatione of a broken
membre. Fol. 46 Hinderance of the sanatione of the tunge tyinge. Fol. 24
Hippocrates in his Porthet. Fol. 2 Hippocrates has binne deceaved. Fol. 9
Hippocrates in prognosticis, and third book of diseases. Fol. 19 Hippocrates
concerning the caries of bones. Fol. 33 Hippes baddelye formede. Fol. 50
Historye of Albucasis. Fol. 26 Historye of Messalinus. Fol. 31 Historye of
Albucasis concerning the corruption of bones. Fol. 34 Historye of Duke
d'Aumalle, afterward Duke of Guise. Fol. 53 Historye of my lord of Bellay.
Fol. 34 Historye of my lord Gyuri. ibidem. Horseleeches are enimyes to all
pingueditye. Fol. 32 How we shall espy the hayrye fissure. Fol. 9 How
great the apertione must be for trepanatio^. Fol. 11 How to sovve a wound
convenientlye. Fol. 14 How we ought to make the apertione in the Empiema,
with a lancet, or with a corrosive, Fol. 19 How we ought to effect the
openinge of the Dropsye. Fol. 20 How we ought to make the apertio^ in the
Hernia. Fol. 21 How we ought to cure the Polypum. Fol. 22 How we ought to
cure the cloven lips. Fol. 23 How we ought to cut the tunge tying in young
Childrene. Fol. 24 How we ought to dravve a tooth. Fol. 27 How we should
conveniently phlebotomize. Fol. 28 How we should stench blood. Fol. 29 How
we should open the veins of the hands. and feet. Fol. 29 How we should
open an Arterye. Fol. 30 How to cut away a bursten vain. Fol. 31 How we
should cause a horseleech to fall of. Fol. 32 How we should restraygne the
blood after the horseleech has sucked. Fol. 32 How we should bind a patent
fistle of the fundament. Fol. 34 How we should situate the woman in
dravinge a child out of her body. Fol. 36 How we should convenientlye
extirpate a ioyncte. (38 How we should tie the ligature to stop blood. Fol.
28 How we should gentlelye take of a ligament from a fracture. Fol. 45
Hurtes of the blather. Fol. 4 Hydrocele. Fol. 22
I
Inanimate things feel effects of the moon. Fol. 51 Incarnative suture and
her fiye manner of vvayes. Fol. 15 Incarnative ligature. Fol. 44 Indication
how we may easilye, or difficultlye attain to the bloodye flixe. Fol. 48
Infusione of Rhubarbe. Fol. 49 Inscisione must be done, before inflammatione.
Fol. 11 Instructione how to work vvyselye. Fol. 7 Inscision of the Scrotum.
Fol. 21 Instructione to know whether the extirpatede member must be
stenchede or let bleed. Fol. 38 Intent of the Aucthor. Fol. 5 Intention of
the Aucthor concerning the fistles of the fundament. Fol. 24 Intent of the
Aucthor of Phlebotomye. Fol. 27 Inventione of sciences. Fol. 1 Inventione of
the Cauteryes is through nature shevvede unto us. Fol. 40 In phlebotomising of
those which are phrensye, we ought to make but a small apertione. Fol. 28 In
what persons the dravving of water must be used, and in what it must be
left. Fol. 20 In what places the scarifications may be made. Fol. 21 In what
persons the operatione of the haremouthes is dangerous. Fol. 23 In what
parts the Cauteryes must be applyede. Fol. 40 In what parts we ought to
apply the Seton. Fol. 43 Irregulated season of the year, aultereth our
bodies. Fol. 51 It is surer to make an inscision, in the fistles of the
fundament then to tie them. Fol. 35 Judgment must be providentlye given. Fol.
4 Iugularis vena. Fol. 29
K
Knowledge by sight of a corrupted bone. Fol. 33 Knowledge through tacture.
ibidem Knowledge by the matter. Fol. 33
L
Legs of a difficult resanatione. Fol. 50 Ligament must be broader then the
dissease. Fol. 44 Ligament for the dissease. Fol. 44 Ligament for the part.
Fol. 45 Ligamentes for shot wounds, with crushinge of bones. Fol. 46
Ligatione of Epoulis, is more certain the^ inscisio^. Fol. 23 Ligature, or
inscisione in the Almondes. Fol. 26 Ligatione of the Elbovve, after
Phlebotomye. Fol. 29 Lips which are cleft in two places. Fol. 23 Lip
vain. Fol. 29 Liqvefactinge fire. Fol. 41 Liver being hurt. Fol. 3
M
Magnitude of the putrefactione in bones. Fol. 33 Malignant air polluteth the
heart. Fol. 51 Man is subject to all influences. Fol. 51 Manner to cure
Epoulis. Fol. 23 Manner how to trepane unto the membrane. Fol. 13 Manner of
applicatione of the Cauterye on the corrupted bone. Fol. 35 Manner to dravve
forth a dead Child. Fol. 36 Manner to dravve out the aqvosity out of a dead
Childs body. ibidem. Manner to elevate again the suncke, and descendede
Matrice. Fol. 37 Manner to praeserve the Cauteryes. Fol. 42 Manner to apply
the transforatione in the neck. Fol. 43 Manner of dressinge of all broken
legs, which may be comparede, with the manner of all ancient Chyrurgians.
Fol. 46 Many men praeserve their lives against the opinione of the
Chyrurgiane. Fol. 6 Many there are which for want of succoure do dye. (53
Many things are oftentimes vvantinge unto the vvoundede. ibidem Master Dvione
an expert Physitione. Fol. 49 Matter of the Vlceratione Ateroma lies enclosed
in a little blather. Fol. 19 Matter of the Potentialle Cauteryes which are
now adays in use. Fol. 41 Master Pare of Cauteryes, ibidem Matter of the
Ligamentes. Fol. 44 Means how to know whether the bullet have taken any
thing with him. Fol. 7 Means to dravve out the head of a dead child, as
yet remayninge in the womb. Fol. 36 Means to find the place in the head to
cauterize. Fol. 42 Means to keep open a Fontanelle. Fol. 43 Means to make
the expulsive Ligamente. Fol. 44 Mediana. Fol. 29 Medicame^tes to be eschuede
in the bloodyflixe. Fol. 49 Membranouse Ligament, or tungeryinge. Fol. 24
Method how to trepane. Fol. 12 Mideler eefe being hurt. Fol. 4 Milte being
hurt. Ibidem
N
Natural situation, which of the aunciente professors is called the right
situatione. Fol. 47 Nature cures all disseases. Fol. 54 Nail which heaveth
up it self may be pricked through. Fol. 21 Necessary things to a good
curatione. Fol. 53 Noe Polypus can through Chyrurgery be curede. Fol. 22 Nose
vain. Fol. 29 Note your form of your trepane in the sculle. Fol. 12 Note the
circumstances of the blow, and the death will seem more admitable. Fol. 53
Nue inventede trepanes. Fol. 13
O
Observatione of the Aucthor. Fol. 9 Observatione in seethinge of the saulte to
the Cauterye. Fol. 41 Occasion of corruptione of Bones. Fol. 33 Occasion of
the death of the king d'Ivetot. Fol. 54 Occasio^e of the Dysenteria. Fol. 28
On what manner in dravving forth a bullet we must collocate the patient. Fol.
6 On what sort we must dravve a bullet out of a ioyncte. Fol. 7 On what
sort the Aucthor tied the arterye on the Aneurisma. Fol. 31 One dissease
follovvinge an other is very daungerouse. Fol. 51 Opinione of Paulus Aegineta.
Fol. 5 Opinione of ancient professors touching inscision. Fol. 9 Opinione of
Hippoc. touching the curing of fractures. Fol. 10 Opinione of Hippoc.
concerning trepanatione. Fol. 10 Opinione of Avicenna touching trepanatione.
Fol. 11 Opinione of Celsus concreninge the apertioue of apostemations. Fol. 17
Opinione of Hippocrates concerning Empiema. Fol. 29 Opinione of Gvido
concerning the fistles of the fundament. Fol. 35 Organicke parts which are
cut of can not be cured again. Fol. 2 Other considerations to be had in
prognosticatione. Fol. 3
P
Paroulis and the means how to cure it. Fol. 23 Parts of Physic. Fol. 1
Parts of Therapeutica. ibidem Patesyede fistles of the fundament. Fol. 34
Patient lyinge on his back can very well suffer phlebotomve. Fol. 29 Paulus
Aegineta. Fol. 8 Penned suture. Fol. 15 Perturbations of mind. Fol. 52
Perturbationes are of great effect in our bodies ibidem. Phlebotomye why it
is difficulte. Fol. 27 Phlebotomye must be done with discretion in the
bloodyeflixe. Fol. 49 Place of the apertione in the vlceration Empiema. Fol. 19
Place vvher we may cut the Varices. Fol. 31 Places whereon we apply the
Cauteryes. Fol. 42 Plain, and smooth situation of a broken membre. Fol. 45
Potentiall Cauteryes and matter thereof. Fol. 41 Practice of the Aucthor. Fol.
13 Practice of the Mr. Floris Philips. Fol. 20 Practice, of the Aucthor
concerning teeth. Fol. 26
Q
Qvantitye of Ligamentes. Fol. 44
R
Ranularis vena. Fol. 29 Raw fruicte causes the bloodyeflixe. Fol. 48 Reason
why a membre must be extirpatede in the ioyncte. Fol. 37 Reason for those
which extirpate a membre, above, or belovve the ioyncte. ibidem. Reason of
Aristot: concerning the bloodyeflixe. Fol. 47 Receipte of the Velvet Cauterye.
Fol. 41 Redivisione of the first kind of Ligament. Fol. 44 Remedies against
the bleedinge of the descidede palate. Fol. 25 Remedies against the
tumefactione Antiades. Fol. 25 Remedies for a vvounded arterye. Fol. 30
Remedies against putrefaction in an Aneurisma. Fol. 31 Remedies against the
Caries. Fol. 24 Remedies to consolidate the vlcerations. Fol. 49 Renuinge of
Phlebotomye. Fol. 29 Root, and original of the Polypus. Fol. 22
S
Salvatella. Fol. 29 Saphena. Fol. 30 Sciatica vena. ibidem Second incarnative
suture. Fol. 15 Second genetalle suture. ibidem Second means to cure the
sinckinge of the palate. Fol. 25 Second Kind of Ligamente. Fol. 44 Second
kind of attractive Ligament. Fol. 45 Seton properlye taken. Fol. 43 Seton
improperlye taken. ibidem Seton with the use thereof ibidem. ibidem Signs
contrary to prognosticatione. Fol. 3 Signs of a deadlye fracture of the
sculle. Fol. 3 Signs when the brains are hurt. ibidem Signs when the
backbone is hurt. Fol. 3 Signs when the heart is vvounded. ibidem Signs to
know when the Trepane is enterede into the Diploe. Fol. 12 Signs when
matter is fullye ripened. Fol. 17 Signs to know the vlcerations Ateromata,
Steatomata, and Melicerides. Fol. 18 Signs of the matter which is retained in
the Breast. (19 Signs of a vvaterburste. Fol. 21 Signs of a venoumouse
Polypus. Fol. 22 Signs of a tractable Polypus. ibidem Signs of a
counterfissure. Fol. 9 Signs to know when the svvollen almondes exvlcerate,
with their remedies. Fol. 26 Signs of an Aneurisma. Fol. 30 Signs of a
venoumouse horseleech. Fol. 31 Signs of a good horseleech. ibidem. Signs
vvherbye the Chyrurgian is hindered, to dravv forth the Child out of his
mothers body. Fol. 35 Signs of a dead Child in his mothers body. Fol. 36
Signs of suppuratione. Fol. 17 Signs when the small guts are hurt. Fol. 48
Signs when the great intestines are hurt. Fol. 48 Similitude. Fol. 50
Situatione of the patient, in the extirpation of a ioyncte. Fol. 37 Situatione
of a ioyncte must be naturalle, and accustomede. Fol. 46 Six things which in
sovvinge must be considered. Fol. 13 Small gutts being cut a sunder, are
incurable. Fol. 16 Some men dye of a small wound. Fol. 4 Some men are cured
contayninge the bullet in their body. Fol. 5 Some wounds are esteemed
small, which indeed are great, and daungerouse. Fol. 51 Sovvinge may not
with any violence be done in the lips of a wound. Fol. 14 Sovvinge of the
haremouth. Fol. 15 Sovvinge of the bellye must not be done as the other
sutures. Fol. 16 Staphilocauston what it is. Fol. 25 Stomach, and guts
being hurt. Fol. 4 Subdivisione of the second inferior ligature in a broken
leg. Fol. 46 Substance of actual Cauteryes. Fol. 46 Substance of the
Cauteryes which the ancient professors used. ibidem Suddayne death
proceedinge of joy. Fol. 52 Suffocatione of the natural caliditye. Fol. 50
Superfluouse comestione, and bibacitye, are not so oppugnant unto us, as is
Melancholye, or sorrovve. Fol. 52 Supernaturalle teeth. Fol. 27 Sutures of the
head variable. Fol. 9 Suture in a separatede place is needelesse. Fol. 13
T
Teethe which grovve forth with an acuitye. Fol. 27 Teeth which stand forth
out of their order, are broken, and vvherin as yet remains some little piece
ibidem. Temporal vain. Fol. 29 Tendones are daungerouse to sovve, and why.
Fol. 13 The apertione of a wound must always be recurvatede dovvnvvardes,
if it be possible. Fol. 46 The apertione in the Hernia, is better to be done
above then under. Fol. 22 The Cauterye makes a greater escara, the^ the hole
of the plaster. Fol. 42 The Child must with the head be dravve^ out of his
mothers body, if it be possible. Fol. 36 The Chyrurgiane can not cure all men.
Fol. 50 The Chyrurgiane is sometimes to late sent for. Fol. 10 The dissease of
a shortened tunge. Fol. 24 The dissease of the tunge after a callouse
vlceratione. ibidem. The figure, or form of wounds. Fol. 2 The forms of
inscisione in phlebotomye. Fol. 28 The hand must be shut. Fol. 47 The head
may not to strictlye be bovvnde, and the reason why. Fol. 20 The hippe must be
stirrede. ibidem The ioyncte being extirpatede, we must dissolve the
ligature. Fol. 38 The leg must be kept right. Fol. 47 The manner of making
an apertione. Fol. 29 The means to dravv out the Polypus. Fol. 22 The means
to cure the palate. Fol. 24 The Melancholicke do hate themselves. Fol. 52 The
operatione to cure these three vlcerations, Ateroma, Steatoma, and Meliceres is
nothing different. Fol. 19 The place vvher, in the Paracentese the apertion
must be made. Fol. 20 The scull is the natural opercle to the brains. Fol. 22
The second instruction in dravving out of bullets. Fol. 6 The second kind of
Dropsye. Fol. 20 The sutures, and temples of the head may sometimes be
trepaned. Fol. 11 The third instructione. Fol. 6 The tumor Empiema externally
sometimes demonstrateth it self. Fol. 19 The vain in Phlebotomye must be
inscided in her middle. Fol. 28 The vain being well openede, yet through the
affrightednes of the patient she droppeth. Fol. 29 The vvounded feels not his
wound at the first dressinge. Fol. 6 The vvou^ded which have binne in the
drivelinge climate, can very difficultlye be curede. Fol. 51 There may not be
any flesh on the bone when we intend to savve it of. Fol. 38 There is but
one expette Chyrurgian in all France. Fol. 50 They which are of most
experience may judge of the poynctes, concerning the bloodyflixe. Fol. 48
Third incarnative suture. Fol. 15 Third generalle stitchinge. Fol. 15 Those
bullets which stick fast in the bones, are very difficult to be drawn out.
Fol. 7 Those who are deprived of any ioyncte are very subject unto the
bloodyeflixe. Fol. 47 Three sorts of sovving by the ancient professors. Fol.
15 Three sorts of Dropsye. Fol. 20 Three things to be considerede in the
collocatione of a broken membre. Fol. 46 Threfoulde means to cure the fistles
of the fundament. Fol. 34 Three things which make Childebirthe difficulte.
Fol. 35 Through perturbatione of mind a man may dye. Fol. 52 Thrustes in the
synnues are daungerouse. Fol. 2 To apply the Cauteryes on the Legs. Fol. 42
To apply the potentiall Cauteryes. Fol. 42 To make a horseleech violentlye to
suck. Fol. 32 To know whether the Hernia be on both sides. Fol. 21 To know
an imbicille part. Fol. 52 To mollifye the skin in Phlebotomye. Fol. 28 To
restrain blood through ligature. Fol. 38 To remove superfluouse fingers.
Fol. 39 To regenerate any substance is the vvorcke of Nature and not of the
Chyrurgiane. Fol. 23 To stenche blood by Cauteryes. Fol. 38 Tractatione of the
returnede Epoulis. Fol. 23 Transforaiion with an actual Cauterye. Fol. 43
Transforatione in the Scrotum. Fol. 43 Trepaninge of the Breast bone. Fol. 29
Two sorts of applicatione of the Seton. Fol. 43 Two sorts of Ligamentes in
generalie. Fol. 44 Two things to be co^siderede in dressiinge of a vvou^de.
Fol. 45 Two sorts of inferior ligamentes. Fol. 46 Tyinge, and third means
to cure the palate. Fol. 25
V
Veins which burst within the brains. Fol. 9 Vain of the foreheade. Fol.
29 Vena pupis. Fol. 29 Vena illiaca. Fol. 30 Vena poplitis ibidem Velvet
Cauteryes. Fol. 41 Virtues of the actual Cauterye. Fol. 38 Virtues of the
doggedayes. Fol. 51 Virtues of moderate joy. Fol. 52 Vlceratione Ranula, and
original thereof. Fol. 24 Vnhealthsame poeple. Fol. 52 Use of judgment. Fol.
1 Use, and inventione of sovvinge. Fol. 12 Use of the pipe in the Dropsye. Fol.
20 Use of the Palate. Fol. 25 Use, situatione, and compositione of the
Almondes. Fol. 25 Use of these times concerning the Varices. Fol. 31 Use of
the horselaeches. Fol. 32 Use of small Boxes. Fol. 32 Use of the actual
Cauteryes. Fol. 41 Use of the potentiall Cauteryes. Fol. 41 Vtilitye of
Inscione. Fol. 7 Vtilitye of the Cauteryes. Fol. 40 Vtilitye in constitutione
of a broken part. Fol. 46 Vva. Fol. 24 Vulgar, and common poeple, can not so
deeply judge, and consider of any thing, as the Chyrurgiane. Fol. 53
W
We can not live without air. Fol. 51 We may not trepane that bone above
the Eyebrovves: Fol. 11 we may not sovve the lips of an inflamed vvou^d.
Fol. 14 we may not provoacke the ca^ckerouse excresce^ce of the gummes, Fol.
23 we may not trepane the sides of the head. Fol. 11 we may right well
trepane, on the sides of the sutures. ibidem we must endevoure to dravve forth
the bullet at the first dressinge. Fol. 6 we must not at any time leave our
patientes. Fol. 6 we must dilate the wound if the bone be dilaceratede. Fol.
7 we must in operatione dilligently consider, that we do not chance to
break any Veins, Synnues, Arteryes, or Tendones. Fol. 19 and 2 we must let
the cloven Lip, after the operatione is done somvvhat bleed. Fol. 23 we
must nipe of the Needles ends stickinge in the cloven Lips. Fol. 23 we must
not purge in the doggedayes. Fol. 51 we oftentimes find hard matter in the
Vlcerations Ateromata, Steatomata, and Melicerides. Fol. 19 we ought not all
times to trepane. Fol. 20 what a Chyrurgiane ought to know, in givinge of
his judgment. Fol. 2 what astringent medicamentes, the patient must use in
the bloodye flixe. Fol. 48 what Apostemations will be openede before their
complete ripenes. Fol. 17 what form the searchinge iron must be of. Fol. 9
what form a Needle must have. Fol. 14 what form the threde in sovving of a
wound must have. ibidem what his meats, and drinckes must be. Fol. 48 what
manner of thread and nedle we must have in sovvinge of the bellye. Fol. 17
what Ligamentes are. Fol. 43 what is reqvired to the resanatione of wounds.
Fol. 52 what is to be understood by the left lip of a vvou^de. Fol. 17
what places may bear trepanatione. Fol. 11 what qvantitye of bone we ought
to trepane. Fol. 12 what sometimes deceaveth the Chyrurgiane. Fol. 7 what
this word operatione signifies. Fol. 1 what we ought to judge out of the
accide^tes of vvou^des. Fol. 2 what we ought to do the Dura matter being
crushede. Fol. 13 what we ought to do when the discendede and svvollen gutt
ca^ not be again restored into his place. Fol. 16 what we ought to consider
before we make the apertione in an Apostematione. Fol. 17 what we ought to
esteem of the bleedinge of the gummes. Fol. 27 what we ought to do when
we perceave the fayntinge to approach the phlebotomised patient. Fol. 29 what
we ought to do before we use the horse leeches. Fol. 32 what vvhe ought to
do in a deep Carry. Fol. 34 what wounds of the hippe are. Fol. 2 when,
and why the external parts must be extirpatede. Fol. 37 when that the
report must be done. Fol. 4 when the Apostemation must be opened with a
Cauterye. Fol. 17 when we ought only to use the exfoli^tive trepane. Fol. 12
when we ought to open an Apostematione. Fol. 17 when we ought to cut away
the palate. Fol. 24 vvherby we may know the vvindy-hernia. Fol. 21 vvherin
consists the danger of dravvinge forth of bullets, Fol. 5 whereon we ought
to consider before phlebotomy. Fol. 27 whereon we ought to consider in the
applicatione of the Cauteryes. Fol. 42 whereon in ligatione we ought to
consider. Fol. 44 vvhervvith the vvou^de is made must be considered. Fol. 53
which are strange things. Fol. 5 why the wound in extractinge of a bullet
mus^ be dilated. Fol. 6 why we may not in the resovving of a wound dravve
the lips close together. why the threde in sovving of a wound may not be
dyede. Fol. 14 why we file teeth. Fol. 2^ why we must give a staff to
them in their hands which we Phlebotomize. Fol. 28 wine is necessary for
all combattantes. Fol. 53 womb being hurt. Fol. 4^ wounds of the Lunges.
Fol. 3 wounds of the Kidnyes. Fol. ^ wounds that are daungerouse. Fol. 2
wounds that be difficult to cure. ibidem wounds which are esteemed
incurable. ibidem
FINIS.
IMPRINTED At Dort by Isaac Canin. M.D.xcviij.


