TWO Discourses of Master Frances Guicciardin, which are wanting in the third
and fourth Books of his History, in all the Italian, Latin, and French
Coppies heretofore imprinted; Which for the worthiness of the matter they
contain, were published in those three Languages at Basile 1561. And are now
for the same cause done into English.

serpent and cross

Printed at London for William Ponsonbie. 1595.

Three Sonnets of Petrarch.
Fiamma dal ciel, etc. Son. 106.
1 LEwd whore that from the meanest state of life,
vnt' others fall and spoil wast beastly bred,
Whose whole delight does stand on hateful strife,
Let fire from heaven be poured on thy head.
Oh neast of sin, wherein now hatched is,
That evil which through all the world is spread,
Whilst Venus plays her masters prize amiss,
with Wine, with ease. and bowsie Bacchus eke,
Old fools, young maids, bestride thy streets in blis,
Daunsing their roundes with Satan's dam vnmeeke,
With bellows, fire, with glasses to behold
Their shame, that they do senseless in thee seek.
Simple thy source: most sinful thou, now old;
his wrath therefore will God of heaven unfold.
L'auard Babilonia, etc. Son. 107.
2 NOw Babylon has filled her greedy sack,
With wrath from Heaune, sact up with filthy sin
Which rents the same, to break at last thy back,
That favor none from Jove dooft seek to vvin.
From Pallas none. To Venus, Bacchus, he
(in lust to swim, and sink up to the chinne)
Oblations thine, and rights devoted be.
Redress thereof my pined heart does pray,
(That help at hand, that golden help foresee)
Restored Church, fell Idols dire decaie,
Recured Faith, al falsehood put to flight;
The man of sin, to bear no more the sway,
The golden World restorde, and every Wight
With fruits of grace, and heavenly dainties dight.
Fontana di dolor, etc. Son. 108.
3 THou source of grief, thou den of wrath and ire,
School of deceit, old errors hydeous haunt:
Erst Rome, but now fell Babel, set on fire
With burning brands, such as old Orchus Aunt
With fury flung, the heart of man t'inflame.
Thou forge of filth, thou virtues fall, auaunt,
Sink shall thy pride, thy sin, and thou, with shame.
How can it be but that thy Christ thy king
Will beat thee down with all thy brandes of blame,
Abate thy horns, and thee to meekness bring,
Thou, that vvhilome of lovv beginning grew,
And wonted was with lowly sound to sing;
With virtues old, thy glories old renew,
Least Constantine return thy vvrack to revv.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, having gotten the sight so these two discourses by means of a
good friend that did lend me the same in three La^guages, the Latin, Italian
and French, imprinted at Basil: I thought it a good labor to put them into
Engish for the matter contained in the same, and especially in the larger of
them, wherein you shall find a notable discourse of anexcellent Author, written
long since, and setting forth very lively how the Sea of Rome did enlarge
their jurisdiction and Territories, by diverse subtle means, as also by the
supposed donation of Constantine the great to pope Siluester. And because they
are left out in all the printed books of Fr. Guicciardin his storye, some
scruple did stay me a while to publishe the same least they might be supposed
to be of some other author. Wherein I have sithence been undoubtedly resolved,
by some persons of honor and good calling, who both have seen the same in the
Original at Florence written of the authors own hand, and yet in the custody of
Laurence Guicciardin, and have had copies of the same from the Guicciardines.
So as I dare affirm on my credit, that the sam were of the authors, and left
out of purpose, because they discover such matter against the popes usurpation
as in the reading of them thou may perceive. I desire but thy favorable
acceptance of my labor, wishing thee al happiness.

At London the 16. of January, 1595. Thy friend to use, W.I.

LECTORI.
INuadendis occupandisque Jmperijs, iuris saepe color initio quaeri solet:
stabilita vero fundataque semel tyrannide, vetera illa initia quantum potest
obruu^tur, lex tantu^ Regia nude, and veluti (...) obtenditur, in contemptoris
legib. maiestatis per duellionumque vindicatur. Jtaque simpliciter magis and
ingenue quam caute Paulus III. cum de summa ipsius potestate aliquando inter
familiares mentio incideret, ridere illos solitus erat vt scholasticos and
rerum rudes, qui a Christo eam tam anxie repeterent, cuius se possessionem vel
solam, optimum et firmissimum titulum habere dicebat, quam viribus opibusque
summis, ciuitatibus munitissimis, and potentissimorum principum sibi
coniurantium auxilio tueri ac defendere posset. Prudentius etiam Jtalo rum pars
maxima, quae pontificem Romans non vti Deum aliquem, aut Dei vicariu^ ob fulmina
illa, quibus iam pene totus inermis est: sed vt principem viris, armis,
vrbibus, castellis, foederibusque potentissimum reueretur and obseruat. Nos
vero quos ille vt puerulos sola vanae religionis larua perterret, quibusque vt
venalitijs mancipijs pro arbitrio abutitur, scire aliquando par est, quo iure,
quaue iniuria tam duro inclementique domino seruiamus: non vt tanqua^ Spartaci
bellum aliquod servile moueamus, sed vt ingenui nati, and quorum maiores
seruitutem illam non seruierent, vindicibus tandem idoneis vel tertia
assertione semel amissam libertatem and strenue recuperemus and fortiter
retineamus conseruemusque. Natales porro nostros vel ab eiusdem domini familia
aliqua salte^ ex part repetere licet, ex qua est hoc quidem mansipium, sed
frugi admodum, and manumissione dignissimum cuius etiam hac in refidem herus
infidelissimus per alligatos obruere conatus est. Nos tabulas quasi ex
naufragio, aut potius ex rogo vispellionum manibus extortas omnibus reddimus.
Quarum fidem and vindicum satis perspecta integritas, and auctoris stylus, and
loci ipsius, vnde dolo malo detractae sunt, vel sola inspectio sic asserunt, vt
de ea nemo bonus just dubitare possit. Reliquum est, vt hoc beneficio
prudenter and serio vtamur fruamurque ne si nos ob pretium participandum iterum
quodammodo venire pati amur, non eadem posthac spes libertatis affulgeat et
perpetua seruitute, dignissima etiam grauioribus flagris mancipia premamur.

Deux discourse de M. Francois Guicciardin, lesquels defaillent es III. and
IIII. es livers de son Histoire en tous les exemplaires tant Italiens, Latins,
que Francois, par cy deuant imprimez.
Retirez de l'original, and publiez nouuellement pour le merit des chooses y
contenues.
AV LECTEVR.
S'IL y a artifice en ce monde auquella preud ho^mie and fidelite so it
requise, certainement on peut dire que l'impression des livers est le premier.
Car les grands profits qui en reuiennent, quand elle est maniee comme il
appartient, sont contrebalancez de tant d'incommoditez and de dangers qui
ensuyuent l'abus d'icelle, que le tout estant comme en la main and dispensation
des hommes, quelques vns semblent auoir eu occasion de reuoquer en doubt, s'il
eust este meilleur and plus expedient que ceste invention ne fust iamais venue
en usage. Or ceste fidelite ne consiste pas seulement en ce que ceux qui font
profession de cest art, ne publient livers inutiles ou mauuais (qui sont
toutefois deux poincts qu'ils doiuent songneusement garder) mais aussi qu'ayans
en main ce qui aura semble pouuoir apporter proufit au public par l'aduis de
ceux qui en peuuent bien iuger, ils ne facent point trop les ingenieux es
labeurs d'autruy, changeants ou retranchans ce qui n'est a leur fantasy and
appetit, mais qu'ils representent fidelement and religieusement leurs
exemplaires. Car quant a moy, pour plusieurs considerations que ce lieu ne puet
pas porter, ie suis de ceste opinion, and croy que plusieurs n'en iugeront pas
autreme^t, qu'il vaudroit mieux supprimer du tout un auteur, qu'en le publiant
abuser ainsi de ses intentions. Cependant ie ne doubt pas que les fautes qui se
commettent en cest endroit, viennent le plus souuet de ceux qui ou fournissent
liberalement de leurs exemplaires, ou bien en font traffic and merchandise
ordinaire (indigne certes d'un homme de lettres, lequel contre le precepte de
mesnage rustique de Caton, doit estre en cest endroict plustost acheteur que
vendeur) tant y a que de quelque cost que cela vienne, il est grandement a
blasmer voire digne de punition public: mesmement quand tell abus se commet en
livers plus authentiques and desquels on employe coustumierement la foy and
l'autorite. Mais pleust a Dieu que nous nu essions point ta^t d'occasions de
nous plaindre de ce malheur, qui n'est que par trop frequent and commun aux vns
et aux autres. Ie ne veux rien dire de S. Ciprian de Rome and de quelques
livers de Tertullien publiez a Paris, desquels toutesfois plusieurs gens de
bien se plaignent: mais ie diray seulement que ces fragments de l'Histoire de
messire Francois Guicciardin nous donnent grande occasion de nous deffier de
beaucoup d'autres. Or qu'ils ne soyent vrayement de luy and n'ayant este
retra^chez par ci deuant de son exemplaire, outre l'asseurance qu'on peut auoir
en la prend'hommie and loyaute de celuy qui les a extraits and communiquez, la
phrase scule de l'autheur qui luy est presque particuliere, (argument certain
and comme infallible en tell chose) en fera plain and entiere foy a ceux qui
en voudront iuger sans passion. Outre ce que (comme vne finesse malicieuse ne
se peut desguiser tellement, qu'en fin elle ne se descouure a la confusion de
son ouurier) on n'a peu si bien remplir ce qui s'ensuit en l^histoire,
mesmement pour le regard du premier de ces deux lieux, qu'on nevoye a l'oeil
qu'il y a quelque deffaut: le quel se trouuera iusteme^t rempli par ces pieces,
qu'on recongnoistra incontinent en auoir este retirees, ou plustost deschirees
and desrobees.

Maintenant les ayants comme rachetees de la main de leurs ennemis, nous les
representons en toutes ces la^gues esquelles le rest de ceste histoire a este
par cy deuant publiee, a fin qu'vn chascun puisse remplir, si bon luy semble,
son exemplaire de ce deffaut: qui est de tell consequence, qu'estans les aduis
y contenus bien receus, and les moyens contraires bien pratiquez, nous
esperons, auec l'aide de Dieu, qu'en brief il s'en pourra ensuyure en Europe
vne paix and tranquilite vniuerselle.

Dui luoghi dell historia di M. Francesco Guicciardini: L'vno de quali e mutato
nel terzo libro a carte 91. b. nella stampa Venetiana in quarta forma. L'altro
del tutto tolto via nel quarto libro a carte 119. di detta stampa.
QVanto che l'historia di M. Francesco Guicciardini, per testimonio d'ogni
intelligente e tenuta utile and profitteuole, tanto piu son da essere biasmati
quelli, and da riprendere la loro infedelta, i quali son stati si arditi and
presuntuosi che non solamente l'hanno corrotta, ma etiamdio stracciatone nia
questi dui pezzi: lun de quali e di tanta co^sequenza and importanza, che non
solo e expediente il leggerlo, ma e necessario a ciascheduno l^intendere la
contenu ta verita in quel discorso marauigliosamente discoperta dal
Guicciardino, and particolarmente sopra tutti li altri senza ueruna passione
narrata. Il che e stato causa, che hauendo ricouerato questi duifragmenti quasi
come dal fuoco, da chi o per paura o per maluagita l'haueua nascosti and quasi
sepolti, noi te li diamo in tutte quelle lingue, nelle quali fino a quest'hora
present l'historia del detto auctore e stata data alla luce: riportando ci
della uerita di questi luoghi, prima alla conscienza di quelli, appo i quali si
ritroua l'originale di detto Guicciardini intero: and appresso a tutte le
person scienziate and intendenti, le quali potranno per loro stes se
riconoscere in questi tali luoghi la medesima lingua and il medesimo stilo del
Guicciardino, di che si vede composta tut ta l'historia, and nedere quanto ella
ne rimanga difettosaper lo mancamento di questapicciola part. A queste cose ag
giugeremo anchora la molta feed, che per la sua sincerita, and per altre
lodeuoli qualita merita che se le priest la persona, da chi cotali luoghi ci
sono stati dati a fine che li communichiamo a tuttigli amatoridel uero, se
mifosse cosi lecito il nominarla, come mi e conueneuole il tenerla celata. Hor
per non perder tempo inprouar cosa che per se stessa e chiarissima a chi non ha
corrotta la uista, in una parola diremo, il nostro desiderio essere, Lector
carissimo, che ogn'huono li legga, and ne facci il suo profitto senza abusare
la propria conscienza di si fatto aduertimento.

Lieu change au trosie me liver de l'histoire de M. Francois Guicciardin. I.
MAis il ne peut euiter les infortunes domestiques, qui troublerent grandement
sa maison auec exemples Tragiques, vilenies and cruautez horribles, voire
mesmes en toute region tant barbare qu'elle puisse estre.

Car ayant des lors qu'il fut esleu Pape, delibere de transporter toute la
grandeur temporelle en la per son du duc de Candie son fills aisne, le
Cardinal de Valence, qui d'un esprit to talement eslong ne de la profession
ecclesiastique, aspiroit au maniement des arms ne pouuant endurer que son
friar occupast ce lieu sur luy, and d'abondant porta^t fort impatiemment qu'il
eust meilleure part en la bonne grace de madame Lucrece leur seur common,
pousse de rage d'amour and d'ambition (esguillons and ministres puissans sans a
toute mescha^cete) fit tuer par une nuict le Duc son friar, lors qu'il
cheuauchoit seul par la ville de Romme, and puis ietter secretement dans la
riuiere du Tybre. Il estoit encor bruit si tell enormite se peult croire)
qu'en l'amour demadame Lucrece, ily auoit concurrence, non seulement des deux
freres, mais du pere mesme lequel ayant des le comme^cement de son pontificat
retire sa fille d'auec son premier mary, qu'il estimoit estre deuenu trop petit
compagno^ pour son degree, and de puis l'ayant mariee a lean Sforze signeur de
Pesaro, ne pouuant encor supporter d'auoir le mary pour compagnon, il rompit ce
second marriage ia consomme, ayant a ceste fin fait prouuer par faux tesmoignage
deuant les iuges que luymesme auoit deleguez, and puis confermer par sentence
and judgment, que Iean estoit de nature froide, and du tout inhabile aux
oeuures de marriage, etc.

A place altered in the third Book of his History, in the 91. page, in the
second side of the pa, after the impression of Venice; the History being
imprinted in quarto.
YEt could he not avoid the evils which happened in his own family, which did
greatly troble his house, with tragical examples, with lust, and horible
cruelty, the like whereof has not been seen in any barbarous nation: For
having in his first entrance into the Papacy, determined, to transport al
temporal authority, to the person of the duke of Candie his eldest son, the
Cardinal of Valentia, who (carrying a mind alienate, and repugnante to
Ecclesiastical profession and did aspire to the managing of arms) could not
endure that his brother should obtain that place before him: and moreover
bearing very impatiently, that he had better part in the favor of the Lady
Lucretia, sister to them both, pricked forward with the rage of love, and
ambition (forcible ministers in all kind of mischief) caused the Duke his
brother to be murdered in a night, as he rid alone through Rome and afterward
to be cast secretly into the River Tiber.

At the same time the report was (if so foul an enormitie may be believed)
that not only the twoe brethren did concur in the love of the Lady Lucrecia,
but the father likewise: who was no sooner made Pope, but he took his
daughter from her first husband (as one far inferior to him in degree) and
afterward married her to John Sforza Lord of Pisaro: but being not able to
brook her husband for his Corriual, did likewise dissolve this second marriage,
already finished: And to the end the same might be done under some color, he
suborned false witnesses, to make proof before Judges, delegate and chosen by
himself, that the Lord John was cold by nature, and altogether unapt for
copulation, etc.

Francisci Guicciardini locus primus re ponendus libro III. folio 121. versu.
33.
NEC tamen potuit calamitates domesticas uitare, quae tragicis exemplis,
libidineque, atque immanitate plus quam barbara, eius domum conturbarunt. Nam
cum ab usque sui pontificatus auspiciis omnem ciuilem potentiam in Candianum
ducem suorum liberoru^ natu maxi mu^ vertere statuisset, and Valentinus
cardinalis animo prorsus a sacris alieno ad re^ militarem totus aspiraret, nec
ferre' posset hunc locu^ sibi a fratre praereptum iri: eundemque in co^munis
sororis Lucretiae amore preferri, libidine atque ambitione, valentibus ad
quoduis scelus stimulis, incitatus, fratrem noctu Romae inequitantem, necari
fecit, and necatum in Tyberim clam abiici.

Ad hoc fama fuit (si tamen tantum nefas fidem meretur) non modo fratres duos,
verumetiam patrem ipsum in eiusdem Lucretiae amores conspirasse: qui simulac ad
pontificatum assumptus est, eam a primo marito quasi tanta dignitate tunc
inferiore, abreptam Ioanni Sfortiae Pisaurensium domino copulauit: sed ne hunc
quidem riuale^ passus, matrimonium iam perfectum dissoluit: verum vt id aliquo
fieret color, cum coram iudicibus a se delectis, Ioannem natura frigidum,
atque ad rem veneream prorsus ineptum, per falsos testes comprobasset, iudicum
sententiis id confirmari voluit, etc.

Luogo mutato nelterzo libro a carte 91. b.
MA non potette gia fuggire gl'infortunij domestici, e quali pertutbarano la
casa sua con essempij tragici, and con libidine and crudelta horribile etiamdio
in ogni barbara regione: per che hauendo in fino daprincipio del suo
po^teficato disegnato di volgere tutta la grandezza temporale al Du ca di
Candia suo primo genito, il Cardinale di Valenza il quale di animo totalmente
alieno dalla professione sacerdotale aspiraua all essercitio delle arm, non
potendo tolerare che questo loco gli fosse cocupato dal fratello: impatiente
oltre a questo, che egli hauesse piu par te di lui nell'amore di mado^na
Lucretia sorella commune, in citato dalia libidine, and dall ambitione,
ministri potenti ad ogni gran sceleratezza, lo fece vna notte, che ei caualcaua
solo per Roma, amazzare, and poi gittare nel fiume del Teuere segretame^te. Era
medesima me^te fama, se pero e degna di credersi tanta enormita, che nell amore
di mado^na Lucretia concorressino no^ solame^te i duo fratelli, ma etiamdio il
padre medesimo: il quale haue^ dola come fu fatto pontefice, leuata dal primo
marito come diuentato inferiore al suo gra do, and maritatala a Giouanni Sforza
signore di Pesaro, non co^partando d'hauere anco il marito per riuale, dissolve
il matrimonio gia co^sumato, hauendo fatto innanzia giudici delegati da lui
prouare co^ false testimonianze, and di poi confermare per sentenza che
Giouanni era per natura frigido, and impotenteal coito. Afflisse sopra modo,
etc.

Discourse retranche, du qua triesme liver de la mesme histoire. II.
POur la declaration de la quelle chose and de beaucoup d'autres depuis
aduenues, la matiere requiert que ie die quel droict l'Eglise ha sur la terre
de la Romagne and sur plusieurs autres lesquelles elle a possedees en diverse
temps, ou possede encor a present: and par quels moyens, estant premierement
institue and establi pour l'administration pure and simple des chooses
spirituelles, elle est paruenue aux estats and principautez mondaines.

Pareillement aussi, que comme chose connexe a ce propos, i'expose quels debats
and contentions sont suruenues en diverse temps pour ceste occasion and autres,
enter les papes and les empereurs.

Les euesques de Romme, desquels saint Pierre fut le premier, ayans leur
puissance and authorite fondee de Jesus Christ's chooses spirituelles, estans au
rest grands de charity, humilite, patience d'esprit and de miracles, furent a
leur commencement, non seulement du tont des^uez de puissance temporelle, mais
encor persecutez d'icelle, and demeurerent par un lon temps peu ou quasi point
cogneus, n'estant leur nom par autre chose plus manifest que par supplices,
lesquels ils euduroient egallement auec ceux qui les ensuiuoient.

Car combien que pour la multitude infinie de diuerses nations and professions
qui estoientlors a Romme, on print peu guard quelques fois a leur progrez and
advancement, and qu'aucuns des emperenrs ne les persecutassent sinon entant que
leurs actions publiques sembloient ne se pouuoir dissimuler ou passer sous
silence: toutes fois aucuns autres on par cruante, ou pour l'amour and zele
qu'ils auoient a leurs dieux exercoient fort rigoureuse persecution a
l'encontre d'eux, come aucteurs de nouelles superstitions and destructeurs de
lavraye religion.

En cest estat ils continuerent estants copendant grandement renommez pour leur
pauurete uoluntaire, sainctete de uie and martires, iusqu'au temps du pa pe
Syluestre: sous lequel estant l'Empereur Constantin conuerti a la foy
Chrestienne, meu par la bonne uie et par les miracles qui se uoioient
continuelleme^t en eux qui faisoient profession du nom de Jesus Christ, les
Euesques demeuroient paisibles and asseurez des grands perils esquels ils
s'estoient veus par l'espace d'enuiron trois cents ans, auec liberte de fair
exercice public de leur religion and ceremonies.

Don't pour la reverence de leurs coustumes, pour les saints commandemens que
contient en soy nostre religion, and pour la promptitude qui est es hommes a
suiure, ou par ambition le plus souuent, ou par crainte, quelq fois a l'exemple
de leur prince, la Chresliente commenca a s'espandre and amplifier par tout
merueilleusement, and par mesme moyen comm enca aussi a diminuer l'ancienne
pauurete des ecclesiastiques, d'autant que Constantin ayant edify a Romme les
eglises de saint Iean de Latran, saint Pierre du Vatican, de S. Paul, and
plusieurs autres en diverse lieux, il les doua non seulemeur de riches uaisseaux
and ornamenns, mais encor, a sin qu a l'aduenir else cussent de quoy estre
conseruees, entretenues and renouuelees, aussi pour l'entretenement de ceux qui
faisoyent le service divine, les enrichit de plusieurs possessions and reuenus.

Depuis ce temps, plusieurs se persuadans qu'auec aumosnes and legs il leur
seroit aife d'ac querir le royaume des cieux, edifierent and douerent quelques
autres eglises, ou a celles qui estoyent ia edifiees donnerent party de leurs
richesses: voyre mesmes, ou par certain loy ou par coustume inueteree,
ensuyuant l'exemple du vieil Testament, chascnn d'eux payoit a l'eglise la
disme du fruict and reuenu de ses propres biens.

A quoy fair ils estoyent excitez d'autant plus grand ardeur and courage,
quils uoioient au commencement que les gens d'eglise, horse mis ce qu'ils se
reseruoyent pour uiure assez frugalement and moderement, employans le surplus
de ces biens party en la fabrique and paremenr des eglises, party en oeuures
pitoyables and charitables, n'estant encor enter en leurs coeurs l'orguoeil and
l'ambition.

L'euesque de Romme lors estoit recongneu par tous les Chrestiens pour
superieur de toutes les eglises and de toute l'aministration spiritnelle, come
scu cesseur de l'apostre S. Pierre: joint que ceste cite pour son ancienne
dignite and grandeur, retenoit, comme de touts les autres, le nom and la
majesty de l'empire, and que d'icelle la foy Chrestienne auoit este espan due
en la plus grande party de l'Europe.

Aussi que l'empereur Constantin aiant este baptize par Syluestre, auoit
uolontiers recongneu, and comme approuue tell authorite, and preeminence en
luy and ses successeurs.

On dit dauantage, que Constantin constraint pour les affairs des provinces
d'Occident de transporter le siege de l'Empire en la cito de Byzantium appellec
depuis de son nom Constantinople, donna au pape la seigneurie de Romme et de
plusieurs autres uilles and regions d'Italie: lequel bruit, bien qu il aye este
entretenu diligemment par les papes qui succederent, and par leur authorite
creude plusieurs, toutefois est reprouue par les autheurs plus dignes de foy,
and encor plus par l'estat des chooses mesmes: d'au tant qu'il est trescertain
and manifest que lors and long te^ps depuis la uille de Romme, ensemble toute
l'Italie, fut gouuernee comme subiete a l'empire, uoire par officiers and
magistrates deputez par les empereurs.

Encore y en a'il (tant est profonde souuentefois l'oscuritees chooses si
anciennes) qui reprenent and refutent hardiment tout ce qu'il se dit de
Constantin and de Syluestre, affermans qu'ilsont uescu en diverse temps

Mais tous font d'accord que le transport du siege de l'Empire en la uille de
Constantinoble, fut la source and origin de la puissance des papes: par ce
qu'affoiblissans auec le temps l'authorite des Empereurs en Italy, pour leur
continuelle absence and pour les gra^ds affairs qu'ils auoyent en l'Orient, le
peuple Romain fe retirant de l'obeissance des empereurs and d'autant plus
deferant auz papes, commenca a leur prester, non pas uraye subjection, mais
vnecertaine obeissance volontaire.

Il est uray que ces chooses ne se manifesterent sinon lentement and peu a peu,
pour les invasions des Gothz, Vandales and autres nations barbares qui sur
uindrent en Italy: par lesquels estant la uille de Romme plusieurs fois prinse
and saccagee, le nom du pape demeura pour quelque temps fort obscur and abject,
and l'authorite des empereurs fort petite en Italy, d'autant qu'auec tell
ignominy ils la laissoyent en proye aux nations barbares.

Enter lesquelles ayant este l'enuahissement de toutes les autres comme un
torrent, la puissance des Gothz, qui estoyent une gent de nom and de profession
Chrestienne sortie de sa premiere origin des parties de Dace and de Tartarie,
se continua par l'espace de soixante and dix ans:

Laquelle en fin estant dechassee par les arms des empereurs, l'Italie
commenca de nouueau a se gouuerner par magistrates Grecs: enter lesquels celuy
qui estoit plus grand and superieur a tous les autres, appelle d'u^ nom Grec
Exarcha, faisoit sa residence a Rauenne, ville tresancienne and lors moult
rich and moult peuplee, pour la fertilite du pays, pource aussi que depuis le
grand accroissement qu'elle receut par la puissance armee de mer qu'Auguste
Caesar and les autres Empereurs entretenoient continuellement au port qui estoit
assez proche de la uille, (duquel toutefois il ne rest auiourd'huy appearance
aucune) elle auoit este habitee de plusieurs capitaines and chefs de guerre,
and depuis par un long temps de Theodoric roy des Goths and de ses successeurs,
lesquels redoutans encor la puissance des empereurs, auoyent plustost
esleuceste ville-la pour assiette de leur royaume que Romme, pour la commodite
de la mer qui est plus prochaine de Constantinoble.

Pour la quelle commodite (bien que pour raison toute contraire) les Exarches
s'y estans arrestez, ils deputerent au gouuernement de Romme and des autres
citez d'Italie des magistrates particuliers sous le tiltre de ducs.

De la eut son origin le nom de l'Exarchat de Rauenne, sous lequel estoyt
comprins tout ce qui n'ayant un duc particulier obeissoit immediatement a
l'Exarche.

En ce temps les papes de Romme priuez de toute puissance temporelle, estant la
reverence spirituelle qu'on leur portoit auprecedent comme abbastardie and
anea^tie par la dissimulation de leurs bonnes coustumes qui commencoient desia
a se passer, estoyent comme subjects aux Empereurs: sans la confirmation
delquels ou de leur Exarche, bien quils fussent esleus par le clerge and peuple
de Romme, ils n'osoient accepter ou exercer leur pontificat: aincois, dautant
que communement le siege de la religion ensuit la puissance de l'Empire and des
arms, les Euesques de Constantinoble and de Rauenne disputoyent: souuentefois
de la superiorite auec l'euesque de Rome.

Mais peu de temps apres l'estat des chooses se changea. Carles Lombards (gent
fort cruel le) estans entrez en Italy, occuperent la Gaul cisalpine (laquelle
de leur empire print le nom de Lombardie) Rauenne auec tout l'Exarchat and
plusieurs autres parties d'Italie, and estendirent leurs arms insqu'a la
marque d'Ancoue, Spolete and Beneuent, esquels deux lieux ils creerent and
establirent Ducs particuliers.

A quoy cependant les empereurs ne donnant aucun order, party pour leut
couardise and nonchal lance, party pour les difficultes and empeschemens
qui'ls auoient lors du costed A sie, la uille de Romme estant de stituee de
leur secours n'y ayant plus en Italy de magistrate des Exarches, commenca a se
gouuerner par le conseil and authorite des papes: lesquels depuis un si long
temps estans auec les Romans oppressez par les Lombards, eurent finalement
recours a l'aide de Pepin roy de France, lequel estant pass en Italy auec vne
puissant'armee dechassade cest Empire vne party des Lombards qui y auoientia
domine plus de deux cens ans, and donna au pape and a l'Eglise de Romme, comme
chooses deuenues siennes par droict de guerre, non seulement Vrbino, Fano,
Eugupio and plusieurs terres pro chains de Romme, mais aussi Rauenne auec son
Exarchat, sous lequel on dit qu'est comprins tout ce qui est depuis les confins
de Plaisance, contiguz au territoire de Pauie iusques a Arimini, enter le
fleuue du Pau and l'Apennin, les estangs, ou plustost marets and palus des
Venetiens and la mer Adriatque and depuis Arimini iusqu'au fleuue de la Toglia,
lequel lors on appeloit Isaurum.

Mais apres la mort de Pepin, estant aduenu que les Lo^bards troubloient de
nouueau le pape and ce qui luy auoit este done, Charles fills de Pepin (apres
que pour ses grandes prouesses and victoires, il fut a bon droict appelle Le
grand) aiant destruit entierement leur empire, conferma la donation faicte
parson pere a l'eglise de Rome, and approuua ce, que pendant qu'il guerroioit
les Lombards la marque d'Ancone and la duche de Spolete (laquelle comprenoit la
cite d'Aquila and vne party de la Brutie) s estoient volonterement donnees au
pape. On afferme ce que ie i'ay dit pour tout certain.

A quoy aucuns escriuains ecclesiastiques adioustent encor que Charles donna a
l'eglise le Ligurie iusqu'au fleuue de Varo, dernier confin d Italy, Mantoue,
and tout ce que les Lombards possedoient en Friuoli and en'Histrie.

Quelqu'un aussi escrit le mesme de I'Ile de Corse and de tout le territoire
qui est contenu enter les villes de Luna and de Parme.

Pour lequel bienfaict les rois de France celebrez and esleuez parles papes,
acquirent le tiltre de Rois Treschrestiens. Depuis and enuiron l'an de grace
huict cens, le pape Leon and le peuple de Romme (le Pape, di-ie, sans autre
puissance ou authorite que de chef de ce peuple) esleurent ce mesme Charles
pour Empereur de Romme, separans mesmes pat ce nom ceste party de l'Empire de
ceux qui habitoient a Constantinoble: comme si Romme and les provinces de
l'Occident n'estans deffendues par eux, eussenteu besoin d'estre deffendues and
gardees par un prince qui leur fust comme propre, and particulier.

Par la quelle division les Empereurs de Constantinoble nefurent encor priuez
de la Sicile, ne de la party d'Italie, laquel le tirant deuers Naples a
Manfredoni, est bornee de la mer, d'autant qu'elles estoyent demourees
continuellement sous la puissance de leurs Empereurs.

Cependant par tout cela ne fut derogue a la coustume, suiuant laquelle
l'election du pape se confermoit par l'Empereur Romain, sous le nom duquel se
gouuernoit la ville de Romme: ains les papes mesmes par leurs bulls,
privileges and concessions, quottoient le temps parces paroles expresses and
formel les: IMPERANTE CAROLO IMP. DOMINO NOSTRO. En laquelle subjection ou
recognoissance ils continuerent iusques a ce, non pas que le succez des
affairs leur donnast courage de se gouerner par soymesmes, mais qu'aiant la
puissance de ces Empereurs commence de s'affoibler premierement par les
contentions qui suruindrent enter les successeurs mesmes de Charle maigne,
pendant que la dignite imperiale demoura enter leurs mains, puis par estre
transportee a des princes Allemans, lesquels n'estoient si puissans que ceux de
la lignee de Charlemaigne, pour la grandeur du roiaume de France, and le pape
and le peuple de Romme and le magistrate, par lequella uille, bien que
tumultueusement, commenca d'estre gouuernee, en de rogeant entierement en tout
ce qui leur estoit possible a la jurisdiction des empereurs, ordonerent par un
decret and loy sollennelle, que des lors en auaut l'election du pape n'auroit
que fair d'estre confermee par l'empereur.

Ce qui s'obserua diuerseme^t par un long temps, selon que la puissance des
empereurs se le uoit ou s'abaissoit par diverse succez des affairs: laquelle
estant grandement accreue depuis que l'Empire fut uenu enter les mains des
Othons de Saxe, le pape esleu par la faueur d'Otho le tiers lors present, meu
d'affection and amor particulier enuers sa propre nation, and irrite du
mauuais traictement qu'il auoit reeeu du peuple Rommain, transporta par son
ordonnance aux Allemans la puissance d'elire, l'empereur de Romme en la form
and maniere qui s'obserue encor de nostre temps: deffendant toutefois a ceux
qui seroient esleus (pour reseruer tousiours aux Papes quelque preeminence) de
n'user du tiltre d'Empereur ou Auguste sinon que premierement ils eussent receu
la couronne de l'Empire.

Don't est procedee la coustume de venir a Romme pour se fair couronner, and de
ne s'at tribuer auparauant autre tiltre que de Roy des Rommains and de Caesar.

Mais estans depuis les Othons deffaillis and la puissance des em pereurs
amoindrie, d'autant que l'Empire ne se continuoit hereditairement en rois
grands and puissants, la ville de Romme se retira ouuertement de leur
obeissance, and se rebellerent plusieurs citez au temps de l'Emhereur Conrad de
Sueue, pen dant que les Papes, entendans tousiours a s'aggrandir de plus en
plus, seigneurioient presque entierement la ville de Rome, combien que
souuentes fois par l'insolence and discord du peuple ils eussent bcaucoup
d'affaires.

Pour ausquels obuier, ils auoyent ia par la faueur de l'Empereur Henri second,
qui lors estoit a Romme, transporte aux cardinaux seuls, par loy and ordonance
solennelle, la puissance and authorite d'eslire and creer le Pape. Auquel lors
encor se presenta un nouueau moien de s'aggrandir.

Carenuiron ce temps ayant les Northmans (desquels le premier fut Guillaume
surnomme Brasdeser) usurp sur l'Empire de Constantinoble l'Apouille and la
Calabre, Robert Guischard l'un d'eux, ou pour se preualoir daua^tage auec ceste
couleur and appearance de quelque droict, ou pour se render plus puissant a se
deffendre contre les Empereurs, ou pour autre occasion, rendit Beneuent au
Pape, comme estant des appartenances de l'Eglise Roman, and reprint d'el le
en fief le duche del Apouille and de Calabre. Le quel exemple fut ensuiui par
Roger l un de ses successeurs, lequel ayant dechasse de la Pouille and de la
Calabre Guillaume de la mesme famille, and depuis occupe la Sicile, euuiro^
l'an mil cent trente, recongneut ces mesmes pays comme mouuans en fief de
l'Eglise, en qualite de roy des deux Siciles, l'une dela, l'autre deca le Far:
le Pape cependant ne refusaut pas de fauoriser, pour son ambition and prouffit
particulier, l'usurpation and la violence de cestuy cy.

Auec tous ces moyens les papes croissants tousiours de plus en plus en
puissance and authorite (comme iamais la conuoitise des hommes ne s'assouuit)
ils commencerent de priuer de ces royaumes les Roys qui n'obeissoient a leurs
commandemens, and les transporter and conferer a autres: iusques a ce qu'ils
paruindrent a Hedry fills de Frederic Barberousse, and de Henry a Frideric
second son fills, tous trois successiuement Empereurs.

Mais estant Frideric deuenu grand persecuteur de l'Eglise, and s'estant de son
temps esleuees les factions des Guelpes and des Gibellins, (de l'une desquelles
les Papes estoit chef, and de l'antre l'Empereur) apres la mort de Frideric, le
Pape confera l'inuestiture de ces roy aumes a Charles Conte d'Aniou, and de
Prouence, duquel a este faicte mention cy dessus, a la charge de six mil onces
d'or de cens par chascun an, and que aucuns de ces rois ne peussent a l'aduenir
estre Empereurs de Romme: Laquelle condition a tousiours depuis este specifiee
ences inuestitures.

Et pour ceste occasion le roy aume de l'isle de Sicile se retira peu apres de
l'obeisance de l'Eglise, quant au cens and a la recongnoissance feudale. Encor
le bruit commun a gaigne ce poinct (bien qu'il ne soit du tout si certain que
ce que nous auo^s ia dit cy dessus) que long te^ps au parauant la Contesse
Mahaut, princess tres puissante en Italy, donna a l'Eglise ceste party de la
Toscane, laquelle bornee du torrent de Pesera du chasteau de S. Quirico and de
la riuicre du Tybre, s'appelle au iour d'huy le Parrimoine de saint Pierre. Et
adioustent encor aucuns que la cite de Ferrare fut paraillement donnee a
l'Eglise par ceste mesme contesse. Ces dernieres chooses ne sont bien asseurees,
mais encor est plus douteux ce qui a este escrit par aucuns, qu' Arithpert roy
des Lombards, lors que leur regne florissoit, luy donna les Alps appellees
Cotties, esquelles on dit aussi que Gennes est enclos ensemble tout ce qui est
conte nu depuis Gennes iusqu'aux confins de la Prouence: Et que Linthprandus,
aussi roy de la mesme nation, luy donna la Sabine, pais proche de Romme, Narni,
Ancone, auec certaines autres terres.

Ainsi selon la variete de l'estat des Empereurs varierent aussi les affairs
des papes auec eux.

Car aiants au commencement este longuement persecutez par ces Empereurs, and
depuis deliurez de ceste crainte par la conversion de Constantin, ils se
reposerent aussi longuement sous l'ombre de leurs ailes, s'emploiants seulement
aux chooses spirituelles vesquirent et par vne longue espace de temps en bas
estat, separez totalement du commerce des empereurs pour la puissance des
Lombards en Italy.

Mais depuis esta^s paruenus parle benefice du roy de France, aux principautez
et seigneuries temporelles, ils demourerent grandement vnis auec les empereurs,
dependans fort volontiers de leur authorite cependant que la dignite d'empereur
se continua en la lignee de Charlmaigne, tant pour la souuenance des
bie^-faicts reciproquement receus and donnez, que pour le respect de la
grandeur Imperialle: laquelle depuis vena^t a decliner, s'estants du tout
separez de leur amity, ils commencerent a fair profession and maintenir que
c'estoit plustost au Pape de donner la loy a l'empereur que de la receuoir de
luy.

Ainsi ayants en horreur sur toutes chooses de retourner en leur ancienne
subjection, and a ce que les Empereurs n'entreprinssent de recognoistre a Rome
and ailleurs les anciens droicts de l'Empire (comme aucuus d'eux estans ou plus
puissans, ou d'un esprit plus haut and courageux s'efforcoient de fair) ils
s'opposoient a descouuert auec arms a leur puissa^ce accompagnez de ces
tyra^s, lesquels sous un nom de prince, and des citez qui s'estoient
aff^anchies and mises en liberte, ne recongnoissoient plus l'authorite de l
Empire.

De la vint que les Papes, s'attribuants dauantage de iour a autre, and
conuertissans la terreur des arms spirituelles aux chooses temporelles,
(faisans ceste interpretation que comme vicaires de Christ en terre ils
estoient superieurs a l'Empereur, and qu'a eux en plusieurs cas appartenoit le
soin de l'estat de ce monde) priuoient quelques fois les Empereurs de leur
dignite imperiale, suscitants les electeurs a en eslire d'autres au lieu dez
excommuniez, and de autre cost les Empereurs ou eslisoient eux mesmes ou
procuroient l'election de nouueaux papes.

De ces contentions aduint qu'estant l'estat de l'Eglise fort affoibli tant par
la demeure de la court de Romme par l'espace de soixante and dix ans en la
ville d'Auignon, que par le schism qui succeda au retour du Pape en Italy,
qu'es villes subiettes a l'Eglise, and principal leme^t en celles de la
Romaigne plusieuis puissans citadins occuperent la tyranny en leur propre pais,
lesquels depuis les papes dechasserent, ou n'estans assez puissans pour les
debuter, accorderent ces seigneuries en fief ou a ceuxmesmes qui les auoient
occupees, ou a autres chefs qu'ils substituoient contre eux. Ainsi commencerent
les villes de la Romaigne a auoir seigneurs particuliers la plus part sous
tiltre des vicaires del Eglise.

Ainsi Ferrare bailee au commencement en gouuernement a Azo d'Aest, luy fut
depuis co^cedee en tiltre de vicariat, and auec le temps fut ceste famille
esleuee en tiltres plus grands and illustres.

Ainsi Boloigne occupee par Iean Visconte archeuesque de Millan, luy fut depuis
ac cordee en Vicariat par le pape: and pour les mesmes occasions en plusieurs
terres de la marque d'Ancone, du Patrimoine S. Pierre and de l'Vmbrie (qu'on
appelle maintenant la Duche de Spolete) s'esleuerent plusieurs seigneurs
particuliers, ou contre la volonte du pape, ou de son consentement force.

Lesquels changemens esta^s semblablement suruenus en la Lombardie es citez de
l'Empire, il aduint tells fois, selon la variete des affairs, que les
Vicaires de la Romaigne and des autres terres ecclesiastiques se retirans
ouuertement du nom de l'Eglise, recognoissoient ces citez en fief de
l'Empereur: comme au contraire, ceux qui occupoient en Lombardie Millan,
Mantoue, and autres terres imperiales, les recongnoissoient en fief du pape.

En ce temps, bien que la ville de Romme retint le nom and la seigneury de
l'eglise, touie fois elle se gouuernoit soy mesmes, Et ores qu'au commencement
que les papes return rent d'Auignon, ils fussent obeis comme seigneurs,
cenea^t moins peu apres les Ro^mains aians cree le magistrate de Banderez,
retournerent a leur ancienne contumace.

Parquoy n'estant demou^e aux papes que bien peu de puissance, ils commencerent
a se retirer de ceste ville, and n'y fire^t plus de demourance, iusqu'a ce que
les Romans appauuris, estans aussi tombez en tresgra^d desordre pour l'absence
de la court, voiant que l'anee mil quatre cens estoit proche, en la quelle ils
esperoient que le pape estant en la ville de Romme il y auroit grande affluence
de gens de toutes parts de la Chrestiente pour raison du Iubile, ils
supplierent treshumblement Boniface qu'il luy pleust y retourner, offrans de
casser incontinent leurs Banderez, and de se sousmettre entierement a son
obeissance.

Sous lesquelles conditions estant le Pape return a Romme, pendant que les
citoyens s'amusoient entierement au gain de ceste annce, il print absoluement
la seigneurie de la ville, fortifia and mit gardes au chastel saint Ange,
tellement que ses successeurs iusqu'au pape Eugene, bien qu'ils eussent
souuentefois beaucoup de difficultez, aiant ce neantmoins establi en fin leur
puissance, les seigneurierent depuis sans aucune contradiction.

Auec ces fondemens and moiens estans eleuez en grande puissance terrienne,
delaissa^s peu a peu la memoire du salut des ames and des commandemens de Dieu,
ayants turn toutes leurs pensees a la grandeur dece monde, n'usants plus de
l'authorite spirituelle si non pour u^ instrument and ministere de la
temporelle, ils commencerent a sembler plustost princes seculiers que papes ou
euesques.

Leur soin and leur affairs commencerent lors d'estre, no^ plus l'aduancement
de la religion, non plus lezele and la charity enuers leprochain, mais les
arms, mais les guerres contre contre les Chrestiens: and cependant de manier
auec leurs pensees and mains sanguinaires les sacrifices, amasser des thresors:
nouelles loix, noueaux artifices, nouuelles trahisons, nouueaux pieges pour
atraper deniers de tous costez: employer a ceste fin sans aucun respect les
arms spirituelles, vendre sans honte and vergongne les chooses sacrees and
prophanes.

Depuis les richesses estans espandues en toute leur court s'en ensuyuirent les
pompes and desbordemens, les facons de fair deshonestes, les voluptez and
plaisirs abominables: null soin de leurs predecesseurs, nulle pensee de la
majesty perpetuelle de leur pontificat: mais aulieu de cela, des desirs
ambitieux and pestiferez d'esleuer, non seulement a richesses exorbita^tes,
mais a roiaumes and principautez leurs fills, leurs nepueux and leurs parens: ne
distribuans plus les dignitez ny les prouffits and reuenus aux hommes dignes
and vertueux, mais presque tousiours les vendans aux plus offrans, ou les
dissipans en persons propres a leur ambition, avarice, ou a leurs plaisirs
vilains and detestables.

Pour raison desquels acts estant la reverence qu'on leur portoit du tout
perdue au coeur des hommes, toutefois leur authorite se soustient encor en
party pour le nom et la majesty tant puissante de la religion, estant
cependant grandement aidee des moiens qu'ils ont de gratifier aux grands
princes and a ceux qui onr quel que puissance autour d'eux, par le moien des
dignitez et autres concessions ecclesiastiques.

De la aduient que congnois sans bien qui'ls sont en grand respect enuers les
hommes, et que celuy qui prent les arms contre eux ne peut attendre qu'une
grieve infamy auec linimitie des autres princes qui s'opposent souuentefois a
tells enterprinses, et qu'en tout euenement il en recoit bien peu de gain:
qu'estans vainecurs ils exercent leur victoire a leur discretion, vaincus, ils
en eschappent a tells conditions que bon leur semble: estans ain si poussez
and eguillonnez d'un desir et cupidite d'esleuer leurs parents de bas lieu aux
principautez, ils ont de long temps este par plusieurs fois les instruments de
guerres, and feux nouueaux en Italy.

Mais retournant a mon principal propos, duquel la tres-iuste douleur du
dommaige public m'a plus ardemment tranporte que la loy de l'histoire ne me
permettoit, etc.

FIN.
A whole discourse clean left out of the fourth book; beginning at the 119.
pa. accor- to the said impression.
FOr the declaration whereof, and of many other things which happened
afterward, the matter requires that I now make mention, what right the church
has over the territory of Romagna, and many other places, which it has had
possession of in diverse times, and holds yet at this present: And by what
means the bishops of Rome, being appointed, and established only for the pure,
and simple administration of spiritual matters are now come to the managing
of worldly states, and principalities: And likewise that I declare (as a
matter conjoined here unto) what strife and contention has happened diverse
times, through these, and other occasions, between the popes and the Emperors.

The Bishops of Rome (of whom S. Peter was the first) their power and
authority in spiritual matters being grounded on Jesus Christ, being men
renowned for their Charity, humility, patience, understanding, and miracles,
were at their beginning, not only void of al temporal authority and power,
but persecuted by the same, and for a long time remained obscure, and as it
were men unknown, their name being for the most part manifest to the world,
only by the tortures and afflictions they suffered, which they endured
equally with them that succeeded them. For albeit that thorough the great
concourse of people, and the diversity of Nations and professions which were
then at Rome, small regard was taken to their proceedinges, and many Emperors
did not at all, move any force, or trouble against them, but when they were of
opinion, that it was not meet to dissemble their public actions, or pas them
over with silence: howbeit other Emperors, whether it were through cruelty, or
for the love they did bear to their particular gods, did persecute them with
all rigor, as the authors of new superstitions, and the subuerters of true
religion.

In this estate they continued, being highly renowned for their voluntary
poverty, holiness of life, and martyrdom, until the time of pope Siluester:
in whose life the Emperor Constantine, being converted to the Christian faith,
and moved by the holy conversation and miracles, which were daily manifested
in those, who made profession of the name of Christ, the Bishops were freed
from the persecution which they had endured the space of three hundred years
(or thereabout) and had liberty granted them, publikelie to exercise Christian
religion, and Ceremonies.

Whereupon through the reverence to their holy life, and the divine precepts
which our religion contains: and through the readiness which is ingrafted in
men, to follow the example of their prince; whether it were (as it often
falls out) through ambicion, or fear: the name of Christians, began
woonderfully to increase and spread it self every where, and withal the
poverty of Ecclesiastical persons, to decrease: For Constantine having builte
at Rome, the Churches of S. John in Laterano, of S. Peter in Vaticano, and of
saint Paul, and many others in diverse places, he did not only furnish them
with rich vessels and Ornaments, but moreover enriched them, with great
possessions and revenues, that they might in time to come be maintained, and
renewed, and that they which exercised divine service might live thereby:
Afterward by succession, many persuading themselves, that by alms, and
guiftes to the church, they should easily purchase the kingdom of heaven,
they either builte new churches, which they endowed with possessions, or
bequeathed part of their riches, to those which were already founded and
erected: yea whether it were by a law, or by an ancient custom, following the
example of the old Testament, every one paid the tenth part of his fruits,
and the revenues of his own goods to the church: whereunto they were stirred
up and animated, with great feruencie, because at the first the Ecclesiastical
persons beside that which served for their moderate maintenance, did employ the
rest of their goods, in building and bewtifieng of the churches; Otherwhiles in
pitiful and charitable deeds, pride, and ambition, being not yet entered into
their hearts, reserving for themselves only that which suffised to entertain
themselves frugality, and with temperance.

The bishop of Rome, was then acknowledged generally of al Christians, superior
of the church and of all spiritual government, as successor of the Apostle
Peter, both because that city, for the dignity and greatness thereof, did
as chief head of others retain the name and majesty of the Empire, as also
that from thence the christian faith was dispersed through the greater part of
Europe: And further for that Constantine, being baptized by Siluester, did
freely yield that authority to him, and his successors.

Moreover, the report is, that Constantine being constrained by the affairs
of the Provinces of the East parts, to remove the seat of his Empire to
Bizantium, which afterward he called by his own name Constantinople, gave to
the Bishop the government of Rome, and of many other cities, and countries of
Italy: The which report albeit that with great advise it was entertained by
the Popes which did succeed, and by their authority believed of many,
notwithstanding the same is reproved by most approved aucthors, and
altogether refuted by the estate of matters themselves: For it is most
certain, that at that time, and long after, Rome and all Italy, was governed
as subject to the Empire, and that by Magistrates deputed by the Emperors.
Moreover there are many (matters of great antiquity, are oftentimes so
obscured with darkness) who do flatly deny, all that is reported of
Constantine and Syluester, affyrming that they lived in diverse ages. But all
do agree, that the changing of the seat of the Empire to the cittye of
Constantinople, was the first beginning of the authority of the Popes: For the
power of the emperors growing weak in Italy, through their continual
absence, and urgent affairs which withhelde them in the east parts, the
people of Rome withdrawing themselves from the obedience of the Emperors, and
so much the more leaving unto the Popes, they began to yield unto them, not
any subjection indeed, but a certain kind of voluntary obedience.

Albeit that these things were not brought to light but by tract of time, and
very slowly, by reason of the invasion of the Goths, Vandals, and other
Barbarous Nations, which came into Italy: by whom the cittye of Rome being
taken and sacked, many times the names of the popes concerning temporal
matters, did remain very obscure and base, and the authority of the Emperors
very small, for so much as they did with great dishonor, leave Italy, in pray to
barbarous people: Amongst whom the fury of other Nations having been as the
course of a mighty river, the power of the Goths continued the space of
seventy years:

These were christians by name and profession, and took their first beginning
from the parts of Dacia, and Tartaria; who nevertheless in the end being
driven from Italy, by the army of the Emperors, the countries began again
to be governed by Magistrates of Greece: of the which he which had sovereign
authority over the rest, being by a Greek word called Hexarche, did make
his ordinary residence in Rauenna a most ancient city, and at that time
very rich and populus: both in respect of the fertilitye of the country, as
also by reason of the great concourse thither, from the mighty army at Sea,
which Augustus Caesar and other Emperors did continually entertain, in the
haven near unto the town (whereof at this day there remains not scarce any
remembrance) it was inhabited by many capitaines, and afterward a long time
by Theodoric K. of the Goths, and his successors, who yet standing in dread
of the power of the Emperors, did rather make choice of this town for the seat
of their kingdom then Rome, in regard of the conueniencie of the Sea, being
nearer to Constantinople.

In consideration whereof (albeit for a contrary reason) the Hexarches being
established in Rauenna did depute or appoint, particular. Magistrates for the
government of Rome and other cities of Italy, under the title of Dukes. From
hence the name of Hexarchie of Rauenna, did grow, under which title all that was
comprehended, which having no particular Duke, did immediately obey the
Hexarchie.

In this time the bishop of Rome, exercising no civil authority, and the
reverence in spiritual matters, which before men did bear unto them, in
respect of their holiness of life (which now they made no show of) declining
and decreasing, they lived as subject to the Emperors: without whose
approbation, or the consent of their Hexarches, albeit choice were made by the
Clergy and people of Rome, yet durst they not accept of or exercise the place
of bishop. Moreover, the Bishops of Constantinople and Rauenna (as commonly the
seat of Religion, does follow the power of the Empire, and force of arms) did
often dispute with the Bishops of Rome for superiority.

But not long after, the state of matters did change: for the Lombards (a
very cruel people) being entered into Italy, did possess that part of Gaul,
which is called Cisalpina (which from their government took the name of
Lombardy) Rauenna, with the whole Hexarchie, and many other towns of Italy,
and extended their army to the Marque of Ancona, Spoleto, and Beneuento, in
which twoe places they did establish particular Dukes.

In the mean season the Emperors not looking to these matters, partly through
their cowardice and negligence, and partly through the lets and broiles they
had in the coast of Asia, the city of Rome being destitute of their succor,
and the government of the Hexarches being worn out of Italy, beeganne to be
ruled by the counsel and authority of the Bishops: who having a long time
(together with the Romans) been oppressed by the Lo^bardes, in the end had
recourse unto Pepin king of France for succor, who passing into Italy with a
mighty army, drove the greatest part of the Lombardes (who had ruled more
than two hundred years) from their government, and gave unto the pope and to
the church of Rome, (as things fallen unto him by right of Arms) not only
Vrbino, Fano, Agobbo, and many other territories near unto Rome, but likewise
Rauenna, with the Hexarchie thereof, under which title (they say) is included,
all that which is contained from the Confines of Placentia, joining to the
Territory of Pauia unto Arimini, between the river Po, the mount Apenine,
the lake or marish of Venice, and the Adriatique sea: and from Armini, unto the
river of Toglia, which at that time was called Isaurum.

But after the death of Pepin, the Lombardes renewing new broiles against the
Pope, and those possessions which were given him, Charles the son of Pepin
(who afterward for his worthy prowess, and many victories, was by right
honored with the name of Great) having utterly subverted and brought their
kingdom to ruin, did confirm the gift made by his Father to the Church of
Rome, and did give consent and allow of, that those of the Marque of Ancona,
and the Duchy of Spoleto (which comprehends the city of Aquila, and a part
of Brutia) did voluntarily yield unto the pope, whilst he made wars with the
Lombards.

These things they do affirm as most certain, to the which moreover some
Ecclesiastical Writers do add, that Charles gave to the church Liguria which
extends to the river Varo (the furthest lymits of Italy) Mantua, and all
that the Lombardes did possess in Friuoli, and in Histria. A certain author
writes as much of the Isle of Corsica, and all the Territories which is
contained, between the towns of Luna and Parma. For which so great benefits,
the kings of France being renowned and honored by the Popes, did purchase to
themselves the title of Most christian kings:

And afterward in the year of Grace eight hundred, Pope Leo, together with the
people of Rome (the Pope I say without any other authority, as head of that
people) did choose Charles Emperor of the Romans, distinguishing by that
name, that part of the Empire, from them which inhabited Constantinople, as if
Rome and the West provinces for want of succor, were constrained to be
defended by a prince proper, and peculiar to themselves.

Howbeit notwithstanding this division of the Empire, the emperors of
Constantinople, were not dispossessed, neither of the Isle of Sicilie, nor of
that part of Italy, which running from Naples to Manfredon, is enclosed with
the Sea, the same being continually under their government.

Notwithstanding, for all these accidents, the custom was not abrogated but
that the election of the pope must be allowed off, and confirmed by the Roman
Emperors, under whose name the Cittye of Rome was governed: nay further in
their Bulls and Charters, they did expres with these formal words, the time of
the writing of them Imperante Carolo Imp. Domino nostro. In which subjection or
acknoledgement they continued until the success of the affairs did give them
encouragement, to govern by themselves.

For when the power of the Emperors began to wax weak, first through the
dissension amongst the successors of Charles the Great, whilst the majesty
of the empire remained in their hands: and afterward by the change and
removing of the Empire, to the princes of Germany, who were not of like power
to the successors of Charles the Great, in regard of the mightines of the
house of France, both the Pope and the people of Rome, and the Magistrates by
whom the city began to be governed (though very disorderly) derogating
wholly as much as in them lay, from the jurisdiction of the Emperors, they did
ordain by a solemn law and decree, that from thence forward the election of
the pope, should not depend of the authority of the emperor: which yet was
diversely observed a long while after, according as the greatness of the
Emperors by the success of matters did either rise, or fall: And their power
being greatly increased after that the Empire came into the hands of the Othos
of Saxony, Gregorye the fifth, by birth a German being made pope, through
the favor of Otho the third, who then was in Rome, partly moved with the
love of his own Nation, and partly provoked by the iniuryes he received of
the people of Rome, by his decree, transported the right and authority of
choosinge the Emperors, in the same form they do yet observe it at this day,
to the Germans, and to the end the Bishops might always reserve some
pre-eminence to themselves, he did forbid in his decree, that they which were
to be chosen Emperors, might not use the title of emperor or Augustus, nor
any other name, then king of the Romans, and Caesar, before they had received
the Crown of the empire from the pope, whence the custom is grown that they
come to Rome to be crowned.

But the house of the Othos being clean extinguished, and the power of the
Emperors grown weak, by reason that the inheritance thereof, did not continue
in the stock of mighty and puissant kings, the city of Rome did openly
withdraw it self, from their obedience, and many other cities did rebel, in
the reign of the emperor Conrad of Sueuia: whilst that the Bishops still
bending all their care by little and little, to advance their own greatness,
did in a manner absolutely command, and govern the City of Rome, albeit
that oftentimes, by the insolency and dissension of the people, they had their
hands full of business: which that they might the better withstand, through
the favor of Henry the second being then at Rome; they obtained by a solemn
law and decree, that the power and authority to elect and create the Pope,
should remain wholly in the cardinals.

And to help this matter, a new means to further their greatness offered it
self: For about that time the Northmans (of whom the first leader was William
surnamed Iron-arme) having usurped over the empire of Constantinople, Puglia,
and Calabria: Robert Guicciard, one of the Northmans, whether it were that he
might get the more advantage, under a color and pretense of right, or to arm
himself with greater force against the power of the emperors, or whether any
other cause did lead him thereunto, he yielded Beneuent unto the Pope, as
appertaining to the church of Rome, and held of the said church as in fee,
the Duchy of Apoullia, and Callabria.

The which example Roger (one of his successors) did follow, who having
driven William (descended of the same line) from Apoullia and Callabria, and
afterward occupied Cicilia, about the year 1130. he held likewise the said
countries, as in Fee of the church of Rome, under the title of the K. of both
Sicilias, the one, on the one side, the other on the other side the Far: the
popes consenting through their own ambition and particular profit, to nourish
the violence and usurpation of others.

By all these means, the power and authority of the pope daily increasing (as
the covetousness of men is never satisfied) they did begin to deprive such
kings of their kingdoms, who were not obedient to their commandments, and to
bestow the same upon others: until the time that those dominions fell into the
house of Henry the son of Frederic Barbaroussa, and from Henry to Frederic the
second his son, al three of them being Emperors successively the one
after the other.

But Frederic being become a great persecutour of the church, and in his time
the faction of the Guelphes and Gibellins being grown (the Pope being head of
the one, and the Emperor of the other) after the death of Frederic the pope
invested Charles Earl of Aniou and Prouence (of whom mention has been made
heretofore) to those kingdoms, upon conditions to pay 6000. ounces of gold
for tribute every year, and that no king of those Dominions might hereafter
take upon him the title of the Emperor of Rome: which condition has ever
since been specified, in the Charters of the king of Naples, which was the
cause, that the kingdom of the Isle of Sicilia, being possessed by the king of
Arragon, did withdraw it self from the yearly tribute, and from the
acknoledgement to hold in fee of the church of Rome.

Moreover, report has gotten thus much (although it be not so certain as
those things we have discoursed of before) that long ago the Countess
Mahaulte, a most mighty princess in Italy, gave to ye church that part of
Toscane, which on the one side is limited with the river Pescia, and the
castle of S. Querico in the earldom of Siena, and on the other side with the
lower sea and the river Tiber, and is at this day called the patrimony of S.
Peter: Others add that the said countess, gave unto the church the city of
Ferrara. These latter things are not very certain, but far more doutfull
are those matters which are written by a certain author, that Arithpert king of
the Lombards, when their kingdom did flourish, did give unto them the Alps
called Cocciae, wherein the city of Genoua stands, and all whatsoever is
contained, from Genoua unto the borders of Prouence: And that Linthprandus
likewise (K. of the same Nation) gave unto them Sabina, a country near unto
Rome, Narni, and Ancona, with diverse other territories.

Thus according to the change and alteration of the Emperors, the affairs of
the popes changed with them. For they having at the beginning been many years
persecuted by the Emperors, and afterward freed from that fear, by the
conversion of Constantine to christianity, they did a long while rest in
quiet, under the shadow of their wings, and giving themselves wholly to
spiritual matters, did live in base estate, separating themselves altogether,
from the intercourse they had with the Emperors, by reason of the power of the
Lombards in Italy.

But afterward by the favor of the K. of France being stepped up to
temporal authority, they remained for a long space, in league and amitye with
the Emperors, depending very willingly of their authority, so long as the
majesty of the empire continued in the stock of Charles ye great, as well in
acknowledgement of many benefits, given and received on both parts, as in
regard of the greatness of the emperors which afterward coming to decline,
the popes withdrawing themselves wholye from their friendship, began to hold
and maintain that it belonged rather to them to give laws to the emperors,
then to receive laws from them.

Thus they disdaining to enter into their former subjection, and to the end
that the emperors might not enterprise the recovering of the ancient right
belonging to the empire, both at Rome and other places (as some of them being
either of greater power, or more wit and courage then the rest, endeavored)
they did openly by force of arms oppose themselves to their might, being
assisted by these Tyrants who (under the title, and name of princes, and of
those Cities, which did enfranchise, and set themselves at liberty, they did
no longer acknowledge and submit themselves, to the authority of the emperors.

Hereupon it came to pas that the popes taking daily more and more upon them,
and converting the terror of spiritual matters, to things temporal and
enterpreting that as Christ his vicars on earth they had the pre-eminence and
place over emperors, and that to them in certain causes appertained the care
of the estate of this world, they did many times deprive the emperors of
their Imperial dignity, moving the electors to choose others in the place of
those whom they had excommunicated, and on the other side, the emperors did
either themselves make choice of, or procure others to create new popes.

By reason of these broils it happened, that the estate of the church being
greatly weakened, as well in regard that the Court of Rome remained by the
space of 70. years in the city of Auignon, as also through the schism which
followed immediately after the pope his return into Italy: and likewise, that
in the cities which were subject to the church and principally in those of
Romagna, many citizens who were of the greatest power, did in their own
country usurp a tyrannical government who were either afterward, forced
from thence by the popes, or else (where they were not of power to suppress
them) they did yield the territories unto them that possessed them to be
holden in fee of the church, or did give authority to others to subdue them,
and rule in their place.

In this manner the most part of the cities of Romagna, began to be governed by
particular lords, the most part of them, under the title of Vicars of ye
church. By this means Ferrara, given first in government to Azzo of Este, was
afterward granted unto him in title of a vicar ship, and in tract of time that
family was exalted to higher titles and dignity. Likewise Bologna occupied by
John Visconte Archbishop of Millan, was afterward given him as a vicarship, by
the pope: and for the same reasons many other territories in the Marque of
Ancona, in the patrimony of saint Peter, and in Vmbria (which we call now the
duchy of Spoleto) many private Lords did rise, being driven thereunto, some
against the will of the pope, others by his consent. The which alterations being
likewise happened in Lombardie, in the cities belonging to the Empire, it
chanced some times, as the state of matters did change, that the Vicars of
Romagna, and of other Ecclesiastical places did openly withdraw themselves
from the nam of the church, and did acknowledge those cities in fee of the
Empire: as contrarily, they which did occupy Millan, Mantua, and other
imperial possessions in Lombardy, did hold them in fee of the pope.

In the mean while, albeit the city of Rome did retain the name and lord
ship of the church, notwtstanding it was governed by their own citizens. And
although at the beginning when the popes did return from Auignon they were
obeyed as lords, notwithstanding a little while after, the Romans having
created a new kind of magistrate which they called Banderez, they returned to
their ancient stubbornness: whervppon the Popes having very small authority
left them, they withdrew themselus from Rome, until such time that the
Romans being grown very poor, and great disorders sprunge amongst them
through the absence of the court considering that the year 1400. drew near, in
the which they hoped, that by the pope his residence there, there would be a
great concourse of people from all parts of Christendom by reasonne of the
Iubile, they humbly besought the pope Boniface, that he would vouchsafe to
return thither again, offering immediately upon his coming to abolish their
Banderez, and to submit themselves wholly to his obedience. Under which
conditions the pope returning to Rome, whilst the citizens did altogether
busy themselves, to the gain and profit they received that year, he took the
absolute government of the cittye upon him, fortified the castle Saint Angelo,
and placed a guard of Soldiors therein: so that his successors until the time
of Eugenius, though with much trouble oftentimes, did notwithstanding thoroughly
establish their authority, and governed the city afterward without any
contradiction.

These foundations being laid, and by these means, the popes being exalted to
temporal authority, forgetting by little and little the salvation of souls,
and the commandementes of God, turning al their thoughts to become great in
this world, using spiritual jurisdiction, but as an instrument and minister to
attain to temporal government, they began rather to seem secular princes,
then Bishops. They employed all their care, and busied themselves, not for the
advancement of religion, not in zeal, and Charity toward their neighbors, but
to raise arms and to make war against Christians, touching holy sacrifices
with their bloody thoughts and hands: yea their whole study was to heap up
treasure together, to invent new laws, new guiles, new sleights to get money
on every side, and without any regard or respect to use spiritual weapons, to
this end only, and to sell without shame, both sacred and profane things.
Riches being spread over all their court, there followed pomp, riot, and
dishonest customs, lusts, and abominable pleasures: having no care of their
predecessors, no thought of ye continuance of the majesty, belonging to so
sacred a function; but in stead thereof ambitious and pestilent desires to
advance themselus their sons, their nephews and kinsfolk, not only to
immoderate wealth and riches, but to kingdoms and principalities: making
distribution of dignities and offices of profit, not to worthy and virtuous
men, but commonly either selling them to those that would give most largly for
them: or else bestowing them upon such persons, as either for their ambition,
covetousness, or other villainous and detestable plesures, did iump and agree with
them. Through which deeds of theirs, the reverence which was wont to be born
them, being altogether fled from ye heart of men, nevertheless their authority
is still vphelde, partly through the mighty name and powreful majesty of
religion, being likewise greatly aided through the means they have to gratify
great princes, and those which bear any authority about them, with Ecclesiastical
livings and dignities. Whereupon it comes to pass, that they knowing right
well, in what great regard they are amongst men, and that they which take
arms against them, are to expect the blot of reprochful infamy, and often
times ye hatred of other princes, which do oppose themselves to those
enterprises, and that whatsoever happens, small advantage arises to their
enemies, that they being Conquerors, and getting the upper hand, they use the
victory at their discretion, being overcome they escape upon such conditions
as they list: and further stirred up, and pricked forward, with a covetous
desire to advance their kindred, from private callinges, unto princely estates,
they have a long while been often the Instruments of wars and new fire in Italy.

But returning to my principal purpose, from the which the most just grief of
ye public loss and overthrow has with more vehemence drawn me, then ye
law of a history does well permit. I say that the city of Romagna, etc.

Alius locus libro IIII. fol. 156. versu. 44. post Concessit.
AD cuius rei and multarum aliarum sequentibus temporibus gestarum clariorem
notitia^, res ipsa poscit, vti quid iuris in Fla^inia, quae nunc Romagna
dicitur, oppidis aliisque compluribus quae vel nunc possident, vel antea variis
temporibus possederunt, Romani pontifices habeant, dicatur: quoque pacto ab
initio rerum sacraru^ administrationi duntaxat praefecti, ad regna and imperia
peruenerint: ad hoc vt id etiam tanquam his annex um and coniunctum, quae ob
has atque alias causas contentiones diuersis te^poribus inter Pontifices atque
Imperatores extite rint, commemoretur.

Pontifices Romani, quo ru^ primus Petrus apostolus fuit, accepta ab Jesus
Christo in rebus sacris ac diuinis auctoritate, charitate, submissione,
patienti a, spiritu sacro and prodigiis magni, per illorum initia, non modo
potentia civilly and mundana penitus nudati, uerumetia^ ab illa uexati, diu
obscuri ac fere ignorati fuere: eoru^ nomine nulla re magis quam suppliciis and
cruciatibus perfere^dis innotescente: quae una cum iis qui eos se quebantur,
sustineba^t. Na^ etsi cum propter infinitam multitudinem diuersarum nationu^
and sectarum quae in vrbem Roman confluxerant, parum Christianoru^ progressus
and actiones animaduerterentur, essentque ab quorunda^ imperatoru^ ui and
vexationibus immunes, nisi si qua^do illoru^ publiciritus silentio praeteri
riri non possent: nihilominus tamen aliqui alii sieve innata feritate, sieve
deoru^ suoru^ insano quoda^ amore perculsi, eos tanqua^ nouarum superstitionu^
auctores, and suae religionis euersores, atrociter persequeba^tur. Hoc in statu
tu^ volu^taria paupertate, tum vitae reliquae sanctimonia, tum suppliciorum
acerbitatibus clarissimi, ad Siluestri po^tificatum perstiterunt. Cuius
temporibus quum ad Christiana^ religione^ Consta^tinus moribus sanctissimis
Christianoru^, and prodigiis ac miraculis, quae frequentissima in iis qui
Christi vestigia sequebantur, elucebant, per motus, animum appulisset,
Po^tifices a periculis in quibus annos circiter trecentos uersati fuerant,
tuti, liberius cultum diuinum exercere, ritusque Christianos palam profiteri.
Quamobrem factum est, vt partim moru^ and vitae admiratione, partim
praeceptorum quae nostra religione contine^tur, sanctitate, partim quoque
facilitate quadam mortaliu^, qua plerunque vel ambitione, vel metu, principis
sui exemplum imita^tur, nome^ Christianu^ mirifice omnib. in locis propagari,
paupertas uero illa sacerdotum beata, diminui coepere. Nam Constantinus templo
in Laterano diuo Ioanni, in Vaticano Petro apost. itemque Paulo, aliisque
diuersis in locis aedificatis, ea non modo preciosis uasis ornamentisque
ditauit, uerumetia^, vt sarta tecta tueri, ac renouare quae extructa era^t,
seque quirebus sacris opera^ darent, sustentare possent, praedis atque aliis
vectigalibus donauit: alii praeterea multi post secuti, rati beneficiis
huiusmodi faciliorem aditum incoeleste regnum sibi patefieri, aut noua
extruebant fana, eaque donis cumulabant: autiam extructis suoru^ bonoru^
portionem aliqua^ attribuebant, quinetiam sieve lege quapiam inueterata, sieve
consuetudine, ad legis Moseae exemplum, quisque de suoru^ bonorum fructib.
decima^ partem locis religiosis pendebat: ad quod quidem efficiendum, magno cu^
ardore excitabantur: quod viderent ab initio sacerdotes, eo excepto, quod ad
parcissimu^ victu^ sibi reseruabant, quicquid reliquum erat, partim in
aedificia religiosa, eorumque supellectilem, partim in egenos aliosque pios
vsus impendere: cu^que nondum superbia and ambitio in eorum pectorib.
insedisset, ab vniuersis qui vbique erant, Christianis omnium omniu^
ecclesiarum supremus custos, and tanqua^ Petri apost. successor episc. Romanus
agnoscebatur: primu^ quod ea ciuitas obsuam antiquam dignitate^, tanquam
reliquaru^ caput and princeps, Imperii nomen maiestatemque retinebat: de inde
quod illinc in bona^ Europae partem religio christiana diffusa erat: postremo
qui a co^stantin. a Siluestro ritu christiano aquis initiatus, eiusmodi
auctoritatem in eo atque in eius successorib. libenter agnouerat. Fama quoque
est, Constantinu^ Orientis prouinciarum motib. Imperii sedem Byza^tiu^, post de
suo nomine Constantinopolim appellata^, transfer compulsum, pontifici Romanae
vrbis, aliarumque and vrbium and regionu^ in Italia, Imperium donasse. Quae
fama qua^uis a sequen tib. pontificib. dil igenter fuerit enutrita and
sustentata, eorumque auctoritate a multis credita, est nihilominus cum ab
scriptorib. grauissimis, tum vero reb. ipsis refutata. Illud autem certo
constat, and tunc and longo post tempore, vrbem Roman, Italiamque omnem tanqua^
imperio Caesaru^ obnoxiam, ab imperatorum ministris ac praefectis fuisse
gubernatam: nec desunt qui, quicquid de Constantino and Siluestro dicitur
(vsque adeo saepe profu^dis in tenebris res vetustae demersae latent)
redarguant, ostendantque eos long diuersis temporib. extitisse: nemo tamen
negat, imperii Constantinopolim translatione ad po^tificum potentia^, viam esse
patefacta^, ex eaque originem habuisse. Nam indies magis and magis imperatorum
auctoritate, tum ex illorum continua absentia, tu^ quod grauissimis in Orient
bellis distinerentur, in Italia debilitata, populus Romanus ab imperatoru^
obedientia paulatim desciscens, atque ob eam tem ta^to magis po^tifices
praesentes respiciens, eis coepit non obedientia^ quidem, sed voluntariu^
quodda^ obsequium exhibere. Quanqua^ ne haec quidem nisi lent sese
ostenderunt, ob Gothoru^ and Vandalorum aliarumque barbararu^ nationum in
Italiam effusiones: a quibus capta saepe ac direpta Roma, and pontificum nomen,
quod ad ciuiles attinet res, in obscuro pene co^temptu^ iacebat, and
imperatorum in Italia auctoritas euanesoebat: quandoquidem ea^ tanta cum
ignominia praedae barbaris expositam deserebant. Aliarum nationu^ impetus cum
torrentis instar erupisset, Gothoru^ per annos septuaginta potentia permansit.
Erant hi nomine and professione Christiani, genere a prima origin Scythae and
Dacae: quibus ta^de^ Caesaru^ armis Italia pulsis per Graecos iteru^ magist.
tus coepit Italia gubernari: quorum qui caeteris imperabat, Graeca voce
Hexarchus appellabatur, sede^que Rane^nae in vrbe vestustissima, eisque
temporibus opulentissima, atque ob agribonitatem frequentis. habebat. Nam post
magnum incrementum ex Caesaris Augusti atque alioru^ imperatorum class
validiss. susceptum, quam in eius portu vr by pene coniuncto, cuius nunc vix
vllum extat vestigium, continenter tenue runt, a multis belli ducib. deinde ab
Theodorico Gothoru^ rege, eiusque successo ribus fuerat habitata: qui quod
imperatoru^ potentia^ suspecta^ haberent, eam potius quam Roman, regni sui
sedem maris opportunitate Byzantio propioris ducti delegerunt: quu^
opportunitate^ Hexarchi, and si contraria ratione secuti, cu^ibi consedissent,
Romanae vrbi, aliisque Italiae ciuitatibus proprios imponeba^t praefectos, quos
Duces appellabant. Hinc Rauennatis Hexarchatus nomen: quo nomine omnia
co^prehendebantur, quae proprios Duces non habebant, sed vni Hexarcho obtempera
bant. Qua tempestate pontifices Romani ciuilis potestatis penitus expertes,
atque in mortaliu^ animis admiratione and obseruantia morib. ipsorum ab illa
pristina puritate iam fatiscentibus, obsolescente, tanqua^ imperatorib.
subiecti, aetatem agebant: sine quoru^, and eorum quos Hexarchos diximus
appellatos, auctoritate, quamuis sacerdotu^ populique Romani suffragiis
renunciati, neque se propontificib. gerere. neque po^tificatum capere audeba^t:
quinetia^ episcopi Constantino politanus and Raue^nas, quo nia^ religionis
seeds imperii atque armoru^ potentiam sequi consueuit, cu^ Romano episcopo
saepenumero de principatu disputaba^t. Caeterum haud multo post rerum mutatio
consecuta. Nam Longobardi, gens ferocissima, in Italiam ingressi, Galliam
cisalpinam occuparunt: ab quorum imperio, Longobardia est appellata. Adiecerunt
etiam Rauennam cum Hexarchatu vniuerso: alias praeterea multas Italiae parts,
armis Picenum vsque and Spoletum and Beneuentum prolatis: quibus in locis Duces
a sedictos imperare iusserunt, atque haec omnia dum imperatores partimignauia,
partim Afiaticis bellis detenti rebus paru^ prospiciunt. Horum igitur auxiliis
Roma destituta, cum nec iam Hexarchoru^ magistratus essent in Italia, consiliis
atque auctoritate pontificum gubernari coepit: qui cum aliquot annis post vna
cu^ Romany ab Longobard. opprimerentur, ad Pipini Francoru^ regis auxilia
ta^dem se receperunt. Qui valido in Italia^ exercitu, vbi Longobardi annos
vltra ducentos dominatum tenuerant, ducto, eos inde pepulit: partemque ipsoru^
imperii, quasi belli iure parti, pontifici and eclesiae Romanae condonauit: in
quibus non modo Vrbinu^, Fanum Fortunae, Eugubbium (Igninum olim) multaque alia
Romae vicina oppida, verumetia^ Raven na^ cum Hexarchatu suo: quo contineri
aiunt quicquid a Placentiae and Papiae finib. Ariminum vsque Padum inter and
Appeninum, stagna sieve paludes Venetorum, and Adriaticum sinum clauditur: ad
haec ipsum Ariminum ad Togla^ flumen, tunc Isaurum appellatum. Pipino autem
mortuo, cum denuo pontificibus Longobardi essent infesti, and quae ipsis donata
erant inuaderent, Carolus eius filius (qui post ob maximas victorias Magni
cognomentum merito est adeptus) eoru^ imperio funditus euerso a patre ecclesiae
Romanae donata comprobauit: and nominatim Picenum and Spoleti Ducatum, quo
Aquila oppidum, Brutiorumque pars continetur, pontifici tum cum Longobardis
bellum gereret attributa. Haec sic habere certo affirmant, quib. pontificii
quidam scriptores addunt, cundem Carolu^ ecclesiae donasse Liguria^ ad Varum
amnem, Italiae terminum: Mantua^ item and quicquid Longobardi in Foro Iulii,
atque in Histria possideba^t. Ide^ quoque aliquis scribit de Corsica insula,
totoque illo tractu qui Luna^ inter and Parmam interest: ob quae beneficia
regis Galliae celebrati, and bonorib. a pontificib. affecti, Christianissimi
appellationem sunt consecuti. Post etia^ anno Salutis octingentesimo, Leo
po^tifex vna cum populo Romano (veru^ pontifex, haud alia auctoritate, quam vt
eius populi caput) eunde^met Carolum Romanoru^ imperatorum nominarunt, nomine
quoque ipso hanc imperii partem ab imperatorib. Constantinopoli agentibus
seiungentes, tanquam Roma prouinciaeque Occidentis ab illis desertae in
periculis: proprioru principum tutela opus haberent. Hac imperii distractione,
transmarini imperatores, nec Siciliae insula, nec ea Italiae part, quae ab
vrbe ipsa Neapoli, Ma^fredoniam vsque pertingens mari terminatur (quonia^
semper illorum imperium agnouerant) exclusi fuere: nec ob id de consuetu dine
qua pontifices imperatorum, quorum nomine Roma gubernabatur, auctoritate
confirmarentur, derogatum est: quinetia^ in suis diplomatib. scripturae tempus
his verbis consignabant: IMPERANTE CAROLO DOMINO NOSTRO. In qua minime graui
vel submissione, vel obseruantia perstitere, du^ rerum euentus animos addidere,
vt suo se nutu regerunt: quippe cu^ imperatorum potentia de bilitari coepisset,
primum dissidiis inter Caroli magni posteros, du^ penes eos imperii ad
principes Germanos translatione, pote^tia Caroli magni successoribus minime
pares, pontifices populusque Ramanus, cuius magistratib. Roma coepit, qua^uis
perturbate and confuse gubernari: Imperatorum auctoritati qui buscunque modis
derogantes, lege sanxerunt, ne deinceps pontificum lectio, imperatorum
auctoritate niteretur: quod quide^ per annos plures vary seruatum est, prout
rerum vicissitudine imperatorum potentia aut surgebat, aut in clinabat. Quae
posteaqua^ ad Othones Saxonas imperium peruenit, aucta: Gregorius Quintus
Othonis tertii sauore, qui tum Romae erat, ad ponrificatum assumptus, hinc suae
gentis amore, illinc Romanoru^ quibusda^ iniuriis, impulsus, suo decreto
legendi imperatoris ius and auctoritatem, ea forma quae ad haec vsque tempora
perducta seruatur, in Germanorum nationem transtulit: atque vt pontificib. in
imperatores, auctoritatem aliqua^ retineret, eisque vicem redderet, inter dixit
ne quis imperatoris Augustiue appellatione, alioue nomine qua^ regis Romanorum
and Caesaris vteretur, ni prius imperii corona^ a pontifice (vnde mos inoleuit,
vt ad capiendam coronam Roman vaniant) accipiant. Caeterum Othonib. extinctis,
and potentia imperatoru^ quod ad magnos reges haereditario iure Imperium non
veniret, Roma palam ab illorum obedientia defecit: multaeque vrbes Conrado
Sueuo imperante, rebellarunt: and pontifices suae amplificandae auctoritati
intenti, Ro^. ciuitatis dominatu prope modum obtineba^t: saepe tamen propter
populi in solentia^ and discordias, multis difficultatib. laboraba^t quem vt in
officio continerent, Henrici secundi fauore, qui tu^ Romae erat, pontificis
creandi ius in cardinales solos transtulerant. Pontificu^ magnitudini noua
accessio facta est. Nam cum Normanni, quorum primus Gulielmus Fera brachius est
appellatus, ab imperio Constantino politano Apulia and Calabria subtracta,
Robertus Guicciardus ex illa gente vnus, sieve vt color iuris aliquo sese
muniret: sieve quo aduersus eos imperatores potentia se armaret sieve alia de
caussa, Beneuento pontifici, quasi pontificii iuris esset, restituto, Apuliae
Calabriaeque principatu^, quasi ecclesiae Romanae fundum recognouit: cuius
exe^plum Rogerius eius successorum vnus secutus, inde pulso, Guilelmo eade^
familia orto, post etia^ Sicilia occupata, fere anno Salutis M.C.XXX. haru^
prouinciarum ius a pontifice accepit: estque rex vtriusque Siciliae, quaru^ vna
vltra, altera cis fretum sita est, appellatus. Neque enim pontifices ambitione
and propria vtilitate adducti, aliena^ cupiditatem and vim fouere recusaru^t.
Hac iuris specie freti, vlterius po^tifices progressi (vt cupido humana gradu^
sistere nequit) quosdam reges illis regnis quasi contumaces priuare coeperunt
in aliosque transfer: quo more ad Henricum Federici Barbarussae filiu^, ab
hoc ad Federicu secund. eius filium, quitres ordine Romani imperatores fuerunt,
caregna peruenere. Verum cu^ Federicus pontificem bello persequeretur,
esse^tque illo tempore Guelforu^ and Gibellinoru^ factiones excitatae, quarum
alterius caput erat pontifex, alteri us imperator: pontifex, mortuo Federico,
Carolu^ Andiouinorum and Prouinciae comitem (cuius antea facta mentio est)
vtriusque Siciliae regem appellauit: hac lege vt quota^nis, auri vnciarum sena
milia tributi nomine penderet: ac ne quis little regum in posterum imperatoris
Romani appellationem posset admittere: quae exceptio semper ab eo tempore in
regni Neapolitani diplomate expressa fuit. na^ Siciliae regnum post a
Tarraconensib regib. occupatum, a pontificum obedientia sese subduxit, atque a
tributo pe^sita^do vindicauit. Ad hoc obtinuit fama (etsi haud ita certa, quam
ea quae hactenusdicta su^t) Mathildam principem in Italia praepotentem,
ecclesiae eam partem Etruriae donasse, quae Pescia torre^ te and Quirici
castello in Senensium finibus ab vna part, ab altera mari in fero and Tyberi
amne, quae hodie Patrimonium Petri vulgo nominatur: and addu^t alii, ab eadem
Ferrari am ecclesiae donata^. Haec postrema dubia fide retulimus, caeterum
multo magis dubia quae ab aliquo scripta su^t, videlicet, Auth pertum
Longobardorum regem, flore^te ipsoru^ regno, eidem ecclesiae alps Coccias, in
quib. Genua, and quicquid ab ea in Prouincia^ vsque Romanorum patet: and
Luithprandum eiusde^ gentis regem, Sabinam Romae propinquam regionem, Narnia^
and Anconem, cum aliis quibusdam oppidis attribuisse. In hunc igitur modu^
reru^ statu variante, variae pariter pontificum atque imperatorum res fuere.
Nam a primis imperatoribus per multa annorum curricula vexati, post Constantini
ad Christum conuersione ab eo terrore liberati, reb. sacris ta^tum operam
dantes, in reliquis imperatorum auctoritati fere subiecti, sub eorum vmbra quie
uerunt. In hoc humili statu diutissime post vita^ egerunt, ab imperatorum
co^mercio, propter magnam in Italia Longobardorum potentiam seiuncti. Post
autem Galliae regum beneficio opib. and potentia aucti, cum imperatoribus
coniunctis. stetere, ab illoru^ auctoritate, dum imperatoria maiestas in Caroli
magni posteris ma^sit, alacri animo pendentes, quod quidem fiebat, tum propter
beneficia, vicissim data, and accepta, tumetia^ ob imperatoru^ pote^tiam: quae
vbi post coepit inclinare, and quasi flaccessere, illorum amicitia pror sus
reiecta, ita se gerere coeperunt, quasi pontifici ae dignitatis esset leges
potius imperatorib. dare'que accipere. Cumque a veteri illo quo subiecti
imperatorib. statu penitus abhorrerent, veritique ne illi Romae atque alibi
antiqua imperii iura recuperare, vt quida^ illorum aut potentia maiore, aut
animo erectiore efficere conaba^tur, tentarent, armata vi sese imperatoru^
potentiae, ab illis tyrannis qui se principes appellabant, and ab illis vrbib.
quae sese in libertatem vindicauerant, nec ia^ imperii auctoritatem
agnoscebant, adiuti, opponebant. Hinc factum est, vt pontifices sibi indies
plura maioraque arrogantes, terroremque armoru^ coelestium in res terrenas
caducas vertentes, ius sibi atque auctoritatem in imperatores, quasi Christi in
terris vices gerentes, assumpserunt: affirma^tes ad se multis in reb. regnorum
atque imperiorum procurationem pertinere. Qua persuasione freti, imperatorib.
interdum imperii dignitatem abrogabant, Septemuiros Augustales, vt alios in
eorum locum surrogarent, incitaba^t. Vicissim quoque imperatores, aut ipsi
creabant nouos pontifices, aut vt crearentur procurabant. Ex his controuersiis,
atque etiam quod pontifices per a^nos septuaginta Auenione sedem habuissent,
nec non ex illo ecclesiae dissidio, quod in Italia pontifice Roman reuertente,
est exortum, cu^ ecclesiae status admodu^ concussus ac debilitatus esset,
factum est, vt in oppidis ecclesiae subiectis, praecipue vero in ea Italiae
part, quae olim Gallia togata dicta est, complures in eis ciues potentia
caeteris superiores, in sua, quisque patria tyrannide^ occupare^t: quos
pontifices aut persequeba^tur, aut, si ad eos opprime^dos impares essent, quasi
ecclesiae beneficio regnare iubebant, aut aliis in eos excitatis, regna^di ius
attribuebant. In hu^o igitur modum Galliae togatae oppida, proprios dominos
acplerosque quasi ecclesiae vicarios habere coeperunt. Eodem modo Ferraria
Actio Atestino a pontifice gubernanda tradita, eidem est post beneficii nomine
attributa: ex quo de inde ea familia illusriorib. honoru^ titulis est exornata.
Sic Bononia ab Ioanne Vicecomite Mediolanensium archiepiscopo occupata, eidem
pari iure concessa fuit. Iisde^ quoque de causis in multis Piceni oppidis, diui
Petri Patrimonio, and Vmbria, quae nu^c Ducatus appellatur, plures reguli, pars
inuito, pars ad consentiendu^ adacto po^tifice, sunt exorti: nec Longobardia,
in imperii praesertim oppidis, ab huiusmodi mutationib. immunis fuit: sicut qui
in Flaminia atque aliis pontificiis locis dominabantur a pontificum obedientia
deficientes, ad imperatoru^ auctoritate^ confugerent: and vicissim qui
Mediolanu^, Mantua^, and alia imperii oppida tenebant, a pontificibus regnandi
ius obtinerent. Roma vero quanqua^ nome^ ecclesiae temporib. illis prae se
ferret, magistratib. tamen regebatur propriis and suis: and qua^uis initio cu^
Auenione in Italia^ post liminio reuertiss. tanqua^ domini agnoscerentur, paulo
tamen post Romani creato magistratu, quod Ba^derensiu^ appellabant, in veterem
contumacia^ recidere: un de cum pontificu^ auctori tas apud eos esset
perexigua, and ipsi alio translata sede, Roman reliquere, do nec Romani ad
paupertatem redacti, atque in magna^ propter eius absentia^ confusione^
delapsi, cum annus millesimus quadrin gentesimus appropinqua ret: in quo anno
si pontifex in Vrbe esset, speraba^t ingente^ fore propter annu^ secularem,
quem Iubileum voca^t, mortaliu^ concursu^, precib. qua^ demississimis
Bonifacium pontificem orarunt, Roman rediret: id si faceret, Ba^derensium
magistratu^ abrogaturos, seque ei obsequentis in omnib. futuros. His
conditionib. in Vrbem reuersus dum Romani illius anni quaestum vnum attendu^t,
pontifex occupato omni Vrbis imperio, Angelica^ arcem communiuit, eique
praesidium imposuit: cuius successores ad Eugenium vsque etsi no^ paucis
difficultatib. conflictati, nihil ominus dominatu post plene stabilito,
insecuti pontifices citra vllam controuersiam, Romae sunt pro sua libidine
dominati. His igitur fundamentis and modis ad terrenam potentia^ elati, ac
sensim animarum salutis, diuinorumque praeceptorum obliti, atque ad mundana
imperia omni cogitatione conuersi, nec diuina auctoritate alio, quam quasi,
telo and instrumento reru^ fragilium abutentes, principes potius gentiu^, quam
rerum sacraru^ pontifices videri coeperu^t. Horum curae and negocia, non ia^
vitae sanctimonia, no^ religionis incrementa, non erga Deu^ and homines
charitas, sed exercitus, sed bella in Christianos, cogitatione and manib.
sanguine respersis sacra tracta^tes: sed pecuniae imme^sa cupido, nouae leges,
nouae arts, uouae insidiae ad pecunia^ vndique cogenda^, in hunc fine^
audasissime arma coelestia vibrare, profanaru^ sacrarumque rerum nundinatione^
impudentis. exercere: hinc opes in immensu^ adauctae, and in totam ipsorum
aulam effusae: ex quibus fastus, luxus, mores turpis. libidines, voluptatesque
nefandae: nulla successoribus, nulla maiestatis perpetuae pontificatus solli
citudo: sed horum loco cupido anxia and pestifera, filios, nepotes, item alios
sibi coniunctos and necessarios non modo ad opes immoderatas, verumetiam ad
regna and imperia euehendi: no^ iam honores and emolumenta in merentes and
bonos conferendo, sed plerunque auctionando, aut in homines ambitione,
auaritia, and pudendis voluptatibus perditos effu^dendo. His moribus effectum
est, vt excussa penitus ex animis hominu^ illa vetere erga pontifices
reuere^tia: tame^ ex part, eoru^ auctoritas religionis, qua nihil in terris ad
homines vel impelle^dos, vel retinendos, pote^tius inuenitur, nomine and
maiestate, facultate qua pollent, principibus atque iis qui apud illos maxim
possunt, sacris beneficiis and honoribus conferendis, gratificandi adiuta
sustente tur. Qui cum sciant magna se in admiratione mortaliu^ esse: and qui
aduersus eos arma sumunt, eos grauis infamiae notam, and saepenumero aliorum
principu^ odia subire: ac quomodocunque res cadat, perexiguum emolumentum ad
eos a quib. op pugnantur, redundare: and victores ex suo arbitrio victoria
vsuros: victos, quib. velint conditionib. pacem habituros: ad haec suos
propinquos ex priuata co^ditione ad principatus attollendi cupidine inflammati,
iam per multos annos bellorum auctores, nouoru^que incendiorum faces in Italia
extite runt. Sed vt ad id a quo iustissimus publici damni dolor me longius
acriusque quam leges historiae forsita^ permittant, abduxit, reuertamur.
Aomili^e Flamin. etc.

FINIS.
Discorso leuato del tutto via dell'historia nel quarto libro a carte 119.
PEr la dichiaratione della qual cosa, et di molt' altre succedute ne tempi
seguenti, ricerca la materia che si faccia mentione, che ragioni habhia la
Chiesa sopra le terre di Romagna and sopra molte altre, le quali, o ha in varij
tempi possedute, o hora possiede: e in che modo iustituita da principio
meramente per l'amministratione spirituale, sia peruenuta alli stati, and alli
imperij mondani: and simil mente, che si narri come cosa connexa, quali
contentioni sianno state per queste and altre cagioni in diuersi tempi, tra e
pontifici et gl'Imperadori.

E pontefici Romani de quali il primo fu l'Apostolo Piero, fondata da Giesu
Christo l'autorita loro nelle cose spirituali, grandi di charita^, d humilta,
di patientia, di spirito and di miracoli, furo no ne loro principii non solo al
tutto spogliati di potentia temporale ma perseguitati da quella stettono per
molti anni oscuri and quasi incogniti, non si manifestando il no me loro per
alcuna cosa piu che ne suplicij, e quali insieme con quelli che gli seguita
uono quasi sosteneuano: per che se been per la moltitudine innumerabile, and
per le diverse nationi, and prosessioni che erano in Roma, fussino qualche
volta poco attesie progressi loro, and alcuni delli Imperadori non gli
perseguitassino se no^ quanto pareua che le attioni loro publiche non potessino
essere con silentio trapassata, non dimeno alcuni altri, o per crudelta, o per
l amore alli dij proprij, gli perseguitarono atroceme^ te come induttori di
nuoue superstitioni, and destruttori della vera religione.

Nel qual stato chiarissimi per la voluntaria pouerta, per la santita della
vita, e per e martyrij, continuarono insino a Siluestro pontifice: a tempo del
quale essendo venuto alla feed Christiana Co^stantino Jmperadore, mossa da
costumi santissimi, and da miracoli che in quelli che il nome di Christo
seguitauano continuamente si vedeuano, rimasono e pontifici sicuri da pericoli,
ne quali erano stati circa a trecento anni, and liberi d'essercitare
publicamente il culto diuino and riti Christiani.

Onde per la riuerenza de costumi loro, per e precetti santi, che contiene in
se la nostra religione, and per la prontezza che e negl'huommi a seguitare, o
per ambiti one il piu delie volte, o per ti more, l'esempio del suo prencipe,
comincio a ampliarsi per tutto marauigliosamente el nome Christiano, and
insieme a diminuire la pouerta de cherici. per che Constanti no hauendo
edificata a Roma la chiesa di san Gioua^ni in Laterano, la chiesa di san Pietro
in Vaticano, quella di san Paulo, and molte altre in diuersi luoghi, le doto
non solo di ricchi vasi and ornamenti, ma anchora, perch si potessino
conseruare and rinouare, and per le fabriche, and so stentatione di quelli che
vi essercitauano il culto diuino, di possessioni and d'altre entrate: and
successiuamente molti ne tempi che seguitaro no, persuadendosi con l'elemo sine
e con legati all chiese, farsi facile l'acquisto del regno celeste, o
fabricauano, dotauano altre chiese, o all gia edificate dispensauano part
delle ricchezze loro: anzi o per leg, o per inuetterata consuetudine
seguitando l'es sempio del testamento vecchi o, ciascuno, de frutti de beni
proprij pagaua all chiese la decima part, excitandosi a queste cose
gl'huomini con grande ardore, per che da principio e cherici, da quello infuora
che era necessario per il moderatissimo vitto loro, tutto il rimamente part
nelle fabriche and paramenti delle chiese, part in opere piatose and
charitatiue distri buiuano:

Ne essendo anchora entrata ne petti loro la superbia and l'ambitione, era
ricodosciuto viuersalmente da Christi any per superiore di tutte le chiese, and
di tutta l'aministratione spirituale el vescouo di Roma come successore
dell'apostolo Piero: and per che quella citta per la sua anticha degnita and
grandezza riteneua come capo delle altre el nome and la maiesta del imperio,
and perch da quella siera diffusa la feed Christia na nella maggior part
dell'Europa, and perch Constantino battezzato da Siluestro, tale autorita
volentieri in lui and ne suoi successori hauea riconosciuta.

E fama oltre a queste cose, che Costantino costretto dalli accidenti delle
prouincie Orientali a transferire la sedia dell'imperio nella citta di Bizantio
chiamata del suo nome Constantinopoli, dono a pontefici el domino di Roma, and
di molt' altre citta and regioni d'Italia: la qual fama, benche diligentemente
nutricata da pontefici che succederono, and per l'autorita loro creduta da
molti, e dagl'autori piu probabili riprouata, and molto piu dalle cose stesse:
per che e manifestissimo, che all hora and longo tempo di poi, fu ammi nistrata
Roma and tutta l'Italia suddita all imperio, da e magistrati deputati dag^im
peradore. Ne manca chi redarguisca (si profunda e spesso nelle cose tanto
antiche loscurita) tutto quello che si dice di Costantino and di Siluestro,
affermando essi essere stati in diuersi tempi: maniu no nega che la traslatione
della sed ia dell imperio a Costantinopoli, fu la prima origin della potentia
de ponte fici, indebolendo in progresso di tempo l'autorita de gl'Jmperadori in
Jtalia per la continua absentia loro, and per le difficulta che hebbononell
Orient, el populo Romano discostandosi da gli Jmperadori, and pero tanta piu
deferendo a pontefici, comincio a prestar loro non sub iettione, ma
spontaneamen te un certo obsequio.

Benche qucste cose non si demonstrorono se non lentamente per le inundationi
de Gothi, de Vandali, and d'altre barbare nationi che soprauennono in Jtalia:
dalle qua li presa and saccheggiata piu volte Roma, era quanto all cose
temporali obscuro and ab ietto el nome de pontefici, and piccolissima in Italia
l'autorita de gl'Imperadori, poi che con tanta ignominia la lasciauano in preda
de barbari.

Trale quali nationi, essendo stato l'impeto delle altre quasi come un
torrente, continuo per settanta anni la potentia de Gothe, gente di nome and di
professione Christiana, and vscita dalla prima origin sua delle parti di Dacia
and di Tartaria: la quale essendo finalme^te stata cacciata d'Italia dalle arm
dell'Jmperadori, comincio di nuoua Jtalia a gouernarsi per magistrati Greci, de
quali, quello cheera superiore a tutti, det to con Greco vocabulo Exarcho,
risedeua a Rauenna citta antichissima, and all'hora molto ricca and molto
frequente per la fertilita del paese, and perch dopo l'augmento grande che
hebbe per l'armata potente tenuta continuamente da Cesare Augusto and da altri
Imperadori nel porto quasi congiuntoli and che hora non apparisce, erastata
habitata da molti capitani, and poi per longo te^po da Theodorica Re de Gothi
et da e suoi successori: quali hauendo a suspetto la potentia de gl Imp. haueua
no eletta quella piu tosto che Roma, per sedia del regno loro, per l'oportunita
del suo mare piu propinquo a Costantinopoli, la quale oportunita, benche per
contraria ragione, seguitando li Exarchi, fermati quiui, deputaua no al gouerno
di Roma and dell'altre citta d'Italia Magistrati particolari, sotto titolo di
Duchi. Da questo hebbe origin el nome del Exarcato di Rauenna: sotto el qual
nome, si comprendeua tutto quollo che non hauendo Duchi particolari, vbidiua
immediatamente all'Exco.

Nel qual tempo e pontefici Romani, priuati in tutto di potentia temporale, and
allentata per la dissimulatione de costumi loro, gia cominciati a transcorrere,
la reuerentia spirituale, stauano quasi come subiecti all Jmperadori, senza la
confermatione de quali, o de loro Exarchi, benche eletti dal clero and populo
Romano, non ardiuano di exercitare, o di accettare el ponteficato: anzigli
episcopi Costantinopolitano and Rauennate (per che communemente la sedia del la
religione seguita la potentia dell Imperio and dell arm) disputauano spesso
del la superiorita con l'Episcopo Romana. Ma si muto non molto poi lo stato
delle cose: perch e Longobardi, gente ferocissima, entrati in Italia
occuparono la Gallia Cisalpina, la quale dall imperio loro prese il nome di
Lombardia, Rauenna con tutto l'Exarcato, and molte altre parti d'Jtalia: and si
distese seno l'arme loro insino nella Marca Anconitana, and a Spuleto, and a
Beneuento: ne quali due luoghi creorono Duchi particolari, non prouedendo a
queste cose part per la iguauia loro, part per le difficulta che haueuano in
Asiagli Jmperadori: da gl'a iuti de quali Roma abandonata, ne essendo piu il
magistrato delli Exarchi in Jtalia, comincio a regnersi eo, consigli and con
l'autorita de pontifici: e quali, dopo molto tempo essendo insieme co' Romani
oppressati da Longobardi, ricorseno finalmente alli aiuti di Pipeno re di
Francia: el qual passato conpotente essercito in Italia, hauendoui e Longobardi
do minato gia piu di duce^to anni, cacciatigli d'vna part del loro imperio,
dono (come diuentate sue per ragione di guerra) al pontifice and alla chiesa
Romana non solo Vrbino, Fano, Agobbo and molte terre vicine a Roma, ma eti
amdio Rauenna col suo Exercato, sotto el quale dicono includeruisi tutto quello
che si contiene da confini di Piacenza contigui al territorio di Pauia in fino
a Arimini, tra el fiume del Po, el monte Apenino, gli stagni o vero paludo de
venetiani, and el mare Adriatico: and di piu Arimini infino al fiume della
Toglia, detto all hora Isauro.

Ma dopo la morte di Pipino, molestando di nuouo; Longobardi e pontefici, et
quello che era stato donato loro, Carlo suo figliuolo (quando che poi per le
vittorie gra^dissime che hebbe, fu merita mente cognominato Magno) distrutto
del tutto l'imperio loro, confermo la donatione fatta alla chiesa Romana dal
padre, and approuo l^essersi, mentre che guerriggiaua co' Longobardi, date al
Pontifice la Marca d'Ancona and el Ducato di Spoleto, el quale comprendeua
lacitta dell'Aquila, and vna part dell'Abruzzi. Affer mansi queste cose per
certe, all quali aggiung ono alcuni scrittori Ecelesiastici, Carlo hauer
donato alla Chiesa la Liguria infino al fiume del Varo vltimo confine d'Italia,
Mantoua and tutto quel lo che e Longobardi possedeuano nel Friuoli and in
Histria: and el medesimo scriue alcuno altro de l'Isola di Corsica, and di
tutto el territorio che si contiene tra la citta di Luni and di Parma. Per e
qua li meriti e re di Francia celebrati and exaltati da pontifici, conseguirono
el titolo di Re Christianissimi: and di poi l'anno ottocentesimo della nostra
salute, Leone pontifice insieme col populo Romano, non con altra autorita, che
del pontef. come capo di quel popolo, elesseno el medesimo Carlo per Imperadore
Romano, separ ando etia^dio nel nome questa part dell imperio da gl^Jmperadori
che habitauano a Costantinopoli: come se Roma e le prouincie Occidentali non
difese da pro loro, hauessino bisogno d'essere difesa da proprio prencipe. Per
la quale diuisione, non furono priuati gl Jmperadori Costantinopolitani, ne
dell'Isola di Sicilia, ne di quella part d Italia, la qua le discorrendo da
Napoli a Manfredonia e terminata dal mare, perch erano state continuamente
sotto quell'Jmperadori. Ne si derogo per queste cose alla consuetudine, che la
elettione de ponteficifussi confirmata da gl'Imperadori Romani, in nome de
quali si gouernana la citta di Roma: anzi e pontifici nelle bolle, ne
priuilegij and nelle concessioni loro, exprimeuano con queste parole formali el
tempo della scrittura, Jmperante il tale imperadore signore nostro.

Nella quale non grave o soggezzione, o dependenza continuorono in fino a tanto
che e successi delle cose no^ det tono loro animo a reggersi per se stessi.
Maessendo cominciata a indebolire la potentia de gl'Imperadori, prima per le
discordie nate tra e descendenti medisimi di Carlo Magno, mentre che in loro
risedeua la degnita Imperiale, and di essere stata tra^sportatane prencipi
Thedeschi non potenti come erano stati per la grandezza del regno di Francia e
successori di Carlo, e pontefici and el popolo Romano, da magistrati del quale
comincio Roma, benche tumultuosamen te, a gouernirsi, derogando in tutte le
cose quanto poteua no alla iurisdittione dell'Jmperadori statuirono per leg,
che non piu la elezzione de pontifici hauesse a essere confermata da loro: il
che si osseruo diuersamente seco^do che per la variatione del le cose surgeua o
declinaua piu la potentia Jmperiale. La quale essendo accresciuta poi che
l'Imperio perue^ne negli Otthoni di Saxonia, Gregorio quinto di natione
Thedesco, eletto pontifice per fauore d'Otthone Terzo che era present, mosso
dell amore della propria natio^e, and sdegnato per le persecutioni riceuute da
Romani, tranferi per suo decreto nella natione Germanica la faculta di eleggere
glimperadori Romani, in quella forma, che infino all et a nostra si osserua,
vie ta^do agli eletti (per riseruare a pontefici qualche preminentia) di non
vsare eltito lo d'imperadori, o di Augusti, se prima no^ riceueuano la corono
dell'imperio (donde e introdotto il venire a Roma a incoronarsi) and di no^
vsar prima altro titolo che di Read Romani and di Caesare. Mamancati poi gli
Otthoni and diminuita la potentia de gli^ Jmperadori, perch l^imperio no^ si
co^tinuaua heredi tario in Re gra^di, Roma apertame^te si sutrasse dalla
obedienza loro: and molte citta, qna^do imperaua Curado Sueuo si rebellorono:
and e po^tefici atte^de^do ad ampliare la propria autorita, domina uano quasi
Roma, benche spesso per la insolentia and per le discordie del popolo vi
hauessino molte difficulta: el quale per reprimere, haueua no gia per fauore di
Henrico secondo Jmperadore che era a Romo, trasferita per leggene Cardinali
soli l'autorita di creare el pontefice. Alla grandezza de quali succedet te
nuouo augmento, perch haue^do e Normanni, de qua li il primo fu Gulielmo cog
nominuto Ferrabraccio, vsurpata all'imperio Costa^tinopolitano la Puglia and la
Calabria, Roberto Guicciar do vno di essi o per fortificar si con questo color
di ragio ne, o per esser piu potente a difendersi co^tro a quegli Jmperadori,
o, per altra cagio^e restituito Beneue^to come di ragione ecclesiastica,
riconob be el Ducato di Puglia di Calabria in feudo dalla Chiesa Romana, il cui
essempio seguita^do Ruggieri vno de suoi successori, and haue^do scacciato del
ducato di puglia, and di Calauria Guiglielmo del la medesima famiglia, and
occupata poi la Sicilia, riconob be circa l'anno mill ce^to tre^ta queste
prouincie in feudo dalla Chiesa sotto titolo di Re di ambidue le Sicilie, l'una
di la, baltra di qua dal Faro, non recusa^do e pontefici di some^tare per
l'ambitione and vtilita propria, l'altrui vsurpatione and violentia: co^le
quali ragioni pote^do sempre piu oltre, come no^ may si ferma la cupidita
humana cominciorono e po^tifici a priuare di quelli regni alcuno de Re
contumaci a loro coma^damenti, and a concedergli ad altri, nel qualmodo perue^
neno in He^rico figliuolo di Federigo Barbarossa, and da Henrico in Federigo
seco^do suo figliuolo tuttatre successiuame^te Imperadori Romani Maesse^do
Federigo diue^tato acerrimo persecutore della Chiesa, and suscitate a tempi
suoi le fattioni Guelfa and Ghibellina, dell'vna delle qualiera capo el
pontefici, dell'altra lo Jmperadore, morto Federigo co^ cedette la inuestitura
di questi regni a Carlo conte d'Angio and di Prouenza, del quale di sopra
estata fatta mentione, co^ censo di vncie semilia d'oro per ciascuno anno, and
co^ condition, che alcuno per l'auenire di quelli Reno^ potesse accettare lo
imperio Romano: la quale condition e stata poi sempre specificata nelle
inuestiture del regno di Napoli: per che el regno dell'Isosola di Sicilia
occupato dae Re d'Aragonia, si separo dopo pochi anni nel censo and nelle
recognitioni del feis do dalla vbidienza della chie sa. Ha anco ottenuto la
fama, benche no^ tanto certa qua^to sono le cose precede^ti che molto prima la
Contessa Mathelda prencipessa in Italia molto potente, dono alla Chiesa quella
part della Toscana, la quale terminata dal torrente di Pescia, and dal
castello di san Quirico nel contado di Siena da vna part, and dall'altra dal
mare di sotto, and dal fiume del Teuere, hoggi detta il Patrimonio di san
Piero: Et aggiungono altri che dalla medesima Contessa fu donata alla Chisa la
citta di Ferrara. Non sono certe queste vl time cose: ma e anchora piu dubbio
quello che e stato scritto da qualcuno, che Authperto Re de Longobardi,
siorendo el regno loro, gli do nol Alpe Coccie, nelle quali dicono includersi
Genoua, and tutto quello che si contiene da Genoua infino a confini della
Prouenza: and che Luithprando Re della medesima natione gli dono la Sabina,
paese propinquo a Roma, Narni and Ancona, co^ certe altre terre. Cosi variando
lo stato delle cose, furono similmente vary le cose de Pontefici con
gl'imperadori. Perch essendo stati perseguitati per molte eta ne principij da
gl'imperadori, and di poi liberati per la couuersione di Costantino da questo
terrore si riposorono: ma attende^do solamente all cose spirituali and poco
meno che interame^te sudditi, per molti anni sot to l'ombra loro, vissono di
poi lunghissimo tempo in basso stato, et separati totalmente dal commertio loro
per la grandezza de Longobardi in Jtalia: ma poi peruenuti per beneficio de Re
di Francia a pote^tia temporale, stet tono congiuntissimi con gl'imperadori,
and dependendo con allegro animo dalla auto rita loro, me^tre che la dignita
Imperiale si continuo ne descendenti di Carlo Magno: and per la memoria de
beneficij dati and riceuuti, and per rispetto della gra^dezza imperiale: la
quale poi declina^do, separatisi in tutto dalla amicita loro, cominciorono a
fare professione, che la dignita ponteficale, hauesse piu tosto che a riceuere,
a dare le leggi alla imperiale: and per cio hauendo sopra tutte l'altre cose in
horrore el ritornare nell antica subiezzi one, et che essi no^ te^tassino di
riconoscere in Roma, et al troue l'antiche ragioni dell imperio, come alcuni di
loro o di maggior potentia, o di spirito piu eleuato si Sforsa no di fare, si
opponeuano sco pertame^te co^ le arm alla potentia loro, accompagnati da
quelli Tiranni, che sotto nome de prencipi, and da quel le cittache vendicatesi
in liberta, non ricognosceuano piu l'autorita dell imperio. Daquesto nacque che
e pontifici attribuendosi ogni di piu, and co^uerte^do el terrore delle arm
spirituali all cose temporali, et interpretando che come vtcarij di Christo in
terra, erano superiori all'Jmper. et che a loro in molti cosi apparteneua la
cura dello stato terreno, priuauano alcuna volta gl'imper. della dignita
imperiale, suscitando gli Elettori a eleggere de gl'altri in luogo de priuati:
and dall'altra part gl'Imper. o eleggeuano, o procurauano che si eleggessino
nuoui pontefici: Da queste controversy nacque, essendo in debolito molto lo
stato della Chiesa, ne meno per la dimora della corte Romana persettanta anni
nella citta d' Auignone and per lo schisma che al ritorno de pontifici
succedette in Italia, che nel le citta sottoposte alla Chiesa, and specialmente
in quelle di Romagna, molti cittadini potenti, occuparono nelle patrie proprie
la tyrannide: e qualie pontifici o persegui tauono, o non esse^do potenti a
opprimergli le concedeua no in feudo a quelli medesimi, o suscita^do altri capi
gl'inuestiuano. Cosi cominciarono le citta di Romagna ad hauere signori
particolari, sotto titolo, la maggior part, di vicarij ecclesiastici. Cosi
Ferrara data dal po^tefice in gouerno ad Azzo da Esti, fu conceduta poi in
titolo di vicariato, and exaltata in progresso di tempo quella famiglia a
titoli piu illustri. Cosi Bologna occupata da Gioua^ni Visconte arciuescouo di
Milano, gli fu poi conceduta in vicariato dal pontefice: et per le medesime
cagioni in molte terre della Marca d'Ancona, del Patrimonio di san Piero, and
dell'Vmbria hora detto el Ducato di Spoleto, sursono, o contro alla volonta, o
con consentimento quasi sforza to de Pontefici, molti signori particolari. le
quali variationi, essendo similmente sopra venute in Lombardia all citta dello
imperio, acca de tal volta che secondo la varieta delle cose, e vicarij di
Romagna, and di altre terre ecclesiastice, allont anatesi apertamente dal nome
della Chiesa recognosceuano in feudo quelle citta da gl'Jmperadori, come qual
che volta recognosceuano in feudo da pontifici quelliche occupaua^o in
Lombardia Milano, Ma^toua, et altre terre imperiali. Et in questi tempi Roma,
be^che ritenendo in nome el domi nio della Chiesa, si reggeua per se stessa:
and anchora che nel principio che e pontefici ritornorono d'Auignone in Jtalia
fussino vbiditi come signori, nondimeno poco poi e Romani creato el magistrato
de Banderesi, ricaddo no nell'antica contumacia, do^de retene^doui e pontefici
piccolissima autorita, cominciorono a non vi habitare in fino a ta^to che e
Romani impoueriti, and caduti: in grauissimi disordini per l'absentia della
corte, and approssimandosi l'anno del mill quattro ce^to, nel quale sperauano,
si a Roma fusse el pontefice, douerui essere pel Giubelio, gra^dissimo co^corso
di tutta la Christianita, supplicarono con humilissimi preghi a Bonifacio
pontefice che vi ritornasse, offerendo di leuarvia el magistrato de Banderesi,
and di sottomettersi in tutto alla obedientia sua. Con le quali conditioni
tornato a Roma, intenti e Romani a guadagni di quello anno, preso assolutamente
lo imperio della citta, fortifico and mess la guardia in castle sant Angelo. e
successori del quale fino a Eugenio, benche vi hauesseno spesso molte
difficulta, non dimeno fermato poi pienamente el dominio loro, e pontefici
seguenti hanno senza alcuna co^trouersia signoreggiata a arbitrio suo quella
citta. Con questi fondamenti and con questi mezzi exaltati alla potentia
terrena, deposta apoco a poco la memoria della salute delle anime, and de
precetti diuini, and voltati tuttie pensieri loro alla grandezza mondana, ne
vsando piu l'autorita spirituale se non per instrume^to and ministerio della
temporale, cominciarono a parere piu tosto prencipi secolari, che pontefici:
cominciarono a essere le cure and i negotij loro non piu la santita della vita,
non piu l'augmento della religione, nou piuel zelo and la carita verso el
proximo, ma exerciti, maguerre contra a Christiani, trattando copensieri and
con le mani sanguinose e sacrificij, ma accumulare di tesoro nuouo leggi, nuouo
arti, nuoue insidie per raccorre da ogni part danari, vsare a questo fine
senza rispetto l'arme spirituali, vendere a questo fine senza vergogna le cose
sacra et le profane:

Le richezze diffuse in loro et in tutta la corte seguitarano le pomp, el luxo
and i costumi inhonesti, le libidini and i piaceri abomineuoli: nessuna cura a
successori, nessu^ pensiero della maiesta perpetua del pontificato: ma in luogo
di questo desiderio ambitioso and pestifero, di esaltare non sloamente a
richezze immoderate, ma a principati, a regni e figliuoli e nepoti and
congiunti loro, non distribuendo piu le dignita and gl'emolumenti ne gl'huomi
ni benemeriti et virtuosi, ma quasi sempre o venden dosi al prezzo maggiore, o
dissipandosi in person oportune al'ambitione, all'auaritia, o all vergognose
volupta. Per le quali' operationi perduta del tutto ne cuori del gl'huomini la
reuerentia pontificale, si sostenta no^ dimeno in part l'autorita per el nome
and per la maiesta ta^to potente and efficace della religione, and aiutata
molto dalla faculta che hanno di gratificare a prencipi grandi, and a quelli
che sono potenti appresso a loro per mezzo delle degnita, and dell'altre
concessioni ecclesiastiche. Donde congnoscendosi d'essere in sommo rispetto de
gl'huomini, and che a chi piglia l'arme contro a loro risulta grave infamia,
and spesse oppositioni d'altri prencipi, and in ogni euento picciolo guad agno,
et che vincitori esserci tano la vittoria a arbitrio loro, vinti conseguiscono
che condition vogliono, and stimulandoli la cupidita di sol leuare e congiunti
suoi di gradi priuati a principati, sono statida molto tempo in qua spessissime
volte lo instrumento di suscitare guerre and ince^dij nuoui in Jtalia.
Maritorna^do al principale proposito nostro, dal quale el dolor giustissimo
del danno publico m'hauena piu arden temente che non conuiene alla leg dell
Historia traportato, diciamo che, Le citta di Romagna vessate, etc

FINIS.

