POPISH GLORYING IN ANTIQVITY turned to their shame.

WHEREBY IS SHOWED, how they wrong, villifie, and disgrace, that whereunto they
pretend to carry greatest reverence: and are most guilty of that which they
vpbraid unto others.

Collected and proved out of themselves, for the singular profit both of
PASTORS and PROFESSORS.

By WILLIAM GVILD, Minister at King Edward.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Allot, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the black Bear. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, And truly honorable, SIR ALEXANDER GORDON BARONET,
of CLUNIE KNIGHT, etc.
NEver more subtily intended the Gibeonits under pretense of old Furniture,
and coming from a-farre, to deceive the Lords People, nor under the like
pretense of Antiquity now, does Babels brood intend to do the same to
Bethels Children. Neither more braggingly did ever the carnal Jews,
dissenting from his Faith, yet claim a corporal descent from Abraham their
father, nor do the crafty Jesuits, dissenting from their doctrine, yet claim
a full consent with orthodox Antiquity: accusing us of Noveltie, as Christ's
own doctrine, and His Apostles, was before us, that it may be seen true
which Saint Peter fore-prophecied of such: to wit, That in the latter times
there should come false prophets, Mark 1.27. Acts 17.19. 2. Pet. 1.2.
who privilie should bring in damnable heresies; and by reason of whom the
way of truth should be evil spoken of.

While as we, notvvithstanding, adhere so to truest Antiquity, as that
consenting with Tertullian, Te^^. Apol. ^lt.
who says, Constat id verius esse, quod prius, id prius, quod ab initio, id
ab initio, quod ab Apostolis, Is is manifest, that that is truest, which is
first; that that is first, which has been from the beginning; that that has
been from the beginning, which has proceeded from the Apostles; we conclude
with Lyrinensis words, Quod it a docemus, Lyrinens. adversiu hereses.
vt cum dicimus nove, nont amen dicimus nova, and vniversum penitus mundum
saeva repentinae haereseos tempestate perculsum, adantiquam fidem, a novella
perfidia, ad antiquam sanitatem, a novitatis vesania, ad antiquam lucem, a
novitatis caecitate revocamus, That we so teach, that when we speak after a
new manner, yet notwithstanding we speak not new things: and we draw back the
whole world, affrighted with the cruel tempest of sudden heresy, from
recent-broached perfidie, unto the ancient Faith; from the madness of
Noveltie, unto sound Antiqultie; from the darkness of Noveltie, unto the
ancient Light.

Yet it is no marvel, that as under pretense of keeping the law made against
blasphemers, our Head was condemned as a blasphemer, by that Jewish High
priest; John, 19.7.
So under pretense of pleading for Antiquity, the members be condemned by the
Roman High priest, as violaters of Antiquity. And as the Hagarenes called
themselves Saracenes, so likewise that under a name contrary to their nature,
that Iesuitish crew, who seem most to procure for Antiquity, practice most
against the same.

This Pharisaicall brood being herein (as in other things) like to their
forefathers, of whom our Savior ^aith, Dicu^t, sed non faciunt, They say,
but do not: So these men, (as Ioab did to Abner) they speak fairlie, but
deal most foulie with venerable Antiquity: 1. Rejecting Scripture (which is
most primitive to us, and Gods own mouth) from being sole determiner in Gods
own cause; because it is indeed that breath of consumption to their man of
sin: and, like the Arc, it plagueth those Philistimes, and over-throvveth
their Dagon. Next, when they have made their recourse from divine Authority,
to humane Testimony, challenging those holy Fathers of the primitive Church,
as impudentlie to be altogether on their side, as ever that Whore challenged
Athanasius, to be her associate in her filthy Whoordome. Yet notvvithstanding,
when they find that wherein they repose, so clearly and peremptorly to
depose against them; no more disdainfully did ever the Jews reject Christ,
preferring to Him Barabbas, than they reject those Ancients, and their famous
testimonies, preferring thereunto the giddie Wine of their inebriating Errors:
and regarding them only so far as they seem to make for them; as Elias sat
no longer by Cherith, nor Jonas under the Gourd, than the one flovved, and the
other flovvrished.

Yea, not only dismiss they them, with contempt, when they make not for
them; but as the envious man, after the husband-mans field was sovvne with
good seed, came craftily and quietly there-after, and mingled in his tares: So
have our Romanists sundry vvayes sophisticated the famous works of the Lords
Worthies, either by intermingling their language of Babel, with the language
of Bethel; and so making their Books like a Lincie-vvoolsie Garment: or doing
to their pains, as Hanun did to the persons of David's Ambassadors, cutting
and curtayling them; or else altering their words, and where they would say
Shibboleth, making to say Siboleth.

And as Paul was accused, for bringing in Strangers and Grecians in the
Temple, to pollute the same; So most justly may they be accused, for unjust in
bringing of strangers (which are Counterfeits, under the name of Fathers) into
the Church of GOD, with such fraudfull Forgerie, to corrupt craftily; and
inventing vvittily, to circumvent wickedly. And all this they do for the
Diana of the Papacy, and supporting of that glorious Whore of their proud
Monarchy; setting not only a City, with Demetrius, but the whole world in
vproare: for (as that silver smith said) by that Craft they have their wealth:
and if the Lords word prevail, they see their Craft is in danger to be set at
naught, and Dagon will surely down before the Ark of GOD.

The proof and particularizing of what is formerly spoken, both in their
dealing with Fathers, Councels, and Histories, I have summarily hereafter
digested, and succinctly set down, and dedicate the same to Your Worships
Name, as a most worthy Patro^ and Pattern of Virtue, sincere in the Truth,
zealous against Error, a Mirror of Policy, a Map of Humanity, an Honor to
Your Name, an Ornament to Your Country, and a sole Moecenas of Letters amongst
Your Equals in this respectlesse and clayie Age: whose Name, therefore, justly
the Penns of the painful shall perpetuate, propagat your Fame, and continue your
memory. And amongst many astricted to your Worship, for your Honorable and
virtuous parts, I shall ever approve my self

Your Worships in all respective duty, W. GVILD.

To the Reader.
AS the Jewish People adorned the Burials of the ancient Prophets, as honourers
of their memories; but in the mean time rejected that Great Prophet fore-tolde
by them, and persecuted their successors: or, as that Roman Band; who
crucified our Head, howsoever by words of salutation they seemed to give Him
honor and courtesy; yet they show by their deeds they meant disgrace and
cruelty. Even so the Romish brood of that lamed souldior, howsoever by words
they would seem to plead for Antiquity, yet their practices do proclaim,
that they are the defacers and defamers thereof in verity. So that amongst
them, (as Lyrinensis says) Dum pro coelesti dogmate humanae superstitiones
introducuntur, been fundata antiquitas scelesta novitate subruitur, and nova
co^tagio non tantu^ portiunculam, sed totam pariter Ecclesiam invasit: that is,
While as humane superstitions are brought in for an heavenly point of Faith,
well grounded Antiquity is overthrown by wicked Noveltie; and a new contagion
has broken in, not upon a little part, but upon the whole Church alyke.

As the Ephesians therefore tumultuously cried out, Acts 19.
Great is Diana of Ephesus; so howsoever they in like manner cry, and appeal
(as Paul did to Caesar) to Antiquity, to Fathers and Doctors of the primitive
Church; yet when they are brought thither whither they have appealed, they are
seen evidentlie as much to reject their orthodox doctrine, as ever the Jews
did the Prophets, whose Tombs they were decoring; and as much to abuse them in
their holy pains, as ever their truest successors were in their harmless
persons; Genesis 38.
and (like Judah to Tamar) to be most guilty themselves of what they vp-braide
to others; straining out the Gnat, but swallowing the Camel.

Yea, as Salomo^ judged between the two Women, which of them was the mother of
the living child; or as Saul confessed of David, 1. Samuel 24.
that he was more righteous than he: So every judicious discerner may easily
here-by perceive, which of us more righteouslie, or reverentlie deals with
Antiquity: for (beside the particulars ensuing in this Treatise) they think
it no fault to appeal from the Fathers, to the Popes judgment, and so to man's
mouth Plus uni pontif^i crederem, qu^m mill Augustinis. Corn. Mus, in Romans 3.4.
. But we never appeal from them, but to Scripture, and so to GODS Mouth.

Again, to reject their sayings, when they are contrary to Scripture, is
thought piaculum in us: But to reject them, when they are contrary to the
Popes Decrees, is thought only pium to them Turre^r. summa. lib. 2. c. 107
Also Stapicton, lib. 7. de doct. prin. c. 10. nec concilia, nec patres, nec
ullus alius, nisi papa controversiaru^ ^^^ex est.
. In like manner, we subject Councels, and their direction, only to
Scripture, and so unto GOD: But they subject Councels, and their direction, to
the Pope, and so to frail man Bellar. l. 2. de pont. c. 27. in fine.
We esteem likewise no man to be exeemed from the authority of a lawful
Council, nor no flesh to be above the same: But they advance their papal
Dignity above Councels in authority, and exeeme the same there-frae; not only
in suffering and correction, but also (as Terrecremata affirms Turrecr.
summa. lib. 2. c. 52.. 9.
) in matter of doing and direction.

The other particulars of their dealing with Antiquity, I have in some measure
heere-after manisted more amply; and especially cleared the same succinctlie
out of their Grand Bellarmine, to avoyde thy distraction about many Books,
and that (Gentle Reader) thou may have the evidence out of one of best
account with them, and most obvious to us, Et ut ex ungue Leonem, That thou
may know the Lion by his Paw, and rightly consider, if so great evidence
may be had in one, or a few, how much more ample may be had in the Writs of
many.

These pains then, taken by me heere-in for thine avayle, and excitation of
others, accept thou graciously, censure charitablie, peruse profitablie,
apply prudentlie, and the LORD give thee the good, and His own Name the
Glory.

Thine in CHRIST JESUS, W. Guild.

The Contents.
FATHERS.
OF Antiquity, and what we bold of the several sorts thereof, Chap. 1 What the
Romanists say of all the Fathers in general, both in exposition of the
Scripture, and dogmaticall points of Faith. FATHERS.
Chap. 2 How they reject them all, when they make not for them, although
consenting in one, Chap. 3 1. In dogmaticall points of Faith. 2. In exposition
of Scripture.
How they deal with the Fathers severallie, and first, with those of the
Greek Church, Chap. 4 How they deal next with the Fathers of the Latin
Church, Chap. 5 How they have corrupted the Fathers, and ancient Writers of
both, chap. 6 1. By adding unto them, (like coloquintida unto the wholesome
Herbs) prooved by examples. 2. By purging, and pairing from them, and so making
them Eunuchs, by violent castration. 3. By altering their words, and so
prooving unfaithful Messengers, by fraudfull relation.
How, many under the name of Fathers amongst them, are either shamelessly
counterfeit, or woefully vitiate, (going masked, like Ieroboams wife, to
deceive:) and this through the first five Ages, or Centuries of the Church,
Chap. 7 How (like those who use diverse weights in the Bag) they adduce
Testimonies of some Fathers against us as true; whom they disclaim as
counterfeit, and corrupt, when they are opposed against themselves, Chap. 8 How
(like those who cried Osanna, and anon Crucify,) they extol and bring the
Fathers for them in one place and point of Doctrine, and at their pleasure
reject them in another, chap. 9 Some notable Frauds (like the Snares of that
proverbiall Harlot) used by our Adversaries, in citation of the Fathers,
where-of the Reader would carefully beware, Chap. 10 How they prefer the
judgementes of their late Divines, to the Fathers, both in dogmaticall points
of Faith, and exposition of Scripture: as Rehoboam did the counsel of the
young Men, to his Fathers Ancients, Chap. 11 Last, by what partial and corrupt
rule, they admit, or reject, the Exposition of the Fathers, Chap. 12
COUNCELS.
HOW, many ways, injuriouslie they deal with ancient Councels, COVNCELS.
Chap. 13 1. By corrupting them, themselves, and that diverslie. 2. By accusing
them, when they make against them; either of ignorance and fraud in
determination, or of after falsification. 3. How they admit Councels, only
where-in they make for them; and disdainfully reject them, where-in they make
against them.
Popish avowed rejection in their late Councels of the most powerful,
principal, and Primitive Antiquity, Chap. 14
HISTORIES.
LAst of all, how they deal with ancient Historiographers, and their own
Records, Chap. 15 1. By giving them the Lie, very vncivellie. 2. By alleging
them also to be corrupt, when they make against them. 3. By admitting them
only where-in they make for them: but other-wyse, without reason, roughly
rejecting them. 4. How themselves have formerlie corrupted those Records
which were extant, and taken some wholly out of the way: that, in matters of
truth, that makes against them, they have left little to be seen, and
foysted in, in their place, many contrary Falsehoods.

TO THE AVTHOR.
THis late, not least embroydred Work of Thine,
With costly Arras of a rich Engyne,
Argues, that Tullie did to thee bequeath
His flowing Tongue, when he did lose his Breath.
Haere thou vnfoldest those Sophisticke Charms
Of railing pedant- Papists, by strong Arms
Even of their own Confession; making plain
Their Wrongs to Age, and their unjust disdain.
Here thou make cle^re, to all judicious Eyes,
That they, not we, Antiquity despise.
Even from their sheathes thou do vnsheath these Swords,
Which to us Life, but Death to them affords.
Hence fear not then, fond Critics, sharpe-vngrate*
Thy Works bear proof against the puff of Have.
M. WALTER FORBES.

TO THE PATRON.
IT is no wonder, tho the Learned Crew
Of Thee, and of none else, Protection sue;
Since Thou do Virtue, Virtue does Thee crown,
With Bays Eternal, of most high Renown.
Then unto Thee, and to none else belong,
The IO PEAN'S of a Poets Song.
M. WALTER FORBES.

DE AUTHORIS INDUSTRIA.
IActat ROMA Patrum e placitis se posse tueri
dogmata, queis vitiat Solis utramque domum;
His assentiri, quod and his reverentia prima
Debetur, Patres pulpita tota sonent.
Ista tamen falso jactat; qui nesci^s haeret
GUILDUS erit dubiae Duxque Comesque viae:
Consulet hunc docte monstrantem cuncta, videbit
ROMA probris laceret queis pia scripta Patrum.
TO THE AUTHOR.
LEarnd GUILD, how learndly div'st thou in the depth
Of Romish Errors, with the Lead of Skill!
And letst all see That has not ever been kept
As Truth, with which Rome now the World does fill.
Scripture repugnes, the Fathers all repyne,
Antiquity vntaynted does declare,
How much Rome will from them in truth declyne,
Although she seem to them still to adhere.
But if the Fathers were on Earth again,
With thanks, brave Guild, they would thy payns repay,
Because thou have relieved them from that Stayne,
Which Rome would rub upon them every day.
Go forward, Guild, and fear not for Thy Foes,
To take such Payns, Romes Errors to discose.
M. W. C.

CHAPTER I. Of Antiquity, and the several sorts thereof.
1. OF SCRIPTURE.
AGe is a Crown of Glory, (says the Wise) when it is found in the way of
Righteousness: and, Ask for the old way, which is the good way, is a
wholesome counsel: For if we speak of ANTIQUITY in the Superlatiue, we may
positiuelie affirm, Quod Antiquissimum est, est verissimum; and quod
verissimum est, est tutissimum: That that which is most ancient, is truest; and
that which is most true, is most sure. Therefore, Gods affirmative Truth to
Eva^, was prior to Satan's negative Lie, Non moriemini, Ye shall not die: And
therefore ever since, after the Beraeans exemple, To the Law, and to the
Testimony, has been the soundest directorie. Neither must rash credulity
(as that of the young Prophets) against the warrant which we have out of Gods
own mouth, 1. Kings 13.
induce us, so to hearken to Gray hairs, as they any way seduce us. Neither
was it a sufficient warrant for the Pharisaicall doctrine in our Saviors time,
that it was said of old: but the true Touchstone, where-to we are taught to
reduce each thing for reformation, is to that, Quod fuit ab initio, which was
from the beginning. Divine Institution being only like the Firstborn, to
whom, as Primacie in order, so Supremacy of authority, as the excellency of
Dignity, and prerogative of Strength is sole and only competent.

This is that which Peter calls the most sure word; which as it came from
Heaven by inspiration, and leads to Heaven by direction: so has it ever
been guarded by Heaven, by powerful protection. And as by it the manner of
Gods worship, as by a pattern, has been formed and prepared: so have the
aberrations there-frae, and decay thereof, 2. Chron. 31.21.35.
been ever reformed, and repared.

This is the Christians Non ultra, No further; whose comprehension and
Consummatum, Accomplishment, (as it is in Scripture,) So does the Soul solie
borrow light, (as the Moon from the Sun,) and only from Scripture: Gods
word there-in only resounding, His enlightening beams there-in only shyning,
His will being there-in fully revealed, and His whole counsel clearlie
detected. So that as the sole rule of Religion we do embrace it, and as the
perfect pattern on the Mount we do proclaim it: although our Adversaries
would seem to supply a def^ct there-in, partly by Apocryphal Writings,
against all Antiquity, and partly by sophisticating the sound sense thereof,
with unwritten verity: the glorious light where-of they would lyke-wyse
obfuscate, with an unknown tongue, against all authority, and the comfortable
knowledge whereof, by an impious prohibition they with-holde from their Laity.

2. Of Councels and Fathers.
NExt unto Sacred Scripture, we reverence Councels, Bell. lib. 1. de Council.
cap. 5. in fine.
and Fathers of the primitive Church: and therefore Bellarmine grants, that
we receive the first six Councels: which we account as Subjects at the right
hand (like Bathsheba) beside the Throne, but will not place them in the Throne,
(like Solomon himself) giving the Privilege of (...) (...) not unto them, but
to their GOD and ours. John 4.42.
And as the Samaritanes, believing them not so much because they said it, as
that we find their speech, like the Woman's, agree with Christ's words: and
therefore take not their sentences as a Law, but as they homologate with the
Law, Isai 8.22.
and are tried by the Testimony.

How-so-ever then we account them Fathers to us, yet we esteem them sons
and subjectes to the Truth it self: and that we are no further bound to
follow them, than Paul willed the Corinthians to be followers of him: 1. Cor.
11.1.
And therefore, as Orpah left Naomi, Ruth 1.
when she left Midian: or as Augustine left Cyprian before him, when he, and a
whole Council, left Scripture, concerning Re-baptizing. So we may leave them
lawfully, when they leave the Truth erringlie, else, why are not the Papists
themselves Millenaries, Quae opinio, Bell. lib. 3 de Pont. cap. 17.. hac.
fuit multorum Veterum, Which was the opinion of many of the Ancients, says
their Grand Bellarmine.

We may not, therefore, sacrifice to the pains of Man, what is due only to
the pen of the Spirit: nor as if gods had come down, in the shape of men, as
the people of Lystra thought Paul and Barnabas, dare we give to them that
supreme honor of absolute belief, as to the mouth of God: but must with
saint Jerome distinguish wyselie of the persons, and with saint Augustine
discern warily of their payns: Jerome saying of the one, Scio me aliter
habere Apostolos, Hieron. epist. 62 cap. 2.
aliter reliquos tractatores, illos semper vera dicere, istos in quibusdam ut
homines aberrare: I know I respect the Apostles one way, and other entreaters
of matters another: the one, as those that ever speak truth; the others, as men
in some things subject to error. And Augustine saying of the other, August. de
beno pers^v. c. 2.
Neminem velim sic amplecti omnia mea, ut me sequatur, nisi in iis, in quibus
me non errare perspexerit, I would have no man so to embrace all my writings
and sayings, that he should follow me, but in those things in which he knows
well that I am free from error. So that they themselves subject their work
to the fyerie trial of the Spirit, their building to the measuring Reed of
the Temple; their speech, to the Law and Testimony; their Coin, to the
Balance of the Sanctuary; and tho never so skillful for the work of the
LORDS Tabernacle, like Bezaleel and Aholiab, yet must their cunning be liable
to the canon of Scripture, and their labors levelled according to that
pattern, whereby no more indignity is done so, to their venerable persons,
nor worthy pains, and happy memories, John 5.39.
than CHRIST wished to be done to his heavenly Speeches; or the Baereans did
to the Apostles Preachings. And in a word, Reserving to GOD, and sacred
inspyred Scripture, their prerogative royal, we protest, that we afford as
much authority, as Piety will permit, Reason require, Equity admit, or
themselves do desire. So far are we from vilifying Antiquity, disdaining
the Fathers, contemning of Councels, or rejecting their Authorities, as most
impiouslie we are belied, and more impudentlie slandered, by those who are of
alike temper in their Faces, Daniel, 2.
as Nebuchadnezar's Image was in his iron legs, being suitable of a whorish
forehead, that cannot be ashamed, who are the supporters of that Whore of
Babylon.

While as they (as shall be shown God-willing) either contradict openly,
castrate craftily, vilify disdainfully* reject contumeliouslie, corrupt
wilfully, counterfeit audaciouslie, or gloss shamelessly, and slander
injuriouslie, not only Fathers severallie, but the most innocent proceedings
in the first, and most famous, Councels.

3. Of History.
ANd as for Histories, the Vnfolder of Prophecy, the Light of Times, the Life
of Memory, the Eternizer of Actions, the Glass of Sufferings, and Detecter of
Truth, we admit the same more than our Adversaries, and dimit them as
probable Witnesses, with far less Injury: wherein we clearlie see, that
Saint Peter and his true Successors, were never more busy to found Re^igion,
than his pretended Successors at Rome have been there-after to confound
Religion, and on the ruins thereof to ground their usurpation: which made
their own Author of Fasciculus temporum, to cry out, F. 49. defecit sanct^ as
primitiv^, and di^in^tae sunt veritate^: that is, Primitive holiness was
ecclipsed, and verit^es were impared.
of the 900. year of GOD, that in that most wicked time, and in the Papal
Seat, both Piety and Verity was altogether decayed: and Platina to say, Quod
eo tum Pontificatus devenerat ut qui plus largitione and ambitione valeret, is
tantummodo dignitatis gradum bonis oppressis and rejectis obtineret: that is,
that at that time the Popedom came to that pass, that he who was able to do
most by bryberie and ambition, good men being borne down and rejected, did
only obtain the place of honor.

Thus is made plain the falling of that Star from Heaven, Revelation, 9.
to whom was given, the Key of the bottomless Pit: Thus did that Beast rise
out of the Earth, horned like the Lamb, but speaking like the Dragon, and
aspire both to such matchless power, and pompous pride: Thus began that Whore
to sit on many Waters, and that Mother of Harlots to make the Earth drunk,
with the Wine of her Fornications, being drunk her self with the Blood of
the Saints.

Thus out of clear Story we see, how what budded both in Demas and
Diotrephes, had its perfection in the Apex of the Papacy; never ceasing, till
that which before was a preaching Church, became thereafter a pompous Court:
and those whose Predecessors were made Martyrs, became themselves, by cruel
massacring, Martyr-makers. So that as in the first period of the Church, there
was truth and patient suffering, (against Satan's force) with holy
simplicity; and in the second there was learned and pithie wrestling (against
Satan's fraud) by error and Heresy: So in the third poysonable corruption,
entered in the Roman Church by Pelf and Pride, Mammon and Monarchy: till at
last Sodomiticall ease and fullness of Bread, bred tyrannous security: which
being joined with Craftiness and obstinacy, does now with bloody cruelty
and impudency, fill up the Cup, and sum up the Mystery.

All which is made manifest by their own Friends and Favorers, who, howsoever
they be the brood of their Bowels, yet like Vipers, who discover the bowels of
their venomous Mother; so these declare the lamentable decay of the light of
religious Truth, under the cloud of Papacy; and the worlds doleful
declyning, to that palpable and mistie darkness of ignorance and Apostacy.
They likewise detect the Schisms and Simonies of the Roman Church, the pride
and prevailing of that Apostaticke Synagogue, the craft and cruelty of that
brutish Beast, the licentious luxury of that lustful Harlot, the cloaked
hypocrisy of that false Prophet, with the damnable entries, desperate lives,
and dreadful deaths of those men of Sin: Sometimes a Whore possessing the
Seat of that Whore of Babylon, as we read of Pope Ioane: Sometimes a Whore
obtaining that Seat to her filthy Whoore-master, as we read of Theodora,
advancing John X. Sometimes the Whoorish Bastard of a Pope, and a Whore
sitting therein, as John XI. procreated between Sergius III. and Marozia,
Meretrix famosissima, a most notorious Whore, (says Onuphrius.) Sometimes by
Monsters for filthiness, and all sort of Vice, as John XII. Steven VII.
Sylvester III. Bennet IX. Sometimes entering by pactio^ with the Devil, as
Sylvester II. Sometimes by Simonie, or violent intrusion, as we see was
common, by Histories consent: Pla^ina in vit^a Syla. 3.
and sometimes by such crafty cousenage, as we see in Boniface VIII. who
entered like a Fox, lived like a Lion, and died like a Dog, Fasc. temp. f. 49.
and 59.
says their own Fasciculus.

All these Witnesses of their own we produce faithfully, we desire them to
be heard indifferently, acknowledging their pens by GODS providence to have
been guided carefully, and for them we thank the LORD for their detection
of verity. But how they are of late belied in their Works, disgraced in their
Writs, rejected in their Testimonies, and vilified by our Adversaries, the
Reader may hereafter see, and the peruser consider.

CHAP. II. What the Romanists say of all the Fathers, and Ancients in general,
both in exposition of Scripture, and Dogmaticall points of Faith.
HOwsoever Thrasonicklie their great Golia^ Bellarmine does brag of the consent
of Antiquity with them in every point of controversy, Bell. lib. 3. de pont.
cap. 19.. hoc i^em.
saying to us, Vos nihil aliud fere afferre soletis, quam vestram ipsorum
interpretationem: Nos vero patrum consensum: Bell. lib. 1. de C^risto. cap. 10
Initio.
that is, You use to bring no other thing almost, but your own interpretation:
but we bring the consent of the Fathers. And howsoever he slanderouslie
vpbraideth us, Bellar. oratione ante Tom. 4.. Corona.
saying, Adversarij parum aut nihil tribuunt patribus, imo nihili faciunt mill
Cyprianos, and mill Augustinos: Bell. lib. 4. de Euch. cap 26. I^^tio.
that is, Our Adversaries give little or no credit to the Fathers; yea, they
count nothing of a thousand Cyprians, and a thousand Augustines; forgetting
himself when elsewhere for communion of the Cup to all, he says, Multa
loca Adversarij ex patribus citant: that is, Our Adversaries cite many places
of the Fathers for them* yet notwithstanding what he especially says of
them all in general, and thereafter how he and others deals with them in
particular, both severallie one by one, and conjunctlie conveaned in Counsel,
we shall hereafter (God willing) declare.

First then, speaking of their interpretation of Scripture, Bell. lib. 3. de
verbo. cap. 10.. respondeo aliud.
he says as much as any Protestant, affirming, that they expone Scripture,
More Doctorum solum, non Iudicum; ideoque sententiam eorum non necessario
sequendam, sed quatenus ratio suadeo: that is, As Doctors only, and not as
Judges, therefore the Sentence is not necessarily to be followed, but so far
as reason persuades.

Next, speaking of their other writtes of dogmaticall points of Faith, he
says, Scripta Patrum non sunt regulae, nec habent authoritatem obligandi:
that is, The Writs of the Fathers are not Rules, neither have they authority
to astrict us to them The reason whereof their own Roffensis does render,
saying, Roff. in resut (...) 7. (...).
Nec diffitemur errasse Patres, Homines enim erant sicut and nos: that is,
Neither deny we but the Fathers have erred, for they were Men, even as we
are. Imo constat (says Bellarmine) quosdam ex praecipuis eorum in quibusdam
non leviter lapsos, Bell. lib. 3. de terbo cap. 10.. at. is. Bell. lib. 4. de
Christo cap. 8. respond^o. Bell lib. 1. de Sacra^. cap* 26.. tertio.
ut Hilarium vix dolores corporis in CHRISTO agnovisse, and Cyprianus
improbabat Sacramenta tradita ab Hereticis aut Schismaticis: that is, Yea, it
is sure, that some of the chief of them erred, and that not lightly in some
things, as Hilarie did, who searce did acknowledge that CHRIST suffered any
pain in His Body; and Cyprian denied, that they were Sacraments, which were
ministered by Heretics, or Schismatickes.

^
Item* Iraeneus contendit (says he) CHRISTUM fere ad annum 50 pervenisse
antequam passus est: that is, Ire^^us also did hold, that CHRIST almost came
to be fifty years of age before He suffered: which is flat contrary to
Scripture, and S. John's relation, who shows, that he was baptized at 30, and
at the third Passover thereafter that he suffered Death, etc.

I omit their confession how many were millenaries; as also Augustines
condemning of Children unbaptized to hels fire, See Camus l. 3. c. 3 of the
Fathers errors.
with Ieromes error of second marriages, etc.

Therefore, Aquin, part* 1. quast, ^ art 8.. odd secundu^.
(says Aquinas) Authoritatibus canonicae Scripture utitur sacra doctrina
proprie ex necessitate arguendo, authoritatibus autem aliorum doctorum
Ecclesiae, arguendo pro^abiliter. Innititur en^m fides nostra revelationi
Apostolis and Prophetis factae, qui cano^^^cos libros scripserunt, non autem
revela^ioni siqua fuit ali^s doctoribus facta; vnde dicit Augustinus in
Epistola ad Hieronymum, Solis enim Scripturarum Libris qui canonici
appellantur, didici hunc honorem defer, ut nullum authorem eorum in scribendo
errasse aliquid, firmissime credam: Alios autem it a lego, ut quantalibet
sanctitate doctrinaque praepolleant, non ideo verum putem quia ipsi ita
senserunt, vel scripserint: that is, Holy doctrine uses the authoriti^ of
canonicke Scripture, properly and necessarily concluding out of them, bu^^^
gueth only probably out of the authorities of other Doctors of the Church for
our faith is grounded on that which was revealed to the Prophets and Apostles,
who write the canonical Books, but not to that which was revealed to any
other Doctors, (if any such thing was) wherefore says Augustine in his
Epist^e to ^^rome, For I have learned (says he) to give this honor only to
the Books of Scripture, which are called Canonicke, that I most firmlie
believe that no Author of any of them in their writing erred in a jet* but as
for others, I so read them, that although they were never so excellent, either in
godliness or learning, yet I do not believe that it is true, because they
thought or wrote so.

Wherefore in Patribus legendis (says their Salmeron) servanda videtur
sententia Quintiliani, Sal^^er. I^s. in Epist. ad Romans disp. 6. s^^ sine^.
(...). l. 10. Cap. 1.
qui sic scribit; Neque statim (inquit) id legenti persuasum sit, omnia quae
magni Authors dixerunt, utique esse perfecta, nam labuntur interdum and oneri
cedunt, and indulgent ingeniorum suorum voluptati, summi sunt, homines tamen,
acciditque lectoribus ut quicquid apud ipsos reperiunt, dicendilegem putant, ut
deteriora imitentur: that is, In reading of the Fathers, the judgment of
Quintilian would be kept, who writes for neither instantly (says he) let
the Reader be assured, that all things which great Authors have said, are
every way perfect, for they err sometime, and succumbe, and give loose reins
to the pleasure of their own wits. It is true, they are great Authors, but yet
they are men; and it befalls their Readers, that whatsoever they find in
them, they think it a Law to their speeches, that so they may follow the worse
things.

And for a particular practice of this fore-saide direction, Lyra in Mat. 1.
Lyra sets down his own example, saying, Nec debet aliquis moveri, si in
hoc ob opinione Hieronymi disc^ssero: nam dicta sanctorum non sunt tantae
authoritatis, quin liceat contrarium tenere, in iis quae per Scripturas non
determinantur, ut ait Augustinus ad Vincentium, de sanctorum doctorum scriptis;
hoc genus scribendi a canonicis Scripturis distinguendum est, nam testimonia ex
eis non depromuntur, quasi non liceat aliter sentire: that is, Neither should
any man be moved, if I depart in this from the opinion of Jerome, for the
sayings of the holy Fathers are not of so great authority, but it is lawful
to hold the cont^arie to them, in those things which are not determined by the
Scriptures, as Augustine says to Vincentius of the writs of the holy
Doctors. This sort of writing is to be distinguished from canonicke
Scriptures; for Testimonies are not taken out of them, as if it were not
lawful to any other-wyse to think.

Now then, if any Protestant say farther, than the foresaid Popish Doctors
avouch concerning the Fathers, either in exposition of Scripture, or other
points of Faith, let the most malicious Adversary instance, and the impartial
Reader judge and discern.

CHAP. III. How they reject Them all, when They make not for them, although
consenting in one: And first, In doctrinall points of Faith.
BELLARMINE answering to Hermannus in the matter of Traditions, Bell l 4 de
verbo, c. 7.. ad (...).
lays this as a ground; Etsi enim erraverint aliqui patrum (says he) in
quibusdam dogmatibus, nunquam tamen omnes simul in eodem errore convenerunt
proinde cum ostendimus omnes convenire in Traditionibus non scriptis
asserendis, satis efficaciter probamus in eo illos non errasse: that is, Albeit
some of he Fath^rs have erred in some points of faith, yet they never agreed
all in any one error: therefor when we show, that they all agree for the
est^blishing of unwritten Traditions, we p^oue sufficiently, that they erred
not in that. Sal^^^. I^s. in 1 Ioh. 3. disp. 25.. tertio.
Salmeron yet comes nearer, and says, Non sunt improbanda veterum
testimonia, quando omnes, vel fere omnes, in unam sententiam convenient, vel in
uno aliquo Scripturae loco interpretando concordant, quia tunc Patres
certissimum and inevitabile reddunt argumentum veritatis catholicae, and certae
ac legittimae interpretationis: that is, The Testimonies of the Fathers are not
to be rejected when they all, or almost all, agree in one opinion, or in the
exposition of any place of Scripture, because then the Fathers give a sure and
inevitable argument of catholic verity, and of a sure and lawful exposition
of Scripture.

And yet how they deal with Antiquity in this point, let these particulars
hereafter declare.

FIrst, in the freeing of the Virgin Mary's own conception, Bell. de amiss.
gratiae l. 4. c. 15. a^ hac.
from all original Sin, Bellarmine is so resolute a decreeter, that he
says, Although there be sundry amongst the Catholics that count it the surest
truth, That except CHRIST alone, none was ever conceived without original
sin: yet seeing the Council of Trent has decreeted otherwise, he
concludes, That whosoever believes the contrary, Inter Catholicos (says
he) non sunt numerandi: that is, They are not to be numbered amongst
Catholics.

And yet behold, Ex hoc loco, (Romans 5.12. In qu^ omnes peccarunt) Sancti omnes
(says Canus) uno ore asseverarunt beata^ Virginem in peccato originali
conceptam fuisse: Ca^us loc. tl. col. l. 7. c. 1. number. 1.. Sancti (...).
that is, Out of this place ( Romans 5.12. In whom all have sinned) THE WHOLE
holy Fathers with one mouth affirm the blessed Virgin to have been conceived
in original sin. Therefore we see that neither do the Romanistes now hold
that, which with one consent the Fathers held of old, nor are they accounted
good Catholics, who now believe the same which they before professed.

This self same agreement of all the Ancients, most clearlie witnesses their
great Master of Sentences, Lombard. l. 3. did. 3.
saying, Of the Flesh which CHRIST assumed in the Womb of the Virgin, Sane
dici potest, and credi oportet, Iuxta Sanctorum attestationis convenientiam,
ipsam prius peccato fuisse obnoxiam sicut reliqua Virginis caro. Sed Spiritus
sancti operatione ita mundatam ut ab omni peccati* contagio^^ (...) uniretur
verbo* that is, Surely it may be said, and must be believed, according to
the Testimony of the Saints, agreeing all in one, that it was at first
subject to Sin, (to wit, that where-of Christ took^ His humanity) as the
rest of the flesh of the Virgin but there-after, that it was so cleansed, by
the operation of the holy Ghost* that being fred from all Contagion
what-so-ever of Sin, it might be so united to the Word.

The same Consent of Fathers, confesses likewise Salmeron: Salmeron^ in Romans
5. disp. 5^.
but yet, how would this Jesuit escape* Respondem^s ex Augustino, etc. We
answer (says he) out of Augustine, and the doctrine of S. Thomas, That a
Reason taken from Authority, is infirm. Also: Against this Multitude which
they object, we answer (says he) out of God's word, Exodus 23, Thou shall
not follow the judgment of many, to depart from the Truth. For when the
Donatists gloried in the multitude of Authors, Augustine answered, That it was
a token of a cause* destitute of the strength of Truth, which leaned to the
sole authority of a multitude who might e^re, (says he.)

Now how deep this Point draws, wherein Popery avowedly opposes it self
against all Antiquity* in equalling the Virgin Marie, even with CHRIST
Himself, let Bernard, in his 172 Epistle, and their own S. Thomas testify,
whose mind the forenamed Salmeron in these words does express, Salm. in
Romans 5. Disp. 49.
saying, Privilegium hoc Thomas quasi nimis excelsum Virgini denegavit, putans
per illud adequari Christo: that is, S. Thomas denied this Privilege to the
Virgin, as too high; thinking it an equalling of her, even to CHRIST
Himself. And yet this blasphemous Doctrine is not only generally held by
Romanists* but decreed, as a matter of Faith, Council. Basil. sess. 36. appendix
5. sess. con^^l. Trid.
in their Council of Basil, and confirmed in Trent.

Wherefore, we may say* as Bellarmine formerlie said in the matter of
Traditions, when we show, that all the Ancients agree, in affirming, that the
Conception of all Men and Women what-so-ever, (except Christ alone) is not
without Original sin: Therefore we may conclude (using his own words) Quod
s^t^^ efficati^er probamus In eo illos non errasse: that is, That we prove
sufficiently enough, that in this (...) they ^o-wyse erred: And consequently,
that the contrary Doctrine, and Decree thereunto, is al-to-gether Erroneous*
and that Church which maintained the same, is vnavoydably heretical, as the
mouth also of that holy Father, Augustine most clearly with us pronounces
saying, Aug. lib. 5. contra Iu^an. c. 9. and de fide ad Petrum, c. 26.
Si absque dubio cara Christi, non est car^ (...), sed (...) carni ^eccati,
quid (...) intelligamu^ (...) excepta omnem, raliqua^ (...) carn^m essa
pectati* and quisquis hoc ^^gat, det^standus hereticus (...). That is, If
without doubt the flesh of Christ as not sinful flesh; but (...) only to
sinful flesh, what rests to be, understood, but that it only being
excepted, all other humane flesh is sinful (...) and who-so-ever denies this,
he is found to be a detestable Heretic.

The second Point, concerning Worship of Images, wherein Popery opposes it
self palpablie against all Antiquity.
Secondly, concerning the Worship of Images at their Polydorus Virgilius
testifies, Polyd. Virg. lib. 6. de invent. rerum, cap. 13.
That all Antiquity, in one Voice, abhorred any such thing: Nam imaginum
c^ltum (says he) n^n modo nostrae Religionis exp^rtes, sedteste Hieronim^,
(...) veteres sancti patr^s damnabant obmetum idol^ta^riae, qua nullum
execrabilias s^^lus esse pot^s^: that is, For not only those that are not of
our Religion, but as S. Jerome testified, almost all the ancient holy Fathers,
condemned the worship of Images, for fear of Idolatry, than (...) there can
be no more an ^^cursed Villainy.

Hence it was, that all adoration of Images, what-so-ever, was condemned as
Idolatrous, both in the East, in that famous Council of Constantinople, of 338
ancient Bisshops, conveaned in the year of God 754; as also in the West, in
that famous Council of Frankford, under Charles the Great, holden by the
Fathers and Bishops of Italy, France, and Germany, in the year of God 794.

And what was the Doctrine which the very papal Sea it self did hold in
the 600 year of Christ before that, Greg. lib. 9. epist. 9.
let Pope Gregory his Letter to Serenus, Bishop of Marsils, testify; vvilling
him, how-so-ever Images were to be tolerated for instruction, to be in
Churches, yet that he should suffer them by no means to be adored, or any
wise worshipped. The Reason where-of he gives, is this, Quia omne manufactum
adorare non licet, quoniam scriptum est, Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, and Ipsi
soli servies: that is, Because it is not lawful to worship any thing that is
made with hands, in respect it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord, thy
God, and Him only shall thou serve. Where we see Dulia, or religious service,
which is the most inferior sort of popish worship, forbidden to Images, by a
Pope him self.

But how cross to this ancient Pope's direction, is the new Papal
prescription, let the words of the Roman^ Catechism^, set out by the command
of the Council of Trent to all men notify, declaring, That Images of Saints
are put in the Churches, Cateches. Romans part. 3. cap. 2. sect. 14.
as well that they may be worshipped, as for instruction* that people being
admo^ished by their example, may conform them selves to their life and manners.

Yea, not only in Gregorie's time were they forbidden to be worshipped, but
by an uniform consent of ancient holy Fathers, conveaned in the Council of
Eliberis, holden Anno 310, Council. ^. lib. cap. 36.
for fear of Adoration that might ensue, they were forbidden to be put in
Churches at all. And therefore Epiphanius, who lived there-after, Epiphan.
Epist. ad Johan. Hierosolym. tom. 1. operum Hieron. epist. 60.
in Anno 390, finding a Veil where-on was painted the Picture of Christ, or
some Saint, in a Church at Anabl^t^, he rent the ^ame in pieces, and wrote to
the Patriarch of Jerusalem (within whose bounds it was) showing that it was
against the authority of Scripture, and repugnant to Christian Religion, to
(...) or suffer any such Wayles, or Images to be (...) Churches.

Therefore it was likewise, when Adrian the Emperor had commanded, Lamprid^is,
in vita Alexandri Severi.
that* Temples should be made in all Cities without Images, that strayght-wayes
it was presently conceited, and rumoured, that he did prepare those Temples
for Christ. The reason was, because the ancient Christians had no Images in
their Churches. Of whom when it was demanded by the Gentiles, why they had no
Images? Minutius Foelix gave them this answer, Minutius Foelix, in Octavio.
What Image (says he) shall I make to God, when man him self, if thou
rightly judge, is God's Image?

Yea, such was the more careful wariness yet, of the ancient Fathers, to
prevent Idolatry, that they would not have the Images of God nor His Saints,
so much as set up in private houses. To which purpose was that speech of the
foresaid Epiphanius ascribed unto him in the Council of Constantinople, Epiph.
citat. a Council. Constant. in act. 6. to^. 5. Council. Nicen. il.
saying, Have this in mind, belo^ed, Sons, not to bring Images into the
Church, (...) Churchyards, (...) places of the (...), not into an ordinary
house; but always carry about the rememberance of God into your hearts: for
it is not lawful for a Christian man to be carried in suspense by his eyes,
and the wandering of his mind.

Nay, in the ancientest and best ^ymes, some would not so much as admit the
Art of making Images, to be amongst Christians, being so jealous of the danger
that might ensue of their unfit location, and illicite adoration: which made
Clemens Alexandrinus to say, Clem. Alexan. Protreptie. ad (...).
We are playnlie forbidden (says he) to exercise that deceitful Art.

And yet to what height both of Impiety and Impudency, against all
Antiquity, is Popish doctrine arisen unto in this point, let their own words
testify.

First, that the same worship is due to the Image, which is due to that which
it represents, so teaches S. Thomas of Aquin, and their S. Bonave^^^^e?
Aquin. 5. pa^^^ ^^est. 25.
and therefore, that the highest degree of divine worship, which is Latria, is
due to any Image of Christ. And that this is not the doctrine of the
forenamed, or of a few, but the constant doctrine of Roman divinity, thus
testifies Azorius the Jesuit, Azorius institut. moral. tom. 1. lib. 9. cap. 6.
It is the constant judgment of Divines (says he) imaginem eodem honor and
cultu honorari and coli, quo colitur id cujus est imago: that is, That the
Image is to be honored, and worshipped, with the same honor and worship,
wherewith that is worshipped, where-of it is an Image.

Secondly, Per se and proprie s^^t v^nerandae, (says Bellarmine) it a
utipsae cerminum and venerationem, ut in se considerantur, and non solum ut
vicem gerunt exemplaris: that is, By them selves, and prop^rlie they are to be
worshipped; so that they themselves do limit the worship, that it goes not
farther, as they are considered in them selves, and not only as they supply
the room of that which they represent. Than which Position, never any was
ever more blasphemous, nor taught more gross Idolatry. And yet, lest that it
should seem to be Bellarmine's, or the mind of a few, Pet. de Cabrera, in 3.
part. Thoma, q. 25. art. 3. disp. 2. number. 32.
Friar Pedro de Cabrera, a great Divine in Spain, tells us, that it is,
Communis Theologorum conclusio: that is, The common conclusion of the Romish
Divines.

The third Point, where-in avowedlie Popery rejects Antiquity: to wit, in
placing their consecration of the Eucharist, in the words, Hoc est corpus meum.
Thirdly, the Archbishop of Caesarea, Archiep. Cas. lib. 1. f. 115.
in his Book of the necessity of amending School Theology, dedicate to
Sixtus 5, says, that it is the doctrine, Omnium Orthodoxorum, tum Graecorum,
quam Latinarum, per verba sacrae orationis fieri consecrationem: that is, That
all the Orthodox Fathers, both Greek and Latin, hold, that Consecration is
made by the words of holy Prayer. And yet all Papists refusing this Verdict of
Fathers, affirm it to be only by these words, Hoc est corpus meum.

The fourth Point, concerning Limbus Patrum: and for probation thereof whether
it was Samuel truly, who appeared 1 Kings 28, us. Bellarmine holds, against
the most common consent of venerable Antiquity.
LAst, when the consent of Fathers is particularly adduced against Bellarmine,
both Greek and Latin, to infirm his proof of Limbus Patrum, out of 1 Kings
28; they affirming, that it was Satan that appeared to Saul, and not the
Prophet Samuel; thus disdaynfullie does he reject their harmony, Bell. lib.
2. de Purg. cap. 6.. respond^^.
saying, His non ^bstantibus, ^enendum est vere Smith elis animain fuisse: that
is, Notwithstanding that all those Fathers say so, it is to be held, that it
was truly the soul of Samuel who appeared. I omit how Bellarmine shows,
that in the matter of Marriage, Bell. lib. 1. de Matrim. c. 7.. ex quo.
their Canus did hold an opinion, both singular and new, against all
Antiquity: wherefore he concludes, that Canus opinion must be altogether
false: or else it should follow that in a most weighty point the whole Church
assuredly had for many Ages ^rred. As also how Gropperus, Bell. ibid. c. 20.
respond^^.
another of their number, in the same matter of Matrimony, dissented from all
Antiquity.

We see then, how consonant to their Practice, is their Thrasonick^ Bragging,
who says, Nos Patrum doctrinam non aliqua ex part admittimus, alia
repudiamus, sed integram amplectimur: that is, Durie resp. adv. VVhi^ak. f. 125.
(says Durie) We^ admit not the doctrine of the Fathers in one point, and
reject the same in another, but wholly embrace all that they holds. Or as
Campian says, (...) oratione 5.
Tenemus integra horum volumina: that is, He keep us close, by their whole
W^ytings. Ethos magistros a De^ dat^s in omnibus audiunt Catholici, Costeri
^^chirid. in praef. antithes. 9.
says Costerus: that is, The Catholics hearken unto them in althings, as to
Masters given unto them from God. Being here-in no less impudent, than was
the Heretic, Dioscorus, who dissenting most clearlie from the Orthodox
Fathers, yet he uttered these words most peartlie and perverselle, Council.
Chalced. act. 1. page 97. edit. Romans
in the Council of Chalcedon, saying, I am cast out with the Fathers, I
defend the doctrine of the Fathers, I transgress them not in any Point.

Secondly, How the Romanists reject the Fathers, consenting in one, in
exposition of Scripture, as formerlie has been shown they do in doctrinall
points of Faith.
VALENTIA declares, Valent. in ana^lys. fid^^. lib. 8. cap. 8. sect. 2.
that their Council forbids expresselie, to expound Scripture against the
uniform consent of Fathers, as being altogether infallible and sure. The
reason where-of, Canus loc. Theol lib. 7. cap. 3. (...) 10.
Canus does give, Quippe cum Sanctorum omnium sensus, Spiritus sancti sensus
ipse sit: that is, To wit, Seeing the meaning of all the holy Fathers, is the
meaning of the holy Ghost him self (says he.)

And yet, what the Popish practice is here in, let us by a few Examples
behold.

First, in the interpretation of that place, Romans 5.12. In whom al ha^^ sinned,
the whole Au^ncientes, with one mouth, Can. loc. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 1. number.
1. ^. Sancti.
(says Canus) affirm the blessed Virgin, to have been conceived in
Original sin and so all agree, that by the word [ All] the whole race of
Adam* are included, that ever were procreated between Man and Woman. But the
Romanists will no-wyse acqulesse to this exposition, because they will have
the Virgin Mary's conception without original sin; and ^o, contrary to the
exposition o^ all the Fathers, will have her excluded.

Where also it is to be noted, that seeing no Graduate in Divinity is promoted
in Paris, without giving a solemn Oath, to maintain this Privilege of the
Virgin Marie: and that this Text, and exposition thereof, is close contrary
there-to, as also to that Ordinance of their own Council, for exposition of
Scripture, according to the uniform consent of Fathers. Therefore it will
clearly follow, that they swear both to impugn Scripture, Verity, as also
consenting Antiquity, together with their Popes and his Counsels authority.

Stella in like manner, expounding the 21 verse of the 10 chapter of Luke,
says, All the Expounders, whom I could commonly see, either of ancient holy
Doctors, or of recent Divines, all these, and their Commentaries, declare* that
the word confite^or, is not taken here for Confession of sins* but for that
(says he) which we call Thanksgiving, Commending, or to bless, etc.
Notwithstanding this meaning of the^^s can neither agree with the words, nor
could it ever satisfy anie-wyse my mind.

Again, Maldonat, commenting on Matthew 26, 29, where our Savior says, I
will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine, says thus, Origin,
Cyprian, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Jerome, Augustine, Beda, Euthymius, and
Theophilast; all these refer those words to Christ's blood, (or that which
was so called in the Sacrament:) but I cannot be persuaded, (says he) that
they can be referred to the Blood of Christ. Because he (forsooth) would have
them understood of the common Cup, before the institution of the Sacrament,
to avoyde the force of this Testimony against Transsubstantiation.

In like manner, expounding these words for Papal Supremacy* Thou art Peter,
Maldon. in Matthew. 16.18.
and upon this Rock I will build My Church, he says thus of the
interpretation of Fathers, expounding the Rock, not to be Peter, but Christ
Him self, or that Confession of Faith, which was made of Christ. This meaning
(says he) of these words, seems not to me to be the true meaning, which all
other Fathers think to be so, whom ever I remember to have read, except only
Hilarie.

Also, for mayntaynance of the same Supremacy, commenting on the subsequent
Verse, Neither will I interpret (says he) that this which is spoken here to
Peter, is spoken also in the same sense to the other Apostles, Whatsoever thou
loosest on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven, although I see all Interpreters,
except Origin only, to be of that mind.

More-over, commenting on Matthew. 11, 13, which speaks of Elias that was to
come, meaning John the Baptist, he says, Almost all the Fathers so expound
that place, but this their exposition is not fit enough. And why? But because
the Jesuit would have Elias yet only to come, in the reign and time of their
conceited Antichrist.

Last of all, Maldon. in Matthew. 19.11.
expounding these words of Matthew, All men cannot receive this Saying; after
that he has adduced the interpretation of the Fathers thereon, to be this, Non
omnes praestare possunt, ut sint sine uxore, quia carent dono continentiae:
that is, All men cannot attain to this, that they may be without a wife
because they want the gift of chastity; he concludes, Sic fere omnes
exponunt, quibus equidem ego non assentior: that is, Indeed almost all
Interpreters so expound, with whom not-withstanding I do not agree. And why?
But because he is a Pleader against this Text, and the exposition of
Antiquity, for forced single life, and the Vow of Continency.

Again, in the exposition of the last Commandment, Bell. lib. 2. de Imag. c.
7. perre.
when Bellarmine has adduced a number of Fathers, holding that Commandment,
Thou shall not covet, etc. to be but one entire Commandment, and not divisible
in two, as the Papists make it, to make up ten, confounding the first and
second; for defense of their Imagerie, he rejects al their judgments, as
gross and erroneous.

Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 6.
In like manner, when he has adduced the expositions of all the Fathers, which
they give on that place of the Corinthians (1. Cor. 15.29.) where-by he would
establish Purgatory, because they serve not for his purpose, he roundly
therefore rejects them all, calling them haske, and both false and forced;
and therefore takes one of later Forgerie, more suitable to his mind.

Again, Tolet. in Ioh. 7. a^^^t. 23.
when Cardinal Tolet, in the exposition of John 7, 37, has adduced
Chrysostom, Euthymius, and Theophilact, their agreement in one, yet this is
his censure, saying, that their exposition is both forced and unfit: and
therefore he professes not to follow it any way.

Last of all, Cajet. pref. in Pentateuch.
thus says Cardinal Cajetan, of the exposition of Scripture in general, Let
no man abhor (says he) any new sense of Scripture for this cause, because
it disagreeth from the ancient Doctors: but let him search more nearlie the
Text, and coherence of Scripture: and if he find agreement, let him praise
God, who has not tied the exposition of Scripture, to the meaninges of ancient
Doctors, but to the integrity of Scripture it self.

How-so-ever then Bellarmine braggeth of their side, that they follow the
consent of Fathers, Bell. lib. 3. de p^nt. c. 19 sect. hoc item. Also, Lib. 1.
de Christo, c. 10. miti^.
falselie imputing to us, that we only follow our own exposition; yet we
see heere-in, that it may be justly said unto them, that of the Poet, Mutato
nomine de te, fabula narretur. Their own Cardinal Baronius, Baron. annal.
tom. 1. ad ann. 34. number. marg. 213.
(beside their forenamed practice) confessing clearlie, that al-be-it the
holy Fathers, whom we (says he) for their heavenly learning, worthily do
call, The Doctors of the Church, were evidentlie endewed beyond others, with
the grace of the holy Ghost, yet in the exposition of Scripture, the
Catholic (that is, the Roman) Church, does not ever, and in all things,
follow them.

CHAP. IIII. How contumeliouslie they deal with the Fathers, and especially,
first, with those of the Greek Church, conjunctlie, and in Council.
IT is reported of Pelagius, that even when he most disagreed from the Orthodox
Fathers of the Primitive Church, yet in his third Book for Free Will, he
soothed up his Heresy, and thought to amaze all men with his praise of Saint
Ambrose; Blessed Saint Ambrose, that Bishop (says he) in whose books the
Roman Faith especially appears, who like a beautiful Flower, shyned
amongst the Latin Writers, and whose Faith, and most pure understanding of the
Scriptures, the very Enemy himself dare not reprehende. Even so, our
Adversaries, when they most disagree lyke-wyse from the most ancient Fathers,
and primitive Councels, yet how they do soothe up their Errors? But with the
like Salve: alleging the holy Fathers, and famous Councels of the primitive
Church, al-to-gether to make for them; and therefore they highly extol and
advance them. But as Ambrose not-with-standing made against his Prayser
Pelagius, So do the Fathers and Councels make close against the Romanistes:
and then, how they turn their Osanna, to Crucify; their Praising, to
Depressing; and their High Valuing, to Low Vilifying, let their own Mouth, and
these Examples, verify.

Their ancient Pope Gregory declares, Gre^. lib. 1. Epist. 24. sub ^in. ^.
that he reverenced the four first Councels, as the very four Gospels;
holding firmlie, that they only stood for Truth, and only with-stood Error:
and yet, what is it that Bellarmine accuses the very second of these Councels
of? Even the standing for, and decreeing of a most gross Heresy, and the
with-standing of such a necessary Truth, which by the definition of Pope
Boniface the eight, Extran. lib. 1. tit. 8. de major and obed. c. vnam sanctam.
is of such importance to believe, that by him who holds not the same, there
is no salvation to be expected, because he is without the Church. And this
great Point is the Pope's Supremacy.

Bellarmine's own words then are these, Bellar. pr^f. de pontif. veni^.
The first (says he) who most earnestly with-stood the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome, seems to be the Grecian Fathers: for they, since the year of
God ^81, would have the Bishop of Constantinople, (who before was not a
Patriarch at all) preferred notwithstanding to the three Patriarchs of the
East, and in the second room, next the Bishop of Rome. And this may be
understood (says he) by the second General Council. Wher-vnto he might
have joined like-wise the sixth Canon of the first Nyce^ Council, no less
peremptor against the fore-saide Supremacy.

Where it is to be noted, that Papal Supremacy, which the Greek Orthodox
Church never would admit, can no-wise therefore be called (as the Papists
term it) a Catholic point of Doctrine: as also if the Pope cannot err, ex
Cathedra, it will follow, according to Boniface foresaid definition, that all
the Greek Fathers are absolutely damned.

Next, he spares not to blotte those holy Fathers, of that fourth and famous
Council of Chalcedon, Bell. ibidem.
both with Fraud and Deceit, in the forenamed point, saying, Thereafter, in
the year 451, the Greek Fathers (says he) not being content with their
former Determination, they preassed to make the Bishop of Constantinople equal
always to the Bishop of Rome: for in the Council of Chalcedon, in the sixteenth
Act thereof, the Grecian Fathers decreed, (but not without deceit (says he)
and the Roman Legates being absent,) that the Bishop of Constantinople should
be so in the second Room, after the Bishop of Rome: that notwithstanding
thereof, be should have the same equal Privileges, as the other had.

Now, if any grosser Imputations can be laid upon any, than he does upon
these holy Fathers, and famous Councels, let any man consider; making them
heretical in Mind and Opinion, and false or fraudulent in Manners and Action*

Yea, what farther falsehood and fraud he lays to the charge of that famous
and Oriental Church, in corrupting the works of others, Bell. lib. 4. de pont.
c. 11.. ad secundum, and sect. secundo. Item, lib. 2. de Christo, c. 23. se^^.
Graci.
let his own words testify. For it was the ordinary Custom of the
Grecians, (says he) to corrupt the Books of other men. Where-of he
clears the Occidentall, or Latin Church, by a reason to be laughed at, for
the palpable evidence of the contrary, (as shall be shown) saying, Quoniam
Romani sicut non accumina, it a nec impostur as habent: That is, Because the
Romans, as they have no sharpness of wit, so they cannot use deceit, (says
he:) while as all men know, and experience has taught, that there are none
that have been more subtle, nor sharper witted than they.

Secondly, how they deal with the Greek Fathers, severallie and apart.
FIrst, when Chrysostom is adduced for peoples reading of Scripture, Bell.
lib. 1. de verbo, cap. vlt.. respondeo verbo.
Bellarmine answers, That continually he exhorted all men (says he) to
read the Scriptures: Non quod vellet omnes rudissimos id facere: That is, But
not, that he would had all men, although never so unlearned, so to do. And so
he imputes to this holy Father, that he spoke far other-wise, than he
meant; and dissimulatelie required that to be done, which he would not have
done in earnest.

Next, when we urge Ireneus testimony (for proving the Pope to be
Antichrist) that the number of the name of the Beast most fitly is Lateinus,
(according to the old form of pronouncing, as Lipsius witnesses) thereby
showing, Lipsius de antiq. pronun. cap. 8.
that he was to be a Latin Bishop, having his Seat in the Latin Church:
and more particularly, in Latium, or Italy, his Decrees also in Latin, and
all public Service in these Churches, subject to him in Latin like-wise.
Unto this Testimony of Ireneus, Bellarmine answers thus, Bell. lib. 3. de
pont. cap. 10. sect. has opinio.
Conjectura illa Irenei (says he) quae tunc aliqua fuit, nunc nulla est: That
is, That light conjecture of Ireneus, which was somewhat in his days, is of
no account with us now: As if such Varlets were best Valuers, or Truth changed
with Time, and Verity ran on the Wheels of unconstant Variety.

Again, when Saynct Cyprian is opposed against Traditions, Bell. lib. 4. de
verbo c. 11. sect. profert. 12. Bell. lib. 2. de sacr. cap. 30. sect. 4.
Bellarmine answers, that Cyprian wrote so (says he) when he would defend
his Error, (which he calls elsewhere the Heresy of Anabaptisme) and
therefore it is no marvel, that he reason after the manner of Heretics. By
which answer, he condemns not only Saynct Cyprian, but Augustine
lyke-wyse, who in this point, of requyring recourse to be had only unto holy
Scripture, greatly commended Saynct Cyprian.

Lyke-wyse, when Theodoret is objected against Transsubstantiation, witnessing
in his second Dialogue, called, Inconfusus, That after Consecration, the
Elements remain still in their former substance; Valentia answers, Valen.
lib. de transsub. c. 7. sect. 11.
saying, That some of the Ancients in this Matter, neither thought nor wrote
truly, nor consideratelie, as they ought. Or he might have added, At least,
as the Jesuits now would have had them.

In like manner, when Chrysostom is produced to prove, that the Virgin Marie
had original sin, because she sinned actuallie, when Christ rebuked her at
the Marriage of Cana in Galile; Tolet, in Ioh. 2. annot. 5. sect. v^t^m^.
Cardinal Tolet answers thus only, In ho^ Chrysostomus probandus non est:
that is, (says he) Chrysostom is not to be approved in saying so.

More-over, when Ignatius, a Greek Father, is opponed against the mutilation
of the Sacrament, Bell. lib. 4. de Euch. c. 26. sect. respondeo pri^um.
Bellarmine answers, Non multum fidendum est Graecis condicibus Ignatii: that
is, (says he) The Greek Writings of Ignatius, are not greatly to be
trusted.

Again, when Origin is objected, to prove, that Marriage is no Sacrament,
Bellarmine answers, Bell. l. 1. de matrim. c. 5. sect. alteram.
Origines autem non est tantae authoritatis in Ecclesia, ut ejus sententia
ne^essario approbanda sit: that is, Origin (says he) is not of such
authority in the Church, that his opinion necessarily is to be followed. And
yet how frequentlie he obtrudeth him against us, as of great authority, let
his citation of him, and his fellow Jesuits, in their Books, testify:
Lindanus, when he cites him, Lind. l. 3. c. ^4.
calling him, Illustre Alexandriae l^men: that is, The bright light of
Alexandria: Durcus contra Whitaker. f. 109.
and Durie calling him, Testis omni exceptione major: that is, A Witness,
without all exception, greatest.

Lyke-wyse, when Euthimius is alleged, in the matter of the Sayncts
beatitude, Bell. lib. 1. de sanct. c. 4. sect. h^be^mu^.
Bellarmine answers, Non est ^ac in re usque adeo magni faciendus: that is,
(lays he) In this matter, be is not so much to be esteemed.

Now, to resume: if with imputations only of double Dissimulation,
conjecturall Lenity, damnable Heresy, rash Inconsiderateness, seducing
Error, and such like, we should thus answer the Testimonies of Fathers,
consenting clearlie with Scripture; affirming them unworthy of Christian
approbation, of honest men's trust, wise men's regard, or Fatherly Authority;
what clamours of Indignity, done to Antiquity, should we hear of our
opposed Party? forgetting that Precept of Equity, Quod tibi fieri non vis,
alterine feceris.

CHAP. V. How the Romanists deal with the Latin Fathers, conjunctly and apart.
AS Canus says of the Fathers in general, Can. lo. theol. lib. 7. cap. 3.
number. 7.
The canonick Authors (says he) as they are supreme, heavenly, and divine; so
they keep a perpetual and firm constancy of truth; but other holy Writers
being inferior, and humane, they err sometimes, yea, and bring forth
Monsters, against the convenient order, and ordinary course of Nature. Alph.
l. 1. adv. here is. c. 7.
So does Alphonsus de Castro, declare, that they are oftentimes found
co^tradictorie to themselves, (says he:) the particular examples where-of
Iansenius, Ians. concord. Evang. c. 137. p. 541. and cap. 146. p. 624.
in his Concordance of the Evangels, has labored to show, in Jerome, Ambrose,
and Augustine.

Like-wise, with levitie and inconstancy, thus does both Bellarmine and
Alphonsus brand holy S. Jerome, who when he is objected unto them against
their Pompaticall and Papal Hierarchy, alleging no difference to be in
Scripture, between a Bishop, and a Presbyter, Bell. lib. 1. de cler. c. 15.
sect. est antem.
Bellarmine answers, Est autem observandum Hieronymum in h^c sententia, non
adeo constantem videri: That is, It is to be observed, (says he) that
Jerome in this point seems not to be so constant, as he should be.

Alph. l. 6. adv. here is. tit. Episcopus.
The like says Alphonsus, in these words, Ex quibus verbis apparet B.
Hieronymum sibi ipsi in hac part minime constare: That is, By which words it
is evident, that S. Jerome was no wise constant in this point.

Yea, more-over, when Jerome is produced, consenting with a number of Fathers,
whom their Medina nominateth, to prove the same point, that primitiuelie a
Bishop and Presbyter were all one, Bell. lib. 1. de pont. c. 8.. respondeo.
Bellarmine answers grossly, giving him the Lie, saying, Videtur revera
Hieronymum in ea opinione fuisse, quae falsa est: That is, It appears
indeed, that Jerome was of that opinion, but yet the same is false.

After the same manner does Pigbius also use Augustine, Pigh. de orig. pecc.
whose doctrine when he has brought, in two points, concerning original
sin, (agreeable to Scripture) yet thus he speaks thereof, Quae Augustini
sententia [sayth hee] non solum incerta, sed and falsa est: That is, Which
doctrine of Augustine's, is not only uncertain, but lyke-wyse untrue, or
false.

Yea, little less vnreverentlie does Bellarmine use one of their own Popes, to
wit, Pius the second, whose testimony when we oppose against Papal Supremacy,
proving, that no such thing was known, nor acknowledged, in the primitive
Church; the fore-saide Pope testifying, Quod ante Nicenam Synodum parum
respectus habebatur ad Romanam Ecclesiam: That is, That little regard was had
to the Roman Church, before the Council of Nice: Bellarmine thus answers,
Quae sententia (says he) partim non est vera: That is, Which declaration of
his heere-in, is in a part false and untrue.

Again, when Tertullian is produced against the Pope's infallibility, Bell.
lib. 4. de po^t. c. 8.. respond^o.
proving Pope Zepherin to have been a Montanist, Bellarmine answers
roundly, That Tertullian is a Liar, saying, Non est omnino Tertulliano hac in
part fides adhibenda: that is, In that matter there is no credit at all to be
given to Tertullian.

Bell. lib. 2. de bon. oper. c. 9. sect. 8.
So lyke-wyse, when the same Tertullian is adduced, for proving Christian
liberty in fasting, Bellarmine answers thus, Tertullian (says he) in that
book expounds the Catholic Doctrine after that manner, as at this time the
Lutherians use; that is, everie-where mixing in Cal^mnies and Lies.

More-over, when Augustine in his Retractions, Bell. lib. 1. de pont. c. 10..
ad Augustin^^.
interpreting the Rock, where-on Christ was to build his Church, is adduced
against the Papists, to signify, not Peter, but CHRIST Himself; Bellarmine
answers, Ex sola ignorantia linguae Hebreae esse deceptum: that is, that
Augustine was deceived heere-in, only by his ignorance of the Hebrew tongue.

And again, Bell. de ^uch. l. 1. c. 11. sect. fi rursus.
when he is produced against Transsubstantiation, showing, that Christ's
words, saying, I will not drink hence-foorth of the fruit of the Vine, were
spoken of the consecrated Cup, Bellarmine answers, Augustinum non expendisse
hunc locum diligenter: that is, that Augustine did not weigh or consider this
place diligently: to wit, not so friendly for the Pope's behoof, and his
Darling of Transsubstantiation, which was hatched after.

In like manner, Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 5. sect. quarta diff.
when the foresaid Augustine, and Pope Gregorie's expositions, on 1 Cor. 3,
13, are adduced, showing, by that Fire which is spoken of there, are meaned the
Troubles of this life, and no other Fire of Purgatory, Bellarmine summarilie
goes to work, and says, Sed hoc jam rejecimus: that is, But as for this
exposition of theirs, (says he) we have already rejected it.

And when he has shown, how many ancient and famous Authors have vehemently
oppugned their idle begging Orders, Bell. lib. 2. de mon. c. 45.
yet he answers, At ^ihileminus vitam mendicantium, tanquam sanctam and
perfectam, approbarunt multi Pontifices: that is, Not-with-standing of all
those Ancients and Authors, it is enough, that many Popes have approved the
life of begging Friars, as holy and perfect.

Yea, more-over, when both a Roman Council, Bell. lib. 2. de mon. c. 35.. at
his. Greg. l. 3. Ep. 11. 1 Timothy 5.9.
and a Roman Pope, are produced, forbidding the vayling of Nuns, before 60
years of age, according to that Apostolical Precept, of receiving of Widows,
Bellarmine thereunto answers, His non obstantibus licere in quacunque
aetate, si adsit usus liberi arbi^rii, talia vota nuncupare: that is,
Notwith-standing of all that is alleged, (to wit, out of Scripture, Councels,
or Fathers) it is lawful (says he) of what age so-ever they be, (provyding
that they have the use of Free Will) to undergo such Vows.

I omit, how he answers the Authorities of other Fathers, only with
imputation of Ignorance, and want of Learning unto them, when they are
objected; as where he says, Bell. lib. 1. de Christo, c. 6.. at contra.
Procopius was a better Orator, than a Divine, (says he:) Lactantius also
was better seen in Cicero's Books, Bell. lib. 1. de sanct. c. 5. sect.
habenius.
than he was in the Scriptures: and Victorius was indeed (says he) a
Martyr, but he wanted Learning.

To conclude, therefore; if with baser Money any can be paid, who exacteth
Satisfaction to the Testimonies of Fathers, than you see by our Adversaries
laid down here, let any one judge: Or if Imputations to those Auncientes, of
Monstrous Births, cross Contradictions, gross Error, light Inconstancy,
base Lying, vilde Slandering, blind Ignorance, careless Neglect, with
undeserved Distrusting them, and open Rejection, can pass for current, either
on their bare word, to satisfy us, or to express their so much pretended, and
bragged of reverence to venerable Antiquity, then let Light and Darkness, and
GOD and Beliall be agreed, or as the Poet says, Iungentur jam gryphes equis,
aevoque sequenti
Cum canibus timidi venient ad
pocula damae.


CHAP. VI. How the Romanists have shamefullie corrupted the Fathers, both by
adding to them, payring from them, and altering their words.
AS the particulars of the proof here-of, are heere-after set down, of Popish
corrupting of Fathers, making the^ either to suffer, if not for their works, a
Purgatory heere-after, yet in their works, a sure Purgatory here; or else,
making them against their wills, to speak the Language of Israel and Ashdod
together: So what was the sensible seen experience of that worthy and learned
Iunius, which himself relates, let his own words, and protestation, bona
fide, testify. I will relate (says he) truly that which I saw with mine
eyes: when I remained in Lions, Franc. Iu^ius, pra^^r.^^die. expurg. belg.
(in the Year of GOD 1559. and the next Year after) I was familiarlie
acquainted with the Correcter of a PRINTING HOUSE there, named Ludovicus
Saurius, who dwelt not far from Mercury Street, in the Lodging close
adjacent to the sign of the three Doves. Now when I had come to salute this
Man, it fell out by chance* or rather by the singular providence of GOD, that I
found him busied in revising over the Works of S. Ambrose, which then
Frelonius was printing: and after much talk hither and to, when I showed
him, that I would no longer be a vvith-drawer of him from his work, he
having begun again the reading over of one Page, said to me, See ye not the
manner of this our Edition of S. Ambrose, how pretty and perfect it is? and to
look upon it, is vvorthie to be preferred before any Edition that ever
hitherto came out. And after I had beheld, and praised the finenesse of the
Edition, he said then unto me, But if I were to buy any Copy of S.
Ambrose Works, I would buy any other Copy vvhat-so-ever, before I bought
this which thou see. And when I had asked the reason why he said so;
Then he taking out some Pages forth of the Hutches, or Drawers under the
Table, which were all razed and cancelled, either in part, or in whole: he
said to me, This is the first Impression (says he) of the Pages which
vvith-in those few days we printed most faithfully according to the Copy
of the Old and true Impression: but two Gray-Fr^ers since then, according to
the authority given to them, have blotted out in all these Pages, as thou
see, and have caus^d those new ones to be put in the place of the former,
against all credit of these our Books; which thing has bred both Charges,
and exceeding great fashrie to the Printer Frelonius. The verity of which
Relation, if any should doubt thereof, he may easily perceive, by collation
of S. Ambrose works, printed at Paris, anno 1529, by Claudius Chevallonius,
which I have beside me: or at Basil, by Hieronymus Frobenius, anno 1538, with
that Impression at Lions, by Frelonius, anno 1560: and as the particulars
ensuing shall give proof of others.

First, Examples of Popish adding to the Fathers.
FIrst, of adding to the Fathers, and their Decrees, being conveaned in
Council, we have a notable evidence, in that impudent and audacious fact of
Pope Zozimus, who added a Canon in his own behalf, to the very first
Council of Nice; which by that famous sixth Council of Carthage was, as a
notable Forgerie, detected, and declared, and could never hitherto, by all the
croaking Frogs of that Jesuitical Crew, See Bell. l. 2 de pon^. c. 25.
be soothed sufficiently, or colourablie excused.

Again, in the matter of appeals, where-as the Council of Milevi decreed,
Council. Milev. c. 22.
under pain of Excommunication, That none with-in Afric should appeal to
any part beyond Sea: Bellarmine is forced to grant a forged addition, Bell.
lib. 2. de pont. c. 24.. respondeo aliqui.
in favors of the Pope, to have been there-after grossly by Gratian added
to the Canon, saying, Addidit ad hunc Canonem exceptionem, nisi forte ad
Apostolicam sedem appelletur, sed haec exceptio non videtur quadrare (says
he) nam praecipue propter Romanam Ecclesiam Africani statuerunt ut non liceret
appellare ultra mare: That is, He added to this Canon, this exception, to wit,
Except perhaps the appeal be made, unto the Sea Apostolic; but this
exception (says Bellarmine) seems not to agree with the Canon, for it was
chiefelie for the Roman Churches cause, that it was decreed, to be unlawful
to any, to appeal out of Afric, to any part beyond Sea. Thus we see for
the Pope's advancement, and gratifying, how false, and trickie his Supposts
have been of old, even by our Adversaries own confession clearlie.

Like-wise, when that gross and blasphemous place in Did. 19. c. In cano^^m.
Gratian, alleged on S. Augustine, is vpbraided, affirming, that the Pope's
Decretals ought to be accounted amongst canonical Scripture, Bell. lib. 2. de
council. c. 12.. respondeo ad.
Bellarmine answers, Deceptum esse ex depravato codice, quem ipse babuit B.
Augustini cui tribuit illum canonem, codices vero very and emendati B.
Augustini non habent ut Gratianus refert: That is, Gratian (says he) was
deceived by a corrupt Copy of S. Augustine's, which he had beside him, to
whom be attributes that Canon; but the true and mended Copies of S. Augustine
since then, have not these words as Gratian reports the^. How bold then the
Pope's Parasites have been with the works of the Fathers, in corrupting them,
for supporting that Whore of Babylon, we may clearlie see, by this confession
of Bellarmine's, and others, who now in their latter and mended Copies, are
forced, for shame, to have razed out of their old Copies, such gross
corruptions, and openly to disclaim the same.

In like manner, to prove that in Purgatory some sins are remitted, Bell.
lib. 1. de purg. c. 4. initio.
Bellarmine cites a place of Augustine, which their own Vives in his Notes
upon that Chapter, denies any ways to be found in the old Copies and
Manuscripts of Augustine, Aug. l. 2^. ^e civit. De^. c. 24.
kept amongst themselves, in their chiefest and Metropolitan Bibliotheakes,
saying, In Antiquis libris Brugensibus and Coloniensibus, non habentur isti
december aut duodecim qui leguntur versus: That is, In the ancient Copies which
are at Birges and Colen, these ten or twelve Lines, which are here read, are
not to be had there.

More-over, the same Ludovicus Vives, in his Notes upon the 8 Chapter, of the
22 Book of Augustine, De Civitate Dei, Also a notable patch is added to the 24
Chapter, of the 21 Book.
says plainly, In h^c capite, non dubium quin multa sunt addita, veluti
declarandi gratia, ab iis qui omniu^ magnorum authorum scripta spurcis suis
manibus contaminabant: That is, In this Chapter, (says he) without doubt,
many things are added, as it were for explanations sake, by those who with
their filthy Hands, have defiled the Wrytings of all Authors, that are of
great Authority. And more particularly, who those are, who have done so,
their own Erasmus tells us clearlie, Erasmus, in iudic^ Scholiorum in Hieron.
saying, Monachi Patrum corruperunt Scripta: That is, It was the Monks (said
he) that have corrupted the Wrytings of the Fathers: as is clear, both by
that addition in the fore-alleadged corrupt Copy of Gratianus his Augustine,
making only for the Pope, and as shall be, Godwilling, here-after also shown,
of the Monks of Weingart, and Bellarmine's own Testimony, of their forging of
Chrysostom's Homilies, Bell. d^scrip. rec^. an^. 396. Rhem. in Math. 3.1.
on Mark, cited by the Rhemists, for monastical life.

Again, in the works of Fulbertus, B. of Chartres, published at Paris, anno
1608, fol. 168, are set down these words of Augustine, Unless ye eat (says
Christ) the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, ye shall have no
life in you, Facimus vel flagitum videtur jubere, figura ergo est dicet
haereticus praecipiens passioni Domini esse communicandum, etc. That is, He
seems to command a great wickedness; it is therefore a figure, will the
Heretic say, requyring us only to communicate with the Lord's Passion, and
sweetly and profitably to lay up in our memory, that His flesh was crucified,
and wounded for us. Remarke then, how the publisher has put in of his own
these words, dicet Haereticus into Augustine's Testimony, cited by the
fore-saide Fulbertus; and by so doing, thinking to meet with the Heretics of
this time, (as he calls us) was not a-ware, that he made Augustine
lyke-wyse an Heretic for Company, whose very words these are, and no other
man's, Lib. de doct. Christ. cap. 16.

Like-wise, Gratian relating the second Council of Cavaillon, Distinct. 1.
cap. Quidam.
their words concerning Confession, sets them down thus, Quidam veve
sacerdotibus confitenda esse percensent, ut tota fere sancta Ecclesia: That is,
But some are of mind, that our sins are to be confessed unto the Priest, as
almost the whole holy Church thinks. But that these words, ut tota fere
sancta Ecclesia, are favourablie added for Popish Confession, to insinuate,
that the same was a catholic doctrine, and practice in the Church then, not
only the preceding words, comprehending the whole Greek Church, their mind
in the contrary, verefieth, Qui Deo solummodo confiteri peccata dicunt, (says
the Canon:) That is, Who says, that sins should be confessed only to God:
but also the Note upon this place of their Canon Law, lately published by
Gregory the 13, freely grants, that these words, ut tota fere sancta
Ecclesia, are added, and are not neither in the Capitular, nor Council.

What forged and farsed Additions like-wise are everie-where through-out S.
Cyprian's works, put in by that impudent Patcher Pamelius, let that Edition of
his of S. Cyprians works, conferred with ancient Copies, as Gulartius has
very well observed them, to all men testify: one example where-of I will
only instance, of the alleadgeance, of a testimony of S. Cyrian's, of that
Edition, adduced for the Pope's Supremacy, in a written Popish Pamphlet, sent
of late to a Brother of our Presbytery, to answer unto; and which, for
evidence of the truth thereof, we yet keep beside us, containing four
gross Additions, even in one only Testimony, besides a most fraudfull
Alteration, of most material words.

The Testimony then or S. Cyprian, Cyprian. tract. de simpl. praelat. Lugdu^^,
apud Seb. Gryphium. 1537.
printed amongst themselves of old, (as I have the Book to exhibit) is
thus: The Lord speaks thus to Peter, (says Cyprian) I tell thee, (says
Christ) that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, etc.
And He says unto him again, after His Resurrection, Feed My Sheep. And
albeit after His Resurrection, (mark this) he gave a-like power to all His
Apostles, and said, As My Father sent Me, so send I you, receive the holy
Ghost: to whom ye forgive sins, they shall be forgiven, etc. Yet that He
might manifest that unity should be amongst them, by His authority, He
disposed it so, that the beginning of this Unity should be at one, yet were
the rest of the Apostles the very same, as was Peter, (remarke this again)
endued with alike fellowship, both of Honor and Power: but a beginning
proceeds from Unity, that it may be shown, that Christ's Church is one.

Thus we may see, that this Testimony sincerely cited, and considered, makes
no ways for Peter's Supremacy of Jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles,
or the Pope's, (as his Successor, over all other Bishops) but is flat against
the same: seeing it is said, That the rest were the same, as he was, and all
had the a-lyke, or equal power, as he had.

But this fore-sayde Testimony, as it is clowted and clamped, and by him who
out of his Pamelius has cited, and set down the same with his own hand, is
thus, Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum, etc. that is, The Lord speaks thus to Peter
(says Cyprian) I say unto thee (says Christ) that thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock^ I will build my Church, etc. And He says to him again, 1.
Addition.
Feed my Sheep^: Super illum unum aedificat Eccl^siam (...), and illi
p^scendas mandat oves suas: that is, Upon him alone did Christ build His
Church, and to him only recommended He His Sheep to be fed. (This is the
first Addition to this Testimony*) And al-be-it (says Cyprian) after His
Resurrection He gave equal power to all His Apostles, and says, As my
Father sent me, so send I you: and, to whom ye forgive their sins, they
shall be forgiven, etc. Yet that He might manifest that Unity that should be
amongst them, Vnam Cathedram constituit: that is, ^. Addition.
He appointed one only Chair to be (says the clowting Tinker:) And by His
authority He disposed it so (says Cyprian) that the beginning of this Unity
should be at one; yet were the rest of the Apostles the very same, as was
Peter, endewed with the like Privilege, Honoris and Potestatis, (says
Cyprian) that is, Al^ration.
of Honor and Jurisdiction. But, Honoris and Dignitatis, (says our
metamorphosing Exchanger) nimirum ante illa verba Christi ad B. Petrum, Pas^e
Oves meas: that is* And the rest of the Apostles had this honor, of equal
dignity, only before these words of Christ were spoken to Peter, saying,
Feed my Sheep. (This is the third new Patch. 3. Addition.
) But a beginning proceeds from Unity, (says Cyprian) and primatus Petro
datur: that is, And the Primacie is given to Peter, 4. Addition.
(says our false Recorder, in Cyprian's name) that Christ's Church may be
shown to be one, (says Cyprian) Et cathedra una monstretur: 5. Addition.
that is, And that lyke-wyse one Chair (to wit, of Infallibility) may be
demonstrate (says this monstrous Mungrell.)

Thus have they sown in their Tares, in another Field: thus also have they
put in their Colloquintida, in the Pottes of the Lord's Prophets, and the Ass
has joined to plow with the Ox together. And by so doing, they have made the
works of many ancient and worthy Writers, like Hermophrodites, which are
hardly known to which Sex they inclyne most; joining their new Clowt, to
the others grave Garment; and so marring both Color and Credit of the whole
Vesture.

Secondly, examples of Popish purging from the Fathers.
AS in the former Examples we have seen their illicite Lincie-wolsie mixture
of Addition, So we will show now, God willing, how these cunning
Arithmeticians are as perfect in their manner of Substraction, and so cannot
only decline in the Dative, but as well in the Ablative Case: and as Naash
would have pulled out the right Eyes of the men of Iabesh, so how they have
(Crow-lyke) picked out many orthodox Speeches, out of the works of holy
Fathers, that were most peremptor against them, making them Eunuchs so by
violent castration after their deaths, whom they could not find to have made
for their Errors by unjust declaration in their lives.

Senensis, therefore, in the Preface of his work, dedicated to Pius the fifth,
not only confesses this practice of Purgatory pains by the Pen, taken
about the Ancientes, but highly also commends the Pope, for his care of
performing the same, saying, Tu beatissime Pater expurgaricurasti omnia
Catholicorum authorum scripta, and praecipue veterum patrum: that is, Thou most
blessed Father (says he) have caused purge all the Writs of Catholic
Writers, and chiefelie the Fathers.

Lyke-wise, this is avowed in the late Edition of S. Augustine, Printed at
Paris, by Nivel, in S. Iacques street, at the sign of the Storks, 1571.
in the Preface where-of, it is said, That by the command of the most holy
Council of Trent, the Books of the Ancient Fathers, are ordained to be
purged.

Yea, the Jesuit Possevin, shows, that this Expurgatorie Practice, Possevin,
l. 1. bibliothec. s^l^ct. c. 12.
is not only to be extended to those that are Print, but to manuscript Copies.

Gretzer. de jure prohib. l. 2. c. 10. p. 328. and 329.
And this the Jesuit Gretzeras confesses, after that he has spoken of the
proscription of some whole Fathers, as Tertullian and Origin, he subjoyneth of
others, saying, Et si librum integrum proscribere fas est, fas etiam erit
pr^scribere partem, seu magnam, seu parvam, eam exscindendo, delendo,
obliterando, vel simpliciter omittendo ob lectoris utilitatem: That is, If it
be lawful to suppress or inhibite whole Books, then it is lawful lyke-wyse
to suppress a great, or lesser part of one, by cutting out, deleting, blotting
away, or by omitting the same simply, for the Readers welfare, (says he.)

This lyke-wise, the Expurgatorie Index it self shows in particular, both
that which is printed at Madrill, by Alphonsus Gomezius, 1594. for Belgia; also
the other, printed by Ludovicus Zanches, their King's PRINTER, for Spain, anno
M.DCXII.

In the which Spanish Index, Index expurg. Hisp. lit. B. tit. Bibliotheca
Patrum.
our of the Books of Abbot Antonius, 36 places are commanded to be blotted
out, who is one, that is set down in the fifth Tome of the Bibliotheca Patrum.
Like-wise a great part of a whole Treatise of Dorotheus Archimandrita, is
ordained to be razed, P. 103.
who is in the first Tome. The like is also ordained to be done with the 29
and 30 whole Chapters of Nicolaus Cabasila, who is in the ^ixt Tome: P. 91. P.
106. P. 109.
and besides two places of Melito, all the whole Chapters of his work, which
follow after the eight Chapter, are appointed, by a vehement purging Pill, to
be clean rid out of the way, who is in the seventh Tome.

To instance like-wise more particulars, Bell. lib. 4. de verbo. c. 11.. f^xto.
by confession of our Adversaries themselves; when Chrysostom is urged for
perfection of Scripture, against Papal Traditions, the Testimony being taken
out of his Commentary on Matthew, (like as he gives witness to the same
Truth, commenting on the first to the Galatians, and 95 Psalm, which are
vnsuspect works, and by all acknowledged to be his) Bellarmine answers thus,
Locus hic ab Arrianis insertus, est quibusdam codicibus nuper emendatis
sublatus: that is, This place (says he, by bare alleadgeance only) was insert
by the Arrians, and out of some Books that are newly amended, is quite purged
away.

Like-wise, for prooving of the same point of the Scriptures perfection,
where-as the old Impression of Athanasius has a notable place, Athan. lib. 1.
contra g^^tes.
saying, Sufficient sacrae ac divinitus inspiratae Scripturae ad omnem
instructionem Veritatis: That is, The holy and divine inspyred Scriptur^^, are
sufficient for ALL instruction of Truth; This word [ omnem] or [ ALL] which
galleth them, and where-in the very pith of the Testimony lies, in their
latter Editions, which they have at Rome, they have al-together razed, and left
out: for so Bellarmine professes, that it is not now in their Books, Bell.
lib. 4. de verbo* c. 11. ^. profert. quarto.
and therefore would have that word to be added of late by us; were not the
oldest Copies printed amongst themselves makes him a Liar; and where-of I have
one beside me, to witness to any the verity thereof.

In like manner, in that fourth Book, and fourth Chapter of Saint Ambrose, De
Sacramentis, it is thus in the ancient and uncorrupted Copies, against
Transsubstantiation, Si ergo tanta vis est in sermon Domini, ut inciperent
esse quae non erant, quanto magis est operatorius est ut sint quae erant, and
in aliud commutentur? that is, If therefore there be such power in the speech
of our Lord, that things which were not before, began to be, (to wit, at the
Creation) how much more (says Ambrose) is the same powerful to make, that
things may still be that which they were before, and yet be changed to
another thing?

But because these words, Vt sint quae erant, so clearlie cross their
Conceit, who after the words of Consecration, would have the Elements of
Bread and Wine, not to be any more, that which they were before in substance;
and to be changed, only into that, which they were not before in use: to
wit, To be Sacraments. Therefore, they have, for avoiding the troubling of
their Brains, in forging fectlesse Evasions, rather taken the shorter Cut, (as
we say) and have in their Roman Edition, (which is also followed in that, set
out in Paris, Anno 1603) quyte cut out, and purged away these words, which like
evil Humors so much before distempered them; making them now smoothe so to
run, Quanto magis operatorius est, ut qua erant, in aliud commutentu^: that is,
How much more powerful is our LORD'S speech, to make that those things which
were, should be changed into another thing? And so no Bone sticks in their
Throat.

Again, in the same Matter, the Author of the imperfect work, on Saynct
Matthew, attributed to Chrysostom, Hom. 11. writes thus; If it be so
dangerous a matter (says he) to transfer unto private uses those holy
Vessels, in which the true Body of Christ is not, but the mystery of His
Body is contained; how much more for the Vessels of our Body, which God has
prepared for Himself to dwell in, ought we not to give way to the Devil, to
do in them what he pleases? Now these words, In quibus non est verum corpus
Christi, sed mysterium corporis ejus continetur: that is, In which His true, or
natural Body, is not; but in which the mystery of His Body is only
contained: because they did threatten so the Eversion of that
Transsubstantiating Conversion of theirs, therefore it is, that in their later
Editions, they have hearkened to that saying, Abscindantur qui nos perturbant:
and accordingly, both in that Impression of this work, at Antwerpe, apud
Ioannem Steelsium, Anno 1537, and at Paris, apud Ioannem Roigny, Anno 1543, and
at Paris again, apud Audoenum parvum, Anno 1557, not one Syllable of them is
to be seen, tho extant in the older Editions, of the date of 1487, and after.

More-over, Bertram, who wrote in the 800 year of GOD, against
Transsubstantiation, then peeping out, when in his Book, of the Body and
Blood of Christ, dedicated to the Emperor Carolus Calvus, who set him a-worke,
he has clearlie in these words dashed that Babels Brood, against the Stone
of solid holy Writ, saying, Things which differ one from another, are not
the same: the Body of Christ, which was dead, and rose again, and being made
immortal, dies no more, (Death having no more dominion over it) it is now
ever-lasting, and not subject to suffering: But this which is celebrated in the
Church, is temporal, not ever-lasting; it is corruptible, and not free from
Corruption. ^.
But as they profess, in the Expurgatorie Index of this Author, when they have
essayed, for escaping, to invent some fine Devyce, and feign some commodious
Sense for them, which is this, to wit, That this is meant of the Accidents, or
Forms of the Sacrament, (says he) which are corruptible. or of the use of the
Sacrament, which continues only in this present world, and in that sense,
is temporal. And when notwith-standing they see, that this will not serve
them, in respect the whole scope of the Discourse is against this Shift, and
tends to prove, That it is not the natural Body of Christ, which was borne,
died, and rose again, which Christians externally receive in the blessed
Sacrament; what then is their next Recourse? Even this bankrout Shift, Non male
aut inconsulte igitar omittantur omnia haec: that is, It is not amiss then,
(say they) nor vnadvysedlie done, that those things be left out al-to-gether.

Yea, not only have they paired away parcels, Chap. 15.. 4.
but (as shall be shown, God willing, heere-after) they have razed, and
bereaved us of whole Records, and entire Treatises, that have made against them.

And, as Erasmus in a word told us before, who were those Egyptian Flies, who
were the Corrupters of the wholesome travels of ancient and holy Authors in
the Church of CHRIST, before the noisome Crew of Jesuitical Frogs, with more
whoorish foreheads, eased that filthy Swarm; and being the last Emissaries
of that false Prophet, undertook that Task: So, to confirm the truth of
Erasmus speech, I will here relate one only proof thereof, which that
learned Father B. Usher, helped to discover. In the year 1616, one Petrus
Stuartius set forth at Ingolstadt, amongst other Treatises, one especially,
of Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Mentz, called his Penitential; in the 33
Chapter whereof, answering to a question of a Bishop, named Heribaldus,
concerning the Eucharist, what became of it, after it was consumed after the
manner of other Meats, and sent into the Draught; Rabanus has these words,
Page 669; Some of late, (says he) not holding rightly of the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of our LORD, have said, That the very Body and Blood of our
LORD, which was borne of the Virgin Marie, and in which our LORD Himself
suffered on the Cross, and rose again from the Grave. Against which Error,
writing unto Abbot Egilius, According to our ability we have declared (says
he) what is truly to be believed concerning CHRIST'S Body. Here we see,
then, that Rabanus tongue is clipped for telling of Tales, (as says that former
Father:) first, therefore, we must see who is the Doer, and next, what are the
words that are razed out. Stevartius, the publisher, freeth himself of the
fact, telling us in the margent, that he found that blank in the manuscript
Copy. But whence had he that manuscript? Out of that famous Monastery of
Weingart, (says he:) So that we see clearlie, that the Monks of Weingart
stand on the Chalk.

Next, let us see what are the words that are razed: B. Usher (as I said
before) has helped notably to clear this to Posterity, thus: In the
Liberaries of that worthy Knight, Sr Robert Cotton, and D. Ward, Mr of Sidney
College in Cambridge, he found a Treatise of the Sacrament, of great
Antiquity, (as he reports) beginning thus, Sicut ante nos quidam sapiens
dixit, etc. In which the Author laying down the opinion of Paschasius
Radbertus, (who was Bertram's Antagonist) that the flesh which is received at
the Altar, is no other than that which was borne of the Virgin Marie, and
suffered on the Cross, and rose out of the Grave, and is yet daily offered,
for the life of the World, Contra quem (says this Author) satis argumentatur
and Rabanus in Epistola ad Egilonem Abbatem, and Ratrannas quidam libro
composito ad Carolum Regem, dicentes ali am esse: that is, Against whom, both
Rabanus sufficiently does reason, in an Epistle written to the Abbot Egilo;
as also, one Ratrannus, (alias Bertramus) in a Book made unto King Charles,
saying, That it is another kind of f^esh, (to wit, Sacramental.) Where-by we
may now see, what it is that these razed-headed Monks of Weingart, have razed
with their hands out of Rabanus Penitential; seeing we are given to
understand by this Author, what his opinion was in this point, in his Epistle
to Abbot Egilo. And therefore, that the foresaid blanke has been filled up
before with these words: to wit, That the natural Body of CHRIST, is that
self same Body, which is by the mouth received at the Altar. Against which
Error, (says Rabanus) vvriting to Abbot Egilo, we have, according to our
ability, declare^ what is truly to be believed, (to wit, the clean
contrary.)

Thirdly, Examples of Popish Altering the words of the Fathers.
FIrst, for proof of this Practice, as the thirteenth Chapter shall give
Instances of their Alteration of the words of a whole Convent of Fathers,
conveaned in Council; So, how they deal with them particularly, let these
Examples testify.

Saynct Ambrose, to show, that Personal Succession, is nothing, without
Succession of Doctrine, says, Petri hereditatem non habea^, qui no^ habent
Petri fidem: that is, They have not hereditarie Succession from Peter, who
keep not Peter's Faith. But how is this Testimony corrupted? (as is to be
seen in Gratian, De penit. did. 1. c. potest.
and in their later Editions) For mayntayning the Pope only to be the
lawful Successor to Peter, and that such local and personal succession, is
the Note of the true Church. Petri hereditatem non habent, qui non habent Petri
sedem, (say they:) that is, They have not hereditarie Succession to Peter, who
have not P^ter's Chair. Where ye see, Seeds, put for, Fides; The Chair at
Rome, for, The Christian Faith where-so-ever.

Bell. lib. 2. de verbo, cap. 12. sect. dic^ secunde.
Lyke-wyse, Bellarmine, (to establish the adoration of the Virgin Marie) he
cites Chrysostom, translating that place of Genesis, 3, 15. [ Ipsa, She:]
which Chrysostom has plainly in the Greek masculine, (...) [ Ipse, or be
shall tread the head of the Serpent] understanding CHRIST, and not the Virgin
Marie.

Also, to prove the adoration of Relics, Bell. l. 2. de r^liq. c. 3. sect.
8. Ioha^n^s.
he cites again the foresaid Chrysostom, saying, Tumulos Martyrum adoremus;
vvhere-as Chrysostom without any word of adoration, says only, (...),
^angamus.

Again, when as Pope Leo his Epistle, is cited for the privilege of Marriage
in the Clergy, speaking (as Moses did of the conditions of the High-Priest's
Wife) De muliere sacerdotis eligenda: that is, What a one for Wife the Priest
should make choice of; without any more warrandable Reason than bare
Alleadgeance, Bell. l. 1. de cler. c. 21. sect. alium.
Bellarmine says, Legitur in codicibus melioribus, de muliere sacerdotio
elegendi: that is, It is read in those Books that are better reformed, (to
wit, by Popish Transforming) of the Wife of the Priest that is to be chosen.
Insinuating there-by, that howsoever he might have had a Wife before his
Su^ception of Priesthood, yet there-after he might not have any.

In like manner, Bell. lib. 3. de pont. c. 7. sect. quod autem.
the same Bellarmine, to prove, that Antichrist is not yet come, he brings
this reason; That when he comes, the Persecution of the Church shall be so
great, and manifest, that such a separation shall be made, (contrary to
Matthew 13, 30) that all the Wicked, and lurking Hypocrites, shall be
conveaned together in Antichrist's Hoaste, and openly oppugn the Church of the
Sayncts: which (says he) has not yet been: and therefore, that Antichrist
is not yet come. But to prove his Major, he adduceth a falsified Testimony of
Augustine's, saying, A^ tunc erumpent omnes in apertam persecutionem, ex
latebris odiorum: that is, And then all the Wicked shall burst forth in open
Persecution, out of the lurking Holes of their hatred. VVhere-as Augustine's
true words are these, only speaking of Satan's loosing, Exibit a^tem, dictum
est (says he) in apertam persecutionem, de la^eb^ is ^rumpet odiorum: that
is, As is said, Satan shall go forth, in open persecution, and out of the
lurking Holes of his hatred to the Godly, shall he then break out.

More-over, when Pope Clements own Testimony in Eusebiu^, Eu^^b. l. 2.
(...). c. 1.
is adduced to show, that of the Apostles, after CHRIST'S Assumption, Nemo sibi
vendicabat primatus gloriam: that is, Never one of them did challenge to
themselves the honor of Primacie, one above another; Bellarmine answers,
Bell. lib. 1. de pont. c. 26.. ad testimonium.
That albeit in the Edition of Basil, of Ruffinus Version, (which is the
oldest, and vnsuspect) these forenamed words be: yet in the Edition of Colen,
turned, and set forth by a Catholic Roman, since then, (which is later,
and done by a Party) the word of [ Primacie] is not to be seen: (there is
notable purging.) And for these words, (says he) Bishop of the Apostles,
(speaking of S. James) is to be found, Bishop of Jerusalem. (Here is again a
notable alteration, and both the former Purgings, and this, are cleared by our
Adversaries.)

Like-wise, Bell. l. de confirm. c. 12.. est quidem.
the same Bellarmine freely confesses Pope Gregorie's Epistles to be
cunningly corrupted, by Popish Episcopal Parasites, who would have
Confirmation only to belong to Bishops; and therefore they have put in the
fore-saide Epistles, baptizandos, for, baptizatos: that is, Those that are to
be baptized, for, Those that are baptized.

The like corruption he confesses to be in Pope Gregorie's Morals, Bell.
lib. 1. de purg. c. 11. sect. secund^.
by those who affirming the Fire of Purgatory not to be material, and
bodily, have put in, incorporeum, for corporeum: that is, Incorporeall, for,
Corporeal.

And when a Testimony out of Socrates is produced against the Antiquity of
their forty days of Lent, Bell. l. 2. de bo^is oper. c. 15. sect. sed.
after that Bellarmine, without any vvarrand, or certainty, has said
only, Probabile est codicem Socratis esse corruptum: that is, It is likely,
that Socrates book bath been corrupted: he subjoyneth, sect. Itaque.
Pro tribus septimanis scribendum esse quinque: that is, That for three weeks,
it is best to write five: and concludes, that this metamorphosing of Authors,
is the only fittestvvay (when they are straited) to extricate themselves, and
compose their differs, saying, Itaque si corrigamus textum Socratis, and pro
tribus septimanis ponamus quinque, nulla erit discordia inter Socratem and
Cassianum: that is, Therefore (says he) if we amend the Text of Socrates, and
if we put for three weeks, five, then no discord shall be between Socrates
and Cassian.

Again, vvhere-as the Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew, attributed
to Chrysostom, in the 19 Homily of the old Edition 1487, has Sacrificium
panis and vini: that is, The offering of bread and wine: the latter Edition at
Paris, Apud Audoenum Parvum 1557, has altered them into these words,
Sacrificium corporis and sanguinis CHRISTI: that is, The sacrifice, or oblation
of the Body and Blood of CHRIST.

Likewise, this Prayer is found in the elder Editions of the Gregorian
Sacramentarie, Greg. oper. tom. 5. ^dit. Paris. 1505. col. 135.
vvhere-by is proven, That Prayer which was used of old for the Dead, did not
necessarily infer, That their Souls were therefore in Purgatory, for who^
they did pray. Annue nobis, Domine, ut anima famuli tui Leonis haec prosit
Oblatio: that is, Grant us, O Lord, that this Oblation may profit the Soul of
thy Servant Pope Leo. For which, the later Editions have chopped in this Prayer,
Liturgis. Pamel^^, tom. 2. p. ^14.
Annue nobis, Domine, at intercessione famuli tui Leonis haec nobis prosit
oblatio: that is, Grant us, O Lord, that by the intercession of thy Servant
Leo, this Offering may profit us.

I need not to repeat again, that alteration of Cyprian's words, See also
Aug. in Psalm. 37, cited by Bell. l. 4. de purg^e. 5.. Aug. having for,
em^^dato, emenda^ri^.
which is already mentioned in this same Chapter, putting, Dignitatis, for,
Potestatis; Honor, for, Power: whereunto the Reader, for inspection of the
whole Forgerie, may have his Recourse.

By such fraudfull Relation, then, of their Minds, and Alteration of the words
of ancient Fathers, they have not only, as it were, marred their Complexion,
and for Shibboleth, made them say, Siboleth; but shamelesselie also to have
called, Light, Darkness; and Darkness, Light; as in their dealing with the
purging of Bertram they openly profess; ordaining by their Expurgatorie
Index, for, Visibiliter, fol. 1137, to be put Invisibiliter: And so, for
founding their Usurpation, have sought so to confound the Truth; that if their
own Mouths did not condemn those naughty Servantes, and their own Pens
and Pains, discovered not unto us some Examples, by Hercules Foot to cognosse
the rest of his hudge Stature; We should doubt, that those whom the LORD made
in their age (like Elias) to plead for the Truth, like Iesabels Priests,
that they had been rather Pleaders for Baal. And therefore we see, how
necessary is that Caveat of Vincentius Lyrinensis, Vin^. Li^. de here is. c. 34.
^. 37.
That it is dangerous to commit the Trial of inveterate Errors, to the
Wrytinges of Auncientes, (how-so-ever he commend the Trial of such as are new
broached, to be made by the consent of Fathers:) his words are these, But
neither al-wayes, nor all kinds of Heresies, are to be impugned after this
manner, but such as are new, and lately sprung up, namely, when they first
arise, while by the straytnesse of Time it self, they may be impeded, from
falsifying the Rules of ancient Faith, and before that their Poison spreading
farther, they attempt to corrupt the Wrytings of the Ancients. (Note this.) But
far spread, and inveterate Heresies, (says he) are not to be dealt with
after this manner, for as much as by long continuance of time, a long Occasion
has lain open unto them, to steal away the Truth. VVhere-of, by a few
Instances, (in place of many) we have proven the Popish Pack to be most
guilty, and whose Errors have s^ielie spread so far as a contagious Gangren
in time of prevayling Darkness, and have continued so long in the Christian
Church, as a longsome Sickness, that the very Mayntayners of them hither-to,
brag of their Universality, and Duration in the Church.

CHAP. VII. How many under the Names of Fathers, Bellarmine acknowledges to
be merely counterfeyt, and this through the first five Ages, or Centuries of the
Church.
FIrst, Clement's Anno 7^.
Epistles are such, for so he says of the fifth, Bell. l. 3. de bonis oper. c.
11. sect. caterum.
It is sure (says he) either that it is not his, or else by some mightily
corrupted.

The like he says of his Recognitions, Lib. 5. de lib. arb. cap. 25.. ad hunc.

Also of his Constitutions, Baron. epit. ad an. 102. p. 72.
Baronius says, that by all men they are counted counterfeyt.

Again, Justinius Martyr, Anno 163.
his Questions, are justly suspect by Bellarmine, Bell. lib. 4. de pen. c. 9..
(...).
to be counterfeit: seeing in the 82 Question, Origin is made mention of, who
lived after I^stinus, more than an hundredth years and fifty.

The very like is clear of Dionysius Areopagita, Anno 70.
that he is likewise a counterfeit, as their own Laurentius Valla, by the
like reason makes good: to wit, because in his book, De divinis nominibus,
Clemen^ Stro^ateus is cited, who lived two hundredth years after Dionysius. And
yet this is he, whom Bellarmine often times cites, to prove the most points of
Popery, as their Hi^rarchie, Monastical life, Purgatory, and such like: but
of whom Jerome makes no mention of in his Book, De Viris Illustribus; which
he would not have omitted, if any such had been acknowledged in his time,
Act. 17.34.
(whose name especially had been in-rolled in Scripture) and had been a
famous Writer.

In like manner, Bellarmine acknowledges Tertullian's Anno 200. Bell. lib. 1.
de Christ^, c. 10. ^. responde^.
Book, De Trinitate, not to be his, because the Sabellians are there refuted,
who rose not in his time.

For the very like reason also he declares, that Cyprian Anno 250.
his Explicatio Symboli, Bell. ibidem.
is not his, because Arrius, Eunomius, and Pbotinus, who were not borne in
Cyprian's time, are by name refuted.

Lyke-wyse, Bell. l. de confir. c. 5.. author. and l. 2. de Euch. c. 9. sect.
^xta^.
he declares, That the Sermons of the Cardinal Virtues of Christ, as also
his Sermon of the Supper of the Lord, are not Cyprian's, but counterfeyt.

In like manner, Bell. l. de ^^nfir. c. 8. and l. 1. de penit. c. 10.
he suspecteth his Sermon of the Unction of holy Chrisme; and the other, of
the Ablution of Feere, to be none of Cyprian's, but to be meerelie
counterfeyt.

As also, he declares that Book, which is given out under the name of
Ar^^bius, Anno 300. Bell. l. 4. de amiss. gra. c. 9. sect. hic ver^.
Master to Lactantius, to be none of his, but a more recent Counterfeyt.

More-over, Bellarmine declares, that the Homilies on Leviticus, attributed to
S. Cyrill, Anno 430. Bell. lib. 4. de verbo, c. 11. sect. item.
are none of his, but a counterfeyt, and of no Authority.

Likewise, he suspecteth the Questions attributed to S. Basil, Anno 370.
Bell. l. 1. de amiss. gra. c. 13. sect. respond^o.
to be none of his, but a miere counterfeyt.

The like says Possevin, of the Questions attributed to Athanasius, Anno 340.
Possevin, apparat. sac. tit. Athanasius.
that they are mierlie counterfeyt.

In like manner, the same Possevin, shows, that many Treatises attributed to
S. Ambrose, Anno 370. Possevin. in appara^^^. tit. Ambrosi^s.
are surely only Counterfeytes, as, De virtutum and vitiorum, conflictu,
expositio fidei, libellus de sp. sancto, liber de concord. Mathei and Lucae;
liber de poenitentia, ad poenitentiam ex^ortatio, de ^rigine and moribus
Brachamorum, expositio in Cantica, and Epistola ad Demetriadem, ac opuscula.
And as for his Commentaries on Saint Paul's Epistles, Bellarmine says, Bell.
l. 2. de lib. a^b. c. 14. sect. respondeo.
they are surely none of his, but counterfeyt.

As concerning Chrysostom, Anno 400. Bell. lib. 2. de ^^ch. c. 22.. Respondeo.
Bellarmine shows, that those Books attributed to him, are counterfeyt: to
wit, his Commentary on the Psalms, Ibid.
and his Homilies on Matthew, called, Opus imperfectum: as also, that his
Liturgy is counterfeyt, appears heere-by, because Prayer is made there-in
for Pope Nicolas, who almost 300 years lived after Chrysostom.

Of those works also that go under the name of Augustine, Anno 410.
those he discards, as counterfeyt: to wit, 1, 1. Bell. l. 3. de sanct. c. 4.
2. Bell. l. 2. de sacram. c. 10. 3. L. 1. de extrem. vnct. c. 4. 4 L. 2. de
gra. (...) l. arb. c. 3. 5. L. 1. de ^ap. c. 6. 6. L. 3. de penit. c. 9. 7. L.
6. de amiss. gra. c. 2. 8 L. 3. de Eccl. c. 6.
his Exposition of the Apocalypse: 2, his Questions upon the Old and New
Testament: 3, his Book, De visitatione infirmorum: 4, his Book, De
Predestinatione and gratia: 5, his Book, De Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus: 6, his
Book; De vera and falsa poenitentia: 7, his Book called Hypognosticon, he
pronounces also suspicious: and last, his Book Contra Donatistas, he
declares to be corrupt.

Besides the former also, Possevin declares, that those Books following,
attributed to Augustine, are none of his, Possevm, I^s. in app^r. tit. August.
De vita eremitica, Epistola ad Cyrillum, Epistola 16, ad Bonifacium, Liber de
Spiritu and anima, Liber de speculo, Liber de conflictu virtutum and vitiorum,
item Liber de Antichr^sto. Also he shows, that those are suspect, his
Exposition upon the Gospel, and Epistles of John, his book De Pastoribus, De
Ovibus, De Disciplina Christiana, De Homiliis, and De verbis Apostoli.

Of those works in like manner, which pass under S. Ierome's name, Anno 390.
Salm. Ies^^^ 2 Thessalonians. 2. desp. 2.. tertia spici^^.
Salmeron declares, that his Notes and Commentaries on all Paul's Epistles,
are counterfeyt. Senensis likewise disclaimeth his Commentaries on the
Proverbes, both for vnlyknesse of Style: and that the Author on the 30 Chapter
commenting, S^^en. app. l. 4. tit. Hiero^^mes.
alleges by name S. Jerome, upon Jeremy.

Bellarmine in like manner declares, that Book attributed to Eusebius
Emissenus, Anno 340. Bell. l. 2. de Euchar. c. 30.
to be a plain Counterfeyt; which is clear by this, That he makes mention
there-in of the Pelagian Heresy, which was not broached long after his death.

And for Eusebius Pamphylus Anno 330. Di^t. 15. cap. Sancta.
History, as the Council of Rome defined it to be an Apocryphal writing,
Bell. lib. 1. de pont. c. 26.
so Bellarmine likewise affirms it to be corrupt.

Thus of the Fathers, of the first five Ages, in the primitive Church, we see,
how many are confessed by our Adversaries, to be corrupt and counterfeyt:
and so, what unsure Warrant Men have to gather, or ground their Faith, on such
Writs and Works. Which made their own Senensis ingenuouslie to confess,
Senens. l. 4. in titulis patrum.
saying, Incertum est quid definiant Patres, idque propter libros suppositios,
qui falso Patribus ascribuntur, etc. Et propter foedissimas corruptelas quae
eis inscribuntur: that is, It is uncertain, what the Fathers define, and that
both for the counterfeyt Books, which falselie are ascrybed unto them, as also
for the most filthy Errors that are insert into them. More of which
Bastardly Brood, who pleases to see, he may behold in the fore-sayde
Senensis, and Possevin's apparatus; and especially of late, in Master Cook, an
English Man, an Army of such discovered, bred most of them in the Brayne-sicke
Pates of idle Monks, and forged on the Anvill of doting Superstition, for
building up of Babell, and opposing the Truth: And like that Harlot before
Solomon, who would have Mothered her dead Child upon her, who truly did owe
the living; So have they Fathered their Bastardly Brood, upon the LORD'S
Worthies, as if they had been their legittimate seed, and brought them with-in
the Sanctuary, Vt ementitis titulis fidem authoritatemque erroribus suis
conciliarent, (as says Senensis:) that is, That by their counterfeyt Titles,
they might conciliate trust and authority unto their own Errors: and which
practice, of bringing up such deluding Counterfeytes, for true Samuels,
Erasmus, declar. 91. ad censur. theolog. (...).
Erasmus shows was so ryfe in the time of the seventeenth General Council,
when Error began to prevayle, that he says, Scatebant omnia libris falso
celebrium virorum titulo commendatis: that is, All places were full of Books,
set forth under the false Title of excellent Men's Names. The Devil having
begun this Practice, even in the Apostles own times, when the Mystery of
Iniquity began to work, which made the Apostle Paul to be therefore so
careful, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
to fore-warne the Thessalonians, That they should not be deceived, neither by
word, or alleged Tradition, nor by Writ, as from him, that is, by
counterfeyt Epistles in his name, to believe the Lord's Day to be then at
hand. And which Practice, we see, continued after the Apostles days most
perniciouslie: Therefore the Arrians wrote a Letter to Constantine, under the
name of Athanasius: the Eutychians also a Letter, against Cyrillus
Alexandrinus, being dead, under the name of Theodoret: and the Mani^heans, and
others, many Books; some Fathered on Adam, some on Enoch, ^ome on the
Apostles, and Disciples of Christ, and some on Christ Himself; who were
rejected, (as Augustine says) Non quod eorum qui Deo placuerunt reprobetur
authoritas, sed quod ista non credantur esse ipso^um: that is, Not that the
authority of such Men, Aug. l. 18. de (...) 38.
who have pleased God, is rejected; but because it is believed, that those are
not the works of such Men, but of other men (says Beda) under those men's
names. Beda, in Epist. Iudae.
But the last, tho not the least, crafty Counterfeyts, and Corrupters, that
ever Satan prevayled by, for erecting his kingdom of Darkness, and a Throne
to the Vicar of his Power, was that Locust brood, which came out of the
bottomless Pit; Revel. 9.
even that numerous and noisome swarm See Bell. de scrip. Eccl. ad an. 396.
of Monks, and other Popish Clergy: to whom I may say, as Jerome said to
Ruffinus, for preassing to substitute a certain Arrians Book, for Theophilus
Martyr, In the Day of Judgment, consider what they will answer to the
Complayntes of such holy Men, Whose Reverend Names they have so Roguishlie
abused, unto most wicked purposes.

AN APPENDIX, For discerning of Counterfeyts.
FIrst, there are 30 Epistles, or there-about, of ancient Roman Bishops,
obtruded unto us, for the Pope's Supremacy, and other Popish Errors, which
to be altogether counterfeyt, heere-by may be known.

1. By the matter contained in them, of pleading for Supremacy, which was
never so much as once thought upon by those holy Bishops, as their own
Duaren, Duaren. l. 3. de saer. Eccl. m^nist. c. 1.
out of ancient Records, testifies, and concludes, saying, Nec dubium est
quin vetustiores, sancteor^sque urbis Romae Episcopi, sede Ecclesiaque propria
contenti, ^e^quis Episcopis Ecclesiarum ipsis commissarum liberam
administrationem reliquerint, quasi urbis unius magis quam orbis Episcopi: that
is, It is no doubt, but that the more ancient and holy Bishops of Rome,
contenting themselves with their own proper Seat, and Church, did leave to
other Bishops the free administration of their Churches in like manner; as
being Bishops rather of one City, than of the whole World, (to wit, by the
new, and now claimed universal Supremacy.) A Pope of their own testifying
likewise, Aeneas Sylvius, alias P^us, 2. Epist. 22^.
that before the Council of Nice, small respect was had to the Church of
Rome, but every Bishop lived to himself: Duaren, l^co supra cit. Cusan.
concord. l. 2. c. 12.
and as the same Duaren, and Cardinal Cusanus testifies, it being but later,
that the Bishops that succeeded those, did far transgress those limits of
ancient Moderation.

Next, those Epistles are farced with the injunction of an heap of
Ceremonies, which were not, not only in their times heard of, but a long time
after in the Church of CHRIST, Aug. Epist. 119. ad la^^^^rium, B. Rhenan.
an^ot. in T^rt. de corona (...) Sa^n. I^s. tom. 9. tract. 32. p. 253.
as Augustine, and Rbenanus witnesses: and the reason vvhere-of, their own
Salmeron gives to be this, Quia primitivi magis essentialibus fid^i
plantandis, quam ceremoniis vacabant: that is, Because the primitive Bishops
did vake more, and ^ooke care to plant the essential Doctrines of Faith, than
to plant Ceremonies in the Church of CHRIST.

2. By the manner, or form of speech used in them, as by a clear Shibboleth,
they may be discerned counterfeyt; being written in such a barbarous sort of
Diction, which was no ways to be heard, especially amongst such learned
Bishops, as then were in Rome; the Latin Language in those times being there
(as it were, at the Fountain head) pure, terse and neat, in the mouths of
all Men.

3. Their Style is all one, which never happens to be so, without diversity,
amongst diversity of W^^ters, except these (...) only: who were the Spirits
Pen men, of Sacred and holy Scripture, where one was only Indyter, although the
Scribes were diverse.

4. There is no alleadgeance of them, in the most famous Councels, by any
Roman Bishops, or their Deputies, where either Laws were made against any
such Supremacy, as in the Councels of Constantinople, Chalcedon, Conc^l.
Const^^t. c. 5. Con^l^. Chal^ed (...) 16. Council. Ephesians. c. 6.
and Ephesus, or where hottest contestation was for any such; either by the
Bishop of Rome, for himself, as in the fact of Zozimus, at the Council of
Carthage, or in the impugning the vsurpatio^ of it by another, as in the
writings of Gregory is apparent, against the Patriarch of Constantinople.

5. There is no mention of those Epistles in the works and writings of the most
ancient and primitive Doctors, that either lived then, or a long time
there-after, in the first 400 years, and above: which doubtless, if any such
had been, they had not escaped so their notice, nor they omitted some-where,
and upon some occasions, to made mention thereof.

Secondly, for discerning between the true vvrytinges of Fathers, and those
that are counterfeyt, and palliate under their names.

1. The diversity of the Style, discovers the diversity of the writers, to a
judicious Remarker; so that, as Augustine speaks of Cyprian, Aug. Epist. 48.
saying, Cypriani stylus habet propriam quandam faciem, qua possit agnosci:
that is, Cyprian's Style has a certain proper Face, or resemblance, where-by
it may be known: Even so, the very like may be said of others. And by this
Note of Cognizance, Bellarmine himself makes sequestration, of sundry
Patches, from the other Works of ancient Writers, whose name they pretend.

2. The gross Slips, which are found in those counterfeyt Additions show, that
they go masked only, under false Titles, which proceeds from Ignorance, or
neglect of computation of Times: and those Slips are either in nomination of
persons, or recording of Heresies, or mentionating of Actions.

By the first sort, are discovered, Justinius Questions to be none of his,
because in the 82 Question, mention is made of Origin, who was not borne an
hundredth and od years after. So is Dionysius Areopagita, dignosced to be
counterfeyt, in hi^ Book, De Divinis nominibus; Clements Stromateus being
cited, who lived not 200 after. So is Chrysostom's Liturgy, Pope Nicolas
being made mention of there-in, who lived almost 300 years after. So are
Eucherius Commentaries, where-in he cites Gregorius, who lived 100 years
there-after. As also, so are judged Saynct Ambrose Epistles: in the 82
where-of, mention is made of Venice, which was not builded, nor begun, long
after his death.

By the second sort, are discovered, Cyprian's Exposition of the Creed, to
be none of his; Because Arrius, Eunomius, and Photinus, Heretics, who were
not borne in Cyprian's time, are by him refuted. So is that book of Eusebius
Emissenus, dignosced to be counterfeyt; wherein he makes mention of the
Pelagian Heresy, which was not a long time broached after his death. In like
manner, Saynct Ambrose Epistles are discovered, to be of the same Stamp,
where-in the same Heresy is mentionated: which unto Saynct Ambrose was
utterly unknown. And Tertullian's book, De Trinitate, is made to march in
the same Rank; Because the Sabellians are there refuted, who rose not in his
time.

By the last sort, is that Epistle of Pope Clement, Bell l. 3. debo^. (...)
sect. (...) rum.
to S. James, Bishop of Jerusalem, by Bellarmine himself thus proven to be
counterfeyt; Because Saynct James died seven years before Saynct Peter's
death; after whom Clement then only succeed^d: and therefore being Bishop
seven years after the death of Saynct James, could not therefore as Bishop of
Rome written to Saint James, who had died (as said is) seven years before.

An-other notable Example I will set down, How that counterfeyt Letter, (...)
206.
of that notable Popish Impostor, as written by Saynct Cyrill, Bishop of
Jerusalem, unto Saynct Augustine, touching the Miracles of Saynct Jerome, is
clearlie discovered. This counterfeyt Peddler, sharply taxes the Grecians, for
their denial of Purgatory, saying, These wicked Sectaries did also maintain,
That there was no place of Purgatory, where-in the Souls, which had not done
full Penance for their sins in this world, might be purged, (says he.)
Then he tells a Tale, how Saint Jerome, being at that time after his death
with God, for the confutation of this New-sprung-vp Heresy, raised up three
Men from the dead, after that he had first led their Souls into Paradise,
Purgatory, and Hell: to the end, that they might make known to all men, the
things that were done there. Now remarke, that Saynct Cyrill, who is made the
Relater to Saynct Augustine, of this Miracle, which Saynct Jerome wrought after
his death, died before Saynct Jerome, the space of 30 years, (as is known to
every one, who knows the History of those times.) And so he makes Saynct
Cyrill to write 30 years after his death; as if he had been the Surviver of
Saynct Jerome: where-as, on the contrary, Saynct Jerome was his Surviver so
long after. And therefore, it would have fitted him, rather to write of any
thing, that fell forth after the death of Saynct Cyrill, than Saynct Cyrill to
have related, what befell after the death of Jerome. And yet, not-with-standing
of the palpablenesse of such Forgerie, Suarez, in 3. part. Thomae. tom. 4.
disp. 45. sect. 1.
Suarez is not ashamed, to bring such Baggage as this, in the clear Nooneday,
to purchase Credit of Antiquity, to their new Staple of Purgatory: while as
their own B. Fisher, playnlie proclaymeth, that it is but Sero cognitum and
receptum: that is, That it is but of late only known, Ross^ns. adv. Luther.
art. 18. p. 314.
and received in their catholic Church: De quo apud priscos illos, nulla vel
quam rarissima fiebat mentio, sed and Graecis ad bunc usque diem non est
creditum Purgatorium esse: that is, Of the which (says he) there is no
mention at all in the Ancients, or if there was any, it was most seldom; and
even unto this day, the Grecian Church believes no Purgatory. And yet
remarke, how this Impostor would have clear mention made thereof, in a most
ancient Doctor, and a Grecian Father to patronize, what the whole Grecian
Church hitherto ever did reject.

3. The contrariety that is found in the writings of Ancients, discovers
clearlie, that many things go under their names ofttimes, whereunto they
were never accessorie: and by this Bellarmine himself proves, that pretended
Epistle written by Pope Clement, to S. James the Apostle, to be a plain
Counterfeyt; it being maintained there-in, That all things should be common:
which elsewhere S. Clement had refuted. And therefore, Quis credat ea a S.
Clemente Christianis tradi, Bell. l. 3. de bonis oper, in part. c. 11.. caterum.
(says Bellarmine) quae ipse idem alibi a Faustiniano ethnico refutavit? that
is, Who can believe, (says he) that such things were taught unto Christians by
S. Clement, which he himself elsewhere did refute, against an Heathen
Faustinian?

4. The Application also of the pretended writings of the most ancient
Doctors, unto those times where-in they lived, will serve much lyke-wyse, to
discover such Counterfeyts, which march insidiouslie under wrong Colors: as
when we see them made Patrons of Errors, which were never hatched, nor durst
peep out, in the Sunne-shyne of those clear Days: as namely, Bell. lib. 1.
de sanct. c. 19. Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 6. Bell. lib. 2. de mon. c. 27.
Bell. ib 3. de Euchl c. 2. Bell. l. de b^pt. c. 25. Bell. lib. 2. de pont* c.
14.
Dionysius, the Areopagite, in the Apostles times, to maintain the Invocation
of Saynctes, and Purgatory: Martialis, the Disciple of Christ, to maintain
forced Continency in the Clergy: Justinius Martyr, to maintain
Transsubstantiation, Unction in Baptism, and Papal Confirmation: and
Clements, the very Successor of Peter, immediately, to stand for the
Supremacy: with many such, which the purity of those primitive times,
together with the deposition of after Records, and History, joined often times
with the very confession of our Party, declares, and discovers
manifestly, their Forgerie.

CHAP. VIII. 1. How the Romanists adduce the Testimonies of Fathers, against us
as true; whom not withstanding them selves else* where do pronounce
Cou^t^^f^yt.
IT is reported of one Evagrius Po^ticus Hype^borita, that he ^et upon the
Works of one Xistus Pythagoreus, an Heathen Philosopher, the counterfeyt name
of one Xistus, a Martyr; and so cunningly brought out of him, so many
Testimonies, against the true Orthodox, in the Point of Man's natural
Ability, and Perfection; that Saynct Jerome restifieth of him, Hieron. Epist*
ad T^siphontem.
That they who knew not, that it was the book of an Heathen Philosopher,
might have been easily induced, under the borrowed Name, and fair Show, of
the book of a Martyr, to drink of the Golden Cup of that Whore of Babylon:
His practi^e being there-in, like that where-of Lucretius speaks; Ac veluti
pueris absynthiatetra medentes
Came dare cona^tur, prius oras pocula circu^
Contingunt, dulci mellis flavoque color.


That is: Like those, for Cure, who give to Babes
Fell Worme-wood to drink out,
With yealow and sweet Honey first,
They stroke the Cup about.


Even so, how cunning our Adversaries are against us, in the like practice, for
oppugning the Truth, adducing Testimonies of Antiquity, under the borrowed
Name of Holy and ancient Fathers, which the force of Truth makes them
elsewhere, to acknowledge and confess to be counterfeyt; let the ensewing
practice, and these proofs, testify.

A
First, Arnobius is adduced by Bellarmine, against us, in the matter of
Free Will, Bell. l. 5. de great. and l. arb. c. 26.. 21.
as a most ancient Father: but is disclaymed elsewhere by him, as a m^ere
Counterfeyt, and Novice. L. 4. de amiss. gra. c. 9.. hic vero.


Next, Abdias his Works, are cited by Bellarmine, for Monastical life: L. 2.
de m^n. c. 27.
and yet he confesses, that the Learned of their own Church, hold the same
for counterfeyt. L. 2. de bon* oper. c. 24.. s^d.


Again, Amphilochius his Vita S. Basilii, is cited by Bellarmine, to prove,
That under the Spece of Bread only, the Eucharist of old was had to the
Sick, Lib. 4. (...) Euch. c. 24.
and for proof of Papal confirmation: L. de confiz. c. 5.
and yet elsewhere, without any doubt, he pronounces that book, to be a
false Counterfeyt. Bell. descrip. Eccl. ann. 380.


Lyke-wyse, Athanasius Sermon, De Sanctissima Deipara, is cited by Bellarmine,
for Invocation of Sayncts, Bell. l. 3. de Sanct. c. 16.
but is declared by Baronius, to be a miere Counterfeyt. B^r^n. tom. ^. ann.
4^. nu^. 19.


So is the 82 Epistle of Saynct Ambrose, cited by Bellarmine, for the Vow of
single life: Bell. lib. 1. de Cler. c. 16.
yet Possevin grants, that it is none of Ambroses. Possevin* ^pp^r. verb.
Ambrosius.


In like manner, Anselmus is cited by Bellarmine, for Purgatory, Bell. l. 1.
de purg. c. 6.
for Real presence, Lib. 2. de Eu^^. c. 36.
for the Virgins immaculate conception, L. 4. de amiss. gra. c. 15.
and for Free Will: L. 5. de gra. and l. arb. c. 26.
and yet Possevin shows, that one Herveus Natalis, who lived only 250 years
since, is the writer of those Commentaries, falselie attributed to Anselmus.
Possev. appar. ver^o Herveus.


More-over, Anacletus Epistles are cited by Pighius and Stapleton, for the
Supremacy, Pigh. Hierar. l. 6. c. 6.
and yet Cardinal Cusanus pronounces them, but miere forgerie. Cusan.
concord. cathol. l. 3. c. 34.


B.
Again, Boniface second Epistle, is cited by Pighius, Harding, Stapleton, and
Turrecremata, to prove, that the African Council submitted themselves to the
Pope: Tur. ^l^mma de Eccl. l. 3. c. 49.
yet Bellarmine declares, that this Epistle is but suspicious, and
counterfeyt. Bell. l. 2. de pon^. c. 25.


C.
Likewise, Bellarmine cites Cassianus, as a very ancient Father, in the
matter of Prayer, Bell. lib. 1. de bon. oper. c. 2.
of Popish Satisfaction, Live. 4. de po^n^t. cap. 9.
of Justification, Lib. 1. de Justice. cap. 13.
and set fasts L. 2. de bon. oper. cap. 2.
against us: and yet he acknowledges, that Book elsewhere, to be but
Apocryphal, and counterfeyt, Lib. 6. de great. cap. 4.. accedat.
and condemned as such, in a Roman Council, under Pope Gelasius.

In which Council in like manner, was the Canons of the Apostles, declared to
be such also; Great. did. 15 cap. sancta.
and yet as the true Canons of the Apostles, are they cited by Bellarmine, for
proof of Easters observation, B^ll. lib. de Sanct. cap. 12.
and Papal Confirmation. Lib. 2. de Confir. cap. 8.


Likewise, Bellarmine cites that Sermon, De ablutione p^dum, as S. Cyprian's,
against us, to prove the indeleble Character of holy Orders: Bell. lib. 1* de
Sa^. ^rd. c. 10.
and yet elsewhere he pronounces the same, Apocryphal. Lib. 1. de p^^n^t. c.
10.


So are Pope Clement's Epistles cited by Bellarmine, for the Supremacy, Lib.
2. de pon^. cap. 1^.
reservation of the Sacrament, Lib. 4. de Euch. cap. 5.
and Popish Confirmation: Lib. ^. de confir. cap. 3.
and yet elsewhere he shows, that it is uncertain who writ them: Lib. 2.
de p^nt. c. 7.
and some he prooveth clearlie, to be mierlie counterfeyt. Lib. 3. de bon.
oper. c. 11.


Of the same Stamp he acknowledges Calixtus Epistle, the first of Clement's,
the third of Anacletus, the first of Anicetus, the first of Victors, the first
of Zepherius, the second of Calixtus, the first of Lucius, and of Marcellus,
the third of Eusebius, and the first of Melchiades, and Marcus, which
notwithstanding are all adduced, by him and others, ordinarily to prove the
Pope's Supremacy. Lib. 2. de pont. c. 14.. ad ha^.


Under the same Colors also marches Cornelius Epistle, cited by Bellarmine,
for prayer to the Dead: Lib. 1. de Sanct. c. 19.
which Baronius declares assuredly to be but falselie fathered. Baron.
(...). to^. 2. an. 221.


Also, that Book, De Cardinalibus operibus Christi, is cited by Bellarmine, as
Cyprian's, for Transsubstantiation, Bell. l. 3 de Euch. c. 20.
and by sundry others, for other points of Popery: and yet he elsewhere
clearly disclaimeth the same, as a crafty counterfeyt. Lib. 2. de confir. c. 6.


In like manner, is that Epistle written to S. Augustine, of S. Ierome's
Miracles, cited as S. Cyrils, (as I showed before by Suarez) and by Eckius, for
Purgatory, Eck. ^om. 2. d^m. ^. advent.
and by others, for the Real presence, and worshipping of Saints: which
Possevin notwithstanding, and that which is before discovered, declares to be
a gross Forgerie. Poss. appar. 1. Aurelius Augustinus.


D
Again, Bellarmine cites Dionysius Areopagita, for Invocation of Sayncts,
Bell. l. 1. de sanct. c. 19.
Purgatory, Lib. 1. de purg. c. 6.
and Monastical life, Lib. 2. de mon. c. 5. Rhem. in Act. 17.34.
etc. And this is that famous S. Dennice (say the Rhemists) who prooveth
playnlie almost all things that the Church now uses in the ministration of the
holy Sacrament, and affirms, that he learned them of the Apostles: giving
also testimony for the Catholic Faith, in most things now contraverted, so
playnlie, that our Adversaries have no Shift, but to deny this Dennice to have
been the Author of them. And yet, what says their own Bellarmine of this
book? It is uncertain at all, (says he) if that book be Saynct Dennices,
whose name is pretended. Bell* lib. 2. de. confirm. cap. 7.. ^am.


Lyke-wyse, Damasus Pontifical is cited by Bellarmine, to prove, that Election
of Bishops, only belongs to the Pope, Lib. 1. de Cler. cap. 8.
for Chrisme in Baptism, Lib. 1. de bapt. cap. 27.
for Images, Lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 9
and Ceremonies of the Mass: Lib. 2. de Miss. cap. 14.
and yet he says elsewhere, that it is notorlie known, that Damasus was
never the writer of that book, but Anastasius only, the master of the Pope's
Library. Bell. de Scrip. Eccl. ann. 367.


Damascen in like manner, his book, De iis qui in fide migrarunt, is cited by
Bellarmine, for the proof of Purgatory, Bell. lib. 1 de purg. c. 6
and yet elsewhere he disclaymeth the same, to be Damascen's at all, and
says, that most easily the same may be proven. Lib. 2. de purg. c. 8..
prima.


E
Again, Eusebius his third Epistle is cited by Bellarmine, for the Supremacy,
Lib. 2. de pont. c. 14.
and yet he professes, that it is no-wyse certain, who is the writer
thereof. L. ^. de confir. c. 7.


Eucherius Commentaries also, on Genesis, and the Kings, are cited by
Bellarmine, for Free Will, L. 5. de gra. and l. arb. c. 22.
and the Mass: L. 1. de missa. c. 6
but he declares elsewhere, that those cannot be Eucherius books, seeing he
often times cites Gregory, who lived not an hundredth years after. Bell. de
scrip. Eccl. ann. 440.


In like manner, Eusebius Epistle of the death of Saynct Jerome, is cited by
Peresius, for Transsubstantiation, Peers. de trad. part. 2. f. 1^8 b.
and by Durandus, for the adoration of the Host: Dur. de r^tib. Eccl. l. 2. c.
40.
and yet this Epistle not only (says Bellarmine) does it manifest the
Noveltie thereof, but also both Ignorance and Deceit. Bell. de scrip. Eccl.
an. 390.1. Hi^ronymus.


F.
Again, Fabianus Epistle is cited by Bellarmine, to prove Traditions, Bell. l.
1. de verb. c. 16.
and by the Rhemists, to prove Transsubstantiation; Rhem in act. 8.10.17.
but that this Book is counted counterfeyt, and Apocryphal, Bellarmine
elsewhere clearlie grants unto us. Bell. l. 2. de confir. c. 8.. secun^o
pre^. ex council


G.
Gregory Nyssen, his 8 books, De Philosophia, are cited like-wise by
Bellarmine, for Free Will, Bell. l. 4. de gra. and l. ar^. c. 14.
and yet elsewhere he confesses, that they look no ways like such a man's
books. Bell. de script. Eccl. an 380.


So are Pope Gregorie's Epistles frequentlie adduced, to prove, that Sacraments
confer Grace, Ex opere operato, L. 2. de sacram. c. 7.
for Popish Confirmation; L. 2. de confirm. c. 3.
and that Concupiscence, after Baptism, is no Sin: L. 5. de amiss gra. c. 8.
and yet he confesses elsewhere, that they are corrupt and vitiate. L. 2. de
confi^. 12.
And Possevin declares also his book on the Canticlos, to be a miere
counterfeyt, which Bellarmine cites for the fore-saide Confirmation. Possiv.
appar. ^. Greg. Mag.


H.
Again, Hegesippus book is cited by Bellarmine, to prove Peter's being,
Bell. l. 1. de co^fir. c. 3. and 8.
and dying at Rome: L^^. 2. de pont. c. 3.
and yet Baronius testifies, that this book is a plain counterfeyt. Bar.
ann. tom. 2. a^. 167. number. 15.


So are Hermes works, called Pastoralis, cited by Coccius, for the Angel
Custos, and for Purgatory: Cor. ^om. 2. l. 7. art. 5.
but Possevin declares, that by the most Learned it is discovered, and
declared a Counterfeyt. Possev. appar. 1. pastor.


I
In like manner, Justin Martyr, his Questions are cited by Bellarmine, for
Unction in Baptism, Bell. lib. de bapt. c. 25.
for Papal Confirmation, Lib. de co^fir. c. 5.
and Transsubstantiation; Lib. 3. de Euch. c. 2.
but elsewhere he declares them, no ways to be Iustine Martyr's, but a more
recent counterfeyts. Lib. 1. de sanct. c. 4.. tertius.


So also is Saint James Lyturgie alleged by ^ellarmine, for the Mass, L. 1.
de miss* c. 18.
whereas the word (...) used there-in, which began after Origen's days, (as
witnesses Senensis) Senen bibl. l. 4.1. Origenes.
as also the commemoration of Confessors therein, which was far later in
Sylvester's days, as testifies Pope Innocent the third, In^^^. ^. de mis^ r.
mis^^ l. 3. c. 10.
shows clearlie, that it is a counterfeyt.

L
Again, Lucius Epistle is cited by Bellarmine, to prove the Pope's Supremacy,
Bell. l. 2. de (...) c. 14.
and his Infallibility: Lib. 3. de (...) 5.
and yet he affirms clearlie, that there is such a doubt, who is the writer,
that he dare not assuredly pronounce, that Lucius was the Author. L. 2. de
pont. c. 14.


Lyke-wyse, he cites Lactantius Verses, De Passione, for Adoration of the
Cross, L. 2. de Imag. c. 28.
and yet elsewhere he confesses, that the Author of those Verses, and of the
other, on the Resurrection, is not surely known. L. de script. Eccles.


In like manner, Linus works are cited, by Coccius, for Apparition of Souls,
and establishing of Purgatory: Coc. tom. 1. l. 5. de s^nct. art. 9.
and yet Bellarmine declares, that both Prochorus, (which some cite) and Linus
works, are but false, and counterfeyt. Bell. l. 2. de pont. c. 9.. sed.


M
Again, Marcus Epistle is cited by Bellarmine, for the Pope's Supremacy,
B^ll. l. 2. de pont. c. 14
and Infallibility: I^b. 3. de pont. ^. 5.
and yet he grants elsewhere, That it is most sure, that the same is
counterfeyt. Bell. de scrip. Eccl. a^^. 340. and 1145.


So does he cite Marcellus, and Melchiades Epistles, for the same Supremacy:
Lib. ^. de pon^. c. 14.
but grants elsewhere, that he dare not say assuredly, that they are
theirs. Ibidem.


O
In like manner, Bellarmine adduceth Origen's Homilies on the Gospels, for
popish Real presence: Lib. 2. d^ Euch. ^. 8.
but anon he disclayme^h them elsewhere, and says, they a^e none of
Origen^. Bell. de scrip. Ec^l.


So are his Homilies, on the Psalms, cited by Bellarmine, for the same former
point, and Auricular Confession: L. 3. de pe^^^ ^. 7.
and yet he freely confesses elsewhere, that it is in doubt, who is the
Writer. L. de s^ri^t. Eccles.


P
Again, Primasius Commentaries on the Hebrews, are cited by Bellarmine, for
popish Carnal presence, Lib. 2. de Euch. c. 31.
and Sacrifice of the Masle: L. 1. de missa. c. 6.
and yet Salmeron shows, that Primasius never wrote them, but Haymo, a late
bishop in Germany. Sal. tom. 1^. disp. 10. in Ep. Paul^.


V
In like manner, Vrbanus Epistle is cited by Bellarmine to prove Confirmation:
Bell. l. 2. de confir. c. 7.
and yet he professes, that it is no-wyse sure, if he be the Author of this
Epistle, or if it be a Counterfeyt. Ibidem.. ad haec.


The Rhemists also, how no less impudent they are, than others, in obtruding
to the Readers of the Rhemish Testaments, false Counterfeyts, for famous
Fathers: and so seducing simple Souls, make them, in the golden Cup of
pretended Antiquity, to drink only the giddie Wine of superstitious
Idolatry, let these few Examples, in place of many, testify.

Rhem. in Act. 17.34.
First, they obtrude the book of Dionysius Arcopagita, as making in all the
points of Popery, almost alto-gether for them: which he learned (say they)
from the very Apostles. And yet, Bell. l 2. de confir. c. 7.. j^m.
besides Bellarmine's confession, of the uncertainty of the Author, it is
clearlie proven, even by their own side, and the book it self, that it is
but a rank Counterfeyt, as may be seen in our seventh Chapter.

Lyke-wyse, Rhem. on A^^. ^.10.17.
for Popish Confirmation, they produce Pope Fabianus Epistle, which Bellarmine
tells them clearlie, Bell. l. 2. de confir. c. 8.. s^cundo.
is accounted by sundry, to be counterfeyt.

Again, they bring in Ambrose 82 Epistle, Rhem. on 1. Cor. 15.32. Possevin.
appar. ^. Ambrosius.
for the merit of Fasting, which their own Possevin declares heere-by, to be
a miere Counterfeyt; Because there is made mention in that Epistle, of Venice,
which was not founded long after Saynct Ambrose death.

In like manner, Saynct Jerome on the Epistles, Rhem. on R^m. 3.20.
is cited by the R^emists, for Justification by Works: and yet Bellarmine
tells them, Bell. l^b. 4. de verbo c. 5.. Hu.
That this book is a shameless Counterfeyt; and has for its Author, rather
the Heretic Pelagius, than such an holy Father.

So are Chrysostom's Homilies, upon Mark* Rhem in Math. 3.1.
cited by the R^emists, to prove the Antiquity of their Monkish Orders: and
yet Bellarmine testifies, Bell. de scrip. Ecel. an. 396. Note*
That they are none of Chrysostom's, but some simple Monke's.

Augustine lyke-wyse, De Ecclesiae dogmatibus, (...) 1. Cer. 11.28. B^ll. lib.
1. de bapt. cap 6.. Nota. M. de Castro. her. 10. tit. baptis.
is cited by the Rhemists, for Auricular Confession: and yet both Bellarmine,
and Alphonsus de Castro, denies it to be Augustines, but a crafty
Counterfeyt's.

So is Augustine, De fide ad Petrum, cited by the Rhemists, Rhem. ^n 1. ^or.
7.9.
to prove, that they are damned, who marry after the Vow of Continency: and
yet Bellarmine declares, Bell. de scrip. Eccl. an. 420.
that it nowayes appears unto any, to be a book of Augustines.

And again, Augustines Questions on the Old and New Testament, are cited by
the Rhemists, Rhem. on Math. 17.27.
for Papal Supremacy: and yet this book is neither Augustines, (says
Bellarmine) nor yet any Catholic Author's. Bell. de gra. prim: homi^^s. c. ^.


We may, concerning such counterfeyt Stuff, there-fore, safely conclude,
where-of at all occasion these Merchands of Babell by Voice and Writ are such
deceitful Venters: eve^ as Bellarmine says of Linus forged History, Bell.
lib. 2. de pont. c. 9.
Historia Lini vere conficta est, and si conficta, non est ullius authoritatis:
that is, The History of Linus, is truly a forged Counterfeyt; and if it be
forged, it is not of any authority at all. Even so may we say of all such
Peddler Trash, (a view of some where-of, we have laid open to judicious Eyes)
that this one Censure may pass on all the Pack, to send them packing for
ever out of open sight; seeing the most part of that which they adduce of
humane Testimony, and obtrude against the Truth, under color and pretext of
Venerable Antiquity, proves plainly but crafty Counterfeyting, and obscure
Forgerie: there-fore, by their own Verdict, we pronounce their Doom, That
they are unworthy of Credit and Authority. Neither marvel we, Revel. 9.
that those Locusts, who are said to have counterfeyt Crowns on their heads,
had lyke-wyse of old such counterfeyting Conceits in their heads; and like
Babels worke-men, that they have been so busy, in the Night time of
Darkness, to prepare so much Stuff, for those Merchands of Babell now: who
for reparing the Ruins of their rottering Kingdom, and the imparing and
impeding the Grouth of the Gospel of Light, are no less busy in venting,
than they were at any time in inventing the same: their Master busily
bestirring himself in his servantes, because his Kingdom is near an end.
Upon both which sorts of his Suppostes, there can no juster Sentence pass in
this purpose, than their own Fellow Parsons pronounces in such case, Parson.
de trip. convers. Angl. pars 1. c. 4. p. 86.
Nebulones esse perditissimos, non solum qui opera spuria claris ascribunt
aut^oribus, verum eos etiam qui pro veris and genuinis obtrudunt: that is, That
they are most damnable Villanes, not only (says he) who ascrybe counterfeyt
works, unto famous Authors; but lyke-wyse they who obtrude them unto any, for
true and upright Wrytinges.

The second part of the VIII. CHAPTER. How the Romanists answer us, when we
adduce the Testimonies of those same Fathers against them, which they obtrude
unto us as true.
1. Disclayming some, as counterfeyt.

2. Alleging of others, That perhaps only they are so.


THE Rhemists call this an old Trick of Heretics, Rhem. in Act. 17.34.
when they were preassed with the Testimonies of ancient Fathers, to deny that
those were the Authors: but some others, of a later age, Rose-w^^d dissert. de
fide hereticis servanda c. 17. p. 191.
and Rose-weed, the Jesuit, says, That this was a common Shift of Heretics,
when they were straited with any clear Testimony of Antiquity, to cry out,
That the book was counterfeit, or corrupt, Hard. respons. ad provoc. ^uc^l:
art. 1.
Evasionem (says Harding) omnium miserrimam, and a ratione and conjuetudine
doctissim^rum alienissimam: that is, A most miserable sort of escaping, (says
he) and most contrarious both to Reason and Custom of the most Learned. And
yet notwithstanding how guilty these Jesuitical Impostors are of this
Practice, which they vpbrayde to others, and how unmindful they are of that
saying, Omni vitio debet carere, qui in alterum paratus est dicere, let these
few Examples that do ensue testify.

First, Bellarmine, (as also the Rhemists) to prove the Pope's Supremacy,
B^ll. li^. 1. de p^nt. c. 10.. terti^s. Rhem. on 1. Tim. ^.15. Bell. lib. 1. de
Euch. c. 13.. Denique
as also Popish Real presence, bring their Testimonies out of S. Ambrose his
Commentaries on Paul's Epistles: and yet when we object a place out of the
same, to prove, that the Sacramental Bread is the representative Body of
CHRIST only, Bellarmine plainly then disclaimeth those Commentaries, and
says, L. 2. de Euch. c. 14.. Diluimus.
they are not S. Ambroses.

Again, L. 1. de v^^bo c. 14. sub fi^em. L. 2. de missa c. 12.. Ad locum.
Bellarmine adduceth Augustine, Ad Orosium, against us, as the true Father, to
prove Ecclesiasticus, to be Canonical Scripture: but declares him
counterfeyt, when we oppose him to him, against the Order of the Mass.

Arnobius also is brought forth, as a most ancient Father, L. ^. de gra. and
l. arb. ^. 26. L. 4 de amiss gra. c. 9.
against us, in the matter of Free Will: but disclaimed elsewhere, when he
makes against him, as (...) and a miere counterfeit.

In like manner, Augustine's Questions, on the Old and New Testament, are
produced against us, as Augustine's own work; L. 1. de missa c. 15. sect. ^.
And.
both to prove the Mass, to be a Sacrifice properly, in one place; as also,
to be propitiatory, in another: but are rejected by the same Bellarmine, L. ^.
de missa. c. 2. sect. Ex Latin^^.
as counterfeit and heretical, when we prove out of the same, That
Sacraments confer not Grace, Bell. lib. 2. de Sacr. c. 10. sect. Resp.
Ex opere operato.

Bell. lib. 1. de ^^n. c ^.. qua^t^m. L. 3. de justif. c. 7.. 5. Basil.
Lyke-wyse, Bellarmine cites S. Basill's Questions, to prove Monastical life,
and a man's incertayntie of his own Salvation: but when we urge against them
those same Questions, against their Distinction of Sin, into Venial and
Mortal, he disclaymeth that book to be Saynct Basill's, L. 1. de amiss. g^a.
^. 13.. Resp.
but one Eustatbius Sebassenus, a condemned heretic.

^. de Euc^. ann^.
More-over, Bellarmine adduceth Saynct Cyprian's Sermon, Le ^oena (...) points
of Popery, L. 2. de missa. c. 2.. ex lati^.
as Transsubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Purgatory, etc. And
yet, when the same is objected against their Mutilation of the Sacrament, L. 1.
de purg. ^. 6.. Haec expos.
by taking away the C^p from the People, he disclaymeth that Sermon to be
Cyprian's, L. 4. de Euch. c. 26. sect. Resp.
but some uncertain Author's.

L 2. de ^on. c. 2. sect. Chrysostom. L. 1. de amiss. gra. c. 10. sect. ^. Ioh.
Again, Bellarmine produces Chrysostom, on Matthew, to prove many Popish
points, as Monastical life, Venial sins, Free Will, Transsubstantiation,
Adoration of the Host, L. 5. de gra. and l. ar^. c. 7.
and against the Magistrates lawful power, in matters of Re^ig^on. But when
we prove out of that same Commentary on Matthew, L. 2. de Euch. c. 22. L. 3.
de Laicu, c. 17. L. 4. de verbo c 11. sect. sexto. Lib. 1. de matrim. c. 9.
sent. secu^du^.
the perfection of Scripture, and that the people should read the same, and
opposes him in the matter of Matrimony; then he disclaymeth that work to be
Saint Chrysostom's, but some Hereticke's, as he pleases to style him.

In like manner, L. 5. de gr^. and l. arb. c. 25.
Bellarmine brings out Clement's Recognitions, for Free Will; Hard. cons^^.
apol. part 1. f. 34.
and Harding brings him for Traditions: and yet, when they are alleged
against the Pope's Succession to Peter, proving, that Peter died not at Rome:
Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 2. sect. add huc.
then he disclaymeth them, as Apocryphal, and counterfeyt.

Damasus lyke-wyse, L. 4. de po^^. c. 4. sect. Damasus. L. 2. de sanct. c. 9.
sect. Damasus.
an ancient Pope, his Pontifical is cited by Bellarmine, to prove the time of
Peter's sitting at Rome, and for the setting up of Images in Churches: but is
rejected, as a Counterfeyt of uncertain authority; when out of the same we
prove, Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 5. sect. Neque multum.
that Linus, whom they make Pope after Peter and Clement, died before Peter
himself: and so improveth the Line of their Papal Succession, as false and
absurd.

Again, Damasus Epistles are urged against us, L. 2. de pont. c. 14. sect.
Secundus.

L. 2. de confirm. c. 3. sect. Septimus.

L. 2. de pont. c. 24. Initio.


to prove Papal Supremacy, and Popish Confirmation: But are disclaymed, as
none of his, when they are opposed against Appeals to Rome.

Lyke-wyse, Damascen is cited by Bellarmine, L. 1. de sanct. c. 13. sect.
de^aque.
against us, to prove the Adoration of Saynctes: but is disclaymed as a
Counterfeyt, when the absurd Tale of their Popes, L. 2. de purg. c. 8. sect
prima.
and other Saynctes, their Freeing of Souls (which were damned) out of Hell,
is objected to them.

L. 4. de Euch. c. ^6. sect. Cyprian.
Epiphanius also, his Epistle to John of Jerusalem, is cited by Bellarmine, in
the matter of the Sacrament: but when the same Epistle is opposed against their
Images, he disclaimeth those words thereof, L. 2, de Imag. ^^ 9, sect. ad
qui^^um.
to be but forged, and counterfeyt.

In like manner, Eusebius Emissenus Homilies are cited by Bellarmine, L. 2, de
san^t. c. 3. sect. Eusebius.

L. 4, de Euch. c. 13, sect. deinde.

L. 2, de Euch. c. 30, initio.


for Adoration of Relics, and that Consecration is by these words, Hoc est
Corpus meum: and yet are elsewhere freely acknowledged, to be none of his.

Ignatius also, a Greek Father, is often times cited by Bellarmine, ^. 2, de
Euch. c. 2, initio.
for sundry points of Popery, as Transsubstantiation, and others: but when he
is adduced clearlie against their Mutilation of the Sacrament, L. 4, de Euch.
c. 26, sect. resp.
Bellarmine answers, That Ignatius Greek Wrytinges, are not much to be
trusted to.

Again, Martialis, as Christe's own Disciple, L. 2, de mon. c. 27, sect. S.
Mart. recog. l. 2, de mon.
is produced by Bellarmine, for the Vow of Chastity, and other points: and
yet, in his Recognitions, he acknowledges both Abdias book, and Martialis,
to be miere Counterfeyts, and of no Authority.

Lyke-wyse, Synopsis Dorothei, is cited by Bellarmine, to prove Peter's
sitting at Rome, L. 2, de pont. c. 4,
as Bishop of that City: but when the same Synopsis is produced, Ibidem c. 2.
prooving, That it was not Peter, but rather Barnabas, that founded that
Church; he d^sclaymeth that book then, as full of Lies, and Forgerie.

L. 2. de Euch. c. 27.
After the like manner, he disclaymeth that book of Pope Gelasius, against
Eutyches, as none of his, when he is cited clearly against Transsubstantiation;
although he be so styled ( Romanus Episcopus) in their own Bibliotheca Patrum,
and that their Massonius lyke-wyse, in the lives of the Popes, coming to
Gelasius, makes mention of this work. And no less causeless also,
disclaymeth he, L. 2. de Im^^. c. 15.
with a shameless forehead, the four books of Charles the Great, against
Images: as lyke-wyse, L. 1. de ^er. c. 22.
that Epistle of Vdalricus, to Pope Nicolas, against forced Continency:
alleging those former, to be none of theirs; and that only, because they
make against him.

I omit the like answer of Gretzer, to Athanasius Synopsis, Great. comment. in
Judith. prol. 4.
against Apocryphal Books.

Of Parsons, Pars. tripl. conv. Ang. part 1. c. 8.
to Elentherius Epistle, to Luci^s, against the Pope's temporal Supremacy.

Of the same Parson's impudent like answer to Bertram's book, Ibidem part
secunda, c. 10.
against Transsubstantiation.

Of Harding's disclayming also Hilarious Epistle, Hard adv. Iuel. ^epli^. contra
sacrific. Miss^. sect. 11.
to his Daughter Afra, against forced Continency.

Of Baronius like rejecting of Pope Leo's Epistle, Baron. epit. ann. 683.
which proves, That Pope Honorius was an Heretic.

And

Of Dureus disclayming that Testimony of Saynct Bernard's, Dureus adv.
Whitaker. l. ^6.
which is produced against the unlawful keeping of impossible and unlawful
Vows.

2. How the Romanists, without any farther Warrant, allege only of some
Fathers, That perhaps they are counterfeyt.
FIrst, when the Treatise of Gregory Nyssen, or his Epistle, is produced
against Pilgrymages, Bell. lib. 3. de cult. sa^ct. c. 8. sect. Ad Mad^burg.
Bellarmine answers thus heere-to, Fortenon est Nysseni: that is, Perhaps
that Epistle is not Gregory Nyssen's.

Again, when Basil is cited against their distinction of Sin, into Mortal
and Venial, Bellarmine answers, L. 1. de amiss. gra. ^. 13.
That probably that work is not Basill's.

Lyke-wyse, when Pope Bonifacius second Epistle, is brought forth, against
papal Supremacy, Bellarmine answers, L. 2. de p^nt c. 25. sect. R^sp.
Valde mihi suspecta est haec Epistola: that is, I suspect that Epistle
greatly.

In like manner, when OEcumenius is adduced, L. 3. de pont. c. 13. sect. Solus.
to prove, that Antichrist shall not sit in the Temple of Jerusalem, Bellarmine
answers, Fortasse depravatus est textus illius: that is, Perhaps his Text, or
Copy, is corrupt, and vitiate.

Also, when pope Honorius own Epistles are exhibited, which prove him to have
been an Heretic, and are insert in the eight General Council, where-in he
was condemned, Bellarmine answers, Bell. lib. 4, de pont. c. 11. sect. ad
primum.
Fortasse illas Epistolas esse confictas, and insertas Concilia generali ab
Hereticis: that is, Perhaps those Epistles were counterfeyted, and inserted in
the General Council, by Heretics.

More-over, when Venerable Beda is adduced, testifying, that this same pope
Honorius was an Heretic, and solemnlie condemned in a General Council as
such, and therefore consequently he prooveth Facto, by deed, against their
doctrine now, That the pope may err; Ibidem, sect. ad. (...).
Bellarmine hereunto answers, Videtur aliquis sciolus addidisse nomen
Honorii in lib^o Bedae: that is, It would seem, that some Smatterer has added
the name of Honorius, in Beda's book.

Lyke-wyse, when in the matter of their superstitious Fast on set Days, a
Canon of the Apostles, and Ignatius Epistle also, are produced against fasting
on Saturday, Bellarmine answers, Bell. l. 2. de bon. oper. c. 18. sect.
Posset.
Potest fieri ut tam in Canone Apostolico, quam in Epistolam Ignati^, solum
probiberetur jejunium diei Dominicae, sed postea a Graecis poste^ioribus
insertum fuerit nomen Sabbathi: that is, It may be, that as well in the Canon
of the Apostles, as in the Epistle of Ignatius, only Fasting on the Lord's
Day was forbidden: but after that, the Grecians, who were later, inserted the
word, Sabbath.

In like manner, when Damasus, the Author of the Pontifical, and their own
Gratian lyke-wise, declares, Great. did. 19. c. Anastasius.
That Pope Anastasius the second, was of one communion with the Heretic
Photinus, Bellarmine answers, Bell. lib. 4. de pont. c. 10. sect. Illud.
Illud de Photino forte est mendaciam: that is, That Relation concerning
Photinus, Perhaps, it is a Lie.

Again, when we produce Socrates Testimony, against the antiquity of their
superstitious fourt^e days Lent, Bell. l. 2. de bonoper. c. 15.. s^d probabi^^.
Bellarmine answers, Probabile est codicem Socratis esse corruptum* that is,
It is lykelie, or may be, that Socrates book be corrupted.

More-over, Council. Romans c. 10.
when a whole Convent of Fathers, in a Roman Council, under pope Sylvester,
are brought forth, against the receiving of young Nuns, forbidding them to
be veiled, before 72 years of age: Yet Bellarmine, Bell. lib. 2. de mon c.
35.. de primo.
without any farther assurance in the contrary, answers only, Fortasse
multo minorem numerum debe^e poni pro 72: that is, Perhaps a far less number
of Years ought to be put there, than 72.

And when a Canon, of the Council of Laterane, is adduced, for the lawfulness
of the Marriage of the Clergy, not reprehended there in the East Church, Bell.
l. 1. de cler. c. 21. ^. ad secu^dum.
Bellarmine answers, Canonem illum forte non esse ullius authoritatis: that
is, That perhaps that Canon is of no authority.

So that, what solid answers these are, to elide that which so clearlie
makes against them; and how they would be hissed at, on our part, let any
impartial Man judge: And yet these are they, who shamelesselie claim all
Antiquity so clearlie to make for them.

As the Lion, there-fore, may be known by his Paw, and Hercules hudge
stature, by his Foot only; So by these few Examples preceding, and from the
practice but of one To wit, Bellarmine.
especially proceeding, we may see, what is the like Trade, and Custom of
the rest.

This is the Direction of that Popish Crew at Duay, Index. exp. ^. Bertramus.
saying of Ancients that make against them, Excogitato commento persaepe
negemus: that is, By devising out a Shift, let us even often times disclaim
them. Which their Cardinal Baronius calls, Baron. annal. tom. 1. an. 32. number.
18.
Honeslum Confugiu^, or an honest way of escaping: (an dishonest, he should
have said.) And their Sanders calls, Sand. l. 2. de ader. Disp. 5. c. 3.
Verissimum and praesentaneum Remedium, A most true, and present Help. And if
they cannot, without gross Impudency, disclaim Auncientes, we see, they
come next to the last Bore of their conjecturall Alleadgeances, of Perhaps, and
I suspect, or It is probable, and would seem, or may be, that they are so,
(as they would have them.) And this is their Non ultra, and hic baerent.
Therefore, justly we see, that we may turn over upon them, that which Heart
says to Raynolds, Heart. cont. Rayn. c. 8. Divis. 3.
Viam tenetis facilem and expeditam, modo strenue per gatis, respuite omnes
authors qui contra vos faciunt, and supposititios esse dicite, it a nempe par
est patronos impudentes, pudendam causam pudendis viis defendere: that is, Ye
have gotten (says he) an easy, and clear way, so that ye cowragiouslie go
forwards there-in, reject all Authors that make against you, and call them
counterfeit: for so it is fit, that shameless Patrons, by shameful vvayes,
should defend a shameful Cause. Their practice herein, being like that of the
Manicheant, (as Augustine shows) concerning Apostolical Writs* Inde probo
(said Faustus the Manichean) hoc illius esse, ^.
illud non esse, quia hoc pro me sonat, illud contrame: that is, Hence I prove
this, to be Apostolical Writ, and that, not to be, because this makes for
me, and that makes against me. Even as Bellarmine has no better Warrant, ^.
to reject Paschasius Testimony, cited against their Mutilation of the
Sacrament, as none of his, but corrupt and vitiate; Because (says he) where
it is said, Bibite, it should have been said, Edite. Which is as much to
say, That Paschasius, is not Paschasius, except he speak in the Roman
Dialect, and frame his Dance, to the Pope's Spring.

CHAP. IX. How the Romanists allege the Fathers for them, in one place and
point of Doctrine; and at their pleasure reject them in another, when they can
neither allege them to be corrupt, nor counterfeyt.
FOR PROBATION heere-of, Bell. lib. 2. de Euch. c. 24.
first, Bellarmine adduceth S. Augustine for him, to prove their sore of Real
Presence in the Sacrament* but with a nore of Ignorance he rejects him, Bell.
^. 1. de po^^. ^. 10.. (...) Aug.
where he expounds by the Rock, whereon the Church is builded, that Christ
only meaned, (revoking any other Exposition that he had made of the same.)
And when we adduce, out of his book, De moribus Ecclesiae, (which they often
cite) Testimonies against their worshipping of Relics, Bellarmine rejects
the same, Bell. lib. ^. de sanct. c. 16. (...) tertis.
with this answer, Scripsit librum binc in primordiis conversionis suae: that
is, He wrote that book in the beginning of his Conversion. Which Answer, how
little it is to the purpose, any Man may see, seeing we find no-wise, that
ever he retreated the same.

Bell. lib. 2. de Euchar. c. 22.
Like-wise, he cites Chrysostom, for the same manner of Real Presence: but
when he is cited, to prove, that the Virgin Marie was conceived in
original Sin, because she actuallie offended; Tolet in Ioh. 2. annet. 5.
Tolet rejects Saynct Chrysostom, and says, That heere-in he is not to
be allowed.

Bell. lib. 2. de Euch, c. 5.
In like manner, Bellarmine adduceth Cyprian, for the same point yet, of Real
Presence: but he rejects him flatly, when he makes against Traditions, L.
^. de verb, c. 11. prosert.
saying, That he wrote that, when he would defend his Error against the
Roman Church.

Saint Jerome also is brought forth, L. 2. de Euch. c. 23.
as a Patron of the same Real Presence: but is roundly rejected in the point
of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, L. 1. de pont. c. 8.. Resp.
saying, that he maintained a very false Opinion.

More-over, Ireneus is cited by Bellarmine, L. 2. de Euch. ^. 6.
for the same preceding point: but is rejected, in his Exposition of the
Number of the Beast's Name, L. 3. de pont. c. 10.. haec.
that it is Lateinus.

Lactantius, like-wise, as a most ancient Father, L. 4. de penit. c. 9.
is adduced by Bellarmine, to prove Popish Satisfaction: but is rejected
roughly, with this Dittie, when he makes against him, as in the matter of
Images, etc. L. 1. de sanct. c. 5. habemus.
Lactantius (says he) fell in many Errors.

Again, through all his Controversies, Origin is cited by Bellarmine, for
special Confirmation, L. 2. de men, c. 11. L. 1. de Christa c. 10.
as of Monastical life, works of Supererogation, and such like: but when in
the matter of Traditions, or other points, he is opposed, then he is
rejected, as one (says Bellarmine) of no Authority. (...). lib. 4. de verbo
cap. 11. sect. item. L. 2. de purg. c 8. sect. septimum.
Yea, more-over, he shows, where he was seen in Hell, with Arrius, and
Nestorius.

Like-wise, Prudentius is adduced by Bellarmine, L. 2. de confir. c. 6.
for Popish Confirmation, Pilgrymage, and vowing to Saints, L. 2. de sanct.
c. 8. and 9.
etc. But when he makes against him, he is rejected roundly, saying, L. 2.
de purg. c. 18 sect. ad secundum.
More poetico lusisse Prudentium: that is, That Prudentius plays himself,
after a poetical manner.

When Ruffinus also seems to make for Adoration of Relics, he is cited by
Bellarmine, L. 2. de sanct. c. 3.
as a most ancient and Reverende Father. But when he clearlie makes against
the Pope's Supremacy, he is very vnmannerlie rejected, L. 2. de pont. c. 13.
sect. observandum.
as one that is false, and untrue.

In like manner, Theophylact is frequentlie cited by Bellarmine, as for
Monastical life, L. 2. de (...). c. 26. L. 1. de pont. c. 25.
and Papal Supremacy: but is rejected thus, when he makes against him,
saying, That he lived in the time of a Schism; L. 2. de Christ^ c. 26. sect.
sex^o.
and therefore his authority is not worthy to be received.

Enthymius, like-wise, is cited by Bellarmine, L. 1. de Christ^ c. 6. L. 1. de
sanct. c. 4. sect. hab^mus.
as one of great authority, when he makes for him: but is thus casten at his
heels, when he makes against him, saying, No^ est adeo a nobis
magnifaciendus: that is, He is not much to be esteemed by us.

Thus may it truly be spoken of the Romanistes, which Anastasius Sinaita
Patriarch of Antioch, reports of the Heretic Severus, in his book written
against the Severians: to wit, Even as he had been the Judge of the quick
and the dead, he so used, at his pleasure, the Fathers of the Church:
receiving whom he pleased, and rejecting in them what-so-ever he listed.
And that this same is done now, by our Adversaries, the preceding Examples do
evidentlie show.

AN APPENDIX. Of the Romanistes, their other shameless and fraudulent form of
Answers, to clear Testimonies of Fathers, objected against them.
1. By giving a Sense, clear contrary to their words.
EXamples heere-of, we have in that Directorie of the Duay Seminary, Inde^
^^purg. tit. Bertramus.
where they ordain, in the book of that ancient Bertram, not only,
Invisibiliter, to be put for, Visibiliter: but thereafter, that the words,
Secundum creaturarum substantiam: that is, According to the substance of the
Creatures; shall be expounded, Secundum externas species Sacramenti: that is,
According to the external qualities, or accidents, of the Sacrament.

No less absurdlie, like-wise, does Bellarmine affirm, That by the substance
of the Elements, which Theodoret avoweth to remain still, as they were
before, after Consecration; that he means, not only bare Accidents to
remain, but the nature only of Accidents to abide, saying, While Theodoret
affirms (says he) that the substance of the Elements abides, B^ll. lib.
2. de Euch. cap. 27. sect. s^d.
and is not changed, he speaks of the Essence and Nature of the Accidents.

But a most pregnant Example of any which we have of late, is that, which is
in the Compende of Becanus Manuell, Becani epit. manual. c. 8. sect. de
communione sub vr^aque specie. conclu^. 3.
a Jesuit: who aunswering to those words of Chrysostom, which are so clear
against the Popish Mutilation of the Sacrament, to wit, Omnibus unus Panis
proponitur, and unum Poculum: that is, To all men who-soever, one Bread is
offered, and one Cup together; Becanus answers, That by the Cup, the Cup is
not meaned, but the Blood, which by concomitance is the Body, and which after
that manner the Laics receive. Whereas the holy Father, Chrysostom, could not
have meaned by the Cup, the blood in the body: seeing by the contrary, the
Cup is ever called, (and that by Christ Himself) The blood that is shed, and
powered out of the body: neither could he possibly more clearlie have spoken,
distinguishing between the Bread and the Cup, and declaring, that under both
kinds, Eating and Drinking, the people of old did duly communicate.

2. How they answer, by tempering the words of the Fathers.
OF this fraudfull Shift, by tempering (as they call it) the words of the
Fathers, to play to their Tune, we have a notable Example, in our fore-saide
Bellarmine: Bell. l. ^. de p^nit. c. 16. sect. hac.
who treating of the Irremissiblenesse of the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
and that it is held to be absolutely such, he says, This appears to be
the mind of Athanasius, Hilarie, Jerome, and Anselmus, on the twelft of
Matthew, Videtur tamen temperanda, (says he) id est, irremissibile esse
ordinary and ut plarimum: that is, But their speech would be tempered, to
wit, that this Sin is ordinarily irrimissible, and for the most part. Which
is both contrary to the words of those Fathers, as also contrary to the
very absolute speech of Christ; Bell. l. 4. de panit. c. 13. sect. Resp.
and last of all, crosses his own Rule, saying, Non oportet restringere, quod
Deus amplum esse voluit: that is, We must not make a restriction of those
words, which God will have to be absolutely taken.

The like Example we have also, in qualifying of Saint Bernard's words, which
we adduce against popish Merits, out of his 310 Epistle: where-in he
declares, that his whole life, even to the very last period thereof, which
he calls Calcaneum, was al-to-gether destitute of Merits. But how
answers Bellarmine, and qualifieth, or tempereth he this Speech? Perhaps
(says he) he spoke this humbly, but not truly. Bell. lib. 5. de Iustif. c.
6. sect. ad alia.
Which sense against sense, Bernard himself elsewhere pithilie
over-throweth, saying, When ye have done all things that are commanded, say,
that ye are unprofitable Servantes. But thou will say, Bern. ser. de tripl.
custodi^.
(says Bernard) that he willed us to say so, for Humilities sake. Yes,
indeed. But willed he thee to say that, against the Truth? No.

3. How they fraudfullie, in their Aunsweres to the Fathers, disjoynt things,
not to be disjoined; and conjoyne things, that are not conjoined.
AN Example of the first, we have in Bellarmine, Bell lib. 4. de Euch. c. 16.
who entreating of the lawful Minister of the Eucharist, he cites
Epiphanius, to prove, that Christ gave no power, even to the Virgin Marie, to
celebrate a Sacrament. But when the same Father is cited by us, against
baptizing by Women; showing also, out of Epiphanius, That the Virgin Marie was
never permitted by Christ, nor his Apostles, any way to baptize; Bell. lib. 1.
de Bapt. c. 7. sect. Quario.
Bellarmine answers, Loquitur (says he) de publico ministerio baptismi:
that is, Epiphanius speaks only of the public Ministry of Baptism.
Where-as by disjoyning the public ministration of Baptism, from the private
ministration, he may see, that the very like answer might be made unto
himself, That Women are not excluded from celebrating the Communion in
private; but that they are debarred only from the public ministration of
the same. And so his Conclusion out of Epiphanius, concerning the lawful
Minister of the Eucharist, shall be quite over-throwne.

An Example of the second, which is a fraudfull Conjunction of diverse
Speeches, which are of diverse matters, as if they were one, we have like-wise
in Bellarmine, Bell. lib. 2. de (...) c. 35.
who for the defense of the receiving of young Nuns, not only against God's
word, 2. Tim. 5 9.11.
but also against their own pope's Epistle, he alleges, that Gregory
speaks only of the Abbatesse, Greg. l. 3. Epist. 11.
and no-wise of the age of Nuns: VVhere-as, both the Title, and the Epistle
it self, shows, that he speaks, both of the Abbatesse in the general, Ne
sit Iuvencula, that is, That she be not a young woman; 1. Tim. 3.6.
as Paul speaks of a Bishop, That he be not a young Scholar: and of the
Nuns which are to be veiled in particular, Ne fiat earum velamen, (says
he) ante annum sexagesimum: that is, Let them not be veiled, before they be
threescore years of age.

4. How they answer the Fathers, alleging their speeches to be hyperbolicke,
when they are no-wise so.
EXamples of this, like-wise, Bellarmine affords us, who when Chrysostom's
speech is adduced, Bell. lib. 2 de verboc. vlt.. Resp.
exhor^ing secular men, to get Bibles to themselves: and if they could not get
more, to get the New Testament: he answers, That Chrysostom's speech, is an
Hyperbolicke form of speech; and not that he would have all to do so, as he
by word exhorted them.

And again, when he is opposed against their Private Mass, saying, That it
is better, not to be present at the Sacrament, or at that (co^memoratiue)
Sacrifice of Christ's body, than to be present, and yet not to communicate:
Bell. lib. 1. de missa. c. 10.. Resp.
Bellarmine* hereunto answers; I say, that Chrysostom spoke this (says
he) hyperbolicallie, as he doeth-sundrie other things. Now, by his own
definition, of an hyperbolicke speech, let us see then, how silly a Shift he
uses, for fraudfull Evasion. An hyperbolicke speech (says he) requires,
Bell. l. ^, dep^^nit. cap. 10.. qu^d.
that truly somewhat be in a thing, although not in so excellent a manner, as
the words signify: other-wise, it should not be an Hyperbole, but a Lie:
neither should a speech be there-by so much adorned, as al-to-gether spoiled.
Now, let any apply this, to the foresaid Testimonies, and they shall
clearlie see, that in them there is no hyberbole.

5. How they urge such Answers to Antiquity against us, which they will not
(as they ought) justly accept of us.
TWo diverse Examples here-of, we have like-wise furnished unto us, Bell. lib.
4. de E^^h. c. 10. Bell lib. 1. de miss^. c. 18.
by our foresaid Bellarmine; who for sundry Pageates of the Mass, brings,
as the greatest Antiquity, Saint James Lyturgie: but when the words of that
Lyturgie, saying, long after the words, Ho^ est Corpus Meu^; those words of
Prayer, Fiat hic Pa^is Corpus Christi, are adduced, to show, that after the
words of Consecration, Bread still remained: Bell. lib. 4. de Euch. c. 13..
(...).
then Bellarmine rejects Saint James Lyturgie, upon this reason, Nam non
omnia quae in Lyturgia habentur (says he) dep^ompta sunt ex Domini exemplo
aut praecepto, constat enim multa esse addita ab aliis, etc. that is, For all
things that are contained in that Lyturgie, are not taken out of the Lord's
Example, or Commandment: for it is evident, that many things were added, or
patched to, by others. Therefore the Grecians (says Bellarmine) should prove
by some Testimony, (which they are not able to do) that those words did flow
from the words, or else from the fact of CHRIST. Which Reason given by
Bellarmine against the Grecians, (who with us deny Consecration to be by those
words recited, Hoc est Corpus meum) is a most valide Reason, furnished by him,
unto us, Why we do, and should, reject all things in the Mass, which does
not flow, either from the words, or fact of our Savior, but are men's
Inventions, added to, or altring that holy Institution.

Like-wise, to prove that Capernaitish form of Christ's presence, and eating
in the Sacrament, (...) lib. 2. de Eu^^. c. 7.
Bellarmine adduceth Tertullian, saying, Albe-it he was a Montanist in his
latter days, yet he was reprehended by none of the Auncientes in this, That
ever he erred, concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Body. Bell l. 5. de
gra. c. 26.. At.
And again, elsewhere he says, It is sure (says he) that he erred not
in this, because no Author counts this amongst Tortullian's Errors. And yet,
when we produce Tertullian, against Popish Indulgences, and other points of
Popery, Bell. l. 1. de indulg. cap. 3.. (...).
Bellarmine rejects him, as heretical, although his own words may stop his
mouth. And we may say even so unto him, That al-be-it he was a Montanist in
his latter age, yet he was never reprehended by any of the Ancients in this,
That ever he erred in the matter of Indulgences, etc. and no Author counted
ever this amongst Tertullian's Errors.

Thus use they diverse Weights in the Bag, which is Abomination: they claim,
and disclaim, for crafty Seduction, against all Civil Honesty, Settled
Constancy, Christian Integrity, Reasons Rule, Conscience Regiment, or any way
equitable Indifferency.

Neither is there any, but may see, that we yielding unto them, the Fathers
to be only Expounders of Scripture, and admitting their Writs to decide all
Controversies; yet are we not with them at any nearer point, while as they
will be such Expounders of the Fathers again, making their Exposition often
times quite contrary to the Text, and (as Pharaoh's lean Kye did to the
farte) the one (as has been shown) to eat up the other.

6. How they answer us, to some Fathers; impudentlie denying the clear words
which are in then Writs.
HOw peart and perverse they are, in this their last mentioned, and most
vnthristie Shift, let this one Example, in place of many, restifie. When
Chemnitius, out of Athanasius, A^han. l. 1. contra gente^ initio.
bringes this Testimony, for perfection of Scripture, Safficiu^t sacrae ac
divinit^s inspiratae Scripturae ad OMNEM instructionem veritatis; that is, The
Holy and Divine inspired Sc^iptures, are sufficient for ALL instruction of
Truth, Bell. lib. 4. de v^rb^. c. 11.. Presert quarto.
Bellarmine denies, that the word Omnem, or ALL, is in Athanasius: affirming
yet more impudentlie, that Chemnitius added this word (where-in the whole pith
of the Testimony consists) to Athanasius, of his own head. The contrary
where-of, may be seen in all old Impressions of that Father, where-of I have
one beside me, printed at Paris, by John Petit, Anno 1520, or any later, over
which the seaming Fire of the Expu^gatorie Index has not passed, hither-to.

CHAP. X. Some notable Frauds, used by the Romanists, in Citations of the
Fathers, where-of the Reader would carefully beware.
1. By citing of Heretics words for them as if they were the words of the
Orthodox Fathers.
A Notable Example of this fraudfull Trick, 1. Fraud.
we have in Bella^mine, who to prove, by the Testimony of Fathers, That
Scripture without Tradition, is sufficient to determine Controversies cites
Ireneus: alleging, Because the Scriptures are Variouslie expounded, that
there-fore Scripture only cannot be Judge. Which words are not Ireneus own
words, Bell. l. 3. de ver^o c. 8.
(as Bellarmine gives them out) neither did Ireneus ever allege any such
Reason, as that There was need of Tradition, because the Scriptures were
Variouslie expounded: but he sets down this, to be the Hereticke's
Reason, for Traditions, whom Ireneus refuteth. Iren. l. 3. c. 2.
There-fore, Ireneus words are these, When they are convinced out of
Scripture, (says Ireneus, speaking of the Heretics of his time)
straightway they fall out, in the accusing of Scripture it self, as if
things were not well set down there, nor that the same had not authority of
its own, and because the same is variouslie expounded, and there-fore Truth
cannot be found there-in, by those that are ignorant of Traditions. In which
words, Ireneus, if he had been living, and heard a Papist in our days,
pleading for Traditions, and accusing God's word of Imperfection, Obscurity,
plyablenesse any way, and wanting authority of its own, (but such as it has
from the Church, and the Pope) he could not more viuelie have painted, nor
described him, than he does here, by the Pattern of an old Heretic.

This necessary Caution, therefore, we would keep, for obviating such
Fraud; that is, we would carefully remarke, that the words be a Father's
own words, which are adduced, and expressing to us, his own mind and
meaning. And this we should do, not only in clear places, as this former
is; but we would more carefully advert the same, in some that are obscurer,
in which it can be hardly discerned, whether the words be a Father's own,
or some Heretick's, whom he refuteth. An Instance vvhere-of, Bellarmine
himself gives us, saying of a Testimony cited out of Clemens Alexandrinus,
which seems to favor the Pelagian Heresy, It is not surely known (says
he) whose those words be, Bell. l. 4. de am^ss. gra. c. 9.
whether Clement's own words, or those Hereticke's with whom he is in that
place disputing. And to this, the Reader would the more diligently take heed,
because the Papists (like the Donatists) out of the obscurest places of
Scripture, or Fathers, ever seek to make their best advantage.

2. How they cite the Fathers, quyte contrary to their mind.
A Remarkable Example hereof, ^raude. Bell. l. 4. de amiss. gr.^. c. 15..
Habem^^.
we find in Bellarmine's citation of Augustine, out of whom to prove, that
the Virgin Ma^ie was conceived without Original Sin, he adduceth a
Testimony, wherein Augustine never meaned, nor affirms, that in her own
conception she was free from Original Sin; but only, that from the time of
CHRIST'S co^ception in her womb, that she was preserved thence-foorth from
actual sinning, through that singular Privilege (as he thought) that then was
granted unto her, by being the Mother of the Lord Jesus. And that this is the
truth, we shall clear the same, out of their Master of Sentences, who
speaking of Christ's conception, shows what was the quality of the flesh of
the Virgin Marie, before that time, and in that very instant, to wit,
sinful, as the rest of the race of Adam, Lombard. l. 3. Did. 3.
saying, Surely it may be cruelie said, and must be believed, according to
the uniform agreement of the holy Fathers witnessing the same, that, that
substance of Marie, (where-of Christ took His humanity) was first subject to
sin, Sicut reliqua Virgin^^ car^.
as all the rest of the flesh of the Virgin was: but there-after, by the
operation of the holy Ghost, the same was so purified, and made clean, that
being free of all tainture of Sin, it might be so united to the WORD. And
after that the fore-saide Master of Sentences have said thus far, of
Christ's own conception, then he comes in the next Section, to d^clare what
Privilege was given to Marie, after that time of Christ's conception, to wit,
That from thence-foorth she was fred from actual sin: and to this effect,
he cites that same place of Augustine, which Bellarmine wresteth, and
abuses, to prove her Immunitie from Original Sin, even in her own
conception; and which Augustine, nor none of the Fathers, ever once did mean.

3. How they urge us, with Testimonies of Fathers, which are the brood of those
Errors, which themselves disclayme.
AN Instance heere-of, (in place of many) is clear, Fra^de.
in the Point of Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, where-in Bellarmine, and
his Fellows, adduce Testimonies of Fathers, importing the last, thereby to
prove the first: and from prayer to the dead, argue so to Purgatory, as if
there were such a Relation between those two, that there could no separation
be any wise made between them. Whereas prayer for the dead, (where-of the
Fathers speak) proceeded from this ground Error, for the most part, which both
the Grecian and Latin Fathers mayntayned: to wit, That the Souls of the
Faithful, who departed this life, remained till the day of the general
Refurrection, without attayning to the blessed Vision of GOD, in certain
Places of Rest, Iren. l. 5.
which Ireneus calls, Invisible Holds, destinated to them by GOD: Aug.
En^hir^d. c. 108.
or, as Augustine terms them, Hid Receptacles: or, as Lactanctius styleth
the same, L^^t* l. 7. insist c. 21. Hi^ar. in Psalm. 120. Amb. d^ Cain and Ab^^
2. c. 2.
A common Custody: or, as Hilarie speaks, A Bosom of Rest: or, as Ambrose
names them, Places of Suspense, and Habitacles: or, last of all, as Bernard
calls them, Atria, or Utter Portches, or Courts. Bern (...). 3 de omnibus,
(...).
Now, seeing this was their (...), or ground Error, (which the Papists
disclayme, Bell. lib. 1. de Sanct. c. 1.2.3. and 4.
as well as we) and upon this evil laid ground, that they founded only
their Practice of prayer for the dead; seeing the Papists reject the first, as
an illegittimate Birth; why urge they us then, with the second afterbirth?
wresting their speeches, far against the mind of the Fathers* for their
new-conceited Purgatory, whereunto their prayers for the dead had no Relation
at al. And there-fore, when as they urge us with the Testimonies of the
Fathers, for prayer for the dead, they themselves must first believe this
confining of Souls of the Godly, in those hidden Receptacles of Rest,
where-in they are kept, from the time of their death, until the Resurrection,
as in a Common Custody, (and which quyte everteth Purgatory, as their own
Suar^z confesses: Suarez in 3. part. Thomae ^. 59. Art. 6. Disp. 57.. 1.
) or else they must cease by those Testimonies, to induce us, fraudfullie to
believe, that there is such coherence, and inviolable dependence, (as they
pretend) between prayer for the dead, and Purgatory, that the one
necessarily does infer the other, and whereof the ancient Fathers never
once dreamed* as witnesses their own Fisher, bishop of Rochester, saying,
That amongst the Fathers, Roffen. art. 1^ cont^a Luther. page 314.
there was never any mention thereof at al, or at the least, very seldom any
wise; and that the doctrine of Purgatory, was only lately known, and of
late a^^an^rlie received by the Church.

And where-as in the ancient alleged Lyturgies, S. Iacobi Liturg ^ 29.
they find mention of prayers for the dead, the extense of persons being
considered, to whom those prayers did reach, shall no less forciblie evert
their Furnace of Purgatory. In the Lyturgie (which they call Apostolical) of
Saynct James, prayer being made for all, even f^o^ Abell the just, that had
died hither-to: and more particularly in Chrysostom's Lyturgie (which is
called the Lyturgie of the Eastern Church) the prayer that is used there for
the dead, Liturg. Chrysostom. p. 9^.
extending it self by name, to the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, and even to the blessed Virgin, which is there nominate: none of
whom the most impudent Papist dare place in their Fire of Purgatory: Bell.
lib. 2. de purg. c. 18. etc. 5.
and Bellarmine himself informs us, how those prayers stand without any
supposall of Purgatory at all, to wit, Relation being had to the second
Sentence, or full accomplishment, that the whole Man is to receive, by a
solemn and public Sentence of Acquitall in that Day from Sin, or the
Consequences* thereof, and by an Adjudgement to a full Consummation of all
perfect Happiness, compryzed al in short words, by the Apostle, for
Onesiphorus, saying, (while he was alive) The Lord grant unto him, that he
may find Mercy of the Lord in that Day.

Again, it was the Error of many Fathers, (says Bellarmine) that after
this life, Bell. lib. 2. de purg. c. 1. Aug. l. 20. de civit. Dei c. 25. Lact.
l. 7. instit. c. 21. O^^g: in Ie^. hom. 13. Amb. in Psalm. 11^. Sermon. 3. and 20.
all the Godly, (the Virgin Marie, nor the Apostles, no^ being excepted)
should be purged, by a Fire, at the Day of Judgment: Yet, not-with-standing,
Bellarmine add^ceth the Testimonies of those Fathers, which speak of this
same Fire, and none other, to prove the Popish Fire of Purgatory, immediately
after death, although so far different, both in time, and in extense to
persons.

Seeing, therefore, Bellarmine disclaymeth this fore-sayde Opinion, as
erroneous, why urges he the Testimonies of Fathers against us, to prove
fraudfullie, under the name of ( Ignis Purgans) their Popish Fire of
Purgatory? before the Resurrection, and which after death is endured by some
only: where-as those Fathers meaned a far diverse Fire, to wit, which should
be at the Resurrection only, and should be suffered by all indifferently.

And yet, that he does this most impudentlie, let this clear the Truth. To
prove that the Fathers held such an erroneous Opinion, as is fore-saide, Bell.
lib. 2. de purg. c. 1.
Bellarmine brings S. Ambrose words, on the 118 Psalm, and twenty Sermon,
saying in the fourth of Genesis, That the Lord did put a flaming Sword before
the entry of Paradise: which (says Bellarmine) he calls that purging
Fire, through which of necessity every one must pass, who-so-ever they be
that enter into Paradise. And yet he brings the same Father, Bell. lib. ^.
de purg. c. 5.. Ambrosias.
in this same very place, and those same very words, to prove the Elph-fyre
of their Popish Purgatory.

In like manner, Bellarmine cites Augustine, Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 10.. B.
Aug.
to patronize their Purgatory, in his 21 book, De Civitate Dei, and 16
Chapter, and 24: where he affirms, That some shall suffer certain
Purgatory Punishments, before the last Judgment. Which being compared with
the 25 Chapter, of the 20 book, it will appear clearlie there-by, that he
means that Fire of Conflagration, that shall immediately go before the last
day of General Doom; and not that Popish Fire of Purgatory, that is
suffered after the day of particular Death. And the effect where-of, he
shows shall be this, Aug. in Psalm. 103. conc. 3.
to wit, That it shall separate some to the left hand, and melt out others, to
the right hand of CHRIST; and so consequently shall seize on all men, both
wicked and Godly.

To obviate, therefore, this Fraud, the (...), or ground Error, would
carefully be adverted; that if they reject the Roore of such Colloquintid^
themselves, they urge us not with the Blade, or Branch, nor fraudfullie make
that to serve their Turn, by clayming the Fathers, in such a point, wholly to
make for them, while as trial does discover, that themselves rejecting the
Ground, they, Ipso facto, lyke-wyse disclayme the super-structure.

And this the more warily would be seen unto, because the Ground Error is
some-tymes more latent, especially to one, that is not acquaynted with such a
Father his whole works, whose Testimony is cited: one notable Example
where-of, I will instance, out of our Adversaries bringing of Theophylact, for
the countenancing of their praying, and offering for the dead: not considering
his Ground Error, whereupon this a-rose; which was not for bringing the
Souls of those out of Purgatory, who died only with the guilt of Venial
Sins; but to save the Souls of those out of Hell, vngone there, who had died
impenitentlie, with the guilt of heinous sins; and which he thought, by the
Prayers and Oblations of the living, might be gotten done: grounding his Error
on that Speech of our Savior, Theophyl. in Luke 12.
Luke 12, 5, in which he wishes us, to observe, That Christ did not say,
Fear him, who after he has killed, casts into Hell; but, has power to
cast into Hell. For the sinners, which die, (says he) are not all-wayes
casten into Hell: but it remains in the power of GOD, to pardon them also.
And this I say, for the Oblations and Doales, which are made for the dead,
which do not a little avayle them, which die even in grievous sins:
Where-fore, let us not cease, by Alms, and Intercession, to appeal Him that
has power to cast, but does not always use this power, (says he) but is
able to pardon also.

4. How they cite words of Fathers, which no-wyse are in their Writs.
FOR a clear Evidence of this, Bell. lib. 1. de purg. c. 10.
let this one Practice of Bellarmine's sufficiently examplifie, who to prove
Purgatory, does cite these words, out of Theodoret's Commentary, on the
first Epistle to the Corinthians, and third Chapter, saying, Hunc ipsum ig^em
p^rgatorium credimus: that is, We believe this same Fire of Purgatory to be
indeed. Which words, not-with-standing, their own Senensis testifyeth,
Senen. l. 6. annot. 258.
are no-wyse to be found in the Writs of Theodoret.

CHAP. XI. How the Romanists not only equal, but prefer the judgment of
their late Divines, to the Fathers, (not-with-standing of the Reverence they
pretend to Antiquity) and this, both in Dogmaticall points, and exposition of
Scripture.
FIrst then, forequalling their new Doctors, with the most ancient Fathers,
let the Jesuit, Sandeus his speech concerning Bellarmine, Sandeus in admoni.
sua ad Laurentium p. 63.
in Proof have the Primacie: A Man (says he) most learned, and modest, Quem
veluti saeculi nostri Augustinum venerabitur posteritas, and boni omnis and
catholice eruditi suspiciunt: that is, Whom the Posterity shall reverence, as
the Augustine of our Age, and whom all good men, and Catholicke-instructed, do
wonder, and admire.

Again, Senens. bibli. l. 4. t. Ioamies Fisherus.
thus says Sixtus Senensis, of Fisher, late B. of Rochester: In the abundance
of Learning, (says he) and sincerity of Godliness, and in constancy of
mind, Cuiqueue ex sanctissimis and acerrimis Ecclesiae propugnatoribus merito
comparandus: that is, Worthily to be compared with any who-so-ever, of the
most holy Fathers, and most cowragious Defenders of the Church.

In like manner, Perer. in genesis 25.15. Disp. 1. number. 24.
thus says Pererius, of his Fellow Tostatus: A man (says he) surely not
only for the multitude of Wrytinges, but also for the subtlety and rypnesse
of Wit, gravitie of Judgment, and excelling in sundry kynd^ of Learning,
Antiquis illis magnisque patribus and docto^ibus merito annumerandus: that is,
Who is worthily to be numbered with the ancient Fathers, and great Doctors of
the Church.

Next, for preferring their new Doctors, Roff^n. contr. ^uther. art. 1^.
to the most ancient Fathers, let their bishop Fisher testify, who says,
That it cannot be obscure unto any, that many things, as well in the Gospels,
as in the rest of the Scriptures, are now more exquisitelie discussed, by later
Writers, and more clearlie understood, than they have been heere-to-fore.

Stella in Lu^. 10. p. 15.
Again, when Friar Stella has rejected the Exposition of all the Fathers, on
Luke 10, 21, he says, That tho it be far from him, to condemn the common
Exposition given by the ancient Fathers, yet he knows very well, that
Pigmeis being put upon Giants shoulders, do see farther than Giants
themselves.

Like-wise, Salm. in Romans l. 2. Disp. 51. secundo.
when the Jesuit Salmeron, gets the whole Fathers (as Erasmus shows) in
his Teeth, against the conception of the Virgin Marie, without original Sin,
in their exposition of Romans 5, 12, yet he answers, That the whole devotion
toward the Mother of God, did not consist in Bernard, Bonaventure, and other
Fathers: for she had many then, as she has now, better known to her self,
(that were of the contrary mind) then they were known to the World: and
there-after, he concludes, in favors of the new Romish Clergy, saying, Quo
Iuniores, ^o perspicaciores esse Doctores: that is, That the later their
Doctors be, that they are the more witty and clearer sighted.

In like manner, in another Question of great moment, Whether the Law of Moses,
concerning Degrees forbidden in Marriage, belong to Christians, where-in from
the authority of ancient Fathers affirming the same, when the Church of Rome
is attainted, as patrons of Incest, by her Dispensations with such forbidden
Degrees, the Author of Apologia tumultuaria, Lib. pro dispens. matrim. Heu. 8.
cum v^ore fratru. sect. postr^^^.
answers heer-in thus, Let the Fathers (says he) have their own
reverence, etc. But I dare say, that the more recent Divines, in many places,
are more pertinent and pithie, yea, more exquisite, diligent, and watchful.
And even so says Costerus, Costeri Enchirid. cap. 3.
That as the Church is grown now in number, so is the same in Learning, and
Sharp-sightednesse.

CHAP. XII. By what partial and absurd Rule the Romanists do admit, or reject,
the Testimonies of Fathers.
FIrst, for clearing here-of sufficiently, Bellarmine gives evidence, who
amongst the diverse Expositions of Fathers, and others, upon that place of the
Romans, 14, 5, which says, One man esteems one day above another; takes
that only, and admits as true, Quae nobis maxim fave^, Bell. Lib. 3. de
sanct. cap. 10 sect. 2
(says he:) that is, Which most favors our side, being heere-in like
Faustus the Manichean, Aug. Lib. 11. contra Faust. cap. 2
who by this Rule admitted some Apostolical Writs, and rejected others, Qula
hoc pro me sonat, (said he) illud nequaquam: that is, Because this makes for
me, and the other not so* Partial Iniquity, but not precious Verity; and no
wise the love of the Truth, but self-love, bearing the whole swey.

Again, whether the same unction be meaned, Mark 6, and James* 5, in this
point for defense of extreme unction, to be by Christ's institution,
Bellarmine rejects the judgment of Beda, Theophylact, and OEcumenius, who
are contrary to his mind; and he receives a newer Exposition, of their own
Divines, saying of the same, Mi^i save eo nomine gratior est, quia video
Lutherum Calvinum, and Chemnitium, in priori opinione: that is, Surely this
Exposition is the better liked by me, because I see Luther, Calvine, and
Chemnitius, of the first opinion. Thus is our consent with Antiquity, (we
see) a sufficient ground to them of dissenting therefrom, direction of Reason
not inducing, but distraction of Affection seducing them from the Truth.

In like manner, Maldonat, on the sixth of John, giving an Exposition of the 63
verse, says, I deny not, (says he) that I have no Author before me of this
Exposition, Sed bane eo magis probo, quam illam alteram Augustini caeter^rumque
alioquin probabilissima^, quod haec cum Calvinistar^m sensu magis pugnet: that
is, But I approve this Exposition the rather, and prefer it before the other
of S. Augustine's, and the other Ancients, (although other-wise the same be most
probable, and lykliest to be the true meaning) because this Exposition
fights, or is more contrary to the meaning of the Calvinists. Thus we see
Faction, not Affection to the Truth; Prejudice, not sound Judgment; and the
hatred of persons, and not the regard of Cause simply, so in these to
prevail, that we may loose hope, that we can avail them.

THE SECOND BOOK, OF* COUNSELS.
CHAP. XIII. As the Romanists deal with the Fathers, so how they many vvayes
deal injuriouslie with ancient Councels.
1. By adding to them.
AS for the Tomes of Councels in the general, Bell. lib. 1. de Council. c. 2.
thus far does Bellarmine ingeniouslie confess, Quod Libri Conciliorum
negligenter conservati s^nt, (says he) and multis vitiis scatent: that is,
That the books of the Councels, being negligentlie kept, do indeed abound
with many Errors. And so, how sure reasoning, in matters of Faith, can be
now, out of their Canons, for most part, may easily be seen.

And of the truest, and most vnsuspect Canons, of the most ancient Councels,
most impudentlie does Bellarmine profess; speaking thus of that most famous
Council of Chalcedon, Bell. Lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 22 sect. sacu^do.
(which their Pope Gregory did reverence, as one of the four Gospels) That
the Canons thereof had not authority with them, Nisi quatenus sunt renovati
(says he) a Romany pontificibus: that is, But in so far, as they are
renewed by the Popes of Rome.

In particular, therefore, to show how this Fyning, and Forging, is practiced
in the Roman Mint, before the Canons of Councels pass for current Money, in
the Papal Kingdom, we will first instance their Popish Patching, and adding
to the same.

A notable Example where-of, we have in that fact of Pope Zozimus, who added
to that famous first Council of Nice, a Canon in his own favors: whose
Fraud was detected, his Pride checked, and his Usurpation prevented, by that
famous Council of Carthage, which stands up yet, in the faithful Records
thereof, as a Cloud of Witnesses, to testify the same, even unto this day.

Next, whereas the fourth Council of Carthage, decrees expresselie, That no
Woman baptize; yet not-with-standing, for mayntayning their Popish Practice in
the contrary, they Gratiam* de consi^. did. 4 c. mu^ier. L^mbard. Lib. 4.
sent. did. 6
have added (as Bellarmine confesses clearlie) this Condition, to that Canon,
Nisi necesitate cogente: that is, Except Necessity compel: Quamvis non
habeatur illa exceptio in tomis conciliorum, (says Bellarmine: Bell. Lib. 1.
de bapt cap. 7. sect. quarto.
) that is, Although that Exception be not in the Tomes of the Councels.

Again, for vp-holding of Papal Supremacy, vvhere-as the Council of Milevi
decreed, That in no Case what-so-ever, any Appeals should be made out of
Afric, to any beyond Sea: yet Bellarmine confesses, Bell. lib. 2. de pont.
c. 24.. Respondent.
That Gratian added of his own head, this Clause to the Canon, Nisi forte ad
Apostolicam sedem appelletu^: that is, Except perhaps that Appellation be made
to the Apostolical Sea of Rome. Which Clause annulleth the whole Cano^, and as
Bellarmine testifies, is close contrary to the mind and express intention of
that whole Council.

2. How they purge and pare from the Councels.
NExt, unto their adding to Councels, nay, I may say, adding whole
Suppositions, and forged Councels, unto the number of those that were true and
real, as that Rome Council, under Sylvester, vvhere-in is pretended, that it
was concluded, That no man might judge the first Seat. Council. Romans anno 325.
^. 20.
And for failing in that, and drawing the matter yet more vp-wardes, an elder
Council yet, is brought out of a Corner, and hollowlie made to pronounce, That
the first Seat must not be judged by any. Con. Sinness^n. anno 303. circa
fin^m.
Next, then, (I say) to such liberal adding in gross, and in piece-maile,
after the fore-sayde manner, let us see, that they are as Skillful in
Subduction, as they are for Seduction, by their Arithmeticall Addition.

In the old Copies of the General Councels, there is inse^t the fourth
Decretall Epistle of Pope Clement, Gratian. causa. 12.^. 1. ^. Di^ectissimu.
(which is contained likewise in their Canon Law) wherein the Popes
mayntayning of that Nicolaitane Error, is evident, to wit, Of having all
things in common, where-in Wives are also comprehended: and whereupon it
clearlie and consequently follows, that the Pope may err, and Popes have
monstruously erred. But what have they done for this, in the new Editions of
the Councels? Even this, to wit, They have purged, and put out those words,
that Wy^es should be common, as is confessed in the Notes set out of late upon
their Canon Law, by Authority and Command of Gregory the thirteenth: where-in
we are beholden to them, that how-so-ever they will have the Men, yet they
desire not the Wives, to be Catholic also.

3. How they alter the Words and Canons of the Councels.
A Notable Example heere-of, in Surius his Editio^ of the Councels, (...) 97.
and their Epitomizer Caranza, who for eschewing the clearness of that ancient
Council of Laodicea, (...) 35.
against the worshipping of Angels, has without either sense, or shame, put
Angulos, for Angelos: So that, where-as the Council says, (...): that is, It
is not lawful for Christians to pray unto Angels, they make the words to be,
Non oportet Christianos ad angulos congregationes facere: that is, Christians
must not conveane in corners. And where-as the Title of the Canon is, De iis
qui angelus colunt: that is, Of those that worship Angels: they make it to be
thus, against all sense, De iis qui angulos colunt: that is, Of those that
worship Corners. An absurd Tale.

Which Fraud, and Falsification, Saynct Theodoret most clearlie convinces;
Theod. in Coloss. ^.
who commenting on the Collossians, makes mention thus, of this famous Decree,
They who defended the Law, (says he) they induced Christians also to the
worshipping of Angels, saying, That the Law was given by them. And this
erroneous Vice continued long in Phrygia and Pisidia: Wherefore, that
Council, (says he) which assembled at Laodicea, which is the Metropolitan
City of all Phrygia, by a Law did prohibit, That no man should pray to Angels.

The same Caranza lyke-wyse, for mayntayning the Pope's Supremacy, against the
sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, alleges, that he saw in a most ancient
Latin Edition of the Councels, which the most Reverend Cardinal Marcellus
show him, (who was Legate to the Pope, in the Council of Trent) the words of
that Canon, set down thus, Quoniam Metropolitano Episcopo hoc idem moris est:
that is, Because this same is the Custom of the Metropolitan Bishop.
VVhere-as in the vp-right Copies of the Nicene Council, it is thus, Quoniam
Episcopo Romano parilis mos est: that is, That the Bishop of Alexdria should
have power over those that were in his Diocie, because the Bishop of Rome had
the same custom of jurisdiction, to wit, over those that were in his Diocie.
Which confyning of his jurisdiction, only within his Western Precinct, or
Diocie of Rome, and equalling other Bishops with him, in a-lyke jurisdiction
within their several Precincts, does al-to-gether ever this Challenge of
Supremacy: and there-fore, for eschewing the force of that Canon of Nice, the
Falsifyer of the same, had pulled out the Pope, out of the Comparison, as if
none should compare with him in Jurisdiction, and put in any poor
Metropolitan Bishop, in that Comparison with the Bishop of Alexandria. And
which gross and filthy Falsification of Councels, we see is an old Practice
of theirs, and may be seen yet, in their Cardinals Liberaries, and in the
Bosom of the Church of Rome.

Like-wise, where-as the second Council of Orange, holden in Anno 529,
against the Pelagians, and Semi-Pelagians, condemning their erroneous Doctrine,
concerning Grace, and Free Will, set down, amongst other Conclusions, this in
particular: This also we wholesomlie profess, and believe, (say they) That in
every good work, we do not begin, and are helped after-wardes, by the Grace
of God: but He first of all, [ Nullis praecedentibus bonis meritis,] that is,
No good merits of ours going before, inspireth in us, both Faith, and the love
of Him, etc. This Canon Binius, in his Edition of the Tomes of the Council,
for mayntayning Popish Free Will, and Merits of Congruitie, has taken both
Freedom of Will, and of Action also, notoriously to corrupt this wholesome
Canon, and to put in for Nullis meritis bonis praecedentibus: that is, No good
Merits of ours going before, Multis meritis bonis praecedentibus: that is,
Many good Merits of ours going before. Now, for Merits of Congruitie; what
Congruitie is between Nullis and Multis; None, and Many, let any one judge.
And that this Corruption of Binius, or at least, (if they call it) The Error
of the TYPOGRAPHER, were carefully attended, and avoided in latter Editions, I
would gladly wish.

Secondly, How they accuse the Councels, when they make against them, eyof
Fraud, and Ignorance, in determination; or else, of after-falsification.
A Clear instance we have of this, Bell. (...) d. Romans pont.
in Bellarmine, who speaking of that most ancient and famous Council of
Chalcedon, holden Anno 451, and of their Decree against any Papal Supremacy,
lays no less to their charge, than Fra^d^ and Falsehood, in express terms.

Again, to prove that the Pope may err, and has erred, and that he was
likewise subject to Councels of old, when the sixth Synod is alleged,
condemning Honorius, as a Monothelite, Bell. lib 4 de pont. c. 11. (...)
secu^dum*
Bellarmine answers thus, Decept^s fuisse patres ex falsis rumoribus, and non
intellectis Episcolis Honorii, ideoque immerito cum Haereticis numerasse
Honorium: that is, That those Fathers were deceived, by false Rumors, and by
Ignorance, in not understanding the Epistles of Honorius; and therefore, that
very vndeservedlie they reckoned Honorius amongst other Heretics: imputing
so, both blind Ignorance, and unwise Rashness, to all those Reverend Fathers.
And when this will not serve his turn, he lays an imputation of
after-falsification on all the Registers, and Record keepers of this famous
Council, saying, Honori^ nomen sine dubio inter cos qui damnati erant, est
insertum ab aemulis Romanae Ecclesiae: that is, That the Name of Honorius,
without doubt, was insert amongst others that were condemned, by the Enviers of
the Church of Rome.

Likewise, when the seventh Synod is alleged, Bell. ibid.. ad tertium.
where-in (after long time that interveined, and due trial was taken) the
sentence of the condemning Honorius, is confirmed, and the sixth Synod there-in
is approven, Bellarmine answers, Deceptos fuisse patres ex sexta Synodo, quae
vel corrupta erat, vel per errorem Honorium damnaverat: that is, That those
Fathers also were deceived by the sixth Council, which was either corrupt, or
else through Error, had condemned Honorius.

In like manner, when the Epistle of Pope Leo, Bell. i^id sect. ad s^^^m.
contained also and registrated in those Councels, is adduced for probation of
the preceding point, which he wrote to the Emperor Constantinus Pogonatus,
witnessing the truth of Honorius Heresy, and just condemnation in the
foresaid Councels, Bellarmine replyeth unto that also, saying, Di^o Epistolam
Leonis esse etiam corruptam: that is, I say, (although without any warrant) that
the Epistle of Pope Leo is also corrupt, etc. Nec tenemur unum Leonem magis
sequi, quam alios tot summos pontifices: that is And if that Epistle be true,
yet we are not bound to follow one Pope, Leo, more than so many other Popes.

Yea, some seeing the evidence so clear, and unavoidable, of Pope Honorius
conviction of Heresy, in so solemn and famous free Councels, have been so
impudent, as to say, That they were but forged, and counterfeyt, Bell. lib. 1.
de council. c. 5. sect. Corvenerunt.
as Bellarmine testifies of Albertus Pighius: But Turrianus (says he)
de^endeth the contrary, that they are both sincere and upright. Thus we see,
when they are straited, how they fly in others Faces: and this clear evidence
does Bellarmine afford us, in a weighty matter of their Popish Unity.

Thirdly, How they admit Councels, only where-in they make for them; and
reject them disdaynfullie, as no Councels, where-in they make against them.
FOR probation heere-of, let us adduce Bellarmine, Bell. lib. 1. de sanct. c.
18.. secundus.
who when out of the third Council of Carthage, he would prove the
Macchabees to be Canonicke Scripture, he gives this reason, why Calvine
cannot deny the authority thereof, in this, because he uses the authority
thereof in another point himself, to wit, against the invocation of Sayncts:
and therefore he cannot say, Patres in uno sapere, (says he) and in alio
delirasse: that is, That the Fathers were wise in one point, but proved sottish
in another. And yet, speaking of that famous first Council of Chalcedo^, Bell.
lib. 3. de Laicu c. 20.. ad hoc.
and their decreeting against Papal Supremacy, he brings in Pope Gelasius
Verdict thereof, wherewith himself consents, saying, Quod in eo quaedam
fuerunt bona, and admittenda, quaedam vero mala, and rejicienda: that is, That
in that Council, some things were good, and to be admitted; and some things
were evil, and to be rejected. And consequently, that the Fathers were wise
in some things, and in other things proved but sottish: to wit, in such things,
as they make against Popery, viz. that great Dagon especially of the Pope's
Supremacy.

Again, when this fame Council of Chalcedon (which he acknowledges was
universally and wholly approven) is cited against Foreign Appeals, to
Rome; yet Bellarmine answers heere-to, Bell. lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 2^. sect.
secun^o.
thus: That Pope Leo did approve the same, only so far as it meddled with the
explication of matters of Faith. Now if Papal Supremacy be not a point of
Faith, let Boniface the eight his Decree witness, declaring, That except a man
believe the same, he cannot be saved. Seeing, therefore, that Pope Leo
approved the Council, in so far as it defyned matters of Faith; in so far,
then, as it defyned concerning Papal Supremacy, it will follow, by
Bellarmine's own consent, Extravag. unam sanct^m.
That the same was approven by Pope Leo fore-sayde.

In like manner, Bellarmine adduceth the Council of Eliberis, Bell. lib. 1. de
(...). cap. 7. sect. qu^n^o.
for Baptism by Laickes. But when the same is adduced, against Images in
Churches, Lib. 2. (...) c. 9 sect. add^.
he rejects the same, as of no authority.

Also, that famous Council of Franckford, holden under Charles the Great,
against the worship of Images, was confirmed by Pope Hadrian* (says
Bellarmine) in so far as it defyned, Lib. 1. de con. c. 7. sect. quartum.
That Christ was not the adoptiue Son of God. But is rejected by him, (says
he) upon the other part, in so far, as that Council condemned the seventh
Council before it, to wit, for decreeing the worshipping of Images.

Again, where-in Concilium Quinisextum, or Trullanum, makes for picturing of
Images in Churches, Bellarmine says, (...). hos ergo.
That in so far it was approven by Pope Hadrian, but wherein it displeased his
Holiness, it was rejected, upon this reason, Because the Pope was not there-by
himself, nor his Legates. Which reason, if it were sufficient for rejecting
a Council; then upon the same might that second famous and General Council
be rejected, which was celebrated at Constantinople, against Macedonius, that
denied the Deity of the Spirit. For thus does Bellarmine confess hereof,
Bell. lib. 1. de council. c. 5.. Est vero.
saying, That it is to be noted, that in that Council, not one of the
Western parts was there: and yet it is wholly approven, and Pope Gregory
reverenced the same, as one of the four Gospels.

Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 13.. Denique.
Lyke-wyse, in the point of Papal Supremacy, Bellarmine, to prove the same by
ancient Councels, cites the Florentine. But when a Canon of the same Council,
is cited against Unction in Confirmation, as no-wyse Apostolical, Bell. lib.
2. de confirm. c. 9.. Resp.
Bellarmine answers, That all things that are in Councels, pertayne not to
the Faith.

Bell. lib. 4. de E^ch. c. 10.. Eusse.
In like manner, Bellarmine, to prove the Communion, under one kind, to have
been an old Custom, long before Constance, he cites the Council of Basil.
But when the same Council is cited, to prove the Council, above the Pope, it
is rejected, with no gentler Styles, than Conciliabulum Schismaticum,
Seditiosum, and nullius Authoritatis: that is, A Schismaticke Conventicle, and
a seditious, which is of no Authority. Bell. lib. 3. de Eccles. c. 16. Ad.
So highly does Bellarmine advance here-by their Note of Popish Unity.


Again, the Council of Constance, (says Bellarmine) in the first Sessions
thereof, Bell lib. ^. de conci. c 7.. Qut^tum.
where it defines the Council to be above the Pope, is rejected: but in the
last Sessions thereof, and in all things that Pope Martine 5 approved, it is
received by all good Catholics. Basil then was lawful in the beginning, but
unlawful in the ending, because it displeases the Pope. And Constance here
in the contrary, is unlawful in the beginning, but lawful in the end,
because it pleases him. So that we may see, although Bishops in Councels be
Judges, and have a decisme Vote, so that, whereon they agree, (according to
Bellarmine's assertion) they may say, Bell. lib. 2. de Co^^^^. c 11.. Quarto.
It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us. Yet when they have decreeted
all, even Sub anathemate, yet the Pope, out of his supereminent power, may
admit what he list, or reject what he pleases; and so advances himself
above the holy Ghost, (to whom in the decreeing those things, seemed good) and
consequently above GOD, and that which is worshipped.

CHAP. XIIII. Popish avowed Rejection, in their late Councels, of the most
primitive and principal Antiquity.
LAST of all, what regard they carry in their late Papal Councels, to the
most principal, and only greatest Antiquity of Divine Institution,
Apostolical Practice, and holy Custom of the primitive Church, which is the
only way that should be inquired for, let their avowed Confession, of the
Transgression of those Sacred Limits, and their professed Declyning from that
primitive Path, testify: saying thus in Council, concerning the matter of the
holy Eucharist.

Al-be-it Christ did institute this Venerable Sacrament after Supper, Council.
Constan. Sess 13. Con^^l. Trid. Sess. 21.
(say they) and gave the same to His Disciples, under both kinds of Bread and
Wine: And lyke-wyse, al-be-it in the primitive Church, the same Sacrament was
received by the Faithful under both kynds; yet, not-with-standing, this custom
is, upon special reasons now brought in, to wit, For the eschewing of Perils,
and Scandals, That it shall be hence-foorth received by the Priest under both
kinds; but by the Laickes, only under one kind, of Bread. These are the
very plain words of those Popish Prelates, in the Council of Constance.

And yet Bellarmine, for this Reason only, of Disagreement from Christ's
Institution, Bell. lib. 1. de Euch. c. 2.
and His own Practice or Example there-in, rejects Saynct James Lyturgie:
making, that want of Conformity there-to, (as to the Pattern in the Mount) a
just cause of rejecting any prescription in God's Sacred worship, whether
contrary, or diverse therefrom.

No marvel, there-fore, as the Jews rejected Christ Himself, preferring to
Him, Barabbas; so that after Him, also they persecuted His Disciples: And even
so, it is no marvel, that the Romanists now reject at their pleasure, the
fore-sayde humane Testimonies, which are against them; preferring to Sacred
Antiquity, their new Venom of Heresy; when they so peartlie, and
publicly, profess their Incroaching upon the most ancient Institution, and
Sacred Testament of the very Son of GOD, and the Great Seal of HIS Glorious
Kingdom.

THE THIRD BOOK. OF HISTORY.
CHAP. XV. How they deal with the ancient Histriographers, and their own
Records.
1. By giving them the Lie, when they make against them.
FIrst, then, for Precedencie, to begin with a Pope: when Aeneas Sylvius
(called there-after Pius the second) declares, That before the Council of
Nice, little respect was had to the Church of Rome, but each one lived to
himself, Bellarmine answers, Sententia Aeneae Sylvii partim non est vera:
Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 17.. Cum.
that is, The Relation of Aeneas Sylvius, is not partly true. And so the
Cardinal gives his Holiness, roundly the Lie.

Next, to a Pope, how he uses a Cardinal, let his own words witness: For
when Benno the Cardinal, is truly relating the Vitiousnesse of Pope Gregory
the seventh, and the Innocence of the Emperor, Henry the fourth, whom he
persecuted, Bellarmine calls him a Loud Liar: Bell. ^. 1. de pont. c. 17.
Pet. (...)*
and says, that his book is full of most shameless Lies.

Thirdly, how conjun^ctlie a Troop of Writers, for company, get the Lie
together, let Bellarmine give Testimony unto us; who tells us, That al-be-it
all ancient Writers agree in this, That the Council of Franckford condemned
the seventh Synod, which established the worshipping of Images; yet Alanus
Copus says, Mentiuntur omnes: that is, They are all Liars. Which Bellarmine
calls, Bell* ^. 2. de council. c. 8. sect. (...).
Paulo durius dictum: that is, Somewhat hardly spoken. But behold, how he
next falls into this Ditch himself.

When Martinus Polonus relates the History of Sylvester the second* who
sold himself to the Devil, to attain to the Papacy: which History
Platina, Bembus, Nauclerus, Fasciculus, Onupbrius, and all other
Histriographers, Bell. l. 4* de pont. c. 12.. Resp.
testify: Yet Bellarmine (having a Face of the like temper with the brazen
belly of Nebuchadnezar's Image) answers, saying, Respondeo sine dubio esse
fabulas quae narrantur de magia and morte Sylvestrit that is, I answer, That
without doubt, (says he) they are but Fables, which are told of the
Witchcraft, and death of pope Sylvester.

Again, when the same Martinus Polonus, and other thirty and three
Historicians, (all Friends to the Church of Rome, most of them Clergy Men,
and some of them Sayncts) report, how pope Ioane, a vicious Whore, possessed
the papal Sea so long, and died publicly in birth, in her pontifical
procession, Bellarmine gives him, Bell. (...) 1. de pont. c. 24.. Deinde.
and all the rest, the Lie.

In like manner, when Paphnutius Opposition, in the first Council of Nice, to
compelled Single life, is recorded, not only by Socrates and Zozomen, but
also by Epiphanius; and received as true, by all their own Writers, Espen. de
contin. l. 1. c. 4. Alth. l. 13. t. Sacerdos. Great. did. 31. c. 12. P. Cost.
Ep. ad fratrem. Bell. lib 1. de cler. c. 20.. At neque.
as Espenseus, Alphonsus de Castro, Gratian, Petrus Costus, and others: yet
not-with-standing, Bellarmine answers, saying, Either that all is false,
which those men report of Paphnutius; or else, if any such thing fell out,
that it was but badlie told by them.

Last of al, how they use their own Writers severally, let these few Instances
lyk-wyse to us notify. When Beatus Rhenanus deponeth faythfullie, That pope
Zepherin was a Montanist, Bellarmine answers thus, Bell lib. 4. de pont.
cap. 8.. Quia.
Mentitur Rhenanus: that is, He is a loud Liar.

When Canus, lyk-wyse, declares, That pope Honorius was an Heretic; having
for his warrant, not only his condemning in Councels, but also his own
Letter, containing a clear Evidence, That he was a Monothelite, Bellarmine,
Bell. lib. 4. de pont. c. 11.. ad secundam.
not-with-standing, answers thus, Dico Canum, his errare: that is, I say,
that Canus twyse strayeth from the Truth.

And, when Durand and Adrian, are produced, to testify, That Gregory did
err, Bellarmine answers shortly, Bell. ibidem c. 10.. Resp.
and says, That Gregory erred not: but they rather erred, departing from the
Truth, (says he) in reporting so.

2. How they allege them to be corrupt, when they make against them.
FOr instancing heere-of: when we bring a place out of Eusebius, against
papal Supremacy; showing, If any had the same in the Apostles days, it was
James, the Lord's Brother, who was bishop of Jerusalem, and is called
Episcopus Apostolorum; Bellarmine answers heere-to, Bell. l. 1. de pont. c.
26. sect. ad.
Locum sine dubio esse corruptum: that is, That the place of Eusebius, is
without all doubt, corrupted.

Again, when we bring against the same Supremacy, the Act of that ancient
Council of Carthage, (as their own Gratian cites, Great. Did. 99. c. prima.
and sets it down) That none, no, not the bishop of Rome, should be called
Universal; and which in effect pope Gregory himself does testify; Greg.
l. 4. Epist. ^8. Bell. lib. 2. de pont. cap. 31. sect. ad.
Bellarmine answers, That Gratian corrupted that Canon, by adding some
words thereunto, and there-fore, that the same is of no authority, nor his
Relation thereof, of any credit at all.

Like-wise, let us see, how upon incertayne probabilities, and conjecturall
suspicions only, they reject what-so-ever they find to make against them.

When that Record is adduced of pope Boniface the second, who in his Letter to
Eulalius, bishop of Thessalonica, makes manifest, That the whole Fathers, of
that famous Council of Carthage being excommunicated of the bishop of Rome, in
token of their not acknowledgement of such power, or Supremacy, that they
remained so, without regard thereof, for the space of an hundredth years, and
died, most of them all, under the said Censure, ( Augustine being one of them,
and yet accounted a Saynct) Bellarmine hereto answers, Bell. l. 2. de pont.
c. 25. sect. Resp.
Valde mihi Epistolas eas esse suspectas: that is, That he suspecteth greatly
those Epistles of Boniface: vvhere-as their own Lindanus says, Lind. panopl.
l. 4. cap. 89. in fin^.
That he that scorneth those as forged, I pray you, what will he leave
(says he) of all the Story of Antiquity, safe or sound unto us?

And when we produce Socrates Testimony, against the Antiquity of the
forty days of their Popish Lent, Bell. lib. 2. de oper. bon. c. 11.. Sed
probabile.
Bellarmine answers, That it is probable, that Socrates book is corrupted.

3. How they admit them as true, only when they make for them; but otherwise
roughly reject them.
TO clear this out of our foresaid Bellarmine, Bell. l. 4 de pont. c. 9.
when he is to liberate Pope Liberius of Arrianisme, he cites the Testimony
of Socrates, Bell. l. 1. de cler. c. 20.
Zozomen, and Nicep^orus, as the faithful Recorders of that Age: and yet when
Socrates, is cited by us, to witness the Nicen Councels acquiescing to
Paphnutius speech, concerning the married Clergy, and Zozomen is brought to
witness Nectarius fact, against Auricular Confession, Bellarmine calls them
both in those points, manifest Liars, and Heretics: Baron. annal. anno 325.
nu^. 6.
even as Baronius says the like of Nicephorus, whereas their own Canus
avoweth all those to be, ^an. loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 5. sect. Quod.
Probatae fidei Authors: that is, Authors of approved Credit.

In like manner, Sopbronius, and Simeon Metaphrastes, are cited by Bellarmine,
ut illustres Historici, to prove his point of Papacy: but when they report,
that Linus died before Peter, whom they make to have been Pope after Peter,
Bell. l. 2. de pont. c. 6. sect. Adversus.
and ^o ^alsifieth their Succession, then are they disdainfully repudiated by
Bellarmine.

Lyke-wyse, Bellarmine adduceth Zonaras, to prove Honorius Innocence, as
there-in, one of sole and singular Authority: yet in another case, concerning
the Emperor Constantines commanding of Pope Sylvester, Bellarmine rejects
his Narration and Testimony. Bell. l. 1. de Council. c. 20. sect. Resp.


Also, Bellarmine adduceth Marianus Scotus, Baron. Ann. to^. 1. anno 34.
(whom Baronius calls Nobilis Chronologus) to prove Pope Zacharie's just
deposing of Childerike, King of France, Bell. l. 2. de pont. c. 17. sect. Ac.
and Pope Gregorie's the seventh just oppositio^ to Henry the fourth. But
when Fasciculus Temporum, L. 4. de pont. c. 13. sect. Marianus.
who follows him, and the Passionall, (two of their famous Histories) are
produced to improoue Peter's sitting at Rome, Bellarmine answers, L. 2. de
pont. c. 5. sect. Quo^^rca.
We justly contemn (says he) Fasciculus Temporum, and the Passional
chiefelie, seeing Fasciculus follows Marianus Scotus, who contradicts most
clearlie both himself and the Truth.

Again, for the justness of the forenamed Pope Zacharie's deposition of King
Childericke, Bell. l. 2. de pont. c. 17. sect. Ac.
Bellarmine cites Sigebert: but when he is cited to testify the Innocence
of Henry the fourth, whom Hildebrand persecuted, L. 4. de pont. c. 13.. Deinde.
then Bellarmine alleges him to be unworthy of Credit.

Likewise, for the clearing of the orderly and just proceedinges in Pope
Gregorie's Election to the Papacy, Bell. ibid. sect. Extat.
Bellarmine cites Platina, as the only saythfull Recorder, in whom (says
he) is the very form of his election set down. But when he is adduced by
us, to prove the noveltie of Auricular Confession, and that the first enjoynet
thereof, was Innocent the third, Bellarmine rejects Platina, Bell. l. 3. de
punit. c. 13. sect. Deinde.
saying, I trow it be a Lie (says he) which Platina reports: adding, that
he is no authorized Author, although his Declaration in his Preface to the Pope,
by whose command he vvrote, does evidentlie shovv the contrary.

In like manner, in a matter of History, for proof, that Peter substituted
Clement to succeed him, Bell. lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 5. sect* deinde.
Bellarmine cites Tertullian, Tanquam gravissimus author: but when he is
adduced by us, to prove, that Pope Zepherin was a Monatist, in this point of
History, L. 4. ^e pont. c. 8.. Resp.
Bellarmine answers, That there is no trust to be given to him.

Also Gregorie's Dialogues, and the Stories there-in contained, are cyted by
Bellarmine, Bell. l. 2. de mon. c. 21.. Alia. L. 1. de sanct. c. 19.. S. Greg.
L. 2. de purg. c. 6. sect. prima.
for Monastical life, and invocation of Sayncts, etc. but is rejected as
false, when he ridiculouslie tells of a Purgatory of Souls, after death,
into warm Bathes.

Thus use they their Historicians at their pleasure, whether ancient or more
recent, even as Herod used the Baptist; who although he heard him in many things
gladly, yet he rejected and persecuted him, in the matter of Herodias.

4. How they have so forged, and corrupted Records that are extant, and taken
others al-together out of the way, that in things concerning the Truth, which
makes against them, they have left very little to be seen, and feysted in,
many contrary Falsehoods.
THE thing that ever that Whore of Babylon has most labored for, Aeneas
Sylvius, alias Pius 2. Epist. 288.
and her Suppostes for her have most endeavored, has been still A Supreme,
and sole Soveraignitie. The which, although a Pope, and one of the Sitters on that
Scarlet-colored Beast, does ingenuouslie confess, That Rome was free, and
far from the like Challenge, or the Church of GOD, from the acknowledgement
of any such Diotrephes-lyke Pre-eminence, in her purest and primitive times,
while as she remained as an holy and chaste Spouse unto CHRIST, under the
Dragon's Persecution, till the time of the Council of Nice. Yet, that the
World may be borne in hand, That such Supremacy, as is now challenged, was
ever reckoned due to that Seat of Majesty; and that even from the very
beginning, and profession of true Christianity* that she did sit as a Queen;
there-fore, for probation heere-of, and to make up that Gappe between the
Apostolical times, and that Council of Nice, they have forged some Decretall
Epistles, Decretall Epistles counterfeyt.
of the bishops of Rome, to have interveaned, fraughted with no other Ballast,
nor Burden, but Soveraignitie, and their Horns still sounding on high, the
trebble tune only of Lords Paramont, and Universal Seignorie.

And if the Nicene Fathers have been too niggardlie disposed, by passing a
Sentence, of confyning those Roman bishops, within their own Circuites,
against any such boundless, and universal Supremacy: then, the World must
know, that she is not so destitute of Lovers, but that she has her
Favorites, which can mende their Fault; and like Picke-Lockes, with wrong
Keys, release their holy Mother, from such narrow Imprisonment, and can make
Canons before hand, to be urged in due time, by their pope Zozimus, and to
give such an hard Charge, A Canon of Nice, counterfeyt.
to a whole Africane Council, as they shall be in hope, that those shall
yield presently, to such a brave Battery. Which if that fail them (as
vnluckilie it did) and that Paper only be found in the shot, in place of
hard Bullet; Then shall be made up, two famous counterfeyt Councels: the one
where-of, shall be a Roman, (and there-fore no marvel, if in Favors of
Rome) which shall check Nice, Council. Romans Cap. 20. Anno 315. (...).
^in^^ssan. anno 301. ^oth counterfeyt.
for its Nycenesse, and match, yea, outmatch the same, in Venerable Antiquity:
and shall not yield only, That the Pope has power, to judge all others; but
(as if that were too narrow a Scantling) shall give him this Prerogative, by
their Declatatour, expresselie to be judged by none.

And if this will not yet serve, to be so Supreme in Ecclesiasticis, as to
be both Lawgiver, and Law-lesse: but being glutted, with the Surfer of
Spiritual Jurisdiction, his large Maw also, and appetite after Temporal
power, must be lyke-wyse satiate: There-fore, to set him on the highest
pinnacle of Pride, and to put on the Kepstone of Absolute Monarchy, on his
lofty and triple-crowned head, for the completing of the Mystery of
Iniquity, and full in-thronizing of that Vicar of the Prince of Darkness,
into the Possession, (or at least the Claim) of Satan's full Grant, unto this
pretended Servaunt, of that which the Master had before re^used, when it was
said unto Him, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down, and
worship me. There-fore, there must be an ample and fair Donation,
Constantine's Donation, counterfeyt.
of Constantine's well framed out, vvhere-in his Holiness is invested, not
only in the City of Rome, but also infeft, and seized, as Lord Paramont, in
Temporalibus, in the whole Seignorie, and Empire of the West. Which Donation,
how grossly it is forged, and Knavishlie counterfeyted, is clearlie shown,
by their own VALLA, a Roman, and Channon of Laterane.

And, as yet, the Pope not contenting with this, Boniface the eight,
there-fore, does step farthest of all, and makes the highest Reach: So that
their own FASCICULUS TEMPORUM testifyeth of him, Quod in tantam arrogantiam
erexit seipsum, ut Dominum totius Mundi se diceret tam in Temporalibus, quam in
Spiritualibus: that is, He rose up, unto so high pride, that he called
himself, Lord over the whole World, as well in Temporal things, as in
Spiritual. And which Claim, himself, in his large Decretall, ^
clearlie profes^eth. So that he has left it, as a Non ultra, to his Papal
Successors.

Next, unto forging whole Treatises, to come to their corrupting of other
Records, for the Papal behoof, let Cardinal Benno stand up as a witness, in
the life of Gregory the seventh, of whom their own Aventin thus likewise
reports, ^
that, Non solum ad ambitionem suam occultandam fabulas comminiscitur, annals
corrumpit, res gestas invertit; sed etiam coelestia oracula adulterat, etc.
that is, That Gregory the seventh, ( alias Hild^brand) to hyde his pride, did
not only make up Fables, as true Histories, did corrupt the sound Registers,
and inverted things that were done; but also did adulterate the very heavenly
Oracles, expounding sacred Scripture falselie, (says he) and forcing the
same, so to serve his wicked Lusts.

And last of all, how they have taken all things almost out of the way, that
could make against them, (so that it is GOD'S great providence, that we have
the Scripture left unto us sound) their own Alphonsus de Castro furnishes us
with a notable Example, A^phons. de Hares. lib. 1. cap. 13.
testifying, Quod ducenta volumina Wickle^^, Episcopus Pragensis, (says he)
concrema^i fecit, pulcherrime conscripta and regumentis pretiosis ornata: that
is, That the Bishop of Prague caused burn two hundredth Volumes of Wicklesse's,
most excellently well, written, ^
and covered with most rich Covers. And this he did at his own hand, without
any superior warrant, long before the condemning of the said deceassed
Wickleffe, or Jerome of Prague either, in their ensewing Council; making so of
their Books, the bones of Bethel's Priests, which was indeed their most
succinct sort of confutation, Non arguendo, seit comburendo, all their Reasons,
being Razing, and their firmest Arguments, being the Fire and Ferio.

Again, Pope Gelasius had a notable Epistle, against the mutilation of the
SACRAMENT, and is cited by Gratian: But what does Bellarmine freely confess
heere-of? Bell. Lib. 4. de Euch. cap. 26.. Resp.
Haec Epistola (says he) modo fortasse non extat: that is, Perhaps, now,
this Epistle is out of the way. Even as those Romish purgers do profess of
Bertram, that they care not, Index expurg. ^. Bertram.
Si vel nusquam sit, vel intercidat: that is, That it were not in the World at
all, or were perished: because it is such a clear Evidence, of the learned
opposition, that was made eight hundredth years ago to Transsubstantiation,
when it was but hatching, as no clearer any ways can be.

And in like manner, in the matter of Divorce, and privilege of the party
vvronged, to marry again, Gratian cites a Canon of an ancient Council:
Bell. Lib. 1. de Matrim. c. 17. ^ecruidus.
but Bellarmine says, That now, Ne nomen quidem illius Concilii extat, ex quo
canon ille depromptus est: that is, That not so much as the very name of that
Council is extant, out of which that Canon is taken.

Likewise, Bellarmine grants plainly, Bell. Lib. ^. de Pont. cap. 14..
Tri^^s^^^s ter^^^.
that the Decretall Epistle of Celestine the third, showing, that he
maintained the Heresy, That difference in Religion, is cause of Divorce, was
before, amongst the old Decretals, and that Alphonsus de Castro saw it in his
time; but that the same is now quyte abolished, and taken away, he freely
confesses.

Besides those Suppressions of Evidences, what Oppressions likewise have been
of the persons of the good and Godly, under Papacy prevayling, since the
eight hundredth year of GOD, let their own Platina, in the life of Sylvester
the third, and their own Fasciculus, after the life of Steven the fifth,
testify: the one recording, That all good Men suffered Oppression, and
Rejection: and the other telling of such Persecution, that he says, Eia!
Quis conventus, quae Congregatio, quis Homo jam securus erit? that is, Alace!
what Company, what Assembly, yea, what Man now, can be safe? And
there-fore, he calls that Age where-of he spoke, The vvorst Time that ever
was, In quo defecit Sanctus, (says he) and diminutae sunt veritates a Filiis
Hominum: that is, VVhere-in the holy Man is perished, and Truth is departed
from the Sons of Men. Thus were the Godly (as themselves confess) in their
persons either oppressed forciblie, or else their pains were suppressed
fraudefullie.

Which Oppression toward the Godly, Revel. 11.
joined with strong Delusion toward the God-lesse, caused the Warning,
which the few Witnesses gave, that the same was either not heard, or if it
was heard, it was not believed; or what was witnessed, and believed, could not
the least part thereof come to our Ears, who live so long after them: Partly
through ignorance of the Age, lacking Historicians, as BELLARMINE testifyeth of
that nynth CENTURIE, Bell. Lib. 4. de Pont. cap. 12. in fin^.
Quo nullum indoctius, (says he) nullum infoelicias: that is, Than which
Age, none was ever more unlearned, and more unhappy: Partly, also, through
the want of the ART OF PRINTING, and propagating of the true Travels of the
LORD His Servauntes: Partly through the violent Curbing of the Pens of the
Pious, and partly by interring their Pains after them, by total Deletion,
whom they could not deter in their Lives, from faithful Relation: or else
so vvoefullie and vvickedlie vitiating their Works, that Corruption of Writs
and Fal^ehoode is seen, where Correption of Vice, and Truth was ^et down:
and with the EDOMITES against the Temple, although not crying openly, yet
practizing privilie, razing, even razing to the Foundation, and drowning (like
the EGYPTIANS, many Birthes of ISRAEL, in their Rivers of Suppression, and
in the LETHE of Eternal Oblivion.

So that we may say with the PROPHET, Except the LORD had left a very small
Remanent, as ISRAEL would have been like to SODOM, and like unto GOMORRHA:
Isai. 1.^.
So, except the LORD HIS Providence had made some to escape, Judges, 9.
as IOTHAM did from the Hands of ABIMELECH, or as IOASH was preserved, 2.
Chron. 23.
by the Wife of IEHOIDA, we had not known so the Sedulitie and Subtlety of
ANTICHRISTIAN HIERARCHY, as now we see traced forth, and treated of in
their own History. Neither how comfortablie, and carefully; mercifully,
and marvellouslie, like MOSES in PHARAOH his Court, ISRAEL in afflicting
EGYPT, the three Children in the fyerie Furnace, and the seven thousand under
cruel ACHAB: Even so, how those Sealed, and Virgin Worshippers, have been
reserved, and GOD'S People, in the midst of BABELL, ever been preserved; like
the Temple unpolluted, in the midst of Court and City, of that defiled
multitude with Idolatry, who followed the Beast.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7. Lin. 5. Is is, for It is. Lin. penult. affrighted, for stricken. Page
11. lin. 17. to, for them. Page 30. lin. pen. by, for with.

Any other Escapes in Printing, let the Reader amend.


