A MARVELOVS Hystory intitulede, Beware the Cat. Conteynyng diverse wounderfull
and incredible matters. Uery pleasant and merry to read.

GEVE GOD THE GLORY NOW AND EVER MORE
IMPRINTED AT LONDON, IN Fleetestrete at the sign of the Faulcon by Wylliam
Gryffith: and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstons Churchyard. Anno. 1570.



Love and Live.
To the Right worshipful Esquier master John Young, Grace and health.
I Have penned for your masterships pleasure one of the stories which master
Streamer told the last Christmas, and which you so feign would have heard
reported by master Feres him self. And although I be unable to pen or speak
it so pleasantly as he could, yet have I so nerely used both the order and
words of him that spoke them, which is not the least virtue of a reporter that
I doubt not but that he and master VVillot shall in the reading think they
hear master Streamer speak, and he him self in the like action shall doubt
whether he speaks or reads. I have divided his oration into three parts,
and put the argument before them, and an instruction after them with such notes
as might be gathered thereof: so making it book like, and entitled. Be ware
the Cat. But because I doubt whether master Streamer will be contented that other
men plowe with his oxen, I mean pen such things as he speaks, which
perhaps he would rather do him self to have (as he deserves) the glory of
both therefore I beseech you to learn his mind herein. And if he agree it pass
in such sort, yet that he peruse it before the Printing, and amend it if in
any point I have mistaken him. I pray you likewise to ask master Ferres his
judgment herein, and show him that the cure of the great plague of master
Sreamers translation out of the Arabicke, which he sent me from Margets,
shall be Imprinted as soon as I may conveniently. And it I shall perceive by your
trial, that master Streamer allow my endeavors in this kind, I will
hereafter as Plato did by Socrates pen such things out of the rest of our
Christmas communications, as shall be to his great glory, and no less pleasure
to all them that desire such kinds of knowledge. In the mean while I beseech
you accept my good will, and learn to beware the Cat. So shall you not only
perform that I seek but also please the Almighty who always pres you:

Amen.
Yours to his power. ^ B.

The Argument.
IT chanced that at Christmas last I was at the Court with master Ferres then
master of the Kings majesty's pastimes about the setting forth of certain
enterludes, which for the kings recreation we had devised and were in
learning. In which time among many other exercises among our selves we used
nightly at our lodging to talk of sundry things for the furtheraunce of such
offices wherein each man as than served. For which purpose it pleased master
Ferres to make me his bedfellowe, and upon a pallet cast upon the rushes in his
own chamber to lodge master willot and. M. Streamer, the one his Astronimor
the other his divine. And among many other things to long to rehearse, it
happened on a night which I think was the. xxviij. of December after that M.
Ferres was come from the court and in bead, there fell a controversy between
M. Streamer who with M. willot had already slept his first sleep, and I that
was newly come to bead the effect whereof was whether birds and beasts had
reason, the occasion whereof was this. I had heard that the kings players were
learning a play of Esops Crow, wherein the most part of the actors were birds,
the device whereof I discommended, saying it was not commicall to make either
spechles things to speak, or brutish things to common reasonably. And although
in a tale it were suffreable to Imagine and tell of something by them spoken or
reasonably done, which kind Esop laudably used, yet it was uncomely said I and
without example of any author to bring them in liuly peirsonages to speak, do,
reason, and alaege au^^orities out of authors. M. Streamer my Lo^^ ^^uine,
being more divine in this point than I was ware of, held the contrary part,
affirming that beasts and fowls had reason, and that as much as men, yea and
in some points more. master Ferres him self and his Astronimer wakened with
our talk harkened to us, but would take part on neither side. And when M.
Streamer had for proof of his assercion declared many things of Oliphants that
walked upon cords, Hedgehogges that knew always what weather would come,
Fores and Dogs that after thoy had been all night abroad killing Geese and
Sheep would come home in the morning and put their necks into their collers,
Parates that bewailed their kepers death, Swallows that with Selandine open
their young ones eyes, and an hundred things more which I denied to come of
reason, and to be but natural kindly actions, alleging for my proof authority
of most grave and learned Philosophers, well quod master Streamer I know what I
know, and I speak not only what by hearsay of some Philosophers I know, but
what I my self have proved. why (quod I then) have you proof of beasts and
fowls reason? yea (quod he) I have heard them and understand them both speak
and reason as well as I here and understand you: at this M. Ferres laughed. But I
remembering what I had read in Albertes works, thought there might be somewhat
more than I knew, wherefore I asked him what beasts or fowls he had heard, and
where and when: At this he pawsed a while, and at last said: If I thought you
could be content to hear me, and without any interruption till I have done to
mark what I say, I would tell you such a story of one piece of my own^
experimenting, as should both make you wonder, and put you out of doubt c^^
this matter. But this I promise you aforet I do tell it, that as soon as any
man curiously interrupteth me, I will leave of and not speak one word more.
When we had promised quietly to hear, he turning him self so in his bead as
we might best hear him, said:

FINIS.
The first part of master Streamers oracion.
BEing lodged as I thank him I have been often, at a friends house of mine,
which more rowmish within than garish without, stands at Saint Martins lane
end, and hangs partly upon the town Wall Why Alde^^gate was so named.
that is called Aldersgate, either of one Aldricke, or else of Elders, that is
to say ancient men of the City which among them builded it, as Bishops did
Bishopsgate: Bish^^ builded ^^^shopsgate.
or else of Eldern trees, which perchance as they do in the gardens now there
about, so while the common there was vacaunt grue abundantly in the same place
where the gate was after builded, and called thereof Elderngate: as Moregate
took the name of Why moregate.
the feeld without it, which has been a very Moore. Or else because it is the
most ancient gate of the City, was thereof in respect of the other, as
Newgate, called the Why Newgate.
^^^ergate. Or else as Ludgate takes the Why L^^^gate.
name of Lud, who builded it, so most part of Haroldes (I know) will sonest
assent that Aluredus builded this. But they are decesued. For he and his wife
Algay Why Algate.
builded Algate which thereof takes the name, as Criplegate does of a Criple
who begged so much money in his life as put to Why Cryple gate.
the silver Wethercocke which he stole from Poules steple, after his death
builded Powles weather cock was silver.
it.

But whereof so ever this gate Aldergate took the name, which longs chiefly
to Historyes to know, at my friends houss which as I said stands so nere it
that it is over it, I lay often times, and that for sundry causes. Sometime for
lack of other lodging, and sometime as while my Greeks Alphabets were in
printing to se that they might be truly corrected. And sure it is a Against
young men's negligence.
shame for all young men that they be no more studious in the tounges, but the
world is now come to that pass, that if he can prate a little Latin, and
handle a Racket Against unlawful games.
and a pair of fire square bowls, he shall sooner obtain any living than the
best learned in a whole City: which is cause that learning is despised, and
bagagical things so much advanced.

While I lay at the foresaid house for the causes aforesaid, I was lodged in a
Chamber hard by the Printing house, which had a fair Bay window opening


