TWO FRUITFUL SERMONS, NEEDFVLL for these times: Whereof THE ONE MAY BE CALLED,
A Marriage Present; THE OTHER, A SICKEmans Glass.

Compiled by ROGER HACKET, Doctor in Divinity.



AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Cuthbert Burby. 1607.

A MARRIAGE PRESENT.
GENES. 2.22. And he brought her to the man; then the man said, this now, is
bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.


FOR the better opening and understanding of this Scripture, you may observe:
first, who brought her; God, which a little before, had made her out of the rib
of Adam. Secondly, whom he brought; Eve, the first of women. Thirdly, to whom
God brought her; to Adam, the first of men, the father of us all. Fourthly, why
he brought her; to be Adams wife, Genes. 2.18.
for God did not think it meet that Adam should be alone, therefore he made
Eve, and gave her to Adam to be an helper meet for him. Verse. 20.
Fifthly, Adams accepting and taking her to be his wife this now is bone of my
bones, and flesh of my flesh. In which words, Adam does not only show, that God
made her of a fleshie rib, that was taken from him: but also that now they two,
were become one flesh, being joined together in holy marriage by God and their
mutual consents. Thus in these, though briefly, yet you may plainly see, the
meaning of this Scripture; And he brought her to the man, etc.

Whereas it has bin an ancient and laudable custom, Zanch. lib. 4. cap. 2.
de Matrimo. these. 2. de consecrat. nupt.
as Zanchius observes, out of Christ's turning water into wine, at the marriage
of Canaan, to grace the married couple with diverse presents: I, in stead of
better things, have brought unto the Bridgrome and his mate, and to this most
Christian assembly, a few country flowers; O let them find grace in your
eyes, they are gathered out of the garden of Eden, out of the garden of the
Lord. Of which, the first is the Prime-rose, take you al of this; God gives Eve
unto Adam; let all your marriages begin in the Lord; The second is the
Maydens-blush, a flower for you maidens; Eve comes not, and gives her self,
this did not stand with her maidens modesty: but God brings her, and gives her
to Adam. So should you attend your parents pleasure, till he bring and give you
unto man. The third is the sweet, cooling, cordial, and low growing Violet:
for you the Bride, and for all you women, which either are, or would be joined
in marriage with man. When GOD saw that it was not meet for man to live alone,
Genes. 2.2^.
he made Eve, and he gave her, to be an helper meet for man. Remember o ye
daughters of Eve, that you were made for man, that you were given to man, not
to be hurters, but to be helpers mere for them. Show by your obedience, that
you are low growing Violets; by your lovely carriage, that you are sweet; by
your mild patience, that you are cooling; by your loyal faithfulness, that you
are cordial; by your gracious help, that you are like this sweet, cooling,
cordial and low growing Violet, the flower that God here commends unto you.
The last is the Rosemary, the flower of men; for you the Bridegroom, and for
all you married men, that are joined in holy wedlock with your wives: although
the Rosemary ouertops all the flowers in the garden, and thereby boasts his
rule; yet remember that Rosemary is good for the head, rule with wisdom;
helpful to the heart, rule with love: that it is always green, be always
lovely and loyal to your wives. When God had given Eve to Adam, Adam takes
her, and of her he faith, this is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh,
there is his love: he cleaues to his wife, and they two become one flesh, there
is his loyalty: this God inspired in him, there is his wisdom. Smell sweet o
ye flowers, in your native sweetness; be not adulterated with the water of this
world: o show your selves in your proper beauties, The Prime-rose for all.
and be not gilded with the idle art of man.

The first of these flowers, is the Prime-rose, of this let us first speak,
and as in the first of the year, the Prime-rose is desirously gathered of all,
so let this with the first be accepted of you all. God gave Eve to Adam, let
all your marriages begin in the Lord. Let God give the woman to the man, and
join man unto the woman: for if he join not, how can the married couple look
for a blessing of the Lord? It should not be with you, o ye young men and
maidens, as it is with the beasts, that every one should take his mate, and
after an unseemly manner come together: but God must give Eve to Adam; of you
it should be said, that God has joined you together. For what is the cause
that the bed of many married couples is defiled, that many husbands and wives,
jar, as instruments that are out of tune, and want the sweet content of that
blessed estate? God gave not Eve to Adam, they were married, but yet not in the
Lord. Wherefore let this Prime-rose, be in the prime of thy desires, seek for
a wife at the hands of the Highest, Prou. 19.14.
seek to be married in the Lord. For surely as wise Solomon speaks, houses
and riches are the inheritance of the fathers; but an understanding wife
comes from the Lord. Genes. 24.9.
This made aged Abraham to charge his servant, and that by oath, to seek a
wife for his son Isaak, not among the daughters of Canaan, but among the
people where he was borne. Verse. 12.
This made his charged servant, to pray to the God of his master Abraham, for
success: and God heard his prayer, Verse. 58.
and so moved the heart of Rebecca to give consent; Verse. 50.
that her brother Laban, and father Bethuel, were enforced to confess, that it
was proceeded of the Lord. In such manner offer up your prayers to the Highest,
o ye that desire to be married; that he would bless you in this your weighty
business, so shall you to your comfort find, Toby 7.11.
that your lot is fallen on a good ground, that it is proceeded of the Lord
Remember how Sara, the daughter of Raguel, was married to seven, and how every
of them, that night they came in to her, that night they died. What was the
reason? Toby 8.7.
God gave not Sara in marriage to them. After young Toby marieth, comes in to
her, and lives: mark the reasons noted in the story, Toby 8.4.
he came not in to her for fornication, but uprightly: he prayed to the God of
his fathers, God gave Sara a wife to him, they were married in the Lord.
Wherefore accept of this sweet Prime-rose, you that are in the prime and
spring of your lives, seek by prayer and all good means, that God may give
Eve to Adam, a wife to you, that you may be married in the Lord. The
Mayde^sblush for maidens.


The second flower is the Maydens-blush, a flower for you maidens; Eve comes
not of herself, nor gives her self to Adam, this does not stand with her
maidens modesty: but God brings Eve, and God gives her to Adam: even so should
you attend your fathers pleasure, till he brings and gives you unto man. For
you sweet maidens bear your fathers name, he gave you life, and from him you
have whatsoever you seem for to enjoy: will you then rob your father of his
child and unkindly despise the author of your life? shall the flattering
speeches, and baynfull bates of one, but a few days known, more prevail with
you, than parents words, than all that they have done, and are likely to do
for you hereafter? Numb. 30.5.
If thou hadest made a vow to God, yet unless thy father approved it, thou
should not perform it to the Highest: shall God go from his right, to
maintain thy fathers power; and will thou, to the wrong of thy father, hurt of
thy self, keep touch with thy supposed lover, Exodus 22.16.
that keeps no touch and faith with God? In the old Law it was said, if a man
had entised a maiden, which was not promised, and had said with her: If the
father would not give her to him, the offender was to give a dowry to her,
(whom he had humbled) and he might not take her unto wife. Hear o ye maidens,
your parents consent is not only required, as Peter Lombard speaks, ad
honestate^, sed ad necessitatem, not only to grace and honest your marriages,
Council. Lateran Can. 51.
but to make them lawful and good. Therefore in the Council of Lateran, those
privy marriages which are made, without the parents consent, are pronounced as
unlawful, as they that are made, within the prohibited degrees of
consanguinitie, and affinity. Wherefore o ye maidens, take at my hands this
sweet flower of the Maydens-blush, it will grace your mayden-heads, please your
parents, and make you be beloved both of man and God. And when in your
espousals, it shall be asked, Who gives this maiden unto wife; cause not thy
aged father to withhold his hand, but cause him rather to step forth with
joy, and before God and his Church, to perform for thee that blessed work.

Now as to the parent, God has given power to bestow his daughter; so also
that he do it well and wifely, Deuteronomy. 7.3.
God requires at his hand. God says, Thou shall not give thy daughter to a
Cananite. There he gives thee power to bestow thy daughter in marriage, 1. Cor.
7.37.
but yet no power to bestow her on a Cananite. He that gives his daughter in
marriage, does well: Verse. 39. Eccles. 7.25.
the parent has power to give his daughter in marriage, says the Apostle; but
yet he must do it well, he must do it in the Lord. He that has married his
daughter, (says Jesus the son of Syrach) has performed a good work. Thou
have power to marie thy daughter, but withal perform a good work, give her
to a man of understanding, as in that place it follows. Marry not thy
daughter to wealth and worship, but marry her unto a man: for a man may get
wealth and worship, but wealth and worship never gets a man. For on thee, thy
modest daughters eyes are fastened, thou art unto her that pillar of light, when
thou mouest, she moves, when thou stand still, she stands; well
persuaded of thy fatherly love, and provident wisdom, she resigneth over her
will to thine, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Coloss. Homil. 12.
and yields her self to be disposed by thee. Seek therefore for a man for
thy daughter (as Chrysostom speaks) which in love shall cherish her, in
wisdom shall rule her: now thou art to resign thy power of her, Decret.
25.26 Cause. 31. Q. 2^. cap. 3.
which once resigned, thou can not reclaim: now thou art on her tender self
to set an head Wherefore do not as Urban Bishop of Rome, wrote to Sanctio a
King of Arragon in Spain, either by thy fatherly authority over awe her; or
by the deceiving reasons of wealth and worship, seek to persuade her, Matthew.
19, ^.
to like a man who^ she cannot love. For although thou wast the father of her
body, yet God it was that gave her her soul, whose only it is, in a true
liking love to join man and wife together. Do not therefore wrong God in his
right, in seeking to join those together, whom the Lord neither yet has nor
would have joined: for if thou do, and thy daughter loath to give any
farther nay, yields with her woe, to thy desire; thou have not performed a
good work, thou have not done well, thou have not married her in the Lord, thou
must bear the blame of their after-varyings, and whatsoever other their fouler
faults. Hear o ye maidens, how sweet this flower is, of the Maydens-blush,
how in joining you in blessed marriage, it requires Gods, fathers, and also
your consents. Wherefore if your parents, or they that are in place of parents,
Genes. 24.57.
will not call you as Bethuel did Rebecca, and ask of you your free consents;
yet may thou in thy maidens modesty, without offense given unto thy father,
deny to like where thou can not love, or to give thy hand, where thou can
not give thy heart. Mark 10.9.
And with this must all parents rest contented; for to join the hearts of man
and wife together, is not the work of man, but of God Otherwise, if contrary
to thy liking, thou suffer thy self to be joined to another; it may boe, o
over modest maiden, thou will stain this Maydens-blush with thy wiuish tears,
thou will be the cause of thine own future troubles, which now may be staned,
but then cannot be remedied: thou must eat the bread of discontent, and he in
the bed where thou would not be; your after-varyings, if it proceed not to
worse, will be a trouble to your friends, and grief unto your self. Wherefore
with you, o maidens, let me leave this flower, it is the Maydens-blush. As the
father is to give Eve to Adam, so must he do it in the Lord, and with Eues free
consent. The Violet for married wives, first is helpful.


The next flower that comes to my hand, is the sweet, cooling, cordial, and
low growing Violet. This commends it self unto the Bride, and to every of you
that either are, or would be married wives. It is the sweetest flower in the
garden of Eden, Genes. 2.18. Verse. 20.
and me thinks it best beseems you. When God saw, that it was not meet for
man to live alone, he made Eve, and he gave her to Adam, to be an helper meet
for him. Forget not o ye wives why Eve was made, why she was brought and married
to Adam: sure not to be an hurter, but to be an helper meet for man. Of all the
flowers in the garden, none is so helpful as is the Violet: of all the
creatures, none such helpers meet for man, as is the woman. If man swell with
pride, and lift up his nose among his neighbors; she with her lowly and humble
carriage, remembers him, that he is no better than his forefathers, which are
returned to the earth from whence they came. If man burns in the flames of his
fleshly lust; she is the cooler of those flames, to avoid fornication, 1. Cor.
7.2.
let every man have his wife: Verse. 9.
it is better to marry than to burn. If man sparkle with anger, in that
unseemly heat; she with her soft and welpleasing speech, soon abateth that
heat, and makes him to see, James 1.20.
that the wrath of man never fulfilleth the righteousness of God. If man be
heavy, and vnquiered within, either for wrongs imposed, or sustained loss;
she as a cordial comfort caseth those his sorrows, and satisfies his soul
with sweet content. What man gets abroad, she saves at home, and under
him, with his gain and credit, governs his family and home-affaires, being
as Augustine speaks, August. adu. Pollent. lib. 2. cap. 12.
infirmitatis remedium, humanitatis solatium; a medicine of man's maladies, and
sweet procurer of his best content. So helpful unto man is this sweet,
cooling, cordial, and low growing Violet. Wherefore o ye married wives, remember
that man was not made for the woman, but the woman for the man, 1. Corin. 11.9.
as the Apostle speaks. Remember you were made to be helpers meet for man,
do not degenerate from the cause of your creation. O, how unworthy is it your
sweet selves, that as Adam complained of Eve, the woman that thou gave me,
she gave me of the fruit to eat: Genes. 3.12.
so thy husband should complain of thee, the woman that thou gave me, she
has hurt me, she has entised me to sin! Although, this will not serve thy
husband for excuse, yet this will show, that thou despisest the end for which
thou wast created, and with sin neglectest thy imposed duty, to be an helper
meet for man.

Secondly the Violet grows low.
Now after the help the Violet affords, in the second place I pray you consider
how it grows by the ground, it grows low: even so must all you married
wives, grow low, you must be subject to your husbands. This is the sentence of
God given on Eve, and on all Eues daughters, which may not be revoked, Genes.
3.16.
that not only in sorrow you should bring forth your children (which you all do
to this day feel) but that your desires must be subject to your husbands, and
they must rule over you. In vain thou pleadest for thy self o woman, that
thou art one flesh with him. For although that be true yt which thou vrgest,
Ambros. de Paradiso cap. 14.
yet as Ambrose observes, for two causes God commands thee to be subject to
thy husband. First, because thou wast made of man; but especially, because by
thee sin entered into the world, man was entised for to sin. So Chrysostom
brings in God in this sort, Chrysostom. hom. 17. in Genes.
speaking to the woman: I made thee equal, and gave thee Princedome with thy
husband, but because thou have abused it unto thy husbands hurt: from
henceforth I make thee subject, he shall rule over thee. Hence it is, that the
maiden, when she is married, leaves to be called after her fathers name, and
from thence forth is called after her husbands. So Eve of (...) was called
(...). Hence it is that the woman's contracts and bargains are of no force,
either by the laws of God or of man, except the husband do approve the same.
Nay hence it is that the married wife, may not perform the vows she has made
to GOD, Numb. 30.9. Aug. epist. 199 Annot. in Tertull. de veland. Virgi.
except the husband gives way to her desires. Hence it is, that to this day,
the Persian Ladies, upon the top of their coronets, have the sign of the foot;
in token that the top of their glory must stoop, even to their husbands feet.
They still remember the ancient decree of Ahashuerosh and his Princes, that
all women great and small, Hest. 1.20.
must give honor to their husbands; Verse. 22.
and that every man must bear rule in his own house. They acknowledge that
Queen Vashty, for refusing to come, when the King her husband sent for her;
was worthily by the sentence of the King and all his nobles, Verse. 16.
put from her royal seat: in that she had done evil against the King, and
against all the Princes, and all the people: Verse. 17.
in leaving her self an ill example, to all other women to despise their
husbands. Thus by the first Law of God, nature, and of nations, this is imposed
upon women, that they be subject to their husbands; the same is required in the
Gospel. Ephesians. 5.22.
Therefore Paul, Wines be subject to your husbands as to the Lord, for the
husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the Church. As the
Church to Christ, so let the wife be subject to her husband, in all things.
Where mark, wives be subject to your husbands, there is the precept; he is
your head, there is the reason: as to the Lord, as the Church is to Christ,
there is the manner. In what should they be subject? in the end it is said, in
all things. It is not enough for you to be good to your husbands, but you must
be subject too; as St. Paul speaks, You must be good, and subject to your
husbands. Titus 2.5.
Amongst many other reasons alleged for this required subjection; S. Paul
says to the Colossians, It is meet. Indeed meet, that the Moon should give
glory to the Sun, Coloss. 3.18.
from whom she receives all her light: the woman subjection to her husband,
from whom she deriueth all her worship. S. Peter, that by their submisse and
reverend carriage, 1. Pet. 3.1.
they might win their husbands to the faith. Nothing more preuailes with man,
then the submisse carriage of his wife. Titus 2.5.
St. Paul adds a third reason, lest the Word of God be evil spoken of for
your sakes. For when women make show of religion, and yet will not be subject
and obedient to their husbands, their faults in this are ascribed to the
blameless Gospel of our Christ. Wherefore hear o ye married wives, Hieron.
comment. in Titu^.
what S. Hierom speaks upon this place: Since the husband is the head of the
woman, as Christ is the head of man; what wife soever is not subject to her
husband, is as much in fault, as man is, when he is not subject unto Christ.
(mark his reasons) For the first sentence that God gave (wherein she is charged
to be subject) is despised, and Christ's Gospel infamed, when a Christian woman
will not do that to her husband, which the Heathen women willingly perform.
Wherefore grow low, o ye helpful Violets, be not only good, but be good and
subject to your husbands. Hierom. Epist. 14. cap. 6.
And as Hierom writ to Celantia, so I to you; Let the authority of thy husband
be vpholden by thee and let all the house learn of thee to honor him: do thou
show him to be a master by thy obsequiousnes, to be great by thy humblenes; for
in this thou shall be the more reverenced, by how much the more thou do
reverence him.

Thirdly the Violet is sweet
Let not this move your patience, o ye married wives, that I present unto you,
this low growing Violet; although it grow low, yet, which in the third place I
observe, the Violet is sweet. For such are ye women, full of sweetness, full of
love. That which is spoken of Christ's Spouse in the Canticles, Cantic. 4.10.
has place in you: Fair is thy love, better then wine, sweeter then the savor
of all spices, thy lips drop as hony-combes (so sweet are her words) thy
plants are as an Orchard of Pomegranats; so sweet are her deeds. Although God
made Eve subject, yet God also made her sweet. Sweet in her favor, sweet in
her carriage; by which she mastereth the heart of man, and draws him in love,
unto her liking. Although man be hard and heavy as the iron, that will not
bow, or hardly move; yet her sweet love shall be as the Adamant, that shall draw
him to her, and cause him to forsake father and mother, the things of high
price, and to cleave to her. Wherefore, forget not your nature* o ye sweet
Violets: the Violet always smells sweet. Take view I pray you, of your dainty
selves, how with sweet odors you are delighted, and with ill sauors, you are
nothing pleased: and by your selves measure your husbands; it is the sweet and
not the sour, that is grateful to them. I pray you consider, that although
the sweet Rose has prickles, yet the Violet has none; that it is the
sweetness, and not the prickles, that pleases man.

Fourthly the Violet is cooling.
As the Violet is sweet, so is it also cooling; and such should you wives be
unto your husbands, for since there are often two unseemly heats in man, the
one of lust, the other of anger: the woman as a sweet cooling Violet, is to
assuage them both. For to speak, first of the fire of his lust, how it may be
quenched, the Apostle shows, to avoid fornication, let every man have his
wife. It is the wife, 1. Cor. 7 12.
and not the harlot, that should quench those lustful flames. 1. Cor. 7.9.
It is better to marry, than to burn. For to man, the wife is given a remedy
of his lust, a means for him to avoid fornication, a sweet cooler to abate
this heat. Withdraw not therefore this your help from your husbands, but give
unto them (as the Apostle speaks) due benevolence; 1. Corinthians. 7.3. Verse. 4.
for the woman has not power over her own body, but the man. The which
cooling help if she shall deny, when he lawfully requires it; by that she may
be in part a cause, Verse. 5.
that Satan tempt her husband unto uncleanness; and for that, make him to
blame her as some cause of his folly. It may be a fault in him, at sometime to
require it; yet is the^ thy yielding no fault in thee, if otherwise he will not
be satisfied; August. contr. Jouin. cap. 10.
this is as Augustine speaks, venialis in vxore, in meretrice damnabilis,
pardonable in a wife, though damnable in an harlot. It was an error of Syricius
the Pope, who adjudged sinful every carnal conjunction of man and woman;
abusing those words of the Apostle, That they that were in the flesh could not
please God. For God made male and female, Genes. 1.27. Verse. 28.
he wills them to increase and fill the earth; which yet they could not,
without carnal coputation; he said not only of marriage, Hebr. 13.4.
but of the carnal use of the married, The bed undefiled is honorable among all
men. The which Gregory the great acknowledged, Gregor. mag. in Psalm. Poenit. 4.
Men are not therefore conceived in sin, because it is a sin for married
folks, carnally to know one another: for that is a chaste work; and no fault
in the married couple; because the nuptial contract, is not exorbitant from
faith, God appointing marriage, and the conjunction too; in that he made them
male and female. Wherefore since the bed undefiled is honorable, a chaste work,
in the married couple: show your selves cooling Violets to your husbands, Gods
ordained remedies for their lust.

The other heat, which sometime is unseemly in man, is the heat of anger: by
which all inflamed, he is carried beyond all bounds of reason, to do the things
that are not good: this also by her mild and patient carriage, the woman must
seek to cool, and to lay the storms of those blustering winds, although it
be with the showers of her tears. August. confess. lib. 9. cap. 9.
For although she may not, as Augustine speaks in the praise of his mother,
either in word or deed resist her moved husband; yet to him she must be a
cooling Violet, to assuage his anger, and a means to bring him to his wonted
quiet. And if to thee o woman, any thing seems may be better ordered; as
Augustine advised a matron, so I do thee, Aug. epist. 199.
Reverently impart it to thy husband, yet always follow his authority, as thy
heads; that all may bless the peace of your house. Yea if thy lot should fall
so hard, as that thy husband to thee should prove a Nabal, 1. Sam. 25.3. Verse.
17.
churlish, evil conditioned, yea so wicked that a man may not speak to him,
as the very servants complained of their master; yet do thou perform the part
of Abigail, Verse. 24.
in seeking to pacify those whom he has offended; and in all reverence when
opportunity serves, Verse. 37.
impart to thy husband his danger and his fault. Thus be to your husbands o ye
wives, sweet cooling Violets, to quench the heat of their lust and anger.

Fifthly the Violet is cordial.
And yet before we leave this Violet, remember that which in the last we
observed, it is cordial. Such is a woman to her husband, when she is loyal.
She should not suffer any strange fire to burn on her altar; nor in her soil
any base stocks to grow, which her husband has not planted. She must
remember that of them two, the Scripture says, Genes. 2.24. Matthew. 19.6.
that they are become one flesh, she may not join it to another. If he be not
loyal, nor keep faith with her, yet must she with him; Matthew. 5.32.
she has vowed it before Christ and his church; she must therefore ever cleave
to her husband, and despise all other; and as the Marigold that opens and shuts
with the Sun; so alone with him she must open, and with him shut. This is a
cordial comfort, most pleasing to the heart of man. For when by her, he
receives children, that he has fathered to be heirs of his labors, staff
of his old age, in whom his name and memory is continued; it is so welcome to
his heart, that no cordial comfort may be compared to it. Neither is she only
cordial in her truth and loyalty; but in this, that she is an haven of rest
in man's greatest troubles, the ease of his griefs, help in his sickness, a
sweet companion in all his sorrows. For, in silence to ouerpasse the rest,
only see in the bed of her husbands sickness, how, whilst there is hope, she
ministereth with care, and feeds with comfort: nay she, when hope fails,
how against hope, she plieth the Physician, still seeking for help. Sometime
casting up her sighs and eyes to heaven, often be dewing the earth with her
tears, entertaining every one with a welcome heart, that will but speak for
husbands help. How then can there be a more cordial comfort unto man, then
this? Wherefore with you, o ye married wives, let me leave this Violet, although
it grow low, to remember you of your subjection; yet since it is so helpefull,
so sweet, so cooling, so cordial, it is a flower most meet for you; a flower
which shows you what to your husbands you should be.

The last of the flowers is the Rosemary, The Rosemary is for married men.
the which by name, nature, and a continued use, man challenges as properly
belonging to himself. In the which, although it ouertoppeth all the flowers in
the garden, boasting man's rule; and the Violet low grows at his root: yet
let man remember that it helps the brain, strengthens memory, and is very
medicinable for the head. By which is inferred, that as man is to have the rule
over his wife, so he is to rule as the Rosemary, with a sound and not a sick
head, to rule in wisdom; in that wisdom, with which here Adam inspired,
does acknowledge his wife, to be bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, the
only helper meet for himself. Wherefore if thy wife be not always pleasing,
but has in her the infirmities of women; yet of thee Peter requires, that
thou should dwell with her, 1. Pet. 3.7.
according to knowledge, and give her honor as to the weaker vessel. Thou must
dwell with her according to knowledge, thy wise patience must be still
continued: thou must give honor to her, as to the weaker vessel, thou must
seek to please her in her weak desires. Although thy wife should be as the
Moon, which always has her stains and spots, yea and which sometime with
her own disgrace, turns her body from the Sun: yet must thou still
continue a sun to her, not only in reaching to her the light of knowledge,
but in releeuing her with thy beams of comfort. This is to dwell with her
according to knowledge, and as Paul in other words speaks, 1. Cor. 7.3.
to give unto her due benevolence. The Philosophers dividing the mind of man,
make reason to sit on high, will to hold the middle, the affections to stand
beneath: this reason, may be compared to man; this will to woman; these
affections unto her desires. Now as the will, will not be enforced, but
ouerwayed with reason, yields to him her ready consent: so must a woman, not
by threats and high swelling speeches, but by words of kindness be woed to give
to her man in their different motions, her due consent. For hear o ye men,
reason does not enforce, but seeks to persuade the will. And although unto
you it be given for to rule, yet despise not the counsel of your wines,
remember God made them helpers meet for you. Although it seemed grievous in
wise and faithful Abraham's sight, to put away the bondwoman and her child, in
so hard a matter to hearken to his wife: yet to him the Lord commanded saying,
Genes. 21.12.
In all that Sarah shall say unto thee, hear her voice. For this is to rule in
wisdom, readily to embrace the counsel of thy wife; when thou shall find it
better than thine own: except Abigail had quenched the coals, that her
husband Nabal by his churlishnes had kindled; 1. Sam. 25.34.
David had not left, by the dawning of the day, any one in Nabals house to make
water against the wall. Wherefore o ye men, although the Sun rule by day,
yet let the Moon rule by night: although you rule abroad, yet let your wives
bear some stroke at home; although you rule as heads, yet let them rule also,
like to such, as were taken out of your sides. Let the Rosemary be in your
hands and heads, rule with wisdom, which gives to every one, and therefore
to your wives their due.

Another property of the Rosemary is, it affects the heart: even so should your
hearts o ye men, in true love be affected to your wives. This you may observe
in Adam here, no sooner God brought Eve and gave her to him, but forthwith his
soul cleaues to her; but forthwith he says, This is bone of my bones and
flesh of my flesh. Ephesians. 5.33.
Forthwith he loves her as himself. Let every man (therefore as Paul speaks)
love his wife, even as himself; as himself, o Paul, Verse. 25.
nay more then himself, even as before thou have said, as Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it. For consider o man, what thy wife does, and
has done for thee. To thee she yields, (which before thee no^e might ever
touch) to take the maiden flower of her unconquered self, the which once
gathered, thou can never restore. For thy sake, she forgets her father,
and her fathers house, and is now called after thy name. To thee she gives her
sweet self, and all the fruits of her first love. By thee, she submits her
lowly self, to be ruled and ouer-ruled: when yet a while, she might be
free, not under covert, but of full power. And how then can thou but love thy
wife, which with thee has left so many known pledges of her unfeigned love? To
pleasure thee, she breeds in pain; and brings forth in sorrow, high priced
children, chief of man's desires: which are called, not after hers, but after
thine and thy fathers name; these she brings up with care, governs with
love, in pleasing them, seeking to pleasure thee: and how then can thou but
love thy wife, of whom thou have received children, the surest pledges of a
woman's love? If God has shut up her womb, and for thy sins withholds from
thee this desired blessing: yet at board and at bed, at home and abroad, she
performs to thee so many kind offices of her sweetest love; that thou can
not but confess, that Elcanah did to barren Anna, that thou art better to her,
nay that she is better to thee, than many sons. 1. Sam. 1.8. Chrysostom. in
Epist. ad Coloss. hom. 10.
Surely as Chrysostom speaks, that beauty was given to a woman, lust unto
man; shows nothing else; but that this by the Almighty was therefore done,
that the wife might be beloved of her man. Wherefore as S. Paul speaks to
the Colossians, so I to you; Coloss. 3.19.
Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. For your bitter
dealings, nay speeches, nay looks, (for kindness is killed by a bitter look)
abates the sweetness of a woman's love, and makes them hate where they are bound
to love. Wherefore o ye men, as the Rosemary affects your heads, and moves
you in wisdom for to rule; so let it also affect your hearts, and move you in
kindness for to love. Remember, of all the creatures God had made, he found
none, worthy a man's best love, and that therefore he made the woman to be an
helper meet for him. Genes. 2.20.
Do not over much tote on their faults, and please your discontented humors
with their wants: this beseems not your wisdom, nor your love. For as
Zanchius speaks, He truly loves who when he finds in his wife some things
that do displease, Zanch. in 5. ad Ephesians.
not well beseeming her, and scarce agreeing with his profit; does yet love
her, and perform the duties of a good husband to her. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad
Ephesians. Hom. 21.
Which, as Chrysostom speaks, hides her wants, and gratifieth her in her due
desires; which says not to her, this is thine and that is thine; but which
rather says, all is thine, and I am thine, this is not the speech of him that
flattereth, but rather of him that wisely loves. Wherefore o ye men, although
the high growing Rosemary, shows your rule, yet let it remember you to rule
in wisdom, to rule in love.

And yet before I leave this scepter of your rule with you, consider in the
third place, that the Rosemary (in summer and winter) is always green; even so
should men always continue, true and loyal to their wives; the same in love and
loyalty at the last, the which unto them they were at first; they should in
summer and winter be always green. Man should not only forsake father and
mother, and all strange flesh, Genes. 2.24. Proverb. 5.15.
but even to the last still he should cleave unto his wife. Verse. 20.
As the Wiseman speaks, he should content himself with the water of his own
well, of strange waters he should not drink. For when God made woman, he took
not two, but one ribbe from man; neither did he join in marriage two, but one
woman unto man; and of them two he said, he spoke not of more, they shall be
one flesh. Genes. 2.24. Matthew. 19.6.
Those whom God has joined together, thou seek to sunder, and transgressest
the holy ordinance of the highest, in that thou couplest thy body to another,
and defilest the bed that should be undefiled. But yet fear, howsoever thou
can beguile and blind the world, thou can not God: Hebr. 13.4.
Fornicators and adulterers God will judge. If thy wife should walk after thee
in that sinful way, and should bear for thee strange children (which although
thou fatherest, yet thou did not beget) to sit at thy fires, and to inherit
thy goods; thou shewedst her the way by thy ill example, and with uncleanness,
God has justly punished thy unclean self. Wherefore despise not, O man, the
wife of thy youth, nor let her first love be ever forgotten; keep thy vowed
faith with her, Proverb. 5.18.
of which both God and his Church are witness. Genes. 2.23.
Honor the holy ordinance of the highest, he has joined thee to one, Mark
10.7.
and not to many; he has willed thee to clean to one, and to forsake all
other: he has said, that you two are but one flesh, Verse. 8.1. Cor. 7.3.
that thou have not power over thine own body but thy wife. Thou may not
therefore with the wreck of thy faith, breach of Gods ordinance, to the wrong
of thy wife, hurt of thy soul, ill example of other, defile the bed which
should be undefiled, and pollute thy body with other women, which only
belongs to thy wife. Be therefore true and loyal to your wives, O ye married
men: you are their heads, thereby you shall teach them to be loyal to you.
Let this ros marinus, this flower of men, ensign of your wisdom, love, and
loyalty, be carried not only in your hands, but in your heads and hearts, that
by this your wives may understand, how much they are beholding and endebted to
you.

Thus have I scattered my flowers, the Prime-rose amongst you all, let God give
Eve to Adam, let all your marriages begin in the Lord. Amongst you maidens, the
Maidens-blush, Eve is brought and given unto Adam; so should you by your
parents be given unto men; it does not stand with a maidens modesty for to
go and give her self. Amidst you married wives, the sweet, cooling, cordial,
and low-growing Violet; although God made Eve subject, yet he made her an
helper meet for man. And lastly among you men, the Rosemary the flower of men;
although God has given you to rule over your wives, yet rule them in wisdom;
you are their heads, respect them in love, they are bone of your bones, and
flesh of your flesh: and in loyalty ever cleave to them, for with them you are
become (and so should remain, distasting all other) one flesh. Now what
remains, but that we beseech our heavenly Father, to plant these sweet
flowers in the garden of your hearts, and to water them from above with the
sweet dewes of his heavenly grace: that you may daily reap the fruits of all
happy content, to your mutual comforts in this life, and increase of bliss
in the life to come. The which the Lord give you for his Son Christ Jesus
sake, to whom with the Father, and the blessed Spirit, be all power, majesty
and dominion, both now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A SICK MAN'S GLASS.
ISAIAH 38.1.2.3. About that time was Hezechiah sick unto the death. And the
Prophet Isaiah the son of Amos came unto him, saying; Thus says the Lord,
set thy house in order, for thou must die, and shall not live.

Then Hezechiah turned his face to the wall, and besought the Lord, saying:

Now I pray thee Lord remember, how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart, and have done that which is pleasing in thy sight: and
Hezechiah wept sore.


THis Scripture diuides it self into two principal parts: whereof the first
is, the message done to Hezechiah whilst he was sick, contained in the first
verse, About that time, etc. The second is, the behavior of Hezechiah when he
had heard the message, remembered in the two next verses, Then Hezechiah turned
his face, etc.

In the message we are to observe these five points, first the time when it was
done, About that time. Secondly, the person to whom it was done, to Hezechiah
that was sick. Thirdly, the person by whom it was done, by Isaiah the Prophet,
sent unto him from the Lord. Fourthly, the message it self, Set thine house in
order. Fifthly, the reason why the King is advised so to do, Thou must die,
thou shall not live.

In the behavior of Hezechiah, when this message was thus delivered to him, we
are to consider these three especial points. First, that he turns his face
unto the wall. Secondly, that he prays, Now I pray thee Lord remember, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is pleasing in thy sight. Thirdly, that he wept sore. Of which when we
have briefly spoken, we will seek to apply it, first to this auditorie, and
then to this our brother deceased. First of the first.

Concerning the time of Hezechias sickness, and so consequently of this message
done unto him, there is great question among the learned. Of whom Rab. D.
Kymhs. Rab. Solomon. Lyran. Bullinger.
some in their writings deliver that it befell him, during the time that
Senacharib had enclosed him in Jerusalem, and there lay in siege before it.
Ierom. Rabanus. Calvin. VVolphius.
Other (whose opinion I think more meet to follow) that not then, but shortly
after; even Jsai. 37.36.
after that the Lord had sent his Angel, to destroy of the army of that proud
vaunting and blaspheming Prince, an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and
2. Reg. 18.28.
had put an hook in his nostrils, and had led him back the same way he came,
without any hurt done to Hezechiah or Jerusalem. Thus then, when Hezechiah and
his people were ioying, in this their so great and strange deliverance,
Hezechiah their King, the very light of Israel and breath of their nostrils, is
strooken with a grievous sickness, and has this message sent unto him from the
Lord, that he must die, and shall not live. O earth, how unstable are thy
joys, and how are all thy sweetes sauced with sour! The brightest sun of
man's prosperity is often clowded, nay it has a time appointed by the highest,
wherein it must set.

The second thing to be considered, is the party to whom this message was
sent, it was to King Hezechiah, which was then grievously sick. Behold Kings
have no privilege from sickness, no charter from death: nay it was to a good
King, 2. Reg. 18.3.
which did uprightly in the sight of God, like as David before him, whom God
prospered in all things that he took in hand; yet was this good King, as
though he were unworthy to enjoy the late deliverance given to his people,
strooken with the plague, the very fear of the world, and mark of Gods wrath.
If God deal so with Kings, what are we to look for, the very mean of the
people? If thus with good Kings and them of the household of faith; what shall
he do unto those which walk in the ways of the world, and have not God
before their eyes? Let therefore all flesh hear the message sent unto them
from the Lord, Thou must die, thou shall not live.

You hear to whom this message was sent, now in the third place consider from
whom he received it. It was from Isaiah the Prophet. It was from that Isaiah,
Jsai. 37.4.
to whom a little before he sent the chief of his Princes, to entreat him to
lift up his prayers for them to the Lord. Verse. 29.
It was from that Isaiah which in their greatest fear prophecies deliverance
to the people, destruction to Senacharib and his host. It was from that Isaiah
whose words he honored as the oracles of truth, and whose person as the
beloved servant of the most high God: from him he received this comfortless
speech, Set thine house in order, thou must die, thou shall not live. And yet
not from him but from the Lord, for he was but Gods mouth, Gods messenger, and
therefore here he says, Thus says the Lord, Set thine house in order, thou
must die. This cut off all his hopes, this put an end to all his desires, this
stopped the mouths of all such of his Princes and servants, which fed his
sick soul with a vain hope of life, and hurt some desire of his recovery.
Whatsoever man says, or thou would, thus says the Lord.

And what is that he says, which is the fourth thing we proposed to be
observed? Give order for thy house, or set thy house in order, dispose of the
estate of thy kingdom, and of thy worldly affairs, make thy will, and that
with speed, lest thou be prevented by death. What meanest thou Isaiah thus to
speak? thou seem to many to be a miserable comforter of the sick, too much
to daunt his fainting spirits, too much to trouble his affrighted soul. And
indeed, with such speeches, not only the sick, but the standers by, are seldom
pleased. Yet this was the word which the Lord God put into the mouth of his
Prophet, and which he commanded him to deliver to his sick King. Put thine
house in order, thou must die. Hear O my brethren of the Ministry, which
should be the children of the Prophets, what plainly without all mincing you
should speak; and hear O ye worthies and great men of the world, what with
patience on the bed of your sickness, you must be content to hear, set your
house in order, you must die.

Neither must you think that this was only required of Hezechiah to set in
order his house, and temporal affairs; but principally and above all other,
he was to set his soul in order, and to make it ready for the Lord. For he
knew that Heb. 9.27.
after death he should be brought into Gods presence; Luke 16.2.
to give account of his stewardship, how he had lived, how he had ruled, and
2. Cor. 5.10.
to receive according to the things he had done in his life, were they good or
evil. To the end therefore that he might have a prepared soul, and be as
Revel. 21.2.
the Bride that had made her self ready, that he might with aged Simeon Luke
2.29.
depart in peace, and with joy approach the presence of his Master the King, is
here advised by the Prophet, to set his house, himself, his soul in order.

Mark the reason (which ye is fifth thing we observed in the message) a
forcible motive to persuade Hezechiah to set his house in order, Thou must die,
thou shall not live. Men for the most in the extremity of their sickness, do
hope for life, and if they be beaten from their hopes, yet they will not be
driven from their desires. But here to the end that the King might be driven
from all hope and desire of life, he delivers this message to him from the
Lord, Thou must die; and lest he should feed his soul, or be fed by other,
with any vain hope of life, he further adds, Thou shall not live. This
seems a very hard and distasteful speech to be spoken to the sick, which few
will abide: yet is it full of true charity and Christian duty. For by this
means the sick soul is better moved to remember her self, to bewail her
sins, and in a good hope of mercy, to make her self ready for her God. The
which all you may behold here verified upon this summons made in this King.
Thus much for the message delivered to the King.

Now let us consider the Kings behavior upon the delivery of this message. He
turns to the wall, he prays, he weepeth. First, He turns to the wall.
Why? does he it in contempt of the Prophet, repining at the message that was
sent unto him, as the manner of some is, which turn aside their heads, when
they like not that which is spoken to them? No, he does not disdain at the
message, neither does he here complain of any his hard usage; Hieron. comment,
in hunc loc.
but since he could not for his infirmity go into the Temple, he turns his
sick self unto the wall of the Temple, as Jerome out of the Rabbines notes,
withdrawing himself from the world and all worldly help, and in the humblenes
of his soul acknowledging 2. Reg. 20.19
that the word of the Lord is good, which he has spoken by this Prophet. Thus
Hezechiah here seeks not to run away from God, or to hide himself from his
presence: but presenting his sinful soul before his Majesty, he begins to
prepare himself, and according to the advice of the Prophet to set his soul
in order. And therefore, to the end he might not be interrupted in his prayers,
and private meditations, nor have his senses or mind withdrawn, by the speech
or view of any that should come into his presence; he turns from his Nobles
and friends, he turns from the company, he turns to the wall of Gods
Temple, and by this his gesture shows, that according to the command of God,
he seeks in a serious manner, to set his soul in order, and to make it
ready for the Lord.

The which may the better appear, in that which in the second place we
observed, which is, and he prayed: for by this it appears, why he turned unto
the wall, even that he might power forth his soul in a greater devotion before
the Lord: and therefore, after he had turned to the wall, he prays, saying;
Now O Lord I pray thee remember me, how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. He
does not here lay open his former godly life, or boast before the Lord of his
well doing; as though God were therefore beholding to him, and in his debt, and
bound to give ear unto his prayers; but seeking for his best comfort, in this
time of his extreme distress, he turns from his Nobles and friends, from
his honor and kingdom, and turns to the wall of Gods Temple, turns unto
God, and prays, saying, Now Lord I beseech thee remember me, now in the bed
of my sickness, now when nothing in the world can yield me comfort, now when my
Nobles, honor and kingdom must leave, and cannot help me, now Lord I beseech
thee remember me. And what above all would he have God then to remember? that
I have walked before thee, not in falsehood, but in truth; not with a
dissembling, but with a perfect heart; and that I have done, not that which is
evil, but which is pleasing in thy sight. As if he would have said, It was thy
grace that gave me such an heart, so to walk, and so to do: take not away thy
grace and favor from me, but thou which have made me well to live, now O Lord
remember me, and make me well to die. My kingdom, wealth and worldly friends,
do not now yield unto me the least of comforts, but are matter rather of my
grief and trouble: but my comfort is in thee O my God, and in thy mercies,
that thou have made me walk before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and
to do that which is good in thy sight. Yea Hezechiah comfort thy self in thy
well deeded life, for Revel. 14.13.
thus says the Spirit, Write, from henceforth blessed are the dead that die in
the Lord, they shall rest from their labors, and (when all things else shall
forsake them) their works shall follow them.

You have heard how Hezechiah prayed: now in the third place it follows to
consider that he wept very sore. And why? was it for the pains he then
endured? Indeed the plaguie sores are very grievous. Or was it because he was
forthwith to die, to leave his kingdom and the glory of it? 1^ Reg. 19.4.
He knew with Heliah that he was no better then his fathers. Or was it because
he was to leave his kingdom, in that dangerous time, without a known
successor? These were pious tears of a most pious Prince. Yet was not this the
only cause of his tears, but when upon the view of himself and of his
doings, he saw himself many ways faulty, he bewailed his sins which he
had committed, and bedewed with tears his many ouersights; being grieved at
the very heart, that in a more forward zeal he had not sought the honor of
his God. These were the causes of Hezechias tears, and thus did he on the bed
of his sickness, with tears, prayers, and turning himself from the world unto
his God, seek to set his house in order, and to prepare his soul for the
presence of his God.

Now since August. de cur. pro mort. cap. 2.
these funeral speeches should rather serve to the instruction of the living,
than to the idle commendation of the dead: let us seek to apply that which
has bin spoken to you here assembled, to do this last duty to your deceased
brother. In the handling of which, that we may the more orderly proceed,
first, observe the summons made unto you; You must die, you shall not live.
Secondly, the end why this summons is made unto you, that you should set your
house, your souls in order. Thirdly, the manner how you should set your selves
in order, most lively showed in the person of Hezechiah: first, by turning from
the world unto God. Secondly, by praying unto God. Lastly, in weeping and
bewayling your many wants and imperfections.

Concerning the summons: amongst many other, God sends forth four Sumners, to
summo^ al flesh unto his high court of justice. First old age, to show unto man
that he is declining, and that his hoary head waxes white unto the harvest;
but old age yet dreams of long life, and puts off to prepare himself for
the Lord. Whereupon the Lord sends another Sumner, the voice of the Preacher;
to remember Genesis 3.19.
man that he is earth, and that he must to earth again: this earth hears and
acknowledges to be true, yet he feeds God with vain delays, and speaks
to his unready soul, Luke 12.19.
thy time is not yet come, yet it is good being here. Whereupon the Lord
sends his third Sumner, that is, all grieuing sickness, which paineth the
body, vnquieteth the mind, which makes their wonted pleasures very irksome
to them; yet 2. Cor. 16.12.
sick man, then feeds himself with a vain hope of life, seeks to the
Physician, but not to God; and if to God, yet then it is with his hartiest
prayers, that he might live. Whereupon the Lord seeing the sons of Adam thus
to shift his presence, he sends forth his last Sumner, fearful death, which
perforce, without delay, or farther shifting, brings man, before he is
prepared, to Gods high court of justice, there to receive his final doom:
this is that which is here mentioned, Thou must die, thou shall not live.
Although thou wast Dan. 4.11.
that goodly tree of which Daniel makes mention, whose top reaches up to
heaven, and whose branches ouer-spread the quarters of the earth: yet if the
most high shall send his watchman to hew thee down, down thou must, thou
can not stand; thy leaves shall wither, thy fruit shall fall. Although thou
wast as faithful as Abraham, pious as Daniel, powerful as Eliah, beloved as
David, and mights live so many hundred years, as the Fathers are said in the
first age of the world: yet in the end, of thee it shall be spoken, which was
said of them, Genesis 29.5.27.5.5.
And they died. Nay although thou had the utmost of Physickes skill, and
the Physitio^ waited in thee every change, although thy friends (the comfort of
the sick) enuiron thy bed, and thy pious children power forth tearefull
prayers for thy longer life: yet loath to depart, thou must take them by the
hand, and if thou will not set thine house in order, yet thou must die. Thus
must all flesh kiss the earth with Brutus, which is our mother; and the very
price of beauty Job 17.14.
must say unto corruption, Thou art my father, and to the worms and rottennes,
thou art my brother, thou art my sister. For we al Job 1.21.
came naked into the world, and naked we must return: nay Genesis 3.19.
we were all taken out of the earth, and unto earth we must return again.
Hebr. 9.7.
It is decreed that all must die. All, there is none excepted; must, there is
no remedy. When Saladine the great conqueror found himself arrested by death,
he caused a spade and a winding sheet to be carried about his camp, and
proclamation to be made; These are the conquests of Saladine. Hear O ye
bladders puffed with pride, which hunger after the glory of the world, and in
your desires have swallowed up the riches of the earth; that a spade and a
winding-sheete are the conquests of Saladine, the forth and fruit of your
desires. I was all things, said Seuerus the Emperor dying at York, but now am
nothing: this all things O ye great ones, with which now you brave and please
your selves, unto you dying, shall be as nothing. Awaken therefore your sleepie
souls, and give ear to this summons God sends to you: know that you were
borne to die. And pray unto God as David in the Psalm, Psalm 90.12.
Teach me O Lord (thou can not teach thy self, thy wealth and world
enchaunts thy mind) to number my days (that they are Genesis 47.11.
but few and evil, as Jacob said) that so at the length thou may apply thy
heart unto wisdom: to attain that life which ever shall endure, where thou
shall serve God without sin, line without all fear of death, where thou
shall never be taken away from the sweet companions of thy blessed life, nor
they from thee. Then shall Philip. 1.23.
death, feared of other, be desired of thee, and in the russe of all thy
greatest prosperity, thou shall have a longing to be with thy Christ, Psalm.
27.13.
there to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living.

You have heard the summons sent unto you, from the Judge of the world, you
must all die, you shall not live. Now consider the reason, why this summons is
sent unto you, even to this end, and for this cause; that you should set your
house, your selves in order. By thy house, if thou understand thy temporal
affairs, set them in order, dispose of them in time, leave not thy substance a
matter of variance to thy posterity: and for that which is thine, let thine
heir be beholding to thee, and not to other. For often times it falls out,
when men die intestate and without a will, that they have much of their goods,
whom they would to have little: and they that have most, do little thank them,
because they have it not of their gift, but by an ordinary course of Law.
Dispose therefore of thy temporal affairs, and bind the receauers of thy
goods, in a thankful remembrance unto thy self: when by thy made will they
see, that that which thou have given unto them, thou might if thou would,
have bequeathed to other. And do it in time; for why should thou cause the
world to fasten on thee that deserved rebuke, that thou would still live,
and art loath to die: or that loath to leave them, thou would carry thy
goods with thee unto thy grave? Yea do it in time; for unto what times have
thou reserved these thoughts; when thou should wholly busy thy self, in
making thy soul ready for thy God the^ (as a bird taken in alime-bush, the
which the more she fluttereth the more she is limed) thou weariest thy musing
soul in thy secular affairs, without all free thought or care of God? And
indeed what time is this, Bernard. conc. ad diuites.
as Bernard speaks, to make thy will, and to dispose of thine estate, when thy
head aketh, thy hand shakes, thy tongue faultereth, thy heart groaneth, and thy
many grievous pains do so trouble thy thoughts, that neither thy writing, nor
thy words can well express or make known thy mind? A weak soul thou art
then, easily led to do yt thou never mindest. Thy will then not thine, but the
will of some other, which may best persuade thee. And if then thine, even as
thou would; yet see how one word inserted in some place, may alter thy
meaning, in some maine matter, how two or three witnesses carry away all. In
time therefore dispose of thy worldly affairs, whilst thy thoughts are free,
affections stayed; and when at thy leisure, thou may maturely peruse, that
which before time thou have done. So shall thy testament be testatio mentis, a
witness of thy mind, and the will thou have made, thy will, and not the will of
another man.

And if thou ought thus to dispose of thy worldly affairs; how much rather
should thou seek to prepare and dispose of thy soul, to cast up thy
reckonings, since thou art forthwith, without all delay, to give account of thy
stewardship unto God. For as it is Hebr. 9.27.
decreed that all must die, so is it also by the same God said, that after
death all shall enter into judgment; 1. Cor. 5.10.
all must appear before the tribunal seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil. All, therefore thou; must, there is no shifting;
appear, thou can not be hidden; there to receive what thou have done
whilst thou had a body, whilst thou liuedst. And what shall then become
with thy unready soul, which unprepared, before she looked, and before she
had cast up her reckonings, made up her accounts, is to be presented before
her Judge? Alas, how can thou look for thy quietus est, or how can thou
but fear thy everlasting ruin? Thou had a time to make thy peace with God;
now that his black tents are pitched up, and under the arrest of death, thou
stand before him to receive thy doom; thy time is gone. John 9.4.
Work therefore whilst it is day, (as thy Savior advises) the night comes
wherein no man can work. Upon which words says Cyrill, Cyril. in Job. lib. 6.
cap. 14.
every one of us have our day, and have our night. Our day is the space of our
whole life, in which it is given us of God, to work that which shall make to
our everlasting good: our night is the time after our natural death, in which
no man can work, or wipe away those death-bringing stains, which in the day
of his life he has contracted. It may be then it shall grieve thee that thou
have evil done: yet then, as Austine speaks, August. de fid. ad Petr. diaco.
cap. 3.
thy sorrow shall be without fruit, because then it shall find no mercy in the
sight of God. The which Ambrose, speaking of those words of David, Psalm. 39.13.
Forgive me that I may be refreshed before I go hence, and be no more seen,
most plainly shows: Ambros. de bon. mortis cap. 2.
David desires to have his sins forgiven him before he died: for he which
here does not receive remission of his sins, he shall not there. The reason
whereof Austin gives, because there may be Jnter Aug. opera de rectitud.
Cathol. conuers.
poenitentia dolorem habens, sed medicinam non habens; A repentance which has
grief, but not a repentance which brings relief. And as in another place he
says, there may be August. de fid. ad Petrum diac. cap. 3.
stimulus poenitudinis, the prick of sorrow, but there cannot be correctio
voluntatis, amendment of the mind. Wherefore whilst thou live prepare thy
soul, and make haste unto thy God, and pray with Ambrose, Ambros. in Psalm. 38.
Here forgive me my sins where I have sinned; except thou forgive them here,
I shall not find the restfull comfort of forgiveness there. Neither do thou
repose thy unprepared soul, upon the vain stays of deceiving Popery; all
the Masses, and Dirges, and other shows of piety, which in a blind zeal thy
well willers shall procure for thee when thou art dead, shall nothing boot
thee, or make thy soul find favor with her God. For, as Chrysostom
speaks, the Chrysostom. ad Top. Antioch. Homil. 49.
mariners, when the ship is drowned, cannot help, nor the Physicians when the
party is dead. Wherefore now prepare thy soul, for Basil. Quest. diffuse
explic.
now is the acceptable time, as Basil speaks: now is the day of health, this
world is for thy repentance, that for thy recompense; this for thy working,
that for thy rewarding; this for thy patience, that for thy comfort; now God is
helping to all them that do repent them of their evil lives, then he will be
a severe examiner of their deeds. Wherefore now, whilst thou live, set thy
house in order, prepare thy soul, and make it ready for the Lord.

And that thou may the better know well to do it, lay before thine eyes the
example of Hezechtah, and remember well what he is here said to do. First he
turns from his Princes and Nobles, he turns to the wall of Gods temple, he
turns to God: even so in the bed of thy sickness, turn from the world, turn
to God. For whither will thou go if thou go not to him? or of whom will thou receive help and comfort if not of him? If thou look on thy friends
and children, they may bewail thee, but they cannot help thee. If thou
remembrest thy wealth and worship, they may be matter of thy grief and sorrow,
but cannot then afford thee any small relief. Wherefore turn thy self and
soul from them, withdraw thy thoughts, and consecrate that little remainder of
thy life in an holy meditation unto thy God. Neither do thou fear his angry
countenance, because of thy many and grievous sins: for if in a true faith
and an hearty sorrow thou then turnest to him, Luke 15.20.
he will meet thee in the way, he will embrace thee with his arms of mercy,
kiss thee with the kisses of kindness, take away from thee the rags of thy
sins, and clothe thee with that costly robe, the righteousness of his all
justifying Son. Turn thee therefore from the world unto thy God, and when
thou can not turn thy feebled body, turn thy mind. For as Genes. 8.9.
the Dove that was sent out of Noah's Arc, flew here and there over the face of
the waters, but found no rest for the soles of her feet, till she returned
into the Arc again: so the soul of man, sent by God from the highest heaven,
flies here and there, and wearieth her self with the things of this world, but
finds no true rest nor pleasing content, till she return unto her God
again. Wherefore return thy soul unto her maker, and there seek for that,
which in the whole world thou can not find. True it is, that the wicked
which are at no peace with God, nor have any hope or confidence in his mercy;
they Genes. 3.8.
fly from his presence, as the thief does from the face of the Judge. But
alas whither will they fly from his presence, or which of Gods creatures can
yield them comfort, when he in anger shall set himself against them? or to
what end do they slack their coming, which anon perforce must be brought
before him, and receive even for this their contempt a more heavy doom?
Wherefore let not thy soul be like one of theirs, neither do thou tread in
their distrustful steps, but in this be thou like this good King Hezechiah,
turn thy self and soul from the world, turn to God.

And when thou have thus turned from the world unto thy God, then in the second
place consider what Hezechiah here does, he prayed to his God, saying; Now O
Lord I beseech thee remember me. Even so do thou: for unto whom should
thou make thy prayers but unto him which best knows thy need, and which has
bound Psalm. 50.15. Joel 2.32. John 14.13.
himself by promise to help thee in this time of thy need. Although Psalm.
121.1.
thou art to look unto the hills, to follow the examples of holy men; yet, as
Austin upon that Psalm observes, August. comment. in Psalm. 121.
thou must still acknowledge that thy salvation comes from the Lord.
Wherefore to him lift up thy soul in prayers, and with thy heart cry, when
thou can not with thy weakened voice, Now O Lord I beseech thee remember me.
And then do not boast of thy merits and well doing, as though God were
therefore bound to help thee, and to yield relief; but rather let thy merits
be Gods mercy, as Bernard speaks, Bernard. in Cantic. sermon. 61
Shall I sing of my righteousness? nay I will remember thy righteousness only,
for that is mine. And yet that thou may the better assure thy staggering
soul of Gods favor to thee in this time of thy need, remember with Hezechiah
Gods former mercies, beforetime showed to thee, in the progress of thy life:
for that God which has given thee to walk before him in truth, and with a
perfect heart; that God which has given thee to do that which is good and
pleasing in his sight; he will not now leave and forsake thee, but he will then
hear thy prayers, and as thou beseechest, he will then remember thee. Alas
(beloved) in this time of thy need, what can thy wealth and worship steed
thee? what can thy friends and well willers help thee? what can then better
comfort thy fainting soul, than thy harmless and well deeded life, which
thou have passed in Gods fear? these 2. Pet. 1.10. Ephesians. 1.4.
thy good works will assure thy soul that thou art an elect vessel chosen of
God; Matthew. 7.17. John 15.5.
these fruits of thy believing faith will witness to thee that thou art a
blessed plant whom Gods right hand has planted; Romans 8.14. Ephesians. 5.8.
these holy actions of thy spiritual life will speak to thy soul that thou
art lived of God, and that he lives in thee by his grace. This his Ezech.
9.5. and 6.
mark God does see and will acknowledge in thee, and these Revel. 14.13.
fruits of thy faith, works of piety, when all things else will leave and
forsake thee, will not forsake thee; but will accompany thee unto the heavens,
and there will present themselves with thee to thy God. How studious therefore
should we be in piety? how fruitful in good works? how provident for this
oil? how careful to do that which is good in Gods sight? since these in the
time of our greatest need, make so much for our comfort and relief. Surely to
a man that Ierem. 17.5.
makes not flesh his arm, but Philip. 3.8. 1. Corin. 1.20.
reposeth himself on the mercy of Christ, and on his all sufficient merit, a
well deeded life will make much for his comfort. Insomuch that in a good
confidence of hope, he will say with David, Psalm. 31.5.
Lord into thy hands do I commend my spirit; for thou Lord of truth have
redeemed me.

And when thou have thus, according to the good ensample of Hezechiah, prepared
thy self: do not thou forget, that which in the last place he is said to do;
and that is, he wept very sore: for when the servants of God do see that
Psalm. 23.6.
God still follows them with his helping grace, how Mat. 14.27. Luke 12.32.
in the midst of their troubles, he still speaks words of comfort to their
souls; when Romans 8.11. and 16. Ephesians. 1.13. Hebr. 11.15.
they find that inward witness of Gods spirit testifying to their spirits, that
when 2. Cor. 5.1.
this earthly tabernacle shall be destroyed, they shall have a building not
made with hands, but which is eternal in the heavens; yea when God so far
opens their eyes, that Matthew. 17.2. 2. Cor. 12.2.
they see some part of that his goodness, which he will fully show unto them in
the land of the living: then 2. Cor. 5.2. Jerem. 31.18. Ezech. 16.61.
all ashamed of themselves and full of tears they bewail their sins, and
neglected duties, because they have not sought Gods glory in a more forward
zeal, nor more carefully have honored him in the course of their lives. Psalm.
126.5.
O blessed soul which thus sowest in tears, for thou shall reap with joy! O
blessed soul which thus do Matthew. 5.4.
mourn and bewail thy sins, for thou shall be comforted! the Lord shall
not forget thy tears, but he shall put them into his bottle. Nay he shall
forthwith give thee a Revel. 14.13.
life, in which thou shall serve GOD without all sin, rest from thy labors,
and Jsai. 25.8. Revel. 7.7.
have all tears wiped away from thine eyes.

Wherefore, O ye that hear me this day, since you are all the sons of Adam,
and must to earth from whence you came, since to every of you the heavenly
voice has said, You must die, and shall not live. Set an order to your housen,
prepare your souls, and whilst you live, before you be prevented by death,
cast up your reckonnings, and make your selves ready for the Lord. With this
good King Hezechiah, turn your selves from the world, your wealth and worship,
and turn unto the Lord. Unto him power forth your prayers, and in the bed of
your sickness say, when all help of friends and physic do fail, now O Lord
I beseech thee remember me. And that he may the better be moved to hear you
then, and to give you succor to your content, during this your earthly
pilgrimage, and small abode in this decaying world, walk with your God, (faune
not on the world,) in truth, not in falsehood, with a perfect, not a dissembling
heart, and ever seek to do, how irksome soever it be to thy flesh, and
unpleasing to the world, that which is good and pleasing in Gods sight. And
when thou have failed in these thy duties, bewail thy sins and ouersights,
and with an humbled soul come to the feet of thy blessed Savior, and grieve
not to wash them with the tears of thine eyes, which has washed thee with his
most precious blood. Thus much in the application of this text to you.

Now rests it, that we should somewhat speak of this our brother, for whose
sake we are here assembled. For since it has been an ancient and most
laudable custom, used by the holy Fathers in the Primitive Church, and
continued throughout all ages unto this day; to commend unto the people of God,
in their Funeral Sermons, many virtuous men and women: and that to these ends,
that they might show their thankefulnes to God, for giving such grace unto men;
perform their last duty to the deceased, and might stir up their hearers,
to be followers of their virtues, that so they might be partakers of their
praises: let not these our speeches be unpleasing to any, neither let the
studious of novelty, seek to disgrace this laudable custom, which to so good
uses of all antiquity has bin approved. For as Hierom speaking of Paula a
virtuous woman, Hieron. epist. 27. cap. 13. 2. Chron. 32.33
All assembled themselves when Paula was dead, they thought it a sacrilege, not
to do this last duty to such a woman: So since this great and honorable
assembly, does thus honor our deceased to his grave: I cannot be wanting, in
this my last duty unto him. And although his senseless corpse perceives not
that is done unto him; and therefore it may seem to some a thankelesse duty:
yet as a token of our true love, we leave this with thee, O thou beloved, and
know as Augustine speaks, August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 13. Jdem de
cura pro mort. cap. 3.
That such pious duties do please the Lord. But where shall I begin? in a poor
place; of poor, yet honest parents he was borne; advanced by God to this
wealth and worship, and made the first of known note in his fathers house.
Thus God from the sheepe-fold called David, and gave to this son of the earth
to be a Knight, and to sit among the great ones of the City. From out of this
root has sprunge twelve living branches, nine sons, three daughters: the
gifts of God, and the parents comfort. Bless thy gifts O God unto her comfort,
and let the desired memory of their departed father, still live and be
remembered in them. Whither shall I go? His affable nature and most lovely
carriage, desiring to do good both to poor and rich: his respective duty
unto his betters; and ready observance to be at their command: his many
employments in this City causes, and faithful diligence wading through al:
his answering trust to his reposing friends, and ready hand to help them at
all times of need, his kind entreatie of the poorest of his kin, and willingness
to embrace the love of strangers: his bounty to the needy at home and abroad,
and purse supplying scholars wants, his set weekly contributions to the poor
whilst he lived; and Will, giving to them a child's part being dead: makes me
entreat you, (as Basil. Concio, de Sanct. Mamante Martyr.
Basil did his hearers in a funeral Sermon, he makes of Mamantes the Martyr)
that every of you, which have been helped, pleasured, or thus entreated by him;
or which can truly witness this his kind and virtuous carriage; would help me
with the sweet flowers of your true reports, to adorn his Hearse. That as many
the 2. Chron. 16.14. cap. 21.19.
Kings of Judah were said to be buried with sweet odors, and diverse kind of
spices: so we may bury this our brother with the sweet reports of his well
deeded life, and the spiced odors of his happy death. And to begin, this is my
flower, best beseeming him, and most pleasing me: that as he grew in worship,
so he grew in piety. This does witness with me your morning Sermon, by him
(notwithstanding his employments) often frequented: this, the Preachers of the
Word in greater love than before respected; this, his prayers with his
household, in greater devotion than before time followed. Smell sweet pious
flower, spread forth thy odors; he lives well that lives with his God. Follow
with your flowers, and Prou. 10.7.
let the memory of the just be followed with praises, when the name of the
wicked, as a snuff of a candle shall go forth with stink.

I will not excuse whatsoever his infirmities: he was a man, and carried about
him a body of flesh; yet play not thou the part of a kite or puttocke, which
passes over many sweet and pleasant things, and gorgeth himself with
garboyle and carrion: for if thou do, many that hear me this day will
speak against thy vile and base affection; and to thy face shall show (as
Gregory speaks of his brother Basil) that his vices were better than thy
virtues. Greg. Nazian. monod. in mag. Basilium.
Cover therefore whatsoever his infirmities with a lovely silence, and since
the Lord has cast them behind him, and drowned them in the bottom of the
sea, let them die with him, and with his dead carcass let them be buried in
his grave.

Thus he lived, the love of the world, the desire both of poor and rich. And
thus he died, even in the height of al his prosperity, being but newly entered
into this place of worship, and as another Hezechiah laid on the bed of his
sickness, by turning to the wall, praying, weeping, he makes himself ready
for his God. For after he had set an order to his worldly affairs, he
withdrew his thoughts from all worldly business: and sought to holy that
little remnant of his short life unto the Lord. This his continued silence does
witness, when yet he knew all that came unto him, saluted the^ by name, but
would not have any further speech with them. This that speech of his to me, the
first morning I saw him, The Lord has visited me, but yet he has not given me
over as a pray unto mine enemy: O Lord think upon me for thy mercy, that I
may still show forth thy truth. This that which is written of dying Jerome,
Eusebius de mort. Hieron.
O my friends interrupt not my approaching joy, do not hinder me from yielding
to the earth that which is the earths. For urged to take, by the entreatie of
many friends, his last, but fruitless potion, as though in it were life,
without it death: for a while he resolutely withstood, and protested he would
not take it for a thousand pound. And when he was further moved to take it by
one, that loved him and his; he replied, I pray you move me not, you would
reckon him unwise, that would take forty shillings when he might have three
pound; that would accept of a life in this world, when he might have a life in
heaven. Thus, as it is written of Austin, Possidon. de vit. August.
not ashamed to live, he feared not to die; because he knew he had a gracious
Lord. The which he further showed: for when the tongue failed, and denied to
make known the meaning of his heart; and when many of us that were present,
supposed for many hours before his departure, that he was bereued of sense and
knowledge: being at ye length to depart this world, of himself, vnmotioned,
raising up his hands, lifting them unto the heavens, and with the one knocking
of his breast, not as an evil servant, but as a cheerful son, he gave up
the ghost, and, as it is said of faithful Abraham, went unto his fathers in
peace. Wherefore to turn from him again unto you, do not only Number. 23.10.
wish with Balaam, but endeavor whilst you live, that your souls may die the
death of the just, and that your latter ends may be like unto his.

And since he so blessedly lived, and blessedly died: although thou can not
stop the floods of thy kind affection, Eccles. 38.16.
but must needs bring forth thy tears, and make lamentation over the dead,
as one that has suffered a great loss; yet in so great an hope of his assured
good, let not the Temple of God be over sad; 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
weep not as they that have no hope. Although thou criest with David, 2. Sam.
1.26.
I am sorrowful for thee O my friend Jonathan, very kind have thou been to
me, and John 11.32.
weeps with Mary for thy brother Lazarus; yet with thy tears go unto Christ,
in him seek thy comfort. Neither keep (as Basil speaks) Basil. Concio. de
great. act.
fresh the wounds of thy sorowing soul, nor seek the means to increase thy
grief; but as the weak sighted turn away their eyes, from such things as
hurt them: so turn away thy thoughts from all matter of thy grief. For
although his body be 1. Cor. 15.42.
sown in corruption, it shall rise in incorruption: although it be sown in
dishonor, it shall rise in honor: although it be sown in weakness, it shall
rise in strength. Aug. epist. 6.
He is gone before, we shall follow. God give us so to follow that we may ever
rest with him.

Sit Deo gloria.

