A PLAIN DEMONSTRATION OF JOHN Frithes lack of wit and learning in his
understanding of holy Scripture, and of the old holy doctors, in the
blessed Sacrament of the Altar, Newly set forth by John Gwynneth Clerk.

LONDINI. 1557.

Qui cupit Haeretici, nunc scirc Sophismata Frythi,
Plebs, quibus, est miris ludificata modis.
Commonstrat Gvvinneth tibi Clericus, ecce Johannes,
Isto quem fecit Codice Mart suo.
In quo se multum videas sumpsisse laboris
Praesertim, quem nunc cana senecta premit.
Poenitet haud tanti, tamen, ipsum omnino laboris,
Se tibi fructiferum, si modo percipiat.
The Prologue.
GOOD Christen reders, where as of late, in the beginnynge of my writing
against Frithes book, I promised this order.

First to set forth by it self, what manner of state it is, wherein an
Heretic leads his life.

Secondarily, what manner of foundation it is, that Frithe bildeth his wicked
purpose upon.

Thirdly, how falselie he does understand, not only the holy scripture, but
also the old holy Fathers, and ancient Doctors of the Catholic church.

Fourthly how crafty, false, and foolish, his reasons, and arguments are to
be found, if they be well and truly tried.

Fifthly, what is to be said against his opinion, that one body cannot be in two
places at once.

Sixtlie, that the possibilite thereof, may be proved by very good reason.

Ye shall understand, that of this division, the first and second part, I
have performed and put forth all ready, although but rudely and not in all
poynctes even as I would, if my have to the rest, had not ben the greater. But
yet sufficiently, and even more then enoughe, to show the due prouse of so
much as I thereby did intend. And now therefore, here does follow the third
part, for which, I dispatched my hands with the more quicker speed of the
other two paste. And that not with out cause. For in this consists the very
chief pithe of my principal purpose in all the rest. Which is to make his
false understanding of the old holy Doctors and (...) true meanynges
plainly to appear. And therefore I wish, all those in especial, which has
most need thereof, to look well, and wisely upon it. And therein to have no
respect unto me, nor yet to any pain or labor bestowed of my part in that
behalf. But to have good respect only to the truth, which is and may clerly
be found therein. Whereof I dare say, they shall not miss, if they be of such
good will, as without which, they cannot be saved. For if good will, be to us
in all things so necessari, that we can nothing do rightly with out it, how
much more necessary is it to be had, about the trial of truth, in so weighty
and worthy a matter, as is the very real presence of the blessed body of our
Savior Christ in the holy Sacrament? For to even by the truth, of a most
weighty, and worthy thing, there is always required a most pure, and parfit
good will. Which is never mixed with pride, nor vain glory, never infected
with disdain, nor envy, never yoked with stout stubbernes, nor obstinacy, but
ever indewed with meekness and humilite, with dew fear of God and charity,
with patience and pity of man's weakness and infirmite, for only to men of
that sort were, these most gracious and merciful promyses made. Petite et
dabitur vobis, quaerite and inuenietis, pulsate and aperietur vobis. That is to
say. Ask, and to you it shall be given, seek, and ye shall find, knock and
it shall be opened unto you.

And therefore what is more precious, and more expedient to be had, then the
truth of this holy Sacrament? wherefore, let him take heed which has it not.
For when shall he have it, if he will not so much as ask it? when shall he
find it, if he will not vouchesafe to seek it? or when shall he enter into
it, if he will not knock to be let in? The door is not to be opened, but
only to them that will knock. The thing is not to be found, but only of
them that will seek. Neither is it to be granted, but only to them that
will ask. And who does ask for it? who does seek after it? or who does
knock, to enter into it? In very deed, none rightly, none wisely, nor any
profitably, but only those, that be of good will. Wherefore only to them (as
I said) those promyses were made. And therefore it is not enoughe, to read,
to talk, or to reason, and question of the matter. But it is much more to be
wayed and considered, with what manner of will, and intent, all that is done.
For truth is a Lady, always of that straingenes, that she will not vouchesaufe
to show her amiable face, but only to them that be of good will. For if any
other by chance fortune sometime to see her, (specially there, where they have
no lust or desire to meet with her) indeed unto them, for all her bewtifull
countenance, she gives but a lowrynge look, with small occasion of any
credence. And no marvel why, for those be they, of whom the Scripture does
say. Mat. 13.


They see and see not, They here and here not.

And that is not all for lack of knowledge, but in very deed for lack of
good will. For as the common saying is.

Who is so blind as he, that will not see. Therefore good will (Gentle reders)
good will is it, which does both ask and obtain, seek and find, knock
and is hard, and so let in. For without that, most true it is, that nothing
can speed in this kind of things. Wherefore this matter, is to be weyed, and
pondered thereafter. For who does not know, that readers there be of diverse
and sundry sorts.

Whereof some will sone conceive myslykinge, if they find but the matter any
thing long in readinge, and say, it is to tedious. How be it in very deed
those be they, of whom men may say.

They are sone weary of well doninge.

Some other therbe which in reading, falls strayte into mislikyng, if they
find any thing pass their under standinge, saying it is very dark and to
obscure. And all because, they love not in such good labor, any while to tarry
or long endure. But of that, they do first, they will make the last, and so
give it over.

Some, if they find not the matter, set out with painted speech according
to their pleasure, straight, they will say it is very gross, and but rudely
dunne, without wit or learning, and so make that an excuse of their
mislikinge.

Some will mislike the matter, because of the writer. And some the writer,
because of the matter.

And some not each for other, but even indifferently both together. But what
estemers, or lovers of truth shall we reckon all these, which will think it
to dearly bought, with bearing the light burden of a little tediousnes? or to
paynfully gotten, with the laboring away of a little obscuritee, and darkness?
or to be the less worthy good acception, for lack of some fine and curious
expression? or to be regarded after the writer.

And not, as it ought to be, even after the matter? what estemers (I say) or
lovers of truth shall we reckon these? how unworthy of truth be they, which
will other refuse it, or set the less by it, for these causes or any other
like? specially in so great a matter, as this holy Sacrament is? Wherefore this
much have I said, for a louinge warning, and a frindly monition, only to
them, which has need thereof. Trustinge, that when this, that follows shall
come to their redynge, they will not forget this necessary warninge, but well
and wisely will bear it in mind, and use them selves accordingly. For
otherwise, read they may, but profit they can not. And therefore now good
Christen readers, because no man is, or can be herein, sufficient of him self,
but as the holy Apostle does say.

Our sufficiency is of God, I wyshe unto you, 2. Cor. 3
as even to my self, the perpetual succor and help of that holy Spirit,
which is the worker and merciful giver of every good will. To whom with the
Father, and the Son, be honor and glory now and ever. Amen.

IT is to be noted that where I do not recite the words of Frythe, nor any
of his allegacions, but that I show in what leaf of his book, the reader
may find it, ye shall understand, that I mean it of his book which is of
the first printe, bearinge date Anno Domini 1533. for his book of any other
later prynte (which I have heard of and not seen) may chance to vary from
the first, in the number of leaves. And so by reason of that, it might
peradventure be thought, that other (I say) not truly of him, or else of the
places, where I report him to say, as he does. In auoydinge whereof I have
thought it good to give this knowledge thereof before.

The arguments of the chapiters.
THE cause, why Frythe does allege the old holy doctors, and specially
Saint Austen. Cap. 2. That his false understanding of Saint Austene proved, is
full proof enough against him, in all the rest of the old holy fathers beside,
and of the scripture also. Cap. 3. How Fryth does handle this text, This is my
body: and Saint Austen upon the same. Cap. 4. and 5. How Frith behaueth him
self in his allegacion of Saint Austen writing against Adamantus. Cap. 6. What
Frithe concludes of the Sacrament, and what he makes of Christ. Cap. 7. How
frith lies upon the plain litterall sense of Scripture. Cap. 8. How Frithe
under pretense of Englishinge Saint Austens words, does therein falsely
expound them for his own purpose. Cap. 9. How he lies upon Sayncte Austene?
and what an argument he makes between this word, eat, and this text, This
is my body. Cap. 10. That this text, This is my body, has a litterall sense
proved by Saint Austen directly against Frithes purpose. Cap. 11. How falsely
Frithe does understand this that Sayncte Austen says, Christ bore himself
in his own hands after a certain manner, and what a certain manner is. Cap.
12. and, 13. How Frythe pretends to believe Saint Austen, and yet believes him
not in deed. Cap. 14. Of the good and perfect agreement of the words of Saint
Austen, where he says, ye shall not eat this body that ye see, nor drink
that blood which they that crucify me shall shede out. And where he says,
Christ has given us the same flesh to eat, wherein he walked here in yerth.
Cap. 15.16. How directly Frithe in apert words is against Christ. Cap. 17.
How Frythe deceived him self in this text, what if ye see the son of man
ascendynge thither where he was before: and how he belieth Saint Austen upon
the same. Cap. 18. What a part Frithe plays with Saint Austen in
understanding of this text, The flesh profits nothing. Ca. 19. That Frithe
gathered out of the old Fathers sayings, not their meanynges, but his own
foolyshe dremynges, whereby he deceived himself and other also. Ca. 20 What the
spiritual understanding of this matter is. And that Frithe understood it not.
Cap. 21.22. That it is not even properly spoken to say, that Christ has now
a natural body or natural flesh. Cap. 23. What spiritual understanding is,
after the mind of Chrysostom. Cap. 24 He that understands Christ's flesh
to be immortal, and understands nothing in it to the contrary, understands
it Spiritually. Cap. 25. That those which are and shall be dampened in Hell and
so continue for ever, can not for all that, be trewly and properly called
immortal. Cap. 26 That there is nothing now in Christ's body, that may be so
understand, as it is now in our bodies, or was in his, before his
resurrection. Cap. 27. and. 28. How falsely Frithe does understand those
places of S. Austen, which he does allege out of his work. De Ciuitate dei,
libro. 21. Cap. 25. and out of his sermon (as Frithe does note it) De sacra
feria Pasche. Cap. 29. and. 30 How many manner of ways the blessed body of
Christ is eaten. And whether it may be properly said, to be any way eaten
corporally or not. Cap. 31 Of the difference that is betewne Corpus and
Corporale, That is to say, between a body and a bodily thing or perteynyng to
a body. Cap. 32. That the Sacrament in respect of it self, is not corpus, that
is to say, not a body, and yet it is corporal. And that there is no such
corporalite in Christ's body now, as is in ours. Cap. 33 That although the
blessed body of Christ, be of good Catholic men, for diverse good causes,
called corporal and natural, yet it is not properly so, but supernatural and
super corporal. Cap. 34 Whether the quantite of Christ's body now, be such as
ours is, or whether he has his quantite thereof, as we have ours or no. Cap.
35. and. 36 That Frithe does not allege Saint Austen upon certain textes of
Scripture even there, where he goes even purposely upon them, but takes him
in other places, where he touches but part of the sense, to confyrme thereby
such other matter as he has in hand. And the cause why, that Frithe does
use him so. Cap. 37. The cause why, that Saint Austen does some time write more
obscurely to us, then he does to heretics. Cap. 38 That, not only the very
real eatinge of Christ's blessed body in the holy Sacrament, which is
general, but also the spiritual eating of it which is special, is proved by
Saint Austen. Cap. 39. That Frithe by Saint Austen is convinced in this, that
he would have none other eating of Christ's very body but only spiritual,
which he means to be nothing else in effect, but only to believe that Christ
died for us. Cap. 40. and. 41. That if Frithes faith were true, the ordinance
of man in the Roode, should be better then the ordinance of christ in the
Sacrament. Cap. 42. What a false part Frithe plays with Saint Ambrose, and
of the cause why. And what he seyth of Belasius. Cap. 43. and. 44. What false
dissimulation Frithe uses in the sayings of the old holy fathers. And how
directly he is therein against him self. Cap. 45 That this word substance, and
also this word nature, are taken and used each of them very diversely. Cap.
46.
The fautes escaped in the pryntynge apeereth in the later end of the book.

A DEMONSTRACION.
HERETICVS. O sir, who could have made me believe, that ye would have served me
after this sort?


CATHOLICVS. Why what is the matter?


HER. Is this to morrow?


CATH. No, this is to day.


HERE. Tushe, will ye be there? ye wot what I mean well enoughe. For did ye
not promise me at our last partyng (after ye had declared your mind upon that
part of John Frithes book which he calls his foundation) that we should
here have met together again, the next morrow after?


CATH. Was it Monday, Tewsdaie, or Wenesday, when I made thee that promise?


HERE. Tewsdaie.


CATH. And what day is this?


HERE. Mary Wenesdaie.


CATH. And is not Wenesday the next morrow after Tewsdaie.


HERE. Ye, but I pray you sir, how many Wenesdaies has there been sense that
Tewsdaie? And yet could I (from that time hitherto) never meet with you till
now.


CATH. Marvel not thereat. For to be short and plain, thou shall
understand, that there chanced unto me such business, immediately after our
partynge, that I could never have time connenient, to discharge my self of
that promise till now. And therefore even now am I cum, only for that purpose
and nothing else. Wherefore, if thou take this Wenesday, even as the next morrow
after that Tewsday, it is no great matter, for all shall be one in the reckenydge,
since I will perform now, no less then I promised then.


HERE. If ye so do, I will be very glad. For in your so doing, we shall have
(as I guess) some strainge talk ere we part.


CATH. Thou may be sure of that, for the matter requires no less.


HERE. Yet first I pray you, may not a man be so bold, as to ask you, what
your business has been all this while, which has so long kept you from the
perfourmance of your promise?


CATH. Thou may not only ask, but also know it to, if thou will.


HE. Perchance I know a good part of it all ready.


CATH. Think thou so?


HERE. Ye trewly. For I dare say that your chief let, has been about the
writing of all the talk, that you and I have had to gether, both the first
day, and also the second.


CATH. How know thou that?


HERE. By such a mean as deceaueth me not, for wot ye what?


CATH. What?


HERE. In very deed, it is now in print, and abroad in many men's hands.


CATH. What is it?


HERE. Even as I tell you.


CATH. And what of that?


HERE. Nothing else, but as I told you at the first, that if would displease a
great sort, if it came to their heringe, as it does now in deed.


CATH. And did not I then tell the again, that it could displease none, but
only such, as would other keep their grefe thereof secretly to them selves,
or else in their disclosinge thereof unto other, show them selves what they be.


HERE. Ye but yet for all that, it goes farther then so. For beside those, whom
ye mean, it does not please some other, which are (as ye count them) even
both wise, and also learned.


CATH. That may chance to be true, how be it, although it does not please
them, yet is it enoughe to me, that it doothe not displease them.


HERE. It must needs displease them, when it does not please them,


CATHOLICVS. That follows not. For it is two things to displease, and to not
please although they seem and be some time used and taken for both one. For
not please, is properly but as it were a mean between please, and displease.
As it may well apeere by the diuersitee of things, whereof some does please,
and therein they gender delight. And some does displease, and therein they gender
grief. And some be indifferent, and they do another of them both, that is to
say, another please nor displease. And therefore, of that sort I take my labor
to be, to them that be learned and wise. For although it be hard for them to
be pleased with that, which they could do far better them selves, yet
their wisdom and learning, will not suffer them to be displeased with that,
which holds the truth, and refelleth the contrary, although not so aptly as
they could frame it. Wherefore mine intencion therein, was not so much, to
please those of learning which be wise, and of my help has no need, as it
was to help those ignoraunte heads, which for lack of grace and learning
both, are not so wise, and therefore of help, has very great need. And
this, those learned which be wise, does wey and consider well enoughe: Being
(as always they are) more willing to set forward the truth with their good
patience, then to burt or hinder it, with any dispraise or great mislikinge, of
my simple handlyng thereof. And therefore tell not me of any displesure taken
with all, but only among such, as I told thee of before.


HERE. Well sir, yet I would wish you, another to do, nor say, that should
displease any man.


CATH. Why do thou wish that to me, more than to an other?


HERE. I wish it not only to you, but also to other like wise.


CATH. And I wish unto thee, a little more wit, than to wish so to me, or to
any man else. For doubtless therein, thou wishest away with the best doing, and
also good saiynge, that ever was, or shall be used of any man.


HERE. Do I so?


CATH. Thou do no less. For who has done or said so, yt he has therein
displeased no man? I dare say, not the holy apostles, nor our Savior Christ
him self another. Therefore thou make herein the strangest wish, that I have
herd. wherein thou do not consider, this notable saying of the holy Apostle
Saint Paul.

Galat. 1.
Si hominibus placerem, Seruus Christi non essem. That is to say, If I should
please men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

Therefore, who can do, speak, or write, that shall displease no man?


Cap. 2.
HERE. Sir I pray you let all that pass. And let me here what ye can say to
the dispatch of your promise.


CATH. What was that?


HERET. Have you for gotten?


CATH. No not so. But yet, although I have not forgotten it my self, I doubt
for all that, whether thou do so well remember it, as the truth thereof does
require.


HERE. Yes sir that I do, for your saying was this, that ye could, and would
prove, that John Fryth did falsely understand, both the Scripture, and also the
old holy Doctors to. And farther more, that his reasons were and are, but
deceaueable sophisticacions, and nothing else.


CATH. True it is. That was my saying in deed. And for the perfourmaunce
thereof (which is the cause of our meetinge here now) thou shall understand,
that he does not allege those holy doctors, for any thing more, then for
the proof and confirmacio^ of his own intellection, and understanding of
those Scriptures, which he would have us believe, does make for his purpose.
And therefore, when I shall prove his understanding of those holy doctors to be
utterly false, and far from their meaning in deed, shall not that be a
sufficient proof, that other they make directly against him, or else at the
least, nothing for him? And therefore if they make nothing for him, why does
he allege them? If they make against him, is not also that, even proof
enough, of his false understanding of Scripture, which he would defend by
them? when his saiynge is ye, and their menyng naie? Except thou will say,
that he is more credible then all they, when he never thought so him self: For
if he had, he would not have brought them in, for his witness as he does.


HERE. Well sir, when ye have made this proof ye spoke of, you shall then,
know farther of my mind.


CATH. With that am I well content. And therefore now to draw near unto it,
thou must (for a more compendious breuitee of the matter) farther consider,
that as he brings the old holy doctors for nothing so much, as (if it
would be) to confirm his false understanding of Scripture, so he brings
none of them all saving one, but to confirm his false understanding of that
same one, whom he takes only to be enough for his purpose. Wherefore if I
prove him false in his understanding of that one, it must needs follow, that
he is therein proved false in his understanding of all the rest.


HERE. Ye but which one of them is that?


CATHO. If thou will needs know, it is even holy Saint Austen.


HERE. And how know you, that be brings in, all the rest of the holy
doctors, only to confyrme his understanding of Saint Austen? or that he
understands Saint Austen falsely, as ye say he does.


Cap. 3.
CATH. I will recite unto thee some of his own saying, and by that, thou
may perceive how I know it. For in the 30 leaf of his book, he thinkyng,
or feinyng, that he has his purpose proved by S. Austen, does say these
words.

This were proof enough (says he) to conclude, that all the old fathers did
hold the same opinion. For who would once surmise (seeing we have S. Austen so
plain for us, which is the chiefest among them al, who would once surmise (I
say) that he dissented in this great matter, from the other faithful fathers,
or they from him? Nevertheless, I dare not let him stand post alone, least ye
despise him. And therefore I will show you the mind of certain other also. And
also of his master Saint Ambrose. etc.

In these words of his, it appears plain, and much worthy to be noted, that
he does not only bring the old holy fathers to confyrme his understanding of
Saint Austen, but also that, (to fortify the same) he would have no man, so
much as once surmise, that S. Austen in this great matter, dissented from other
the faithful fathers, nor they from him, as I grant all that to be true in
deed. But what a surmise is this of him, that (as he says) he dare not let
Saint Austen stand post alone, lest we would despise him, if he should not
bring forth the mind of the other faithful fathers to defend him? where
took he any occasion thus to surmise, but only of his own arrogant foolish
head, to make ignorant persons believe, that this holy man S. Austen makes
clearly for him in his wicked purpose? as in the.29. leaf of his book, he
bosteth in plain words, which are these, Blessed be god (says he) which has
so clearly discussed this matter by this faithful father.

Now, lest thou would say or think, that this same arrogant surmise of his,
proceeded not, but (as many a man does some time speak) rashly by chance, here
him in the.24. leaf of his book, where he has these words.

Now were this enough (says he) for a christen man that loved no contencion.
But because there are so many sophisters in the world, which care not what
they say, so they hold not their peace, I must needs set some bulwark by
this holy doctor, to help to defend him. For else they will shortly over
run him (as they do me) and make him an heretyke to. Therefore I will allege
his master Saint Ambrose. etc.

How say thou now? who can declare his malicious and arrogant blindness, so
fully as he declares it him self? for what a malicious blindness, is this of
him, thus to surmise any need to defend Saint Austen against us, as though we
would not allow him? Therefore when it may here, of his own words appear,
that he brings not in, the rest of all those faithful fathers, for any need
he has of them, but to defend Saint Austen, whom he says, is proof enough
for his purpose because he dissenteth not from them, nor they from him, it must
needs follow, that if Frithe be found false in his understanding of Saint
Austen, he shall be therein found false in his understanding of them all, and of
the scripture to, when they do al agree (as he does confess) and herin dissent
not one from another. Wherefore what need I, to travel about the trial of
his falshed any farther, but in Saint Austen only?


Cap. 4.
HERE. Ye but what brings he of Saint Austen that you can prove he does not
trewlye understand?


CATH. Thou shall sone perceive what, if thou mark where about he goes, and
what his principal purpose is.


HERE. Marry sir his principal purpose is this, to prove, that Christ's very
body flesh and blood, is not really, verily, and presently in the sacrament.
And to begin his proof with all, his own words in the.21. leaf of his book
are these.

Except I bring (he says) euydent Scripture, which they all shall expound
as I do, I desyer not to be believed.

This I dare say is a reasonable request.


CATH. In very deed, thou say even truth. For it is so reasonable, that I
would to God, al his folowers would assent unto it, and grant him no less.
But I fear that many of them, granted him such a request at the first,
that they will now deny him this at the last. And therefore as touching his
bringing of evident Scripture, and his exposicion of the same, This that I
find in the. 6. leaf of his book, is much to be noted, where his words be
these.

In every text (he says) is but only one verite, for which it was spoken.

And also again, in the.18. leaf he has these words. Some textes of
Scripture (he says) are only to be understand after the letter, and some
textes are only to be understand spiritually, or in the way of an allegory.
And, some must be understand both literally and spiritually.

Here we may first ask of him, how he will prove, that some text must be
understand both literally and spiritually, if it have in it (as he says it
has) but only one veritee? for only one veritee in one text, to have two
sundry understandings, and both true, is very straynge, and that more
strainge, then may well agree with reason, or truth other. Again we may ask
of him also, why should any one text have any mo understandings in it, then
any other has, if it have in it but only one verite, as those other has,
which he says are only to be understand after the letter, or only
spirituallye? very repugnant it is, to say (as he does) that in every text is
but only one veritee, for which it was spoken, and to say, some text must be
vndestande both literally and spiritually, whereof the one understanding or the
other, can not be true, if the text have in it but only one veritee (as he
says) it has. Nevertheless, upon this phantasy of his, even there does he
conclude with these words.

And I say (says he) that this text of scripture, This is my body, is only
spiritually to be understand, and not literally.

How say thou to this? do thou perceive what he says?


HERE. Ye very well.


Cap. 5.
CATHOLICVS. Then how will he prove that this text, This is my body, is only
spiritually to be understand, and not literally?


HERE. Marry sir even by Saint Austen. For even there immediately following he
adds unto it these words.

And that does saint Austen (says he) also confirm, which writes unto
Adamantus, and says, These sentenses of Scripture, Christ was the stone, the
blood is the soul, and this is my body, are figuratively to be understand,
(that is to say spiritually, or by the way of an allegory) and thus have I
Saint Austen wholly of my side which thing shall yet herafter more plainly
appear.

How say ye now?


CATH. I say this, that Frithe does herin but report Saint Austen this to
say. And does not allege where, nor yet perchance recite Saint Austens own
words, in such order and form, as he does speak them him self another.
Wherefore Frith is herein to be rather mistrusted, then believed. And beside
that, these words which he him self does here report of Saint Austen, does
leave this text (This is my body) so much at large, as to be understand
litterallie, as well as figuratively. And does not drive it to this narrow
straight of only figuratively, as Frithe would wraste and wringe it unto: for
figuratyuely, and only figuratively, does very much differ. Because, with the
one, there may stand an other, but with the other, no more but it self alone.
It is two things to say, that our Savior christ is a man, and to say that he
is only a man. For the one is said trewly, and the other is a damnable heresy.
Wherefore as he that says Christ is to be understand a very man, and yet
takes him not therein to be only a man, nor denies him to be very god. Even so
S. Austen which does say, that this text, This is my body, is to be
understand figuratively, does not therein say or mean it to be understand
only figuratyuely. Nor denies it to be understand literally. For although a
thing be trewly said to be so or so. Yet that draws not with it this
consequence to be only so. But Frith does reason the matter after this sort,
as if he should here a man reported, to be learned in Astronomy, he will
straight conclude, that the man can no skyll of Phisike nor Geometry, but only
of Astronomy. When for all that report, he may be, as diverse ar, learned: some
in two, and some in all three. Therefore of this kind of conclusions, I hope
thou see enoughe. Wherefore, how can Saint Austen (whom Frithe him self,
does here report, to say none otherwise of this text (This is my boddy) but
that it is to be understand figuratively, make any thing for him, in this
that he says it is to be understand only figuratively and not literally?
when the words reported of Saint Austen makes no farther mention, but of the
one, and not of the other. And yet, without putting any difference between
fyguratyuely, and only figuratively, or bringing for him any dew allegation of
Saint Austens own words where, or in what order he spoke them him self, the
blind arrogant fool is not here a shamed to boste and say, that he has
herein Saint Austen, wholly of his side. Who does here nothing touch any part
of his purpose.


Cap. 6.
HERETICVS. Sir me think ye do use him, with very ungoodly terms.


CATH. Not so ungoodly as he is worthy. And that shall well apere ere we part.


HERE. Yet where ye say, that he does not perchance herin allege saint
Austens words in such order, as he does speak them him self, in deed
although he does it not here, where you impute unto him that fault, yet he
does it afterward, in an other place, both in latyne, and also in english.


CATH. Where is that?


HERE. In the 30 leaf of his book his words be these. Saint Austen says
(says he) Non enim dominus dubitauit dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum daret
signum corporis sui. Et in eodem capite exponit. Sic est enim sanguis anima
quomodo Petra erat Christus, nec tamen Petra (Ait) significabat Christum sed
ait Petra erat Christus.

That is to say, The Lord doubted not to say, this is my body, when he gave a
sign of his body. And after in the same chapter he expounds it. For trewly
so the blood is soul, as Christ was the stone. And yet the apostle says
not, the stone did sygnifie Christ, but he says, the stone was Christ.


CATH. Is this his allegacion of Saint Austens words?


HERE. Yea sir.


CATH. Properly done. For between these words of Saint Austens,

The lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave a sign of his
body. And these words.

So the blood is the soul, as the stone is Christ. There runs as many
words mo of Saint Austens beside, as I dare say, occupies nere hand in
some book, and hundred lines.

And between these words.

So the blood is the soul, as the stone was Christ. And these words,

Yet the Apostle says not the stone did signify Christ, but he says the
stone was Christ. There runs also an other number of words and sentenses
likewise: so that it is not possible for any man to understand or perceive,
for what purpose Saint Austene does speak any of those sentenses, being thus
put forth, as frithe does here ch^i^e them feintly together, omittynge that
(as he does) which goes immediately before and after. And beside this, thou
may also perceive, that these words which he joins withal. Saying. And
after in the same chapter he expounds it.

Avenone of S. Austens words, but Frithes own words, craftily put in, to
allure us to believe, that S. Austen does expound that, which goes before,
with that, that Fryth joins unto it after, which is this. For treuly so the
blood is the soul, as christ was the stone.

Therefore that we may the better perceive, how well this saying, does expound
the other before (as he says it does) let us consider them both together, to
see how well they do agree. The first is this.

The lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when he, gave a sign of his
body.

This as frithe does say, Saint Austen does expound in the same chaptre with
these words.

For trewly so the blood is the soul, as Christ was the, stone.

How say thou now? greeth not these two sayings well together? do they not
well depend one of an other? yet Frith does say, that S. Austen expounds the
one by the other. Moreover, what is all this is to his purpose of this text,
This is my body, to be understand only spiritually, and not literally, as he
says it is? Farthermore I would feign know, what he him self, doothe farther
gather of Saint Austen in this place.


HERE. It apereth immediately following in the same leaf.


CATH. What is that?


HE. His words be these. Here (says he) Saint Austen says plainly, that
Christ called the sign of his body, his body. And in this chapter does
compare these three textes of Scripture, This is my boddy, The blood is the
soul. And Christ was the stone. and declares them to be on phrase, and to be
expounded after one fashion.

Now have you hard, what Frith gathers of this place of S. Austen, and
therefore what say you to it?


CATH. I say, that S. Austen, says not here, so plainly, that Christ called
the sign of his body, his body, as Frith does here plainly belie him in so
reportyng of him. For S. Austen, has here no such words, as can be wrested
unto that sense. For is it all one to say, that the lord doubted not to say,
This is my body, when he gave a sign of his body. And to say, that he called
the sign of his body, his body? As if I ley my hand flat upon an heap of fine
sand, saying, this is my hand, will it follow thereof, that I call the sign
of my hand, my hand? which sign I make in the sand, by layinge my hand
thereupon? how be it this consequence is not so strainge, as it is common with
frith: Therefore as he lies falsely upon S. Austen in this, so he does likewise
in the rest, for Saint Austen makes no such comparison there, of those three
texts together, nor declares them so to be one phrase, nor to be expounded
after one fasshion, as Frith does here speak of, and would have us take it.
And therefore to then^^^ he would not have us come by the trial of his falshed
herein, he, fearing least it should be sought out and spied at length,
provoke us by the manner of his allegacio^ to search for it there, where he
knew right well, we might so long look after it, that we should he willinge
rather to let it pass, then to labor any further for it.


HERE. Why say you so?


CATH. Because it is so. For did thou not thy self recite unto me right
now, that Frith says, Saint Austen doothe write to Adamantus this same that
he now gathers herein for his defense?


HERE. That is true.


CAT. Then if Saint Austen wrote it (as Fryth says he does) unto Adamantus,
that wrytinge is to be found, other among Saint Austens epistles, (where I
dare say it is not) or else in some book of his, dedicat or entitled to
Adamantus by name, where as in deed, there is no such another. Therefore why may
I not say, that herin he provoke us to search and labor in vain, to the
intent we should not find whereby, his falshed might be brought to light?


HERE. Sir ye take him wrong, for even there, where S. Austens words in
latin, before alleged, does stand in Frithes book, in the margent of the
fame place, is noted these words. Augustinus contra Adamantum. Whereof the
english ye know well enough.


CATH. That is no more to say, but Austen against Adamantus.


HERE. Ye say truth.


CATH. Then how frames these two together, that this is put in the marge^t,
Austen against Adama^tus, and frith says in the letter, Saint Austen wrote to
Adamantus and for although to Adamantus, and against Adamantus, may stand
together in some respect, yet so can they not do here. For S. Austen writes
not to Adamantus, but only of him, and against him. Therefore if Frith him
self, did make that note in the (...), then he greeth not with himself in the
letter. If the printer did note it in the margent, to mende Frythes lie thereof
in the letter, why did none of them does amend this, which Frith does say, (And
in the same chapter he expounds it) and tells us not which chapter, nor
yet makes any mention thereof before another? Had it been any great matter for
Frythe (if he had meant well) to have said, Saint Austen in the.^^. chapter of
his book written against Adamantus, has these, and these words and so
forth? think thou that Frith refused this to do, for no cause? it were not
hard to find more cause then I speak of now, if a man would wast so much
time about it, as needs not: For thou have hard enough al ready, to perceive
herein part of his false wily ^e^hes; wherein he trusted, not so to be seen, as
now he is, and more shall be ere we part.


Cap. 7.
HERE. I wysshe that ye would here his conclusion hereof, before we go any
farther. And then will I tell you more.


CATH. what conclusion is that?


HERE. Immediately after those words of his, which I last recited unto you
before, he adds unto them these.

Now is there no man (says he) so mad as to say, that Christ was a natural
stone (except he be a natural fool) whose judgment we need not greatly to
regard. Therefore we may well conclude that the sa^rament is not his natural
body: but is called his body, for a similitude that it has, wherein it
signifies and represents his body. And that the Sacrament of so great a
thing, is called even with the name of the very thing it self.


CATH. Is this his conclusion?


HERE. Ye trewly.


CATH. Thou say well: for those he his words in deed. And therefore who is
he, that would deny him this conclusion, being rightly understand? No man I
think of any learned judgment. But what is it to his purpose of improuynge or
disprouinge the real presence of Christ's very body in the holy Sacrament? or
whereof does this conclusion follow? of this, that he says, there is no man so
mad, as to say that Christ was a natural stone, is he so mad, as would have
it follow thereof?


HERE. No not so.


CATH. Whereof then?


HERE. He does mean, that as Christ was called a stone, and was not a natural
stone indeed, so the Sacrament is called his body, and is not his natural
body indeed another?


CATH. Well, this granted, what is it to the purpose of the very presence of
Christ's blessed body in the sacrament? for that is it, which he goes about,
with all he can to disprove? will it follow that Christ's blessed body is not
really and verily in the Sacrament, because the Sacrament in respect of it
self, is not his natural body? The question lies upon in, or not in. And Frith
concludes upon is, or is not. As if I say, my book is in the Church, he
will prove the contrary by this, that the Church, is not my book. Therefore
because the church is not my book, is it not thereby well proved think
thou, that my book is not in the Church? because we say, as the truth is,
that the very body of christ is in the sacrament, he will prove the contrary by
this, that the sacrament is not his very body. Pluck out of his book, all
those conclusions, that he of this forte, and trust me trewlie, thou shall
therein leave but few or none behind. For it is common with him, to make his
assertion of one thing, and his conclusion of an other.

Which is good enoughe, to such rash, light, wilful, and ignorant heddes, as
can no skill of the matter. For when they find this, (his nedlesse probation)
true, that the sacrament is not the very body of Christ (as it is not indeed,
in the bare respect of it self) they take what so ever he says beside, to
be sufficiently proved in the same. For well knew he, that the most part,
are far from the knowledge and consideration of the distinction and
difference, that is between the Sacrament and the thing of the Sacrament.
Whereof the old holy Fathers does say.

Aliud est Sacramentum, and aliud res Sacramenti.

That is to say.

The Sacrament is one thing. And the thing of the Sacrament is an other.

And therefore because the one sometime bears the names of both, that is to
say, the name of it self as it is, and also the name of the other, not as it
self is, but as it is called, for good cause why, he thought, that as the
Sacrament is called Christ's body, and yet is not his very body indeed, so he
thought as thou saydest before, that his body is said to be therein, and yet is
not verelye therein indeed. Wherefore as he thought the true proof of the one,
should be enough to color his false pretended proof of the other, so with
the truth of the same one, he would take away, not only the truth of the
other but also our very profit of them both together. But whether he saw this
much him self or no, I can not perfitly tell. But of this am I sure, that his
folowers sees it not, for if they did, they would not all, (I suppose) do as
they do. And therefore when he says (as thou have recited) that there is no man
so mad, as to say, that Christ was a natural stone, except he be a natural
fool, I would have them all, for the trust they have in him, tell me how
much more, then a mad natural fool was he to say, that it is not dampnable
so to think? which is far worse, then so to say? for parcha^ce in some case,
it may sometym^ so be said, when in no case, at any time, it may so be thought,
but most dampnably.


HE. Ye but I pray you sir, where does Fryth so say?


CATH. Do thou not know, that in the.59. leaf of his book, he speaking of
his belefe in the Sacrament, has these words?

The believing of this poinct (he says) is of it self not damnable, as it is
not dampnable to think, that Christ is a very stone or a vine.

These words thou see are plain enough. For what difference is there
between a very stone and a natural stone, but utterly none at all. And
therefore what wicked wretch has there been hard of, so cursed that ever
spoke any such thing of our Savior Christ? for what follows thereof but
this, that it is not dampnable to think Christ to be worse, or not so good,
as a dog? for a Dog in the dew order and dignitee of nature, is far better then
a stone or a Vine other. For a stone has but a bare being without any life at
all, where as a vine has so much, and a vegetable life also. But a Dog has
not only being, as well as a stone, and a vegetable life, as well as a Vine,
but also a sensible life, which is far passing them both. Wherefore, except
thou be of that wilful blindness, which will say, as no man else will that no
life is better then life. Or a vegetable life, better then a sensible life,
thou must needs grant a Dog far better then a very stone, or a vine other.
Therefore what soever is thought to be a very stone or a vine, must needs be
thought to be worse, or not so good as a Dog. But this wicked kaytise, says it
is not dampnable, to think that Christ is a very stone or a vine. Wherefore
it does, and must needs follow thereof, that it is not dampnable to think
that our Savior Christ is worse, or not so good as a Dog. O what a thing is
this of him, but such an unspeakable cursednes, as never was, nor yet is, to
be hard of, if a man might chose? But it is with him, as the Gospel does
say.

Exabundantia cordis os loquitur, That to say.

Of the store of the heart, the mouth does speak.

Therefore how came this into his heart, but thoroughe the most cruel subtle
and wily blaste of the father of liars, and consequently the father of all
Heretykes?

How was it otherwise possible for him this to say, but by that mean? And yet
that, not without the holy permyssion of Gods inscrutable providence, to
the great and wonderful shame of all those, that follows this cursed kaytyues
opinion. To their shame, I say, that ever they should be of such a wilful
blyndnes, and thereby so infortunat, as to be the folowers of such a dampnable
lyinge leader. And yet in this, their inevitable shame, is offered unto them (if
they will take it) a wonderful occasion of obteynyng the great mercy of God
again. For what greater occasion of their return unto truth again, can they
have or imagine, then this their notable shame of following him, whose most
dampnable error is so great, and also manifest, that they them selfs are not
able to defend, nor excuse it? It is none excuse that some of them does make,
saying that Frithe might so say in some respect. For in what respect may any
man think, but dampnablie, that Christ is a very stone? Who so ever thinks
him a very stone, can therein think him no better thing. For a very stone, of
him that so takes it; can be thought no better then a very stone, of what
sort or kind so ever it be. Therefore, Frithe being found the author of such
a doctrine, what need we any farther trial of him, other in the holy
scripture, or in the holy doctors other, when we have such a proof of him,
as this, his most cursed saying is, that it is not dampnable to think that
Christ is a very stone or a vine? who would trust him in any thing else. Sith
we have found his falsehed so abominable in this?


Cap. 8.
HERE. Sir there may be more said herein for his defense then you wene. For ye
find much fault with the manner of his recital of saint Austen. And yet here
you recite his words after such a sort your self, that ye will be sure to
take that, where with, ye may make against him, and leave out that, which
follows and makes for him.


CAT. If that be true, I pray thee first tell me this, why may not I do so with
him, as well as he does so with Saint Austen?


HERE. Where does he so with Saint Austen?


CATH. If thou do not perceue it all ready, thou shall see it plain enough
ear we part. But first tell me where I do so with him?


HERE. Mary sir in your recytall of those words of his, where he says.

It is not dampnable to think, that Christ is a very stone or a vine.

For there ye leave out these words folowinge, which he joins unto them
saying,

Because the litterall sense so says.

For these words does show the cause, why he speaks those words before.
And therefore I marvel why, you recite not these, as well as the other.


CATH. Because the other without these, was enoughe to declare, what a blind
malicious Heretic he was: but yet nevertheless (sith thou go so far) I
will say now more then I said before. For this brother of liers, was so set a
work by the father of liers, that where as he lied before, but upon Saint
Austen, for to color the falshed of his own purpose, now here, for a farther
cloak of the same, he lies also upon the holy Scripture, which he falsely
takes to witness. For where fyndeth he any litterall sense, ye or mystical
sense other, in all holy Scripture, that says, it is not damnable to think
that Christ is a very stone.


HE. Lo here ye missevnderstand him again, and take it far otherwise, then he
does mean, for he does mean, that the litteral sense does say it is not
damnable so to think, but he does mean, that the litterall sense does say,
that Christ is a very stone, and therefore he him self says it is not dampnable
to think that Christ is so.


CATH. Yet thou shall not excuse his lie of the holy Scripture so. For where
does he find, that the litteral sense does say, Christ is a very stone?


HERE. Where Paul says.

Petra autem erat Christus. That is to say. 1. cor. 10


A stone was Christ.


CATH. Although there be a difference to say a stone was Christ, and to say
(as Frith does) a very stone was Christ, or Christ a very stone, yet here,
why more a stone was Christ, Then the stone was Christ?


HERE. That is all one.


CATH. Ye among Heretics. For I think your tergiuersations, be never to
seek. For is it all one to say (a stone) and to say, the stone? when the one,
is so general, that it may be understand of any stone. And the other so
special, that it makes relation to some certain stone, mentioned before or
after? And therefore it is not all one to say. The stone was Christ and to
say, A stone was Christ. For in signification (The) and (A) does here much
differ. Wherefore Frith does falsely English the litterall sense (which is)
the stone was Christ, with this that he says, a stone was Christ. 1. cor. 10
For the one makes plain relation to the spiritual stone expresselie
mentioned of the Apostle him self immediately before, and so does not the other.
Moreover frithes falshed herin rests not thus, but goes farther and adds
unto it this word (very) saying christ is a very stone. Putting away by yt
word very, al ambiguite of sense, that might rise of this word a stone.
Therefore he saying a very stone, what litteral sense in the scripture can there
be found, that so says of Christ? Or what is there to be said for Frith
herin, but that thou must needs confess him a very manifest liar, and that
upon the litteral sense of holy Scripture?


HERE. Although there be no litteral sense that so says of the stone, yet the
litterall sense says, even so of the Vine, saying,

John^. 15
Ego sum vitis vaera. That is to say, I am a very vine.


CATH. What makes that for Frith? For although the litterall sense be so, of
the Vine, yet it is not so, of the stone. Nevertheless Frithe speaks it of
the stone, and not of the vine. For he says.

It is not dampnable to think, that Christ is a very stone, or a vine.

And says not a very vine.


HERE. Yet ye may there perceive by this word (or) that he meant the same word
(very) of the vine, which he speaks of the stone.


CATH. Then, why does he, but only mean it, without any expression of it,
where it is. And expresses it, so plainly, where it is not?


HERE. Because it may be understand of the stone, as it is expressed of the
vine.


CATH. That is false. For although the litterall sense does say in the one
place, a very vine, yet it another does, nor can say, in the other place, a
very stone.


HERE. Why so?


CATH. Because the stone there, has in it contained a particular respect to
that, which goes before. And so has not the vine, which is spoken in such
a generalitee, that it has no respect to any one vine, more then to another.
And therefore by this it may well appear, that falsely does Frithe bring in,
these two textes, of the stone, and the vine, to be one phrase of speech,
without any difference. How be it, that does he, only to thentent he might
there withal, wringe in, this text, This is my body, to be likewise of the
same forte, and of one manner of speech.

Which has from them both, a far greatter difference, then they have each
from other, which is not small another, when the one can not be trewly
englished with this article (A) seying a stone, nor the other with this word
(The) seying the vine. But in those places (A) is proper to the vine, and (the)
to the stone. As the very true and perfect sense of the letter in both places,
does of necessitee require. Wherefore, thus may thou see, how well Frith
has quyt him self, in his understanding of the scripture hitherto, and of S.
Austen both.


Cap. 9.
HERETICVS. Ye but sir, he has not yet done, with the scripture, nor with
Saint Austen another. In so much, that for a farther proof of his understanding
of this text, This is my body, he does in the 22. leaf of his book, allege
Saint Austen again, in these words.

Si autem flagitium aut facinus iubere videtur, Aug. 3. li. doct. christiana.
figurata loquutio est. Nisi Manducaueritis (inquit) carnem filij hominis and
biberitis eius sanguinem, non habebitis vitam in vobis. Facinus vel flagitium
videtur iubere. Figura est ergo praecipiens passioni dominicae esse
communicandum and suauiter atque vtiliter in Memoria recondendum, quod pro
nobis Caro eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit. That is to say. When so ever the
Scripture or Christ seems to command any foul or wicked thing, then must
that text be taken figuratiuelye, that is, it is a phrase, allegory, and manner
of speaking, and must be understand spiritually, and not after the letter.
Except (says Christ) ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, ye shall not have life in you. He seems (says S. Austen) to command a
foul and a wicked thing. It is therefore a figure commaundyng us to be
partakers of his passion, and sweetly and profitably to prynte in our mind,
that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

Now have you hard his allegacion of S. Austen, both in latin and also in
English.


CATH. Therefore thou shall here mine allegacion also of the same place of S.
Austen again: and then tell me how Frithes allegacion thereof and mine, both
agree together. For S. Austens words be these.

Si autem flagitium aut facinus videtur iubere, aut vtilitatem, aut
beneficentiam vetare, figurata loquutio est. Nisi Manducaueritis (inquit)
carnem filij hominis and sanguinem biberitis, non habebitis vitam in Vobis.
Facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere. Figura est ergo praecipiens passioni
dominicae esse communicandum and suauiter atque vtiliter recondendum in
Memoria, quod pro nobis Caro eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit. That is to say.

If the Scripture seem to command an evil or a wicked thing, or forbid a
profit or a good thing, it is a figurative speech. Except ye eat (he says)
the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in
you. Therefore it is a figure commaundinge us to be partakers of his passion,
and swetely and profitably to prynt in our memory, that his flesh was
crusified and wounded for us.

Here thou may now perceive plain that Fryth has not so many latin
words, in his allegacion of S. Austen, as I have in mine, and yet I have
fewer Englisshe words in mine, then he has in his, by a great sort.


HERE. How cummeth that to pass?


CATH. Not without a falshed of his part, if thou mark it well. For where
these few latyne words of S. Austens, Figurata loquutio est, are no more to
say, but (as I have said) it is a figurative speech, Fryth does English them
after this sort, saying.

Then must that text he taken figuratively, that is, it is a phrase, allegory,
and manner of speaking, and must be understand spiritually and not after the
letter.

Have thou hard of any true man, that would, or truly could, so turn those
latin words into English as he does? Do thou not see, how his wily
falshed does here, under pretense and color of Englishinge S. Austens words,
bring in nothing else, but his own false fantastical exposicion of them, to
make his disciples believe and think, that Saint Austens meaning, was but
according to this, his own false feynynge? what words has Saint Austen
here, that may be wrested to this, which this false liar does say, it must be
understand spiritually and not after the letter?

where fyndeth he this same, not after the letter? therein lies all the matter,
And thereof here speaks S. Austen nothing at all. For he says no more, but
that this text.

Except ye eat the flishe of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you.

Is a figurative speech. And does not say, only figurative, or not
litterall, as this merchant doothe bear us in hand, and would make us
believe that he does.


HERE. Yet sir, if it be a figuratius speech, then must it be understand
figuratively.


CAT. That is true.


HE. Therefore if it must he understand figuratively, then it may not be
understand literally.


CATH. That follows not. For Fryth him self does grant and say, (as I told
the before) that some texts must be understand both figuratively, and also
literally. And therefore why may not this, which Frith speaks of, be one of
them? as it may indeed, for any thing that Saint Austen says here to the
contrary? And yet as though S. Austen had said the contrary, (as he does not)
this false Raynard is not ashamed to knit up the knot with these words.

This truth (says he) thanks he to god, does Saint Austen declare unto us.
which thing beside the opening of this text, against master Woores mind,
does plainly show, what he thought in the words of Christ's supper.

Which is no more to say, but that those words may not be understand after
the letter, because here, Saint Austen tells us nothing of that matter,
whether they may or not. Therefore does not Saint Austen declare this truth
unto us very well, when he speaks nothing of it?


HERE. Sir, if it might be understand, both figuratively and also literally
to, S. Austen would not have made mention (as he does) of the one sense, and
not of the other.


CATH. How know thou that?


HERE. It is most like so?


CATH. Ye to Frith. And therefore that is enough to him, to conclude so falsely
thereof as he does. But thou must understand, that it was not Saint Austens
mind there to speak of any of them both, that is to say, another of the one
sense, nor of the other, but as it chaunsed the one and and not the other, to
serve his purpose for example of that he had in hand, which was to give a
rule, whereby a figurative speech in the scripture might be known.

And not to discuss how or whether that text might be literally understand
or not. And therefore, grant this to be true, which Fryth does here say that
Saint Austen.

Does plainly show, what he thought in those words of christ's supper.

Yet it follows not thereof, that he does show all, that he thought therein.
For it is two things to show what he thought, and to show all that he thought.


HERE. Marry sir that is true, but Fryth, for the opening thereof, does
allege him again in these words.


Cap. 3.
CATH. Nay soft I pray thee, let us first here what Frithe faith more of
this place, which he has here alleged all ready, before we go any farther.
For he has yet showed us almost nothing, what he gathers of it, after his
own mind, but only his false exposicion thereof, brought in (as I said)
under the color of Englishyng of Saint Austens words.

Therefore let me here what he says farther of it him self, without any cloak
or color at all.


HERE. That shall ye do. For immediately after this his saying, that S. Austen
does plainly show, what he thought in the words of Christ's supper, he adds
unto it these words.

For since he called it (says Frith) a foul and a wicked thing to eat his
flesh, then may you soon perceive, that he thought it as foul and as wicked
a thing, to eat his body, seeing his body is flesh. And then consequently it
shall follow, that other this word, eat (where Christ said, take this and
eat it) must be taken spiritually, or else that this saying of Christ. This is
my body, must be figuratively spoken. But this word, eat, is taken after
the letter (for they did in deed eat the bread) therefore it must needs
follow, that this sentence (This is my body) must be figuratively spoken.

Now have you heard what he says and gathers of it him self.


CATH. Than saiyst true. And therefore shall I need to bid thee mark his false
lie, that he makes here again of Saint Austen? For does Saint Austen call it
a foul and a wicked thing (as this liar says he doothe, when he says no
more but that the scripture therein seems to command an evil or a wicked
thing? Saint Austen another calls it so him self, nor yet does say, that the
scripture calls it, or commands it so another. He says the scripture so
mech to command such a thing. And does not say, the scripture does
command it. But in deed to command, and seem to command, to call, and
seem to call, or to be, and seem to be, is all one with Frith. As who say there
is nothing otherwise then it seems to be, nor any thing seems to be,
otherwise then it is.


HE. Sir ye can not avoid his argument so.


CATH. His argument? what is that?


HERE. Ye have hard how he does say, that

Either this word eat (which Christ said, take this and rate it) must be taken
spiritually, or else that this saiynge of Christ, This is my bodi, must be
figuratively spoken. But this word ^ate (says he) is taken after the letter,
for they did (he says) eat the bread, therefore it must needs follow that
this sentence (This is my body) must be fyguratiuely spoken.


CATHOLICVS. I marvel where Frythe learned this kind of argument, which
can bring forth such a worthy conclusion. For does it not properly follow,
that this sentence (This is my body) must be figuratively taken, because (as
he says) this word eat, is taken after the letter? And this he doothe but
say, without any proof at all.


HERE. That is not so. For he does prove, that this word (Eat) is taken
after the letter?


CATH. That is but a part of it, and yet (for all thy saying) he proves not
that another.


HERE. Yes, he proves it by this, that (as he says) they did eat the bread.


CATH. Ye but that I deny. For without question they did eat that, which they
were bid to eat, whereof, it was to them said, Take eat, This is my body,
which shall be given for you. And that was not bread, except thou will say,
that bread was given for their redemption. And therefore, where he says, that
this word bread, is taken after the letter, And thereof would have it follow,
that this sentence, This is my body must be figuratively spoken, I ask him
why figuratively, more then lytterally, or why fyguratiuelie, and not rather
literally? For if the word of eating, he taken after the letter, does it
not thereof much better follow that the words of that which is eaten,
should be taken after the latter likewise? To take the word of eating, in a
litteral sense and therefore the words of the thing eaten, is a figurative
sense is more strange then I can skill of. Yet the one (says he) must needs
follow the other. But by what reason, although no man can tell, yet to such as
will needs believe him, it is good enough, although it be never so false and
foolish to any man else.

And therefore since it appears in the.47. leaf of his book that he takes
not the eating of Christ's body, but only for the beleuynge in him, I ask
him, why may not this word (Eat) be taken spiritually, as well as this text,
This is my body, be spoken figuratively? or why may not the same text be taked
literally, as well as this word (Eat) be taken after the letter, since these
be so joined together?


HERE. Because there is a great difference between them.


CATH. Ye that is, as Frith would have us take them, but not as our savior
Christ in the unity of sense and sentence together does join them. For there
is no doubt, but the meaning of this word Eat, and also the meaning of
this same saiynge of Christ, This is my body, are both together of him so
inseperably kint and contained in this one sentence.

John^. 6
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you.

That they both makes one perfect sentence and sense, whether thou take it to
be litterall or spiritual. And therefore by this one lesson aforesaid, it may
well appear, that they can not so differ in sense, but that they must other be
both spiritual, and not literal, or both litterall and not spiritual, or
else both not only spiritual, but also lytterall, Wherefore, Frythe can not
say, that they be both spiritual and not litterall, because he says ^he
an^ (...) them, that is to say, this word Eat, is taken after the letter.
Again, he can not say, that they are both litterall, and not spiritual,
because he does both hold and say, that the other which is, This is my body,
must be taken figuratively, that is to say spiritually. And therefore it must
needs follow, that they be both, not only spiritual, but also litterall.


Cap. 11.
HHERE. Sir that can not be. For as I was about to tell you before, Frithe
brings Saint Austen plain against it.


CATH. How so?


HERE. Look you in the.23. leaf of his book, and there shall ye find how he
does allege Saint Austen, both in Latin and also in English in these words.

Quando loquebatur dominus noster Jesus Christus de corpore suo, Nisi (Inquit)
quis manducauerit carnem meam et biberit sanguinem meum, non habet in se vitam.
Caro enim mea vere est cibus, et Sanguis meus vere est potus. Intellectus
spiritualis credentem saluum facit, quia littera occidit, Spiritus est qui
viuificat. That is to say.

When our Lord Jesus Christ spoke of his body, except (quod he) a man eat
my flesh and drink my blood, he shall have no life in him false. For my
flesh is very meat and my blood is very drink. The spiritual understanding
saves him that believes, for the letter kills, but the spirit quickens.

Here you see plain, that Saint Austen is clearly against the litterall sense.


CATH. Whether he be or not, it is Frithes mind therein, which I require.


HE. That shall ye have, for his own words upon the same place be these.

Here may you playnelie perceive (says he) that this text must only be taken
spiritually. For he say the to take it after the letter, it kills, and
profits nothing at all.

And therefore I wonder that we have been led so long in this gross error.


CATH. And I wonder that Frithe was led so long in this gross blyndnesse,
that he would wade so far as he did, upon a figurative sense, before he had
made it certain, in what respect it is figurative. That is to say, whether it
he figuratyue in respect of the very mer^ essenciall substance of the thing,
or else in some other respect parteyning as it were to the same, or to the use
thereof.


HERE. Sir I suppose this is but an invented evasion of you, to shake of the
matter and nothing else, For here Saint Austen says plain, that the letter
kills. And that he would not say, if there were any litterall sense in it.


CATH. Then sith thou take it so, although we might doubt of Frithes
allegacion herin, because he shows not where Saint Austen does speak those
words, but by this note in the margent of his book ( August. in sermo. ad
infantes) which sermon, I have not seen, nor no more (as I think) did Frithe
another, yet to grant him no less, but that they be the words of saint Austen
indeed, Thou shall here how Saint Austen does speak them him self, where I
have red them in an other place. For upon the title at the.33. Psalm, where he
says.

Quando loquebatur dominus noster Jesus Christus de corpore suo, (Ait) Nisi
quis manducauerit carnem meam et biberit sanguinem meu^, non habebit in se
vitam. Caro mea vere est esca, et Sanguis meus vere potus est.

There, in that place follows immediately these words Et discipuli eius qui
eum sequeba^tur expauerunt. etc

And not these words.

Intellectus spiritualis credentemsaluum facit, quia littera occidit, Spiritus
est qui viuificat.

Which Frith adds unto them, and places them there of his own head. How be
it, I will not deny, but that Saint Austen has those words, but where? in
very deed not there, where Frithe does place them. But.iiii. or.v. lines
before, clean to an other purpose, then Frith would here make us believe, that
Saint Austen speaks them for. And therefore what a part he plays in that,
judge him now thy self.


HERE. Sir, parchance Saint Austen has in some other place, all those words
together in the same order as Frith does here allege them.


CATH. Grant that to be true, and yet it can not prove Frithes purpose for all
that.


HERE. What, not when Saint Austen does say, that in those words of Christ,
the letter kills?


CATH. No trewly. For although it he true, that the letter kills, yet there
may be therein, (as there is) a litterall sense for at that.


HE. Then it kills?


CATH. No, not so another.


HERE. How prove you that?


CATH. I will leave all other proufes, and prove it even by Saint Austen him
self.


HE. Nay then, if you prove that by S. Austen, I will tell you an other manner
of tale, then ye look for.


CATH. What so ever thou will tell, I tell thee, that upon the title of the
said.33. Psalm, S. Austen speaking there of the prophet david, as the story
compels him to do, does say these words.

Et ferebatur in manibus suis. Hoc vero fratres quomodo possit fieri in homine
quis intelligat? Quis enim portatur in manibus suis? Manibus aliorum potest
portari homo. Manibus suis nemo portatur. Quo modo intelligatur in ipso David
secundum literam, non inuenimus. In Christo autem inuenimus. Ferebatur enim
Christus in manibus suis. Quando comme^daus ipsum corpus suum ai^. Hoc est
corpus meu^. Ferebat enim illud corpus in manibus suis.

That is to say.

He was borne in his own hands. But brethern how this may be done in a man,
who can understand? for who is borne in his own hands? A man may be borne in
the hands of other. But in his own hands no man is borne.

How it may be understand in David him self after the letter, we do not
find. But we find it in Christ. For Christ was borne in his own hands,
when he setting forth the same his own body says, this is my body. For he
bore that body in his own hands.

Here it can not be avoided, but even by Saint Austen, these words of Christ.
This is my body, must needs have a litterall sense.


HERE. That is not so. For although Saint Austen, does here say, that christ
was borne in his own hands, when he said, This is my body, yet it follows
not, but that he mente he bare him self in his own hands figuratively, and
(as Frith says) not literally or after the letter.


CATH. A, will thou be there? does not Saint Austen here plainly say, that he
finds the same in Christ, which he finds not in David? And this (he
says) he finds not in David, how it may be understand that he was borne in
his own hands after the letter. Wherefore it must needs follow, that he
finds how it may be understand in christ that he was borne in his own hands
after the letter, when he said, This is my body. And thereupon does Saint
Austen rest. For otherwise, he might have found it in David, but (as he
says) not after the letter. And therefore after the letter he fyndeth it in
Chiste. Now therefore tell me where is Frithes denial of this litterall sense
becum, sith he is therein, thus clean over thrown, and that by the plain
words of Saint Austen him self, whom he falselye bosteth to make so much
and clearly for him? when the truth is, he makes directly against him.


Cap. 12.
HHERE. Sir ye hear not yet, what Frythe does farther say, unto it.


CATH. It shall not skill what so ever he say, against so plain a truth as
this is. Specially when against truth, can nothing be brought but fasshed.


HERE. Yet me think you should here him, as well in the rest, as in this that
is paste, before ye give any judgment thereof.

For he takes upon him to prove, that Saint Austen, does not here so mean, as
ye understand him.


CATH. Peradventure he takes it so upon him, for it is more easier to take it
upon him twice, then to do it once.


HERE. Yet perchance ye shall see him do it indeed.


CATH. Which way?


HERE. Even by Saint Austen him self.


CATH. That would I hear.


HERE. In the.84. leaf, of his book these be his own words.

The text of Saint Austen (says he) which they there alleged against me was
this, that in the Sacrament, christ was borne in his own hands, where unto I
said, that Saint Austen does full well expound him self. For in an other
place he says. Ferebatur tanquam in manibus suis. That is, he was borne after
a certain manner in his own hands. And by that he says after a certain
manner, ye may sone parceyue what he means.

Now have ye hard what Frithe says of Saint Austen again.


CATH. Thou say truth. And thereby do I well perceive him to follow more
that, which he has in this point hard of Saint austen by other, then that,
which he has seen of saint Austen him self. And that appears not only by
this, that he makes here no mention of any special place of Saint Austen,
where those words should be, but also by this, that in the place, where I have
read Saint Austen concerning the same. That is to say, upon the title of
the.33 Psalm, his very words be these.

Ferebatur in manibus suis. Quomodo ferebatur in manibus suis? quia cum
commendaret ipsum corpus suu^ and sanguinem suum, accepit in manus suas, quod
norunt fideles, et ipse se portabat quodammodo eum diceret. Hoc est corpus
meum. That is to say.

He was borne in his own hands. Now was he borne in his own hands? because
when he did set forth the same his own body, and his blood, he took that
into his hands, which the faithful does know. And he bore him self after a
certain manner, when he said, this is my body.

These be the words of Saint Austen in that place which I have red. And
although it be no great matter, yet there is no such, tanquam in manibus
suis, as Frithe does here speak of. Therefore if he him self saw and red
this place of Saint Austen, and would not (as he does not) allege the words
of it as they be, judge thou what a part he plays in that.

Of the other side, if he saw them not him self in S. Austen, but took them
(as I believe he did) out of some heretics book, to color his false purpose
with all, how foolish was he to think, that it would never be spied?


HERE. Sir all this, is but a void draught. For in the words which ye do
here recite of Saint Austen your self, appears enoughe for Frithes purpose,
and as much as he requires.


CATH. What is that?


HERE. This that Saint Austen says.

Christ bore him self in his own hands after a certain manner, when he said,
this is my body.

For by this that he says after a certain manner, ye may sone perceive
(says Frythe) what he means.


CATH. O after a certain manner? indeed it is to us after a certain manner,
that Frithe does always make his conclusion, upon an incertayne ground,
although it be to him, aftter his common manner. For what is the cause that he
does not first make it certain, what Saint Austen means by this, that he
says, after a certain manner?


HERE. Frithe says ye may perceive what he means.


CATH. Ye, we may, and do, but yet why does not Frithe express the meaning
of it, least he take it one way, and we an other?


HERE. He does express it in the same place immediately following, and that
in these words, saying.

How be it, if Saint Austen had not thus expounded him self, yet he says, Ad
bonifacium, that the Sacrament of a thing has a similitude of the thing,
which it signifies. And for that cause, it has many times, the name of the
very thing which it signifies. And so he says, that he bore him self,
because he bore the Sacrament of his body and blood.


CATH. And well said. Is this the bering of himself in his own hands after ye
certain manner, which S. Austen means, to bear the similitude or sacrament
of him self in his own hands?


HE. What else?


CAT. Then, where is the bering of him self in his own hands after the letter?
S. Austen says (as I said before) he bare him self in his own hands after
the letter. But to bear the similitude or sacrament of him self in his own
hands, is not to bear him self in his own hands after the letter. For there,
the letter makes no mention of any similitude or sacrament other. Wherefore if
S. Austen had mente by this that he says, after a certain manner, none other
but that Christ bore the similitude of him self, in his own hands, when he
said, This is my body, he might sone have found, how that might have been as
well understood in David, as in Christ. Therefore it was not that, which he
meant, when he said, he found not how it might be understand in David after
the letter. For Dauyd might have borne the similitude of him self in his owns
hands. Wherefore this that Saint Austen says, Christ bare him self in his
own hands, after a certain manner, can be no exposition (as Frithe would have
it to be) of this that he says, Christ bore him self in his own hands
after the letter. Nor no more, can this another, that he says.

Sacraments have a certain similitude of those things, whereof they are
sacraments, and often times of that similitude take the names of the things
them selves.

When the letter (as I said) makes there no mention of any similitude or
sacrament other.


HERE. Then if this that Saint Austen says, Christ bore him self in his own
hands after a certain manner, can be no exposicion of this that he says,
Christ bore him self in his own hands after the letter, doubtless those two
sayings can not be both true nor stand together.


Cap. 13.
CATH. If thou or Frith other, take S. Austen after that manner, doubtless ye are
both deceived in him, after a wicked manner. For what is after a certain manner,
but not after a commune manner? Luc. 14.
As when our savior Christ appeered unto certain of his disciples in the way
going to Emaus after his resurrection, either he appeered unto them after his
common manner, or else after a certain manner. If he had apeered unto them after
his common manner, they had then known, it had been he, which (as the gospel
does sey) they did not in deed. Wherefore he apeered unto them, not after his
common manner, but after a certain manner, which was such, as by reason
whereof, they knew him not, as it does there, right well apeere. Again of the
other side, his appearance also unto them then, was other after the letter, or
else not after the letter. If thou say it was not after the letter, then thou
denyest both his very being with them then, and also the letter to, which does
say.

Jesus him self drawinge nere, went with them.

Therefore if thou say that he apeered unto them after the letter (as the
truth is, he did in deed) then thou must needs grant, that he apered unto
them there, not after a common manner, but both after a certain manner, and
also after the letter to, and that both at once. And why therefore say
thou, that Saint Austens saiynge of Christ's bearyng him self, in his own
hands after the letter, and his saiynge that he bore him self in his own
hands after a certain manner, can not stand together, when thou may thus
perceive that after the letter, and after a certain manner, doothe well agree
and stand together, in the gospel?


HERETI. Yet sir me think by you, that after the letter, and after a certain
manner, are not both one, but have some difference between them.


CATHOLICVS. True it is. How be it no such, but that they may and do stand
together well enoughe. For after the letter, is here said, in respect of the
very real and essenciall being of his substance. And after a certain manner,
is said in respect of the strange form, wherein he apeered unto them.


HERETICVS. Ye but when he bore him self in his own hands (as Saint Austen
says) after a certain manner, there was no such strange form appeerynge then.


CATH. Yes even so strange, as when he by the way showed him self to the two
disciples. For then he showed him self in the form of a man which form
could not be strange, but well known, in that respect, what it was. Therefore
the straungnes was not in that, but in this, that he showed him self in the
form of an other manner of man, which was no man in deed, but he him self
so in it, as though he had not been therein. And therefore the form is said
to be strainge, because it was of him so stranigly used. Wherefore likewise,
when he bore him self in his own hands after a certain manner, he bore him
self in the form of bread, which form, to any man could not be
strange, but well known what it was. Therefore the straingnesse was not in
that, but it was in this, that he bare him self in the form of breadde,
which was no breadde in deed, but he him self so in the form thereof, as
though he had not been therein. And therefore the form, may also there, be
said to be straynge because it was, as daily it is, of him so straingely
used. Wherefore as he, to the two disciples, showed him self after a certain
manner, that is to say, not in his own proper form, but in the form of an
other manner of man, which made him therein so straynge unto them then, so
he bore him self in his own hands after a certain manner, that is to say,
not in his own proper form, but in the form of an other manner of thing,
which makes him therein so straynge now unto them, that be unfaithful. For
as Saint Austen says of it in many places, Norunt fideles, The faithful
knowth him therein well enoughe, he is not straynge therein to them. For he
that can use him self under one form, more then is proper or natural unto
him, And that without the craft, art, or help of man, I doubt not, but that
he can use him self under, an other and mo forms, or under as many as he
will. As it may well appear by that he showed him self, as is aforesaid to
the two disciples in the form of a trauailer by the way. Luc. 24 John^. 20
Mat. 17.
And to Mary magdalen in the form of a gardener. Also an other time, to three
of his disciples, in the form of a glorified body. Wherefore he did none of
these, after a common manner, but after a certain manner. Yet this same certain
manner, neither does, nor yet can take away, the very real and substanciall
presence of the vsare thereof, or have any being it self, where the vsare
thereof is not, or force any good and true understanding, that the vsare of
it should not even be there, with it or in it. For it doothe but only show
how dyuersly, he can behave him self in his appearance, and denies not therein
his presence. By this therefore it may well appear (as I said before) that
this saiynge (After a certain manner) and this saying (after the letter) may
well agree, and stand both together.

As good reason, and thexample thereof which I have recited unto thee of the
holy gospel, does plainly declare. For the truth to say, (as the truth is
in deed) those two sayings of Saint Austen are not spoken, but in these
diverse respects. The one (as I said) in respect of the very substanciall
being of the thing it self, whereof it is spoken. And the other, in respect
of the Accidental fact or behavior of the same. Therefore when S. Austen
says, Christ bore him self in his own hands after the letter, the very
understanding thereof apperteyneth only to the real and substanciall presence
of Christ's very body in the sacrament, nothing touching any accidental
qualitees or occult behavior thereof, but the verite of the substance only.
And when he says, Christ bore him self in his own hands after a certain
manner, the true meaning of that apperteineth only to the very secret and
inse^sible behavior of it in the sacrament, and not to the substance wherein
that invisible behavior is. And beside this, how far from all doubt of this
understanding, does Saint Austen express the matter him self, in his words
before alleged? where he says.

Christ was borne in his own hands, when he setting forth the same his
own body. faith, This is my body. For he bore that body in his own hands.


HERE. Ye what body?


CATH. The same his own body (says Saint Austen) or the self same body of
his, choose the whether. For so these words, Ipsum corpus suum, may or must
needs be Englished, and no way else more trewly. Wherefore those words of
Saint Austen can not be applied, to any sign, similitude, or sacrament other,
but directly to the very substance of the thing that he speaks of, which is
the blessed body of Christ. And that specially when he adds unto it, and
says, he bore that body in his own hands. He says not a body, as incertaine
which, but he speaks certainly and says, that body, whereof he does plainly
treat. And that appears also in the other place, where he says.

He bore him self after a certain manner.

For what so ever that manner of bearyng was, yet him self, can be none other
but him self. Saint Austen says, he bore him self. And there is another
sign, similitude, or sacrament of him, that is, or can be properly said, to be
him self. For this word, him self, or it self, has none other respect, but
always and only, to the very real and substanciall being of him or it, whereof
it is directly spoken. Wherefore this that S. Austen says. Christ bore him
self in his own hands after the letter. Serves only to convince them, that
denies the very real presence of Christ's blessed body in the holy sacrament.
And this that he says.

He bore him self after a certain manner.

Serves only to help and amend the blindness of them, that considers
none other but only such common manner of bearyng and being, as their own
outward deceiuable senses, daily dremeth upon, whereby they are drawn to such
wonder at the matter, that they think it to strainge, to believe therein, as the
holy Catholyke church does teach. And all because this bearyng that S.
Austen speaks of, is not common, but after an other certain manner, then
their blind fantastical dreming of sensible things, can, may, or is able, to
reach unto. And therefore therein to hold and keep them still, Frith does
labor and travail with his wringyng and wresting of this same certain manner,
to such an understanding, as another the words of S. Austen, nor yet any
reason, authoritee, or learning, can bear or suffer. For he, through lack of
puttinge any difference between the thing done, and the manner of the doing,
does so confound them together, that with his handlyng of the one, he deceives
him self and many mo, in the truth of them both. But such was his lack, not
only of learning, but much more of grace. For it is two things to teach
what was done, whereof S. Austen says,

Christ bore him self in his own hands after the letter.

And to teach how or after what manner it was done, whereof S. Austen says no
farther, but that it was done after a certain manner, of which certain manner,
here he declares no farther, because (as he does trewly say) the veritee of
the thing, the faithful does know. And therefore because he declares here no
farther thereof, Frith of his own head, takes upon him to do it him self,
after his heretical manner. Whom if we could believe, we might thynk our
savior Christ no better then a very stone, without (as he says) any parell
of damnacion at all. Wherefore if thou haste marked well, what I have hitherto
said, thou may easily perceive how foolish and false his understanding of
Saint Austen is.


Cap. 14.
HERE. That is to be weyed as we find him in the end. For he has mo places
of S. Austen for his purpose then these. And specially one, which passes all
that ye have herd of him yet, and directly against the place of the. 33.
psalm, which you have alleged.


CATH. Which one is that?


HERE. In the 27. leaf of his book, he does allege Saint Austen both in
latin and in English also, after this sort, saying that Saint Austen says.

Non hoc corpus quod videtis, estis manducaturi, nec bibituri illum sanguinem
quem effusuri sunt qui me crucifigent.

Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendaui, spiritualiter intellectum viuificat vos,
caro autem non prodest quicquam.

That is to say,

You shall not eat this body that you see, nor drink that blood which they
that crucifi me, shall shed out. I have given a certain sacrament unto you, if
it be spirituallye understand, it quickneth you, But the flesh profits
nothing.

Now sir, of this, Frith does ask this question.

What things can be more plainly spoken?


CATH. And I ask of him again, what things can be more falsely understand,
then he does understand them? for if he had understand them trewly, or been
willing so to do, he might and would, as well alleged S. Aust. in these
words, which he has no farther from that place, then in the very self same
leaf, where he says of our savior Christ.

Psalm. 92.
Suscepit enim de terra, terram. Quia caro de terra est. Et de carne Mariae
carnem accepit. Et quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit, and ipsam carnem nobis
manducandam ad salutem dedit, Nemo autem illam carnem manducat nisi prius
adoraueri, inuentum est quemadmodum adoretur tale scabellum pedum domini.

That is to say, He took earth of earth, because flesh is of earth. And of
the flesh of Mary he took flesh. And because he walked here in the same
flesh, and for our health has given unto us the same flesh to eat, but no
man does eat that flesh, except he honor it before, it is found how such a
foot stool of our Lord, should be honored.

Now, although it does not here (for lack of that, which goes before) even
evidently apere, why S. Austen does chiefly speak these words, yet may I say
of this place, the same, and as well as Frithe does say of the other, what
things can be, more plainly spoken? More plainly spoken I say, as touching
the veritee of Christ's own blessed flesh and blood in the holy Sacrament? For
is it not here, most plainly expressed of Saint Austen, that Christ for our
health has given unto us the same flesh to eat, wherein he walked here in
earth? And where did he so give us that to eat, but in the holy sacrament?
Therefore what could Saint Austen say more to the very playnesse of the
matter, if a man had asked him purposely, how he did believe therein, or what
his faith was in that behalf?


HERE. Nay then, if Saint Austen can handle the matter after such a sort, as
of the other side, in the parson of Christ to say.

You shall not eat this body, that you se, nor drink that blood which they
that crucify me, shall shed out. And farther say, I have given a certain
sacrament unto you, if it be spiritually understand, it quickens you. But
the flesh profits nothing.

If Saint Austen (I say) can handle the matter so, that he will speak so
plainly of both sides, and make for each part, being so contrary as Frithes
opinion and yours is, trust him who will, for so will I never from hence forth.


CATH. Perchance no more thou have done hitherto.


HERE. Yes that I have always till now.


CATH. So would Frithe say for his part, if he were to answer therein. And yet
I dare say, he trusted him, no farther then he thought be should make for his
purpose. And (as it appears) no more do thou, nor any of you all.


HERE. Why say you so? for as touching Frithe, I am well assured that he
trusted saint Austen above all men, as it does by his own words evidently
appear.


CATH. If he had so done in deed, as he did falsely so pretend, he would not
alleged the one of these foresaid places, and left the other behind as he
does, being so nere together in one leaf, as of some volume they are in
deed, but would allege them both and made some conference between them of
their agreement, if he had trusted Saint austen as well in the one, as he did in
the other. How be it because he saw the one place, make so plainly with our
belefe, that he could cast there upon no color to the contrary, he left out
that, and brought forth the other, which as he thought might seem, to make
only for his purpose altogether. Wherefore this came not of any trust that he
had in Saint Austen in deed, but of the trust he had in his own false and
wily handlinge of some certain places of Saint Austen, to deceive his
disciples withal, whereof he chose this place, which thou have alleged to be
one. For if he had trusted Saint Austen as he pretended to do, he would have
trusted him as well in the one of these places, as in the other, where as now
it is plain, he trusted him in none of them both or at the least, mistrusted
him in the one, and onwares, or wilfully, would mistake him in the other.


HERE. Why sir, would he have him trust Saint Austen in both places, when they
be so repugnant, and so contrary one against an other, that they can, by no
reason, join nor agree together?


CATH. What be they?


HERE. Even as I tell you.


CATH. Thynkest thou Saint Austen being a man of such wit, of such
learning, of such holiness, and therefore of such most excellent fame through
all christendom so many hundred years, to be one of that sort, that in so
weyghtie a matter, forgets to day, what he said yesterday? or will say one
thing now, and to morrow the contrary? or in his writynge ouershotte him
self in one sentence, before an other be dry? For doubtless, these two
sayings are placed so nere together, that I believe the one was not dry,
before the other was written. Therefore how mad a phansy were it, so to
think of Saint Austen, that these two places are contrary, and one against an
other?


HERE. Why, who can take them otherwise, the words being so plain? for does
he not say in the one place,

Christ has given us the same flesh to eat, wherein he walked here in
earth.

And in the other place.

You shall not eat this body that you see?

And what is this, but eat and not eat one thing both at once, which is not
possible? for other that body which they saw, was the body of that flesh,
which (as Saint Austen says) was given us to eat, and that flesh was the
flesh of that body which they saw, and should not eat it, or else that body
was of an other flesh and that flesh of an other body, and then the one or
the other, not Christ's body or Christ's flesh, which were (I suppose) even
cursednes to think. For whereof is his own body, but of his own flesh? And
whereof is his own flesh, but of his own body? And therefore where he says
the same flesh, he might have said the same body. And where he says this body
that you see, he might have said, this flesh yt you se, and al one. And
therefore when he puts eating in the one place, and not eatinge in the other,
and both of one thing, what can be more contrary?


Cap. 15.
CATHOLICVS. I wonder that thou can not, make as great shifte, to rid thy
self out of error, as thou do, to keep thee in it? for indeed to keep
thee in it, thou have said enoughe, and a great deal to much. But of the
other side, nothing at all.

And therefore to help thee out of it (if thou be so happy) hear now, what I
have to say.


HERE. What?


CATH. To whom shall we take these words to be spoken, that Saint Austen
says in the parson of christ, you shall not eat this body, that you see?


HERE. I take them to be spoken to us, which do eat the Sacrament.


CATH. That can not be. For that body, which he speaks of, after that sort,
as they did see it, we never saw.


HERE. Then it is spoken as it were to thapostles, and such other as did see
it.


CATH. That is true. And therefore how did they see it?


HERE. How should they see it, but with their eyes?


CATH. And what manner of body was it, that they did see with their eyes?


HERE. A body sensible, passible, and mortal.


CATH. Thou can make no better, nor more direct answer, then that is. For
the words of Saint Austen, are of none other, but of that boddy, which they
saw, and that was sensible, for else, they could not have seen it. And
therefore where Saint Austen says.

Ye shall not eat this body that you see,

He might as well have said, ye shall not eat this body that ye feel or may
feel. Whereof it is written, Palpate and videte, That is to say.

Feel and see. Luc. 24


Or ye shall not eat this body that is passible, whereof it is written.

Oportet eum multa pati, That is to say. Mar. 8,
It behooves him to suffer many things.

Or, ye shall not eat this body that is mortal (whereof it is written.)

Oportet eum occidi. That is to say, Luc. 9,
it behooves him to beslayne.

And what were any of these sayings against this, that in the other place he
says.

Christ has given us the same flesh to eat, wherein he walked here in earth?


HERE. Mary sir, if that be true, then he has given us, visible, palpable,
passible, and mortal flesh to eat. For therein he walked here in earth, and
that he never gave us, to any such purpose. Wherefore this latter saying of
Saint Austen can not be true.


CATH. No can?


HERE. No trewly.


CATH. Then how say thou to this? does not Christ now in heaven, sit on the
right hand of God the Father, in the same flesh, wherein he walked here in
earth.


HERE. That can not I tell.


CATH. Why can not thou tell? for if he sit not there in the same flesh,
wherein he walked here in earth, then he sits not there in the same flesh,
that he took of the holy virgin mary.

If he sit not there in the same flesh, that he took of the virgin Mary, then
he sits not there, but in an other flesh, or else in none at all. If he
sits not there, but in an other flesh, or in none at all. Then is it not
true to say, that he is her son, nor she is his mother. For she can not be
the very mother of an other flesh, then she brought forth her self, or the
mother of no flesh at all. Wherefore, other thou must grant this to be true,
(as I think thou will not) that she is not now his mother, nor he her son,
or else thou must needs grant, that on the right hand of God the father in
heaven, he sits now in the same flesh wherein he walked here in earth. For
that is the flesh which he took of her.


HERE. Well sir, I will not stick to grant that now, because I see more in it
then I did before.


CATH. Then if he (now sittinge on the right hand of God the Father in heaven)
have the same flesh, wherein he walked here in earth, and the same flesh,
was here in earth passible and mortal, how cannest thou avoid this, but that
it is passible and mortal now in heaven?


HERE. No sir not so. For I can avoid that well enoughe, and it were but by
this, that ye declared yesterday, how John Frithe was deceived in his
foundation, by mistakinge of this same word, the same. For although Christ
have now the same body and flesh in heaven, wherein he walked here in earth,
yet he has not there now the same, in the same and every condition.


CATH. Then it is the same, and not the same.


HERE. What else? For it is the same body and the same flesh in respect of
the substance, but not the same in respect of the state, condition, and
accidental qualites thereof, which it had when he walked here in earth. For
it was then passible and mortal, but now impassible, and immortal, which are
clean contrary. And therefore not the same now, that it was then, nor the
same then, that it is now in one respect. And yet the very same then, that it
is now, and the very same now that it was then, in an other respect. For such
is the difference between the substance and the state, condition and
accidental qualites of any thing, that it may always and trewly be said, to
be the same and not the same in those diverse respects.


Cap. 16.
CATHOLICVS. Thou make me greatly marvel to here the speak.


HERE. Why so?


CATH. Because thou haste (as thy words does declare) so good understanding
of the difference, that is between the substance of a thing, and the state,
condition, or accidental qualites of the same. And yet nevertheless, wilt
take Saint Austen so ouerthwartly as thou do. For where he says.

Christ has given us, the same flesh to eat, wherein he walked here in
earth.

Thou take him to mean that flesh in every condition, with all such
accidental qualites as it had then. And not in the only respect of the
substance of it. And again, where he says,

Ye shall not eat this body that ye see,

Thou take him to speak that, in respect of the substance, and not in the
only respect of the state, condition, and qualites of it. So that, thou
understand Saint Austen wrong in both places. That is to say, thou take
his meaning of the first place, to be in the second, and of the second, to
be in the first, as the places them selves, are well able to declare. For where
he says.

Christ has given us, the same flesh to eat, wherein he walked here in
earth.

Clear it is, that in this same word (us) Saint Austen among other, meant him
self to be one. And in that he meant him self to be one among other, to whom
he says, Christ has given his flesh to eat, plain it is he never mente,
that Christ gave it him or them to eat, but as it was in his time, when he
should eat it. And in his time when he should and did eat it, it was another
passible, nor mortal, nor yet subject to any such other accidental and
natural qualites, as it was before the resurrection thereof. Wherefore thou
may by this, with half an eye perceue, that Saint Austen, never spoke those
words of Christ's giving his own flesh to eat, in respect of any such
qualites, but only in respect of the veritee of the substance.


HERE. Then, why does he add unto them, these words, saying.

Wherein he walked here in earth.


CATH. That he does, to declare his mind and meaning in the veritee of the
thing, which was in Saint Austens time, (even as it is now) the very same
wherein he walked here in earth, and is now in the holy Sacrament. The very
same I say, in the only respect of the substance, but (as every man does or
ought to know) not the same, in respect of those qualites, which in his
resurrection were changed into such perfections as are to us inscrutable and
incomprehensible. And therefore of the other side, where Saint Austen says,

Ye shall not eat this body that ye see,

Why wilt not thou see, that to be spoken, not in respect of the substance but
of the qualites, when the facultee of seeing or sight, doothe no farther extend
or pertayne but unto the understanding of the qualitees, and not of the
substance? For if he had said.

Ye shall not eat this body, and gone no farther.

Or had added unto it these words.

Which shall be given for you.

As it was said at his institucion of the holy sacrament, it had been then an
other matter. But when he says.

Ye shall not eat this body that ye see.

What is it else to say, but that ye shall not eat this body visible, or this
body sensible, or this body in such condition and state, as ye now see it in.
When the seeing it self, does import no farther of the body, but as
aperteyneth unto the sight, or sensibilitee thereof?


HERE. Then, why does he add unto it these words, saying.

I have set forth unto you, a certain sacrament. If it be spiritually
understand, it gives you life. But the flesh profits nothing.


CATH. First, these words.

But the flesh profits nothing.

Are in this place, of Frithes own adding and putting unto the other before.
And not of Saint Austens puttyng there. How be it because they be the words
of the gospel, and of Saint Austen recited, not far from the same place, where
Frith does take the rest, I will not clean omit them, but I will spare them
for a while, And first go to this that he says.

I have set forth unto you a certain sacrament, and being spiritually
understand, it gives you life.

Therefore what other thing is that to say but this, that when he says,

Ye shall not eat this body that ye see.

Ye shall not eat it in such sort, as ye see it, but as it shall be in a
sacrament, wherein ye shall not see it. For else, if he had not so meant, he
would not have said.

Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood ye shall
not have life in you.

For he meant not that flesh to be eaten in that proper visible form which
they saw, and yet to be eaten, in deed for all that, or else he would not have
denied life (as he does) for the not eating of it. And therefore eaten it must
needs be of very necessitee. Although not that, as it was of them seen, but
yet that, as it should be of them and us both, trewly and verily believed, in the
holy sacrament. And for that cause he says, I have set forth unto you a
certain sacrament, and being spiritually understand (that is to say, farther
and far otherwise then your senses can reach) it gives you life. Wherefore
because here appears both eating and not eating of one thing both at once,
which are both true, And that can not be in one respect, it must therefore
needs follow to be understand and taken, as the truth is, in two respects.
Whereof the one, that is to say, the eating, is in respect of the very thing,
with the invisible state, occult and secret behavior thereof, as it is in the
holy sacrament. And the other, that is to say the not eating, is not but in
respect of the visible form, and sencible appearance thereof to their eyes.
And therefore this eating and not eatinge be not here so direct contraries, as
thou take them for.


Cap. 17.
HHERE. Then, where is this become that he says,

If it be spiritually understand, it gives you life? As who say, or else it
does not?


CATH. I have told the that already.


HERE. Ye but yet even therein consists Frithes purpose altogether, as it may
partly apeere by that he says in the.21. leaf of his book, where he recityng
the saying of Christ to the Jews that believed him not, And also the mind of
Saint Austen thereupon (as he says) he has these words.

Christ said, does this offend you? what will ye say then, when ye shall see
the son of man ascendynge thither, where he was before? Then adds S. Austen
(says he) you shall know that he meant not, to give his flesh to eat with
your teeth: for he shall ascend hole. And Christ adds, it is the spirit
that quickneth, The flesh profyteth nothing. The words that I spoke, are
sprite and life. That is to say, (says Saint Austen) are spiritually to be
understand. And where Christ says, that the flesh profyteth nothing,
meaning of his own flesh, (as saint Austen says), he means that it
profits not, as they understood him. That is to say, it profits not, if it
were eaten.

Now here ye may see, how Frith has plainly proved both by the words of
Christ, and also by Saint Austen upon the same, that all this matter lies in
a spiritual sense, and must be understand spiritually.


CATHOLI. Frith has not proved that so plainly, as he has herein, proved him
self a false liar once again. For under the color of his allegacion of
Christ, and Saint Austen together, he has herein wrapped no small piece of his
own heretical falshed, to deface the truth of them both. For of those words
of Christ, the flesh profits nothing, when Saint Austen says it
profits not, as they understood him, where did this antichrist find this
exposicion, which he adds unto it, saying.

It profits not, if it wear eaten.

S. Austen has no such thing nor Christ another. And yet as though they had,
this crafty and false Raynarde does annex it unto their sayings, to make it
seem to be their meanynges.


HERE. And will you call him an antechriste therefore?


CATH. What should I call him else? For who can be more contrary to Christ
herein, then he is? for Christ says.

Except ye eat it, ye shall not have life in you.

And he says.

If ye eat it, it shall not profit you.


HERE. Tushe, those be not Frithes words. For he says.

It profits not if it were eaten.


CATH. And what is that, but if ye eat if, it shall not profit you? is it not
all one? Therefore is there any thing more against Christ's saiynge then that?
when Christ says,

Except ye eat it, ye shall not have life in you.

Does life not profit? and specially everlasting life, which Christ does
mean, and promise that we shall not have it, except we eat his flesh? And
yet this antechrist says, it shall not profit us, if we eat it.

Therefore, which of these two, are we best to believe? Christ, or this his
wicked adversary? for both we can not allow, they be so contrary.


HERE. They be not so contrary as ye take them. For all Christ's meaning (as
it apereth by his own words) is of spiritual eating by feyth, and not of
carnal eating with the teth. And that does Frith defend and nothing else, as
it apereth in the.44. lefe of his book where his words be these. If Christ
had (says he) so meant, that his own body natural should have continued in
the sacrament, which is the meat of the soul through feyth, and not of the
body by eating of it, and may as well be eaten through feyth, although it
remain in heaven, as if it were here present to our mouths, if he had (I
say) so meant, then would he never have given us such scriptures as he did. for
I say that this gross imaginacion may not stand with the process of the
scripture, which is received, as it shall appear by certain textes. First
where our savior says, The flesh profits nothing. The weight of those
words does compel us to understand our matter spiritually.

For by this short sentence, we are no less plucked back from the carnal
eating, then was Nichodemus, that he should not once dream of the carnal
regeneracion, when Christ said unto him. That what so ever was of the flesh,
was flesh.



And also again, in the.47. leaf, Frith has according to the same even these
words.

It is impossible (says he) the scriptures standing as they do) that the
natural body of Christ, should be present to our teeth in the sacrament.
And as for our faith it neadeth not to have him present in the bread. For I
may as well eat him and drink him through faith. That is to say, believe in
him, as though he were as present in the sacrament, as he was hanging on the
Cross.

In this ye see, Fryth does express his mind so plainly that no man can
doubt of his meaning therein. Which in effect rests but in two points,
whereof the one is. That christ's very body flesh and blood has no very
being nor real presence in the sacrament. And the other is, that what so
ever Christ spoke as towchynge the eating thereof, must needs be understand,
only spiritual. And these two has he proved by the words of Christ, and
also by S. Austen to.


CATH. What, will thou be at that point yet, for all that thou have hitherto
herd already? thou plaiest the very Frithia^ now in deed, to say that he has
proved both, when he has proved in deed none of the both by any thing that we
have hard of him yet. But thou have herd proof enough to the contrary, if
that would serve. And therefore what so ever he has brought for his proof
hitherto, has other made directly against him, or else utterly nothing for
him. Therefore speak of no proof that he makes, for he makes none in deed.


HERE. Yes sir, for he has proved, that it must be understand spiritually.
And thereof it must needs follow, that it may not be understand carnally, for
they be two contraries. And therefore, where there may be no carnal
understanding, there can be no flesh remaining. Wherefore thus has Fryth
his purpose thoroughly, that is to say, that the flesh profits not to be
eaten, and that, by reason of the spiritual understanding, whereof he is most
assured, both by christ's words (as I said) and Saint Austens also.


CATHOLI. Then if he were so assured, he could not be therein deceived.


HERE. No more he was.


CATH. Trowest thou so?


HERE. I think so.


HE. Why, thou may perceive by thine own reason, and also by this which I
told the before, that although, it must be understand spiritually yet it
follows not that it must be understand only spiritually. For spiritually (as I
said) and only spiritually, is two things. Therefore if Frith take it to be
understand only spiritually without any other, or farther respect, then he
takes it otherwise, then he has, or is able to prove it, by the words of
Christ, or Saint Austens other. Again of the other side, if he take it to be
understand spiritually and not only so, Then has he proved therein, so much
for his purpose, as is in deed, even nothing at all.


HERE. Why sir it is proof enoughe for him, that he is by Saint Austen most
certain and sure (as he has declared) that it must be understand spiritually.


CATH. What although it be so, and not only so?


HERE. Ye why not?


Cap. 18.
CATHOLI. Then if thou rest upon that, what if Frith knew not, what the
spiritual understanding of it is?


HERE. Yes that I dare say he did.


CATH. Then he would have given it a difinicion, and made it certain, before
he had wrought any conclusion thereupon, as every threw and wise persuader
does, in what so ever he takes upon him to prove. But this we see he did not.
And why? but other because he was therein ignorant, and therefore could not do
it, or else because he was of such a malicious falshed, that though he could, ye
he would not do it Which is of the twayn, most like to be true. For he saw
perchance that if he had made a good difinicion, or plain distinction, between
the spiritual and the carnal understanding thereof, it should not only not
have served, but also clean have destroyed his purpose altogether. And therefore
he chose rather to roue at a ve^ture, the^ to shote at any mark certain.
wherefore let us, seek out the certeinte of this spiritual understanding. And
that once had, we shall soon see, whether he went about to bring it to light,
or else to hyde it all together, or no. For he will not deny but that Saint
Austen and other old ancient, fathers and doctors of the holy church, did
certainly know it, when he pretends to prove all his purpose, most chiefly
by them.


HERE. I grant that, for them he will not deny.


CATH. Then remember thou well, what I have hitherto said. And let us return
to thexaminacion of that, which thou have recited all ready, out of the 21.
leaf of his book.


HERE. Marry sir that is how Christ, to those that believed him not, did say.

Does this offend you? what if ye shall see the son of man ascendynge
thither, where he was before? Then adds S. Austen (says he) you shall know,
that he meant not, to give his flesh to eat with your teeth. For he shall
ascend hole. etc.


CATHOLICVS. Is this Saint Austens saiynge upon those words of Christ?


HERE. So says Frith.


CATH. Therefore here, thou shall see once again, what Frith was. For if it
were not for avoiding of tediousness, I would recite unto the, the very
words of S. Austen, upon those words of Christ, both in latin and also in
english. but his words in latin turned into english shall be sufficient,
which are even very these. Christ answering said, Does this offend you,
that I said, I give you my flesh to eat, and my bloodde to drink? This
offends you in deed. Therefore what if ye see the son of man ascendynge
thither where he was before? What is this? By this he eased some, whom he knew.
By this he opened wherewith they were offended. Wherewith utterly, if they would
have understand it. For they thought him to deuyde and distribute his body.
But he said, he would ascend into heaven even whole. When ye shall see the
son of man ascendinge where he was before, ye shall certaynlie see even then,
that he distributeth not his body, in that manner that you think. Ye shall even
then certainly understand, that his grace is not with bytinges consumed.

Now where is this, that Frithe says of Saint Austen.

You shall know that he meant not, to give his flesh to eat with your teethe?

Where is this (I say) where is it? in deed it can not be found. And
therefore in the steed of that, this we find, that Frithe was nothing
ashamed of his lies. For if he had, he would never have put so many of them in
his writings as he did. And besides this, what fault is there here found,
with those unbelievers of Christ, which understood him not in this matter?


HERE. This fault, That their understanding ran upon the flesh of Christ.


CATH. That is false. For their fault was not therein, but it was in their
misunderstanding of the manner of it, as here Saint Austen in plain words
does well declare, they thought him to deuyde, and distribute his body piece
mele. And that misvnderstandinge, does Christ's question touch directly,
saying. What if ye see the son of man, ascendynge where he was before?

What were this question of his hoole body to the purpose, if it were not to
confound, and overthrow their misvnderstandinge of the division thereof in
parts? for by this, he opened, (as Saint Austen says) wherewith they were
offended. Which was with the distribution and erogation of his body in parts
as they thought.

So that their fault (for which they are here reprehended) was for that they
gave no farther credence to Christ, in the manner of geuyng his flesh to eat,
then their own imagination, and blind understanding did lead them unto. And
not for that, they thought his meaning to be of his own very flesh in deed.
For which thinking of his own very flesh, they bare here, no smake of any
blame at all, as they should have done, if it had been a fault so to think.
Wherefore, this thou may see, how very nothing, this place makes for
Frithe, notwithstanding all the great trust that he had therein.


Cap. 19.
HERE. Ye but sir, ye must consider, that (as you have herd) Frithe goes
farther then this. Saying even there.

Christ adds. It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits
nothing.

This text excludes all understanding of flesh, and drives us to the spirit
altogether.


CATH. There, Frithe would have it indeed. But why does he not bring in
Saint Austen there, as well upon this text.

The flesh profits nothing.

As he would make us believe, he does, upon this other before.

It is the spirit that quickens?

Sithe they join so nere together, as immediately one text after an other can
do?


HERE. He thought it was no need, because this. The flesh profits nothing,
is so plain of it self.


CATH. It is hard to find thee without an excuse. But nevertheless thou
shall here what Saint Austen says of it, for all that. And then judge, why
Frith did pass it over. For Saint Austens words turned into english are even
these.

What is this (says Saint Austen) that he puts to it, it is the spirit that
quickens, the flesh profits nothing? let us say unto him (because he
suffers us, not speakinge contrary, but coveting to know) O good lord and
master, how does flesh profit nothing, when thou have said, except a man eat
my flesh, and drink my blood, he shall not have life in him? does life profit
nothing? And for what pupose are we that we are, but that we might have
everlasting life, which thou have promised with thy flesh Therefore what is, it
profits nothing, the flesh profits nothing, but as they understood it?
for they understood flesh so, as it is rent, or torn in a dead carkas, or as
it is soulde in the shambles, and not as it is quickened with the spirit.
Therefore so it is said, the flesh profits nothing, as it is said science
puffs up. Now therefore ought we to hate science? God forbid. And what is,
science puffs up: alone without charitee. Therefore he joins to it. But yet
charitee does edify. Add therefore charitee to science, and science is
profitable, not by it self, but by charytee. Also now likewise, the flesh
profits nothing, being flesh a lone. Let the spirit come to the flesh,
as charitee comes to science and it profits very much.

And a littell after, he speaking in the parson of Christ knitteth up his
exposicion of this text with these words.

So, I give not my flesh to eat, as they did understand flesh.

Whereof it follows (say I) that otherwise he did give it to eat, although he
did it not so. For the words import no less. Therefore, here thou may
parceyue, why Frith brought not forth this place or exposition of Saint Austen,
as he does the text, whereupon he goes. Which was in deed, because he
lyked not Saint Austen so well in other places, but he liked him as evil in
this, for all his false bostinge, that he makes so much for his purpose.
Where as in deed, he makes for him in no place, but directly against him in
many places, as it has, and hereafter shall right well appear. Wherefore in
all this, thou see, Saint Austen takes not the spiritual sense so, that he
excludes the whole understanding of all flesh therein.


HERE. Sir, Saint Austen comes not to that yet. For unto this text, that is
to say,

It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing.

Frithe does add the words of Christ following, with Saint Austens mind upon
the same, which words are these.

The words that I spoke unto you, are spirit and life, That is to say (says
Saint Austen) are spiritually to be understand.

Here is the hoole matter come now, even clearly to light, both by Christ and
Saint Austen to. And what would you have more?


CATH. This exposition of S. Austens, which thou speak of now, is very
short.

And more short then he is wont to make upon so great a matter. And therefore
could Frith find no more of it but this?


HERE. Yes sir sumwhat more, which will like you less, if ye hear it.


CATH. It were strainge that I should mislike any of Saint Austens doings in
such matters. And therefore what so ever it be, I pray thee let me hear it.


HERE. That shall ye do. For Frithe in the.45 leaf of his book has these
words.

This is a plain conclusion (says he) that when Christ said, the flesh
profits nothing, he meant it even of his own flesh, that it could not
profit, as they understood him, to be eaten with the teethe. Albe it, it does
much profit to be slain for our redemption, and eaten thorough faith. Which
thing we may do, although his natural flesh be not in the Sacrament. For I
may as well believe in him, though he be in heaven, as if he were in earth, and
in the Sacrament, and before mine eyes. And that Christ spoke these words of
his own body, it is plain, by Saint Austens words, writing upon the same
place. And therefore he says, that they must be understand spyrytually, and
adds, if thou understand them spyritually they are spirit and life. And
though thou understand them carnally, yet nevertheless they are spirit and
life. But unto thee, they are not spirit and life, which understand not
spiritually, those things that I have spoken.

Here you may see now, that Frithe has more of Saint Austens exposition, then
I told you of before.


CATH. Ye but upon what words of Christ, does Saint Austen make this
exposition, which Frithe does here allege?


HERE. Upon these, that Christ says, my words are spirit and life.


CATH. Thou say even very true. And therefore where thou tellest me, that I
may here see now, that Frithe has more of Saint Austens exposition, then thou
did tell me of before, I say unto thee again, that thou may here see
(if thou mark it well) that upon these words of christ,

The flesh profits nothing.

Frith does bring in that exposition of S. Austens, which Saint Austen makes
upon this saying of Christ.

The words which I have spoken unto you, ar spirit and life.

And the proper exposition that Saint Austen makes upon these words.

The flesh profits nothing.

Which exposition, I recited unto thee right now my self, he does clean omit
and dissemble, as though there were no such matter at all. Therefore will thou
not see, what a part he plays herein? Thus to apply a man's exposition of
one text, to an other, and his proper exposition of that other, clean omit,
dissemble, and will not be known of it? Have thou seen a more manifest falshed
at any man's hand?


Cap. 20.
HERE. Sir the macter is not so great as ye make it. For when Christ says, my
words are spirit and life, he means those words which he spoke at that
time, among which were even these.

The flesh profyteth nothing.

Therefore they be of the words, which he means to be spirit and life. That
is to say, spiritually (as S. Austen says) to be understand. Wherefore these
words of saint Austen, spiritually to be understand, do as well serve and
expound this text.

The flesh profits nothing.

As they do this text.

My words are spirit and life.

Whereupon they were (as you say) directly and purposely spoken.


CATH. Ye but why does not Frithe, as Saint Austen does, put each of those
textes, with their own proper and whole expositions by them selfs? And then
with conference made between them, see what he could gather of them both
together, for his purpose?


HERE. I can tell what your answer would be, if you were asked that question?


CATH. What?


HERE. Ye would say, that he would not so do, because, that the one exposition,
would have made as much against him, as the other seems to make with him.


CATH. What month thee to think, that I would so say, but even the very
truth thereof? for most true it is, that the one exposition sounds no more of
the spirit, then the other does of the flesh. Whithe Frithe could in no wise
away with all. And therefore that made him so ready to bring forth that one,
which might seem to make for his purpose, and not to be known of the other,
which makes so much against him. For all his purpose was in nothing so
much, as to exclude all the real being of Christ's very flesh, in the holy
Sacrament. For there, he would have nothing but very bread in a bare
signification. And therefore could he abide nothing, that might seem or sound
to the contrary. But what so ever he could find among the old holy fathers,
to sound or smacke of any spiritual understanding in the matter, that did he
catch and hold, thinkinge utterly thereby, to prove his intent thoroughly.
Never serchinge what they mente by it, but always took it and applied it to
that he went about, which was, as it does well appear, nothing else but
falshed indeed. And therefore it proved there after. For had he been at the
first, as ready to try what the old holy fathers meant, by that spiritual
understanding, as he was rash and ready to run headlinge upon his own
dreamynge thereof, without any good aduysement or dew consyderation, or would
have referred the judgment of his own phansyes, to the Holy Catholic
church, as every true and good christen man ought to do, and as I For my part,
daily pray God of his grace, that I never do otherwise, if he had (I say) this
done, it had never proved with him and some other as it has done, which was
but according, to this old saying, the hasty man, lacks never woo.


HERE. Sir why do you account him rash and hasty herin, when he takes not the
old holy doctors, but according to their own sayings?


CATH. I do account him so, because all sayings, are not always so simple, but
that many of them oftentimes, contain and have in each of them, diverse
understandings. Or else there should not be as there is, such contention
about there meaninges, after that men has uttered and put forth their bare
sayings. Wherefore, the faut of rashness that I find with Frithe, is because he
looked so much upon their sayings, that he passed nothing upon their very
meaninges, but to their sayings, he joined his own meaninges, and thereby
deceived him self and many other moo.


HERE. Why, what other meaning should he gather of this their saying, a
spiritual understanding, but a spiritual understanding in deed? And that he
not only does, but also defe^deth, as much as he can. And therefore as I told
you before, where there is a spiritual understanding, there can be no carnal
understanding. And where there can be no carnal understanding, there can be
no very flesh remaining.


CATH. Thou say so. But how will he, or thou other, prove yt there is in this
matter no carnal understanding, or no flesh remaining?


HERE Because there is a spiritual understanding.


CAT That follows not. for I told thee diverse times before, that spiritual,
and only spiritual are two things, for if it be not only spiritual, then it
may be both so, and otherwise that is to say, so in one respect, and otherwise
in another respect. Wherefore if it may be, both so and otherwise, where is
Frithes purpose become then, which rests all together upon only so and none
otherwise? Therefore he must prove, that it is only mere spiritual, and not
only that, but also, what a spiritual understanding is. For without that all
his hole talk, is but vain babbling and nothing else.


Cap. 21.
HERE. Well sir, it is to late for him, to do that now. And therefore since
ye hold it so necessary to be done, I pray you for the fruictful furderance of
our talk herein, declare you whether the understanding of it be only mere
spiritual or not, and what the spiritual understanding of it is.


CATH. Then thou must first consider this, that although some, yet all and
every spiritual understanding, does not exclude, and forbid the
understanding of all manner of flesh, as it does, when it is but only and
mere spiritual, as some time it is, and some time not. For if thou take
spiritual understanding so, that is to say, to be always of only and mere
spiritual things, thou shall not take any body or flesh, within the compass
of any spiritual understanding at all. Wherefore if thou take it so, that
there may be no spiritual understanding of any flesh, thou take it then,
even directly against the holy Apostle Saint Paul, writing to the Corinthians
of the general resurrection, and describinge the difference of the state of
the body before and after. where he says, It is sown a natural body, 1.
cor. 15
and it shall rise a spiritual body. There is a natural body. And there is a
spiritual body.

And a little after he says also.

That is not first, which is spiritual, but that, which is natural. And
then that which is spiritual.

Here thou may see by the holy apostle (if thou trust him) that some body
is, and mo shall be, spiritual at length. And a spiritual body can not be,
trewly understand, but at the least in some respect spyrytually. Except thou will say, it may be otherwise understand then it is, which is no perfyte
good, and true, understanding in deed. Therefore, this does not follow, as Frith
would have it, that where is a spiritual understanding, there is no flesh.
But this doothe well follow, that where there is spiritual flesh, there the
understanding must needs be spiritual, not therein deniyng the veritee of the
flesh, but declaring the state and condition thereof. Yet this spiritual
understanding, is not al only and mere spiritual, because it is not dyrectly
and only of a spirit, but of a certain perfect and very flesh, which is
spiritual, and not a spirit, but spiritual, for that it is advanced so nere
the perfection of the spirit, whereunto it is knit, and thereby made
spiritual, as of the contrary part, the mind of some man is made carnal
and fleshly, not because it is fleshe-but because it is so addict unto the
flesh, that it is become subject unto the vicious desires or inclinacio^
thereof. And therefore called (as it is in deed) fleshely. For of such a man, we
say, he is a man of a fleshly mind, yet his mind is not flesh for all that.
Wherefore as the spirit of that man is fleshly and no flesh, so is the flesh
of the other, spiritual and no spirit. And for that it is spiritual, it must
be spiritually understand. And that can it not trewly be without the spirit,
by which it is made spiritual. And therefore the words which are spoken of
that flesh, are called spyrite and life, that is to say, spiritually to be
understand. For without that spyryte the flesh profyteth nothing. Wherewith,
they were trewly answered, which took it otherwise, that is to say, without
the spyryte. As it apereth by the words of Saint Austen recited before.


Cap. 22.
HERE. Yet it will not synke in to my head, but that, if this spiritual
understanding of flesh, be of flesh, that is very flesh in deed, it must
needs have also then, a fleshly understanding with all.

Because it seems more agreeable to the thing, then the spiritual
understanding of it does. For what makes understanding carnal or fleshelie
but flesh? or how can flesh be not fleshely understand, when understanding
must needs be after, and according to the thing that is understand?


CA. Herein thou art as frith was, wonderfully deceived. For he did, as thou
do put no difference, Inter carnem and carnalem. That is to say, between
flesh, and fleshly or fleshy, when the one has respect to the substance of
flesh, and the other, to the natural qualitees, disposicions, propertees and
usage thereof, or thereunto belonginge. And therefore when the flesh is
understand, after any of them, then the understanding of it, is carnal and
fleshely, For those natural qualitees, propertees, and disposicions of flesh,
is it, that makes the understanding of it carnal and fleshelye, and not the
substance it self: as it may well appear, not only By Saint Paul, but also
by Saint Austen upon the same sixth chapter of Saint John, where his words be
these.

Qui aderant plures, non intelligendo scandalizati sunt. Non enim cogitabant
haec audiendo nisi carnem quod ipsi erant. Apostolus autem dicit. Et vae rum
dicit, sapere secundum carnem, Mors est. Carnem dat nobis suam dominus
manducare, and sapere secundum carnem, mors est, cum de carne sua dicat, quia
ibi est vita aeterna. Ergo nec carnem debemus sapere secundum carnem.

Which may thus be englished.

Many of them that were present, not understanding the matter were offended.
For in hearing these things, they did not imagine, but the flesh that they
were themselves. But the apostle says, and says true, to understand after
the flesh, is death. Our lord gave unto us, his flesh in eat, and to
understand after the flesh is death, when he said of his own flesh, that
there is everlasting life. Therefore we ought not to understand flesh after
the flesh.

Here thou may see a manifest difference of understanding, between flesh
and after the flesh, and therefore how say thou to it now?


HERE. I say that S. Austen says here very well. For what means he by this,
that we ought not to understand the flesh after the flesh, but that we ought
to understand it after some other thing, which is here meant by the flesheand
not the flesh it self?


CATH. I would not have thought the so foolish, as to take it so. for this as
is though it were all one to say, we ought not to understand the flesh after
the flesh, and to say, we ought not therein to understand any flesh at all,
when the saying forbyddeth us not, the understanding of the flesh it self,
but the understanding of it, after the common course, and natural disposicion
thereof. It forbyddeth us to understand it, as nature here daiely does use it,
and at length shall lose it, but not as the spirit shall at length again
obtain it. The spirit of man it self, is now in this life much after the
flesh here, but the flesh in the next life, shall be after the spirit there.
After the flesh here, has no place, nor being there. And that ought we to
consider here. For the flesh is one thing, and after the flesh is an other.
Wherefore although in the course of nature, they go here both together, yet in
this matter, our understanding must pluck them a sonder, or else, thou shalt
understand flesh, after the flesh, which is death, as thou have hard
before, and more plainly does appear, by the manifest words of thapostle
again, in an other place, where he says.

Et si cognouimus secundum carnem Christum, 2. cor. ^
sed nunc iam non nouimus. That is to say

Although we have known Christ after the flesh, yet we do not so now.

What do we then? know we now, no flesh in Christ? God forbid. for we know it
in deed: but not after the flesh. What is after the flesh? Necessitee,
passibilitee, corruptibilitee, mortalitee, and such other. These were once
known in Christ. And his flesh then, known after them. But so it another is,
nor ought to be known now. And therefore not after the flesh, and yet flesh in
deed for all that, although not fleshly flesh, which only makes fleshely
understanding, But spiritual flesh which makes the understanding spiritual.
For as thapostle says.

^. cor. 15
There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.

And what is that to say, but there is a natural flesh, and there is a
spiritual flesh?

That (he says) is not first, which is spiritual. But that which is
natural. And then that which is spyrituall.

These two states of flesh, thou may know by reason, can not have like
understanding. Wherefore by this, it may well appear, that the spiritual
understanding of this matter, whereupon Frith does ground him self, and yet
understood it not, is not even only and mere spiritual, as he does take it,
excludynge all manner of flesh. But spiritual of spiritual flesh, which
Frithes understanding did never touch, nor once dream upon.


HERE. That is your pleasure so to say.


CATH. No, it shall not be only my saiynge, but as in the.17. leaf of his
book, it may be partly perceived by his own saying, which is this.

As touching the other words (says he) that Christ spoke unto his
disciples at the last supper, I deny not but that he said so, but that he so
fleshly meant, as ye falsely feygne, I utterly deny.

Now mark, what does he mean, by this, which he lays here so sore to our
charges, that we have (as he says) so falsely feygned of Christ's meaning?


HE. He means your feygnynge to be this, that Christ meant, that his words,
concerning his body, spoken at his last supper, should be taken and
understand fleshly, which can not be.


CATH. And means he so?


HERE. His words declare no less.


CATH. Therefore by this it is clear, that his meaning of our feynynge, is
even like his understanding, which is in deed both false and fleshly to. For
do we feyne, that Christ spoke those words of his blessed body, with a
fleshely meaning? Where finds he, that we feyne that, as here he lusts so
to lie? For we do not only, not feine it, but utterly deny it, constantly
affirmynge, and faithfully teachinge, that therein Christ meant, in deed very
flesh, but yet not (as this flesh monger lies) fleshly flesh, for all that.
How be it even fleshely flesh it is, which Frith dreameth upon, and none
other. And that deceaueth him altogether. For commonly where so ever he makes
mention of Christ's body, his flesh, and eating thereof, he does not call it
but a natural body, natural flesh, and the eating thereof, carnal
eating, eating with the mouth teeth and belly, and such other talk
concerning the same, as smells not, but even altogether fleshely and
nothing else: as it appears in the.44. and.45. leaf of his book, and many
other places therein beside: when, as I told thee before, between flesh and
fleshely, there is as great difference, which Fryth did nothing consider. And
therefore it is no wonder although he came never at the spyrituall understanding
of the matter, being so fleshelie phantasied, as his own talk therein does
plainly declare that he was. Wherefore in him are well verified these words
of thapostle saying.

1, cor. 2
Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt Spiritus dei, stultitia enim est illi,
and non potest intelligere, quia spiritualiter examinatur. Spiritualis autem
iudicat omnia.

Which may thus be Englished,

The fleshly man vndestandeth not those things, which are of the spirit of
god. For they are foolishnes to him, because he can not understand that they
are spiritually to be examined. But the spiritual man judges all. That is to
say.

The spiritual man judges all, both spiritual and carnal. But so can not
the fleshly man, whose reach passes not the common course of natural and
fleshly flesh, Wherefore it is no marvel, though this fleshly Fryth, does
falsely feygne, our understanding to be but fleshely, as his understanding was,
which could no farther then such flesh, as he was of him self.

For in all his book, thou shall not find one spark of understanding that
he had, of any spiritual flesh at all. And therefore, his thinking that our
understanding of flesh is none other, then his was, caused him in the.23.
leaf of his book, to have these words.

I wonder (says he) that we have been led so long in this gross error.


HERE. So does many mo, as well as he, I may say to you.


Cap. 23.
CATHOLI. Ye but what gross error is it, which he notes us here to be led
in so long?


HE. That ye believe christ's very natural body and his natural flesh, to be
presentely in the Sacrament.

And therein to have such carnal eatinge of it, with toeth and belly, as he
makes mention of, in diverse places of his book.


CATH. What if we would grant him, that it were a very gross error, (as he
calls it) so to believe?


HERE. Then ye must other confess your selves in a great fault for so
beleuyng, or else deny, and say ye believe it not.


CATH. Let it so be, that we believe it not. And what of that?


HERE. Then is Frithe and you, even both at a point, and of one opinion there
in.


CATH. Nay not so. For we believe, that therein is very flesh for all that. But
he believes that therein, is utterly none at all. Therefore his opinion and ours
are not both one.


HERE. Then, how can you believe, that therein is Christ's very flesh, if ye
believe not, that his natural body, and natural flesh is in it?


CATH. Well enough. For if thy weak hedde could bear it, I would deny, that
Christ has any natural body, or natural flesh other.


HERE. No not in the sacrament.


CATH. No nor in heaven or any where else.


HERE. What never speak it. For then it must follow, that he has no very
body, nor very flesh at al.


CATH. That is after Frithes learning. For his wit was so yoked with the commen
course of nature, that his understanding could reach no farther. And yet in
his time I dare say he herd of this difference of things, that some were
natural, and some supernatural. Wherefore, I deny not, but that the blessed
body and very flesh of our Savior Christ, was once natural, but not since
the time of his resurrection. For what is natural, but what so ever is under
the yoke and laws of nature, as our bodies are, and our flesh is? And what
things may we call supernatural if that be not one of them, which has been
once natural, and now has overcome the power and strength of nature, and has
gotten clean out of the laws and bondage thereof? wherefore, if thou say, that
there is no such thing, then thou must needs grant, that the body, and
flesh of our Savior Christ has even now, need of eyer and brethe, meat,
drink, sleep and such other, as without which, no natural body of man
does, Ex. 34.3. re. 19.
or can be able, to live and endure. Except it be by miracle for a season, as
in part, it was with Moses and Helyas by the space of.40. days. Therefore if
the body of Christ have now, need of those things, then it is passible, and
may suffer. If it be passible and may suffer, then it is mortal, and may dye.
And that I am suer thou will not grant. Wherefore if it can not dye, it is not
mortal, if it be not mortal, it can not suffer. If it cannot suffer, it has
no need of those things, or any other like. If it has no need of any of
those things, what has nature to do with it, when those be things, which of
necessite nature requereth? Therefore if nature have nothing to do with it, how
can it be natural? That, is not natural, which the course of nature has
nothing to do with all. Therefore why does Frithe so often call it natural, but
because his understanding of it, was so carnal that he could see no spark of
the state of it, which is spiritual? He did not know, that natural and carnal,
are no meet, nor convenient terms, to be put to the expression of the holy
flesh of Christ, as they are not indede If a man should go to the very proper
signification of the words. Because therein they make no difference between
the state of that flesh and ours. For ours is natural and carnal. And
therefore to the declaring of his flesh, there should be put in the place of
natural, supernatural. And in the place of carnal, spiritual, as now the
verites of the thing, does most worthyly and dewly require. For if it were
always used to be spoken of so, it would perchance ease some weak minds, of
many carnal and fleshly fantasies, that runs yet in their head des about
this matter, as there did none other in Frithes hedde, so long as he lived.
For as it appears in diverse places of his book, he took nature, to be one
of his pryncipall grounds, to prove his purpose by, in this case. And therefore
he that will go about to improve and disalowe that by nature, which is
supernatural, shall prove him self (I may say to thee) even as Frythe did,
far worse then a natural fool. Wherefore herein leave thy dreamynge of what
so ever is natural and carnal, and turn it to that, which is spiritual
and supernatural an other while. Or else thou shall never have, true, perfect,
and constante faith in this matter, while thou lyuest. For so long as thy
cogytation herein, runs or rests upon the common course of natural
flesh, thou shall never be satisfied, with any truth, that thou shall get
and come by that way. Therefore remember and follow the holy Apostle in that he
says (as I told thee before.)

Although we have known Christ after the flesh, 2. cor. 5, 1. cor. 15
yet we do not so now, for if therbe (he says) a natural body, there is also
a spiritual body. Now he it that is not first, which is spiritual, but that
which is natural, and afterward that, which is spiritual.

Wherefore in this matter, thou must forget natural and fleshly flesh, and
understand, or at the least have in belief, supernatural and spiritual
flesh. And then thou shall, as Frithe did not, trewly understand the meaning of
Christ, where he says.

John. 5
The words which I have spoken unto you are spirit and life.

For spiritual understanding is not here, as Frith did take it, only and mere
spiritual, without all respect, and being of any manner of flesh at all. Nor
the carnal understanding, which he speaks of, and lays here to our
charges, is none such another, as he takes it for.

He was far deceived in both. For as he took the one, to be only and mere
spiritual, So he took the other to be only and whole carnal. Which are both
false, as it may well appear, and it were but by the very substance of the
thing it self, which indede is flesh. But yet some way, so spiced with
spiritualitee, that it is another carnal, nor yet only, or mere spiritual, but
spiritually to be understand, for the spiritual state, which it has
obtained.


Cap. 24.
HERE. Sir, then let me here somewhat more, whereby I may better perceive, what
spiritual understanding is. For yet I know it not.


CATH. It is even that, which is not carnal.


HERE. By that am I never the nere.


CATH. Therefore mende thy question, and then thou may chance of a better
answer.


HER. Then, what is carnal understanding?


CATH. That is well asked. For with that, thou should begin. Because that
once known, thou shall know the other so much the better. For that order in
the same matter, upon this text, the flesh profits nothing, does holy
Chrysostom follow in these words.

Quid autem est carnaliter intelligere? simpliciter veres dicuntur. Neque aliud
quippiam excogitare. Non enim ita iudicanda sunt quae videntur. Sed misteria
omnia interrioribus oculis consideranda, hoc est, spiritualiter. Qui non
manducat carnem meam, et bibit meum sanguinem, non habet vitam in semet ipso.

Quomodo nihil prodest caro, sine qua nemo potest viuere? vide quod ea
perticula, caro non prodest quic quam, non de ipsa carne, sed de carnali
auditione dictum est.

That is to say.

But what is it to understand carnally? simply as the things are spoken, and
to imagyn thereof nothing else.

For those things which are seen, are not to be judged so. But all mysteris
are to be considered with the inward eyes. This is spiritually. He that eats
not my flesh, and drink my blood, has not life in him. Now does the flesh
profit nothing, without the which, no man may live?

Mark, that this part, the flesh profits nothing, is not said of the
flesh it self, but of the carnal hearing of it.

Here, by this, thou may well perceive, that carnal understanding extends
no farther herein then sensible experience does lead. But spiritual
understanding extends to that, which no sensible experience is able to reach
or come unto, although it be in sensible things. As the grace of baptim,
although it be in the sensible sacrament and ministration thereof, yet it is
insensible it self. Farther more thou may here also perceive, that holy
Chrysostom does not reprehende the understanding of the flesh it self, but
the carnal hearing of it.

That is to say, the fleshly or fleshy understanding of it.

Which is, when it is taken and understand after the flesh, as it is in the
commen course of nature. For that, he does here reprehende and nothing else.


Cap. 25.
HERE. Well sir, let it so be. And would you have me therefore understand very
flesh to be in the Sacrament?


CATH. Indede I would have thee believe it.


HERE. I take understanding, and beleuynge to be without any great difference
in this case. And therefore because this point runs upon spiritual
understanding, how can I understand very flesh, but that mine understanding
thereof, must be carnal and after the flesh, which I do understand?


CATH. Ye what flesh do thou mean?


HERE. Mary Christ's flesh.


CATH. I pray thee heartily understand that flesh, even after that flesh, and
spare not. For so, thine understanding of it shall another be carnal, nor yet
natural another as carnal and natural be communly taken. For if thou
understand that flesh, after that flesh indeed, thou do then understand
it even as it is, and not as it was, that is to say, as it is now, and has
been ever since his resurrection. But not as it was, between that, and the
first time of his incarnacion. How be it, this same carnal and after the flesh,
that I mean here, is not in him, properly called, carnal and after the flesh
now, but spiritual and after the spirit. Because in him, what so ever was
contained under or in the signification of this word carnal is now turned so
far into the contrary, that it is comprehended under the signification of
this word spiritual.

And therefore if thou understand that flesh, after as it is now, thine
understanding of it is then spiritual, and not carnal.


HERE. Ye but although that flesh be (as ye say) spiritual, yet it is flesh.
And therefore sith it is flesh, how shall I know when I understand it
spiritually and not carnally?


CATH. When thou do understand it as it is.


HERE. Ye how is that?


CATH. Immortal. For if thou understand it otherwise then so, thou
understand it carnally, and after the flesh, and not spirituallie. For
although immortalite comes to the flesh, yet it comes not of the flesh,
but of the spirit. And therefore if thou understand it immortal, thine
understanding thereof is spiritual.


HERE. Of immortalitee we have none experience. And therefore, how or by what
mean, should I understand it immortal? For I take immortalitee to be such
a thing as does far pass my understanding and as I tkynke yours to.


CATH. Although it passes my understanding never so far, yet so long as it
passes not my beleueynge I do not care. but I am afraid that it passes not
only thy understanding but also thy beleuynge to.


HERE. Nay that it does not, for I believe it verily.


CATH. Then if thou do so. For the proof of the thing, this only testymonie
of of the holy Apostle is enoughe, where he says.

Christus resurgens ex mortuis iam non moritur. Mors illi vltra non
dominabitur. That is to say.

Christ rising from death, dies no more. Death has no more dominion over him.
Therefore that living flesh, which is above, and be yonde all the power of
death, must needs be immortal. For although death and it, made once a fray,
wherein death gat the victory and the flesh gave way for a little while, yet
soon after, that same flesh gat the victory of death again, and that for
ever. Wherefore if there were no more, nor any thing else, whereby to
understand it immortal, but this one testimoni of thapostle, it were (as it
is) sufficient and even enoughe to any good christen man.


HERE. Sir because ye speak of enough. Is it enough to understand or believe it
immortal?


CA. It is enough, so thou understand or believe therein, nothing to the
contrary.


HR. As how?


CAT. No corruptiblitee, no passibilitee, no necessitee, nor any thing else to
be therein, ye apperteyneth by any occasion to the contrary. For as these do
naturally appertain and belong unto the state of mortalitee, so does their
contraries, supernaturally appertain and belong unto the state of
immortalitee.


Cap. 26.
HERE. Then, me think by your saying, that impassibilite does appertain to
immortalitee so, that they must needs go always together.


CATH. What else?


HE. Therefore if they must needs go always together, then the bodies that shall be
dampened in hell for ever more, shall be impassible. For they shall be immortal,
and never die. And so suffer no pain at all, if immortalitee and
impassibilitee go always together?


CATH. I pray thee where foundest thou that?


HERE. Where should I find it, but even in reason?


CATH. Ye in such reason as Frithe followed, but not in very reason in deed.
For I deny that those in hell, shall be immortal.


HERE. Then they shall, and must needs there dye again, and have and end at
length.


CATH. I say not so another.


HERE. They must needs other dye again, and come to an end, or else live for
ever, and then they be immortal. For the one or the other, can not be avoided,


CATH. As far as thou see, thou may say. How be it, I deny both.


HERE. What, that they shall die again, or be immortal?


CATH. That same I mean.


HERE. Ye may deny what you list, but yet I am sure, the one or the other
must needs be true.


CAT. If thou be so sure of that, then tell me what do thou mean, or
understand, by this word immortal?


HERE. Marry that, which is past death for ever.


CATH. Naie, that is no good answer. For a dead dog or a dead horse, is
past death for ever, and yet is not immortal.


HERE. I mean that, which is once past death, and yet lives again for ever.


CAT. There thou say well. And therefore what makes a body to live for ever?


HERE. The obteynynge of life without end.


CATH. What is life without end?


HERE. Life everlasting.


CATH? Ye what is life everlasting?


HERE. I can not tell what I should call it, but even so, or everlasting
life, which is all one.


CATH. Then there is nothing that makes bodies to live for ever, but
everlasting life.


HERE. That is clear.


CATH. Therefore if no bodies can be immortal, but such as lives for ever:
And none can live for ever, but by everlasting life.

It follows plain, that it is everlasting life, which makes bodies
immortal.


HERE. That I grant must needs be true.


CATH. And to whom is everlasting life promised? to them that shall be damned in
hell? John. 6.
or else to them that shall be saved in heaven?


HER. What question is that? for everlasting life is promised to none, but
only to those, that shall be saved.


CAT. Then, when everlasting life is promised to none but only to those that
shall be saved, and none can be made immortal but by everlasting life, it
must needs follow, that none but only those that shall be saved, can be made
and trewly called immortal. And therefore why say thou, that those bodies
shall be immortal, which shall not have everlasting life, but shall be damned
in hell for ever more? and so thereby conclude that because of their
passibilitee and penal sufferynge, immortalitee and impassibilitee goes not
always together, which is far against both reason and truth. For although
those damned bodies shall have a perpetual passibilitee and sufferynge without
end, yet they therein shall not be immortal for all that.


HERE. How can those two stand together?


CAT. Well enough. For once again, what is meant by this word immortal, but
that, which is not mortal? And what is not mortal properly, but that, which
lives beyond and out of the danger of death, and all the stinges thereof? for
there is nothing immortal but only that. And may we say, that the damned
bodies in hell, shall be in that case? when they shall always remain in death? ye
and in that death, ^po. 2.21
which the holy scripture calls Mors secunda, that is to say, the second
death, which may also be called the death of all deaths, when it shall never
cease, but be everlasting.


HERE. Then yet ye grant, that they shall be, everlasting.


CATH. Ye in death, but not in life.


HERE. If they be not in life, they can feel no pain.


CATH. That is not so. For the feelynge of pain, does not even properly
belong and apperteyne unto life, but unto death. Even as the selynge of
pleasure, does not belong unto death, but unto life. It is proper to death, to
come by pain. And proper to life, to acquere pleasure. for the feeling, which
perfect and very life has, is of none other but of pleasure. And the feling
that very death has, is of none other, but of pain. But this is sumwhat
strainge, because in this world, there is none of them both. That is to say,
another perfect life, nor yet (if I may so call it) perfect death another. For
the life that we have here now is but as it were a course unto death, or a
mixture of both together. wherein death in conclusion prevails and makes an
end of both. that is to say, of life and it self to. For they both be here
transitory and temporal, but afterward, permanent and eternal, not mixed
and confounded together, or the one following the other, as they do here. But
there, clearly and distinctly separate a sonder, each from other, for ever
more.


HERE. Yet is it marvel to me, how those in damnacion should feel pain, if
they be dead, as ye say they be. For there is no dead thing can feel.


CATH. Thou that take one thing for an other. For did I say that they shall
remain dead? when I said none otherwise but that they shall remain in death.
Ded and in death, are two things. For he that is dead, is past death and
without all manner of felyng. But so is not he, that is in death. For he is but
at the point of dyinge, which abiding so, is far worse, then dead in deed.
For he feleth sumwhat but what is that? In deed no pleasure, but only pain
and that extreme. Wherefore that, or so much as we see of this matter, by daily
experience here, gives to us good occasion of some consideracion, how it
shall be there. For although it be finished here in a short time, yet it shall be
there continual for ever. Wherefore, say not, that those which shall remain
in perpetual damnacion and misery, shall be therefore immortal. For that
word properly, belongs only to them, that shall remain in pleasure
eternal. And therefore as those may, and be trewly called immortal, so the
other might, if the word were in use, be called inuitall.

For those two words gives this much to be understand, that, as the one
sort, another does nor can die.

So the other, another does nor properly can live. For they be contraries.


HERE. If they in hell another do, nor can live, it must needs follow, that they
have no life.


CATH. How can they have life, when they are in everlasting death?


HERE. Then that death can not grieve them, if they have no life. For (as I
said) without life they can not feel.


CATH. That is not so. For what is feelynge, but the sensibilitee of well or
woe? That is to say, of pleasure or pain, And therefore whereto tends, or
belongs the sensibilitee of pain, but unto death, as I told the before? And
whereto, tends or belongs the sensibilitee of pleasure, but unto life? And
therefore, shall, or may we say, that they have in hell the sensibilttee of
pleasure? God forbid. If they have not the sensibilitee of pleasure, they have
not that, which apperteyneth and belongs properly unto life. If they have
not that which apperteyneth and belongs unto life, how can we trewly say,
that they do live or have life?


HERE. why sir, life is one thing, and pleasure is an other, and pain is a
third. Wherefore I take not life of it self, to be other pleasure, or pain
other, but only as it were an indifferent receptacle of the other two by
course, as they chance unto it.


CATH. Ye, that is here in this world, where death has dominion over it. And
where those contraries of pleasure and pain are confounded together for the
time. But not so afterward in the world to come, where they shall be divided,
with all that properly belongs unto them.

And so to remain a sonder for ever more. And therefore it follows not, that
they have life, because they have the sensibilitee and feelynge of extreme
pains, which (as I said) belongs unto death, and not unto life.

For how should we trewly judge life in those, which we know, it were better
for them, that they had never been borne: as of one of them in especial, the
Gospel does say.

Bonum erat ei, si natus non fuisset homo ille. That is to say.

It had been good for that man, if he had not been borne. If he had not been
borne, he had had no life. Therefore if he have life, and had been better to
have had none, then it must follow, that no life, is better then life, which
cannot be.


HERE. Yes sir in some respect. For although life must needs be better then
no life in respect of it self, and in the order of nature, yet no life is
better then life, in respect of him, which has purchased such a state, that no
good thing, can do him good. Wherefore because this can not be avoided, but
other he has life, or no life, and clear it is, that he has not no life,
which no life were better for him then life. Therefore if must needs follow,
that he has life, although it be worse for him the^ no life.


CAT. Then I perceive that thou will needs have life in them, that shall be
damned in hell for ever.


HERE. What else?


CATH. Therefore since there is life in heaven, life in earth, and life in hell
to, what difference will thou put between those three lives?


HERE. Very great difference. For in heaven, life is endued with only
pleasure and no pain. In earth, with both pleasure and also pain. And in
hell, with only pain and no pleasure.


CATH. What life call thou that which is alwaie endued with only pain and
no pleasure?


HERE. Such as I grant to be worse to them, then no life at all: but yet it is
life for all that.


CATH. If it be so, how comes this to pass, that the holy Scripture does
call it death? ye and gives it to be understand everlasting, which is far
worse.


HERE. I shall tell you therein, as I think. because death consists in
extreme pains, and pains be there, extreme and perpetual, therefore it may
well be called death, specially when it has in it no commoditee left, that
apperteyneth unto life, except it be feelynge.


CATH. Nay except not that. For feelynge is no commoditee but condicionall,
that is to say, if it be of pleasure, whereof they in hell have none at all.


HERE. Therefore the life that they have, may be called death.


CATH. Ye but the scripture does not so call it, because it may, but because
it is so. And therefore how can thou trewly call them immortal, when they are
in a death eternal? they might rather be called mortal, then immortal. How
be it properly none of them both. For mortal is that. which shall have a
fynall death. And immortal is that, which shall have none at all, but a
perpetual and a pleasant life. for never die, is only in heaven. And ever die,
is only in hell, Wherefore since ever die, and never die, be two direct
contraries, this word immortal can never be trewly nor properly said of them
both: for it does exclude and utterly forbid the understanding of all death,
which has in hell, no less then a perpetual continuance for ever.

Therefore since it may thus appear, that although those damned bodies shall
have their being eternal, and yet are not in deed immortal, because they
shall remain in the second death which is perpetual, it must needs follow,
that there is no such impediment as thou do object against the going
together of impassibilitee and immortalitee, but that they may, as they are,
and must needs be, always inseparable. Wherefore although by this occasion, thou
haste caused me somewhat to dygresse from my purpose, yet to return thereunto
again, I say as I said, that as passibilitee and corruptibilitee does
apperteyne and belong to the state of mortalitee, so does there contraries,
that is to say, impassibilitee and incorruptibilitee appertain and belong to
the state of immortalitee. And for a general rule, there is nothing that is
or may be so understand of Christ's flesh, and his body now immortal, as
it is and may be now of other men's flesh and their bodies, or might have
been of his, when it was mortal.


Cap. 27.
HERE. And ye say so, we shall have a goodly conclusion of that, ear we part.
For if there be nothing to be understand of Christ's flesh and his body now
being immortal, that is or may be understand of other men's flesh and
bodies, or might have been of his, when it was mortal, then we may not
understand any form, figure, or fasshion of his body, nor any members
thereof, as hands, feet, ears, eyes, mouth, nose, and such other, which
we do well understand and see, that other men have. Whereof this must needs
follow, that other he has such a monstrous body, as never was seen or hard
of, or else no body at all.


CATH. Thou handlest me now, even as Frith handles Saint Austen, and the other
holy fathers of the church. And the truth to say, as al ye do (for the most
part) handle us al in what so ever we say or write. For commonly, ye do not
only mistake our meaninges, but also peruersly alter, and chainge our sayings,
as thou do mine here even now. For did I say, there is nothing that is or
may be understand of christ's flesh and his body now immortal, that is and
may be understand of other men's flesh and their bodies, or of his, when it
was mortal? what a peruersion of a man's tale is this? for my saiynge was none
other, but that there is nothing, that is or may be so understand of Christ's
flesh and his body now immortal as it is and may be of other men's flesh and
of their bodies, or might have been of his, when it was mortal. Be these two
tales like? How be it to Frithe and to thee, it is all one to say, there is
nothing to be understand, and to say, there is nothing to be so understand. In
deed by this we may understand, of what generation or of what sort of people
ye are. But nevertheless, will thou understand the figure or form of
Christ's immortal body even so, as thou do, or ought to do even now, of
mine or thine? when the figure and form of thine and mine, are corruptible? as
they must needs be, whilse all the whole body is no less then so? Therefore
how can yt understand a body to be immortal, and understand any part of
it corruptible? when the corruption of parts tends to the whole. And the
corruption of the whole, is death or destruction to any thing?


HER. How should I understand it incorruptible, when (as I said of
immortalite) we have no experience of any such incorruption?


CATH. Even as thou do understand it immortal, so understand it
incorruptible. For as nere to thy understanding, is the one, as the other, and
all one.


HERE. We have Saint Paul for our guide in the one.


CATH. So thou have him likewise in the other. For the body says he.

Is sowed in corruption, and it shall rise in incorruption. Cor. 15.
That is to say.

It is sowed in the state of corruptibilite, but it shall rise again in the
state of incorruptibilite. Wherefore the figure and form of Christ's immortal
body, may in no wise be so understand, as it is now of our bodies.


HERE. That I now parceiue must needs be granted, as touching corruptibilite.


CATH. Ye and as touching any thing else in our bodies, what so ever it be.


HERE. That were straynge. For we may understand his immortal body to be
sensible, that is to say, visible, palpable, and of a certain stature and
quantite as other men's are.


CATH. Beware what thou do. For will thou understand the sensibilite of his
body, to be subject to the sensis of men, and to the actions of other natural
things, as the sensibilite is of our bodies?


HERE. How else?


CATH. What, when so many displeasures chances to men thereof, as we may daily
see? do thou not know, that by our sensibilite we be made subject to
passibilite? for what corporal passion or pain could be put unto us, by any
man, or other body, if we could not be hard, seen, touched, or felt? or what
penal suffering could touch us, but by our senses of hearing, seeing, or
felyng? Therefore by our senses or sensibilite, we come to passibilite and
suffering, and by passibilite and suffering we come to death and corruption.
There is no man I suppose, that has the stature and quantite of his body so,
but that he would, some time, for one cause or other, have it other more, or
less, or otherwise then he has, if he might. If not, yet who does not know
it to be subject to division, which tends to corruption, and so to
destruction? therefore will thou understand the form, figure, stature,
qua^tite, senses, and sensibilite of christ's body after this sort, and as
thou do and must needs understand them in, and of other men's bodies? if
thou so do, without question, thine understanding of it then, is but carnal and
after the flesh, And not spiritual and after the spirit, and therefore not
according to ye scriptures before alleged. For so thine understanding walks
not, but wtin the compass of sensible experience, which can not reach, to
the state of immortalite, nor to any thing nere it. For so long, as thou
understand any point in that body so, as you do and must understand it in
ours, without fail thou do not understand it immortal, but as it were
mortal still, although, or what so ever thou do think, or phansy to the
contrary. For what is in our bodies, yt is not subject to dissolution,
corruption, and mortalite? And what is so contrary to immortalite as those
things are? therefore thou shall never trewly understand Christ's body to be
immortal, so long as you dremist upon any thing to be in it, as it is natural.
Because it is not in part, but even whole supernatural altogether.


Cap. 28.
HER. I wene ye would make us understand him to have no body at al.


CA. why say thou so.


HE. How should I understand him to have a body, and understand not the form,
figure, stature, color, quantite, and such other accidental qualites thereof,
as I do of other men's bodies?


CA. Because he has those things now, far otherwise and after an other sort
in his body, then other men has them in theirs.


HER. How is that?


CAT. Ye that how, is it, that leads you al. But yet so much of that how, as
my poor understanding can reach, and thine can bear, I will tell thee.
Other men has their accidental qualities, not subject to their wills, but
to the order of nature. And he has them, not subject to the order of nature,
but to his will, which is in a farther liberte, and the fardest that may be.


HERE. I do not well understand your meaning therein.


CATH. That is this. Thou standinge here now presently before me, I do see in
thee, all these things that we speak of. That is to say, thy form, favor,
color, stature, quantite, and so forth, by reason whereof it is true, after the
common understanding, that I see thee.


HERE. I grant no less.


CATH. Therefore what if thou would not, that I should see thee now, being
thus present before me? could thou with draw the visible appearance of these
things from my sight, if I lust to behold them in thee?


HERE. I could not do so though I would, so long as I stand before you.


CATH. Therefore thou have them not, subject to thy will when thou can not use
them according to thy will.

Wherefore by this it appears plain, that when thou art seen, and parchaunce
would not be seen, these things in thee then are therein but resysters of thy
will, and not folowers thereof. And therefore, god forbid that we should
understand them to be so, and after that sort, in the blessed body of our
Savior Christ. Wherefore, other he has them not at all, or else he has them
subject to his holy will. And parell it were to think, that he has them not
at all, because it is so hard to understand, how a very body may have any
being without them. And more parill it is to think, that he has them in his
body, as we have them in ours, which are tending to corruption. But no paril
at al, to think yt he has them subject, and at the beck of his holy will, to
use or not use them after this or that sort, always at his pleasure. That is to
say, to show them or not show them, or him self by them, when, where, and as it
shall please him. For if it were his glorious pleasure to stand here now
between us both, thynkest thou that we should see these things in him, as in
like case, we should see them in other, and ask them no leave? or that his
very being between us, should let thy seeing of me, or my seeing of thee, as an
other man's direct being between us should do, whether we or he would or not,
except it were his holy pleasure so to do? And therefore, because the altitude
of this matter, extends so far beyond the common reach of our reason, and
understanding, how to avoid every how, that has, is, or may chance to be
hurled against it, but with other like howes of the same sort, it pleased him
of his infinite goodness, for the coroboration of the verite of our faith
herin, to leave unto us, in his holy scripture, some, ye and sufficient examples
thereof. For how did the ponder ofite of his holy boddy behave it self, John. 6
when he walked upon the water? did it not there, forsake the common order of
nature, and submit it self wholly and only to his will? How did the visible
form, of his whole body, (wherein al these things were contained) behave it
self, John. 8.
when the Jews would have horled stones at him in the temple, if they had not
suddenly lost their sight of it? did not also that, even there then, leave the
order of nature, and follow his only will likewise? mo plates diverse there be,
for the purpose, which shall not need to be recited now: Therefore if he had
these accidental qualites of his body, so obedient unto his will, that he
might as he did, use them at his pleasure, contrary and against all the rules
of nature, (he being then, in a mortal state, and they of them selves in a
natural course) how much more now and ever since are they subject to his
will, he having his body glorified, and in a state immortal? wherein, they are
also chaynged, from what so ever the state of mortalite in them requered.
Wherefore, if he has them (not as we have of necessite) but as the truth is,
at his liberte, to use, or not use them (as I said before) when, where, and
how so ever therein his holy will and pleasure is and shall be, where are all
your knappyshe and scorneful cauillations become, that ye, by the natural
course of these things, make against his real and very presence in the holy
Sacrament? saying, what? so long and large a body, with hands, feet, arms
legs, head, here, back and belly, in so little a room and space, as the
Sacrament is of? and yet more over, another see him nor feel him another? who
would believe this? In deed none of you, which frame your beleuynge, after
your sensible seeing and feelynge. But nevertheless, what are all these
cauillations of yours to the purpose? all these I say, with other, of some of
you, more shamefully invented, then of us, conveniently may be recyted?
Therefore what if thou thy self, had the sensible form of thy body, at
the liberte of thine own will, to show or not show it, how, when, and where
thou list? would thou not some time be so among men, that another by their
seeing, nor yet by their feelynge, they should beware of thee? And when thou
were so among them after that sort, would it follow that thou were not there,
because they could not se thee, nor feel thee? Therefore by these your own
objections, it appears plain, that your cogitations and understandings
herein, runs not, but directly and only after the flesh, and not after the
spirit. Ye and that after the fleshly flesh, without any spark or respect,
of any spiritual flesh at all. Wherein lies so much of the matter, as
caused the Holy Apostle to say.

Although we have known Christ after the flesh, 2. cor. 5.
yet we do not so now. That is to say.

Not now after as it was, when he walked in it here in yerthe according to the
course of nature, and so therein suffered at length. But now after the
spirit, and as the spirit had obtained it, when and before he sitting in
Emmaus with the two of his dysciples, showed him self unto them, first in one
form, whereby they knew him not, and immediately after in an other, whereby they
knew him in deed, And yet there upon so suddenlye vanished away from their
sight, that both they and also we, might and may thereby understand and
perceive, how very subject and obedient his sensible form, was and is, unto
his holy will, to use, this way or that way, at his only pleasure. Therefore it
follows not, that he is not presently and verily in the holy Sacrament,
because he suffers us not, therein sensibly to se him, nor feel him. But this
follows well, that because he suffers us not, to have any such sensible
experience of him therein, we be so much the more bound, therefore to thank
him, as all the merit and profit of our faith comes to, in that holy
mystery. Wherein, among all other artycles, faith is in none (as I think)
more excellent and necessary.

Wherefore, this thou haste now hard even more then enoughe, to perceive how
far Frithe was (for all his babbling pretense of the contrary) from the very
spiritual understanding of this great mystery. And through his lack of that,
and of good will together, what blind and dampnable falshed he fell into,
both in his understanding of the Scripture, and also of Saint Austen likewise,
I think I have declared unto thee so much thereof, that thou can not with
reason, require any more, whereby thou might any better know what he was,
then by this that I have showed thee all ready.


Cap. 29.
HERE. Why say you so? for be you well assured he has yet one other place of
Saint Austen for his purpose, which passes all that we have spoken of
hitherto.


CATH. I pray thee what is that?


HERE. In the 23. and the.24. leaf of his book, he does upon this saying of
Christ.

He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, bydeth in me and I in him.
Allege Saint Austen in these words.

Qui manducat carnem meam, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet and ego in
illo. Hoc est ergo mandu care illam escam and illum bibere potum, in christo ma
nere et illum manentem in se habere, ac per hoc, qui non manet in Christo, and
in quo non manet Christus procul dubio non manducat eius carnem nec bibit
sa^guinem, etiamsi tantae rei Sacramentum, ad iuditium sibi manducat and bibit.
That is to say.

He that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, abides in me, and I in him.
This is therefore the eatinge of that meat, and drinikng of that blood, to
abide in christ, and to have him abiding in us. And therefore he that abides
not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, without doubt he eats not
his flesh nor drynketh his blood, although he eat and drink the sacrament
of so great a thing unto his damnacion.

And upon this, Fryth him self has these words. This one place (says he)
is sufficient to prove my purpose though he said not one word more. For here
he does plainly determyne, that he which abides not in Christ, That is to
say, he that is wicked or unfaithful, does not eat his fleashe nor drink
his blood, although he eat and drink the sacrament of so great a thing. And
so must it needs follow, that the sacrament is not the very natural body of
Christ, for then the unfaithful should eat his flesh, seeing he eats the
sacrament of his body.

How say you now?


CATH. Is this all?


HERE. No not so, For although this be enough, yet he has more.


CATH. Let us then have it altogether.


HERE. In the same leaf, Fryth goes farther with these words.

This saying (says he) has saint Austen in an other place also, where he
writes in this manner. Qui non in me manet, and in quo no^ ego maneo, no^ se
dicat aut existimet manducare corpus meu^, aut bibere sanguinem meum. Non
itaque manent in Christo qui non sunt eius membra. Non sunt autem membra
Christi qui se faciunt membra Meretricis.

That is to say.

He that bideth not in me, And in whom I abide not, let him not say, or
think, that he eats my body or drinks my blood. They abide not in
Christ, which are not his members. And they are not his members, which make
them selves the members of an harlot.

And these (says Frith) are also the very words of Bid. Whereunto he adds of
his own words these.

Here is it plain (says he) proved again by the auctorite of S. Aust. and
Bid, that the wicked and unfaithful (which are not the members of Christ) do
not eat his body nor drink his blood. And yet they do eat the sacrament as
well as the other. Wherefore you must needs grant (says he) that the
sacrament is not the natural body of Christ, but a figure, token, or
memorial thereof.

Now sir, do you mark well these places of S. Austen, and what Frith does here
gather of them?


CATH. Ye, very well.


HERE. Then I pray you say now even as you think: do they not even clean
overthrow, the principal purpose of what so ever ye have said before?


CA. In deed I would grant no less, if they had in them, none other meaning,
but this that frith picketh out of his own heretical dreaming.


HER. His heretical dreaming? What mean you by that?


CATH. I will tell the so thou will first consider his old foolish accustomed
conclusion, which he does here infer and renew again, and that in both these
places.


HERE. What conclusion is that?


CATH. Be not these his words?

It must needs follow, and ye must needs grant, that the sacrament is not the
natural body of christ. What is this to his purpose, of the not being of
Christ's very body in the sacrament? to be, and to be in, is all one with him.
Whereof I have told the enough before. And therefore, what fyndest thou else in
any of these two places of Saint Austen, that can make any thing for his
purpose?


HERE. I wonder that ye will ask me that question, since they make so much and
so clearly for him as they do. For whether you take the sacrament it self, to
be the very body of Christ, of Christ's very body to be verily in it, these
places makes directly against you in them both.


CATH. How so?


HERE. Does not the first place say (as Frith has declared) that, to eat
Christ's flesh, and drink his blood, is to abide in him, and he in us? and by
that, he that abides not in Christ, nor Christ in him, eats not his flesh
nor drinks his blood, although he eat and drink the sacrament thereof. Now
this being plain enough, yet to confirm the same, does not the second place
say also, let not him say or think, that he eats my body or drink my blood,
which abides not in me, and in whom I abide not? Therefore they abide not in
Christ, which are none of his members. And they are none of his members, which
makes them selves the members of an harlot. And yet clear it is, that such
wicked persons, does often times eat and drink the sacrament. Wherefore, if
other the sacrament it self, were Christ's very body and blood, or his very
body and blood were verily in it, it should and would needs follow, that such
wicked lyuers and unfaithful persons, as never abide in Christ, nor he in
them, which do daiely eat the sacrament, should therein eat his very
body, and drink his blood. And that does Saint Austen in both places utterly
deny.


Cap. 30.
CATH. What does he deny?


HERE. Marry that such wicked persons do eat the very body of Christ, when
they eat the sacrament.


CAT. And thereof will thou infer, that the very body of christ is not in the
sacrament?


HE. What else? for that must needs follow.


CATH. Saint Austen says not so.


HER. No, not in those words, but yet he says as much as that comes to.
For if the very body of Christ were verily in the sacrament, then should those
wicked persons, that abides not in Christ, nor Christ in them, eat his very
body, when they eat the sacrament.


CATH. And even so they do in deed.


HERE. Will you say so, when Saint Austen says plainly nay?


CATH. And so say I to.


HERE. What ye and nay? eat and not eat one thing both at once?


CAT. Ye why not?


HERE. Nay, then it is time, to make an end, and even to bid you farewell, if
ye talk after that sort.


CATH. If thou so do, thou do therein but as it is common with such as thou
art. For ye will be sure to shake of a matter (if ye may) when ye have most
need to harken well to it.


HERE. Who would not shake of such a talk as ye make? for how can the
eating and not eating of one thing, both at once, stand together?


CATH. Although I have told the before, yet once again I will tell the how,
if Fryth (or thou for him) will tell me one thing that I will ask the.


HERE. What is that?


CATH. I would know what manner of eating this is, that Saint Austen does
mean, and here speak of?


HER. Tushe sir, I pray you go not about the bushe with any such questions,
but go directly to the matter, and there an end.


CATH. Call thou that a going about the bushe, to try certainly what a man
does mean, by that he says?


HERE. Ye sir when the words be so plain as needs it not. For Saint Austen
says, that those persons does not eat the body nor flesh of Christ, when
they eat the sacrament. And what would ye have more plainly spoken then that
is?


CATH. I grant it to be both plainly spoken, and also trewly. But yet another
plainly nor trewly another, as Frith does take it.

For he takes it not to be spoken, but of the very real eating of it, which
in deed is utterly false, and directly against that, which I told the, of
Saint Austens own saiynge before. where he says,

Christ for our health, has given us the same flesh to eat, wherein he
walked here in earth, and the same flesh, that he took of the virgin Mary.

And where did he (as I said before) give us that flesh to eat, but in the
holy sacrament? And therefore who so ever does eat the sacrament, must needs
also therein, eat that flesh, or else that saiynge of Saint Austen can not be
true. Wherefore this is directlye against Frithes understanding of these two
later places: which thou haste recited. Whereby we may well perceive, that
Saint Austen meant not in them, as Frith does take him. For if he did, he
should be in this one place, directly against him self in the other two
places. Which in so weighty a matter, god forbid to be thought of S. Austen:
whose most excellent wit, learning and holiness, has reigned and flourished
so long in such an honorable estimacion, as it has most worthily done. For
herein, if he had so meant as Frith does take him, then in him there should have
been verified this notable saiynge of the Apostle.

Modicum fermentum totam massam corrumpit. That is to say.

A little leaven corrupts the hole lump of dow. Therefore, Saint Austen was
to wise, to well learned, and to happy, to over shoot him self in this great
matter, with any crum of the leven of this contradicion.

Which were enough to deface all his doing herein, and him self to. Wherefore
it can not be avoided, but this is enough, whereby thou may be sure, that
frith does falsely understand these two places of Saint Austens, as he does
all the rest before.


HERE. I will here more ear I grant so much. For how so ever ye avoid this
contradiction in Saint Austen yet I am sure ye can not avoid the contradiction
that is herein between him and you. For here he says plainly that the
wicked, which abide not in Christ, nor Christ in them, does not eat
Christ's body nor his flesh, although they eat the sacrament thereof. And you
say here as plainly, that they do eat it. And what is this but eating and not
eating one thing both at once. And what is that, but plain contradiction,
which in no wise can stand together?


CAT. Why so?


HER. Who knows not why?


CATHO. That is even I. For do not thou know, that in daily common meats,
eating is ordained only, to man's commoditee and profit, And not to his hurt
or hinderance, although they be daiely, very much abused?


HERE. All that I grant to be true.


CAT. And does it not sometime chance, that the hole man and the sick man,
eating of one meat, the one eats it to his profit, and the other to his
hurt?


HERE. What of that?


CAT. If the sick man's eating, who takes nothing but hurt and hinderaunce
thereof, should come in question, or be asked whether he does eat any thing or
not, will it not, nor may it not, be rightly answered and said, that he
eats nothing? When he takes not that therein, which eating is chiefly or
only ordained for? In so much that if one will say, he does eat, will not
an other say, what eating call ye that, which does more hurt then good? ye
rather no good at all, but much hurt, when the eater is never the better for
it, but the worse: For is that eating worthy, or meet to be called eating,
which is not only without all the commoditee and profit of eating, but also
does purchase far more hurt and hinderaunce, then not eating. Therefore
although in respect of the thing eaten the sick man does eat the very
same meat, which the hole manne does eat, yet because he does not eat it,
with that inward effect and profit of it, that the hole man does eat it
with all, it may well be said and stand with reason, that he eats not,
because that which he does, is but in vain. For although eating be
commonly taken and understand of the meat and outward manner of receyuynge
thereof, yet it may as well and better be understand of the very inward
commodytee and profit thereof, for which profit only, the outward eating
is prepared and ordained, as it is plain, when without, yt the other does
nothing (as I said) but greatly hurt and hinder, although the fault and cause
thereof, be not in the meat taken, but only in the state of the taker.
Wherefore, if a man would say, (as right well he might) that the sick man
eats not, meaning in respect of the commoditee and profit, that eating is
ordained for, yet of that faiynge it follows not, but that he does eat of
the very same meat, that the hole man does eat, for all that.

For the name of eating does include the understanding, not only of the
outward manner of eating, but also and most chiefly, of the inward co^moditee
and fruictfull profit thereof, which is the very dew end, whereunto the other
is not ordained but only to serve. And therefore of eating, that same dew end,
does most worthily bear the name, as it does sometime, and even specially now
in this case, where it is, of no more mente, but even of that alone. So that
between these two respects, that is to say, of the outward eating, without
profit, and of the inward eating, wherein consists all the profit thereof,
there is both eating and not eating of one thing, and that both at once. The
one by it self alone, evil and hurtful: and the other, good and effectual.
Therefore likewise in our case, of this effectual eating it is, that Saint
Austen does here speak of. For does he not in these two foresaid places,
speak only of these eaters. which abide not in Christ, nor Christ in them?


HERE. That I grant.


CATH. And may we not think, that Christ is our health?


HERE. May we not? Nay what ought we more, to think and say, then that?


CATH. Therefore if Christ be our health, those that abide not in him, abide not
in health.


HERE. That is true.


CATH. And those that abide not in health, who can say but they be sick?


HERE. It follows plain.


CA. And those that are sick, although they eat the same meat, that other
does, even really, yet for all that, they eat not the same meat that other
does, effectually and profitably. And that eating only it is, which Saint
Austen does here deny, and none other. and yet not with standing, that he
denies not here but only that eatinge of Christ's very body, which fails
not in deed, but only in those, that abide not in Christ, nor Christ in
them, because they abuse them selves so wickedly, Frith would needs for all
that, understand him, as though he had denied that eatinge thereof, which
houldeth and is in all of lawful age, both good and bad even generally. And
therefore herein, how false his understanding is, it may well appear by this
that Saint Austen makes here no mention of the whole multitude of eaters
thereof in general, but only of one part of them, which are but a certain
sort in special.


Cap. 31.
HERE. Nay then it is time to give over, if ye make so many eatinges of
Christ's body.


CATH Why how many?


HERE. Mary sir ye make twain.


CATH. I make none, but yet because thou speak of twain, in deed there be
three.


HER. Three? which three be they?


CATH. One is only, spiritual. An other is only real. And the third is,
both real and spiritual together.


HERE. How so?


CATH The only spiritual eatinge, is in them, that having a well purged
conscience with a penitente heart and a perfect faith, would feign receive the
holy Sacrament and can not. But let, as perchance in sickness, with the
lack of time, or with the feeble weakness of stomach, which some time is not
able to keep that it takes, or let with any other impediment, whereby
they can not, or conveniently may not have it. And the only real eatinge, is
in those, that receueth the holy Sacrament not abiding in Christ, nor christ
in them, because of their paruerse behauour and wicked state. Of whom only
(as I said) and of their not eating, Saint Austen does here speak, and of
none other. Thirdly, the eating both real and spiritual together, is in them
that does receive the holy Sacrament, not only actually, and therefore therein
the body of christ really, as the naughty sort does, but also in a right
faith, with a pure conscience, and a contrite heart, spiritually, as the other
for lack thereof does not. Wherefore, of Christ's blessed body, this many manner
of eatinges there be.


HERE. Then I perceive, that ye take, to be at the least, one eatinge of it
spiritual and an other corporal, some time a sonder, and sometime both
together.


CATH. That word corporal, to be put there, not borrowed, but even properly
spoken and understand as it is commonly taken in every condition, I dare not
grant.


HER. Why so?


CAT. Although it be hard to tell the why, for thynsuffitie^cie of our
english tongue yet for the best declaration thereof, that I can make, thou
shall understand, that for this latin word Corpus, we have this english
word, body. And for this latin word Corporale (which comes of Corpus)
because we have no proper English word for that, we borrow thereof this word
corporal, which gives any thing to be understand, partayninge to a body,
according to the order of nature, as accidental qualites does. And farther
more likewise, for this latin word Caro, we have this English word, flesh.
But for this latin word carnale (which comes of caro) because we have no
English word for that another, so proper as is able even aptly and fully to
counteruayle the signification thereof, we therefore borrow of it, this word
carnal, as we do of corporale, corporal. Which words, both corporal and
carnal, although they be no English words properly, yet by use, they are
grown into such acquayntaunce with many, (although not learned in the latin
tongue) that they know, or have a great guess, what they mean and signify.
And that in this case, is what so ever (as I said) partayneth to a body or
flesh naturally. Which some does English with these words, bodylie and
fleshly, although those be the proper English words, not of corporale and
carnale, but of corporaliter and carnaliter. which does some what differ from
corporale and carnale. Therefore when we eat the blessed body of christ in the
holy sacrament, we may no more say, that we eat it corporally or bodyly (and
yet eat it verily). Then, when we eat therein (as we do in deed) his very
flesh, we may say thereof, that we eat it carnally or fleshly. For so we
eat it, as we ought to understand it. And we ought not to understand it
carnally, nor fleshly. For if we do, then we understand it after the flesh,
which the doctrine of the holy apostle does utterly forbid, as I have
declared unto thee al ready. And therefore as the flesh, and after the flesh,
is two things. So the body, and after the body is to things likewise. And as
the understanding of the flesh after the flesh, is none other but to
understand it carnallye or fleshelie, So the understanding of the body after
the body, is none other, but to understand it corporally or bodyly. Wherefore,
as it is proved both by Saint Austen and also by Saint Paul before, that we
may not understand Christ's holy flesh after the flesh, that is to say, not
carnally nor fleshly, so we may not understand his blessed body, after the
body another, that is to say, not corporally nor bodyly. For after one rule,
they must be understand both of them, which rule the holy apostle does
give us, where he says (as before is alleged.)

2. cor. 5,
Although we have known christ after the flesh, yet we do not so now.

Therefore if we may not know Christ now, after the flesh, we may not now,
understand him after the flesh. For we can not know him one way, and
understand him an other way. Therefore if we may not understand him after the
flesh, then we may not understand him after the body. For that is flesh.
Wherefore as it is none other to understand him after the flesh, but to
understand him carnally or fleshly, so it is none other (as I said before) to
understand him after the body, but to understand him corporally or bodily. And
for that cause, as we are by the apostle, forbid the understanding of him
after the one, so we are likewise in the same, forbid the understanding of him
after the other. And therefore, how would thou have me grant a corporal
eatinge of Christ's body, or to be eaten corporally, when we may not
understand it corporally? for we may not eat it after one sort, and
understand it after an other, least we make a discrepance or a variete in the
thing, which in the verite of it self, is none other in our eatinge, then in
our understanding, nor in our understanding, then in our eatinge of it, but
all one. For although a body can not be by nature corporally or bodyly, except
it be verylie, yet, by possibilite, it may be verily, although it be not
corporally or bodily, but as Christ's body in the Sacrament is. For verily,
rises of the substance. And corporally or bodily rises of the natural
qualites thereunto annexed. Which in his blessed body are supernaturally
chaynged. And therefore it is sufficient for us to believe, that (as the truth
is) we eat his body in the Sacrament verily, although we eat it not
corporally or bodylie. That is to say, not after a corporal or a bodylie
manner, because to be eaten of us, it nether does nor yet needs, to behave it
self after that sort.


Cap. 32.
HERE. Why sir, how is it possible to be true, but that, when it is eaten
verily, it must needs be eaten corporally and bodylie? for a very body, must
be very bodylie eaten, or else it can not be eaten in deed.


CATH. That I grant, when it is eaten after the common course of natural
eating, but else not.


HERE. If it be verily eaten in deed, it can none otherwise be eaten but even
so?


CATH. That is not true.


HERE. Why, what call you, eaten after the common course of natural eatinge?


CATH. When that which is eaten, is or may be seen, felt, tasted, and eaten
sensibly, for then therein, the order of nature has his course, and bareth rule.


HERE. And do not I see feel and taste what I eat, when I eat the Sacrament?


CATH. That is an other matter, for I speak not this that I say now, of the
Sacrament, but of a very body.


HERE. why is not the Sacrament a very body?


CATH. No trewly.


HERE. That herd I never before.


CATH. I would thou hadest had no need to here it now.


HERE. What need so ever I have had, I have always taken the Sacrament to be a
very corporal thing.


CATH. And even so it is.


HERE. Why, ye say it is not a body.


CATH. So I say still.


HERE. How can a thing be corporal and be not a body? for a body can not be
but corporal, another any thing be corporal, but a body.


CAT. Thy dream runs not, but always upon the common course of nature. And
yet even therein thou art deceived to: for quantite is a corporal thing, but
yet not corpus that is to say, not a body for all that, but in, or of a body
as a certain thing appertayning unto it. Also color is a corporal thing
to, but yet not corpus, or a body another. And so likewise of form, figure, and
all other sensible obiectes and qualites what so ever they be. for every one of
them is corporal, and yet none of them corpus or a body, but only pertaining
or naturally belonginge to a body. And therefore they are called corporal
qualites.


HERE. Then belike, ye call that corpus or a body, where in all those things be.


CATH. No not so another. For we call that, substance, and not a body.


HER. Then what call you a body?


CATH. Not substance by it self, nor those accidental quantites and qualites
by them selves another, but substance and they joined naturally together. For
then it is corpus, that is to say, a body, or else in the order of nature, no
very body indede. And therefore this word corporal, serves so indifferently
to them that it may be said some time of the one, and some time of the other.
That is to say, some time of the substance, and some time of thaccidentall
quantite and qualites.


HERE. And why not of them both or all together?


CATH. Because it is then, corpus, or a body, which word commonly, in the
course of nature, extends in sygnification properly, to no less then all the
whole together, and not to any of the parts particulerly by them selves.


HERE. Yet then I may say, that the Sacrament it self is at the least a
corporal substance, although it be (as you say) not a body.


CATH. How can thou say so, when it lacks nothing else of a body but only
that? For there is none other cause why, that it is not a body, but because it
has not a proper substance, as other quantites and qualites has, wherein they
be.


HERE. If it be not a corporal substance, how could I see and feel it as I
do?


CA. As thou see and feel all other corporal things. Whereof, any corporal
substance, thou never saw in all thy life. For it is but only the quantites
and qualites that thou or any man else, does or can se of any thing, and not
the substance it self, which is always of it self and by it self insensible.


HERE. Yet by those quantites and qualites, I do suerly know, that there is a
substance, wherein they be, when I see them.


Cap. 33.
CATH. In that thou must except the holy Sacrament. Which is alone, and without
the like, among all sensible things that are in our knowledge: Of the which
Sacrament, what if I would say this, that the same which we see, is a
corporal thing, and not a body. And yet has in it a body, that is not
corporal?


HERE. If ye would so say, it were strayngely spoken. How be it, if you would
so say in deed, your meaning thereof, I would take to be this. That there, is
corporalite without a body. And a body without corporalite.


CATH. Take it even so?


HERE. Then ye mean the corporallite without a body, to be of the Sacrament in
the only respect of it self. And the body without corporalite, to be the
thing of the Sacrament, which you say, is the very body of Christ really and
presently contained therein. Is it not this that ye mean?


CATH. Forth with thy purpose, and then I will tell thee more.


HER. My purpose is this. If Christ's very body in the Sacrament, be without
corporalite, being the same body (as you say it is) which is in heaven, it
must needs follow that Christ's body in heaven, is of no corporal substance.
For without corporalite, there can be no substance corporal. And therefore
consequently, if it be of no corporal substance, then it is no body at all.
For with out, a corporal substance, no body can be.


CATH. First whether thou put the case of his blessed body, in heaven, or else
in the holy Sacrament, all that is one to me. For I put no difference between
them in the verite thereof, but that it is the very same in the one place, that
it is in the other. And therefore if thou put this word corporal to that
substance, for to show a distinction or a difference between the substance
thereof, and the incorporall substance of an Angel or a spirit, I hold well
with all.


HERE. And with no cause else but only that?


CATH. Yes trewly, and that is this. If thou put it also to that substance, and
call it corporal, meaning it to be corporal, by reason of a supernartual
connection of that substance, and such supernatural quantitee and qualitees
together, as are beyond al therperience and reche of any mortal man's wit,
reason, or understanding, I hold so well with that to, that I will here none
of you all, what so ever ye would feyne or say to the contrary. But if thou
mean it corporal, by reason of any such mortal, and corruptible quantitee
and qualitee, as there is none other in thy body and mine, or in any other
mortal creature living, I deny it utterly to be corporal so, or to have so
much as any being, other in the sacrament or in heaven other, after that
sort. For your dreamyng of such manner of corporalitee in him, is also an
other cause why, then I told the of before, that these mad, and heretical
phansies has risen among you, saying and askyng, what, Christ's very body
presently in the sacrament? what, so great a quantitee in so little a space?
what, before my face and see it not? what, have it in my hands and feel it
not? what, receive it, eat it, and taste it not? what, here and there one body
in so many places at once? who would believe this? And so ye conclude with your
capteyne Fryth, where he says in the.76. leaf of his book,

It is no article of our creed (says he) and therefore let them7 believe it that
will. A goodly conclusion and even like not only him self, but also all the
rest of his folowers. How be it, by this it may well appear, what manner of
fruictes they be, which ye have gathered out of such corporalitee in
Christ, as ye dream always upon in your selves.

And no marvel why, when ye will needs make your deceiuable senses (which
beguildeth you daily) to be the judges and guydes of your faith, in such
divine mysteries.


Cap. 34.
HERE. Why sir, be there not of your sort, and even in the same believe that
you be of, that does both say and wryt, that Christ has even now, a natural
body, and that it is of a corporal substance?


CATH. I grant no less. But what of that? think thou therefore, that when
they call his body a natural body, they mean it such a natural body as ours
are, within the compass and common order of nature? or when they call it a
corporal substance, that they mean it corporal, by reason of any such
corporal quantitees and qualites as our bodies has, which bodies are yet, by
the^ and with them, subject unto death and corruption?


HER. If they do not so mean, why do they put those words natural and
corporal to it, which does none otherwise sygnifie: and not rather forbid
them to be used, when the significacio^ of them, is to their meaning so
contrary?


CATH. I shall tell the why. First, because there be no proper words for the
things that they mean by them, except they should call natural supernatural,
and corporal supercorporall. Whereof allthough supernatural, has some use
monge them that be learned, yet is it far, both from the use and also the
understanding of them, that be unlearned. But as for this word
supercorporall, plain it is, that that was never in use among the unlearned,
nor yet among the learned another, because there is not found any such word
of that composicion.


HERE. Then were they best, to bring both those words into an use, whereby
they might express directly what they mean, and not there, to use those other
words, which does signify the contrary or insufficientlie.


CATH. No not so. for where they put this word natural, if they should put
supernatural, and where they put corporal, if they should put
supercorporall, although most of such as be learned, could well away with
all, yet the great multitude of the unlearned, should by that, be rather
provoked to the mistrust and doubt of the verytee of the thing, then to the
fyrme credence and fast belief thereof, if such straynge words, were joined
unto it, as they for lack of knowledge were not able to understand, nor
could away withal. For those words supernatural and supercorporall, could
not be brought among them into such a familiar use, as might lead them any
nere the understanding or beleeuynge of the veritee of the thing, then the
other words does, nor so nere another, they being unlearned as they are.
Wherefore it were without wisdom, all reason, and discreacion, to ioygne such
words unto that (which of necessitee they ought to believe) as might rather
bring them in dout, and the thing out of credence, then to confyrme them in
their faith as the truth thereof does require. And therefore these words
natural and corporal, does much better serve the purpose in that respect,
then the other could do among them, if they be well understand, and trewly
considered, wherefore learned men does put them there.


HERE. Why, wherefore is that?


CAT. Not to show or signify the state or manner of the thing, but most
certainly to confirm and ratify the veritee thereof. For the verytee of
Christ's blessed body in the holy sacrament is the thing, that we are bound
to believe, And not after what manner or sort it is there, which passes the
reach of all men's wits, but not of his power, which first said the word,
and told us so much of the matter, as is clean out of doubt, except it be
with them which does therein mistrust, and not believe him.

Wherefore beside all this, if these words natural and corporal, were in
this case put clean away, and not used of good and catholyke men, to be joined
unto it, as they are are, how like is it, that some of you, would sone reyse up
again, this old very pestilent heresye of the Manicheis, which said that
Christ had but a fantastical body, and no very body in deed. For that most
wicked error, is not convinced and put away, by any words, more clearly then
by the words natural and corporal. For when by them, the body is called a
natural body, and of a corporal substance, that does declare it plainly, not to
be fantastical, but even very essencial. And therefore one of the chief causes
why catholic me^ do use to put those words unto it, is to prevent, and
suppress that cursed heresy, from risynge any more again. And an other cause
is (as I said before) to confyrme and stablishe the faith of the multitude, in
the veritee of the thing, And not to declare thereby the manner of being and
qualitees thereof (which far passes our knowledge) nor to show any such
naturalitee or corporalite, to be in it, as we have in our bodies, subject to
the order and course of nature, by reason whereof, we are now and then,
compelled even to sustain, diverse displeasures.


Cap. 35.
HERE. Yet sir, how so ever other qualitees behaueth them selves in christ's
body, we must needs think, that he has in it, the very same proper quantitee
thereof, which he had when he walked here in earth.


CA. what even so, as we have ours, or he had his then?


HE. Ye how else?


CAT. Then tell me this. have thou not hard of some honest man, that without
just cause has been put in the stocks, yrons, or in close prison, when he
would have been away, if he might?


HER. Yes that I have.


CAT. And what held him there then against his will?


HE. Marry the stocks, yrons, or the prison, wherein he was.


CAT. It seems so. But yet if thou consider it well, thou shall find it his
quantitee, and nothing else. For if his quantitee had been so subject to his
power, as his power was to his quantite, he might have used his quantitee then,
according to his will. For any man may use what so ever is in his power, as he
will and list him self. And therefore if he might have used his qua^titee
according to his will, it was not the stocks, yrons, nor the prison another,
that could have holden him therein, when he would have been away. wherefore it
was his quantitee (not being subject to his power) that kept him there against
his will. And therefore will thou think that christ has the quantite of his
holy body after that sort?


HER. Why sir, this must needs be true, that of the length, breadth, and depth
of it, an ynch can be none other, no more, nor less, then an ynche. And a
foot, none other no more nor less, then a foot. And the hole, none other, no
more, nor less then the hole. Nor the least part of it, none other no less
nor no more then the least part. And this order of quantitee holds (as it
must needs do) in every man's body likewise.


CATH. Thou do yet dream still (I perceive) upon the common order of
nature, and nothing else. According to the which, quantitee has also this
propertee, that always the more, must needs conteyne the less. And the hole
all the parts thereof. But what if the quantitee of Christ's blessed body be
now of this sort, that the less may contain the more. And every part the
hole?


HER. That is impossible.


CATH. Not so impossible, as it is for the to believe it, so long as thou do
think it impossible.

But nevertheless, thou and I may chance, although not now, yet hereafter,
to assaie what may be said to the possibilitee thereof. Where as for this
time, this may be sufficient, that Christ's blessed body is now without doubt
supernatural. And therefore other it is all hole supernatural, or else but in
part. If it be supernatural but in part, then is the rest of it, under the
yeoke and bondage of nature still, which (I suppose) were wickedness to think.
Wherefore of the other side, if it be all hole supernatural, as it is in deed,
then there is no part of it, but must needs be supernatural likewise. And
therefore if there be no part of it, but supernatural, then must the quantitee
thereof needs be supernatural to. for that is a certain part of it, except
thou will say (as I think thou will not) that it is without any quantitee at
all.

Wherefore if the quantitee thereof be supernatural, as it must needs be, this
may well follow, that as the bondage of naturalitee in natural bodies,
compels the more quantitee, to contain the less, and the hole, all the
parts, so the liberte of supernaturalite in Christ's supernatural body, does
permit and able the less quantitee, to conteyne the more, and every part the
hole. For a dyfference to be between quantitee, natural, and supernatural,
thou must needs grant. And as for any other difference between them then
this, I suppose thou shall not be able to find any.


HERE. Yes sir that I can. for quantitee natural, is of necessitee vysyble,
and so is not quantitee supernatural.


CATH. Although it were even so as thou say, yet that could make no proper
difference between them.

For although some quantitee natural, be of necessitee vysyble, yet all is
not so. For the natural quantitee of the air, another is nor can be visible,
when the hole body of the air it self, is invisible. And therefore how should
visibilitee, and inuisibilitee make a difference between quantitee natural and
quantitee supernatural, when both may be found in one of them? That is to
say, in quantitee natural.


HER. Then this may be the dyfference between them. That quantitee
supernatural is perpetual, and has a being for ever. But so has not
quantytee natural.


CATHOLICVS. Why say thou so? For as the earth is perpetual and shall have
a being for ever, so the natural quantitee thereof must needs have and be
likewise. Wherefore perpetuitee can be no proper difference between them
another, when it is and may be found in each of them, And therefore seek as
long as thou wylt, hard it shall be for the (as I said) to find any other
dyfference between them, then I have showed the. Or if there be any other, yet
they let not, but this may be one for all that. Wherefore if this be one, that
the less quantitee may conteyne the more, and every part, the hole, where is
your heretical objection become, that ye say so great a quantitee as Christ's
body is of, can not be in so little a space, as the sacrament does occupy?
as who say, he can therein none otherwise be, or do, then ye can understand.


Cap. 36.
HERE. Sir, how so ever he can be or do, or we can understand, well I wot,
that so great a quantitee to be in so little space, is far against reason.


CATH. Then if thou will not be satisfied, with that I have said already, tell
me this. how are all things new in him, if his quantitee be old, that is to
say, of the old sort, as it was before his resurrection? For does not the
holy apostle, after he had said,

2. cor. 5
Although we have known Christ after the flesh, yet we do not so now.

Add unto it and say this.

If there be any new creature in Christ, the old things are past and gone.
And that he confirms with these words.

Behold (he says) all are made new.
HERE. Ye sir, all that he speaks, for as much as perteyneth to the spirit
of them, that trewly follows Christ. But not for any thing that perteyneth
to the flesh.


CATHOLI. Will thou say so, when he does even there make mention of Christ's
flesh? wherefore therein, thou say not well, For he speaks it both of
Christ, for so much as partayneth to the newnes of him in flesh, and also of
them, that trewlie follow him, for so much as pertayneth to the newness of
them in spirit. That is to say, in spirit now, and in flesh then, when they
shall rise again and be made all new, not only in spirit, but also in flesh,
Where as now they are all new, not in flesh but only in spirit. And therefore
the mind of the apostle is there, to declare, that as Christ is now all new
in flesh, for so much as partaineth to the mortal and corruptible state of
the quantite and qualites thereof, so must those that trewly follow him, be now
all new in spirit, that they might here after at the latter day, be likewise
all new in flesh, as he is now.

Who shall then as the apostle says, Phili. 3,
transform the low state of their bodies into the likeness of the glorious
state of his body, according to the operation of his power, whereby he is able
to make all things obedient unto his will, as it appears to the Philippians.
Cap. 3.

Wherefore if thou say that Christ's holy flesh, has in it now, such quantite,
as it had before his resurrection, Thou say none other therein, but that it
is old. And therefore if thou say that it is old, then thou deniest it plain
to be new. And if thou deny it to be new, then thou art therein directly
against the holy Apostle, which does partly thereof say, as before is
alleged. The old things are gone and past, behold all are made new.

Therefore what things are made new in Christ's flesh, but the corruptible
quantite and qualites thereof? for when he says.

Although we have known christ after the flesh, yet we do not so now. He
does not therein deny him to have flesh, but to be known after the flesh.
Therefore what other thing is it, not to know him after the flesh, but not to
know him after the former course and old state of the flesh, as it was
before his resurrection, which is now altered, chaynged, and made new, far
after an other sort. And therefore when the quantite and qualites of his
blessed flesh, in the time of the passibilite, and mortalite thereof, were for
all that, even then obedient and subject unto his holy will, far beyond and
contrary to the common course of nature, as I declared unto thee before, And
when they are (farthermore) even now in the time of his glorification, made
new, and chaynged so far into such an other state, as passes the
understanding of any mortal man's wit, why dremyst thou (not wythstandynge
all this) upon any such naturalite and corporalite to be in it, as is in
ours, or was in his, before his resurrection, when (the very truth to say)
that same naturalite, is now turned into supernaturalite, and that corporalite,
into supercorporalite, if I might so call it? Leave therefore thy musinge and
beholdinge of any course of nature in this case, which course of nature has
herein nothing to do. For so long as thou do wey the matter after that and
seek none other rule to follow then so, it is not possible for thee to come
by the truth and to believe therein, as thou ought to do.


HERE. Then sir I pray you this, who is able by any reason to understand, how
any of them both, that is to say, other the body or the flesh, should or may
have any being at all after this sort, that ye speak of? for how is it
possible to understand a man's body or flesh to be, without what so ever is
corporal or carnal? That is to say, without such quantitee and qualites as
perteyneth unto them, by the course of nature? specially, when we have no
knowledge of them at all, but that it is first gotten, by such manner of
things, as belongs unto them naturally?


CATHOLICVS. I doubt not but this question troubles thy hedde very much.


HERE. It does in deed.


CATH. And why?


HERE. I can not tell why, but so it does.


CATHOLI. In very deed for nothing else, but only because thou would feign
understand, before thou do, or wylt believe. But how can that be? when the
Scripture says.

Nisi credideritis, non intelligetis. That is to say,

except ye believe, ye shall not understand. Therefore believe well first, that
thou may be the better able, to understand at the last. Or if thou wylt
needs have understanding go before, let not thine under standing leave this
behind, but take it for a suer truth that this matter, is not committed unto
us, to be understand, but most constantly, and firmly, to be believed.

It is a matter of Faith, and not of knowledge or understanding. And
therefore it is enoughe herein, that understanding is able, to refell and
overthrow, what so ever any malicious adversary, is able to imagine or say to
the contrary. And so to commit the rest unto parfit faith, which works by
charity. For she is able to bring her servant understanding, to the very
contemplation of the thing, when the convenient time thereof shall be.


HERE. And call you understanding a servant to says?


CATH. Ye why not?


HERE. Understanding me think is the worthiest of the twain.


CATH. Thereof is no doubt, where it has the higher place, but that (thou must
consider) is not yet even now in this case, nor in many other mo, nor herafter
shall be, except it follow faith for the time, and serve her trewly, that is (with
her help) to defend her boldly, from her great enemies, which seeks her
destruction daily.


Cap. 37.
HERE. Sir with this talk I perceive, ye would led me away from my purpose
clean.


CATH. Why what, is that?


HERE. Think you, that I have yet forgotten and clean done, with those two
latter places, which (as I have showed you) John Frithe does allege of Saint
Austen?


CATH. If thou have not done with them in deed, I do not a little marvel.

For I suppose, thou have hard of them so much, that thou haste no need of
any more.


HERE. You think so, but so do not I. For Saint Austen says even playnlie,
that they which abide not in Christ, nor Christ in them, eat not his body
nor his flesh, although they eat the Sacrament of so great a thing. Whereof
(as I said before, and as Frithe does declare) this must follow, that Christ's
very body and his very flesh, is not in the Sacrament really and presentely.
For if it were, they should eat that, when they eat the Sacrament.


CAT. And have I not told thee plain enoughe, that even so they do in deed?


HER. Ye but Saint Austens words be as plain to the contrary, that they do
not.


CATH. No, not fruitfullie, profitablie, and effectually, that is to say, not
spiritually.


HERE. Tushe will ye be there? Saint Austen does make no mention of
fruitfully, profitablie, effectually, nor spiritually another, but says
absolutely and directly that they eat it not.


CATH. Although he does so say, and expresses no farther, yet he means it,
of the only spiritual eatinge, and of none other.


HER. All that is but your saying and your opinion, as mine is to the contrary.
And therefore if you can none otherwise prove his meaning then so, I will
utterly stycke unto his plain saying, which makes with frith clearly.


CATH. What for all this, that we have said and done hitherto?


HERE. Ye for all that.


CAT. Then if thou will needs have me try out herein, Saint Austens very
meaning, how can I better do it, then with his own saying?


HERE. I must needs grant, there is none to that.


CATH. First therefore to begin with all, when the one of those places, is in
Saint Austens work De Ciuitate dei Libro. 21. Cap. 25. and the other noted, in
Frithes book with this title.

Augusti. sermo. circasacra feria pasche, and also when Frithes purpose in
both places, lies upon the understanding of this text of the Gospel.

He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, bideth in me, and I in him.
Tell me why does Frithe here bring in Saint Austen upon the said text, in
those foresaid places, where it was another Saint Austens only, nor yet his
princypall purpose to speak of it, but as it were by the way, took part of
the sense thereof, to fortyfie thereby, an other matter which he had in hand?
why does Frithe (I say) bring in Saint Austens saying upon the said text in
those places, and not in that place, where Saint Austen goes upon it
purposlie, and only to show the understanding thereof? is there any other
why, but his accustomed falshed, if a man would mark it well? For who would
pass over a man's saying in a matter, where he speaks purposly and only of it,
and take him in an other place, where he by chance touches it but partly,
and as the case and occasion, which he has in hand, does there requere? who
(I say) would so do, and mean trewlie?


HERE. Sir peradventure those words which Frithe. does here allege of Saint
Austen in those foresaid places, be the very same words which Saint Austen
has in that place, that ye speak of. And then, if it be so, it is well
enoughe.


CATH. That shall appear straight way. For that place which I speak of, is
upon the sixte chapter of Saint John. Where saint austen recitinge that same
text purposly to declare the meaning thereof, has these words.

Qui manducat meam carnem et bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and ego in
illo, hoc est ergo manducare illam escam, and illum bibere potum, in Christo
manner, and illum manentem in se habere. Ac per hoc, qui non manet in Christo,
and in quo non manet CHRISTVS, procul dubio, nec manducat spiritualiter carnem
eius nec bibit eius Sanguinem.

That is to say.

He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, bideth in me and I in him.
This is therefore, to eat that meat and to drink that drink, to abide in
christ, and to have christ abide in us. And by this, he that abides not in
christ, and in whom christ abides not, without doubt, he eatethe not his
flesh spiritually, nor drinks his blood.

How say thou now?


HER. Even as I thought at the first. For ye can not say, but these are (so
far as they go) even the very same words, which Saint Austen has in the
first of the other two places before.


CATH The very same say thou?


HERE. The very same, all save one word.


CATH. Ye, which one is that?


HERE. This word, spiritually.


CATH. Thou say even true. And therefore that same one word spiritually,
was the very thing, that caused Frithe to refuse this place of Saint Austen,
and to run to those other two places, wherein that word spiritually was not
expressed. By reason whereof, Frithe had in them some hope, where as in this, he
had none at all. For he perceyuinge this place to speak precisely, and
expressly of one eating that is special, (which gives an other to be
understand, that is general) thought, that if he should make his allegation
thereof, it would give an occasion, of a great interruption of all his purpose.
And therefore he took the other two places, (which (as he thought) seemed to
deny the very eatinge that is general) to serve his turn far better then
this, which does express the special. Wherein he clearly deceived him self,
as it may well appear by this, that Saint Austen does even here, the very
same that he does there, speak only, (as I said) of one sort of eaters in
special, and not of all ingenerall. Wherefore the same eatinge that S. Austen
does mean there, must needs be understand of this eatinge, which he does
express here. For indeed they be all one, as the special state and sort of
the eaters is, of whom he speaks in all three places.


Cap. 38.
HERE. Then I marvel greatly, that Saint Austen would in these two places, so
bestow his words and speak them, after such a sort as he does.


CATH. Why do thou marvel there at?


HER. Because he does therein, seem rather to mean, as Frithe takes him, then
to mean as you report him.


CAT. To whom does he so seem to mean?


HERE. To every man I think.


CATH. That is not so, for I, and most men, takes him to mean therein, far
otherwise then Frithe does. And therefore he seems not so to us, as he does
to him.


HERE. I can not tell how he seems to you, but well I wol, he seems to me and
many other mo to mean even as Frithe does take him.


CATH. Ye but wotest thou why?


HERE. No not yet.


CATH. In very deed because Frithe and such other as he was, were none of
these, to whom Saint Austen wrote in those two places, after that sort as he
does.


HERE. To whom th^^?


CATH. Without sail unto none, but only to men of good will, and that of the
learned sort of the Catholyke faith.

To whom Saint Austens mind, is in those two places, theare ^ng^e, and out of
all doubt. Therefore only to them (I say) he wrote there, as he does, and not
unto any such heretics as Fryth was, whom no truth can satysfie. For look
where so ever Saint Austen wrote any thing unto them, that is to say unto
heretics (because they lack both truth and also good will to) he left
therefore no part of his mind unexpressed (so far as the matter required,
wherein he procured their amendment) but did at large, with such plainness so
set it forth unto them, that they them selves could have no doubt of his
meaning, although they were never so unwilling to take any profit of his
plain saiynge.

This he used always unto them, but not always so unto us. Because in us, there
was no such need. For we, by his express and manifest speaking of this
matter in some place, do right well know his true secret and sylent meaning
thereof (although not expressed) in every other place. Wherein we do not as ye
would do if ye might.


HERE. What is that?


CATH. Ye would hyde, and overthrow that, which is very certain and manifest,
by that, which seems uncertain and secret. But we contrariwyse, as reason
compels us, do show and defend that, which seems incertaine and secret,
by that, which is most certain and manifest. For where Saint Austen says.

They that abide not in Christ, nor Christ in them, eats not his flesh nor
drinks his blood, although they eat and drink the sacrament of so great a
thing.

Because he expresses not there, even certainly what manner of eating it is
that he means (wherefore some, are thereof in doubt) we may and justly do, way
that place by this, where he says.

He that abides not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, without doubt
he eats not his flesh spiritually, nor drinks his blood.

By this place therefore, we way the other, because he excludyng all doubt in
this, does plainly express what manner of eating it is, that he does mean in
the other, wherein he does but leave it to men of good will to be understand,
who never fails to take it right.

Therefore when that manner of eating, which he does mean, is made very
certain in the one place and not so in the other. That is to say, plainly
expressed in the one place, and not expressed in the other, why did Fryth
allege him in that place, where it is not expressed (since in that manner of
eating lies all the matter) and would not allege him in the other place,
where it is expressed, and put clean out of question? what other why (as I
said before) can there be found in his so doing, but only falshed? For who
would take a man's tale to witness, where he speaks but obscurely or
incerteinly, and utterly refuse it there, where he speaks it full, hole, and
plainly? any man else, but only Frithe, and such as he was? for the plain
place he wilt well, he could another overthrow, nor yet wrynge it to any
appearance of his purpose.

But the obscure and ambiguous place, he thought he might wrest, which way he
list, and so to make many believe (as he did in deed) that it sufficientlye
served his turn.


HERE. Yet ye confess that place of Saint Austen which Frythe does allege,
to be obscure and ambiguous.


CATH. Ye to them, that lacks good will or knowledge. But not to them, (as I
said) which be learned and of the catholyke says. Wherefore, thus may
thou see, Why Frith alleged that place of Saint Austen and not this, so
craftylie as he did. Which was no more but only because, when he saw, there
was made therein, no special mention by name of the real eating, which is
most common and general, nor yet of the spyrytuall eating, which is more
singular and special, but of eating symplie, without any dyrecte or proper
distinction, he thought he might understand of them both, which he list, or
else take it, as though there had been none other manner of eating thereof, but
even very one alone. And thereuppon he did take that place to be no less,
then enoughe, and very sufficient to prove his purpose.

As I grant it had been in deed, if it had been after that sort to be
understand, as he took it.

But he looked so much upon this point, that he found there no mention made
of any dystynction of eatynges (whereby he thought he might take (as I said)
which he list or one for all) that he forgot, what mention Saint Austen made
there, of the distynctyon (although not of eatynges, yet for all that) of
eaters, which was enoughe, to show what manner of eating he mente. For as his
manifest speaking was there, of a peculiar sort of eaters, so his very
meaning, must needs be understand of a peculiar manner a eating.

For it is against all reason and trewthe, to deny that to some, which is
common to all, or to grant that to all, which perteyneth but to some. And
therefore, thou may well know, that Saint Austen would not do so. For he
denied not there, but only that eating, which apperteyneth unto some, and
not unto all.

That is to say, only to them that be good, and not unto them that he naught.
Of whom there, he does make mecion, and of none other. For the libertee real
of eating perteyneth both to good and bad. But the spiritual eating perteyneth
to none but only to them that be good.


Cap. 39.
HERE. Sir, Saint Austen makes no such distinction or difference between
real and spiritual eating, nor between general and special eating as ye
speak of.


CATH. Why say thou so? for, although he does it not, even in those manner of
words, with such conference of both together as thou would have yet he
does it in deed for all that. as it does right well appear upon the syxt of
Saint John, Tracta. 27. where his words be these.

Hoc totum quod dominus de carne and de sanguine suo loquutus est. Et quod in
eius distributionis gratia vitam nobis promisit aeternam. Et quod hinc voluit
intelligi manducatores carnis and sanguinis sui vt in illo maneant, and ipse in
illis. Et quod non intellexerunt, qui non crediderunt. Et quod spiritualia
carnaliter sapiendo, scandalizati sunt. Et quod eis scandalizatis, and
pereuntibus, consolatio domini affuit discipulis qui remanserant, ad quos
probandos interrogauit, Nunquid and vos vultis ire, vt responsio perma^sionis
eorum innotseceret and nobis, nam and ille nouerat qui manebant. Hocergo totum,
ad hoc nobis valet DILECTISSIMI, vt carnem Christi and sanguinem Christi, non
edamus tantum in sacramento, quod and multi mali, sed vsque ad spiritus
perticipationem manducemus and bibamus. Vt in domini corpore tanquam membra
maneamus, vt eius spiritu vegetemur, and non scandalizemur, etiamsi multi modo
nobiscum manducant and bibunt temporaliter sacramenta, qui habebunt in fine
aeterna tormenta.

That is to say.

All this that our lord spoke, of his flesh and his blood, And that in the
grace of distribucion thereof, he promised unto us life everlasting, and that
thereof he would to be understand, that the eaters and drinkers of his flesh
and blood, should abide in him and he in them, And that they did not
understand, which did not believe, And that they were offended, by
understanding spiritual things carnally, And that they being offended and
perylshynge, the comfort of our lord was present to the disciples which did
abide, unto the probacion of whom he asked, will you go away, that the answer
of their abiding might be also known to us, for he knew them which did abide.
All this therefore, most dearly beloved, avails unto us for this purpose,
that we should not eat the flesh of Christ and the blood of Christ only
in the sacrament (which many does that be naught) but that we should eat
and drink it, unto the part taking of the spirit, that we should abide as
members in the body of our Lord, that we might be quickened with his spirit,
And that we should not be offended, although many now, does eat and drink
the sacraments with us temporally, which shall have in the end torments
eternal.

Now what can thou wish more plainly spoken, for the real eating and
drinking of Christ's most precious flesh and blood in the holy sacrament,
then when he says (as here thou see) we eat it not only in the sacrament?
that same not only in the sacrament, does most clearly declare it to be
therein even verily eaten. for he would not have said, not only in the
sacrament, but not in the sacrament. For not in the sacrament, and not only in
the sacrament, are two things. Not in the sacrament, denies it to be eaten
therein, but not only in the sacrament, confesses it to be eaten therein,
and also other wise to. Wherefore this very real eatinge of Christ's blessed
flesh and blood in the holy sacrament, must needs be common and general, when
(as here S. Austen says) many does it, which be naught, whose eating thereof,
thou may well know comes not to the perticipacion or partaking of the
spirit that quickneth, when those be they, that abide not in Christ, nor
Christ in them.

And therefore the participacion or partakynge of the spirit therein, is and
must needs be, the spiritual eating, which is not general, but special
and proper only to those, that abide in Christ, and Christ in them. as the
noughty and evil sort does not. And yet they in the sacrament (as Saint
Austen does here plainly say) do eat his flesh, and that must needs be
really, because it is to plain, that it can not be spiritually. Wherefore, here
thou have now of Saint Austen plainly expressed, and distinctlie touched, both
the very real eating, which is common to good and had, and also the spiritual
eating, which perteyneth to none, but only to them that be good.


HERE. Yet this place of Saint Austen, although ye make the most of it that ye
can, nevertheless it does not so well satisfy me, as you think.


CAT. In that thou show of what sort thou art, And therefore here him in an
other place, where his words be these. Sermo.1^. de verbis domini


Illud etiam quod ait. Qui manducat carnem meam and bibit sanguinem meum in me
manet and ego in illo, Quomodo intellecturi sumus? Nunquid etiam illos hic
poterimus accipere, de quibus dicit Apostolus, quod iudicium sibi manducent and
bibant, cum ipsam carnem manducent and ipsum sanguinem bibant?

Nunquid and Judas magistri venditor and traditor ipsius, quamuis primum ipsum
manibus eius confectum Sacramentum carnis and sanguinis eius cum caeteris
discipulis, sicut apertius LVCAS EVANGELISTA declarat, manducaret and biberet,
mansit in Christo, aut Christus in eo? Multi denique qui vel cord ficto carnem
illam manducant and sanguinem bibunt, vel cum manducauerint and biberint
Apostatae fiunt, nunquid manent in Christo, aut Christus in eis? Sed profecto
est quidam modus manducandi illam carnem and bibendi illum sanguinem: quo modo,
qui manducauerit and biberit, in Christo manet and Christus in eo. Non ergo
quocunque modo quisquam manducauerit carnem Christi and biberit sanguinem
Christi, manet in Christo, and in illo Christus. Sed certo quodam modo, quem
modum vtique ipse videbat, qua^do ista dicebat.

which may thus be englished.

How shall we understand this which he says, he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, bydeth in me, and I in him? may we take those to be
understand here, of whom thapostle does say, that they eat and drink their
own damnacion, when they eat the same flesh, and drink the same blood? Also
did Judas the wicked traitor and seller of his master, although he did (as
Luke the Euangelyste does apertlie declare) eat and drink with the other
disciples the same sacrament of his flesh and blood when it was first made in
his own hands, abide in christ and christ in him? farthermore, there be many,
that even with a feigned heart, do eat that flesh and drink that blood, or
when they have eat and drink it, forsake there faith, abide they in Christ,
and Christ in them? but in very deed there is a certain manner of eating that
flesh and drinking that blood, whereby, he that eats it and drynketh it,
abides in Christ and Christ in him. Therefore not in what so ever manner, any
man eats the flesh of Christ, and drinks the blood of Christ, abides in
christ, and christ in him. But in a certain manner which manner he saw, when
he spoke these words. If thou be not here now even thoroughly satisfied, both
as touching the certeintee and also the difference, of these two eatings and
drinkings of Christ's most blessed flesh and blood, that is to say, both of the
real eating, and also of the spiritual eating of it, it is not Saint Austen,
nor all the other holy fathers beside, that therein can satisfy the. For no man
can more plainly express them, then he does here distinctly deuyde and show
them.


Cap. 40.
HHER. Ye but sir, Frith by all those words of eating and drinking of Christ's
own very flesh and blood, does understand none other meaning thereof but only
spiritual eating and drinking of it in faith, and not very real eating and
drinking of it in deed, but after such a sort as he means and speaks of,
in the fourth leaf of his book, where his words be these. Abraham (he
says) did eat his body and drink his blood through faith.

And in the first leaf he says also

It was not necessary, that the words should so be understand as they sound.
That is to say, he would not have it so taken, that these words of eating and
drinking, should, as they sound, be understand of the very real eating and
drinking of christ's own flesh and blood in deed, but only of the faith and
believing in him, as it appears in the.17. lefe of his book where he says.

Who so ever dwells in Christ, (that is to say) believes that he is sent of
god to save us from our sins) does verelie eat and drink his body and
blood, although he never receive the sacrament. This (says he) is the
spiritual eating necessary for all that shall be saved.

And in the.47. leaf.

As for, our faith (he says) it needs not to have him present in the bread.
For I may (says he) as well eat him and drink him through faith, that is to
say, believe in him as though he were as presently in the Sacrament as he was
hanginge on the cross.

Now therefore by this, you may perceive that Frithe (as I said) does
understand none other by all those words of eatinge and drinking of that
flesh and blood, but only spiritual eatinge and drinkinge of it in faith.
That is to say, only believing without any real eating of it at all.


CATH. What, in so many places, and so diversely, as our Savior Christ him
self, his holy apostles, and all the other holy fathers of the Catholic
church, does speak of it, in those plain words of eatinge and drinkinge?
And when none of them all, does so declare it, nor teach it? as in witness
whereof, it does in the words of S. Austen, last recited before, very clearly
appear, if thou remember them well. When therein he says, that those does
eat the same flesh and drink the same blood, of whom the holy Apostle does
say, they eat it and drink it, to their dampnation. And plain it is that
those, which eat it and drink it to their dampnation, does another eat it,
not drink it spiritually. For if they did, it could not be to their
dampnation, But to their salvation. Wherefore how so ever Frithe does take it,
sith it is clear by Saint Austen, that those, which does eat it and drink it
to their dampnation, does eat the same flesh and drink the same blood, and
yet not spiritually, it must therefore needs follow, that they do eat it and
drink it even in very deed really. Except thou wylt say, they eat it not at
all, which were directly against Saint Austen and Saint Paul both.

Farthermore, thou shall understand, that in Saint Austens days, there were
many, that came and did believe in the name of Christ, which were called
Cathecumini, that is to say, herers or learners. And so called because they
were not baptized, for that they believed not some certain mysteries in some of
the Sacraments. And therefore where the gospel does say, that when Christ was
at Jerusalem in the time of Easter, many did believe in the name of him, for the
miracles they saw him do, John. 2.
but Jesus did not commit him self unto them.

Saint Austen upon the same place does say, that all those be such, which are
called cathecumini, that is to say, herers or learners. For his own words
thereof in latin be these.

Tales su^t oe^s Cathecumini. Ipsi ia^ credunt in nomine Christi Sed Jesus non
se credit eis. Intendat and intelligat charitas vestra. Si dixerimus
cathecumino, credis in Christo? Respondet, credo, et signat se. Iam crucem
christi portet in front. Et non erubescit in cruce domini sui. Ecce credit in
nomine eius. Interrogamus eum, manducas carnem filii hominis and bibis
sanguine^ filii hominis? Nescit quid dicimus, quia Jesus non se credit ei.

Which may thus be englished.

Cathecumini are al of the same sort. For they believe in the name of christ.
But Jesus commits not him self unto the^. Let your charity mark and
understand. If we shall say to the cathecumini, do thou believe in Christ?
he will answer and say, I believe, and blesses him self. Now he bears the
cross of Christ in his forehead. And is not ashamed of the cross of his
lord. Behold, he believes in his name. We ask him again, do thou eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink the blood of the son of man? he knows
not what we say, because Jesus has not committed him self unto him.

How say thou now? what thing is it, which this Cathecuminus does here
not know, when he is asked this plain question of the eating and drinking of
Christ's most blessed flesh and blood? The words be plain. And therefore what
is there in them, that (as Saint Austen says of him) he does not know?


HER. The spiritual understanding of it?


CATH. What meanest thou by the spiritual understanding of it?


HERE. The spyrituall eatinge and drinkinge of that flesh and blood.


CATH. Ye but what is the spiritual eatinge and drinkinge thereof?


HERE. It is, as Frithe has said to believe in Christ.


CATH. To believe in Christ? is it that think thou, which Saint Austen
does here mean, that (as he says) this Cathecuminus does not know, when he
him self says of him, that he believes in christ? Thou may perceive it can
not be so. For if S. Austen had meant here none other eatinge and drinking of
it but that, he would not have noted him to be ignorant of his question, when
he him self reports him to believe in the name of Christ. For that were as
much as he requires, if he had meant nothing else.

Therefore if thou perceive it not already, let us look farther what S. Austen
does mean, by his not knowinge. Any thing else, but his not beleuinge? And
what means Saint Austen by his not believing, but that he believes not
according to his askyng? And what is it to believe according to his askinge,
but to believe the very eatinge and drinkinge of Christ's flesh and blood? for
that is the very plain question, which he does ask him. Wherefore that must
needs be the thing which the Cathecuminus knows not. And that because, he
believes it not. And therefore it is his lack of faith in the real eatinge
and drinkinge of Christ's holy flesh and blood, that Saint Austen does here
find fault with him for. And not for any other eatinge and drinkinge thereof,
which as Frithe says is nothing else but only faith and believe in Christ.
Which faith (as Saint Austen says) this Cathecuminus has, and yet christ
commits not him self unto him. Therefore when Saint Austen does ask him
the question of eatinge and drynkinge of the flesh and blood of the son of
man, it is an other eatinge and drinking that he does mean and speak of,
then this Cathecuminus does know or believe, or else he would not reprehende
him therein as he does. It is an other also, then Frith does believe, when he
says a man may use it, although he never receive the Sacrament. And therefore
what other is it, but even only the very real eatinge and drinking of it in
the holy Sacrament?


Cap. 41.
HERE. Why sir, does not Saint Austen say as Frithe does allege, in the.17,
leaf of his book Why preparest thou teethe and belly? believe and thou have
eaten.


CATH. What of that? will thou gather thereof, that there is none other eating
of it, but only believe? Therefore if there be an other, what does this make
for Frythes purpose or thine other? And that there is an other, have I not
proved it all reddie before, by the manifest words of Saint Austen him self?
Wherefore if this be true, (as Frithe does say it is) that these words of
eatinge and drinking in this matter, mean nothing else but faith and belief,
it must needs follow, that Saint Austen does here unjustly reprehende this
Cathecuminus, of whom he does confess no less him self, but that he has
faith and believes in the name of christ. And beside that, this must also follow
thereof likewise, that when he says.

Believe and thou have eaten. It is no more, nor none other to say, but believe
and thou have believed. What reason is this? or who would think S. Austen to
mean so?


HER. Why what should he there, mean else?


CATH. Even as he does, which is this. Believe trewly, and thou have eaten
spiritually.

For the spiritual eating, comes not to pass, but through the whole truth of
believing. And the hoole truth of beleuinge, consists not in holding some
parts of the faith, and denyinge some other, but in holdinge them whole, even
altogether. Therefore Saint austen does here (as in many other places more)
farther mean then he does express. For where he does here (as touching the
faith) no farther say, but believe, yet he means these words, wholly, and
trewly, to be understand with all. For he means no such believe, as is mixed
or corrupted with any falshed, or with the lack of any part of it. Therefore
beside this, he means farther then so to. For he means not that same
belief another, although it be never so whole and true which is infected with
evil and wicked manners. But he means that, which (as the Apostle does say)
works by charity. Wherefore believe so, and I will grant, that thou have
eaten, or else not. For without that manner of beleuynge (which is but
according to Saint Austens meaning) doubtless there can be no spiritual
eatinge at all. And in that manner of beleuinge, there is and must needs be
contained, the very belief of the real eatinge. For the spyrytuall eatinge
was not ordained for the real eating, but the real eating for the
spiritual eating. And therefore without the very belief of the real eatinge,
the spiritual eating can never he had.


HERE. Then the spiritual eatinge, and the real eating must needs go so
together, that the one can not be without the other.


CATHOLICVS. That is not true, except it be in belief. For therein they must
needs go always together. But else, so much they dyffer, and are some time a
sonder, that an infidele may chance to eat it really, but yet for lack of
faith, never spiritually. And a good Christen man may eat it spiritually,
although, through some lawful impediment, he eat it not reallie. Wherefore by
this it is clear, that all the sort of you, which denies it (as Frithe
does) to be eaten really, without doubt do never eat it spiritually. Where in
your tortuous and eluishe doctrine, does most manifestly appear. For ye hold
with that, which ye never do. And utterly deny that, which ye daily do.


HERE. How so?


CATH. Ye grant and hold with the spiritual eatinge of Christ's holy flesh,
which eatinge without fail, ye never come to. And ye stiffly deny the real
eatinge of it, which eatinge in deed ye often and commonly do. And therefore
when ye do that, which your selves deny, how is it done, but unworthily? and
whereto tends that, but (as the Apostle says) to your own dampnation? but
now I let that pass, 1. cor. 11.
and to an other place of Saint Austen, where his own words be these.

Sicut audiuimus, cum sanctum euangelium legeretur, August sermo. 46. de
verbis. domini
dominus Jesus Christus exortatus est promissione vitae aeternae ad manducandam
carnem suam and bibendum sanguinem suum. Qui audistis haec, non dum omnes
intellexistis. Qui enim baptizati and fideles estis, quid dix erit nostis. Qui
autem inter vos adhuc Cathecumini vel audientes vocantur, potuerunt esse cum
legeretur audientes, nunquid and intelligentes? Ergo sermo noster ad vtrosque
dirigitur. Qui iam manducant carnem domini and bibunt sanguinem eius, cogitent
quid manducent, and quid bibant, ne (sicut Apostolus dixit) Iuditium sibi
manducent and bibant. Qui autem non dum manducant and non dum bibunt, ad tales
epulas inuitati festiment. Per istos dies magistratus pascunt. Christus
quotidie pascit, mensa ipsius est illa in medio constituta. Quid causae est O
audientes, vt mensam videatis, and ad epulas non accedatis? Et forte modo cum
euangelium legeretur dixistis in cordibus vestris, putamus quid est quod dicit,
Caro mea vere esca est, and sanguis meus vere potus est? Quomodo manducatur
caro domini and bibitur sanguis domini? Putamus quid dicit? Quis contra te
clausit vt hoc nescias? Velatum est.

Sed si volueris, erit reuelatum. Accede ad professionem and soluisti
quaestionem. Quid enim dixerit dominus JESUS, iam fideles nouerunt. Tu autem
Cathecuminus diceris, Audiens and surdus es. Aures enim corporis patentes
habes, quia verba quae dicta sunt au dis, Sed aures cordis adhuc clausas habes,
quia quod dictum est non intelligis.

Which may thus be Englished.

When the holy gospel was red as we have herd, our Lord Jesus exhorted us
to the eatinge of his flesh and drinkinge of his blood, with the promise of
everlasting life. You, which have heard these things, do not yet all,
understand them. For you which are baptized and are faithful, does know
what he said.

But those among you, which are yet called Cathecumini or hearers, may be
hearers, but therein understanders think you? Therefore our sermon is directed
unto both. Now those which does eat the flesh of our Lord and drink his
blood, let them take heed, what they eat, and what they drink, least (as
the Apostle says) they eat and drink it to their own dampnation. But let
them, which does not yet eat, nor yet drink, being invited, make haste
unto such dayntes. For in these days magistrates does eat. Christ does
daily feed, That table of his. is set in the mids. What is the cause, O ye
herers, that ye see the table, and come not to the delicates? perchance now,
when the gospel was read, you said in your hearts, perceive we what it is
that he says, my flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink? how is
the flesh of the lord eaten, and the blood of the lord dronken? perceive we
what he says? who has hid it from the, that thou know it not? hid it is.
But if thou will, it shall be opened. Come to the profession, and thou have
solued the question. For those that be now faithful, knowth what our lord
Jesus said. But thou art called an herer, and yet in heryng thou art deaffe.
For thou have the ears of the body open, because thou herest the words
which are spoken. But thou have the ears of the heart yet shut, because thou
understand not that, which is said.

Now, means Saint Austen here nothing else by all these plain words of eating
and drynkyng of Christ's holy flesh and blood, but only faith and belief?
which only Frith does call the spiritual eating and drynking thereof, saying
there is none other but that? Therefore is it only that eating and drinkyng,
whereunto Saint Austen does here inuit those, which he calls Cathecumini or
here is, who has feith (as he said before) and does believe in the name of
Christ all ready, and bears his cross in their forheades? is it also that
eating and drynkyng, that is to say, only faith and belief,

Whereunto he does here inuit them, with the name and promise of deinties and
delicates, set upon the table? the name of the table deintes or delicates,
prete^deth and declares an other manner of eating and drinking then is only
feith and belief, if thou look well upon it? moreover, is only faith and
belefe, that same eating and drinking, which (as he says) our savior Christ
does exhort us unto, with the promise of everlasting life? when the
Cathecuminus (as he does also declare (has faith and does believe in the name
of Christ, and yet cummeth not to this eating and drinking, that Saint Austen
speaks of. Is it not also that eating and drinking, that is to say, only
faith and belefe, whereof he says, let them which does eat the flesh of our
lord, and drink his blood take heed what they eat and what they drink, lest
(as thapostle says) they eat it and drink it to their own damnacion? He
says not how they eat and how they drink, but what they eat and what they
drink. And what means he by that same what? very bread in a bare
significacion as Frith does take it? did not those Cathecumini or herers take
it so, whom S. Austen does reprehe^d? wherefore did he blame them? but because
they believed therein to be nothing else but only that, wherein they were deceived
to?

How be it, after Frithes understanding, it is all one to say, let them take
bid what they eat, and what they drink, and to say, let them take heed what
they believe and what they think. I will not deny, but those warnings be very
good, but yet to say they be both one (as Frith does take them) who would
understand it so, but only he, and the blind weiward schole which thou art of?


Cap. 42.
HERRE. Sir ye may say what ye will. But nevertheless, all these words of
eating and drinkyng are not meant literally, but of the eating and drynking of
the sacrament, in the only respect of it self, and not in the respect of
christ's own very flesh and blood, which Frith says is not there in it in
deed.


CATH. Then since thou will be so folishe as to take it after that sort, tell me
what the Sacrament is?


HERE. As Frith does say, a figure, token, or sign of Christ's body and
blood, representyng his death.


CATH. And is there no more in it but that?


HERE. No.


CATH.. Then why is it damnable to eat it vnwoorthyly?


HER. Because it is (as I said) a figure, token, or sign of Christ's body and
blood representynge his death.


CATH. Ye but then, why is the sentence of damnacion declared upon the
unworthy eating and drinking of it, more then upon the unworthy lookyng or
behoulding of it?


HER. Because Paul says it is so.


CATH. Nay Saint Paul does not say, that the one is any more damnable then
the other. For he speaks but of the one alone. And yet therein, his saiynge
does not make it damnable another. For it does but declare it so to be And
therefore I ask of the, why the other should not be so to? For if I be
unworthy to eat it, I am (without question) unworthy to look upon it. For
beetwene the act of eating, and the act of lookynge or behouldynge,
doubtless there is no difference, of any woorthynesse or vnwoorthynesse, more
in the one, then in the other. Wherefore, if there be none other cause, why it
is damnable to eat it unworthily, but because it is a figure, token or sign
of Christ's boddy and blood representynge his death, then it must needs be as
damnable to look upon it, or behold it vnwoorthyly, because figures, tokens,
and signs perteyne rather, and more commonly to the sense of the sight, then
to any eating or drinking other. And therefore unworthy seeing or beholding
of it, can be no less fault, then is the unworthy eating and drinking of
it, if there be no more in it, then thou speak of. Wherefore, let us go
farther and consider this, that if it be nothing else, but a figure, token, or
sign of Christ's body and blood representynge his death, why is the sentence
of damnacion declared upon the unworthy eating and drinking of that, more then
upon the unworthy lookinge and beholding of the Crucifix or the roode? For
that is a figure, token, or sign of Christ's boddy and blood representynge his
death to. which it does much more aptly, much more apparently, much more
lively, and therefore much more profitablie, then the sacrament does, if
there be no more in the sacrament, then thou say there is. For that the
roode does, it does it most sensibly. But that the sacrament does, it does it
sca^t intelligibly. And therefore if there be no more in the sacrament, then is
in the roode then is the roode as good and better then the sacrament is.


HERE. No sir not so. For I will not deny, but the sacrament has in it, that
the roode has not.


CATH. What is that?


HERE. The sacrament has in it, the ordynance of Christ. And the roode, but
the ordinance of man. For Christ did institute and ordeine the one, and man
the other.


CATH. Then thou must needs grant that therein, the ordinance of man, is
better then the ordinance of Christ. For every figure, token, or sign, is
always ordained to signify. And that sign must needs be best, which does
most aptly and most manifestly represent the thing that it signifies. But
the roode does much more manifestly represent the thing that it signifies,
then the sacrament does, wherefore the roode must needs be a better sign
then the sacrament is. Therefore if the roode be (as it seems by Frith) a
better sign then the sacrament is, And the better sign must needs proceed of
the better ordinance, (as the better effect, of the better cause) it follows
plain, that the ordinance of man in the roode is better then the ordinance of
Christ in the sacrament.


HERE. Tushe sir, I can not away with that reason.


CATH. That is because thou art not able to avoid it, as thou art not in deed,
except thou grant a better thing to be in the sacrament, then any figure,
token, or sign other. And a better there is none, but only the very thing,
that is thereby signified, which is the very body and blood of Christ. For
what can be directly better then a sign in that kind of things, but only
that, which it does signify? because there is no mean between them, whereof
any comparison is to be made, but only of the one to the other, that is to
say, between them two. Therefore other thou must needs grant the blessed
body and blood of Christ to be verily and really in the sacrament, (whereby
the sacrament is made more and better, then is any other figure, token, or
sign) or else thou must needs grant the roode to be a better figure token or
sign then the sacrament is. And so the ordinance of man to be better (as I
said) in the one, then the ordinance of Christ in the other. Wherefore by
this, (which thou dare not grant) thou may, if thou have any grace, well
perceive the very cause why the sacrament does in the Judgment of all true
christen people, so far pass the roode as it does. For although the roode
be a worthy sign and very expedient for us to behoulde, yet it is not ordained
but only to refreshe our memory, faith and devotion. Where as the virtue of
the sacrament is, to give life, health, and salvation. Whereof the glorious
author him self does say,

John^. 6.
Take, eat, this is my body, which shall be given for you. He that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood has life everlasting, and I will reyse him up
again in the latter day, for my flesh is verily meat, and my blood is
verily drink.

And why does he say, it is verily meat and verily drink, but because we
should verily eat it, and verily drink it? For what so ever is verily meat,
is without doubt, to be verily eaten accordingly. And therefore what can be
spoken more literally, as touching the verytee of the thing?

Wherefore it was a very mad and a weyward fancy of Fryth to say, or
think, that there is none other meaning or understanding of those plain
words of eating and drinking of that holy flesh and blood, but only
feyth and belief. And that (as I said) in so many sondrye places, and by
such, and so many notable, and most worthy authors, as that matter is
spoker. of, set forth, and by those words expressed. But yet even such is
the blyndnesse of heresy, unto the which, because credible seems
incredible, and intelligible not intelligible, what skilleth it, what Fryth
does say? or what is his saiynge to that thou haste herd of Saint Austen?
whom although he takes above all men for his defense, yet thou may now see,
how clearly he makes against him. In so much, that if I should recite unto
the, all such other places of Saint Austen as makes no less, but rather more
against him likewise, the whole day were to little to serve the purpose. And
therefore now content thy self with that I have hitherto said, as thou have
herd already, which is so much, as perchance would seem to soome, even
to be more then enough. Wherefore with this content thy self, and fare well
for this time.


Cap. 43.
HERE. What will ye do sir? will ye now depart, without any farther
examinacion of so large a matter, as Frith has gathered together, out of all
the other holy doctors beside?


CATH. Ye why not? for it were but a lost labor to bestow any more time
about that, since he brings none of them al, for any other purpose (as I said
at the first) but only to confyrme that, which he would make us to believe, he
gathers out of Saint Austen. And that apeereth by his own words, which I
recyted unto the before, and also will now again, to put the in better
remembrance thereof. For his words be these.

This (says he) were proof enough, to conclude, that all the old fathers did
hold the same opinion. For who would once surmise (seeing we have Saint
Austen so plain for us, which is the chiefest among them all) who would once
surmise (I say) that he dissented, in this great matter, from the other
faithful fathers, or they from him? Nevertheless I dare not let him stand
post alone, least ye dispyse him.

And therefore I will show you the mind of certain other also. And first of
his master Saint Ambrose.


HERE. Ye marry sir, I pray you let us here what Saint Ambrose says.


CATH. What need that? For thou see it plain, that he brings not in Saint
Ambrose nor any other beside for any thing else, but only to show thagrement
between Saint Austen and them. And therefore look (as I have declared unto
the) how Saint Austen does make for his purpose, even so does Saint Ambrose,
and all the rest likewise. That is to say, none otherwise in deed, but even
dyrectlie against him.


HERE. Yet if ye will not recite those words of Saint Ambrose, which Frith
does allege, I will recyte them my self.


CATH. What need that, when thou know them well enough already, or else how
could thou recite the^?


HER. Yet I will do it, to here what ye will say to them.


CATH. Although I have therein said enoughe already. Yet chose the do as thou will.


HERE. Then ye shall understand, that his allegacion of Saint Ambrose is even
this.

Saint ambrose (says he) writing upon the epistle of paul to the Corinthians
in the.xi. chapter says. Quia enim morte domini liberati sumus, huius rei in
edendo and potando carnem and sanguinem quae pro nobis oblata sunt
significamus,

That is to say.

Because we be delivered by the death of the lord, in eating and drynkinge
this thing meaning the sacrament, we signify the flesh and blood which were
offerered for us.

Here does saint Ambrose say enough (says he) if men were not sophisters, but
would be content with reason.

Now by this ye see, that Frithe desires none other, but that reason might
rule, as it ought to do.


CAT. In deed this reason I find in it, that thy recital hereof (as I now
perceive (chances very well for thee, if thou will be so happy, as not to
trust falshed wilfully. For if ever thou foundest a falser harlot, then Frithe
shall be found in this, trust me no more. And that not only in his allegation of
Saint Ambrose words, but also in his translating of them into english to. And
to thyntent it may the more playnlie appear unto thee, I will so trewlie allege
the very same place of Saint Ambrose my self, as thou shall not fail to find
it, word by word, look where it is, when thou will. For the very words of
Saint Ambrose are these.

Quia enim morte domini liberati sumus, huius rei members in edendo and potando
carnem et sanguinem quae pro nobis oblata sunt significamus.

That is to say.

Because we be delivered by the death of our lord, we mind full thereof do in
eating and drinkinge the flesh and blood which were offered for us, signify.


HERE. Ye what do we signify?


CATH. Soft let that alone for a while. And let us first confer Frithes
allegation and mine, not only in latin but also in English both together,
that we may se, how well they do agree. And therefore in his allegation of the
latin, what has he done with this word Memores, which is to say in English
mindful. Why did he leave out that, and would not bring it to light? he
thought perchance that Saint Ambrose did not well to put it in. Or else he
thought to make an exchaynge with him, and for that latin word, to give him in
recompense, these three or four English words. That is to say, meaning of
the Sacrament. For what Latin word has Saint Ambrose here, that may be
trewlie turned in to this English word meaning? Or into this word
Sacrament? If he have here none such, (as he has not in deed) what follows,
but that Frithe of purpose did put them in, to deceive and make the simple
English reader believe it to be, the mind of Saint Ambrose when it is but his
own false Heretical practice, and nothing else? As it may well appear by
this, that under the color of a translatour, he plays here the false
expositer. And why? but as I said to seduce the reader. For where as Saint
Ambrose does join these words (huius rei) and this word (Memores) together,
which are to say, myndefull of this thing, Frithe puts away this word,
memores, and joins to huius rei, these words, in edendo and potando.

Which being so joined are to say, in eating and drinking of this thing.
Now to say, myndefull of this thing, as Saint Ambrose says, and to say,
in eating and drinkinge of this thing, as Fryth says thou may perceue,
has a great difference. Whereby does it not even clearly appear, how false
a part he plays herein? And yet to make us believe, that Saint Ambrose did
mean, by this same, huius rei, the Sacrament, he of his own head adds unto
it, for an exposition thereof, these words, meaning of the Sacrament. When
Saint Ambrose means by it not so, nor any thing else, but (as it is plain)
the very same, that he makes mention of before, which is the death of
Christ, whereby we are delivered, saying.

We myndefull of this thing, in eating and drinking the flesh and blood,
which were offered for us, do signify.


HERE. Yet sir ye make thereof no parfyt sense. For as I asked of you before,
what do we sygnifie? we can not sygnifie except we sygnifie somewhat. And as
ye do handle it, there is nothing expressed. Wherefore there must, other be
somewhat understand, or else this word signify makes no sense at all.


CATH. There is no doubt, but some thing there is to be understand. And what
is that, but the death of Christ, which before is expressed? specially when
Saint Ambrose, meaning none other, but even the same does say.

We myndefull of this thing do signify it, in eatinge and drynkinge the
flesh and blood which were offered for us?

And this is the sense and very meaning of Saint Ambrose words.


HERE. Here is a maruaylous thing to see, how Frithes Englyshinge of this
matter and yours does dyffer. For where ye say, the meaning of it is this,
that we sygnifie the death of christ, Frythe does say, we sygnifie the flesh
and blood, which were offered for us.


CATH. If Frithe will needs understand it and take it so, then I ask of him,
how and after what manner do we sygnify them?


HER. In eating and drynkinge says S. Ambrose.


CA. Ye, whereof?


HERE. Frithe says, of the sacrament.


CA, Ye but there frith lies. For S. Ambrose says not so For he says, of the
flesh and blood which were offered for us.

In eatinge and drinkinge of them (says he) we signify the death of Christ.
For he has not here any such word as the Sacrament is, nor any such meaning
as Frithe does say he means another. Wherefore by this it may once again,
even plainly appear that Frythe does here falselie belie Saint Ambrose, as he
does Saint Austen, and all the other holy fathers beside.

And therefore I pray thee tell me one thing, that I will ask thee.


HER. What is that?


CATH. Thou see what a place of Saint Ambrose, Frithe has pykte out for his
purpose, and how he has handled him self therein.


HERE. What of that?


Cap. 44.
CATH. Why did he not as well allege Saint Ambrose in this place, that is to
say, Libro. 4. de Sacrament. and Cap. 4. Where his words are even these.

Panis iste panis est ante verba sacramentorum. Vbi accesserit consecratio, de
pane fit Caro Christi. That is to say.

This bread is bread, before the words of the Sacraments. But when the
consecration is cum to it, there is made of the bread, the flesh of Christ.

And in the next chapter of the same book, his words be also these.

Antequam consecretur panis est. Vbi autem verba christi accesserit, corpus est
Christi. Denique audi dicen tem. Accipite and edite ex eo omnes. Hoc est corpus
meum. Et ante verba christi, Calix est vini and aquae plenus. Vbi verba christi
operata fuerint, ibi sanguis efficitur qui plebem redemit. That is to say.

It is bread, before it be consecrat. But when the words of Christ comes
to it, it is the body of Christ. And for proof thereof, harken to him that
says Take and eat of it all you. This is my body. And before the words of
Christ, the Chalice is full of wine and water. But when the words of Christ
has wrought, there is made the blood, which redeemed the people.

Farthermore in the.6. book and the first Chapter of the same work, his
words be these.

Sicut vaerus est dei filius dominus noster Jesus Christus, non quemadmodum
Homines per gratiam, sed quasi filius ex substantia patris, Ita vaera caro,
sicut ipse dixit, quam accipimus.

That is to say.

As our Lord Jesus christ is the very son of God, not as men are by grace,
but as the Son of the substance of the father. So is it very flesh, as he
says him self, which we receive.

Now therefore tell me why, that Frithe does not allege these places of Saint
Ambrose (among many other like in his words besides) as well as that other
place, which he does allege, and so falsely handle as I have declared unto
thee? Is there any other why, but only because he was not able to deface the
manifest truth of these places, as he did (so far as in him lay) the truth
of the other? Beside this, he does in the.39. leaf of his book allege also
the blessed martyr Saint Cyprian in these words.

Cyprian says (says he) that the people is annexed in the sacrament, through
the myxture of water.

Why therefore does he not as well allege him in that place, where he has
these words.

Cipri. Sermon. de caena domini
Panis iste quem dominus discipulis porrigebat, non effigy, sed natura
mutatus, omnipotentia verbi, factus est caro.

That is to say.

This bread, which our lord gave his disciples, being chaynged, not in
outward form, but in nature, by the almighty power of the word, is made
flesh.

This place made not for Frithes purpose. And in deed no more did the other
another, as it may well appear by this, that he another does, nor yet can frame
any manner of proof of his purpose by it. For he does no more but without
cause thereof, feign him self to marvel, that men will not understand and
take it, as he does.

For thereupon, his words be these.

I marvel me much (says he) that they are so contentions and will not see,
that as the water is the people, so the wine is christ's blood, that is to say,
in a mystery, because it represents Christ's blood, as the water does the
people.

Here thou see, he gathers of this place, which he does allege of Saint
Cyprian, nothing else, but only a marvel, that we take it not as he would have
us.


HERE. Yet sir he does say, that as the water is the people, so the wine is
Christ's blood, that is to say, in a mystery, because it represents Christ's
blood as the water does the people.


CATH. True it is, that so he says, but so he does not prove it for all
that. And therefore as he does but only say it of Christ's blood, even so he
does but only mean the like of Christ's flesh. Whereof Saint Cyprian does
not say, this bread is made in a mystery, sign, or signification of flesh,
but he says it is made flesh, That is to say, flesh indeed for if he had
not verelie-beleued, the nature of the bread (which he takes for the
substance thereof) to be as he says, by the almighty power of the word,
converted and chaynged into the very flesh of Christ in deed, he would never
have so said of it, as here thou haste heard he does. Wherefore now thou
see how well S. Ambrose and Saint Cyprian both, serves his purpose in Saint
Austen. And even so without question, does all the rest of the old holy
Fathers which he does allege beside. For doubtless of them all, he does
nothing else, but only pyke out such places, as he knew well, the unlearned
reader should not be able to understand. Specially when he, for his own
part does set them so craftelie forth unto him, and handle them so
ungraciously as he does. Whereof a part, I have here now declared unto thee
by manifest example of his wicked and false handelynge, not only of Saint
Ambrose, but also of Saint Cipryan to. But as for any such other places,
which Saint Ambrose, and the other holy Fathers have so plain, as may easily
put the simple reader in suertie of the truth, and clean out of doubt, he
would in no wise touch, nor bring forth any one of them, but so wynke at
the matter, as though there were no such in deed. And therefore to know
what he was, and what his doings are, what is there else, that thou would
have more, then I have told thee? If this to thee be not enoughe, in very
deed there is nothing will serve.


HERE. Yes sir somethynge will serve, but yet not all this, I may say to you?


CATHOLI. Why so?


HERE. Because I do know, why ye would so feign have done, and make such have
to be gone.


CATHOLICVS. Why?


HERE. Because Frithe has one saying of a certain Doctor to be answered
unto, which I perceive ye be not willinge to meddell with all.


CATH. What Doctor is that?


HERE. Frithe shall tell you that, him self. For in the.76. leaf of his
book, his words be these.

That there remains bread (says he) might be proved by the authorite of
many doctors, which call it bread and wine, even as Christ and his Apostles
did. And though some Sophisters would wrest their sayings and expound them
after their own phantasye, yet shall I allege them one doctor which was
pope, that makes so plain with us, that they shall never be able to avoyde
him. For Pope Belasius writes on this manner.

Certe Sacramenta quae sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christi, diuinae res
sunt. Propter quod and per eadem diuinae efficimur consortes uaturae. Et tamen
non disinit esse substantia vel natura panis and vini. Sed permanet in suae
proprietate naturae. Et certe Imago and similitudo corporis and sanguinis
Christi in action Misteriorum celebrantur.

That is to say.

Suerly the sacraments of the body and blood of Christ which we receive, are
godly things. Therefore through them are we made partakers of the godly nature.

And yet does it not cease to be the substance or nature of bread and wine,
but they contynew in the properte of their own nature. And suerly the Image
and similitude of the body and blood of christ are celebrated in the art of
the mysteries.

This am I sure (says he) that no man can avoid it, nor so wrest it, but that
all men shall soon espy his folly. And therefore I may conclude, that there
remains the substance and nature of bread and wine.

Here ye may now see, how sure of his purpose Fryth makes him self, by the
plain testimony of this doctor.


CATH. Ye but yet I perceive, thou see not, how sure I make my self, that he
for all this, is nevertheless deceived.


HERE. That were to straynge. For there can be no plainer words for his
purpose, then he does here allege of this doctor.


CATH. Thou say well, and therefore let us return to Saint Ambrose again.
And that not only with good remembrance of what so ever I have alleged of
him unto the already, but also with dew consideracion of this, that I shall
allege of him more unto the now. For in the ninth chapter of his work
entitled De his qui misterijs initiantur, where he makes a comparison
beetwene the blessed body of Christ in the sacrament, and the shadows and
figures thereof in the old law, he has even these words.

Potior etenim lux qua^ vmbra, veritas quam figura, corpus authoris quam Manna
de coelo. Forte dicas. Aliud video. Quomodo tu mihi asseris quod Christi corpus
accipiam? Et hoc nobis adhuc superest, vt probemus.

That is to say.

Better is the light then the shadow, better is the truth then the figure,
better is the body of the maker, then the Manna from heaven. Peradventure thou
would say, I see an other thing. How affirmest thou to me, that I receive
the body of Christ? That does yet remain for us to prove.

And now therefore take thou good heed, because for his proof thereof, these be
part of his words.

Probemus hoc non esse quod natura formauit, sed quod Benedictio consecrauit.
Maioremque vim esse Benedictionis, quam naturae. Quia Benedictione etiam natura
ipsa mutatur.

That is to say.

Let us prove this not to be that, which nature has formed, but that, which
benediction has consecrated. And that the power of benediction, is more then
the power of nature. For through benediction also nature it self is chaynged.

Which things he proves by no less then manifest example of holy scripture,
saying.

Virgam tenebat Moses, proiecit eam and facta est serpens. Rursus apprehendit
caudam Serpentis and in virgae naturam reuertitur. Vides igitur prophetica
gratia, bis mutatam esse naturam and serpentis and virgae.

That is to say.

Moses had a rod. He did cast it forth, and it was made a serpente. He
took the serpente by the tail, and it was turned into the nature of the rod
again. Therefore thou see the nature, both of the Serpent, and also of the
rod, by the prophetical grace, to be twice chaynged.

Now after this example of the scripture and diverse other mo, he has also
these words.

Aduertimus igitur maioris esse virtutis gratiam, quam naturam. Et adhuc tamen
propheticae Benedictionis numeramus gratiam, Quod si tantum valuit humana
Benedictio vt naturam conuerteret, Quid dicimus de ipsa consecratione diuina,
vbi verba ipsa domini Saluatoris operantur? Nam sacramentum istud quod accipis,
Christi sermon conficitur.

Quod si tantum valuit Sermo Heliae, vt ignem de coelo deponeret, Non valebit
Christi sermo vt species mutet elementorum? De totius Mundi operibus legisti.
quia ipse dixit and facta sunt, Ipse mandauit and creatasunt. Sermo ergo
Christi qui potuit ex nihilo facere quod non erat, Non potest ea quae sunt, in
id mutare quod non erant? Non enim minus est, nouas, rebus dare, quam mutare
naturas.

That is to say.

Therefore we perceive grace to be of more power then nature. And yet hitherto
we reckon the grace of the prophetical benediction. wherein, if man's
benediction was so strong, that it did chainge nature, what say we of the
divine consecracion it self, where the self same words of our Lord and
Savior does work? For this sacrament which thou do receive, is made by
the word of Christ. For if the word of Helias was so strong, that it
brought down fire from heaven, shall not the word of Christ be so strong,
that it may chaynge kinds of elements? Thou haste read of the works of
the whole world, that he spoke the word, and they were made, he commanded,
and they were create.

Therefore can not the word of Christ, which was able to make that of
nothing, which was not, chainge those things that are, into that which they
were not? For it is not less, to give new natures to things, then it is to
chaynge them.

Here thou have now herd, what Saint Ambrose says. And therefore I would feign
know of Frith, how he would join that saiynge of Gelasius, and these of Saint
Ambrose together?


HER. How can they be joined together, when they be clean contrary? for
gelasius both say.

That it seaseth not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine, but they
continue in the propertee of their own nature.

And Saint ambrose does say.

That through benediction the nature is changed. And through cansecracion, there
is made of the bread, the flesh of Christ. And through the operacion of
Christ's words, there is made of the wine and water, the blood which redeemed
the people.

And so after him, there remains no substannce nor nature of bread and wine
at all. But after Gelasius there remains both. Wherefore these two doctors be
directly one against another.


CATH. And do thou believe, that they be so in deed?


HERE. It is so plain, I can not choose.


CATH. Then is Frith not only therein against the, but also against him self
to. For thou know (as I told the before) that he does in these words ask
this question.

Who would once surmise that Saint Austen dissented in this great matter from
the other faithful fathers, or they from him?

As who say no man would so surmise. And therefore if none of them, in this
great matter, dissented from S. Austen, nor he from them, It follows thereof,
that none of them, dissented from other. If none of them dissented from other,
and Gelasius one of them in deed, as Frith him self does take him to be, then
does Saint Ambrose and Gelasius by Frithes own saiynge agree together well
enough. Therefore if Saint Ambrose and Gelasius do agree together well enough,
why does not Frith in this great matter, believe them both, that is to say as
well saint ambrose in these places which I have recited, as he does gelasius in
that place, which he does recite?


HERE. It were but reason, if they did agree together in deed, but plain it
is they do not so.


CAT. Then Frith does lie. For by his own saying they do agree for all that.


CATH. If they do not, how come this to pass, that none of them both, in all
this long time, from their days hitherto, has been touched with any
sclaunder or note of heresy? Frith escaped not so, but was quickly taken for an
heretyke, as he was most worthy. Therefore if they had dissented in this
great matter one from an other (as Frith does say, they did not) there is no
doubt, but one of them both, had been an heretyke in deed, and could not have
escaped away withal, thus long in the Church of Christ, without the worthy
infamy and note thereof.


HERE. Yes sir well enoughe. For in this case, there is no matter of heresy at
all. For Frith says, there is no man bound to believe it under pain of
damnacion.


CATH. Although I toulde the enough of that saiynge of his, even yester day,
yet now therein, mark his lack, of wit, learning, or grace, or else rather of
al three. For here thou have herd, how he calls it, and confesses it to be a
great matter.


HERE. That is true.


CATH. And I told the yester day, how and where, he calls it an article of
our faith.


HER. Ye but none of our creed, he says.


CATH. Yet an article of our faith he confesses it to be for all that. And
therefore when he does confess it to be, not only an article, but also a
great matter, what other thing therein does he, but (although unawares to him
self) confess it to be a great article of our faith. For the article can not
be small, and the matter thereof great. And therefore if it be a great article
of our faith (as it is in deed) wherein does heresy consist, if it be not, in
the not beleuynge thereof? And who denies it to be a damnable faut, not to
believe a great article of our faith, but such a great heretic, or the very
same that Frith was in deed? when the not beleuynge, of the least article
thereof, is enough to make an heretic with all. Wherefore this may thou see
what wit, learning, or grace was in Frythes head, that would say they do
agree, and dissent not one from an other (as they do not in deed) and yet
houlde not so much with the one, as he does directly against the other, that
is to say, not so much with Gelasius, as against holy Saint Ambrose.


Cap. 45.
HERE. Sir I pray you let that pass. And to this, that (as I perceive) you do
take these two doctors, S. Ambrose and Gelasius, not to dissent one from an
other, but very well to agree together, whereat I marvel, their words being
so contrary as they are.


CAT. Of their agreement I have no doubt. But whether they be the very words of
Gelasius which Frith does here allege of him or no, I have some doubt of that,
because he does not show, nor note in what place of Gelasius works, we may
find them. But let us grant him the most he can ask, that they be the very
words of Gelasius in deed. And therefore let me see what he can get by that?


HER. No more but even as the very words of Gelasius does declare, which are
plain, that

It does not cease to be the substance or nature of bread and wine, but they
continue in the propertee of their own nature.

Therefore what doubt can there be, in the meaning of these so plain words?


CATH. Some perchance in this, that he says, it cease not to be the
substance or nature of bread and wine. He says not the substance and nature,
but the substance or nature, As doubting which of them both he might best
say. And therefore it is incertaine to Frith, which of them both he meant.


HERE. That is not so. For there is no doubt, but Gelasius meant as well the one
as the other, and refers to us, the libertee of understanding or taking of
which we list, because although they be two words, yet they are both of one
signification.


CATH. They are some time confounded (thou may say) and taken one for an
other, But yet not both of one proper signifycacyen for all that. For
substance perteyneth properly to the pryncipall being of a body, making it to
be the same that it is. And nature, although it be some time taken more
generally or largely for the whole thing, yet commonly it perteyneth but to
the accidental qualitees, and propertees thereof, declarynge it to be rather
such as it is, then what it is. Therefore if Fryth say, that Gelasius meant
both substance and nature, that I may well deny, because his words be
disiunctiuelie spoken, of the one, or the other.


HER. Yet may we then choose, and take which of them we will.


CAT. Which shall that be?


HER. Substance.


CATH. Nay not so. For thereof Gelasius makes a restraynt him self, if thou
mark it well. For when he does say, They continue in the propertee of their
nature, he says not, in the propertee of their substance. Which had been as
much to say, as in the propertee of their chief and principal being, For of
the substance every thing that is a body, (as breadde and also wine is) has
his nominacion. Therefore he says not in the propertee of their substance.

But in the propertee of their nature, as of a less being then of substance.
And yet even therein, this is also to be noted to, that he says not in their
nature, but in the propertee of their nature. For nature and the propertee of
nature, is not without a difference, as it is well proved by this, that the one
proceeds and is said of the other. For the propertee of nature, is but the
operacion of it according to the same.

Whereof nature is some time let by one occasion or other. And yet then,
although it be so put or let from the proper operacion thereof, it is
nevertheless nature still for all that. And therefore Gelasius, to amend or
qualyfye, his words of substance or nature, and to avoid all synyster
understanding thereof, does add unto them and say, They continue in the
propertee of their nature. As he might say, I do not mean the very
substance or nature it self, but the natural quantitees, qualitees, and
propertees thereof. Wherefore, if he had meant (as Frith does take him to
mean) the very substance or nature it self of breadde and wine still to
remain in deed, it had been superfluous and to no purpose, but rather a very
folly to tell us, (as he does) that they continue in the propertee of their
nature.

For who does not know, that all substanciall and natural things, for the
time of their being, do contynew in the propertee of their nature? Therefore,
Gelasius was to wise, and to well learned, to teach us that, for a special or
a necessary lesson, which every man knows already.


HERE. Why every man does know, that they contynew in the properte of their
nature.


CATH. Ye but every man does not know that they so do, without their own
proper substance.

And that is the cause, why Gelasius does so say thereof as he does. For else
he should speak it without cause or any need at all. And that he would not
do. For if he had thought or meant, that the very substance or nature it self,
of bread and wine, had therein continued still, he would not have said they
contynew in the propertee of their nature, which every man knows, but he
would have said they contynew in the verytee of their substance, because the
contrary thereof, is well and trewly believed. For therein lies all the doubt or
question if any be. In so much, that when it is heard, that the substance or
nature of a thing does cease to be, it is thought, by and by, that the
propertee thereof does cease wythall, because in the common course of things,
it does so in deed. This same thought therefore, did Gelasius intend to help,
when he says, they contynew in the property of their nature. As who say,
although their proper substance and nature be chaynged yet they continue in
the propertee of their nature for all that, and in nothing else, as the truth
is, they do not in deed. Again of the other side, when it is heard, that the
propertee of nature in any thing, does hold and contynew, it is thought
straight way, that the substance and nature of the thing, does also contynew
likewise. Wherefore that same thought, did Saint Ambrose purpose to help, when
and where he does say, that.

Through benediction the nature is chaynged. And through the consecration, there
(...) made of the bread, the flesh of Christ. And through the operation of
Christ's words, there is made of the wine and water, the blood which redeemed
the people. And as our Lord Jesus Christ is the very son of God, so it is
very flesh (as he says him self) which we receive.

Here thou may playnlie perceive, according to the agreement of these two
doctors, how the one defends the other. For who so ever would take and
gather of S. Ambrose, that there does not remain the natural propertee of
bread and wine, because he speaks so plain of the alteration and chaynge of
the substance or nature thereof, Gelasius does directly for him answer and say,
they contynew in the popertee of their nature. That is to say, the propertee of
their nature does contynew still, although the substance or nature it self
be chaynged. And who so ever would, for this saying, take and gather of
Gelasius (as Fryth does) that there remains the very substance or nature of
bread and wine still, because he speaks so plain, of the continewance of
the natural propertee thereof, Saint Ambrose does in that behalf, directly
answer and say, that.

Through benediction the nature is chaynged. And by consecration there is made
of the bread, the flesh of Christ, and so forth.

Wherefore, by this it does most clearly appear, that Frithe was not deceived
in that he says, these faithful fathers dyssented not one from an other, but
well and trewlie agreed together. But how therefore, does he agree with him
self, in this that he so says, and yet aloweth not so much the saying of
the one, as he does utterly deny the saying of the other? when dyrectelie
against Saint Ambrose he does say, there remains the substance and nature
of bread and wine. Who can be more against him, then he is herein against him
self? He holds with the saying of Gelasius, but not with the saying of Saint
Ambrose. And yet does hold, that they dissent not one from an other. Haste
thou heard of any man, that ever framed his things together after this sort?


HER. Why say you that he holds not with Saint ambrose? If he held not with
him, he would not allege him so often as he does.


CATHOLI. Thou say well. For even so he holds with Saint Ambrose, as he
does (for all his saying) with Gelasius.

That is to say, with none of them boeth. For it is two things for him, to
hold with them, and to hold with his own false understanding of them, as
he, thou, and many other does. For if he sought in them any thing else but
that, he would not (as he did) pyke out only such places, as be to the simple
reader dark and obscure, but would have set forth as well such other
places, as are clear and out of all question, and not omit or rather hyed
them (as I told thee before) even purposly to deceue.


HERE. How should he set forth such plain places of them, as ye speak of,
when parchaunce he never saw them?


CATH. Nay thou shall not excuse him so. For in the.81. leaf of his book, his
words are these.

Of this (says he) springs the manner of speakynges, that the old fathers
do sometime use. which at the first sight, might seem contrary to our
sentence. But if they be well pondered, it may soon be seen, how they should
be taken.

Now tell me, how could he (as here he does) make mention of that manner of
their speakynges, which (as he confesses) might seem contrary to his
sentence, if he had not seen them? And having seen them, what is the cause,
that he brings forth none of them, to let us see, how they do but seem
contrary to his sentence, and may be otherwise taken? Is there any cause why,
but that he knew, they would make clean against him, sithe his own words
declare no less, but at the least, they seem so to do? Therefore in auoydinge
of all doubt, why does he not bring forth some of them, that we might see,
how they seem, and how he would prove that they do no more but so?


HERE. Marry sir he does even immediately folowinge show ye how, and that in
these words.

Many times (says he) when they speak of the Sacrament and outward eatinge,
they apply unto the Sacrament and outward eatinge, the fruit and conditions
of the inward eatinge and thing it self. Because, that in a faithful man,
they are so jointly joined, that the one is never without the other.

Lo here he does tell, how that manner of speakinges and sayings of the old
fathers, are in those places, to be taken and understand.


CATH. In what places?


HERE. In those, where their sayings might seem (as he says) to be contrary
to his sentence.


CATH. What be those sayings?


HERE. That shall not skyl, for here he has showed you how they should be
taken.


CATH. Have thou heard of any man so mad, so foolish, or rather so false, that
would make an exposition, upon no special recital of any saying? where are
the words of those old fathers? where shall we find that manner of their
speakynges? where or which are the places wherein they make this application
that he speaks of? He tells us not that. But makes us an exposition, we
see not whereof. He sends us forth, and will not tell us wether. How shall
we try his saying, or herein make him answer?


HERE. That is no matter, for be requires none.


CATH. Thou say even true. For so that his saying might be allowed, he
would ask no more. But full well did he know, that if he had alleged those
plain places or any of them, this false gloss of his, could have done him no
seruise. And therefore he thought it better for his purpose, to report them as
he list, then with any just recital of their own words, to let them
report them selves. Wherefore if thou will thy self, thou may now, easily
perceive, the cause why he brings not forth, those manifest and plain
places of the old Fathers, as he does the other obscure, which he does so
falsely handel, as I have declared unto thee.


Cap. 46.
HERE. Sir ye can lay no such handlinge of Gelasius words unto his charge.
For he makes no manner of exposition of them, but does take the^ even as he
fyndeth them.


CATH. Even as he finds them? What is that to the purpose? for if thou go to
fyndinge, why did he not take the Catholic faith, even as he found it? For
once he found that well enoughe, if he would have kept it. And because he
would not keep it, therefore he lost it. And not only that, but also the true
understanding of them, which did most parfitlie teach it. For how might he
understand the very teathers of truth, when he him self, was so ernestlye
bent as he was, against the trewthe? And for a more clear knowledge thereof,
thou must consider, that truth is denied two manner of ways. One, in the bare
word it self, an other, in the meaning thereof. And therefore whether the
truth of the word and the truth of the meaning go both together, or else a
sonder, (as some time they do, and some time not) yet Frithe thou shall find
unable to be defended in any of them both. As when Saint Ambrose does say.

Through benediction the nature is chaynged. Truth is there, both in the
word, and also in the meaning. Which Frithe (as well in the one as in the
other) does utterly deny. Where he says.

There remains the substance and nature of bread and wine. And again when
Gelasius does say.

It cease not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine. Truth is
there also, in the meaning, but not in the word, as Frithe does take it. For
he takes substance there, as the logition does take it. And as it is one of
the ten predicamentes, where it is always taken in corporal things, to
signify that, which susteyneth, and is as a receptacle of natural quantite,
and qualites, as heat, told, color, ordor, form, figure, or such other. For
that, wherein those accide^tal qua^tites and qualites are contained, is (as it
ought to be) after the logition, called the substance of the thing. And in that
sense, does Frithe take it, wherein he was utterly deceived, or willinge to
deceive. For here, it ought not so to be taken. And therefore after that sense,
truth is not here in the word, but yet in the meaning for all that.

For if the word had here been put in that sense, there had been no truth in
any of them both. That is to say, another in the word, nor yet in the meaning
another.


HERE. Why sir, did Frithe amiss to take the meaning of Gelasius, according
to the word?


CATH. Why do thou ask of me that question, sith indede, he took it not
so? for when the word has diverse and many meaninges, how could Frith be
sure to take the meaning according to the word, before he had made it
certain, in which of those meanynges the word is put? For substance, is a
word of such a sort, as by that, is mente some time one thing and some time
an other. In so much, that some time it is taken for wordlie goods, by reason
whereof, we say of a rich man, that he is a man of great substance. Some
time, when we behold a goodly new buyldinge, we say that it is substancially
done. There, substance is applied partly to the strength of the thing to
contynew, and partly to the conning of the artificer.

Also it is some time taken for a certain quantytee of stuff, and some
qualytee of workemanshyp.

As when a man comes to a Drapers shop, to hye him a Cloak or a gown
clothe, and has an endee of the peace turned out unto him to look upon, he
desires at length to see the other end of it, and when he has felt that
in his hand, ye marry says he, here is an other manner of substance in this
end, then is in the other, cut me therefore that I shall have, out of this
end. Therefore what means he, by that other manner of substance, but a more
quantitee of stuff, and some qualite of better making in that end, then in
the other. For the very substance of both the ends, and also of the whole
clothe, after the Logition, is all one. But not so after the common use of
speaking. Again it is also taken sometime, for the pythe or pryncipall part
of a tale. As when we hear a man long about the vtteringe thereof, we bid
him go quickly to the substance of the matter. Substance is not there, taken
after the logition another, but after the common speech. Beside this, it is
some time taken for nature it self, as nature is also taken for it, and that
as though there were no difference between them. And so does Gelasius put it
here, when he says.

It cease not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine. Meaning
indeed none of them both after the logition. But yet in that he does say,
substance or nature, he puts no difference between them, but (as thou
saydest before) take which we list, it is all one to him. For if they had not
been to him as both one in this case, he would not have put as he did, the
one or the other. As who say I care not which ye take, but he would have put
the one and the other, (as two distinct) or the one and not the other, (wherein
had been no question) or else nether of them both. Therefore sithe it was all
one to him, to take of them, which we list, it follows well, that he did not
put the one, but for the other. And which for other, that was, his own order
of words does well declare. Which is not, nature or substance, but
substance or nature. He puts substance before, for that which he puts
after, as an exposicion thereof. That is to say, nature. Therefore he says
substance or nature, as who say by substance I mean nothing else but nature.
For if he had put nature for substance, as he does substance for nature, he
would not have joined unto them these words, saying, they continue in the
propertee of their nature, but he would have said, they co^tinew in the properte
of there substance. How be it, he would not say so, because it had been directly
against his purpose. Wherefore even as he does put substance for nature, so in
very deed, he does put nature for the propertee of nature. And therefore as a
plain exposicion of his mind therein he does say, they continue in the
propertee of their nature. As who say therein is all the being they have. For
if he had thought them to have any other, or more being then that, it had been
but a vain saiynge of him, to say that they continue in the property of their
nature, when it had been far better, more certain, and playner, to say they
continue in their very substance, or very nature it self, which towcheth there
whole being, where as the propertee of their nature, touches but a part of
it. For the proper nature of bread and wine it self, and the propertee of
their nature, is two things. And therefore Gelasius says not, that they
continue in their proper nature, but in the propertee of their nature, which is
less. And so much of bread and wine, we grant to remain in the holy
sacrament, as well after the consecracion as before. And yet not afterward,
and substance or nature of bread and wine for all that, except thou take
nature, for the only accidental quantitees, qualitees, and propertees thereof,
as it is often times used to be taken. Ye and sometime for the conditions and
behavior of men, both good and badde. As when we see a man of a customable
gentle behavior, we say, he is a man of a gentle nature. Again when we see a
man of the contrary sort, and always intractable, we say he is a a man of a
straynge nature, or a man of an evil nature. And as some will say, I never saw
man of that nature. And yet all men are but of one nature, as nature is some
way taken. Therefore when substance and nature both, may and daily are, so
diversely used and taken, as they are in deed, what can Frith (for all his
craakes) get of gelasius, by those words? he should first have tried and made
it certain, how or in what sense gelasius did put them and what he means by
them. And then so to allege them with their dew exposicion accordingly. But
that, because he never used to do with S. aust. nor S. ambrose, he thought it
to late to begin it with Gelasius^ For he did better like the first sound of
those words after his own mind, then he did the very meaning of them, after
gelasius mind. Wherefore this may thou see how very nothing Gelasius makes
for him, although they were the very words of Gelasius in deed. Therefore
what if they be not his words? how then?


HERE. Then some where, I must needs grant a fault, if it were so. Now be
it, I can not believe that ever Frith would allege them in Gelasius name, if
they were not Gelasius words in deed.


Cap. 47.
CATH. Then for a farther trial thereof, I would wish the to take so much
pain (which were not great) as to read over that notable and worthy book,
entitled, (the assercion and defense of the sacrament of the altar) made by
master doctor Smith of Oxforde a man well known to be of great and famous
learning. Wherein among other his good and perfect solutions, to a great sort
of Frithes heretical objections, thou shall find one solution concerning this
matter, in the.148. leaf of the said book, where part of the words be these.

For an answer here unto (meaning Frithes allegacion of Gelasius) ye shall
understand (says he) that this saying ascrybed unto Gelasius, being of this
sort as it is, is neither found in any of the works reputed and taken for
the true and undoubted works of Gelasius, nor yet it is so read in the said
book, entitled, Antidotum contra hereses, as here in this objection it is
deduced, like as it shall manifestly appear unto the reader thereof, conferring
them both together. And undoubtedly among learned catholyke men, it is
constantly believed, that this saying of Gelasius, as it is here deduced, is
falsely ascrybed unto gelasius, and counterfeit by the lutherians, who (for the
maintenance of their false error and naughty opinion or heresy, being that
with the very true body and blood of Christ, there remains material breadde
and material wine) have so contrived the matter, that where in all Gelasius
works, there can not be found any one saiynge after this sort, they have yet
iobbed it in, in an other book. Ye and to avoid suspicion of falshed, and to
get them the better credit, they have put it in the said book, having an
honest name, being intytuled a tryacle or remedy against heresies, thinking
that in such a book, having such a title no man will think that any
heresies are planted at all, to be mainteyned in any wise, But that in such a
book all veritees and catholic assertions are set forth to be allowed. And
that this is very like te be as I do say, it appears in manner notoriously of
it self, as well for that the said saiynge, as here it is deduced, is not (as
I said) among the other sayings of Gelasius in his known and approved
works, as also for that no writer (in the said Gelasius time) did either
hold this opinion, so ascribed to gelasius, nor yet any thing speaks in or
for the confutacion thereof, which undoubtedly they would have done, in case
the thing had been so in deed, as it is deduced and purposed for true,
semblably as they did the like, against all other error and heresies, which
then did spring and were sown abroad, especially being of such importance
and weight as this is of. Moreover this thing by the way (good reader) may be
noted to the great confusion and shame of these falsifyers and corrupters of
books (as Fryth is and other also of that sort) that the saiynge of Gelasius
is so here rehearsed, that a plain man would think that Gelasius had so said,
as Fryth does here bring him in, and lookyng upon the book entitled
ANTIDOTVM, out of which, the saiynge of Gelasius is extracted, there shall ye
find far otherwise. Ye and moreover, the thing which ye shall find there,
in the foresaid book, it is so corrupted, that ye can not (as it is there)
make any sentence of it. etc.

Now these words of this great learned man's setting forth, with the rest
that follow in the same place, if thou would thoroughly read, peruse, and well
way them with indifferent judgment, thou should easyly perceive, whether
there be so much as any lykelyhood that those pretended words of Gelasius
be Gelasius words in deed, or no. Therefore if they be not what does Fryth
get by them? Of the other side, if they were his words as Fryth does say they
be, yet well and trewly, waied, considered and with reason understand, thou
should find (as it does now already appear) that they make not only
nothing for him, but also rather, even clean against him. Wherefore, since (as
I told the at the first) that all frithes purpose in the old holy doctors,
was no more but only to get some color of, or by such certain sayings of
theirs, as he could and did pyke out, to make it (as it were by them) seem that
his understanding of those places of scripture, which he does meddle with
all, could not be but true, pretending that they were to be taken in the same
only sense that he did put them for. And again since it is now proved, that
the chief of all those places of the holy fathers, which he did so pyke out,
and most trusted upon, he did but falsely understand after his own blind
phansy, and not after their minds, but far otherwise and clean contrary to
their meanynges, as it has most plainly apered, even by the testimony of their
own sayings, which I have trewly recited unto the, what folowth hereof but
this? if his understanding of those places of scripture be true, there is is
false. if theirs be true, his is false. And which shall we take? for both, we
can not they be so contrary. Therefore because their understanding thereof, is
well known to be so true, that even he him self another did nor durst deny
it, and his understanding so false, that all the color and craft he could set
upon it, is not able to defend nor hide it, who is so blind, weywarde, and
wylfull, as, notwithstanding all this, will yet trust or believe him? any other
but such, as passes not much, whether they go to god or the devil?
wherefore, if the dew consideracion hereof, be not enoughe to a certain thee,
that he was but a false and a wicked teacher of error and Heresye, it shall be
enoughe to a certain me, that thou art but a man intractable, and full of
insatiabilite. And therefore more of me now, thou gettest not at this time.


HERE. Yes sir a little, I pray you. For what say you to his natural reasons,
which ye have reported to be nothing worth, and promised to prove the same?
Therefore I would feign here, what ye would say to some of them ear we part.


CATH. I marvel that ever thou will require, look after, or regard any
reasons of his, whom thou haste seen proved so false and foolish as he was.
For thou have now heard to many good reasons against him, to think that any
of his, can make with him. For very reason thou may well know, can never
be against it self.

Nor any one of that sort against an other, be they never so many. And
therefore the manifest truth of those reasons, which thou haste heard
against him all ready, might make thee sure, that none of his can hold,
although they seem never so much to the contrary.


HERE. Ye but sir, ye must answer them otherwise then so, or else can not I be
content. For his reasons, I may say to you, works more in my head, then all
that ever he says beside.


CATH. Then must thou take a new day, for I will tarry no longer about that
matter now.


HERE. Then what say you to this, that ye have lost a great piece of the
labor, which ye have taken at this time already.


CATH. Although in thee, I fear the same, yet I would have thee tell me, how
or wherein.


HERE. In that ye have so spiced your talk, with such obscure words and
straynge terms at many times, yt I cannot tell what ye mean by them.


CATH. Why did thou not tell me so then, when I did speak them and was in
hand with them?


HERE. I thought I would not let your purpose so much, but would and did
rather harken, whereupon ye would rest in the end.


CATH. Then, why fyndest thou more fault with any obscuritee or strayngenesse
of my words, then thou do with any of Frithes words? for he uses as
straynge words as I do, and more straynge to. For in the.42. leaf of his
book, thus he says.

What need he (meaning Saint Austen) to make these, words and Antithesies,
but because. etc. Now what understand thou by this word antithesies? Can
thou tell what it means?

And again in the.52. leaf, where also he says.

It must be, Ratione porositatis vt in igne and ferro, nam penetrationem
dimentionum nunquam probabit. This, he does not so much, as express, or turn
into english. how be it that was perchance because his ignorant disciples
should think him the greater clarke. for some there be, that, the less they
understand of what so ever they hear, the better learned judge they him, which
is the speker. But notwithstanding, if he had put forth the very english of
it, as it had been his part to do, since he writes in English, yet how much
should thou have been the wyser for that?


HER. Even so much as the understanding of that comes to. For then I should
have known what he means by it.


CAT. that will I see straight way. For the english of it is this. It must be
(says he) by reason of porsfite, as in fyet and iron, for penetration of
dementions he shall never prove.

Now tell me what he means by it?


HERE. That could I soon do, if it were not for a word or two.


CATHOLI. why for that word or two, but because thou do not understand
them? And why do thou not understand them, but because they be to thee,
obscure and straynge as every thing is to him that knows it not. And
therefore sithe he uses words and terms, more obscure and straynge then I
do, how come this to pass, that thou cannest not as well away with the
obscurite and strayngenesse of my talk full of truth, as thou cannest with
the abscurite and straygenes of his talk, full of error and falshed? Wherein
this augmenteth my marvel greatly, that ever thou would be so light and so
rash as to chaynge thy faith in so weyghty a matter as this is, being not
able (as thou art not, by thine own saying) to understand such convenient
and necessary talk thereof, as it requires upon such occasion, as Frythe and
other Heretics has given unto it. Wherefore in those points, which thou art
ignorant of, trust another thy self, nor yet those, which are as blind as
thou art, or as false as Frithe was. But consulte with such as can skyll, and
be of good will, for at their hands thou shall be sure of nothing but truth.
And now get thee hence I pray thee, for I have some what else to do.


HERE. Then sir, when shall I come unto you again to here what ye can say to
Frythes reasons?


CATHOLICVS. Come to me when thou wylt.


HERE. To morrow by eight of the cloak?


CATH. Content.


HERE. Then I will say no more at this time, but God be with you.


CATH. Farewell.


FINIS.
Fautes escaped in the pryntinge.
Leaf. Side. Line. Fautes. Corrected..3..2. 24. and also of and first of.3..2.
30. other the the other.11..2. 30. he does mean he does not mean.16..1. 21.
this word bread this word eat.16..2. 1. follow the other follow of the
other.24..2. 3. adoraueri adorauerit,32..1. 23. ye he would not yet he would
not.39..1. 1. for this as for as this..46..1. 27. thou that take thou
take.61..1. 1. supernartuall supernatural.62..21. 27. for he would for else
he would.70..1. 34. is it not also is it also.76..2. 5. Members Memores..81..1.
18. accesserit accesserint.82..2 27. the words. these words.83..1. 23. in his
words in his works.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETESTRETE BY THOMAS POVVELL. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum. ANNO. M. D. LVII.


