THE Private School of Defense.

OR THE DEFECTS of Public Teachers, exactly discovered, by way of Objection
and Resolution.

TOGETHER With the true practice of the Science, set down in judicious Rules
and Obseruances; in a Method never before expressed.

By G. H. Gent.

LONDON: Printed for John Helm, and are to be sold at his Shop in S.
Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1614.

TO THE HOPE OF GREAT Britain, Prince CHARLES.
PRaise is the end of all Arts, the perfection of Praise is only in Eminence,
which begets Example and Admiration. Seeing then (great Prince) your Birth
gives you the best privilege to express the worthiness of Virtue, I see not
but her followers, either in Art or Action, should necessarily fly to your
High Patronage. This consideration makes my low deserts look upward, which in
this at least will merit your view, that the Science of Defense, not unworthily
styled Noble, (if either truly practiced, or rightly understood) was never
before in our Language brought to any Method. The Professors thereof being so
ignorant, that they could rather do, then make demonstration, or reduce their
doing to any certainty of principle.

Many are the imputations laid upon this Art, (for such I dare now affirm it)
the chief whereof is, the increasing our bloody and irreligious Duels, which
if the name of this Science, being called of Defense, will not avoid, yet the
most licentious age of the Romans shall sufficiently clear: No History of
those times making mention of any Duello or single fight to the loss of any
Noble Person in that State, or disreputation of the public Justice. Yet that
this kind of battle was known and in some cases approved amongst the
Romans. The Hiperduels between the Curatij and the Horatij, and that famous
Duel between Torquatus and the Frenchman, apparently speak.

It is not then the public profession of this Science, nor the multiplicitie
of Professors that increase these desperate assassinations: for, Knowledge
begets Wisdom, and Wisdom by how much it participates of skill with
Discretion, misdoubteth the same in another, and concludes safety as the sum
of her ability. This is manifest in the Italians, the first inuenters of
Foyle-weapon, and the cunningst Practisers, where notwithstanding these single
Combats are rather reported then seen; and yet in ruder Countries as Poland,
etc. nothing more common; which I impute wholly to a daring Ignorance. Neither
had this knowledge of Defense, if justly taxt with any so wicked effects, been
graced with so many Authentic privileges in all well governed States, nor the
Professors thereof had received such honor and respect, insomuch that amongst
the Romans some of them had their Statues erected, as Plutarch witnesses.
These Reasons (if my judgment fail not) forcing the same.

First, Necessity at home, as a Remedy to an vnauoyded Disease, in opposing
sudden assaults, which from Caine, pleading Antiquity, will not now lose
their plantation. And since Innocence is no protection against murtherous
intents, God and Nature tolerate this Defense.

The second is, Public good abroad, for avoiding blood, if the state of a War
should require a single Trial, which howsoever was presumption in Goliath, was
true valor in David: the imitation of this example, has been frequent in
great Persons in foreign, and memorable in our own Country: as between
Edmund, surnamed Ironside, and King Canute, to a happy issue. Neither can I
forget an offer in the same kind made in more late years, between Frances
the first, King of France, and Charles the fifth, Emperor, though without
effect.

The last Reason is, Commendable and profitable Exercise. First, no other
recreation carries so general employment both of body and mind, as this does:
for here the Feet labor equally with the Hands, the Eye and the Judgment
walk together: and for the profit, it leads to as much use in making the
person ready and daring to the war; as Horsemanship begets dexterity for the
shocke. The School of our private Practice being the same to the Battle, that
the Muze is to the Troop: for with what confidence shall he go on upon many,
that has no knowledge to give him hope of safety from one.

Pardon my tedious discourse (most Excellent Prince) if it be a Crime, not
Error but Zeal offends: for how can I choose but speak much of Arms to you,
whom we all expect the most Heroyicke Professor and Defender of the same: to
which your future ability in your high Atchieuements, if my poor endeavors
may give the least furtherance (as I promise my self much herein) I return
from your Acceptance, laden with full reward and happiest expectance: whom no
second respect could induce to the undertaking this so difficult a Labor,
which my Person shall in your command, in all humble service, be ever at
attendance to make good, resting

The most devoted Servant to you and your Princely Virtues, G. H. Gent.

THE Private School of Defense.
THE INDVCTION.
SOme hold opinion that Skill avails little or nothing in fight; and
therefore so soon as they shall see this Title, will cast away the Discourse,
as an unprofitable Argument. He that is the most obstinate enemy to himself,
in rejecting the benefit of skill, must needs confess it no vain Exercise,
if the aptness and facility be only thought on, to which the active practice
of it brings the body, and enables it for enduring in fight. But to the point
of material use.

Of such men's understandings I would know how comes it (then) that an ignorant
handler of a Weapon meeting with an ordinary Professor of Defense at Foyles,
can neither certainly give offense, nor avoid it.

They will answer me, that at blunt, a man comes boldly on, and is not
troubled with any such considerations, as at sharp must of necessity disorder
his remembrance, and put him out of fight.

To that, thus; All rules (indeed) must admit some exceptions: heat or cold may
somewhat distract a fighter; heat in casting him too forwardly upon a danger:
coldness in not preparing him to follow an advantage of offense, yet these
come never wholly to prejudice the use of skill: for, speaking of such an heat
as always falls upon this peril; we must not understand it to be simply that
heat needfully belonging to courage; for then it is an orderly Virtue, and
loses no strength either borne with it, or taught it; but it must be forced up
into much anger (which seldom happens in the Defendant, for whose cause only
we profess teaching) before it can turn a man into that weakness. Where it
does happen, it is a kind of madness, which (for the time) loses all reason,
as much as that part of skill: and shall good advice be altogether neglected
because a mad man is incapable of it?

Then touching Coldness, though it be brought down into the very baseness of
Fear in one, yet it is impossible to make Skill utterly of no use to him. For
the gesture of the body upon such a danger, will naturally fall into those
motions that it has got by practice.

So that skill to every reasonable man is something a friend. But when it is
entertained by one naturally of a good temper, it can by no means fall under
any of their Objections that despise it; for such a man brings no more fury,
nor less assurance with him into the Field, then the School, and therefore
will have as much advantage of an ignorant man in fight, as there is difference
between them in practice.

To exemplify this, you may read of one Coranso, a Noble man, who from two and
twenty Duelloes returned Conqueror: Being demanded the reason by some that
considered the equality of his adversaries in show, and the uncertain chances
of the field: he answered, Strength, Length, Courage, Temper and Cunning. So
he concluded Nature in Art, and attributed the managing of those parts he was
borne with, to the ability of those he was taught.

Since therefore that the Science of Defense is understood to be a profession
of use, it follows to examine the defects of Teachers, and to resolve upon the
worth of the knowledge: which follows immediately after our Definition.

The Definition of the Science of Defense, with the parts thereto required.
THE Science of Defense is an Art Geometrical, wherewith the body is guarded
with a single or double weapon from wrong of the Offender, or the greatest
disadvantage of his Offense.

The Parts thereto required are Strength and Judgment.

Under Strength are comprehended swiftness of motion and quickness of Eye:
where ability is without perfection of these, it is but a supply of defects,
drawn from the Judicial part or Judgment.

Under Judgment fall the considerations of Time, Place, and Distance.

It has seemed to many that there is no certainty in this Science, which
granted, it must lose his title; in whose behalf we cannot but with great
reason auerre, that as the body is punctual, so it has a just circumference
in the hands and feet, which to defense and safeguard thereof, run in an
equal line, which extended with strength in a just proportion, make the body
the same as the Point is in Circle, untouched or impossible to be violated.

To them that object Example against Knowledge, in that none or few, have ever
attained this height of assurance, I can make no other answer, then argue from
their own School, and say, that none or few, in disputation, ever gave
satisfaction without some doubt, therefore Logic is no Art of true disputing.
True it is, all Arts and Sciences have their just and absolute bound, to which
though in the speculatiue part or Theorie, many have arrived, none ever did in
practice. Since as in those of words, many subtilties and nimble inventions
oppress and wrest the best expositions: so in those of exercise of the body,
the inequality of place, as the slipping of ground, dazeling of sight, many
times disorder the best and surest way of Defense and Knowledge. Wherefore
though by the weakness of man's casual nature, we can promise to our Scholar
no positive security, yet the imperfection in the learner, makes the Art no
whit less certain or singular.

To those that reject the Science, because they cannot promise themselves
supreme excellence, is to reject the study of Physic, because he cannot be
a Galen, or a Paracelsus; or if any shall from the fall of some man of the
sword (as our word men term them) by the unskillful arm of some rude
assailer, contemn our instruction, I would have such a youth turn Muletor,
because Ventidius that rubd Asses, came to be Consul, and Valerius Cato the
Grammarian became a hackney-man: Fortune not Science herein is to be blamed.

Notwithstanding, that the excellence of this Science may not want Example; I
cannot forget the memorable perfection of the two Romans Bythus and Bacchus,
who having fought eighteen several Combats or Duelloes, returned both without
hurt, and at the last were both, at one Passage, run through and slain,
leaving no place to Judgment, that could give preeminence to either: whereupon
it became a Proverb in Trials of equality, B^thus contra Bacchum. But I have
digrest too far In magnis rebus voluisse sat est; In high matters it shall
suffice to sit in Phabus Chair, though we cannot run his full days
journey: wherefore we return again to handle the parts derived, which make
to approve our Definition; the Eye and the Foot.

That which we call Strength, is not only a Bucke-beating ability of the
arm; for the point, to which all use of weapon is now with great reason
reduced, is not so blunt but small force makes it enter: neither in Long or
Passage is the force required so much as shift of body, to which the Eye must
like a faithful Centinell give warning, and the Feet nimbly give performance:
for if the Eye fail in perceiving opportunity, or the Feet in taking it, in
vain is the force of arm: on these two then we ground Ability, to which the
Judgment gives the crown or conquest.

Now for Judgment, as we said before, Time must be observed when, Distance
where, Place how. Occasion of Time and Distance may seem fair to the eye, yet
the Place may justly bar it. As where open way is given to a Passage with
advantage, the incertaintie of footing may cast you too forward, and disorder
your weapon by unsettled motion. Again, Place and Distance may both draw you
on, yet Time may promise by letting slip that occasion, some opener way to
great advantage: for upon every slight ^^^ing of the arm, it is better to
make offer of hurt to that pa^the^ our home for such prof^ many times draws
the adversary to a Guard, that neglects a (...) of more deadly danger. Last^
^m^ and ^ac^ may both succeed to your wishes, yet Distance (...) ^ustly check
your resolution: (...) observation more then (...) the Judgment required,
which being from our purpose to set down i^ figure, I refer you to the
laborious work of Gio^an de Gras^ the Italian, who handles this ^o^ a^ large
and has took up much ground in the expression thereof.

Thus much for our speculatiue (...) Science, wherein I know (...) ^a^ disagree
with me which I could not omit to set down, because it makes to the honor of
the worthy Professors of this Science, whom I desire the courteous Reader by no
means to imagine that I am so ignorant to mean, where any question is made of
their sufficiency in this Book: for I dare boldly affirm, for general
Weapons no Country can afford more able and sufficient professors then this our
own in their performance; whose teaching I will not dispraise, if it come not
within compass of these following Taxations, which by way of Objection and
Resolution, I presume, I have made apparently worthy of censure to all
indifferent practisers.

The Defects of the Teachers of ^cience* discovered by way (...) the true use
thereof set down in the Re^tion.
OBJECTION I.
MOst of the common Teachers use but one form of play, and teach all men alike
without observing the nature of the Scholar, whether he be of a hot spirit or
a cold; or whether he have advantage or disadvantage in ^^n it soortnesse,
strength or weakness of arm or body.

RESOLVTION.
HE that shall teach a strong man with a single weapon to run Passages with
shift, takes from him the advantage of his strength, who should either attend
the Close, or having length to his strength, should standing offend to the
nearest, as in this Book you shall find under the title Order for fight. Or
he that shall teach a weak man single weapon or binding Passage for the Close
of advantage, forfeites him to a strong man's mercy, though he has much less
courage or skill. Whereby the defect in the Objection plainly appears, as in
many other, rising from this example.

OBJECTION II.
THE public Teachers teach, at many weapons, as they give it out in their
Challenges, as though every Weapon were used with several Guards and Defenses,
one contrary to another.

RESOLVTION.
THis is mere deceit, to blind the eyes of their spectators in public, as
they do their Scholars in private: for all mentioned in the defect are
contained in two weapons, that is single Rapier and Quarter-staffe, and their
defenses, as you shall find in the rules of Practice.

OBJECTION III.
THey teach all men to lie at a settled guard with their whole breast toward
their enemies, and do likewise make them trust to a Daggers defense.

RESOLVTION.
TO give the whole breast, when the more thin the body offers it self to the
offender, the more free it is from being hurt, is no less absurd, then if they
should teach only to guard the head, and leave the breast open: for of dangers
choose the least. Lastly, for defense, he that trusts to his Dagger, cannot
possibly at that instant offend with the same. And there is no surer principle
then this; there is no good defense without offense: neither good offense
without defending, which since only the Rapier or Sword can most certainly
do, the main of both must necessarily be cast upon them.

OBJECTION IIII.
THE public Professors of this science, teach nothing at Backe^w^d, and Sword
and Dagger, but the have blow.

RESOLVTION.
IF the point beats the blow in fight as less engaging him that proffers a
thrust, then him that offends with edge, which I know and they cannot deny, it
is as much prejudicial to their Scholars, to teach them the bare blow at Sword
and Dagger, as if they should teach at hapier only to thrust and not disorder:
the necessary use whereof you shall find in the next Resolution.

OBJECTION V.
IN single Rapier, and Rapier and Dagger, they teach all their Scholars as
they call them, Stucks, otherwise Long, to throw them into hat without
disordering their adverse Rapier: and do likewise teach Passages, to run
them right forward upon their enemy.

RESOLVTION.
TO my knowledge there is no offending Long, otherwise Stuck, upon any man,
with any safety, without disorder: and no Passage that is done without shift,
can be without great danger.

OBJECTION VI.
THey will suffer their Scholars to see one another practice, and likewise
they themselves will discover every man's play to any man.

RESOLVTION.
TO let any man see another practice, gives much advantage to the spectator,
and is much prejudicial unto him whose practice is seen: and most murtherous
and damnable in the Teacher to betray their own Scholars to death.

OBJECTION VII.
THey will seldom or never fight in the same guard they teach others: nor so
much as hold the same guard good to morrow they used yesterday.

RESOLVTION.
THeir knowledge is accidental, not material, they have some general
notions, which (wanting Art) they cannot reduce to heads and principles: how
can he then be constant in one guard, that cannot set down any for best, and
yield a reason thereof?

Hence it comes that I was taught more in a week by an understanding Artist,
then I could learn in seven years practice in public Schools. And if any
of their Scholars happen to be excellent, it proceeds rather out of their
own witty and industrious observance upon the accidents of practice, then
from any certain demonstration of their Teachers.

Considering all these advantages and disaduantages, let every man make his
own Practice private, and with those he may have no cause to deal withal:
for their nice tricks in Schools, or Playerlike fights at many Weapons upon
Stages, are mere shadows without substance. Therefore let Art and Nature be
joined in one.

Order in fight.
THE managing of a Quarrel is half the performing thereof, let every man be
rather Defender, for he has the advantage of the Offender in choice of
Weapons. Let him if he be strong make choice of a single Weapon, either being
a long Rapier, or a long Sword: for the Challenger has thereby the disaduanatge
of a strong man; for he cannot command his point to help his weakness upon
the Close. Or likewise a Turkey Samatorie; for he is crooked, and has a broad
point that will not enter, and therein is the least danger of all; and is much
a^a feable for a strong man for the Close of advantage to disarme.

Let him that is weak of body, and has a short reach, make choice of a double
Weapon, being a short Rapier and Dagger, or short Sword and Dagger: so may he
the easier command them to help his weakness; for he must keep his enemy
from the Close. Therefore let him give a little ground, for that will encourage
his enemy (a strong man desirous to close) to come forwards. Then is your
Passage, or Crosse-Passage with shift unexpected: or if he has length and not
strength, let him offend to the nighest parts, otherwise answer.

Likewise if a strong man be offender, and has a long reach, let him offend at
length to the nighest part, or else to seek for the Close of advantage as
aforesaid.

To help the length of a short man.
IF a weak man be offender having a short reach, let him run Passages upon
his enemy, with as much shift of body as he can: Shun the Close; for if he
seek to hit at length, he gives advantage to his enemy to hurt him; for his
enemy has advantage at length by reach, and advantage of strength upon the
Close, or if he be strong though short of reach, let him make choice of a
single Weapon to disarme.

To help the strength of a weak man.
THree things help the strength of a weak man: change the point when the
adverse seeks to take it; change back to recover it; or else open your side,
and then it is not well to be taken.

A good Guard
IS he that lies with the right side as thin as he can, toward his
enemy, and the point no higher then the shoulder, trusting to your Rapier or
Swords defense; for thereby your enemy has little room to hit, and you the
less to defend. And also a good guard discourageth the enemy to offend, and
is ready always to defend. He that dazels much never defends well: for if you
offend when he (...) be can neither certainly de^^^ himself, (...) offend you

He tha^ does practice many guards is most commonly con^ (...) none and i^
^ight that behooue one most to be constant in a good guard* and slow to put out
without great advantage: for he (...) offends is thereby the easier (...) and
if you offend upon one (...) his guard offend to the highest part for them you
may go (...) of and if you offend to the other parts that lies further of
your offense is flow, and most common past recovery, if it do (...) or not,
for a hapier enters, and (...) at the ^oyie does, help (...) offender of
again, but rather (...) himself.

Principles belonging to Fight
STay no longer with^^ (...) your enemy then you are offending.

Offend always upon the adverse coming forward.

In offending go off with your weapons point straight (...) your enemies
breast, for then you are (...) ways ready to defend your self* and offend your
enemy.

Many tricks do too much trouble the mind: know (...) ^^e few; three defends
the whole.

Rules of Practice.
THere is but three defenses (...) single weapon.

1 Long. 2 Passage. 3 Change back (...) (...) them back to your guard.
And likewise three Offenses.

1 Disorder Long. 2 Disorder Passage. 3 Your binding Passage for the Close of
advantage.
The Dagger helps the Rapier especially in two things in Offense.

1 Passage. 2 Crosse-Passage.
And two in Defense.

1 When the Rapier binds high, the Dagger binds low. 2 Or when the Dagger
binds high the Rapier binds low.
The chiefest way to force a man to good practice for play or fight, is to make
him maintain a single weapon against all advantages.

First, let him learn single Rapier then to maintain single Rapier against
Rapier and Dagger; and likewise against Sword and Dagger: and lastly, to
maintain short Sword against all the aforesaid advantages.

I have concluded my rules of Practice, and the whole Book, with the most
necessary instruction belongs to this Science, and the least observed in
Schools, which is the maintaining of Defects: this being the scope and true
end of our skill, to help the weak, wherein the strongest shall also confess
himself to want this knowledge, if he consider the use thereof in accidental
quarrels, which cannot be denied much to exceed occasions for the field: for
supposing himself incident to sudden on-sets, how is he provided with his
wearing weapon, being for the most part, a single Rapier or short Sword, to
defend himself from the advantage of a Sword and Dagger, Rapier and Dagger, or
Halberd? whereas by practice against this unequal opposition (as in the
Chapter before prescribed) he shall find himself enabled not only for
defense in this extremity, but also may offend his adversary, as I have seen
upon the public Stage, a single Rapier most shamefully foil both Halberd and
half Pike. To add to this supply of defect, I would have a man wanting one
hand, or one eye, by practice, to help his imperfection: or being lame in both
arms, with his feet and shift of body, to clear that defect (all cunning in
this Art consisting more in feet then hands.) Further, should one be lame in
feet having eyes and arms, I would have him practice those Weapons and Guards
may best perfect his condition, being neither able to pursue nor retire. This I
could express, being a man my self defective, but that act and demonstration,
not words, must make this apparent, wherein I refer my self to judicious
trial, concluding with an Answer to one Objection, that will arise from
meanest understanding, being this.

Why should so few of our Fencers ariue to this knowledge, or to no more height
of doing, then this discovery of their defects has manifested?

I answer, these two conditions must concur to make a Fencer absolute, Art
and Nature; now for Art examine the equality of those Vshers our Masters
brings up, you shall find most of them Butchers, Byt-makers, Shooe-makers, or
Truncke-makers, men envred to the hide, rather able to bear blows then avoid
them. Whence we see a Gentleman or Artist, who can reduce knowledge unto rule,
in small time out-goes his Teacher having both Hands, Art and Nature, his
Schoolmasters wanting one, and many times both of them. Not that this my
taxation reaches to all Masters of Defense: for I have seen some, whom I must
confess to be both knowing and able, who detest our commonly applauded, rude,
and buffeting play: whose Judgments will be as far from deprauing me or my
work, as I shall be from the least envy toward them, whom I confess much
worthy of esteem and reward.

FINIS.

