THE ENGLISH Phlebotomy: Or, Method and way of healing by letting of blood.

Very profitable in this spring time for the preservative intention and most
needful all the whole year beside, for the curatiue intention of Physic.

Collected out of good and approved authors at times of leisure from his other
studies, and compiled in that order that it is: By N. G.

Prouer. 30. verse. 15. The horse-leach has two Daughters which cry, give,
give.
Prouer. 27. verse. 9. Balm and sweet incense make the heart merry: so sweet
is that friend that gives counsel from the heart.
Imprinted at London for Andrew Mansell, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Royal Exchange.

1592.

To the right Worshipful, Master Reginald Scot, Esqure; daily increase of
wealth, Worship and wisdom, in the true fear of GOD.
THIS pleasant and profitable practice of blood letting (Right Worshipful Sir)
has always, and that worthily been accounted and called of the ancient and
latter Physicians, Vnum e maioribus remedijs, one of the greater remedies in
the Art of healing; (not as I take it) for that the same is of gretest charge
to the patient his purse, a vein being commonly opened for twelve pence: but
because if the same be done with skill according to Art, it brings great
profit to health, without any great diminishing of wealth. How this so great a
remedy in both the inte^tions, of Physic, Preservative and Curatiue, is
greatly abused by vagabu^d Horse-leaches, and travailing Tinkers, who find work
almost in every village, through whose wickedness (having in truth neither
learning, knowledge, witre, nor honesty) the sober practisioner and cunning
Chirurgian lives basely, is despised, and accounted a very abject among the
vulgar sort. The whole world with woeful weepings too too plentifully can
witness, and many godly and faithful Christians here and else where with
pinching pains and griping griefs even to the last gasp, have pitifully felt.
For these kind of men are so far off from repayrers of men's bodies, as
they would seem to be that they are, rather marrers and manglers of men,
women and children, without all care to men whom they ought to tender, foster
and cherish, without all conscience to God, to whom they must one day render a
reckoning of this their desperate and devilish dealing.

No man brought up among Christian me^ of any practice or calling, but has
long sithence learned this lesson; how frail, infirm, and weak soever our
mortal bodies are, yet it has pleased God to call them his own temples, his
own instruments, and his own dwelling places: an unspeakable dignity, far
above that for which Alexander Magnus so contended, when he would needs be
called the son of Jupiter.

Paul to the Thessalonians willing us to keep our vessels, viz. our bodies in
holiness and honor, suggesteth unto us these two points: first the fragilitie
and mortality of our earthly bodies, comparing them to vessels of earth, and
pots of clay, which break with a blow, and perish with a knock: secondly, that
yet they are not our own bodies, to use as we list to sensuality like brute
beasts; but to keep them carefully, as vessels which the Lord has cleansed and
washed with his own blood, to his own glory in all holiness and honor.

The Priests of Baal cutting and launsing their own bodies with a vain and
wicked supposal, that in so doing they pleased God, grievously sinned (as
diverse affirm) both against nature and godliness; against nature, because no
man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it as the Lord
does the Church: against godliness, because works of piety and religion in our
selves or in others, they either quite surcease, or are greatly hindered when
the bodies of men are decayed in strength, weakened in vigor, languished with
sickness, or finally destroyed by death.

To let pass these things which diverse deliver out of their pulpits, of the
excellency and dignity of man's body: have not the Philosophers in the
schools called the same Microcosmos, Orbiculus, a little world most beautiful
in form, and fairest in shape, excelling far all other living creatures
whom the creator has made. In whose brain, as in primo mobili, is fixed that
inesteemable Jewel called Reason, no monster or Idol, but the mother of all
Arts and Sciences, by whom (God guiding the same) are wrought and invented
marvelous matters by Sea and by land, in every matter of speculation or
practice. This I have hitherto discoursed to this drift, that those blind
bussards, and runagate Artists, might at length see and consider that they are
no way willed or wara^ted like butchers to cut, rend and tear, the bodies of
men without skill, either in letting blod or any other practice of Chirurgi, but
like brethren to cure, repayr and amend that which is amiss, refusing no pain
taking for their own parts, nor rejecting due consultation with men
experienced, that so the noble Science of healing may be generally honored, the
diseased recovered, and the skilful workman worthily in fine rewarded.

To met with this mischief acording to my Mediocritie, and that such as are
desirous of this practice either for pleasure or profit, might be somewhat
fraughted with a few pithy instructions and necessary rules in the same, and so
at length attain to the most exquisite cunning and deep knowledge thereof: I
have thought it good not only to publish this my rude collection, containing
(if I be not deceived) the whole handiwork of Phlebotomy, but also to
counteruaile my default as rudely, (yet most humbly) to request your worships
favor for the protection thereof.

But for as much as Seneca that christian Ethnicke (for so does Erasmus term
him, for his profound wisdom and deep indgement) wills us in bestowing of
any gift to be careful that it be fit for the estate of the giver, and also
meet for the condition of the receiver, least in stead of expected thanks
disgrace may grow, and what the giver means of good will, may perhaps by the
receiver either limping in judgment, or freezing in delight, be little
regarded, and less countenaunced: I am in a word or two to show that for my
part I have not (as I think) much swarued from the sound advise of the
Philosopher, in making your worship patron of my poor seely pains.

First for that even your self have already in print in your book called The
discovery of VVitchcraft, openly and biterly enueighed against one sort of
blood thirsty men, as I do now against another sort: namely witchmongers,
who are daily and hourly without just cause conuenting before Magistrates, and
haling to the halter (if the Magistrates dexterity in the administration of
justice did not moderate their malice in murdering) poor, plain, seely and
simple innocents, and old women: whom by frivolous evidences, incredible
proofs, vayn ghesses, preiudicate presumptions, mere impossibilityes they
would have condemned and executed for witches. These men, in mine opinion,
should far better please God, and much better deserve, of the Christian
common wealth, if they would speedily turn from this their heathenish
Infidelity, extreme folly, and barbarous cruelty, and seek rather by due
execution of law and justice the blood of these bloodsuckers indeed, who for
want of skill in this profitable practice of blood letting, in every corner of
the country without controlment, either presently kyl, or at leastwise
accelerate the immature deaths of diverse faithful Christians to God, and good
subjects to their Sovereign. A poor man that robs or kills but one man,
is straight way trussed up at Tyborne, and these desperate dicks which range
the country with a budget of gross stuff, a box of salve, and a case of
tools, living in the Sanctuary of Idleness, skilful in palmestry, tellers of
fortunes, cou^terfeyting themselves to be Jews or Egiptians: imitatyng doctor
Tocrub, with strange looks, diricks, pricks, crosses, figures, and such
foolish fantasies, may safely kill thousands: no more the^ come under their
hands, which is as many as they can get; for who is so bold as blind Bayard?
and withal me^ must give them money for murdering, whereas if they had had
their just hire, they should have had hanging.

Secondly, I have thought your worship a meet person to dedicate this book
unto, not so much for that it was penned at vacant times during mine abode at
Scots Hall, under which roof I came by your good means; but rather for that,
through you when the same was first penned it passed the view and apportatio^ of
that right worshipful and wise man M. Doctor Coldwel, a pillar in this our age
of that noble profession. I assure you I thought my self happy to have my
little Latin examined by the direction of his judgment to whose worthy and
famous faculty, the matters therein mentioned were most properly appertaining.

Thirdly for that being thoroughly acquainted with your gentlema^ly conditions, I
am not ignorant of that ardent affection which you have always carried unto
your friends, Gentlemen I mean of like quality with your self: for, Amicitia
inter^ares, Love is among like, as says the Philosopher, whom as you love
earnestly in time of their felicity, and health, so you never loathe in their
calamity or sickness, putting in ure that work of compassion and Christianity
commended, and commanded us in the Gospel of visiting the sick: which work as
you now execute friendly without fear, so in fine you shall not find without
reward. In visiting your sick friends, for iner peritura perituri viuimus: this
book (if you will vouchsafe to bestow some vacant time in reading of it) may
stand you and them in some stead, though not by cunning in the practice, yet by
counsel in advise: for verily it contains the right Method and way of
healing, practiced by the ancient fathers in Physic, Hippocrates, Galen and
Auicen. And as you like a good Christian defy al magical cures which are but
cousonages, and would have other men do the like: so here you may spy a very
ready way rightly to cure all humane diseases, compendious and not costly, both
for your self and for your frined. To let pass Lysimachus a worthy Captain
to Alexander, Artemisia a noble Queen, Gentian King of Illyrica, King Salomo^,
and Queen Saba taught by Solomon in the secrets of Physic and Nature, to the
encouragement of all learned and wise gentlemen whatsoever they do otherwise
profess) to take now and then some Physical discourse in hand. I produce the
example of Dioscorides, no mean gentleman, but a noble Knight of Egypt who
served Anthonius and Cleopatra like a worthy Soldier in the field, and was so
delighted even on the midst of his martial affairs with the study of Physic
and Surgery: that one way vz. in the noble knowledge of Oiles, he excelled all
men before his time, or since.

For my self that am the giver, if it be objected that this labor is
frivolous, for that other men of far greater gifts than my self, even of the
self same profession, have written of this argument in the english tongue long
ago, as namely Sir Thomas Eliot, and Doctor Bullein, with diverse others, men
of famous memory* the one writing a Castle, the other a Bulwark of health: My
answer is, that hardly discuss we that argument, whereof something before to
that or the like effect has not bin extant; and this I add beside, that these
men entreating of many things in one book, were constrained even purposelie
to pretermitte some, yea diverse needful instructions which here may be had
largely discussed.

If it be said that a matter of Physic is no fit argument for a Divine to
handle, albeit I might easily wash away this with the apparent examples of
diverse Divines to the contrary, as of old Doctor Turner, Doctor Penie, and
Doctor Coldwel: Now with diverse others yet will I say somewhat more, namely,
that both these the Divine and the Physician work upon one subject, they
assemble themselves in one place, vz. the chamber of the sick, they both visit
and busy themselves about the sick to do him good, he is no longer Homo but
Cadauer if there be once a separation of the soul from the body. Vbi
desinit-Philosophus, ibi incipit medicus, where the Philosopher ends, there
begins the Physician: so may it be said likewise in some sense, Vbi desinit
medicus, ibi incipit Theologus: where the Phisirion fails for the bodies
recovery, there the Divine is required for the souls health. For mine own
part I am fully persuaded in mine own conscience (think or say others what
they list) that I have done more good to the Church of God and commonwealth of
this land, in this simple translation or collection, call it whether you will
(for I have but borrowed it of others and brought it into the english) then
diverse dogged Divines of this age, Penry, Brown, Barrow, and the sectaries I
mean, who in stead of the true bread of life that came down from heaven, even
Jesus Christ with his whole and wholesome doctrine, fed most daungerously the
souls of men with diuilish devises, and their own fantasies accounted
themselves terrene Gods, and desirous of nothing more then among their
auditors, to have their own positions horrible and heretical tobe admired and
embraced as oracles from heaven. If the end of this more then Pharisaical
hypocrisy be not the disturbance of Gods peace and the Queens, the wisest men
in this land have utterly lost their wits, which these men with all their
learning, if they have it in such plenty as they would seem to have, shall
never make me believe for a truth. Experience of these days prove, that by
the means of these men, we are al so generally infected with Clergy factions
and Lay factions, that as we are full of fancies, so we follow nothing but
factions, which I pray God speedily redress for his great mercies sake.
Finally as Atheism is most iniuriou y objected to him that holds these
positions. God to be the creator of al things: That God only sees and
searches the hearts and reins of men: That he only works miracles: That he
only makes thunder, lightning, and tempest, and restrains the^ at his
pleasure: That he only sends life and death, sickness and health, wealth and
woe, etc. And as he is most wrongfullie and wickedly adjudged a Papist, who
detecteth the abomination of their Idolatries, their pestilent practices of
knauerie and cousonage, their absurdities in opinion and impurities of life,
(al which and much more then I here now speak of or can call to memory) are
exta^t in print, and so in the sight of the whole world if men would not be
wilfully blinded: so by this little labor beside the exercises of my peculiar
profession, it may evidently appear what love and liking I have always borne
to good, godly and profitable studies, and how I loath loytering; and so
consequently lust which is an inseperable companion of Idleness and sloth, how
I have rather passed (as I hope) with commendation from Paul his Epistles to
Galen de Sanitate tuenda for public profit, than to Ovid his de Art Amandi
with condemnation for my private pleasure.

Good Sir as you have been hitherto eue^ (as I may say) zealous for my
preferment, and likewise jealous over my credit, an assured testimony of your
true love toward me, so I beseech you take in good worth at my hands this poor
gift which I offer of pure good will, which if I once perceive that you do, I
shall think my trauail sufficiently recompensed: and my self enforced during
life to the accomplishment of your good pleasure, so far forth as my tenuitie
shall be able any way to extend.

Your Worships unfeigned welwiller and to command in what I may, Nicholas Gyer,
minister of the word.

The English PHLEBOTOMY OR Method and way of healing, by letting of blood.
Of fullness, emptiness, and their divisions. Chap. 1.
THat this treatise of bloodletting may have an orderly proceeding; we must
begin with Fullness and Emptiness, which have between them selves a mutual
relation. Abundance or fulness therefore is called of the Grecians Pleonexia: and
after Galen in his book De plenitudine it is two fold. One fullness is in
quality, as namely, when the bare quality exceeds without Humor. The other
is of quantity, as abundance of meat or of Humors.

Abundance of meat is called of the Grecians Plesmone; of the Latins
Sacietas: where we are to note, that some interpreters translate very ill, for
Plesmone, repletio: as in the second ofthe Aphorisms. Aphoris. 22. Quicunque
morbi ex repletione fiunt curat euacuatio; when it should be thus converted:
Quicunque morbi ex satiaetate fiunt, etc. All those diseases that come of
fulness, euacuation does cure.

Abundance of meat, called of the Latins Satietas, is also twofold, according
to Galen in his 2. book of Aphorisines, Comen. 17. One according to the great
largenes or capacity of the veins or vessels called of the Latins quo ad
vasa: as when such abundance of meat is received, as thereby the stomach is
ouerstretched: the other abundance is according to natures strength, called quo
ad vires: as when more meat is eaten, then natures force can well overcome.

Abundance of humors is also of two sorts. One of all the humors called in
Greek Plethos or plethora: in Latin plenitudo, or multitudo: whereof Galen
writes in his 13. book. Metho. cap. 6. Vbiautem aequaliter inter sesucci ad
aucti sunt, idem plethos and plethoram Graecivocant, nos succerum plenitudinem
seu redundantiam dicimus. When as the humors are equally increased between
themselves, that the Grecians call plethos or plethora; we call it, abundance of
humors. Now whereas Galen says in his 2. book de Composi. Medic. secundum
locos, cap. 1. That to be abundance of humors, when only blood is increased:
we are to understand that blood there signifies impure blood, and such as is
mixed with other humors, called blood, of that which principaly there abounds.
For it can not be, that only pure and good blood should be contained in the
veins, without sommixture of choler, flewme or Melancholy: which must be so
likewise understood, where it is said that any other humor abounds, the same
is not pure alone without mixture of othets, but that humor joined with others
abounds in the vessels.

The second abundance of humors, is called in Greek Cacochymia, in Latin
Vitium succi, or vitiosus succus* and it is when one humor alone abounds.
Hereof also Galen speaks 13. Meth. cap. 6. Vbi flaua bile, nigra, vel
pituita, vel serosis humoribus repletu^ corpus fuerit: Cacochymia. i. succorum
vitiu^ dicimus. When the body is replete with yellow or black choler, with
flewme or watrish humors, we call it Cacochymia. i. corruption of humors. And in
the end of his book de Plenitudine he says: Plenitudo est copia humoru^ in
vniuerso animalis corpore. Fulness is abundance of humors in the whole body:
and a little after, he plainly shows the difference between Cacochymia and
Plethora.

Plenitude or fullness of humors, is also twofold: one in regard of natures
strength, called Quo ad vires or virtutem: which is, when the humors so
abound, that they oppress and much grieve the natural forces of the body.
And although there be not such abundance of blood in this fulness quae ad
vires, as is in the other quo ad vasa: yet those humors which are in the body,
oppress the powers of nature, whereupon nature being oppressed and not able to
govern those humors: they being as it were forsaken of nature, lose their
goodness, and offorce putrify. And of this fullness these are the signs:
heaviness, stretchings, a sensible werines, having a feeling like an ulcer: of
which Galen says 2. Aphoris. Aphoris. 5. Spontaneae lassitudines morbos
praenunciant: Voluntary wearines forsheweth diseases.

The second fulness of humors called Quae ad vasa is, when there is such
abundance of humors or of blood; that the veins and vessels are greatly
extended or stretched: so that it is to be feared, least the veins themselves
break. And therefore Hippo in the first book of Aphorisines: Aphoris. 3.
would have in wrestlers this dangerous fulness speedily euacuated, that the
body might begin again to be nourished. And this plenitude quae ad vasa is
either of pure blood only, or of all humors with the blood. And this fullness
has these marks: redness of color, swelling, veins full and stretched. Of
these two Plenitudes and their signs speaks Galen in his book De
Plenitudine, reckoning up these marks: swelling and stretching of the veins,
redness, lumpishnes of the body, a slothfulness in motion of the bodily
members. Also Method. 9. Cap. 5. He reckons these signs of repletion quo ad
vasa: obstructions, stretchings, swelling and redness: Of this twofold, read
Auicen, Secunda primi doct. tertia. cap. 3. Also Galen in his book De Plenitu.
and Metho. 9. Cap. 5. and 10. lib. eiusdem Cap. vltimo.

Because these points taken out of the books of ancient learned Phisicions,
may seem as yet hard to the vnskilfuller sort, that yet rashly and without
skill or regard of these things use the practice of letting blood: It will not
be lost labor in my poor judgment, with more plain words to illustrate
their sayings, if it may be, to the understanding of all men that are this way
studious, and yet want the help of the Latin tongue and Latin writers.

It appears by the premises what Repletion is, vz, a superfluous abundance
of humors in man's body, which happens two ways, either in quantity or in
quality.

We may also learn, that repletion in quantity, is when the four humors are
more in abundance than is proportionable to the body that contains them, or
when one humor much exceeds the rest in quantity: For the blood contained in
the veins is not simple, or of one kind, as has been said; but consists of
flewme, black and yellow choler, and pure blood mingled together, which humors
notwithstanding so mingled, by common agreement and continual use of speaking:
we commonly call blood.

The just and agreeable proportion of humors is this: That in a man thoroughly
healthful and of good temperature: there is less yelow choler than Melancoly:
less Melancoly than flewme: less flewme than pure blood: so that that blood
is accounted best, not that has like proportion of all humors, but such an
equality of the four, as has been now specified.

Blood therefore faulteth in quantity when the humors being settled in a just
proportion, do pass and exceed the agreeable measure of Nature: for then the
whole frame of the body swells; the veins above measure are stretched, and
all the members, specially after any exercise, are wonderfully retched. This
constitution of humors, though they be good, yet it faulteth, beclause it is
come to an immoderate abundance, which accustomably is wont to bring great
peril. Whether therefore there be in the body abundance of other humors
above the blood, so that the equabilitie of the proportion be not observed that
way: or that there be too much abundance of pure blood. Yet because the pure
blood in the permixtion greatly exceeds the other humors; it is a ^ault not
in the quality but only in the quantity: and therefore both of these are
contained under this kind of repletion in quantity: and this is simply,
absolutely, most properly, and commonly judged repletion, and is called
Plenitudo ad vasa, as is aforesaid, because it does thoroughly fill the large
capacity of the veins, which are termed the vessels or receptacles of the
body, though it enforce not the powers thereof. First therefore, where all the
humors superfluously increase, filling and extending the receptories of the
body, as the stomach, the veins, and the bowels: It is most properly called
in English fullness or repletion in Latin plenitudo, in Greek Plethora as
before.

Repletion in quality; is when the blood or other humor is hotter or colder,
thicker or thinner than is convenient to the body. This is the second kind
of repletion, mentioned by the foresaid auucient writers in Physic, and
which is referred to the force, strength and ability of the body.

In this repletion, although the vessels of the body be not so much puffed up,
neither swell, as in the other: yet they contain more good blood and
nourishment than the nature of the patient can well rule or overcome: For a
little nourishment to a weak nature, is often troublesome and grievous: and
although at the first it be right good; yet it does not long so continue: but
being forsaken of the bodily heat, as not able to concoct the same: in protract
of time and number of days, it corrupts and becomes the causes of diseases.

This constitution of the Greeks, properly called Cacochymia, is when the
body is infarced either with choler yelow or black, or with flewme, or with
watrie humors, and of late writers is thus defined: Cacochymia est vitiosa
humoris qualitas, qua is a iusta mediocritase desciscit: Cacochymia is a
corrupted quality of the humors, by reason whereof the humor departs from
his just mediocritie. Under which Cacochymia is contained all corruption of
humors in quality: whereby the powers of the body are hindered from their
proper functio^s, whereby also the whole body waxethfilthie and daily decays.

Of this corruption of humors in quality, one kind is somewhat better and more
tolerable: as namely, when either superfluous humors are excessiuely heaped up
together; or when the humors mixed with the blood, do not keep their just and
natural concord or proportion: the other kind is worse and intolerable: when
the superfluous humors or iuces in the body, both primi and secundarii, both
the principal humors, and these next the principal are fallen into corruption,
from their natural and convenient temperature, which is the destruction and
corruption either of the substance or of the temperament. Again both these
happen sometime with rottennes and putrefaction, sometime without. Where note,
moreover that the name Cachochymia largely taken, comprehends also the
corruption of the excrements. Hippocrates Aphoris. 15. says, where meat is
received much above nature, it causes sickness. Galon in his Commentaries
declaring that place says, more meat then accords with natures measure, is
named Replecion. And afterward he expounds that word above nature, to
signify too much and superfluously: As who would say, where the meat is
superfluously taken, it causes sickness. Meat but a little exceeding does not
forthwith cause diseases, but may yet keep the body within the bounds of
health, for meat ingendring sickness must not a little, but much exceed the
exquisite measure.

It appears by Galen that in his time certain denied this foresaid division
of fulness, set down by the ancient writers, and approved of the late
practisioners, saying that the same was to be considered only by the strength
of nature, granting plenitudo secundum vires, but not quo advasae. These he
confuteth in his book de plenitud. about the beginning in these words. Qui ex
ipsis tantum viribus plenitudinem metiuntur hi videnter nunquam vtres praeter
modum repletosvidisse, nec se etiamplus quapar est vnquam impleu^sse ^ibo ita
vt ventriculus inde distenderetur. 1. Those that measure Replecion only
according to the forces of nature; they seem never to have seen men's bodies
puffed up like bladders or bottels, neither at any time to have stuffed
themselves with meat, more than moderation required, and whereby the stomach
was ouerstretched.

Again, others in Galens time granted only that plenitude which is quo ad
vasa. and denied the other quo ad vires. These he confuteth in the same place
in these words. Itaque subiecimus duas esse tum notiones, tum relationes
multitudinis: alteram ad robur virefque illi us qui defert, alteram ad eius qui
suscipit capacitatem. Idest, Therefore we have added that there are two
notions and reports of fullness, one according to the strength of the patient,
the other after his capablenes.

The discommodities which happen by Replecion are manifold, moistnes thereby
is too much increased, and natural heat quenched, again natural heat
resolves somewhat of the superfluous meat and drink, and of that which is
resolved of meat undigested, proceed gross and undigested fumes, which
ascending up to the head, and touching the rim wherein the brain is wrapped,
causes headache, trembling of the members, dimnes of sight, and many other
diseases.

Moreover the sharpenes of the said fumes, prick and annoy the sensible
sinews, whose roots are in the brain, and from thence passes through all the
whole body. The said fumes engendered of Replecion, and piercing the innermost
part of the said sinews called sensible, greatly annoy the animal powers,
there being: by occasion whereof Understanding and Reason both, as touching
the use of them, are wonderfully let and troubled, and likewise the tongue
which is Reasons Expositor, is greatly deprived and hindered of his Office: As
it appearethin them which are miserably drunk, and in those which have most
extreme and grievous pains in their head, proceeding of Replecion.

Thus much harm comes to the body by too much nourishment, and although the
stomach do his Office in concoction, yet the veins too abondantly filled, are
spread out, divided, stopped and stuffed with wind, and greatly grieved. It is
apparent that of replecion and fulness of the veins (then the which in diseases
a more hurtful thing cannot chance) diverse infirmities do come, and the
replecion of the belly, though the excess may be expelled by vomit or sedge,
and so is more tolerable than fullness of the veins: yet it is likewise to
be disallowed. If a man have at any time too much ingorged himself by and by
he may assay to vomit: for though he do well digest it, yet there is some
danger, lest the veins be oppressed with fulness: especially when the party
continually lives intemperately, never regarding or minding euacuation. It is
good therefore to vomit first, before the meats be corrupted in the stomach,
if any impediment hinder vomiting, a sedge by stool is a present help. If
neither serve, sleep long, and often in drink use warm water. When the surfeit
is sufficiently digested chiefly by sedge, it is expedient to wash and use
fomentations. i. plasters mittigating pain, and a little to taste of salt
meats, and to drink wine or bear alaid or tempered with water. These things
by the way touching remedies for surfeiting, which in our days is too usual,
to the great dishonor of God, and the certain destruction of our bodies, yea,
and of our souls also, if GOD grantvs not grace speedily to repent and amend.
But if neither siege, nor timely digestion of the meat recemed, do not ensue
our surfettings; then the signs of replecion are to be looked for, which are
set down by Oribasius Euporist. lib. 1. which are these that follow: as Loss
of appetite, delight in nothing, sloughthfulnes, dulnes of wit and senses, more
sleep than was accustomed, crampes in the body, starting of the members,
fullness of the veins, thickenes of the pulsies, horror and shroueling of the
body mixed with heat.

But the general signs of abundance of blood are these: bleeding at the nose
chiefly forth of the right nosthrill, spitting of blood, veins full and great,
chiefly in the face, rednes of color, a ponderous waightines of the whole body
unapt to any motion, an unaccustomed drowsines, a sluggishnes of mind without
any evident cause, the skin stretched, pulses very full, debilitie of sight,
grievous dreams, plenty of sweet spittle in the mouth, swellings and
blushings in the face, heaviness and painful wearines in the shoulders as it
were after labor or bearing great burdens, urine thick and red. Replecion
known by these notes, except it be ruled by Phlebotomy or otherwise, it
choketh the natural heat of the body as Galen says, 1. Aphoris. Aphoris. 3.
Nimia repletio calorem natiuum extinguit. Too much fulness extinguisheth
natural heat. Also Metho. 13. cap. 6. Plethora tum sanguinis missione
curatur, tum frequenti balneo, exercitatione, fictione and digerentibus
medicamentis. Repletion is cured by bloodletting, often bathing, exercise,
rubbing, and digestive medicines. Look more in Galen 3. and 6. de tuenda
sanita. These men therefore in whom blood so abounds, are to be helped by
Phlebotomy, by opening Mediana or Cephalica, or applying of Boxing-glasses with
scarrifieng the place first, or otherwise as after shall be declared.
Remembering by the way, that if either purging seem too long, or the opening of
a vein cannot be done accordingly: that in these cases Electuarii succi
Rosarum are good to purge blood. But hereof there is no place to speak further
at this time.

Finally it is very behouefull to know in what place the corruption or ilnes
of the contents of the body is placed, or where the Repletion is, before we
can address our selves fitly to euacuate. That fulness therefore which of the
Greeks, we have said to be called Plethora, is chiefly resident in the
veins and habit of the body, and this being an abundance of all the Humors in
quantity, is euacuated by bloud-setting or opening a vein, and with
cupping-glasses. The Repletion called Cachochymia being an abundance in
quantity of one Humor, is i^ the whole body or in some particular part. If
Cachochymia be in the whole: it is euacuated by purgation, by general
sweat, by abstinence, and that kind called insensibilis euacuatio.

Cachochymia particular is thus euacuated: If it be in the belly, by vomit and
by siege: If in the entrails, with Clisters, Suppositors, and by siege: If in
the Liver, by the Urine: If in the Spleen, by the Hemorroids: If in the
Breast, by Coughing: If in the Head, it is purged through the Nosthrils and
roof of the mouth: If in the Raines or Bladder by Urine: If in the Genitals by
Venus: If in the Skin, by Svveating, Resolving and with Cupping Glasses.

And thus I conclude this first Chapter containing the chiefest and principal
points concerning Fullness, Emptiness, and their divisions. Not intending to
write any thing at all of the subtle and abundant definitions and
descriptions of Galen in his book De plenitudine, and likewise in his
Commentaries upon the Aphorisms of Hippocrates.

For I hope it has here sufficed, to show what replecion is, the kinds
thereof, the operations of them good or evil: remitting them which be curious,
and desire a more ample declaration, to the most excellent works of Galen,
where he may be satisfied, if he be not determined to repugne against reason.

What Euacuation is, and of the kinds and differences thereof. Chap. 2.
FOrasmuch as things contained in the body against nature, while they remain
in the body, are the inward causes of infirmities, which by Art especially are
to be removed: therefore then Euacuation, as a most general remedy is first
of al to be attempted. Euacua^^^^ therefore is an expulsion of those things
which are contained in the body against nature. There are contained in the body
these three, spirits, humors and excrements. The excrements are the ordure or
reffuse of the belly: urine and superfluous humors, sent from the brain and
the lungs. Humors some are superfluous, some necessary properly called succi.
1. iuces. Humors superfluous separated from the blood by natures force, and as
unprofitable for the nutriment of the body: are sent a far off. As phlegm
inhereth in the maw, stomach, and about the entrails. yeallow choler in his
proper coffer, namely the gall. Melancholy in the Spleen: The iuces are
converted into the substance of the body, nourishing the same: Of this kind are
those iuces whereof the blood is compact, and those otherwise called secundarii
humores. Now each of these are sometime agreeable to nature, sometime
repugnant to nature. They are agreeable to nature, when they retain the right
quality and quantity, according to the law of nature for conservation of
health. They are repugnant to nature, when they keep measure neither in
quality nor quantity. And therefore whatsoever of these manifestly departs
from the just mean and measure which nature has appointed, (because it is the
cause of sickness) if otherwise it cannot be amended, it is altogether to be
taken away and expelled, the expulsion whereof is called Euacuation.

The differences of Euacuations are to be taken of the situation of the
contents and corruptions, which are either Plethora or Cachochymia as was
showed in the Chapter precedent. The meats and drinks received into the body,
if the stomach and liver do their natural Office, be altered by concoction,
in such wise, that the best part thereof goes to the nutriment of the body,
the worst being separated by the members Official from the residue, are made
excrementes in sundry forms and substances: which excrementes are like in
quality to the natural Humor, which then reigns most in the body. These
excrements are none other as was said^, but matter superfluous and unsavory,
which by the powers of nature may not be converted into flesh, but remaining in
the body corrupt the members: and therefore nature abhorring them, desires to
have them expelled. These excrements are in number three, Ordure, Urine, Humor
superfluous.

Of Ordure are two sorts, one digested which passes by siege, the other
undigested expelled by vomit. Where I say digested I mean that it is passed
the stomach, and turned into another figure. Likewise I call that undigested
which s^il retains the figure of meat.

Urine is the watery substance of blood, like as whey is of the m^ke, which out
of the meat that is altered, concoct, or boiled in the stomach, is streyned in
the veins called Mesacaicae, which proceeds from the hollow part of the
Liver, and sent by the Raines into the Bladder, passes by the Instrument which
is ordained as well for that purpose as for generation.

Humor superfluous is of three sorts either mixed with any of the four Humors
called natural, or else it is gathered into the brain, or is between the
skin and the flesh, or lies among the Synewes, Muscles, or Joints: Of Humors
some are more gross and cold, some are subtle and hot, and are called Vapors,
Now to expel these excrements there are nine sundry kinds of Euacuations.
Letting of blood, pargation by siege, abstinence, vomiting, sc^rrifieng or
cupping, sweat, urine, spytting, sternutation, bleeding at the nose, bleeding
by the Hemmorroids, exercise: and in women there natural purgations* But in
this Treatise I will only handle that Euacuation which is done by opening of a
vein, by Cupping-glasses, and by Leaches, showing the commodities which by the
discrete using of these, come unto the body of man.

And that the way of Euacuation may be the more easy: we may divide the body
of man into three general Regions, which being enclosed in their proper limits,
have not only diverse receptories of superfluities, but also diverse ways to
purge the same.

One and the first Region is extended from the meat pipe called Gula to the
middle part of the Liver, wherein are contained the maw, the stomach, the
venies Mesecaicae, as many as come to the entrance, the hollow or inner part of
the Liver, the Spleen, and Pancreas, that is, a thing between flesh and
kernel lying between the stomach and the Liver.

The 2. Region runs from the middle of the Liver, through the thin and small
veins, of all and singular parts, comprehending the outward part of the
liver, and every hollow vein and the greater artery placed by it, and
whatsoever is between the Armehole and the flanks.

The 3. Region comprehends the muscles, the uppermost skins, the bones, and
the whole mass of the body, which extends from the very entrance and lesser
veins through every part and the outmost skin it self. Great is the
diversity of these Regions, for so much as they are so enclosed within their
own limits, that there is betvveene them no fellowship at all. But the
greatest diversity is in their own proper operations, having concoctions,
excrements, and ways of purging diverse one from the other. By observation and
marking whereof we shall the better proceed in Euacuation.

Beside these general and universal Regions of the body: there are some more
special and particular, having also excrements, yet not retching so far, nor
following through the whole body, of which sort are the brains, lungs, raines,
and belly. Hereof are derived two differences of Euacuations: one general,
the other particular. That is a general Euacuation which draws matter
universally from the whole body. Of this sort are Sweat, Bleeding, Vomits,
Euacuation, by siege. Each of these (though specially and for the most part they
euacuate one Regio^ or part of the body. Yet these also empty other parts,
though not so abundantly. As vomit first and chiefly euacuateth the stomach,
if it continue long, it purges also the bowels and the greater veins, last
of all the state of the whole body. Euacuation by siege or purging: chiefly and
most of all purges the entrails, stomach, bowels, and the first veins, then
the greater veins; Last of all the small veins and the state of the whole
body. Opening a vain first exhauseth the veins and arteries joined unto them:
then the body and all the bowels even til it proceed to the first veins.
Euacuation by sweat called in Latin, perspicatio or dissipat io per cutem:
First dissolueth from the habit or state of the body. Secondly, from the
greater veins and arteries. Lastly, from the bowels and inward Region of the
body.

Particular Euacuation does only alleuiate some particular part laden with
Excrements: Of which sort are, purging of the brain through the palate and
nosthrils, spitting of fleame whereby diseases of the breast and lungs are
eased: Pissing forth of sand and matter from the raines: Passage of blood by
the belly or Hemmorroids: the one cleansing first the lower part of the body
called Podex, the other the belly, and both of them the hollow vein called
Vena caua. When the womb therefore is provoked either with a Clister or a
Suppository, or whatsoever eruption be made in any other place through the
skin, it is likewise a particular Euacuation. Again, of Euacuations, some are
of their own accord, some are done by Art. Natural or voluntary Euacuation,
is when any thing is expelled out of the body without any medecin, this
chances sometime even naturally: For nature while it is in health, rightly
governs the state of the body, and does expel thence whatsoever
supersluously abounds or is corrupted; this Euacuation is both natural and
convenient. This also chances sometime contrary to nature, as when the
strength of the body is so infeebled, that it cannot govern and restrain the
Humors of the body, but lets them quite flow forth: or when the virtue is
strong, yet it is sometime so provoked either with abundance or acuity of the
Humor, that it permits the Humor to pass of his own accord out of the
proper vessels and receptories thereof: Both these are accidental,
unprofitable, and besides nature; because the good blood comes forth mingled
with the bad without choice or order. Artificial Euacuation is when the same
comes by outward help and this is two fold.

The one right profitable, only Euacuating that which offends in just
quantity, and quality. The other contrary to this, extraordinary and
unprofitable, exhausing the Humor that annoieth not, which comes by the
unskillfulness of the Physician. Nature by her own force, and by the virtue
expulsive, accomplisheth her Euacuation. The Physician does his, by diverse
necessary helps provided for the same. And in letting blood he opens the
vein either with a fine penkife, sleme, or lancet, or some other applyable
medicin. Purgation he attempteth with medicines, expelling evil humors from the
body either by vomit, or by siege. Also he expels evil humors by
breathings, euaporations, exercise rubbings, mouings, heat, bathings specially
sulphurious, and accidentally by abstinence. Also the Physician uses
particular Euacuations in particular parts (as ye have heard) He purges the
brain through the nosthrils by medicaments called in Greek Errhinae. And
through the palate of the mouth with medecines called, Apophlegmatismi, which
chewed in the mouth bring Humors from the head, the breast, and lungs, with
medecines called Berhica. The Raines and Bladder with Diuretica. The womb or
belly with Hysterica. Again, the belly is softened with suppositories and
clisters: again euacuation or eruption is made in particular parts by
medicines called Digerentia. ^. resolving medicines by Suppuratoria. ^.
medicines breeding matter by medicines, called Amycticam, Caustica, Idest,
burning things, by horseleches, cupping glasses which draw blood with
scarrifieng the skin, by launcinges or cuttings, by iron red hot: All these
are used of Physicians.

The kinds of Euacuation reckoned up of Fuchlius. Phlebotomy. Purging.
Vomiting, Scarrifieng. Boxing. Abstinence. Long sleep. Carnal copulation.
Flux of blood from the Nose. Terms. Hemorroids. Euacuations some are
Natural, Phlebotomy. Artificial, Purgation. common partaking of both.

What Phlebotomy is and from whence the opening of a vain does e uacuate.
Chap. 3.
FOR so much as the blood in general is mixed with the four Humors which are
also bedewed as it were with a thin watery substance, and that they all are so
mingled together through the heat and concoction of the Liver, that never an
humor can be seen, never so little, to be severed from the others therefore, I
say, the retentiue virtue cannot so strongly hold back the blood in the
crooked small veins when a great vain is opened, and that with a sufficient
large wound: but the same will issue and come forth. If by chance it happen
that the retentiue virtue go about gredily to suppress the blood, yet at
length it will pour it out plentifully with often handling and rubbing of the
veins. Neither does this or that humor by it self alone come forth, as in
purging: but blood generally; that is to say, mixed with other humors in the
veins.

Touching the definition what it is: Phlebotomia (which is word for word out
of the Greek, the cutting of a vein:) is an artificial eduction of blood,
either abounding iu quantity, or offending in quality, by opening of a vein.
I call it an artificial incision, because it must not want art and judgment:
For in it, consideration must be had of the inflicted wound: of the quantity
of the blood: of choosing the aptest vain: either to pull back blood, or to
euacuate it quite: or to make it only less in quantity. Also, for that
consideration is to be had, whether the vein must be opened straight down, or
overthwart, of the same side of the body, or of the other: with diverse
considerations besides, whereof we will speak in their proper places.
Therefore Phlebotomie which is one of the greatest remedies, the Physician
uses, is for good cause defined an artificial kind of educing. Galen in his
2. Aphoris. Coment. 17. defines it to be an exquisite euacuation of all the
humors equally. Auicen defines it vniuersalem euacuationem, quae multitudinem
humorum euacuat: or thus Vena sectio est vniuersalis euacuatio, quae anctionem
humorum super aequalitatem in venis exuperantium, euacuat. i. an universal
euacuation which takes away abundance of humors, replenishing the veins above
measure.

Though the blood in the veins be in a moderate mean, or but little in
quantity, yet of the proper moving, and vehemency of it self it issues out:
nature little or nothing at al protruding the same. Phlebotomie indifferently
euacuateth both good and bad humors contained in the veins with the blood.
Neither in diseases proceeding of corrupt constitution of humors, can nature so
moderat the matter, as that, that humor alone shall flow forth that abounds in
quantity or offends in quality. I confess, that in the judicials of
diseases, called Crises, many times nature separateth and as it were, excludes
by ways convenient, those ill humors prepared before by concoction: yet
notwi^hstanding, if then at that instant we open a vein, nature cannot thereby
in so short time expel the hurtful humor.

Whereas Auicen says, Phlebotomie eu^cuateth good blood, the ill remaining
behind, and that he fears, lest opening a vein bring the patient, either to
abundance of hot chollerik humors, or cruditie of flegmatike humors: if he mean
it of the humors mixed in the veins, it is most falls: for neither does the
watrie humor issue forth before choler, nor choler before flewme, or Melancoly,
nor the bad humor before the good. Which daily experience proves to be true:
for when the blood comes forth, it appears simple and of one form: but in
the porrenger it loses his color, and every part thereof congeleth se^crally
in his own region. The watrie humor swimmeth above, not far unlike v^ine.
Thin choler and the flowring part of the congealed blood, is also above next
the water. Melancoly abides in the bottom: the red blood and the paler flewme
keep in the middle region. So that opening of a vein euacuateth all humors
which are in the veins equally.

We are here to set down, from what place the evacuation is made: for,
inasmuch as blood is moist and flowing: that first issues forth which is next
the opened vein, then that which is next the same: thirdly, comes forth,
not only that which is in the veins and arteries, but also that which is in
the bowels and whole habit of the body. For there is a wonderful continuation
and order of the veins, so that a way being once made, all the blood often
times flows out of the body, and brings death to the party. But when the
passage is stayed, then the blood is sent forth by the veins and arteries,
till there be a certain proportion in the whole body: For the emptied and
wanting parts by the long small veins draw blood forth of the full parts,
and repleated members; and so ^^^^or them, as it were in their need. Again,
the full members grieved with too much abundance, unburden themselves on the
veins that are emptied. Again, the humor being liquide and flowing
voluntarily follows the lower euacuated regions, and there continues:
whereupon it follows, that whenever bloudletting shall empty the veins;
the same also shall euacuat the whole body. In regard whereof Phlebotomy in
the definition thereof, is called very well an universal euacuation, and that
for two causes. First, because it withdraws all humors whereof the blood
consists. Secondly, because it euacuateth from the whole body; but yet not
in like sort. Forasmuch as the parts of man's body are placed in their order:
therefore first it exhauseth from the near parts, then from those that are
further off. And again, forasmuch as some veins are spread into some parts of
the body, and other into other parts: therefore bleeding with more celeritie
and force draws from those parts which are rightly and directly placed, then
from those members, which are opposite or overthwart.

Whether Phlebotomie must go before purging* or contrary. Chap. 4.
IN this place it is a necessary question to be moved, and answered; whether
bleeding or purging must go first, in this case (which is very frequent) where
they are both requisite. Some will always have, that when purging is
necessary; bleeding must go before^ and they bring out the authorities of
Hippocrates and Galen. Others contrarily affirm that always some extenuating
or lessening receipt called barbarously Medicamentum minoratiuum must be first
received, and them Phlebotomie succeed. But of these opinions neither is
simply true, and yet both true, as the case may be limited. And for the cases
wherein a gentle purgative is to proceed^ Phlebotomie: they are in number these
six.

First, when the stomach, the Mesecaicae veins, the great veins, and the
ways and passages of the body, or any of these be stuffed with filth, or
incombred with crudities: or that the excrements are hardened in the bowels,
although the whole body abound with blood beside, yet a gentle and easy
receipt is to be taken; as Manna, Cassia or a clister (but no violent receipt)
which may euacuate from the foresaid veins, and open the obstructed passages.
If the blood should first be drawn forth without some gentle purgation or
euacuation in the greater veins: then the veins outwardly exhausted by
bleeding, through their attractiue virtue, would draw unto them ill iuces;
specially, if the disease require any plentiful bleeding. This is affirmed by
Auicen and Galen. 9. Metho. cap. 5. who did use to refrain from Phlebotomie,
if there were cruditie of meat in the stomach, or rawnes in the veins called
Mesecaicae, til their concoctio^ were ended, and the excreme^ts descended.

Secondly, when the blood is very viscous, clammie and gross, we do not only
take medicines attenuating, but also lessening things and a diet convenient to
prepare blood: and to make the member bleed the better, use a bath: for often it
comes to pass, that a vein being opened, no blood issues forth, because of
the thicknes and clamminesse thereof.

Thirdly, it faleth out in many cholerike bodies, that choler contained in the
upper part of the stomach is easily moved, and so boileth causing Lipothymia.
i. ouercoming: in which case it behooves to use before some Minoratiue receipt,
and also in bleeding to use somewhat to keep back the boiling of choler.

Fourthly, in diseases wherein appears a difficulty by reason of Cacochymia
or abundance of other humors mixed with the blood. When a practisioner
perceives that he must use Phlebotomie, and yet with some difficulty; in this
case he may use some easy purgation, or one of some force: whereby it may fall
out that nature shall thereby so be eased (which the siege and ease of nature
will show thee) that thou shall not need bleeding at all, but only preparation
of the matter, and then to renew the educing thereof as before.

Fifthly, remember Au^cens saying: Sanguis fraenum cholerae existit: blood is
the restrainer of choler: therefore in diseases mere cholerik, it were a rash
part to set bleeding before purging, which perhaps thou may be without, after
the exhibiting of the medicine. And if thou use the patient well; let those
things suffice, which change or repel the sharpnes of choler. Yet this is to
be added, that if there should be such abundance of choler as might cause a
swelling above nature or inflammation; then bleding upon that, is a present help.

Sixthly, the same reason may serve in flegmatike constitutions. Wherein for
many causes (although no small fullness appear) yet we are not to use
Phlebotomie before purging.

The cases wherein Phlebotomie preceedeth purging are these. First, when great
fulness appears, which either has caused, or is like to cause any vehement
disease, as Apoplexia, which is a sickness engendered of gross humors, filling
the receptories or vessels of the brain, and thereby depriving the party of
feeling, speech, and moving: as Peripleumonia, which is an inflammation or an
apostume of the lungs, with a vehement Fever, coming sometime of it self, but
most commonly following upon great and sharp rewmes, squinances, pleurisies,
or such like diseases: as Suffocation; which is in English, strangling: then
and in this case without fail, and chiefly if the womb be laxatiue, use
letting of blood without precedent purgation. And this seems to agree with
Galen lib. 10. de Composi. medica. secundum locos, ca. 2 Where he says: if
the body do equally abound with humors: first let blood and then purge. And
hereunto Auicen accords in quarta primi Cap. 4. This (says he) is a truth,
and the precepts of Hippocrates in lib. Epidemionium: that if both bleeding and
purging be necessary, and that the purgative must be vehement, then begin with
Phlebotomie.

Secondly, in dangerous fluxes of blood out of the nose, or in spitting of
blood called Hoemoptoicapassio, or in bluddie fluxes: for to turn the matter a
way in full bodies, we presently let blood without medicine going before.

Thirdly, in wrastlers abounding with blood: to whom the same abundance
threatens some great danger, and that it is presupposed that there are no ill
humors in the circuit or compass of the body; in this case we use Phlebotomie
without purging.

Fourthly, we may safely let blond (without medicine) those that are whole, and
for abundance of blood only, are accustomed to yearly bleeding; and that have
in the year taken little or no Physic, as it chances to many persons in many
countries of the North.

Fifthly, we may open without purging, the inner vain of the arm, in women
with child, if they carry Corpora Phletorica, full bodies, and that in the 5.
6. or 7. month after the conception: yea and also before they be quick. This
practice we are to use specially, when they being with child, wax very
slow, heavy, and as it were, ouerladen with abundance of blood, we may take
Salua tella vein: or if plenitude so require; the inner vein of the arm: for
the quantity respecting a discreet moderation.

Sixthly, we may let those blood without medicine, that have fallen from some
high place, and taken hurt in the breast and stomach, in whom is to be feared
an inconvenience called of the Greeks Egchymosis.

Seventhly, we speedily let blood such persons, without further Physic, as by
reason of their fulness through some accident, as fear, or such like, wax
domme; in which case we let blood abundantly, so that both arms are opened
together.

Here I am to note a great error in Auicen; both repugnant to truth it self,
and also contrary to Galen: For Auicen affirms, that when cold and thick
humors are in the body: first we must begin with purging, and then open a
vein. Diverse and many ways has he erred in this. First, because in
phlegmatic humors, gross and cold mixed with blood, he would have
Phlebotomie not used before purging. And in this case, by all likelihood of
reason, the cure should begin with bleeding. Secondly, in this he dissenteth
from Galen, who 11. Method. Chap. 4. though there were obstructions in the
body of thick and clammie humors: yet first he would begin the cure with
Phlebotomie.

If Auicens meaning be, when flegmatike humors overcome the blood in multitude
or abundance, that then we must first use purging; then is he greatly
deceived, for as much as he proponeth a case in which Phlebotomie should not
avail, except with those many cold humors there be also some excess of
blood, which chances very sildome or not at all. But it may seem that
Auicen has reason, namely this: that the blood being extracted; those humors
would wax more raw: and so by opening a vein, the patient is brought to a
marvelous cruditie of cold humors. This is no reason: for by Phlebotomy we
detract blood; not because of obstructions, caused of gross and cold humors,
but because blood superaboundeth. For the stopping is afterward removed with
other helps. Therefore, when obstruction concurreth with abundance of blood;
we must not extract very much blood, but keep back some, till the time of
the cure, as Galen teaches 11. Method. Chap. 14.

And thus much, of the order between Phlebotomie and Purging: whereby we see
that a strong purgative must follow bleeding: and that an easy purgation or
clister may go before.

Of the effects, that is, Of the profits and disprofits of opening a vein.
Chap. 5.
Schola Salerni, in two verses reckons up three effects of bleeding:

Exhilerat tristes, iratos placat, amantes
Ne sint amentes, Phlebotomia facit.
It swageth wrath, and cheeres the sad:
Preserues loue-sick, from being mad.
FIrst, it makes glad those that are pensive. Secondly, it appeaseth such as
are angry. Anger is especially caused through mixture of much yellow choler
with blood. And sadness, by commixture of much Melancoly with blood. And
forasmuch as both these humors, choler and Melancoly are exhausted with the
blood, these two effects must consequently follow. Thirdly, it preserves
loue-sicke persons, from madness, by drawing humors from the head to the lower
parts, and so expelling the same.

Although occasion will hereafter better serve to show the causes why we use
Phlebotomy: yet here now speaking of the effects, I will briefly show five
causes, for which we use to let blood, and by the which may be gathered the
profitable effects of this practice: of the which five causes; one only cause
is the direct, the other four are indirect.

The direct cause of bleeding is euacuation of the blood. But forasmuch as
blood is good for nature, therefore Phlebotomy must be used ^duissdly: that the
same blood only may be expelled, which is unprofitable and hurtful to nature.
Blood, as you have partly heard, is made unprofitable to nature two ways:
either when it does not thoroughly keep the proper quality that it cannot so
nourish as it did before when it was good: or when in quantity it so
increases, that it either presses down the powers of the body, or stuffeth
and stops both the veins and the arteries: In these two cases, bleeding is
good, as one of the direct euacuating helps. Yet in these cases bleeding is
not to be used indifferently, but with this difference: in abundance of blood,
much may be detracted: In little plenty, small euacuation serves. Hereupon
Galen writes lib. 9. cap. 10. Method. Si sanguis vitiosus in corpore fuerit,
paulatim quod vitiosum est, euacuare oportet, and paulatim ad in o icem quod
salubre est, pro eo reponere. If corrupt blood be in the body, we must by
little and little take away the bad; and by little and little procure in the
place thereof, that which is good: which way of curing or amending of corrupt
blood, the Phisicions call in Greek Epicrasis. And to this Alexander
Tralleanus subscribeth lib. 9. ca. 2. The reason why this is not to be done at
once, is for that the powers of the body would relent and give over. And
although that which is euacuated be superfluous: yet by a sudden and thorough
mutation, it does more hurt than good. It is better therefore to empty the
body safely, and by little at once, than by making have, to dispatch both the
disease and the party diseased.

And here it appears, how much they abuse Phlebotomy which detract the ill
blood so long, til the good also begin to come: whereas it may fall out, that
all the blood will flow forth of the body, before that the good will appear.
It behooves therefore the euacuatio^ to be little. And (as Gaelen councelleth
in this case) before the opening of a vein, to use Epicrasis. i. to give the
patient such meat, as may cause good blood; that good blood may still come in
place of the bad: and then a little after, more blood may be taken. This
therefore is called the direct bleeding, because it is don of it self, to
euacuate that which by opening a vein ought in deed to be withdrawn: namely,
multitude of humors and of blood, of blood principally; and of humors
secondarily: in as much as they are mingled with the blod. The other are called
indirect causes: and are used only to revoke or call back the violent force of
humors to the contrary part, or to turn the flux of them aside another way.

The first indirect cause is, for the greatness of a disease, or for vehement
inflammation of an impostume: for in apostumatio^s of great heat, in hot
fevers, and in vehement griefs, there is not found a more excellent remedy
than opening of a vein.

The second indirect cause is, to allure the matter to the place of euacuation.
Therefore in stopping of Terms or Hemorroids, the vein Saphena is to be
opened. Fulness coming by suppression of Terms is to be euacuated by the
legs from the knee to the anckle, whether we cut a vein, or use scarifying,
or launcing: for veins opened in the arms of weomen, revoke and draw upward
their natural purging.

The third indirect cause is, that the humors may be turned to some other
place, contrary or opposite to the place, unto the which they flow of their own
accord. Therefore in immoderat flux of Terms, we open the Basilica vein, that
is the inward vein of the arm, which is also called Hepatitis; that the
matter being called to a contrary place, may be turned from his flux.

The fourth indirect cause is, that some part of the matter being taken away by
bleeding; nature may the more easily ouercom, the rest: For the virtue of the
body being weaker, then that it can rule such abundance of humors, we take
away by bleeding some portion of them, least thorough impotencie and debilitie
of nature, the same humors should flow to the weaker members, and there breed
apostumations, and swellings contrary to nature. But of this more shall be
spoken at large in the proper place thereof, namely in the Chapter of reuulsion
and deriuation of plucking back, and turning aside of the blood and of humors.

Touching the utility of bleeding: great is the profit thereof: For Galen
reports that therewith he has often cured fevers: and that it is boldly to be
taken in hand when necessity requires it. Therefore we may worthily blame
those, which in our time, contrary to Galens judgment, and against reason and
al experience, speak evil of this profitable practice.

First, it sharpeneth the sight, making the same more clear: the reason
thereof is, for that it diminishes those humors which thorough their fumes,
hinder the clearnes of the eyes: so that consequently the sight thereby is
sharpened.

Secondly, it purges the brain, and sharpeneth the wit, by the foresaid
reason.

Thirdly, it heateth the marrow, wasting those superfluous humors, by whose
commixture and flowing the marrow in the bones waxes cold.

Fourthly, it purifieth all the senses, taking away those fumes and
euaporations, which ascend up to the head, and there trouble the senses.

Fifthly, it purges the bowels and entrails: The reason is, because nature
governing the body, being disburdened of that blood which was (as it were) an
oppression to nature, and grieved her (as it were) with some heavy burden: does
now with ease concoct and overcome raw and rude humors detained in the bowels.

Sixthly, it stays vomits and laskes: for it draws the humors from the
inward parts, to the outward parts. Whereunto Auicen agrees writing thus,
Phlebotomia propteriae quod ad diuersum trahit, naturam secundum plurimum
retinet. Phlebotomy, because it draws to the contrary part, therefore
commonly it reteineth nature. In which place it is to be understood that in
fluxes of the womb, the vein of the Arm is to be taken, which presently
helps: But if you do otherwise, that is, take the vein in the foot, or
leg, it profits nothing. Sometime it chances that the belly by opening of
a vein is more flowing than before, and that especially chances two ways:
first because nature being disburdened by bleeding, strength is increased: so
that sometime it stirs up other euacuations, as namely by siege. The second
way is when through imbecility of the retentiue virtue, which imbecility by
opening of a vein is increased, so that the womb is more stirred and provoked.

Seauenthly, it profits against immoderate watching, for it emptieth
abundance of humors, from the which commonly diverse sharp fumes ascend up to
the head and hinder sleep.

Eighthly, it takes away heaviness, sluggishnes, and wearines of the body. For,
as has bin already said before, bleeding disburdeneth nature, which rules our
bodies of multitude of humors; which before was pressed down by them and
oppressed with them. And again, Melancholy, the chiefest cause of heaviness, is
expelled with the blood, as the dregs and grounds thereof.

Ninethly, it cures difficulty of hearing, abating abundance of humors whose
thick and slatuous spirits, carried upward into the head, stop the hearing
port and passege of the ears.

Tenthly, it helps the voice, taking away superfluous humidi^ies, which too
much moisten the artery, or vein of the voice, and speaking. From which
humidities horcenes of speech proceeds,

Eleuenthly, it refreshes and increases the powers and strength of the body:
For the body being freed from a multitude of humors, must of necessity have
the virtue and strength thereof augmented. These commodities of bleeding, are
thus set down in verse by Schola Salerni.

Lumina clarificat, sincerat Phlebotomia
Mentes and cerebrum, calidas facit esse medullas:
Viseera purgabit, stomachu^, ventremque coercet:
Puros dat sensus, dat somnum, taedia tolli^.
Auditus, vocem, vires producit and auget.
It clears sight, the wits, and brain.
It marrow warmes: does clean procure
The entrails, stomach: this is plain:
It stays lasks, makes senses pure,
It causes sleep, expels grief:
To ear, to tongue, it brings relief,
To be short, these are the commodities of Artificial bleeding: thereby the
organs of the senses are cleansed: weak bodies are made strong, if years
serve. By it are helped Repletions, Pluresies, hot tertians, frensies,
pestilences and d^uers other diseases as shall appear in the Chapter ensuing.

The only disprofit in bleeding is this, that the vital spirits thereby are
^havven forth which thing Galen witnesses in his book de Scarrificatione:
saying, to open a vein often in the year, I judge not profitable: for with much
blood the vital spirits are also exhaled: which being done too often, wastes
the whole body, making the same cold, and causing the lively operations
thereof, to wax worse and worse. To frequent bleeding therefore brings on
old age apace, and makes the same subject to many diseases, as the dropsy,
gowt, shakings, palsies, falling sickenesses, and apoplexies. For natural
heat being too much cooled, and the principal moisture diminished: the bowels
languish and crudity rules with many flegmaticke humors, which are the causes
and original of the foresaid cuils. This Schola Salerni remembers: And Auicen
in primo testefieth the same.

The best remedy to recover vital spirits decayed, is drinking of wine: for
wine among things nourishing quickly and in short time is the most principal.
By meats also vital spirits are recovered in time, but not so soon. Wherein is
to be noted, that after bleeding must be taken meat easy of digestion, of
good iuces, and of much nourishment, as potched-egs, and such like: which meat
easy of digestion must be taken moderately the first and second day after
bleeding, as Rhases counsels writing to Almons. lib. 7. cap. 21. For the
virtue digestive, made weak by bleeding cannot overcome as yet much meat.
Hereupon also Isaacus in his dyets writes thus: Meat to such as have bled, is
to be withdrawn and diminished; but drink to be augmented, for in respect of
the meat, drink is to be augmented; not in regard of his former use of diet:
that now he may drink more than he was accustomed: for in truth, he must
drink less than he did before bleeding: because the virtue concoctiue (as ye
have heard) is yet too weak to bear much abundance of drink. The words of
Schola Salerni touching this matter are these,

Spiritus vberiorque exit per Phlebotomiam.
Spiritus ex potu vini mox multiplicatur,
Humorumque cibo damnum lent reparatur.
Abundant spirit with blood does pass,
yet drink of wine does it restore:
By help of meat the same alas,
will hardly come as it was before.
Of Revulsion that is pulling back, and deriuation, that is, turning aside of
blood and Humors by opening of a vein. Chap. 6.
REvulsion is a provided remedy for blood flowing out of the nose or belly, or
that flows to any part like them to cause inflammation. It is called in the
Greek Antispasis: That is, a turning to the contrary way: in Latin Reuulsio,
that is, a pulling back; and as the word impotteth, so is it desined, a
drawing of the running humor into the contrary part. Nothing can more speedely
keep back the force of a Flux than this practice. Now for to understand
which is the contrary part, we must note that the Mathematics call those
contraries, which be the extremities of one and the self same straight line,
which stand furthest off in a straight proceeding or going forth of the self
same vein; through whose passages the humors have their course. For a vein
being opened, first the part next the wound is euacuated; and that euacuated
part draws the blood out of the further part. And forasmuch as opening of a
vein does thus euacuate (through the help of the small straight veins which
nature has ordained to allure and draw, as she has the overthwart veins to
expel:) The same opening of a vein (I say) will provoke more blood and in
shorter time from those parts where the straight veins are spread then from
the rest. Yea, if the veins draw not at all, yet the humors voluntarily will
flow in the straight course of the veins: they that are in the right parts,
follow the right members: and they that are in the left parts follow the left
members: and that course of humors is commended, which are carried straight
wise; and that discommended when they are carried crookedly and overthwart, as
declaring nature to be violated and corrupted. The names of Physical
contraries in this practice are these: before, behind, the right, the left,
upward, downewarde, within, without. Neither are these contraries in revulsion
of humors, except they be so placed in a straight course of veins. For the
left side is not contrary to a left Pluresie, or the left leg, from the knee
downewarde, called in Latin Crus, contrary to the right leg inflamed. For
herein this is a common and direct society of veins, whereby the left leg
being opened, draws from the right: But from the right side to the left no
vein comes with straight and right strings: Therefore a vein opened in the
same remoueth not a Pluresie on the right side: But either leaves the hurtful
humor in the inflamed part, or mingleth it with the pure blood, or brings a
Pluresie in the left side: which often falls out so.

For as much therefore as all our endeavors and devises must tend, by opening
of a vein, to exhaust blood abundantly and speedely from the inflamed part:
take such a vein as is straightly situated to the affected part. So in reason
we shall follow nature, and imitate Hippocrates, who in a Pluresie willed to
take the inner vein of the Arm on that side which is grieved. Neither only
does the Physician open the inner vein of the right arm in a pluresie on the
right side, but also in inflammation of the liver: and yet all the veins are
joined to the liver in fellowship. If that appear not, we may take Mediana: If
that neither appear, we go to Vena humeralis, rather than to the inner vein
of the left arm; attributing so much to those veins which are directly and
straightly scytuated. Therefore Revulsion in a straight course brings evident
and speedy help, whereas in a crooked or overthwart locution it brings none
at all.

Moreover, a large vein opened, withdraws blood plentifully and speedely
from the next places. Therefore when there is a great and vehement inflammation
of some evil Humor, abundantly concurring in some principal member, and part
of great sense and feeling: a large vein must be opened in some near place
unto it: which may abundantly and speedely euacuate from the place affected. If
the infirmity be but small, a lesser vein may be chosen, and in a place
further distant, to euacuate a less quantity, and at more leisure. Revulsion
in this sort, not only stays the Flux, but also exhausteth first from the
affected member the rotten and ill blood, before it deal with the good blood
of the other parts and members of the body, and then all fear is removed of
any new Flux to ensue. For when the part affect ed shall be disburdened more
than the other, through great euacuation lately made, very hardly in reason,
can the same be grieved with another Flux of humors, except we go on with a
fresh intemperate order of living. And again, the members far distant
(covetous as it were) because of their great want: will not suffer the blood in
them contained, to flow to the others. Neither will the member affected (except
there remain in the same great dolor and heat) allure or suck any thing from
them, being now but weak and consequently not requiring great nourishment.

The opinion therefore of the Arabians concerning opening of a vein must
needs be false: Who suppose that in a Pluresie a vein opened on the same
side does increase the force of the Flux. Affirming also that for the
plenitude (if it be much) lest the Flux should increase, the same is to be
taken from the lower vein of the foot. After this that the Revulsion must be
made from the inner vein of the contrary arm. Last of all, that the relics
and remainder is to be euacuated out of the same side. What discretion I pray
you is this? so often to vex the sick Patient, whom we may cure at one time:
For blood abundantly taken out of the side affected, draws plenty as it were
at the well head, freeing that part from inflammation without suspicion ^
orfeare of any new Flux. Euacuation made from the overthwart veins, only
abateth superfluity of blood and humors, with small quantity of the corrupt
blood, and less ease to the pained part: Or else the corrupted blood removed
from the affected member, is mingled in the veyns with the good blood, and so
the evil that was to be remedied, is made worse. When a vein is opened in a
right and straight course (e directo as they call it) it both euacuateth,
pulls the humor back, and turns it aside. And as a slow and continual
running, does most safely pull back from the furthest parts, and remove a
flux that might possibly ensue: So also the blood being turned into a long
tract, as it were of a new way, by little and little with Revulsion: it turns
from the old course, without offending the natural powers any thing at all.

Now that this Reuulsion, or calling back of flowing humors to the contrary
part: may be practiced with the greater profit; I am to give here
advertisement, that four conditions are therein to be respected, as Auicen
sets down in quarta primi cap. 1. First we are to consider the diversity of
the member, and still to draw to the contrary part, as from the right part to
the left, from the lower member to the hyer, from before to behind, etc.

This consideration to be very needful, Hyppocrates proves by experience:
For 5. Aphoris. Apho. 68. he writes that pain in the binder part of the
head, is cured by opening a vein in the forehead: which Hyppocrates practiced
to auert the matter as Galen notes in the Commentary. This auersion or turning
to the contrary is done either according to longitude, that is, above and
below: or latitude, that is, from the right to the left, or according to the
altitude, that is, before and behind.

The second condition is to have a care of the fellowship and community of the
veyns* therefore in abundant flux of terms, we pull back, applying the
Cupping-glasses to the Paps. Which Hyppocrates most learnedly witnesses 5.
Aphoris. Aphor. 50. For there is a kind of Affinite between the veins of the
womb and the veins of the Paps.

Thirdly, care must be had of the rightnes and straightnes of the veins, which
care being had great profit insueth.

The fourth condition is, to observe the farnes of the distance. But of these,
two conditions especially are to be observed. That is to say, the fellowship of
the veins, with their rectitude or rightnes: And therefore Hyppocrates
counsels to open the inner vein of the same side or arm, and not of the
contrary arm. Which also Galen affirms, li. de cura. ratio. sanguinis
missione ca. 16. whatsoever Auicen would otherwise, in tertia primi. Therefore
they are to be blamed that in a Pluresie of the right side, open a vein in the
left* as Galen teaches, lib. artis medic. cap. 95.

There are three ways of auersio^ or turning away and a side of humors called
Deriuatio. One by repelling things that beat back the matter, another by
things reuelling, which pull the matter clean away, and draw it forth to the
contrary part. And the third way is, by things transmissiue, which send the
matter from one member to another. So Diuersio, or Deriuatio is as it were
genus to Revulsion. If therefore (as ye have heard) there be great
inflammation, or a sudden and hasty Flux of humors; open a great vein of the
same side might, e d^recto, as these rermeit. I say, a great or large vein
because if the euacuation be in the greater vessels, it is done with the more
speed: As Galen says, libri primi arti^ medic. cap. 95. And it is said
rightly in the same side, for this is the counsel of Galen, lib. 13. Metho.
cap. 11. But if the Flux of humors be slow, and not hasty as in the other, or
that a vein must be opened for preservation only: A vein further off may be
taken according to the judgment and discretion of the Physician, as ye have
partly heard before.

But forasmuch as the Liver is the Fountain and original of all the veins,
and Phlebotomy cuacuateth blood, it seems that blood should never be abated,
either for Euacuation or Revulsion, unless the vein of the right arm be
taken, which chiefly does euacuate and pull back from the fountain, that is,
the Liver. Which also may be proved by that notable man Hyppocrates his
authority, affirming our whole body to be Conspirabile: That is, of one
agreement, and of a common and general accord together, one member with
another, and Confluxibile, that is, always running together, and so allied,
that each part thereof suffers with the other.

This being so, it seems that rectitude is not at all to be regarded in
Revulsion. For what vein soever we open because of the consent of the whole
body with the parts the like profit will ensue.

For the Solution hereof we make answer: that as it is now said, it would
follow in effect. But that nature a provident dame has so placed the midriffe,
as it divides the stomach from the lower bowels, and has separated the right
parts from the left: Lest one part being hurt, the other part should also
suddenly perish. And this is the cause that therefore rather the right with
right, than with the left; and the left with the left, rather than the right,
do accord together, and mutually suffer one with the other. And therefore also
Hyppacrates said well. Sanguinis reuulsionem secundum rectitudinem (cat a Ixin)
fieri debere. That Revultion of blood must be done according unto rectitude.
If therefore a vein be thus opened we shall soon see the apparent vtility,
if we do otherwise or the contrary, it profits nothing.

This is seen even by natural eruptions of blood: For if in swelling of the
Spleen, nature expel blood out of the right Nosthrill, or in swelling of the
Liver from the left Nosthrill, no help insueth. But if the bleeding be
according to rectitude called in Greek Cata Ixin, as speniticke persons, out
of the left Nosthrill: and in diseases of the Liver out of the right evident
profit will appear. The contrary profits not, but often hurts diminishing
the strength of the body without help to the disease, as says Galen de
curand. rati. per sang. missio. cap. 15. Wherefore as it were following
nature, in that which she does well, and those things which come voluntarily,
and of themselves, and are yet good and profitable to stop bleeding at the
nose from the left Nosthrill, we apply cuppingglasses to the left
Hypocondrium: which is the compass of the side near the breast and Paps, and
if from the right Nosthril, to the right Hypocondrium. The rectitude therefore
as an especial matter is to be observed in Revulsion: yea, and more account
is to be made thereof, than of the differences of the members, neither are the
parts of the body to be judged contrary each to other, except one be opposite
to the other according to rectitude.

An Objection.
It seems that Galen respected not the location of grieved members, according
to this rectitude, lib. 13. Method. cap. 5. Whereas the hand being ill
affected, he scarrified Crura the thighs, and one of the thighs ill affected he
scarrified the other thigh that was well.

The Solution.
Galen in his practice observed rectitude of members. For there is a common and
direct society of the veins, so that the opening of the left thigh: which
draws blood from the right, for both the thighs receive blood from the
hollow vein called Vena caua.

Auicen in 4. primi. 1. delivers two rules not to be neglected in Revulsions.
First that if in the member, from which we will pull back, there be great
pain: the pain must be assuaged, before we make Revulsion. Otherwise, the
dolor greatly attracting, and we also drawing back with Revulsion, the
humors to some other part, there would be too great a contention, and an
excessive moving of the matter: whereby the body might receive much hurt.

His second rule is, that when we pull back, the passage must not be thwart
any principal member. If any ambiguity arise concerning this rule, because
Hyppocrates is said before, in ach of the hinder part of the head, to open a
vein in the forepart: we answer, that the same passage was not made upon a
principal member, to wit, the brain. We also affirm that the passage may be
by a veyn of a principal member, though not by the substance of the said
member: for the flux does not abide, or rest in the brain, as in termino, in
his bound or limit. Therefore I coun^eil ag ine and again, because many are
killed through the unskillfulness of practisioners in this point: at some of
whose deaths I have my seife been present. In a pleurisy of the right side,
open a vein in the right arm: otherwise, the heart being situate in the
middle, between the right side and the left: the passage should be upon a
principal member, namely the heart. And hitherto chiefeiy of Revulsion.

Parocheteusis in Greek: Deriuatio in Latin: in English, Deriuation, or
pulling aside; is defined, a drawing of the flowing humor to the next part. It
is done by opening that vain which is found in the very member affected; and
whereby also sometime that member received nourishment. But now the ill iuce
flowing, and that vein opened, the grieved part is presently disburthened.

This practice is profitably used after reuulsion: In the beginning of
inflammation, when the matter is now in fluxio^ and moving, blood is to be
withdrawn from some far distant place, according to rectitude: after that,
euacuation must be made from the affected part, when the matter is come
thither* and there settleth and abides: then detract blood, either from the
affected part, or very near unto it, and this is called Parocheteusis,
deriuatio. We make deriuation from the member affected, when the same is not
any noble or principal member: and this is done two ways: either manifestly
and sensibly by scarification or boxing: or immanifestly by euaporation, as
Galen shows, lib. Artis Med. cap. 95. But that deduction which is made to the
next parts, is most properly called Deriuation. Thus to stay blood at the
mouth, we bring it to the near parts, and provoke bleeding at the nose. So
in weomen in fluxes of Hemorroids, we stay them in provoking Menstrua. i.
their natural Terms. Thus in inflammations of the mouth, we bring them to
the nose. So in angina, opening the veins in the hands, and the veins under
the tongue, we make deriuation to the next place. So in affectes of the guts,
we do not provoke to stole, but draw it to the next parts: provoking either
urine or swet. So in diseases of the raines, we provoke not urine, but drawing
the matter to the next members, namely the bowels, we provoke to stool.

But here a^yseth a doubt: how the raines can be purged by siege, seeing
there is no sensible way or passage known, from the raines thither.

To answer this, we have but authorities, as namely of Galen and Hippocra.
Galen affirming in his seventh book de Method. Chap. 13. that the raines,
bladder, and bounch of the Liver called Gibba Ierinoris are purged by siege.
And experience shows, that when the belly is solluble and laxatiue; the
urine is the less. Hippo. saying in like manner 4. Aphorism. Aphorismo vltimo:
That much v^ine made by night, shows little siege.

You have heard before, that deriuasion is used after revulsion, when the force
of the flux is stayed, when the heat of the inflammation is laid, when there
is no fear or suspicion of any other inflammation likely to ensue: and also
when the humor is yet moist and liquide in the member, from whence it may
return. But if you suppose the humor to be stuffed in the member, and is not
able to return: which often times falls out in continual old
inflammations, in which hard apostumated relics remain. In this case, when
ye open the vein, use no deriuation but fomentation or bathinges, and
emplasters to digest and mollesie. Wherewith, if the humor cannot be dissolved,
the member not being principal; neither any great pain there felt: the
affected place may be launced, and the humor brought forth: specially, if the
same be contagious, that it infect and hurt the members adjacent: which
practice, though properly it cannot be called deriuation, yet it may stand in
steed thereof.

Whether purgation by siege or inward medicine received, cannot, or may not,
euacuate the blood. And thereasons answered that are brought for proof
thereof. Chap. 7.
IT seems, that an inward receipt sufficiently euacuating blood by siege, may
be both found, and used by Isaacus: who in 1. vi^tici, in the Chapter of
Cephalaea passio, affirms: Quae prosunt Cholerae, prosunt and sangaini: Those
things that are good for choler, are good for blood. But it is known that we
have euacuating receipts for choler: therefore by the foresaid authority, the
same are also good and profitable to euacuate blood. Secondly, there are
receites to euacuate other humors, as choler, flewme, and Melancoly: therefore
also there are to euacuate blood, which is the principal humor.

Thirdly, Auicen in 2. affirms: Pulpam evacuare sanguinem; that the pulpe of
Coloquintidae euacuateth the blood. Fourthly, Haly supra tegni, affirms, that
Galen caused one to be hanged that gave a receipt to euacuate blood: therefore
there was such a receipt then, and may be now. The contrary to these objections
is set down by Galon, that no receipt euacuateth the blood or humor i^ the
veins, but Phlebotomy only.

A second question here may be moved, whether if there be such a receipt found,
the same may be administered or not? It seems that it may, because when other
humors offend, we euacuate them by medicine: therefore it seems, we may so
do, when blood offends. The contrary to this is set down by Haly aforesaid,
and warranted by Galens authority, who caused one to be hanged for so doing.

For solution hereof, we are to understand, that although a medicine euacuating
blood may be found out, yet the same may not be used. The reason is: for that
such a medicine specially or rather altogether respecting the blood, would
neither euacuate nor attract blood, as the other humors are euacuated with
their own proper and peculiar receipts* Yea, if it happen that it do euacuate
blood, as Pulpa Colocynthidis does, according to Auicen: without doubt, it
euacuateth tha^ blood which should be still retained for the good health of
man's body. Serapio says, that the impropriate or improper humor of a receipt,
is sooner thereby euacuated then the proper humor: whereof he renders a
reason, namely, that the proper humor to a rec^it, is the best beloved to the
receipt. Whereby (says he) it comes to pass, that the improper humor is
sooner for saken of nature, than the proper. The humor improper is quickly
drawn to the receipt, and thereby sooner expelled: whereas the humor called
proper (which the medicine most properly respects) is, as it were, the most
beloved friend, and as it were, the most natural child to the euacuating
receipt, and therefore is still rather retained than expelled. By this reason o^
Serapio, forasmuch as blood is natures darling, and more helping than the other
humors, which are but superfluities in respect of the blood. If there were a
receipt euacuating and respecting blood, and that the same were administered the
other humors would be attracted and cuacuated before the blood, and so great
hurt ensue to the body. And if it were so that only blood offended (which is
not perhaps altogether true) yet neither should the blo^ alone be euacuated, as
now it has bin declared. Again, according to the Philosopher 4. de
Animalibus, we are to make choice of the right way, and not to seek crooked
ways. Now opening a vein is the righter and safer way to euacuate blood, than
medicine: for Phlebotomy euacuateth all humors at once, and principally the
blood which most of all abounds in the veins: and this thing, medicine
cannot do. Again, euacuation is done for two causes: either for to remove the
abundance of the humor, or to take away the corrupted quality of the homor.
So euacuation of blood is practiced, either because it abounds in quantity,
or offends in quality. If we open a vein because blood abounds in
quantity: then in like sort there is also abundance of other humors. For
abunda^ceof blood comes through good nutriment, causing bonu^ Chymu^. i. good
^uce proceeding of meat digested: which does not only bring repletion of blood,
but also of other humors as helpers unto blood. Therefore when blood thus
abounds in quantity with other humors, it is better to euacuat them by
Phlebotomie than by receipt. If euacuatio^ of blood be made for that it
corrupts in the veins, then by reason it corrupts the other humors also*
seeing blood is more abounding in quantity than are the other humors: whereupon
Galen says, that in the fever Sinocha, there is corruption of all the humors,
and in all the veins, and therefore blood is never to be euacuated without the
other humors together. Now other humors may superfluously abound and be
corrupted in quality, without the blood, and so consequently may be euacuated
without blood by inward medicine: so that it is natural for the other humors
in this sort to be euacuated, and unnatural so to euacuate blood: which was
the cause that Haly upon Galens authority affirmed, that Galen caused one to
be hanged, which euacuated blood by inward receipt.

To the former objections therefore we answer thus: Isaac his saying; Quod
prodest Choleri prodest sanguini, is to be understood not of euacuating
medicines, but of altering receipts, as thus: those things that are profitable
to alter choler, and to extinguish the amity thereof, they work the same
effect in alteration of the blood. Or we may understand it of euacuation, and
expound it thus: Those things which are profitable to euacuate choler, are
profitable to mundefie the blood; because, by euacuation of choler, blood is
mundefied and cleansed.

To the second we answer, that this argument (Blood is naught and offends as
do other humors, therefore it is good to euacuate the same by medicine, as
other homors offending are euacuated) this is a fallax of the consequent, or
rather figurae dictionis: for it follows not, that if blood offend it must be
euacuated by inward medicine; because the same may better and more safely be
done otherwise; namely by Phlebotomie: and this may serve for answer to the
second doubt before moved in like manner.

To the third may be said, that Pulpa being forcible, it greatly debilitateth
the member: and therefore, when blood is superfluous, it loses and euacuateth
the same, and lets the blood contained in the member, to pass away; but it
does not attract the blood: and this is very pernicious to the body of man.

The answer to the fourth, is plain in the premises. Where note, that
although it have bin declared in this Chapter, that blood is not to be
euacuated by siege, as other humors are: which flux of blood that way, we
rather account a disease, than a remedy: as in Dysenteria and such like: yet
this notwithstanding we do not deny, but medicines may be very profitably
given, and received to mundifie and to purge the blood.

Of the impediments or lets of Phlebotomy, and of the causes requiring and
furthering the same. Chap. 8.
THere are certain things which put off bleeding for a while, and other things
which altogether hinder and forbid this practice: whereof, the first is
indigestion of the meat received: as when a man has eaten much ouer-night, and
in the morning feels himself pained thereby: feeling still, as it were the
sent and savor of the meat which he has eaten remaining still in his stomach,
whereby the cruditie plainly appears. In this case, (except urgent necessity
otherwise require) we must forbear bleeding til the digestion be
accomplished; that is, til the raw humors be concoct, and also the excrements
descended. The reason why cruditie and rawnes of humors through too much
ingorging of meat stays bleeding for the time; may be gathered out of Auicen.
1. Doctri. 6. cap. 3. for that there are three things which attract matter unto
them: that is emptines of the place, heat of the members, the habit and state
of the whole body. If therefore (the body thus affected) we chance to open
a vein, the blood untimely would be drawn by the veins: first, part of this
cruditie of humors: and the veins being destitute of their proper and
convenient nourishment, would draw unto them that which is not as yet
concocted in the stomach and Liver: which unconcocted matter sent abroad to the
other members of the body, would not easily be amended. For (as Galen says)
the third dgestion does not remedy the faults of the second: nor the second*
the curls of the first: Si magnum sit peccatum (as he says) if the evil be
great. So that now, if by this means the matter be turned into the members;
there must, in the mean season, of necessity be abundance of excrementes
remaining in the body, as the occasion of sicknesses: and so at length
sicknesses may ensue. Yea, it is far better (as it seems to Galen, lib. de
Curand. ratio per sanguinis missionem cap. 6. altogether to abstain from
bleeding in intemperate drinkers and gluttonous persons: as from such as cannot
be cured either by purging or bleeding. For by their intemperate life, they
gather in short time again, great abundance of raw and unconcocted humors.
With such it is not best to deal: for to what purpose is it, to have the
excellent use of this practice, by these men's intemperancie defaced among the
common people, which has been so present a help to diverse? See Galen. lib.
11: cap. 9. Method. Meden.

The second matter, putting off this practice for a time, are the excrementes
of the belly. Therefore, first exonerate the womb before bleeding, if it be
not soluble of it self, with a Clister of decoction of Mallows, putting
thereto Oil and Salt, or with a Suppositorie, or with eating a little Cassia
fistula.

The third impediment, is some other voluntary euacuation, that may be at
that present time: as in flux of Terms in weomen, and in flux of the
Hemorroids: whereunto Gaelen likewise consents, lib. 9. Cap. 5. Method.
Meden. in these words: If (says he) in time of bleeding, it happen, that the
Terms do flow; or that the vein called Haemorrhois be open, if the force of
the same flux seem sufficient, so that it alone may euacuate that which thou
requirest: thou shall leave the matter wholly to nature: if not, then thou
may detract so much blood, till by both ways, that be brought to pass,
which thou would have done. But this is not always to be followed: for in
euacuation to turn away the matter, as in immoderate flux of Terms, or in
the flux of the Hemorroides we practice bleeding, as was before showed in the
Chapter of Reuulsion.

Again, concerning these voluntary eruptions of blood, when we intend to
open a vein, if the eruption have been much, then stay from further
euacuation. But if it little or nothing have withdrawn the matter of the
disease, it debarreth us not of further bleeding. Therefore, if the disease and
present necessity require it, and that the powers of nature have not been
damnified by that voluntary eruption, we may speedily open a vein, as in a
strong plurisie. If there have been much sweating, vomiting or great sieges, we
are not to let blood: but if these slake, and that the natural powers are a
little in time recreated, then we may very safely bleed. For those being but
accidents, and not removing the cause of the disease, can not serve in steed of
bleeding. So in a hot agew, if the womb be laxatiue, and that there happpen
Lienteria (which is a flux of the stomach, when the meat and drink runs
from a man, as he took it, utterly without concoction or alteration, rising of
great weakness of the stomach, specially in the power retentiue, which is not
able to keep the meat till nature in full time may concoct it, through
immoderate drinking of cold water: from which, some cannot refrain in hot
fevers: This (I say) does not hinder bleeding, but because thereby natures
strength is enfeebled, the same considered, the bleeding must be the less, if
voluntary eruption of blood remove the matter of the disease, or in some
reason bring ease to the patient; according to discretion, commit the matter to
nature alone. If not, take away some blood, that through natures work and the
Physicians practice together, the cure may be accomplished. Those things which
nature of her self can finish, meddle not withal; but help her with Art, in
that which she begins, and cannot of her self make an end: therefore I
said, in a Plurisie, in a continual fever, if blood abundantly flow from the
belly, hemorroids, or nose: so that the quantie of the euacuation be just, and
the patient thereby eased, let no further blood. If blood come but smally from
the foresaid, and that the sickness still continue vehement: that which
wants is to be done by opening a vein: yea, although the patient be a woman
in childbed: yea, and therefore sometime in a bloody flux, a purgation is
given, that the same which comes forth but softly and slowly, by reason of
the unprepared passages; may flow more abundantly by a more convenient course.

The fourth impediment, is the age of the party that is to bleed, either being
too old or too young. Old folk are not to be let blood, because there is in them
little good blood, and much ill blood: bleeding from them takes away the good,
and leaves the bad behind. Old men after 70 years are not to be let blood,
except they be of a strong constitution of body, and that the vehemence of the
disease require the same. But if in these years, the powers of the body be
weak, and that blood abounds not: bleeding is not to be in them practiced:
for as Galen says, in men of these years, there is little good blood; but of
raw humors great plenty: so that opening of a vein, sends forth the good;
but the ill blod gathered together in the chief veins, in the Liver, and that
part called Mesenterion, which is the double skin that fasteneth the bowels to
the back: or rather, the branches of the vein called Porta, which convey the
iuce of the meat concocted from the stomach to the Liver, it draws forth into
the whole body. Consider therefore, the strength of the body, the vehemency of
the disease: for not only the number of years, but the constitution also of
the body is to be marked. There are of 60 years that are not to bleed, being
weak old men. The age fit for bleeding is at as florens, that is: after some,
the 17 year of age: after some 9. after some 10. after others 14. or 13.

Before the 13 year, after the most approved writers of our time, we are not
to let blood, except those youths have broad veins: be of sanguine
complexion, and that the disease be dangerous and require this practice
necessarily. In these cases we may open a vein, if the veins well appear:
or we may diminish blood, by scarifying the legs or arms. Schola Salerni
says: Denus septenus vix Phlebotomon petit annus.

The seventeenth year of age scarce good:
To put in proof letting of blood.
Children then before they come to 13. or 14. years, are not to bleed, except
some great dangerous disease of necessity require it at nine or ten years:
the reason is, because their flesh and skin is yet but tender, and easy to
breath through, as Galen witnesses lib. 9. cap. 17. Method. Medendi, in these
words: Pueroru^ substantia omniu^facile digeritur ac dissipatur, propterea quod
est omnium humidissima, est omnium minime frigida. The substance or flesh of
children, is most easy of all resolved or separated, because it is most moist,
and less cold than other fleshie substances. It needs therefore no
euacuation, having naturally of itself, how to be purged, calore extraneo by a
foreign, outward and strange kind of heat. And again Galen says, lib, 11.
of the same work Cap. 14 speaking of Synochus a kind of fever: Si in puerum
incidat, qui 14. annum non hactenus attigit, mitti illi sanguis non debet,
propterea quod tantillis, cum praesertim calidi ac humidi sint, plurimum
corporis substantiae quotidie defluat ac digeratur: it a quod ex incidenda
vena, moliendum nobis fuerat, id vltro nobis ex curati corporis natura
praestatur. i. If this fever happen to a child yet not 14 years of age; he is
not to be let blood, because such young ones, being of a hot and moist
constitution, have much of their bodily substance daily dissolved. So that the
same which we go about to bring to pass by opening a vein, is done already
to our hands by the constitution of the Patient. Of this imp e diment, namely,
the age, beside old men and boys, are also meant decrepits, and very Infants.
Auicen remembers in quarta primi, cap. 20. this matter writing almost in this
manner: Thou ought to beware of opening a vein in a complexion too cold,
in a Country too cold, in time of extreme pain in a member, after resolutiue
bathinges, after carnal copulation, in young age under fourteen, and in old
age, except thou have great confidence in the solidity of the Muscles, in the
largenes and fulness of the veins, and rednes of the color: such either young
or old, boldly may be let blood. Yet those that are young of fourteen year
old, must bleed orderly by little and little at once, and at each time more
than before: and all this did Auicen take out of Galen. So that although in
Phlebotomy we are chiefly to consider these three things, that is to say, the
danger of the disease, the age and natural strength of the party: yet the age
is sometime not wayed when the strength of nature serves, either in old or
young. Wherefore Galen lib. de curand. ratione per sanguinis missionem cap. 13.
wills to let blood young sanguine children, and old sanguine men, without
consideration of age, if the disease be vehement and dangerous, if the body be
sufficiently strong, and that there also be vehemence of the Pulsies. In these
cases Necessitas non habet legem; Necessity has no Law. So in Spain they let
children blood of three years old and less, and Auenzoar writes, that he
let his son blood at three years of age, and so preserved him from death,
lib. septi. cap. tertio Collecta. These limits of years in this point
Hyppocrates did not set down. Galen appointed them from fourteen, to
seauentie.

Moved by the foresaid reasons; Rhases, in old decrepite age, nothing at all
fearing the danger of exhausting the natural heat, that remains in the body
with the blood, (whereof notwithstanding often proceeds the hazard of life
by indiscreet bleeding) by opening a vein in decrepite persons, did then
help, and did great good in grievous Pluresies and Perypleumonias. And
concerning young folk, this we find true by experience, that in the fifth or
sixth years of their age, by opening a vein, Pluresies, inward inflammations,
and other grievous diseases are cured.

Yea, we see by the very course of Nature, that Children and sucking Infantes,
often plentifully bleed at the nose without any hurt of body, or any diminishing
of their natural strength.

The age of Childhood has naturally her strength and bodily forces, why
therefore may we not euacuate blood: according to the proportion of the same?
Especially, when the child is plentifully fed, having also large veins, and
is filled with good concocted blood. Again, if it be granted that the forces
of nature are impaired by bleeding: whether is it better for the child to
peri^h through plenitude and abundance of humors? or to free him of his disease
by abating that abundance, though the strength of nature be thereby a little
hindered: Therefore sometime the necessity of bleeding is great, even in
childred; as in Pluresies, inward inflammations, and continual fevers. There
is therefore no age in my poor judgment, but may abide some measure of
Euacuation by bleeding if the child be past fourteen years of age: Yet
consideration is to be had of what constitution he is, whether his bodily
substance be fat or lean, thick or thin, gross or slender, hard or soft, of
much blood or of little: In the first we may proceed to open a vein* in the
other not: and here we most carefully remember, that in children because of
their hot and moist temperature, less blood must be taken, than the plenitude
seems to require.

The fifth impediment is an ill disposition of the stomach incident to some men,
more than other some, in whom chollerick humors flow to the mouth of their
stomachs, and makes them apt to chollericke vomits, although before they have
neither accustomed, nor had any desire to vomit. In thesemen, bleeding is to
be forborne, because thereby the troubled humors flow to the mouth of the
stomach as to the accustomed place, and because the stomach cannot resist so
great a Flux of humors, being partly weak of it self, and more weakened
through their coming. Hereof diverse great discommodities grow to the body,
yea this is the very cause, that some fall down and faint in bleeding. For the
chollericke humors flowing to the stomach, bite and nip the same, and so per
Simpathia through a certain kind of compassion that is between the stomach,
the heart, and the brain: it causes Syncope, that is, sowning. Wherefore
Galen lib. 12. Method. cap. 3. Durst neither purge, nor let those blood, which
have the mouth of their stomach very sensible, tender, weak and abounding
with bitter choler: and which persons also abounding with the same when they
bleed, in the very beginning, long before full euacuation be made, often fall
down and faint: by reason of the foresaid choler, and crudity of humors. And
this is also the counsel of Galen lib. de curand. ratio. per sanguin. missio.
cap. 1. and of Auicen in quarta primi cap. 20. Ye may perceive the mouth of the
stomach to be very sensible, (says Auicen) when ye cannot swallowe down
sharp and bitter things without hurt. Weakness of the stomach is known, by
loss of Apetite to meat and drink. Abundance of bitter choler is showed, by
bitterness of the mouth, by subversion of the stomach long time connnuing, and
by often vomiting up of choler. These signs and tokens discried in any
patitient, do dehort from opening a vein: Yea, this ill disposition of the
stomach: brings not only Sincope, but also sometime present death. As Galen
witnesses lib. 9. cap. 5. Meden. And Auicen in the former cited place.

The sixth, is weakness of the natural forces* Of which there is a threefold
condition, for they are either firm, or weak, or between both. The forces of
nature being but weak they cannot endure Phlebotomy, so forcible an
euacuation. As Galen 2. Aphorismo. Aphorism. encipienti. In quo morbo, etc. and
4. Simplicis medecinae witnesses. This is one of the principal considerations
that are to be regarded in opening a vein, for either we must dehort from
it, if natures forces serve not, or encourage to proceed it, if they will
serve unto it. For it stands with great reason, that bleeding must greatly
infeeble, and put them in danger, that are already weak of nature. Yea it often
falls out, that diverse being let blood, carrying very weak bodies; can never
again recover their former and pristinate strength, as Galen lib. de curand.
ratio per sang. missio. ca. 6. and li. 11. Method. meden. cap. 14. witnesses.
If the body be strong, and that urgent necessiity so require, we may boldly
let blood. If necessity do not urge, bleed not at all, or very little. If upon
great necessity in this case much blood must be taken, the body being feeble
and not able to abide it, we are to euacuate now a little and then a little.
Yea, I give here again advise, especially to regard this consideration. For
many times when the age, disease, and time require this kind of euacuation, and
the natural strength cannot brook it, there insueth Sincope, that is,
sowning: In the which case we must reiterate bleeding, as has been said, or
else stay it, putting the finger on the wound; which stay the Grecians used,
and called Apphasis.

The seventh stay or let is, the habit and constitution of the body, wherein
we are to regard the whitenes or blackenes, leannes or fatnes, thicknes or
thinnes, of the bodies that are to bleed. Thin, white, lean and soft bodies
are not to bleed; because many superfluities are resolved from such bodies,
which being to them sufficient, they need not any other euacuation. This does
Galen affirm lib. 9. Metho. Medend. fleshy bodies, firm, and thick, are
subject nothing so much to dissipation of superfluities, and therefore may
better abide bleeding: as for fat and gross bodies, though they be also
less subject to wasting and dissipation of humors than other are; yet they
hardly tollerat Phlebotomy, because they have but small veins, and they being
emptied by bleeding, the fat of the body wringeth, and as it were presses them
down. So that it is greatly to be feared, lest by such oppression, the heat of
nature be quite extinguished. In this point of the habit of the body, we are
also to consider, the capablenes of the veyns, which being great and swollen,
may better be opened than the narrow and small little veyns. Again, we are also
here to regard, the natural disposition of the humors. For hot and thin humors
are flowing and quickly dispersed. Thick and cold humors are not so: and
because gross and thick fat bodies, have lesser veins, and lesser blood than
lean men, and that in such persons, the very fat of their bodies often presses
down the veyns: so suffocating and choking natural heat: therefore we see by
experience, that oftentimes these corpulent fat men die a sudden death.

Whereupon also Hyppocrates, 2. Aphoris. Aphoris. 44. supposed that gross men
die sooner, and more suddenly than lean persons. This I my self observed,
certain years past, by the death of a Gentleman of good credit, in this
shiere of Kent, one Master Weldon Esquiere, and ofthe Greencloth: Who died
very suddenly being a very fat Gentleman at a parish called great Pecham.

The eighth impediment is, the cold temperature of the Patient, or the coldness
of the complexion. For the bodily constitution being already cold, by
bleeding, of force must be made more cold, Whereby frigiditie ofthe body daily
increases. And as Isaac says in Vrinis. Sanguis est fundamentum caloris
naturalis, in quo calor naturalis confortatur. Blood is the foundation of
natural heat, whereby natural heat is strengthened. Therefore Phlebotomy
(euacuating blood) diminishes the natural heat, and consequently brings a
dangerous coldne^ to the whole body. The foundation of inward warmth (namely
blood) being diminished, inward heat decays, and the body still by little
and little waxes more cold. And this is testefied by Galen, lib. de curanda
ratio per sanguin* missio. cap. 6. Yet when the sick is of a melancholy
constitution, and is grieved with much Repletion, or that Melancholy has much
blood mixed with it: in this case he may bleed. And again, a hot and a moist
constitution of body, having also the bodily substance consisting of found,
whole, and massy members: which by reason of inward heat is daily much
dissolved; tollerateth not so plentiful euacuation, as other complexions.
Where by the way ye are to note that in Physic, that body which abounds
with much humors in the veins, is most properly called Corpus humidum, and may
best of all away with euacuatio^ by bleeding.

The ninth is rawnes, slownes, and clammines of the humors: In which case we
are to forbear bleeding. For otherwise crudity of humors will be increased.
After Galen 12. Method. Medend. cap. 2. And this is the cause, why in long
continuing maladies bleeding is not used according to Auicen: for if it were,
there would follow Crudity of Humors; Debility of Natural virtue;
Prolongation of the disease, with fear never to be cured.

And therefore again, as the same Auicen says further, in diseases daily and
continual, called Morte Chronici; Purgation must go before bleeding, and not
bleeding first: although we are to use them both. Whereof look before. Chap.
4.

Of crudity of humors there are two special causes, the first is the excessive
multitude of humors in the body, choking the inward natural hear, by reason
of whose weakness, and suffocation, nature not being able to overcome those
humors, crudi^^es must needs i^^ue in the body. Bu^ in the case Phlebotomy may
be used* And Galen lib. 2. cap. de Hydroposi ^aith, that bleeding he pet^^in
the (...) of a dropsy which is caused thro^gh abundance of menstruous blood or
of abundance of hemorroids. The reason is, for that although these humors
abound in the body: yet bleeding stays the flux of them both: of that that
is of the menstruous blood, and also of the Hemorroids. This also Trallianus;
affi^meth, lib. 9. cap. 2. In the cure of Anasarca: which is a ^inde of
dropsy, in these words. Omnium curatio a vacuatione incipiendaest,sed Ascitis
quidem dicti, aut Timpaniae a solapurgatione, cus autem Arasarca nome^i est, ea
vena sertionem int^rdum ordum requirit, vt qui ^x sanguine frigidonascitut. The
cure of all dropsies must begin at eu cuation. But that kind of dropsy called
Ascitis or a Timpany, must begin at purging only. That dropsy (called
Anasarca) sometime equireth opening of a vein, as proceeding of cold blood.

This he faith not that this Anasarca requires any further coldness to be
added, but because the withdrawing of abundance of humors in this case,
disburdeneth nature, and makes her the more able to overcome the same
Repletion, being somewhat lessened in quantity by bleeding. It is not therefore
repugnant, but very agreeable to reason, in this case, to use Phlebotomy. For
we see by daily experience, that a small fire is put out by laying on too much
wood at once, or such wood as is green, and that then it burns when the
wood is removed which hindered the burning thereof. Even so is inward heat
of the body choked with multitude of humors, and the same is again
refreshed, when some portion of them is withdrawn.

The second cause of crudity of humors, is the debility of the inward natural
heat, which happens in men of cold Complexions, in men that have been long
sick and in old folk: in these bleeding is not used, because blood being
taken away from them, which is the restorer and maintainer of the inward
natural heat (as ye heard before out of Isaacus) consequently the body must
wax cold, and crudity of humors increase. Blood therefore must remain in these
persons, to concoct and overcome the humors in the body.

And therefore very well says Auicen, Non quotiescunque videris signa
Repletionis, est facio^d^ Phlebotomia: That is, Phlebotomy is not alw^ies
presently to be practiced, whenever we see signs of Repletion, as namely,
when there is fulness of raw humors in the body, and this does Galen also
affirm, lib. 12. Method. Medend.

The tenth impediment is the unfit disposition of the Air, when the same is
too hot, too cold, too dry, or too moist. Also when the same is not clear, but
troubled. And therefore under the star called Canis, in the canicular or
dog d^ies, when thereis excessive heat and drith, it is good to refrain
bleeding: Except great necessity do urge it. So likewise in seasons too moist
and too cold, as in the winter in a state of the Air temperately hot, as when
the wind is south, or southeast, we may bleed temperarately and sparingly.

In a more cold state of the Air, as when the North-winde blows, or
North-west wind; we must bleed more sparingly than before. In a right
temperate and mild state of the heavens, we may bleed plentifully; especially
the Air not being greatly disquieted, with great force of tempestious weather.

And here may be made a profitable collation in this practice: by folding up
together as it were in one: three impediments here specified. The state of the
Country being co^de, the time of the year being cold, the present constitution
of the Air being cold. All which three are outward causes, and ^oyne in this
third point: which is common to them all three: that is, the Country, the Air,
and season of the year, compass about every Patient. Therefore in a cold
Country and in winter, and when the Northwind blows; open no vein. If in a
cold Country and in winter the wind blow South, and that so necessity require,
we may proceed with this practice; so in a hot Country, and in summer, the
wind blowing at the South: bleed not, If necessity in summer require
bleeding, open a vein when the North Wind tempereth the immoderate heat of
the season. For surely these outward causes, though obscurely, and without any
great perceiving* yet they do either keep in, or disperse abroad and
extenuate, the substance both of inward heat and also of the inward humors.
And as in a temperature or complexion hot and moist, Phlebotomy is used best:
and not to be used in complexions hot and dry, or complexions cold and dry. So
when the season is hot and moist, as in the spring we may bleed safely. But not
so, in a season hot and dry, as is the summer, or very cold, as is the winter.

The eleventh let is some great inflammation, or extreme ach and pain, as
appears by Galen and Auicen, who both forbid bleeding in hot inflamed fevers,
and in apostumations of great pain. In these cases the opening of a vein does
cause much business, and agitation of humors in the body. Bleeding on the one
side, drawing and emptying humors: the inflammation and ach on the other side,
striving there against, and attracting humors thither. For all pain, if it be
much and all heat, which concurreth with pain, attracteth and hinders the
flux of humors. Whereby it comes to pass, that by bleeding in this case,
the inflammation is thereby increased, and nature more infeebled, and the same
most chiefly when the bleeding has been temperate, and done according to Art.
But in the foresaid cases: if the blood be withdrawn in great quantity, even
till the Patient give over and faint: it profits very much for, thereby the
abundance of boiling blood in great inflammations is expelled, and the inflamed
member is cooled: so that in vehement pains, opening a vein is a present
help: keeping back the flux of blood, which otherwise would have recourse to
the pained place. And here it is not to be forgotten, that sometime the
expulsive virtue, making have to expel the cause of the grief, causes
thereby sometime an inflamma ^on.

The reason is, for that the expulsive virtue, having done no good at the
first, and (...) more venemently than before, to expe^^ that matter which
causes annoyance, and does therewithal wring out for^ibly some blood out of
the upper parts or members, into the lower afflicted part: as Galen ^heweth at
large lib. 23. cap. 3. Method. Medend. And therefore to keep back the said
inflammation, bleeding greatly profits as ye have heard before Cap. 6. And
this is the intent and meaning of Galen, where he says: In ardentissimis
febribus, si vsque ad animi defectionem, sanguis mittatur, statim totius
corporis habitus refrigeratur, and febris extinguitur. In extreme hot feue^s,
if we bleed even to giving over and sowning: presently the state o^ the whole
body is cooled, and so the fever is extinguished.

In vehement p^ines and grieses therefore, there is no better remedy found,
than ^o ^et blou^, even ti^l the Pa^^ent overcome* Read more hereof in Galen,
lib. 9. Method* Med. cap. 4. l^b. de cura^d R^t^* sa^g. M^ssionem, capit.
vndecim. Fuchlium, libr. secund* sectione. quint. cap. quart. and sext.
institutionum Medic.

The twelfth impediment is the extreme coldness of the Region, a Country which
being cold cannot tolerate so large an Euacuation, as is this kind that we
now presently handle. The reason is, for that the body being before
sufficiently cooled through the cold temperament of the place, must needs
wax more cold, when the natural heat is drawn forth with the blood.
Moreover a country too hot, cannot admit this practice, because in such a place
extremity ofheate draw eth from the body much inward heat of nature, dissoluing
of it self, and dispersing the natural forces and humors of the body, and
therefore in hot Countries, the natural powers are lessened: and there is
less blood in the veyns, which is the reason that also in extreme hot
countries, the bleeding must be none at all, or very little* A country somewhat
colder and moister than this now specified, keeps in the humors and inward
heat: dissoluing very little thereof Therefore men in such countries, may
bleed more abundantly. The contrary to this happens in extreme cold countries,
situated far Northward. For the blood congeled through extreme cold, will not
give place to euacua^io^. And again, if the inward members should be deprived
of their natural and inward heat; they were greatly in danger to perish with
extremity of outward cold. Look more of this before in the tenth impediment.

The thirteenth hinderance, is the time or season of the year, which is a
matter also in letting blood to be considered: as namely, whether it be too
hot a season, as in Summer: or too cold a season, as in VVinter: specially
when it is frost and snow. For to what purpose is it, when the body is
already sufficiently cooled, through the cold season of the year, to make it
more cold by bleeding. And for hot seasons, if the heat be extreme: those
that bleed in them, oftentimes die by sowning or fainting called Sincope, or
resolutio: for extreme heat enuironing the patient, does overcome the vital
spirits, which come forth with the blood; drying and weakening the state of
the whole body. Therefore in seasons extremely note, it is a point of wisdom
to forbear bleeding: which thing Galen teaches, lib. 11, c^p. 4* Method.
Medend. in these words: Et omnino quidem non mittes in tempore aestai is, and
regione aestuosa, and caeli statn calido and sicco. Thou shall not at all let
blood in Summer time, in an hot country, and in an hot and dry state of the
air: as under the dog-starre, and from mid July to mid September; or rather to
mid August. By Galens words we may perceive, that there is the like reason of
the country, and of the time of the year concerning the heat and coldness of
them both. But to put practisioners in ^i^de, that these rules are not always
p^eci^ely to be observed: I give advertisement still, as I have done in other
the like cases before; that in this circumstance of the extreme cold, or the
extreme heat: either of the time, or of the country: that it does not quite
exclude bleeding at all time, even in cases of mere necessiti^: but only thus
far; that these cannot admit so large euacuation by bleeding, as their
contraries may. The Spring therefore (being the most temperate time of the
year, when the forces natural, and humors themselves most abound) is the
best time to open a vein, to avoid future maladies. The next convenient
season is Autumn or Harvest. And of the Spring, the beginning thereof to be
best, Hippo sets down 7. Aphorism. Aphoris. 54. But hereof look more
hereafter in his p^oper p^^ce, and before in the tenth impediment.

The fourteenth let of Phlebotomy is former bathings or hot washings:
especially resolutiue bathes: Which as Galen witnesses in his book of the
Utility of respira^ion Cap. 7. do so forciblie euacuate the spirits from the
whole body, that it stays opening a vein. And again Hippocra. writes in
his second book Aphoris. 51. That it is very perilous, much and upon the
sudden presently one after another, by diverse eu^cuations, to empty the body.

The fifteenth, is a disposition to vomit: of what cause so ever the same
proceeds. For in this cause of lothsomnes of stomach, if we let blood, the
veins by bleeding exhausted do soon draw unto them that wicked and loathsome
matter, which lies in and about the stomach: whereof look more in the fifth
impediment.

The sixteenth impediment, may be custom, or a former order oflife: wherein
we are to consider, to what meats we have been most accustomed: what
excrementes are still retained in the body, contr^rie to former wont. For too
much former rep^etion of the body with meat and (...) bleeding, as appears
in the first impediment. But if there have been before a moderate mean
observed in eating and drinking, wherewith the body has been safely
nourished: then we may boldly b^eed. If it be otherwise; then forbear. Ye^,
from this point also is taken a sure note of the quantity ofblod that must be
extracted. For those that have bin acustomed to be let b^od, may bleed more in
quantity than they that have not bin accustomed to bleed. In this impediment,
moreover, consideration must be had, whether Hemorroids or Terms, are
restreined, contrary to former custom. Or whether we still use our
accustomed exercises or no. But although diverse matters herein are to be
regarded: yet in custom princicipally, these three are to be marked: The
precedent order of diet: the kind of life, that we have spent before: and
former euacuations. Those that have lived sparingly, either by their own
ordinary prescription, or by occasion of sickness; are to bleed less. Those
that have lived more frankly, may bleed more plentifully. He that has been
already let blood, so that the natural powers be not thereby too much
enfeebled, may, as I now said, better abide to bleed, than they that never were
let blood. For this is a general rule: Things accustomed, yea, if they be
evil things, are the less grievous; whereby is confuted the opinion of the
vulgar sort: who greatly commend the first opening of a vein, as a matter
greatly healthful: and discommend all the other bleedings, making their
reconing of this in their most extremities: that though they were never let
blood before: yet now they will send for the Phlebotomer, as their last refuge.

The seventeenth impediment is, carnal copulation: presently after which, the
opening of a vein is also forbidden, because Venus so lately embraced, has
thrown down and weakened the powers of the body, and warmed the same more than
was convenient. How the powers of man's body are loosened and enfeebled through
venerious acts: Galen most excellently declares, lib. 1. de Semine. cap. 25.
saying: In the time of carnal copulation, the stones or genitors, draw forth
of the veins all such seedie humor as is contained in them; which is not much
in quantities and that which is the same, is admixed with the blood in the
likeness of dew: and this to do, is the office of the Testicles. So that first
by the genitors having more strength than the veins; the seedie moisture is
violently drawn from them. And again, the veins draw the same from the
members next unto them: These parts again exhaust from those next unto them
in like sort: so that this extraction cease not, till it have gone through
every part or member of man's body: by reason whereof, all the bodily parts are
deprived of their proper nourishment: and always that part which is perfectly
and thoroughly euacuated, violently takes from that which is next adjacent, and
has more plenty of seedie moisture to be extracted. This (I say) being done
always, and all parts mutually participating among themselves: necessarily
all the receptories, and parts of the whole body must be euacuated, till the
strongest of all the parts be filled. And further, it comes to pass, not
only that the seedie moisture is drawn from the parts of the body through
carnal copulation; but also the vital spirits pass out of the arteries with
the same. And therefore it is no ^^arucile, if such as use lechery
immoderatly, become weak, both these being taken from the body, that is to
say, the seedie moisture, and the vital spirit. Whereunto may be added the
pleasure of Venus, which of it self, is able to unloose the vital fir^itie of
the body. Yea, it is known that some have dyed of too much pleasure in the
act. Marsilius Ficinus in his book de Sanitate tuenda. Cap. 7. confirms in
these words, a^l that has been hitherto said. Venus (says he) if it do but
little exceed the powers natural of the body, presently it exhausteth the
spirits, and specially those that are most sub^ile. Also, it enfeebleth the
brain, weakneth the stomach and hart-strings: yea, there cannot be a more
hurtful thing to the wit and memory. Why did Hippo. judge Coitum to be like
the falling sickness: but because it wounds the mind, which is diui^e and
heavenly. The immoderate use of ust is so hurtful, that as Auicen says in
his boode de Animalibus: If but a little seed issue forth more than nature
can afoorde; it offends more, than if fou^tietimes so much blood had
proceed^d. And therefore, not without some good ground, d^d the ancient
w^iters immagine the nine Muses, and Minerua her self to be vi gi^s* Re^d mo^e
hereof in Galen, Chap. 86. Artis Medicinae. Pauli Aegnieta, lib. 1. Chap. 35.
In Aetius, lib. 3. Chap. 8.

The seuen^eenth impediment, is long continuance of a disease, wherewith the
strength of the body being wearied, a long tract of time, the same cannot now
tollera^e b^eeding. And forasmuch as now the body is more than inongh
enfeebled and brought low, thorough a long continuing and languishing
sickness: by bleeding we may more easily quite extinguish the patient, than
remedy the disease. Galen de Curand. ratio per sanguia. missio. Chap. 20: And
Auicen confirm the same, giving adui^e to forbear opening of a vein in
bodies which have endured long griefs, except corruption of blood move unto
it. In which case sometime blood may be detracted from persons that have
continued sick of long time. And Fuchsius councelleth saying: People in
consumption: o^de folk: weomen with chi^de: and young chi^d^en, are not lightly
to bleed.

The nineteenth impediment, is small quantity of humors being in the body:
for a good consideration is to be had, how the humors offend in the body in
quantity or in quality: Whether there be many or few humors in the pacient.
And therefore sometime upon this ground, we open a vein in weomen with child,
if there be abundance of blood, sufficient both for the mother and the infant
in the womb, if the bodily strength be firm, and that the greatness of the
disease in them so require it. But hereof more at large I mean to write in
another place. And ag^ine, beside the quantity: the diversity of nature in
humors is also a profitable consideration in this practice. For even according
to the variety of humors, the patient is often either to be let blood, or not
lette^ blood: which Galen seems to witness, li. 4. de Sanita tuend. saying:
Some humors come to perfect nutriment before the blood: some are as it were,
half concocted: some altogether raw and undigested: Some are but little
different from the form of blood: some are wholly changed into blood: some
very little, some more, some very much. When humors are a very little, as it
were, from the nature of blood, as not yet turned into the same: or when they
have a very little exceeded further than the nature of blood: we may
confidently open a vein. When the same is more than a very little, either
the one way or the other, on this side or beyond* we are to deal herein more
considerately. If the humors want much of, or exceed much beyond the nature of
blond; we are altogether to forbear bleeding.

The twentieth let: after the small quantity of the other humors, may be the
quantity of the blood: which the wise Physician in this practice will most
wisely regard. As for example: if there be little good blood in the body, and
abundance of other humors: we are to make stay from opening a vein. If any
of the other three humors be but little in quantity, and the blood abundant; we
may boldly let blood. Yea, by diligent observation the Phlebotomer shall easily
perceive, what hurtful humor may be withdrawn with the blood: and therefore,
if there be many cholerike humors in the body of man, and yet not mixed with the
blood: or that there be many flegmatike and raw humors, and but little blood;
by no means is a vein to be opened. This does Anicen forbid in quarta primi.
Cap. 20. If the blood be good and little, and that there be in the same body
many ill humors also: bleeding takes away the good, and leaves the bad
behind. And a little after he adds: that the Physician is diligently to
beware, lest by unskillful bleeding in these cases, he bring the patient (after
he has extracted the blood, (the ill humors still remaining) to an excessive
heat of choleric humors, or too much cruditie of cold and undigested humors.
And although (as ye have heard before) Phlebotomy does equally euacuate all
humors. Yet because now so little blood is in the veins, whereof a little
portion is withdrawn by bleeding: it follows that but a little blood, and
less than before, remains now in the veins with the other humors: and that
there is great plenty of the other humors: forasmuch as they come not out so
redily, when a vein is opened, as the blood does: and therefore, by a
necessary consequent, blood being gone: which was, as it were, a bridle to
other humors: choler must excessiuely boil, and phlegm become more cold and
undigested. VVhereupon also I gather, that those have done ill, and very
unskillfully, which have reproved Auicen of error in this place, seeing he is
rather very highly to be commended: then upon every small and light occasion
to be reprehended.

Finally, we are to forbear letting of blood after continual vomitings,
hunger, great watchings, extreme labors, and after all such things, as
immoderately (...) body, drying and dissoluing the (...) thereof: as Rhases
notes, lib. 7. (...) Almonsorem. Touching the causes* (...) ring Phlebotomie,
they may soon be gathered of their contraries, by those impediments here
specified. And in the fifth Chapter before, ye have heard both the direct and
indirect causes, which may move to let blood: Unto the which place I refer
the studious reader, at this time, concluding this Chapter with the verses of
Schola Salerni: wherein are set down most of the impediments here spoken of:

Frigida natura, and frigens regio, dolor ingens,
Balnea, post co^tum* minor aetas atque senilis,
Morbus prolixus, repletio potus and escae.
Si fragilis vel subtilis, sensus stomachi sit,
and fastiditi tibi non sunt Phlebotomandi.
Complexion cold, the country so,
Great grief, bathings, and veneric*
Too young, too old, long sickness to:
Stomach sick, and fastiditie:
Cannot abide Phlebotomy.
diligen^ (...) ding (...) persons as are me^te or unmeet to be ^^r he loud.
Chap. 9.
IN this Chapter I will be but brief, because I was prolixe in the other
before, from whence many things concerning this point, may be very well, and
with great profit taken. Neither determined ^ at the first, to have made hereof
a distinct Chapter: but that in certain Latin writers I found the like done
before: whom I thought good to imitate. First, therefore this practice is best
for delicate, idle, and corpulent persons, which use to feed plentifully on the
best nourishing meats, without taking any great pain, as Auicen witnesses in
prim.

Secondly, for such as have abundance of blood; which is known by many
infallible signs, and specially by thickness of urine: For abundance of blood
makes the urine thick, as abundance of yellow choler makes the same thin.

Thirdly, for such as abound with Melancholy, having in their bodies, much
natural Melancoly running with the blood, because blood is not thoroughly
purified from it in the Liver. And therefore in this case Phlebotomy must go
before purging, and not contrane, as has been aforesaid.

And here is to be noted, that Melancholy is two-folde. One kind is natural:
another kind is not natural. Natural Melancoly is the refuse of blood: And
when the same abounds, it runs about in the body with the blood: and to
euacuate it, a vein must be opened: and so this kind of Melancholy passes
with the blood, because blood and the refuse thereof, that is natural
Melancholy, comes of one and the self same temperate heat. And when
euacuation is thus done, a purgative may be used. But let purgation succeed
Phlebotomie after some space, namely, when the concoction is finished.

Fourthly, bleeding is much profitable to those in whom is to be feared some
extraordinary heat, shortly to follow: or some extraordinary boiling, either
of blood or of humors, or some other perturbation of body, through too much
abundance of these. Such persons as fear or feel any of these things, are
presently to have a vein opened. Where note, that this rule yet often deceives
diverse practisioners: For when their pacients do feel any heat or
calefaction, presently they judge it some ebullition of humors, and so let them
blood: whereas the same may come through heat and inflammation of yellow
choler: in which case it is so far off by bleeding, that the heat and
ebullition should be allayed, that they are the rather thereby increased and
stirred up. For bleeding (as has been told you before) provoke the humors
to run through out the whole body, with the greater violence. In such a case,
therefore opening of a vein should not be used; except the same heat and
ebullition came altogether of abundance of humors: which is known through
abundance of sweat; chiefly that sweat which is in the morning. For some do
not sweat, but when they have need of euacuation.

Fifthly, it is to be practiced on them also especially, whose bodily powers are
firm and strong: and that are of a sanguine complexion, that is hot and
moist: and not cold and dry. Rhazes, lib. 7. ad Almonso. Chap. 21. says:
Corpora quae venas habent amplas, and conspicuas, quaeque hirsuta sunt, and
color inter rubrum fuscunqne medio, adolescentum nimirum, iuuenum, and senum
non decrepitorum, Phlebotomiae presidia magis tollerare possunt: pueris vero
and infirmis vena secanda non est, nisi maxima incumbente necessitate. i. Such
bodies as have large and manifest veins, that are hairie, and of color
between red and brown: specially of stripplings, young men and old men, not
decrepites: may most safely away with the help of bleeding. But we are not
to open a veinein children, and weak folk, except great necessity so require.

Sixthly, this practice is with great heed to be used: or rather not at all to
be used after the pain of the cholicke, or rather immoderat perturbation of
the bowels: either above or beneath: whether it be Cholica passio, or Illiaca:
For the Humors, as ye have heard in the Chapter before, being moved by
bleeding, the chollericke humor would flow unto the stomach, and inflame the
same: nor yet after strong vomits. For the like event would follow: nor after
a laske.

These and such like extremities vehemently heating the body, and greatly
dissoluing the same: if they should concur^e with Phlebotomy: they would too
much inflame the body, excessiuely move the humors, and mightily weaken the
forces of Nature, as appears in the Chapter before. Fig. 20.

Seventhly, weomen with child, or having their terms, are not to be let blood.
In weomen with child, this is the reason: because natural heat serving for
digestion, would thereby be diminished, and so nutriment would be withheld
from the child, which were very dangerous, if the mother were far gone with
child. The fruit in the womb is nourished by the Terms: and not having whereby
to be nourished, it must of force in the womb (having life, and wanting
nourishment) die for hunger. And again being losened from the natural stays
in the womb, it falls out of the natural bounds, and so causes aborsion.
This (I say) sooner happens when the young fruit in the womb is grown much,
and the mother far gone therewith: for then it needs the more nourishment,
which it can neither find nor have, the blood being diminished. Fulchsius
writes more hereof 31. Coment. lib. 5. Aphoris*Hippon. But here I am to add:
that albeit in ancient time it was accounted perilous to let blood weomen with
child, as appears by that which has been now said: yet out of the Chapter
precedent Fig. 19. it partly appears, that this practice may be done
discreetely and safely, in weomen with child, if necessity so urge: chiefly,
if blood be abundant in them: if the body be firm and strong. I affirm that
they may bleed: But because it has been reputed dangerous; we must
carefully see that we take not from them much blood. To take a little after the
fourth or fifth month of conception hurts not. Yea, experience proves,
that women thereby are made merry and light, whereas before they were very
melancholy, feeling always about them an unaccustomed heaviness: yea, through
a little bleeding they are enabled with the more facility, to bear their
burden to the due and just time of their deliverance. Again, some women being
with child require twice to bleed: that is to say, when they are half gone,
and in the beginning of the eighth month; but hereof take great heed, except
the woman greatly abound with blood. I have seen says Guinterus a woman with
child, that has been let blood three times, in the second, the fifth and
eighth month: because she was very sanguine, and had experience once or twice
before, of aborsion the third month, if she had not bled the second month.
In the other months the fifth and eighth she was in danger of suffocation,
except she had bled again. When women are brought a bed, they must not
bleed, except their second birth be suppressed, or a Fever molest them: In
the which cases also, carefully consider in the Patient, her natural strength.
Those that have their terms naturally, according to the due course of nature,
and the course of the month: are not to be let blood, except in immoderate
Fluxes, to draw back the matter. When they break forth naturally, the whole
matter is to be let alone to nature.

Eighthly, bleeding is not good for such persons as are bound, and have the
excrements retained. For as ye heard in the eighth Chapter, Fig. 2. The veins
being emptied, they attract matter from the next members, and they attract
from the stomach the moystnes of the excrements, whereby they become more
dried and baked, bring diverse ways annoyance to the body. In which case the
womb by Art is to be made solluble, as appears in the place now cited.

Finally a vein may and is to be opened, without hurt or danger, whenever
we feel our selves to be heavy, lumpish, and stopped or stuffed in our
bodies; first considering the quantity and quality of the fullness: which we
may know and discern, by certain tokens, whether it be Plenitudo quo ad
vasa, or quo ad vires, as was showed in the first Chapter, the more heavy and
drowsy a man feels him self to be; so much the more it appears to be
that fullness, which is quo ad vires: But if he feel the former stuffing in
his body increased, than is it that plenitude Quo ad vasa. And thus much to
know the quantity of the Repletion.

The quality of the fullness is known, partly by the colors, partly by those
things which are very nearly joined to the nature of the humors: But of these
signs sufficient has been spoken before in the first Chapter.

In these cases of Repletion, if the strength of the body shall be answerable,
we are to open a vein: for as much as bleeding is the chiefest remedy to
abate fullness. But if the stuffing and fullness of the body be greatly
grievous, and the state of the body not answerable: it is not always necessary
to let blood, As Galen notes, lib. de Curand. ratio. per sanguinis missio. And
again, Phlebotomy is not only profitable when any of the foresaid fulnesses
grieve and oppress us: But also (as has been said) in cases without any
fullness: As in the beginning of an inflammation, which comes either of a
blow, ache, pain, or weakness of the member. For pain (as was said)
draws the blood unto it, and of the weakness of the bodily parts, cause an
inflammation without fullness.

Also when the disease is great and vehement, we let blood, although no fulness
appear in the Patient: yet always having a regard to the age and strength of
the party, as Hyppocrates sets down in these words, 4. Vict. acutorum, 17.
In acutis morbis sanguinem de^rahes, ^ivehemens morbus videatur, florueritque
aegrotanti aet as, and virium affuerit robur. That is, in sharp disease thou
shall let blood if the sickness seem great, if the age of the Patient permit,
and that there be sufficiency of natural strength. And thus much of the
persons that are to bleed, concerning the which point, more may be easily
coniectured and collected of the studious Practitioner, from the Chapters
precedent.

What corruption of Humors bleeding remoueth from the veins. Chap. 10.
IT has been said, that bleeding generally, is the present and proper help,
when Humors offend in the veyns either in quantity or in quality. It has been
already declared, that some humors it euacuateth, other some it reuoketh and
pulls back, which is called revulsion, whereof has been spoken in a
distinct Chapter by it self. Now order requires in some brief sort to show
what corruption of humors generally, bleeding euacuateth from the veins. The
defect of humors in the veins is either Plethora, or Cacochymia, as was showed
in the first Chapter. The only and peculiar remedy of Plethora, or abundance
of blood, is the opening of a vein. And forasmuch as fulness of blood is of two
sorts: One of fulness simple and pure, consisting of a like proportion of the
best humors: and the other vnpure and compounded, taking part with Cacochymia:
that is, abundance of humors corrupted in the veins. Therefore it is to be
marked, that in both these Repletions, the opening of a veyn greatly profits.
When so ever therefore the muscles are sound, whole, and full, the veins
large, great, and swelling, menacing thereby imminent danger to the members:
presently blood must be detracted. After which eu cuation these effects will
ensue: mitigation of pains caused by overmuch retching of the veins: ease
unto the body, which seems as it were now disburdened of a grievous and
weighty ponderousnes: a more nimblenes to all exercise and labor than was
before: an increase and refreshing of the natural heat: an opening of the
straight passages and pores of the members. Finally, there will follow a happy
repulse of diverse imminent dangers and diseases, whereunto by all probability
in short time the body would have been brought.

For it is greatly tobee feared, lest the veins ouerreatched with fullness of
blood, should open and break, and through that means cause inflammation, or
lest some general obstruction should arise, which might keep back the
inward heat, and so utterly choke up the bodily forces whereby might be
caused some vehement hot fever, or as it often happens a sudden death of the
party.

Now from these dangers, can no man be safely and speedely freed, either by
purging, exercise or abstinence, but by bleeding, and with the blood is this
Repletion most safely abated.

That fulness which is vnpure and compounded, is not so safely cured by
bleeding, and yet the more nigh that it comes in likeness to that Repletion
which is simple, and pure: the more confidently, and the more plentifully we
may let blood. And the more vnpure that it is, the more carefully and sparingly
ought a vein to be opened. Therefore those persons that have an il
constitution of body, and yet have their veyns abundantly filled, or that
being of a constitution, are yet repleat with corrupted meats: These I say,
are to bleed no longer, but to avoid the danger of fulness, and the impurities
remaining behind, are to be expelled by Purgation.

Hot chollericke Repletions, of all vnpure constitutions, are most safely
abated by bleeding, because bleeding in this case, not only diminishes
choler, but also cools the same mightily.

Melancholy Repletions, can nothing so well away, with this practice, because
it does not so exceed in heat, that it need at all any refrigeration or
cooling, and the flegmaticke constitution can in no case brook it, for being a
very cold complexion it quite rejects bleeding. For Phlebotomy by great
cooling, so greatly increases crudity and rawnes in the body, that it can
never or very hardly be recovered or amended.

Weakness of bodily strength, resembles this foresaid Repletion, and
therefore also by the self same reason, rejects any large euacuation. And in
truth, is not in this respect to be dealt withal, except the veins
abundantly repleate, threaten some great hurt, or that necessity so require it,
and then it must not be done all at once, but by little and little, as it has
been before declared.

Therefore in each and every fulness that is vnpure, we are to begin with
opening a veyn, for without it we cannot safely afterward purge. For a
vehement purgation especially (if bleeding have not gone before) troubling and
molesting the full body both with much heat, and by force of the attractiue
virtue: brings the Patient into greater hazard than he was before, and
therefore to conclude this point, the veins being swollen, and filled, if
moderate bleeding do no good, it can do no harm at all.

The otherfulnes quae ad vires, which cannot very easily be known by signs,
although it cannot ouerstretch or break the veins, nor overcome the inward
heat: yet because it oppresses the weak forces of nature, lest there should
ensue putrefaction or corruption of humors, it may be diminished by opening of
a vein: Leaving yet behind so much as nature may easily rule: yea, and the
same also, (because it brings no doubt of present danger) may be profitably
taken away, with spare diet or abstinence. Of corruption and putrefaction of
blood and humors in the veins without plenitude, called Cacochymia: that is,
fulness quae ad vires: There rises a great doubt, whether the same may aptly
be removed by bleeding. We answer, that to remove by bleeding a simple
corruption of humors in the veins is profitable and easy (regard being had)
both to the abundance thereof, and to the forces of nature in the Patient. For
albeit when a vein is opened, all humors issue forth equally, and that there
remain behind still as there did before one and the self same proportion of
humors: yet because now by bleeding part is abated of that burden, wherewithal
nature was before oppressed, the forces and powers natural wax not the more
feeble, but they become more strong and cheerful, so that they can bear with
the greater ease, those humors, which as yet remain still behind, and nature
her self governs them with far less trouble than before. And hereupon in
continual fevers, when there is great crudity and corruption in the veyns,
blood being often times detracted, the urine also being red, troubled, and
thick before: It appears now more clear, and shows forth evident signs
of concoction. And note (here by the way) that the Phlebotomer must be very
well exercised in those signs, which prognosticate fulness, and repletion. Yea
and ye must also know perfectly the place of each particular humor: lest after
the manner of the vnskilfuller sort, when the nose a little bleedeth, and the
urine appear somewhat red, by and by ye do let blood* Whereas blood often
times easily comes forth, not only by reason of fulness, but upon diverse
other occasions, nature her self often attempting voluntary eruptions of
blood. Hereof it comes that such persons as have (as it were) the small little
mouths of the veins called Oscula, eaten or gnawen: or that have a weak and
apostumated Liver: and that Hydropicall persons bleed often at the nose.

Also urine waxes re^ and bloody, by the fretting of the stone in the Raines.
Urine waxes yeallow in that kind of yeallow iandies which is simple in
Scirrho hepalis, That is in the hard part of the liver: and in that kind of
dropsy which is called Ascites: Yet in these effects we are not to let blood,
for Cacochymia proceeding of corruption of the bowels, is not that way cured.
Therefore the certain knowledge when a vein is to be opened necessarily, is
only gathered of those marks and tokens which manifestly declare abundance of
each humor: And hereby ye may gather, that bleeding alone speedily helps
that corruption of humors, which lies in the great veins, and only freeth the
Patient from this kind of corruption, except the same take beginning from the
bowels ill affected: and in this kind of corruption, purgation is more meet
than bleeding. And thus it app^areth in a general sort, what corruption of
humors the opening of a vein does remedy.

A particular rehersall of those diseases present, or future, which are cured
by bleding. Chap. 11.
FIrst as ye have heard, a vein is profitably opened in the two plenitudes,
nature being strong and the age convenient. In the fulness quaead vires, have
special regard that the natural forces be firm. But if in this plenitude,
raw, cold, and undigested humors be greatly gathered together in the body,
forbear; taking this as a rule, that with great abundance of raw humors, the
strength of the body cannot stand as ye have already partly heard, and as
Galen witnesses, lib. de curand. ratio. per sangui. missio. cap. 9.

Secondly, it helps diseases present, and future, and serves both in the
curatiue and preservative intention. We read that Galen in the spring time did
let blood those persons that were subject to these diseases following: to wite,
Spitting of blood: A polexies: Falling sickness: Peripneumonia: Pluresies:
Anginaes: Stoppinges of Hemorroids or Terms: Swimmings in the head: The Gowt
in the feet and in the joints. All which Auicen also sets down in quarta
primi cap. de Phlebotomia.

Thirdly, we do not only open a vein in repletion, as Menodorus falsely
supposes; but also as has been said without fulness: when we fear some
inflammation through some fall or other accidental grief. And moreover as we
have already specified, we open a vein for two purposes, sometime to
euacuate, sometime to pull back immoderate flux of humors to the contrary
part, as Galen notes lib. de Curand. ratio per sang. missio. cap. 11 and 9.
Metho. Medend. cap. 11. As to stay blood at the nose we open a vein in the
arm. For this cause Galen lib. 13. Metho. Medend* ca. 21. in Letargus which is
a drowsy and forgetful sickness, rising of impostumation, of cold putrified
fleame, especially, in the hinder part of the brain: whereby memory and reason
almost perishes, and the sensitive power is greatly hindered, causing men
commonly to forget their own names, also to shut their mouths after they have
gaped and by no means to stay from sleeping. In this disease (I say) at the
first beginning thereof, Galen willed to open a vein, albeit the disease be
cold, rather as it seems to revoke, than to euacuate the matter: or Galen so
appointed it, because fulness is always concurring with this forgetful and
drowsy disease.

Hereupon Galen 11. Meth. Meden. cap. 15. affirms it to be very healthful
to open a vein not only in continual fevers called Continentes: but in all
fevers caused and kindled of a putrifieng humor, which should not seem to be
true, especially in intermittant f^uers which leave off for a time, as are
tertian and quartan agues. Forasmuch as in these, blood offends not in the
veins: but some other humor beside blood, putrifieth without the veyns, which
by bleeding in reason cannot be euacuated. This place of Galen cannot sound to
reason or experience, except we understand Galen to give us advise to euacuate
by bleeding the matter of such intermittant fevers, as have also with the
blood, fullness, and abundance of other humors concurring: So that this may be
his meaning. Bleeding may be used in intermittant fevers, if they fortune to
have abundance of humors joined with the blood. For obstruction as Galen
shows li. 11. Meth. Meden. cap. 4. happens in rotten and putrified fevers,
sometime through abundance of humors, sometime through the clammines, grosnes
and thickenes of them. Galen therefore counsels to let blood in staying and
intermittant fevers: rather because of the abundance, than the rottennes or
putrefaction of the humor without the veins. And that this is his meaning,
appears by the words which Galen afterward uses, saying: Forasmuch as
nature ruling the body, by bleeding is lightened and disburthened of that
wherewith she was before oppressed, therefore she will with ease overcome that
which rests and remains behind, which is a (...) sign that Plethora or
fulness is also annox^d to such fevers.

Fourthly, in bleeding, we are not only to consider the disease it self, which
we determine to remedy, but also often times the cause thereof: so that
whatsoever the sickness be, if Phlebotomy may remove the cause, then also it
takes away the grief it self in the end. Hereupo^ sometime, albeit the
disease be cold, yet when the cause moves us to open a vein, we may safely
bleed without hurt. Hippo. (says Galen) shows a cure of his done on a woman
by letting her blood in the Ankle. This woman after childbirth, was not freed
ofher seconds: then a shaking came upon her. This woman I cured (says Hippo.)
by letting her blood in the Ankle, for all her shaking. Shaking is a cold
affect, and blood is hot: and they that must be heated, must not have blood
taken from them. He for all that, boldly did it: and he shows the reason. I
considered (said he) the cause, and the occasion of the cause. He knew the
cause of shaking, was abundance of blood kept back, which was a burden to
nature. The occasion of the cause was the grief of the matrix. This abundance
requiring euacuatio^, and the affected part showing the place most fit for
eu^cuation: considering both these things together, he let her blood in the
ankle, because the womb or matrix was affected. In griefs of the womb or
belly, we take the vain of the ankle, knowing by the Anotomie the communion
between the veins: for some veins communicate to some part of the body, and
others to other parts. And euacuation is to be made from such veins as have
fellowship with the member affected. For, as ye heard in the Chapter of
Revulsion: if we take that vein which communicates not with the part
affected, we hurt the whole body, and do the grief no easement. The
profitable use of this fellowship of veins apeareth especially in revulsion or
pulling back of humors, which is both well and speedily done, when this
co^munitie of veins is observed, as was there declared. But let us return to
our former purpose.

Fifthly, by opening of a vein, is cured the fever called Synochus: both that
which comes of ebullition of blod without putrefaction, and that which is
caused with putrefaction of the blood. So are also hereby cured continuing
fevers, coming of putrefaction in the greater veins. And to these diseases
reckoned up of Galen Fig. 2. we may add these that follow: Frensies, Opthalmia
parotis i. an apostumatio^ about or behind the ears: diseases of the Liver and
spleen: Nephritis. i. pains of the raines and back: inflammations of the
womb or matrix: of the privy parts: arme-holes: arms, thighs, and joints.
Finally, all inflammatio^s inward or outward, which the Greeks call Phlegmonae.
These inflammations are caused by flowing of blood to a member when a vein is
open and broken: which blood there abundantly heaped together, brings forth a
tumor or swelling. To these also are to be added: a consumption in the
beginning: vomiting of blood: bleedings at the nose, belly, or hemorroids: at
the beginning of which diseases, the opening of a vein greatly profits,
staying the force of the flux, and by revulsion, if the vein be opened at the
contrary part, calling back much of the matter from the member affected: so
that bleeding is a present help for those diseases whatsoever, which take the
beginning from too much abundance of good blood. Those sicknesses which come of
an vnpure and mixed plenitude, because they are somewhat near linked unto
these; they may also be cured by bleeding. And although the matter of these
diseases be vnpure: yet either it lies in the veins, or proceeds from the
veins. A gain, by bleeding are cured Carbuncles, felons, moist scabs, outward
rednes in the skin and such like: all these are cured by this practice.

Thus also is cured the burning ague called Causus, and all continual fevers,
whose putrefaction is contained in the greater venies. Yet sometime a
continual fever comes of an humor heaped together and inflamed about the
stomach, chiefly about the mouth of the stomach, and the flat parts of the
Liver, which fever cannot be taken away by bleeding. Neither can the cause
thereof by this practice be removed. Pure intermittant fevers, whether they be
Tertians, Quartans, or Quotidians, because the next matter and proper cause of
them is not in the greater vessels, neither flows from the veins, are not
con^eniently cured hereby. And yet sometime in these also we bleed, either
when the veins swell with immoderat fulness, so that thereby some danger at hand
may be feared: or when any accident of hot inflamed and boiling blood
persuades us thereto: as are namely beating pains of the head: tossings and
moving of the body this way and that way: excessive heat almost stragnling the
pacient. Howbeit, these many times come also of boiling choler about the inward
parts called praecordia, in the which cases, bleeding remoueth neither the
fever, nor the cause thereof: but only asswageth the vehemency of those
accidents, which are present, or shortly like to ensue.

Further, concerning particular affects cured hereby, we may adioyne, beating
pains of the head: Letargus spoken of before fig. 3 and trembling of the
heart. These with the foresaid, are not only cured hereby, when they presently
affect and afflict the patient, but happening yearly unto us: so that it is
very likely we shall be grieved with them in time to come. We may very well
prevent them by bleeding, when we have once espied plenitude to have been in
us, the causes of these infirmities. For there is one and the selfsame way of
healing common, both to maladies present and future. And those things which
are to be done when diseases are present, may likewise be attempted when the
same are but a beginning, or nigh at hand. And here is to be repeated that
which has bin already said, and cannot be too often spoken: that some time we
open a vein, not only without fullness, but even in emptiness: namely, when
some evident cause: as a bruze, ache, or heat, causes flux ofhumors, and
brings inflammation to the members: and this is done, not for any greatness,
or fear of any present grief; but for some doubt of that which is a
beginning, and as it were, at hand.

Here arises a doubt, whether it be more usual to open a vein, the disease
being now present, or future and nie at hand. The answer is, that when the
fulness is very great and dangerous, though the disease be not yet caused,
notwithstanding, without hurt the pacient may bleed plentifully, because the
blood offends nature in the abundance thereof. And hereby the Pacient is often
made safe, and escapes the danger of sicknesses approaching. But when a
disease is bred, and the forces of nature impaired or lessened, either by the
presence or long continuance thereof: just euacuation of blood, without hurt,
can by no possible means be made. Whereupon Hippo councelleth to prevent by
bleeding accustomable impediments rather then to stay their approach and
coming. Hereuppon also in that kind of fever called Ephemera, which dureth
commonly but one day, and is caused of obstruction. In the fever called
Synocris simplex, blood is abundantly withdrawn, before the matter do
putrify. Therefore this is the conclusion of this matter, that blood is let
more safely before the sickness be present and already come, the^ when in truth
it is present: and with greater profit are we to see his coming a far off, and
so beware of him, the^ to stay til he come, and the^ labor to repel him:
wherein we are to remember a pretty and common verse serving fitly to this
purpose.

Aegrius eiicitur quam non admttitur hospes.
If once a guest be enterteind,
with greater shame we him repel:
Then if at all we had not him
received with us in house to dwell.
And also this verse of Ovid.
Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur
Dum mala per long as conualaere moras. *i.
Beginnings stop, too late comes cure,
When once the mischiefs grow in ure.
Reason imputes thus much: that when sickness presently possesses any pacient,
the same requires a speedy remedy, with a greater necessity, than when as,
it has not yet invaded. Whereupon this also follows, that opening of a vein
is more necessary, when a grief is present, then when the sam e is but only
approaching. The cruelty of a present adversary urges us with a greater
necessity, than the danger of an enemy that may come, but is not yet
present. And so I conclude, that in a present disease there is a necessity. In
a disease only imminent, there is but only, in a manner, a security. For a
further instruction, to know what diseases in particular are cured by this
practice: I refer thee to a Chapter hereafter following, which declares in
particular, what vein is to be opened in each particular disease.

What voluntary eruption of blood profits (...) sickness. Chap. 12.
Blood voluntarily and of it self issues forth from the nose, the veins
called Haemorroidae, and the belly: and sometime also out of the mouth by
coughing and vomitting. From other parts of the body it comes not except
very seldom, and that against nature. But from what part soever it come, if it
bleed slowly and sparingly, and albeit the same be according to nature, yet
we are to account it unprofitable: for it nether remoueth the disease, neitheir
disswadeth us from that convenient euacuation by art, which the vehemency of
the disease requires. That voluntary flux of blood which is abundant either
in plenitude, oppressing natnre, or in that fever called Sinocha is profitale,
and often cures the same in the judgment day called dies Criticus. For in
as much as then a general evil equally (as it were) occupyeth all the veins,
from whence soever abatement of blood happen, it ceaceth these accidents of
heuines and fulness.

But in the fever Causon, and in all other continual fevers, in the which other
humors putrify in the greater veins: blood issuing forth never so
plentifully, brings not such profit; and bleeding at the nose, though it
watchinges, rauinges, headache and other such like accidents, yet very hardly it
remoueth the proper cause, and root (as it were) of the disease: except there
fall out some immoderat bleeding, even (as it were) to the dissolution of the
natural forces: which in very deed is never to be wished or desired. For
corrupt blood last of all flows out of the nose, yea and not before there
has passed great store of the good and profitable blood. And therefore in
these fevers, albeit the pacient bleed much and oftentimes, yet a vein in the
arm must be opened. Experience (I say) proves, that often out of the nose
comes good blood, both in color and substance, when vnpure and filthy blood
is drawn out of the arm.

A boundant flux of blood in these diseases, out of the Hemorroidae veins, are
out of the belly: because it flows next of all from the holow vein of the
loins: the same is to be accounted much more profitable tha^ the abouesaid.
Yet neither does this many times take away the very root of the fever, which
lies lurking in the veins next the heart. Whereupon it comes to pass, that
oftentimes we let blood in the arm, notwithstanding: yet but sparingly in flux
of terms, in women brought a bed, and freed of their seconds: lest we inflame
and kindle in them the heat of an ague. A like reason and more apparent there
is also sometime to let blood in the arm, when the hemeroids flow. For
inflammation and other diseases of those parts which are above the liver and
midriffe: are little or nothing at all eased by flux of blood from the
hemoroids or belly: Neither those that occupy the lower parts by flux of blood
from the nose. Also flux of blood out of the right nosthril helps not
affectes on the left side: nor contrary. And therefore voluntary eruptio^ of
blood without reason forbids not that bleeding which is to be done
according to art, reason and experience. Again Phlebotomy helps diseases
either of it self, or accidentally. Of it self it euacuateth or pulls back.
Accidentally, sometime it cools, drawing forth the hotter blood: sometime it
opens obstructions, yet only those which proceed of fulness, and it is
always to be used in those affectes, which it helps of it self: but not
always in those which it cures by accident. To help hot distemperature of
the Liver by bleeding, when there is in the Pacient little blood, is not the
best way, but rather use for that purpose such things as are of their own
nature cooling, and take proper remedies for hot distemperature: and thus much
for this matter.

How to know by certain^ signs the greatness of the disease, and the firmenes
of the natural forces: whereby conjecture may be made, whether the Pacient be
to be let blood or no. Chap. 13.
IN every affect, wherein bleeding avails: the same is out of hand to be
done, if the disease be vehement, and the strength of nature agreeable.
Touching the disease it is sometime so small, that it is cured alone of it
self without the help of art. And although at other times the same be very
vehement and great, yet the forces of nature not only sceme, but also are
indeed so weak, that they can not tollerat any euacuation. Yea undoubtedly
this practice would undo, dis^roy, and dissolve the whole substance of the
natural forces, for whose preservation sake (in truth) we take the cure in
hand. Therefore to know thoroughly and perfectly, how much blood is to be taken in
every disease, we must first consider how great and grievous the sickness is,
and how firm and strong the powers of nature are. Now a disease is either
already caused, and in state, or is now a beginning or proceeding to state.
Again a disease is called great and greeuons, either in regard of it self, or
of the cause thereof, which consists in the humors, or in regard of the
greuousnes of some accident. But first, it is great of his own kind and
nature. Thus an inflammation in any member is more grievous, then a simple
distemperature in the same member. And again the greatness of a disease is
judged by the great use and excellency of the member which it possesses: as if
it be any principal member, namely the heart, brain, or Liver, and it is
contraty when the grief is in a base, unnoble or no principal member. Again,
judgment touching the greatness of a disease, is to be given according to the
local placing of the members, as they stand next to the principal parts.
Therefore next the diseates of the heart, brain, and liver, are to be accounted
those of the lunges, sides, stomach, and splen: and we are otherwise to judge
of those that are in parts further off: as namely the bowels, raines, bladder
and the outward limbs consisting of bones, flesh, and sinews, called in
Latin Artus, and in all the other members, placed in the extremities of the
body. Again in this point judgment may be given by the sensiblenes or feeling
of the member wherein the grief is, if the diseased member have a quick sense,
and a lively feeling, the greater far is the danger, than if the member were
but of a blunt and dull sense.

The greatness of the cause in any disease is judged by the condition and nature
of the humor that is gathered to the part affected, and is there the continual
matter of the grief: wherein we are to consider whether the humor be good or
bad, putrified or not putrified, or of what ill quallity it is any manner of
way. And also whether the same humor be too much or too little: and if the
humor which is the cause of the sickness be wicked and corrupt, the^ we may soon
judge the grief to be great. The greatness of the antecedent cause is perceived
by the fulness or emptines of the veins, bowels, and of the whole body, and by
the purity or impurity of humors, contained in the same. We judge the greatness
of the accidents, by the intention and remission of those things which do
chance: as the increasing or diminishing of pain, thirst, appetit, watchings,
and such like: all which bring down the forces of nature, and make the Pacient
to languish.

As for example: If any ill disease, as namely an inflammation, possess the
Liver, brain, or parts next the heart, and that there be a venomed and
putrified humor, wh^^ewith the veins of the body appear to be stuffed and
filled; so that there insueth in the patient, agitation of the body, ill
appetite, thirst, pain, and watchinges: this sickness woe may esteem vehement,
in the which euacuation may do great good. And again a disease in which these
do not concur, but rather their contraries, we may judge a small infirmity,
and not requiring any euacuation. Between these are their interiected
sicknesses, of a middle sort, which are to be euacuated more or less
according to the remission or intention of the disease, and the accidents
thereof.

Now let us come to the estimation of the forces of nature, of the natural
powers some are settled, and bred in particular members: and are common, and
flowing to all parts of the body. The forces of nature bred and settled in a
member, have one and the self same essence (as it were) of the inward heat:
and they are called one nature, and are engendered (as a man might say) of the
internal spirits, and the first begotten moisture: whereunto is added (as a
matter thereunto requisite) a sound and whole substance of bodily members. The
essence of the common forces of nature, have (as it were) a threefold original
or beginning, or is ^^threefold spirit diffused and spread into the whole body.

The force called virtus animalis, the animal virtue, is diffused from the
brain, by the sinews: The vital force from the heart, by the arteries: The
natural strength from the Liver by the veins: The bodily powers that are bred
in each of these parts: the brain, the heart, and the Liver, are sustained by
those common and flowing powers of nature: so that the whole living creature,
name ly man is ruled and governed of both these virtues: Insitae and communes,
settled and common (to use as good english words as we may) to make manifest
this great point of phisicks skill. Therefore if this living creature and most
excellent creature man, be in perfect health: of necessity these powers of
nature must be sound and uncorrupted, which they will be, if their substance
consist in a just moderation, that is to say, in a just or right quantity, and
in a good temperament. And contrary wise, if the quantity or temperament of
their substance, be inuerted, changed, turned, or altered, they must needs
suffer hurt and offense, and so become weak and enfeebled: Whereby their
functions are presently hindered, the rule of all the body is disordered, and
at length there will follow even extinction of life it self. And therefore
whether the natures forces are weak or strong: may be known by their several
operations and duties. Thus raw and undigested excrementes, either by siege or
by vriyne, when either the one or the other is thin, watrish, or like unto
water, wherein flesh is washed, do show imbe^illity of natural force: so does
holding back of these excremntes, or any other function natural, that is
stayed or hindered.

We discern the vital strength to be enfebled by obscure languishing, and
small pulse* by breathing hardly and with pain, and oftener, and more quickly
tha^ was accustomed: by smalnes and faintnes of speech: so as the same only
come thereby, and not through fault of the lunges and breast; as sometime it
does, in whom notwithstanding the vital force may be sufficiently strong. The
contraries to these, declare firm strength of the vital virtue.

These things declare the animal po wers to be enfebled: tumblings and
tossings of the body, the senses offended, watchinges, rauings, and other
principal actions hindered. The contraries hereunto show the contrary, that
is, firmnes and strength of the animal virtue. By these functions then you see,
how it may be coniectured what power in nature is hurt or offended.

Again these powers are offended, or seem enfebled two ways: either because
they are outwardly oppressed, or because they languish inwardly of themselves,
and in the euacuation it helps greatly to know the one from the other: for
the forces oppressed require large euacuatio^, and the other none at al. And
the distinction of these is to be sought out of their evident causes. If
causes have gone before, which have already altered or wasted the substance of
the forces natural: then we may judge them that they are faint and
languished. If these causes have not been precedent, but that the Patient is
only troubled with an unaccustomed ponderosity: then these are but wronged and
oppressed. The evident and outward causes which alter the temperament of the
settled virtues: are burning Agues, which melt the bodily moystures, or
whatsoever else, that excessiuely heateth, cools, moysteneth, or dries, the
sound, massiue, strong, and solid parts of the body. The substance of these
parts is wasted by very long sickness, which brings the Patient into an
Atrophia that is, a kind of consumption, wherein the body consumes away with
leanness, and is not nourished albeit the sick continually eat his meat: Or
into Tabes, which is an other kind of consumption, wasting the body by long
sickness and lack of nourishment, consuming and putrifieng the Lites: drying
away the Patient, for want of natural moisture, having matter and blood mixed
together.

The threefold spirit of the flowing humor is altered, either through some
distemperature, or some poisoned quality, of the air which compasses us
about, or through the il quallity of other things, which violently break in
upon us: or through some wicked disposition of the bowels or other humors.
The heat of the air, not only of that which outwardly compasses us about,
but also that which we draw into our bodies by breathing, inflameth first the
lunges, then the heart, and all the spirits, so far till often times a fever is
kindled, and caused through the same. Through which distemperature of the
spirits, needs must the strength of the body languish and become enfeebled: yea
by this excessive heat of the air, the spirits are not only subject to
alteration of temperament, but besides they are also thereby greatly wasted and
diminished. Even so in like manner, immoderat cold outwardly, and the same
received inwardly into the body by breathing, weakneth the spirits, and inward
heat: yea and so^time altogether put out, and extinguish the same. The air
venomous and pestilent, drawn into the body with an infection quite
ouerturneth the spirits of life and ofnature: whereof ^nsu^th grievous
sicknesses to the body, no little decay of bodily strength, yea life it self is
taken away by the so daine disease, commonly called the plague.

Now much more apparently are the spirits infected with bi^ings of Scorpions,
mad dogs, and venomous beasts, than by the contagion of the Air.

Moreover they are inward and hidden causes, which do greatly alter the
spirits, and whenever any principal part of the body, is troubled with any
distemperature, upon any occasion: If the same proceed far, it must of
necessity go to the spirits there bred and engendered: And so by offending of
them will lessen the strength and virtue of nature. Also if any corruption of
humor rule in the body, the spirits are disperced, and offended by the
corruption or distemperature of the same humors. Therefore when abundance of
raw humors, passes either the whole body or the stomach: and chiefly the
mouth of the stomach, the substance both of inward heat, and of the spirits
wax cold, the Patient languisheth, yea, sometime he gives over the Ghost and
sounds. Herevppon also when hot choler burns, as it were, the inward
spirits with immoderate heat, or nippeth and pricketh the mouth of the
stomach: it is the cause of no small evils in the body of man. Sometime also
it falls out, that some one or other humor in the body is mixed, besprinckled
or bedewed, as it were, with some kind of venomous filth, as when the seedy
moisture is kept in and putrifieth: Or menstruall terms in weomen longer
retained than is their due course: or when any clodded blood remains behind,
and is not expelled: the vapor of these and such like, infecting and decaying
the spirits; brings sometime Sincope: sometime suffocation of the womb:
sometime the falling sickness, and such other mischiefs, which greatly annoy
the forces of nature. And thus diversely are the spiriets offended through
distemperature.

Again, the substance of the spirits, and natural forces is diminished,
sometime even of it self (and as a man may speak) voluntarily of his own
accord: for the substance being of it self thin and wastable, and included in
an hot thin and open body: Therefore of it self it dissolueth and vani^heth
away. Sometime the same is decayed by occasion of outward and evident causes,
as are namely these: The air which compasses us round: hot and dry,
immoderate euacuations: vehement motion: affects of the mind: pains,
watchinges, great emptines, and all unprofitable excrements: which cannot but
carry with them from the body as they pass, a great quantity or portion of the
vital spirits: seeing their substance is spread over the whole body, and also
flowing with other humidities: whereby it comes to pass, that whether the
belly be very laxitiue by nature, or by medecin: or that the urine be made
immoderately as in the infirmity called Diabete: or that matter or water go
plentifully forth of the breast, stomach, bel^y, or any great apostumation:
thereby of necessity the forces of nature must be mightily decayed. Much more
manifestly must it so fall out, when there is any great euacuation of blood, or
good humors, whether the same pas forth of a wound, the nose, hemorroids,
Piles, belly, or other place. In like manner abstinence which takes away from
the body needful nourishment, enfeebleth nature. Labor likewise and heat
disperseth the substance of the spirits by vapors and sweat: And therefore they
which live continually in labor about furnaces, and hot baths, because daily
some of their substance decays: do not commonly so abound with excrements,
as those that lead a slothful delicate and idle life.

Moreover they that live very incontinently, have also for the most part very
enfeebled bodies, able almost to abideno Physic; and by a continual decay of
seedy moystures, they have their spirits mightily consumed: whereof look before
in the 8. cap. Fig. 17. Great ach and pain works the same effect, more than
labor does. Also of passions of the mind, some suffocate the spirits and
inward heat, as namely fear and sorrow: some wast and spread them abroad,
as mirth and gladness. These are the causes, which being in exceise, do wast and
consume inward heat, the spirits of life and strength of the body: which
being so apparent as they are, may be unto us assured marks and signs, whereby
to know, whether the forces of nature have yet lost, or do still retain their
powers, virtue and strength.

Those causes which only oppress the strength of the body are inward and
hidden, and not so know en unto us, as the forsaid: and they are these:
obstructions, and immoderate abundance of humors which stop the veins and
arteries, because they are thick, gross, and slow humors: by means whereof
they keep in the spirits, and do not suffer them to be cooled, as it were, by
any kind of winnowing: whereby the use of the spirits is taken away: their
virtues are oppressed, and grievously with the inward heat offended: which
matter very often faleth out so in the Lungs, Liver, celles of the brain, in
the arteries: finally, in the very habit of the body.

Obstruction caused of too much abundance of humors, does grieve, oppress, and
sometime overcome the inward heat and spirits of life. Fulness also proceeding
from any obstruction: if the repletion be simple, or somewhat part-taking with
that called Cacochymia: it choketh bodily strength, as for example: Abundance
of blood in a wrastler: Flewine in Leucophlegmatica. i. the third kind of
dropsy: cruditie of humors in the other dropsy: abundance of choler in the
yellow Iaundies. As often therefore, as the powers of nature are descried to be
weak by the excrements: the spirits of life by the pulse, and breathing: the
animal faculty by her proper functions; and by any of the foresaid vehement
causes preceding: we may determine the spirits of nature to be empaired.
When none of these causes have gone before, and that yet the bodily strength
appears weak: then judge them to be only wronged or oppressed: Specially,
if there do concur signs of pure and simple repletion, or of great
corruption of wicked humors: the causes greeuing and oppressing the spirits of
nature being removed: presently their strength is recovered, and they come
again unto themselves, except they be beaten down with the continuance of
their oppression. Here therefore I make three steps or degrees of natural
strength weakly affected: either the same is a little thrown down, or
ouercharged, or thirdly, altogether weakened: whose particular tokens apeare by
that which has been said in the premises.

There are some which only mark the pulses as an infallible sign, to judge
the bodily strength by, which in truth, is a great mark: but yet not alone
sufficient, being both doutfull and unconstant: and also because it is troubled
with diverse outward things, is oftentimes changed. Again, euacuation too
abundant, affects not only the vital spirits, but also in like manner,
the other faculties of nature: whose decay brings death as assuredly, as if
the vital power were extinguished: and therefore in euacuation it is
requisite, as well to mark and observe the other faculties of nature, as the
vital powers. For if the pacient be sick of a vehement and continual disease,
as of Lienteria. i. a flux of the stomach, or Atrophia. i. a kind of
consumption, or Marasmus. i. the ends of the fever Hectike: let him not blood;
albeit the pulse be mighty and full. And therefore I conclude this Chapter:
affirming that we are in euacuation to consider the ablenes and strength, not
of one only, but of all the three aboue-said, running or flowing faculties of
nature. Neither to consider of these alone, but also of the settled faculties,
in which is contained the action of life.

To know by the greatness of the disease, and the strength of the natural
powers: the quantity of blood that must be withdrawn. Chap. 14.
THe knowledge of the quantity in every remedy* is the hardest matter in all
Physic, and most of all troubles the careful and wise Physician. And
although to know the quantity be but a coniecturall knowledge: yet the same
is joined with less danger, and is more secure here than the knowledge of the
quantity in a purgative receipt. The reason is, because we may stop the
blood when we will, as Galen witnesses 2. de ration. virt. in acutis Commen.
11. and lib. de curandi rat^. per sangninis missio. Chap. 12. But when areceit
is in wardly taken, the same cannot be again untaken. Neither is it in our
power, when it is once in the belly, to take away any part thereof: or, if
need be, to add unto it: Which in bleeding we may do: and therefore less
danger is in this, than in the other.

The quantity of the blood that must be extracted, is known by the strength
of the patient: and chiefly by his pulse. Therefore while he bleedeth, let the
Phiebotomer or Physician seele the Pulseis with his hand: and suffer the blood
to pass, according to the alteration of the same: especially, when any great
euacuation (as even unto Syncope) is to be made: Lest it fall out unawares, that
death it self do come in the place of sowning or fainting.

And except necessity do greatly urge, it is best and safest to abstain
from such plentiful euacuation after Galens council, lib. de Cura rat. per
sang. missionem. Chap. 12.

If at any time, the powers of nature being weak, the disease require some
plentiful bleeding: it is good to divide the same, to open a vein twice or
thrice, and at each time to detract a little blood, as ye have partly heard
before: and as it shall be showed more at large hereafter. All sickness
decays the strength of nature, and so does in like manner that euacuation,
which is used to help nature. Lest therefore it might seem a very hard
dealing in this case, more grievously to afflict one already afflicted, and
presently grieved: the matter is so to be ordered, as the substance of the
disease may be removed, the forces of nature as little damnified as may be.
Yea, it is a principal point in a skillful practisioner, so to work, that the
evil may be remedied, and the patient brought in hope of a more profitable
recovery for his health, than his former Physic has been painful unto him.
Those hurts which the natural virtues sustain, by a moderate euacuation are
but small: and these are again quieted, when the euaacuation is accomplished:
for nature now freede of those hurtful humors, wherewith she was before
pressed down, recouereth her former strength, She renueth that which was
drawn from the inward heat and spirits, and become almost the conqueror of
the disease. She ouercometh wholly at length, yea, that which remained behind:
partly by inward concoction, and partly by outward dissipation. It wise Hippo
councelled to give a small diet to the sick patient, not fearing thereby more
and more to weaken the strength of nature, which was otherwise but weak: let
us so esteem of euacuation. But as in diet, so in euacuation we must beware,
lest the virtues of nature extremely enfeebled, do quite give over, and be
altogether extinguished: in regard whereof, we are circumspectly to foresee,
how far the patient can or may endure the same. For (in truth) a just
quantity withdrawn without any great hurt, takes away and cures the
disease. And this point of the just quantity is known, by a comparison of the
disease, and of the strength of nature: for persons firm and strong may bleed
as much as the sickness requires: They that are not so strong, may bleed
less: they that are quite cast down, are not to bleed at all.

And here a profitable question may be moved: whether natural strength may so
greatly be enfeebled, that it cannot or may not away with any euacuation be it
never so little. We see many times, that in great of decayed strength, there
fall out voluntary euacuations, which do much good, and procure health. And
again, it seems, that to each diminution of strength (be the same great or
small) the quantity of the euacuation may be proportionated accordingly.
Neither is it credible, that an ounce or half an ounce ^^blod taken, can do no
great hurt to the natural virtues, albeit they be already much decayed.
These matters seem somewhat obscure: but that the question may be explaned,
and all ambiguities of ancient writers taken out of the way: we answer by
distinction: affirming, that there are three degrees of quantity in
euacuation. The first degree is, when the same euacuation is through perfect and
absolute, taking away either all, or the greatest part of the matter that
causes or continues the disease. The second degree is a profitable
euacuation, but not so perfect and absolute as the other: which takes away
only some part of the sickness, making that which remains more easy and
tolerable than it was before. The third step is so small and little an
euacuation, that the pacient thereby is not one whit eased or relieved. Now to
come to answer the former question: the natural strength is seldom so
greatly dejected, except the same be altogether ouercom and past all hope of
recovery, but that it may abide some little euacuation.

But hereof the ancient writers have made no mention at all, being, as it
were, a matter altogether unprofitable, seeing it is so little: not procuring
reilefe to the ^^cke patient, but rather bringing more danger to t^^ natural
forces air die decayed. And in fi^e, they have decreede and set down, that in
this case no euacuation should be used. Therefore, the natural powers being
firm and strong, require an absolute and perfect euacuation: The same but
mean and somewhat enfeebled; an euacuation more imperfect and yet profitable:
altogether decayed; they require none at all.

If the disease be verievehement, so that it cannot, either at all, or well be
cured without bleeding: it requires necessarily abundant euacuation: The same
but mean, and not sowehement; it requires a more moderate bleeding: but yet
the same greatly profitable, because the cure may afterward be accomplished
with the more celeritie and safety. If the disease be small, it requires
small euacuation or none at all.

Now let us make comparison of the greatness of the disease, and firmness of
the strength together. When the strength is very firm, and the disease
mean, and not very vehement: bleeding is not altogether necessary, but only
profitable, in which case, blood may be safely taken, and as much as the
disease needs. There is no fear to diminish a little the bodily forces; so
as the root of the disease may be pulled up. For they are again very
speedily and redily recovered.

When the strength is firm and the disease dangerous, replenishing the
veins with an immoderate fuldesse, as it falls out in the bodily
constitution of wrestlers, and in fevers called Synochi: a plentiful
euacuation is to be appointed, answerable to the greatness of the disease. Yea,
it profits (says Hippo to bleed even unto Syncope, If the patient may
abide it: in which place Hippocrates means not that sowning which comes of
fear or of cowardlinesse, or of sharpness of humors, pricking and provoking
the mouth of the stomach: but only that which comes of abundant euacuation.
For so in an extreme disease Hippo. appointed as a rule and just order of
euacuation. And this defect of mind and strength is called Lipothymiae, or
Liposychia: in which the party speaks, hears, sees, and knows them that
are present.

Now, Syncope, is (as it were) a suddeine decay of all natural strength, as
in the falling sickness: in the which the patient neither seeeth, hears, or
does any outward action. Lipothymia is more easy than Syncope, and
accustomably goes before the same. In the foresaid affectes therefore, we
let blood even until Lipothymia come upon us: and yet rashly or without
judgment.

Now when the powers of nature begin to quail and give over through
euacuation, we must stay the blood. Neither are we to proceed so far as
unto Sincope: for then the party escapes but daungerously: albeit the
strength of the body be reasonably firm. In consideration whereof, we are to
withdraw the abounding humor, as the bodily forces will permit. And whenever
they are wasted, albeit some of the offending humor remain still behind: yet
we are presently to desist: and this shall thou most certainly understand, if
thou diligently mark and observe the Pulsies, how they alter from great to
little: from equal to unequal: from strong to weak: from apparent to
obscure: and by marking how the force of the flux of blood begins to
relent, and the patient to wax weak.

That practisioner which sets by his credit, and will avoid ill speeches,
must never through bleeding, bring his Patient to Syncope: because the same
being, as it were, an image of death, terrifieth the standers by, and puts
the Patient in a great hazard of his life. Yea, and it is better to let the
patient still remain in grief, than to take away with the disease, life it
self.

And hitherto we have showed, what is to be done, touching the quantity that
must be withdrawn, when the powers of nature are firm and constant.

If the disease be but mean, and the bodily powers but indifferent, the
euacuation must be moderated, which may remove the whole cause of the sickness
with little or small hurt to the strength of nature.

Which albeit, it be but a small and moderate bleeding: yet the same is very
profitable, as ye have heard before. If a great sickness concur with
strength already decayed, and that the same also require some large
euacuation: yet because the powers of nature cannot tolerate it, the same must
not be done wholly at one time: but by iteration, as ye have been told: lest
we take away both the disease and the party diseased: Natures forces being
quite overthrown, albeit the disease so require: yet the body can permit
little or no euacuation: for it is unprofitable and superfluous, not bringing
any commodity, but discommoditie and perturbation to the sick. Therefore in
this case this must be the practice: moderately and often to give the patient
meats of good juice and nourishment, to confirm, strengthen, and recover
nature: and such as have some virtue in them a proprietate against the present
infirmity, and may redress the inward corruption of humors. And when thus the
natural forces shall be recovered, Phlebotomy may succeed. And this practice
is much used in continual and long sicknesses, in sharp diseases, called morbi
acuti: this long stay were doubtful and dangerous.

An observation of things present and past, and also a foresight of things
future: needful and necessary to the further knowledge of the quantity of
blood that must be taken. Chap. 15.
Observations of evident causes, touching the greatness of the disease and
constancy of natural forces, does greatly further our knowledge in this
behalf. Of which evident causes, three of them are in ward and bred in our
selves, as namely, the temperament, the complexion, and the age: and three of
them are outward and accidental: namely, the co^stitution of the air,
according to the several seasons of the year, the situation of the country and
state of the heavens. All which are included in one cause, as grounded al upon
one reason: secondly, former euacuatio^s, either slaid or immoderatly flowing*
thirdly custom and order in diet and life, or kind of euacuations proceeding.
By knowledge of these forepassed causes, we may atteine to the understanding of
the strength both of nature and of the disease: and so consequently of the
quantity that we must bleed: and albeit that the causes present and future
have not yet altered, either the disease, or strength of nature: yet for as much
as they begin to dissolve some humors from the body, and to wast the strength
of nature, they have some moment in this practice. For what these causes
present or past can do, ye have heard in the 8. and. 14. chap. to the which I
refer you concerning the perticulars: here only being contented to rekon the^
up by name (...) the te^perame^t: the state of the body: the age: the
countrietthe time of the year: the disposition of the air and sky: voluntary
euacuatio^s, custom, and the rest, as appears ca. 8, It is the part and
property of a wife and skilful physician, to consider not only the state
present of the natural virtues: but also to foresee what will be their state in
time to come after bleeding. The natural powers after euacuation, are so to be
conserved, as that the same may be able afterward to take other helps and
continue out the prolixity of a continuing di^e^s. Yea, we must retain always
some blood for future fits, and courses of the disease which are yet to come.
Lest afterward urged thereunto, we begin unfitly, and out of due time again
to nourish the same. And this chiefly is to be done in bleeding, for corrupted
and putrefying fevers, whose putrefaction and obstruction is not taken away by
bleeding: but the putrefaction is afterward the better overcome, by the
strong force of nature, when by opening of a vein, she is somewhat relieved.
Therefore to this purpose always some blood must be left for natures
preservation, as Galen councelleth. lib 11. method. cap. 14.

We may conjecture the future strength of the patie^t, partly by the present
causes, which are also afterward like to continue, and partly by accidents,
which may happen contrary to our opinion. Among present causes these are the
chief: the state of the heavens, and the order of man's life. If the
constitution of the air has been hot and dry, and is like so to continue, the
bleeding must be less, than if we suppose a cold air to ensue. Again if we
perceive, that the patient will live sparingly, and ^e^peratly, either for want
of appetite, or because the disease will not suffer him to feed: as in Augina
the Quincie: which shuts up the Jaws: we are to take less blood, than when
we see he will live more frankly and liberally. In these cases we must still
reserve some blood, as natures treasure, to help at a pinch in time of need.

Sudden accidents and unlooked for which greatly enfeeble natural strength,
are these, great pain and ach, watchinge voluntary euacuations: and chiefly
Sinc^pe. into the which many do fall, being not accustomed to bleed at the
first opening of a vein, either because they are we^ke of nature, or stricken
with some great fear, or because the mouth of the stomach fi^^ed with bitter
choler, is become very insensible and weak. When we suppose that some of these
matters will fall out: albeit the strength be firm, yet no blood at all, or
very little is to be withdrawn: except by art we naue prevented the former
accidents. It is (I say) great wisdom to foresee a far off, (...) beware of
such sudden and unlooked for accidents.

This we will manifest by an example. Let the pacient be of a sanguine
complexion, of body, thick and well set, of a flourishing age, that has long
time led a leacherous life, feeding plentifully of good meats, and that has
omitted his accustomed exercises* and lived at home idely: in whom also
accustomed eruptions of blood, out of the nose, belly, or Hemo^roids are
sta^ed: so that by concourse of these causes, the body has greatly increased
or waxed, and that the large veins through repletion, are greatly filled. When
soever a strong ague, or great inflammation, shall possess such a patient,
presently he must be let blood, and that pletifully: Both the greatness of the
disease, and of the cause requiring the same. Moreover this is confirmed by
observation of things past, if present causes agree to these, namely, that
there be a sit temperature of air, by occasion of the country, season of the
year, and the present state of the weather, moderatly cold and moist: and that
the patient be apt to euacuation: also that the sickness be not like to
continue long after, neither apparent signification of an excessiuely hot
temperature of air to come, no thveatning of future pain, or of abstinence,
watchinges, voluntary euacuations: If all these thus agree together, who may
doubt but that a large euacuation may in this case be made: And none at all,
when the con^raryes do appear. Sometime these observations, are mingled among
themselves, and contrary to themselves: In which confusion a wise judgment is
needful, by comparison of them to prescribe the just quantity of euacuation.

The consideration of passed matters many times persuade a plentiful bleeding,
which the observation of things present by and by takes away: As for example,
if the Patient laying aside his accustomed exercise, give himself to pleasure
and idleness, stuffing himself withmeats, and having some notable euacuation
stayed in him: but his body is waxed fat, white of color, loose, open, soft,
full of thiniuce, and that it be Summer, a hot and dry country, a hot and dry
constitution of weather without storms: In this case, let not blood at all,
for sufficient is already euacuated from such a body of it self, and that not
obscurely, but apparently. In this foresaid constitution, thou may detract a
little blood, if it be winter, in a cold country, and the wind* standing at
North: and in this mixture of things, thou must mark not only the multitude
of the observations, but the force of them: Because one many times exceeds
all the rest in power and sway, and he that can neither by art, experience, nor
sound judgment define the quantity of euacuation, according to the advice of
Hyppocrates, let him rather euacuate less, than more than needs.

In this place albeit somewhat has been spoken before to the same purpose,
cap. 9. Fig. 7. It may be profitably demanded, whether being with child, be to
be accounted among these observations here handled, show of truth, and some
probability may be alleged, that when women with child are grievously sick,
we are not to let them blood, because of the young that is in the womb. This
is also defended by Hyppocrates saying, Mulier in vtero gestans abortit, incisa
vena: idque magis, si faetus auctior fuerit, that is, A woman with child is
delivered before her time if she be let blood, specially if the young be much
increased, and grown in the womb. But this of Hyppocrates is not always
true, as neither that which he sets down a little before, Mulierem in
vtero gerentem acuto morbo corripi: Lethale est. That is, it is deadly for a
woman with child to be taken with a sharp disease. For seeing a purgation made
of wicked and venomous simples, stands with greater danger of the child than
opening of a vein, and that Hyppocrates grants that women with child wexed
with a disease caused of corruption of ill humors, may be purged in the
months between the third and the eighth month; truly with much more safety
may we let those blood, being grieved with any sickness caused of Repletion. And
if in the middle time of the going with child, the same may be done: Much
rather in the beginning when the blood more abounds, and the young needs
less nourishment.

Again, if women being with child, nature of her self oftentimes attempteth
euacuation of that which is supersluous (with great profit) out of the nose, by
the hemorroids and belly, and that sometime the Terms flow healthfully at
times appointed: why upon great necessity may we not imitate nature in our Art?
Yea, many women bring untimely fruit except about the fourth month a vein be
opened, the young fruit being overcome with plenitude of the Patient, neither
only in fulness, but without the same a veyn is opened in the arm of a woman
with child, when need constrains, as in a Pluresie, or other vehement
inflammation. It is dangerous in deed to open any of the lower veins in women
with child, because the flux turned downewarde, the terms would flow, and so
the fruit in the womb be dejected and cast down. A vein is opened very
seldom in the eighth or nine month without causing of untimely birth,
forasmuch as then a woman of every light cause receives hurt, and is delivered
before her time, through the weakness and slipperines of the womb. In this
case Cornelius Celsu^ only considered the greatness of the disease, and ablenes
of the strength. Old Physicians* (says he) were of opinion that the first
and latter age could not brook bleeding, and that a woman with child cured by
Phlebotomy should bring forth untimely fruit: yet experience proved afterward
that none of these were perpetual, but that better observations were to be
considered, which the Physician is to remember: For the matter is not great
what the age be, or what a woman bears in her womb, but what her strength
is: a fierce child: a strong old man: a lusty sanguine woman with child, may
safely bleed. And thus you see how a great belly in a woman may be an
observation concerning the quantity of blood that must be withdrawn.

Another observation to find out the just quantite, is to mark the alteration
of color in the blood. So judged Hyppocrates in Pleuritide secundo de ratione
virtus in acutis Commen. 10. where he counsels to let blood if the pain in
a Pluresie ascend to the arm, or the Paps so long till the blood came forth in
color more red or more yeallow: or for pure and red blood, black and blewe,
which both do happen. For blood in an inflammation* differs in color from
the natural blood, as more heated and inflamed. If the natural blood before
in the body were crude and undigested blood, that which is in the inflamed
place, is a great deal redder and yeallower, if it were before read through
adustion, it becomes now more swart and black: But if the Patient f^i^t or
fail, before the blood alter in color, stay not then for the mu^ation or
change thereof. Finally the plenitude in the body admonishes us of the
quantity more or less and thus we conclude, touching the knowledge of the
quantity: how muoh must (...) taken.

Of the time and seasons of the sickness, of this yea^e, of the day, and
hour of the day, when a man is to bleed, or not to bleed. Chap. 16.
ALthough it has been declared, that we are not to let blood in a season of
the year too hot or too cold. Yet in this Chapter, we purpose more exactly
to discuss, what time of the sickness, and what day, the same is to be
done, Auicen, in quarti^ primi cap. 20. says that for preservation, a vein is
most safely opened, when the disease is not come or yet present, disallowing
altogether of this practice in the beginning of sickness: and his reasons to
prove it are these.

In the beginning of a sickness (says he) it attenuateth the humors and
causes them to slow throughout all the body: mingling the bad Humors with the
good blood.

These words of Auicen are neither true nor agreeable to Hyppocrates, and
Galen, Hyppoc. 2. Aphoris. Aphoris. 29. writes, that at the beginning of
sickness. If any matter be to be removed* the same ought then to be done
accordingly: and when the evils are in their state, then to give them rest*
Galen in the Commen* says, that bleeding and purging may be v^ed at the
beginning, but neither of them, Morb^ Consistenti, that is, in the state of t^^
disease: whereofin the Aphoris. following ^yppocrates renders a reason: at the
first and las^ (^aith he) t^ings are more weak, than in the middle estate: for
then all things are most firm and strong. Again, why he should stay for
concoction in bleeding, I see no reason, for as much as blood of his own
nature is always concocted, and a vein being opened it flows out easily of
his own accord. Again, where Auicen in his reasons says, that by bleeding
in the beginning, that corrupted blood is not euacuated that should be, which
afterward puts still the Patient to more pain, so that we are forced
oftentimes, after we have let blood in the beginning of a sickness, to take
medicines purposely to assuage dolors and pain: I perceive not how bleeding
can take the good and leave the bad, seeing nature always reserueth to it
self as a friend good humors, and good blood, rejecting those that are naught
and unprofitable. Also when he says it attenuateth the humors, he is contrary
to himself, for in quarta primi, cap. 4. he judges rather bleeding to make
humors thick, than thin: The blood and spirits themselves which attenuate the
humors by bleeding being withdrawn. Again, this is wonderful, that when the
state of the disease is past, and the Patient past danger, that he would have
then the miserable Patient with a new wound and cutting of a vein again
tormented.

If any think Auicen to be blameles, as being of this judgment, that a vein
is to be opened when nature has attempted Crisin, that is, the judgment of
the disease: which fall^th out to be imperfect and little, not able to do the
feat and accomplish the whole force, neither does this defend him: For by what
reason would ye have bleeding to euacuate the matter left behind of an
imperfect Crisis: The natural virtue being made so weak by that time with
continual contending and striving with the disease: that it can do no good or
very little in the cure, and especially when the rest of that matter is daily
used to be easily euacuated by purgations. In sharp and dangerous sicknesses
therefore, every one sees here Auicens error: for in these sharp, vehement, and
continual diseases, we must bleed or be purged the first day: ye^, stay in
these, is very dangerous, as Hyppo. says, 4. Aphoris. Aphoris. 10. If Auicen
meant it of Morbi salubres. i. recouerable diseases: in these truly neither
first nor last, nor at any time are we to bleed: for then most usually we let
blood when a disease is vehement and dangerous.

The opinion of other some in this place is to be ^aughed at, who thinks that
Auicen admonishes not to bleed at the beginning in sicknesses not dangerous,
as in a tertian, because nature is terrefied by the newnes and sodainnes of the
disease: and these make, or imagine nature to be a thing endued with knowledge,
or an understanding and knowing faculty: which is not so. But if nature be made
afraid in sickenesses not perilous, how much more will she be afraid in
dangerous diseases, in which not withstanding, we hasten to let blood even at
the very first. These matters therefore are full of error.

Let this therefore be the conclusion, that we must bleed in the beginning
of sickenesses. Whereupon Galen counsels (the disease being come) to open a
vein, lib. de Curand. ratio per sang. missio. cap. 9. and cap. 12. If (faith
he) there be repletion of hot boiling blood, whereby a strong ague is
inflamed: presently euacuat, yea, even unto sowning: yet still regarding the
strength of nature. And this is his advise prim. Aphoris. Aphoris. 23. What
diseases so ever are caused of plenitude, or other corruption of humors in the
veins; they are at the beginning to be cured by bleeding: for by this means,
the disease likely to grow is kept back, and so much as is already bred,
nature will easily subdue: Thus hot Agues before they are yet inflamed with
heat of boiling blood, or by vehement putrefaction, are and may be cured.
Also inward inflammations at the first, as long as the flowing humor cleaves
not to the member, but follows the blood may be cured. The said humor issuing
forth with the blood, when a vein is once opened, strength at the beginning is
firm and constant in the Patient, almost like unto us that are well in health:
If therefore at any time bleeding be needful, the same may best be done at
the beginning: he that in fulness of blood, or flux of matter, will stay from
bleeding, and use other helps, in a perverse order of healing, he doubleth the
grief, and troubles the forces of nature more than is convenient: Yea, let
the vein so timely be opened, as the stomach and first veins be not first
stuffed, with either corruption or cruditie of humors or meats undigested.

Thus you have heard the former words of Auicen to be erroneous, howsoever
certain labor to salve them up: yea, and Auicen seems to understand his own
saying, not only of particular diseases in the members: but also of all other
diseases. For afterward speaking of all Fevers, and especially of Febris
fanguinea, Fevers caused of blood, he counsels in them not to let blood
abundantly: except there have gone before concoction, and concerning this
reason, that humors are lessened by bleeding, it cannot be so, for ye have
already heard, that both before bleeding and after, there is retained in the
body one and the self same proportion of humors. If any difference or mutation
happen, seeing the thin humor issues forth with the greatest speed, and the
thick humor but slow: it is more likely, and probable, that opening of a vein
should rather make the blood and humors thick than thin. A gain, whereas he
says in his reason that the humors thereby are agitated, moved, and driven
through the whole body: how should there be this agitation of humors, seeing
rather this practice abateth the multitude of them which was before the cause
of perturbation and sickness. In reason all things now should become far more
quiet than before. Whereas he says the ill blood is mixed in the veins with
the good, what inconvenience comes thereof if a vein be opened? then no
doubt the bad must pass forth with the good. Put the case there be a strong
or vehement sickness caused of abundance of blood only, as are both the
Synochi Fevers, as is the putrified fever, caused through plenitude, as are
Angina, Pleurisis, Peripneumonia, also inflammations of the Liver and other
parts. In these if they be great and dangerous through much abundance of
blood, who will not presently open a vein? who will not while strength
serves, take away that fulness which brings a disease and danger of death?
Hereupon in Syno^ha presently at the first, we hasten to let blood even till
the Patient faint, and before the matter putrify. But Auicen in a sanguine
fever at the first lets blood sparingly, and more plentifully afterward,
when signs of concoction appear. But what concoction does he look for of
good blood, and already well concocted, and offending only in quantity? In
these sanguine fevers therefore, even as in very sharp sickenesses, either to
put off, or to stay bleeding it is very ill, as Hyppocrates says, if the
disease be not so sharp or vehement, yet let blood at the beginning, according
to the proportion of the fulness. If we should in these stay with Auicen, till
concoction (the beginning and state of the disease) be past: we should suffer
the disease to grow and increase, and cause for want of skill the Patient to
be cruelly hand'ed and entreated without help of Physic, which we may
administer, if the disease be deadly, it will never be brought to concoction:
If it be doubtful, or recouerable called Morbus salutaris (as ye have heard)
after the state in the declination, and when the Patient is past danger, what
profit does Phlebotomy then bring? as ye have heard before.

Nature by concoction, separateth the ill humors from the good: these to
conservation: those to expulsion. This she does either by her self, or by the
help of Physic. But opening of a vein, indifferently without choice,
euacuateth al humors. Wherefore then in bleeding, shall we tarry for this
concoctio^ and division of humors? as for example: In apostumations, if the
corupted blood be made matter or filth, it is not then taken away by bleeding,
but by some other means. So in fevers, whose matter is contained in the
veins: when the humor is concoct and divided, we use not to withdraw the same
by bleeding; but by some other practice in Physic: in which case, by that time
that concoction is accomplished, we shall have nature to help us, who ofher
self, indeuoureth to expel humors concocted and divided, the bad from the
good. And if now after concoction and separation of humors we open a vein, we
do not only euacuat the bad, but also the good: and that which is worse; those
humors which are separated by nature, we shall mingle with the pure blood, de
filing the same, and so both confound all, and disturb the good work of nature
herself. Therefore, when the apparent signs of concoction shall appear, the
cure must be done, not any more by opening of a vein, but either by purgation,
or some other help, to turn the matter aside some other way, except (which
sometime chances) there appear signs of cruditie.

In fevers: when the plen^tude is abated, and things which putrified are
concocted, we must assay to euacuat them by siege, v^ine or sweat. Those things
which are rotten and turned to filth, in a P^uris^e or P^ripneumonia, we
euacu^t by spitting. Matter putrified in the Liver, passes through the hollow
vein by the belly. Corruption in the ^ines and in Gibba, passes by v^ine: and
so e^he pu^rified matter* accordingly out of each member, is to be purged by the
next places and fi^test passages.

If by fear, sloth, or any other occasion, opening of a vein have not bin
put in ure in the beginning of a sickness: the same may be d^n at any time: yea,
the twentieth day after, if the signs of fulness and c^uditie still continue,
and that the bodily strength be answerable and not decayed through prolixitie
of sickness. But here is the doubt, that often the matter of the disease is
digested or the strength of nature wasted.

But Auicens opinion, that in the beginning of a disease, a vein is not to be
opened: seems to have ground out of Galen. Chap. ^7. Artis Medicinalis and
Comment. 22. lib. 4. Aphoris norum: saying, The Physician is the minister of
Nature: But Nature her self, never in the beginning of a disease, when the
humors are yet altogether r^we and unconcocted, appoints any euacuation.

therefore, neither must the Physician, at the first: when all things are yet
unconcocted, attempt any euacuation, and so much the less, because crude and
undigested matter not yelding to euacuation: stirs up grievous accide^ts in
the body. Galen. li. 1. Aphoris. Common. 22

Again, say some (in Auicens) defense, it may be that in the beginning of a
sickness: opening of a vein makes the superfluities of the body thin: so
that they may flow and run thorough out the whole body, and so be mingled
with the good blood, whereby it fortuneth that the same is not extracted, which
necessity requires to be expelled. Whereby also it happens further, that
the patient must be let blood again, sometime even the same day, and sometime
the day after, which too much enfeebleth the powers of the body. And thus it
is contended, partly by reason, partly by authority in the behalf of Auicen.
And surely, if the words of Auicen might be restringed, that very seldom, and
only in the case limited, a vein is not to be opened at the beginning of
sickness: it may well stand to sense and reason: but Fernelius and others gather,
that Auicens words were spoken more generally, than that he can by this
special case only, be defended. And because the matter is controuerted, as ye
see, I have set down the reasons brought both against Auicen, and for him.
Leaving the depth of the controversy, to be examined and discided by others,
rather as yet inclining for my part: (for ought that I can see) to the
adversary ^p^nio^ to Auicens, still affirming it to be more viual a great
deal, to open a vein in the beginning of sickness, than to stay a longer time.

And that this assertion may the rather appear to be true: I will set down
certain ru^es whereby it may truly be manifested and approved so by science
and experience. First, when wicked humors greatly swel, being (as it were)
excited and stirred up through repletion of their own accord: they persuade to
euacuation at the beginning of the disease, when the humors are not yet
concoct. For otherwise, the unconstant humor, moving from place to place, and
from member to member without order, might make stay at some principal member,
to the great hurt of the patient. It happens in deed but seldom, that the
humors are moveable, and flowing from one part to another: for commonly they
remain firm and stable in one place.

Secondly, a vein is to be opened in the beginning of a disease: when
quantity of matter abounds in the veins, as Galen says, Com. 29. li. 2.
Aphoris. Yea, in this case also sometime a purgation is taken, that nature may
easily ^o^coct and overcome the residue of the matter of the disease, when the
same is lessened by art.

Thirdly, when the disease is great and vehement, as in very dolorous
apostumations: albeit there be not in the body much matter antecedent: yet the
humor that is, is to be repelled, lest the apostumation open and break sooner
than is convenient. To avoid therefore these great and evil accidents: by and
by, at the beginning incision is to be made: which Galen teaches li. 13. Cap.
20. Method. Medend. in these words. In such affects (says he) a vein must be
opened at the beginning; so that none of those things hinder, which we have
spoken of. i. either the abundance of raw e humors: childish years: the time
of the year: the temperature of the country, too hot or too cold. For not
only in sharp diseases and inflammations, but also in wounds and bruses of
particular parts; specialy being principal: blood is to be taken from the
contrary part, to repel the inflammation: albeit the blood be but little in
quantity.

In the beginning of sharp diseases called morbiacuti, or peracuti: opening of
a vein is passing good. For the better understanding whereof, you must
remember, that a sharp disease is twofold: either exquisite and thoroughly
vehement, passing not the fourth day, which is called of Physicians Malus
peracutus. i. thoroughly sharp: and of some perperacutus, imitating barbarous
authors in Physic. The other not exquisite or thoroughly sharp and vehement,
whose greatest force will be in the seventh day. These diseases being but short,
and at their extreme fits in few days, without any truce, presently at the
beginning, these are to be cured. And because they proceed chiefly of hot
humors, namely, of blood and yellow choler, therefore specially they require
bleeding. Whereupon Hippo. lib. 4. writes. De vict. ratione in morbis acutis.
Aphoris. 19. In acutis morbis sanguinem detrahes: si vehemens morbus videatur,
florueritque aegrotanti aet^s viriu^ and aff^er it robur. In sharp diseases
withdraw blood, if the disease seem vehement, if the age of the patient be
flourishing, and that the natural forces be firm and strong. Schola salerni
has these verses of this very matter.

Principio minnas in acutis perperacutis.
Aetatis mediae multum de sanguine toll,
Sit puer at que senex, tollet vterque parum.
Ver tollat duplum, reliquum tempus tibi simplum.
In sickness sharp let blood with speed.
take much from men of middle age.
Not so when child or old men bleed:
the spring requires the advantage.
As there is regard to be had of general times, so there is also of
particular days and times, in the which diseases come, specially in those
diseases, which have by course an appointed and set time of intermission and
remission. For euacuation is not to be made when the disease is now fierce, but
when the same is assuaged. Fever, sand especially those that are called
intermittents, discontinuing agues, eue^ naturally at the beginning and their
first invasion, cause vomits: and at the declining, sweats. At which times we
may by art provoke these, but in no case use purging or bleeding. In the time
of the fit likewise we must refrain from these, as things which nature then
can not brook. If such accidents of bleeding, or of siege come, they are but
accidental, and are caused only of the heat and force of the disease. No
euacuation can be done safely in such fits, seeing they do too exceedingly hurt
the powers of nature. Also when the humors do so boil with heat, that they
are perturbed and mingled together, there can not be made by practice of art
any just division of the said humors. And if it chance that the hurtful
matter of the disease, be inflamed without the greater veins, and that in a
fit, a vein be opened: it is to be feared, least presently the same corrupted
matter pass into the empty veins, and so of an intermitting fever, will come a
continual. Whereas a vein opened in the most quiet time of a disease,
troubles not nature, but without any fear of an inflammation, takes the
plenitude out of the greater veins. The greatest time of quietness, is the time
in the middle, between the remission and intermissio^ of the disease. If the
time between the fits be much, it is an easy matter to perceive the said
middle time. If the time be but little, then is it far more hard to discern
the same. Because many times no leisure can be granted either before or after
bleeding, by reason of the swift courses of fits, to nourish the party. Thus
you see Phlebotomy is not to be practiced in the day of the fit of any sickness,
which in Latin is called Crisis, or dies Criticus, in the which day, neither
bleeding, nor any other euacuation is to be attempted, lest the matter should
be drawn from that place, whereunto nature has driven it, to be rid or
dispatched thereof: and therefore like wise neither in the fit it self ought
the same to be done. Excellently therefore did Galen give in charge, Comment.
29. lib. 2. Aphoris. that in time of the fit, neither bleeding nor purging
ought to be used, because then the concoctio^ of the disease is chiefly
wrought. Which is far better accomplished in quietness and rest, then in
motion or disturbance. For what respect the state has to the whole disease:
that comparison has the ^itt to the days of intermission. As therefore in the
state of a disease no euacuation is to be used: so neither in time of the fit.

Again, it may profitablie here be admonished notwithstanding the premises:
that bleding is not presently to be used at the very beginning of a diseas,
when we judge the Crisis or judgment ofthe sickness to be yet far of^. For
blood being the foundation of inward heat, wherewith, the same is vpholden:
(natural heat being engendered of blood, as of a material cause,) If blood
should be detracted at the beginning of a disease, the natural heat would be
diminished, which should concoct the material cause of the sickness. Whereby
further it comes to pass, that the disease is longer time protracted, and
the forces of nature enfeebled, through which two, namely the continuance of
the disease, and imbecillitie of nature: great fear of death comes in the
end: and this is the case, wherein Auicens former opinion may stand true.

There is therefore no prescribed day for certain, appointed to let blood in.
Whereupon Galen took occasion to deride those: lib. de curand. ratio. per
sang. missio. cap. 12. which from the 2. hour of the day to the 5. or 6. hour
only did let blood, and at none other time. And Galen witnesses ofhimselfe,
that he did let blood at all times without any danger, yea even in the night.
And 9. method. Cap. 5. he affirms it best, which he also him self
obscrued, to mark not the number of the days, but only the strength of the
Patient, because by experience we have proved that not only the sixth or
seventh days, but also in the days following the sixth or seventh, a vein may
be opened. But because as Galen witnesses, Libro de Curand. ratio. per
sanguin. missionem. Capit. 20. in diverse diseases through continuance of time,
the strength of nature is greathe abated: Therefore the occasion of letting of
blood is not omitted for the number of the days, but for that the natural
strength is wasted: So that if the virtues of the body seem to be consumed the
second day from the beginning of a disease: even then we forbear opening of a
vein. And he thertoo the words of Galen.

Now in diseases which are cured by bleeding when they are present, or
propelled being but future: if they grant leisure so that a choice of an hour
to bleed in May be made: in this case (I say) the fore noone hour is better
then the after noone. For from the rising of the Sun the blood is quickened,
revived, and bears rule in the body: yea in that time of the day it becomes
thin, clear, and apt to flow. Let not the patient sleep nor slumber in that
hour, wherein he is to bleed, but at lest let him be awake a whole hour before:
see also that he have well digested the meat he did eat the day before: so that
the excrements be descended, and that the body have done his accustomed duty
both by siege and by urine. And these must most principally be done, when a
great vein is to be opened. And they are not so greatly to be observed, when
we withdraw blood, from the sm^ller veins: from whence the blood flows but
slowly. If the patient be in health, let ^im do some work, or go first an
hour about his business in his shop, warehouse, market, s^hole, or other
place: as his vocation is: and then bleed; choosing out for the purpose the
(...) hou^e that may be: vide Auicen 4. prin^^cap. 20. And thus much of the
time of the sickness, and of the day.

Of the time of the year best to bleed in, it is agreed generally, the same to
be the begin^^^g of the spring, which is a temperat time, (...) too hot, nor
too cold. Therefore Hippo. (...). Aphoris. 54. writes: Quibus a venis sangui^^
^^ttere confert: iis vere secare vena^ oportet. Those that must have a vein
opened, must ^aue the same done in the spring. And Galen lib. de Cura. ratio.
persang. missio. says: that ^ee by letting blood in the beginning of the
spring, cured many of the gout, and other diseases.

There are 3. months belonging specially to the Moon (as some say. viz. May,
April, Septeber: in which there are also certain days which are not good to
bleed in, as some authors (not contemptible in mine opinion) do affirm:
namely, the first of May, and the thirtieth of the two other months. This for
all these sayings of wise Clerks, is not always so found: for even in these
days, if other things agree, a vein may be opened, which I my self have
done without hurt ensuing. In like case that is false, which is set down by
some, that: the eating of Goose on any the foresaid e three days, is
perilous: which seems to be taken from the custom and superstition of the
Jews. Men in their flourishing years of a sanguine complexion, may bleed
every month of the year: if necessity urge by occasion of great dangerous
sickness, and that blood abound in the veins. For in these, substance of
humors is not easily wasted or dispersed abroad. But for conservation of
health: bleeding is best used, in one of these three months, April, May,
September. And yetnot all alike, for in April, and May, the Liver vein is to
be opened for abundance of blood in the spring: and in September the vein of
the Milt, because in harvest Melancholy abounds more than any other humor,
and I would wish persons greatly subject to diseases, caused of fulness of
blood, and that are cured by bleeding, to bleed these two times in the year:
that is to say, from the Liver vein on the right arm in the spring, and from
the vein of the Milt on the left arm in September. Those that think that if
they be let blood one year they must be so every year: Shall herafter in the
twenty four Chapter be showed to the contrary: for as one swallowe makes not
the spring: So Phlebotomy practiced once or twice, does not import an annual
bleeding, and so we must judge of boxing. The verses of Schola Salerni,
concerning these matters ensue.

Tres insunt istis Maius, September, Aprilis.
Et sunt Lunares, sunt velut hydrae, dies.
Prima dies primi postremaque posteriorum,
Ne^ sanguis minui, nec carnibus anseris vti.
Sit senium aetque iuuent a licet, si sanguis abundat,
Omni mense probe, confert incisio venae.
Hi sunt tres menses: Maius, September, Aprilis:
In quibus eminuas, vt longo tempore viuas.
In May, September, and April,
There be three days are very ill:
The first in May, of rest the last,
In which ne bleed, nor of Goose taste.
Though old or young, if blood abound:
In each month bleed, this rule is sound.
But three be best, and far excel,
September, May, and eke April.
A Table of the things specified in this Chapter following.
An accide^t apper taining to the consideration of bloudletting in general: is
the time: which is of the year, whereof look Cap. 8. Fig. 13. and in this
present Chapter. Of the day or hour, for in Persons not sick, for the
Preservative intention, the morning is best, an hour or two after sleep, when
the body is disburthened by siege, by urine. Sick and having their fit upon
them, who are to bleed when the fit of the fever is off. or not having fits by
intermission, as in continual fevers and inflammations, who may bleed
presently at any hour of the day or night, if the disease be vehement and
dangerous, and the bodelie strength firm: but if the disease urge not, choose
(as for persons not sick) the morning hour.



Of Astrologicall observation in bleeding, and of an other observation nearly
aanexed unto the same: showing what members, and parts of the body are to be
opened according to the several seasons of the years.
AStrologicall observation of the new and full of the Moon, and other
considerations here set down as follow, are to be regarded in light and
small sickenesses: but not so, if the same be vehement and dangerous. For the
heavenly causes are very far off, neither did Hyppocrates make reckoning of
them 4. Aphoris. Aphoris. 10. The first day we must help (says he) in sharp
diseases. And Galen de Cura. ratio per sanguin. missio. cap. 12. says: that
those persons are presently to be euacuated, in whom appears abundance of hot
blood, before the same begot to some principal part (as ye heard before) so
that these things are not to be observed in a vehement pluresie: In Angina the
quincie: Inimmoderat flux of blood: In great plenitude of the vessels: neither
in disco^tinuing agues or fevers that come by fits. In which the time of rest,
remission, and stay, is far better than the morning time: In which we let
blood at what hour so ever it be, of the night or the day: if the fit be off,
and other things answerable. Therefore I say in these, we are not strictly to
observe these rules Astrologicall: observe them, as matters of some force, in
healthful Patients, which bleed only for preservation, and in light* and
small infirmities: if then it happen that thou do bleed.

To come to these Astrologicall observations we are not to let blood in the new
or full of the moon: nor else except the moon be in these signs.. and the
first half of. the last half of Scorpio, or in... Also not in the day of the
change, the day next before, or day next after: Nor when the sign is in the
place where the incision should be made.

Another observation is this, to open a vein in flegmaticke persons: when the
is in. saving in the head. In a melancholy man, the moon being in the first
half, or first fifteen degrees of. except in the hips: or when the moon is
in. saving in the legs. In a chollerick body when the is in. saving in the
breast. The last half of Scorpio: except in the privy members, or in. saving
in the feet. Sanguine men may bleed in any of the signs, so the sign be not
in that member.

Again, after the Mathematicke, this is the constellation or election of time.
In fiery signs it is good for flegmaticke persons to bleed, as in.. Leo is
excepted being the house of the Sun, in the which there must be no bleeding.
In Airie Signs good for Melancholy men: as... is excepted, and the last
seauenteene degrees of Libra, because. respects the hands and the arms, in
which commonly we let blood.

In watery signs, good for chollericke men, as in... In earthly signs it is
ill to bleed, as in...

The general rules of Ptolome for Phlebotomy in 30. of Centiloquium is this:
Tangere ferro membrum cum Luna in signo illius membriest periculosum. It is
dangerous to open a member with a chirurginal instrument, when the moon is in
the sign belonging to that member. Good aspectes in bleeding are these.. and.
also. and. so as. be not co^bust.. and... and... and... and... and.. and.. and.
or. also.. and. or.. and.

Again this is an other observation, from the new of the moon to the first
quarter, for pueri, i. those that are in their childhoode from the first
quarter to the full: for Iuuenes: that is, young men from the full to the last
quarter: for Viri: that is, those that are of man's state, and begin to grow in
years, and from that time to the new again: for old grown folk: Look more
hereof in a Table hereafter following. 28. Chapter.

Another observation, how particular members are to be taken, according to the
particular times and seasons of the year, is this: In the spring and summer
time, the veins of the right side of the body are to be opened: namely of the
right hand, right arm, and right, foot. But in harvest and in winter, the
veins of the left hand, arm, or foot. In the spring time, blood increases:
In the Summer yeallow choler: therefore in the spring time, and in Summer,
those veins are to be opened which most abound with blood and yeallow choler:
that is, specially the right raines: for in the right part of the body is
situated the member causing blood: that is, the Liver: and Choledochos the
Cofer of yeallowecholer: that is, the gall. In harvest is engendered
melancholy, which is not dissolved, but increased in the winter: therefore in
harvest and winter, those veins must have incision, in which melancholy
chiefly reigns: that is, the left veins for the Spleen, thereceptacle of
mela^cholly is placed on the left side. Moreover, these four members, the
head, heart, feet, and Liver: are to be euacuated according to the four
seasons. The heart in the spring: the Liver in Summer: the head in winter: the
feet in harvest: Of which matter you shall hear speak, Schola Salerni,

Ver aestas dextras, autumnusque, hyemsque sinistras.
quatuor haec me^bra: hepar pes, Cephae, cor, vacuad^
Aest as habet hepar, ver, cor sicque ordo sequetur.
The right, the spring and summer have:
The left, autum, and winter crave.
The Summer has the Liver his,
The Spring also claims the heart:
The head the winter does dismis,
O failing foot thou Autums Art.
Preparation before bleeding. Chap. 18.
AS occasion of the time is to be taken, so there must be used before, some
preparation of the body. The neglecting whereof, would bring great hurt to the
party; and surely, the chiefest preparation is this. To purge and cleanse the
members, that are in the first Region of the body: touching this preparation
many things are to be regarded, whereof mention is made in the eighth Chapter,
from whence I purpose to take four principal considerations in this behalf,
being urged thereto, for perspicuity sake: leaving the rest to thine own
discretion to be scanned.

There are therefore (as there we did set down) four things especially which
stay and put back bleeding: That is to say, first crudity of the stomach and
first veins. Secondly, a filthy gathering together of hurtful humors.
Thirdly, the belly bound with dry and baked excrements. Fourthly, the mouth of
the stomach weak, and very sensible. These do not altogether put off
bleeding, but stay the same for a while till by Art they may be withdrawn or
remedied. If a vein be opened, while cruditie rules in the stomach, this
evil will follow: that many raw, unconcocted and undigested humors will be
congested, and gathered together in the place of blood. In hardness of the womb
this mischief ensues: that the Liver and exhausted veins, suck out of the
excrements, silthie juices, and unclean substance: in regard whereof it is
most convenient, to stay so long as the raw matter may be concocted, and till
the excreme^ts descend. And if they cannot utter of themselves, as ye heard,
cap. 8. They are to be provoked with suppositors or clysters, and the womb is
to be made laxatiue with prunes or Cassia. Cruditie and indigestion is known
by the quality and quantity of meats received. Also by the time in which
they were eaten, and also by ponderousnes, and raw belchings of the stomach.
Again, corrupt humors abounding in the stomach, or parts near unto it:
whether the same be bred there, or that they proceed from the head, Liver, or
spleen; they persuade the putting off of bleeding, til they may be purged; else
this corruption of humors drawn into the veins would be more dangerous to the
body than cruditie it self, and infect the veins, far with much more
uncleanness: whereof do come obstructions or a consumption, proceeding of the
ill disposition of the body: or the diseases which we would cure, grow greater,
and their accidents ^^rre worse: yea, and because these corrupt humors are
stirred, they become more fierce and hurtful, nipping the stomach, and the
parts called praecordia. i. the fleshie skin called the Midriffe, which
separateth the heart and lungs from the stomach, Liver, and other bowels:
whereby is caused appetite to vomit, convulsions, Lypothimia, Syncope, and
other fearsull accidents. The signs whereby to know, whether the bodily parts
are possessed with corruption of humors are these: loathing of meat, aptnes to
vomit, vomiting up the noysom and offensive humor: often going to the stool:
heaviness and pain in the stomach, fulness and swelling of the stomach and
precordial parts. If these apeare in the patient, without cruditie of meats:
then are we to expel the offensive humors out of the first region of the body,
which has bin the cause of the foresaid evils. If the humor of himself give
upwards, assay the expulsion by vomit: drinking a draught either of warm water,
or of Hydrelaeu^ warmed, that is water mixed with oil: whereof take the
quantitic of half a pound. If the humor gine downward, expel it by siege.
Cassia is not strong enough to purge the humor from the stomach, as not being
sufficient to expel by siege such clammie and cleaving humors. For Cassia has
but a mean virtue, and that only to assuage and mollify. Rubarb, or Senna,
or some other gentle medicine, according to the quality of the humor: and not
so vehement, as to molest the state of the whole body. And these we may use,
not once or twice but oftener if need require. After all this preparation,
then we are to let blood.

When the corruption of humors is spread throughout all the body and every
particular part, so that the whole body is vnpure: then we must observe this
order: that is, we must purge every part orderly: as first, the greater
veins: and this called Mesentericae venae which are branches of the great
carrying vein called Porta, by which both the guts are nourished, and the
juice of meat concocted, is conveyed from the stomach to the Liver, to be made
blood. Yea, these veins are the second time to be purged, before we euacuate
the whole habit of the body, and not contrary: that is, from the first
veins to the greater: and from them to bring the humor into the state of the
body: which were not to purge the noisome humor, but to infect and hurt the
whole body therewith. But this is the course: to draw the humor from the
habit of the body into the greater veins, from them into the first veins,
and then to bring it into the belly. Yea, this great corruption of humors not
only stays bleeding for a time, but often times altogether. And therefore
we let not blood in the dropsy, in Cacheria, in hard apostumations of the
Liver and spleen.

The third matter of the preparation before bleeding was above said, to be
either the sensibilitie or imbecillitie of the stomach. For those persons have
notable quick feeling, whose veins sent from the brain, are soft, tender, open
and ready to occur and meet with any matter, so that these persons without
hurt cannot eat any sharp, sower or salt things, as vinegar, pepper,
mustard. Imbecilitie of the ^tomake proceeds either of distemperature, or of
a very thin placing and standing of the small veins in the same place. And
this is known by loss ofappetite, when meat cannot abide in the stomach, but
that there will be always pain ofthe stomach, and a promptnes still to vomit.
Those persons that are thus affected, are troubled greatly even with the hasard
of life, of every small occasion: as fasting, anger, sorrow, fear and also by
bleeding. Phlebotomy in these (I say) wastes greatly the vital spirits, and
greatly moves the other humors of the body beside the blood, whereupon there
befall to them when they have bled, conuulsions, the falling evil, sownings
and other fearful accidents, which are caused hereby. In such therefore, we
must have a foresight, and corroborat the mouth of the stomach with things
repelling the sharpnes and influence of humors: as with juice of a Pomegranate,
a Quince, Malum medicum, with juice of Citrons, Lymons, and juice of Barbaries,
sower grages, viniger, or syrops made of these. If there be doubt of a cold
distemperature, use hot aromatike things, chiefly syrop of Mynts,
Diacydonion, sower or sharp wine, or ypocras. Take a little of these wines, or
a morsel of good bread dipped in them, and when the patient has a little rested
upon it: open a vein, and this is the preparation, if the disease permit it. A
vehement disease ^asteneth bleeding, and cannot stay for this preparation: as
repletion in wrastlers, in whom present suffocation, or breaking of veins is
to be feared: as a great Plurisie: a fernent agewe: a great fall or bruise: In
the which we are more to fear the present danger of the disease, than the
hurt by defect ofthe preparation. If we think the humors in the body to be
thick, and that they will not flow (for which cause also we use to walk
before bleeding) we may enter into a bath, to make the humors subtle: not the
same day, in which we bleed, but a day or two before: Not in the self same
day, because it makes the skin soft and thin, and so in the stroke, the
skin slippeth and starteth from the Phlebotomer, which is very dangerous.
For this cause also we give a little syrupus acetosus certain days before
bleeding, to subtiliate the matter. And again, that the humors may pass with
the more facility and become subtle: to prepare the^ to this purpose, we use
frication of the member, to rub the arm or other parts, and the members next
unto the place that is to receive incision. Also we give before bleeding to
such persons as have weak and sensible stomachs nipped with sharpnes of choler,
flowing to the mouth of the same, some portion of meat: yet not all meats with
indifferency, but meats of good digestion: as a morsel of bread dipped in
Syrupus acetosus, which comfort the stomach through the ponticitie, to use
the old barbarous word the sharpnes or ^owernes thereof: which also lets the
flux of humors, and keeps them back from the stomach, by reason of a
certain frigiditie. For as soon as choler sloweth to the stomach, so soon by
the sharpnes hereof, the same is repressed and repelled.

What is to be done in the very time of the incision. Chap. 19.
THe pacient is to bleed lying in the greatest quiet that he may, both of body
and of mind: especially if the strength of the body be infirm, and that there
be doubt of Sincope, let him sit up in his bed, and lift up his head above the
pillowes: for while we stand or sit, that faculty which bears up the body,
is in a kind of travel, and the entrails and bowels hanging of the
precordiall parts, do enforce the vital and natural powers. By lying therefore
(specially some what upright) the bodily strength is preserved, according to
Galen. prima particula. prognosticorum. And as dead bodies are laid forth upon
their backs: so the lying of sick and weak bodies, must be upon their
broadest part, which is the back. Again, the back bone is the stronger part of
the body, being acording to Auicen the foundation of the body, as the keele or
bottom of a ship is the ground work of all the shipwrights labor.

If the party that is to bleed be fearful, turn his face away to the
contrary side, and let his mind be drawn by other talk of the standers by
from the present practice of the Phlebotomer. The member that is to be opened,
must hang downward, that the course of the blood may be direct and easy for
that part which we desire most to euacuat. Then that part of the member which
we mean to take: as of arm, thigh, hand, or foot: must be rubbed, to draw
the blood unto that part, even until it wax hot. Next we take a strong bond
and bind it next above the place, whose vein must be taken, that the blood
coming down, the vein may swell and appear in sight. It must be bound
harder in some, than in others: as namely in such persons that have their
veins covered, as it were, with much flesh or fatt.

By this hard binding, the vein is stretched out, or swells: it stands
sure and flies not from the stroke of the Phebotomer. And thirdly, the blood
comes forth with the more force: we use also to bind beneath the place, when
the quiuering and unconstant vein, slippeth aside out of his place from the
hand of the Physician. They that have a full and thick skin, narrow veins, and
deep in the flesh: or great veins, and covered with fat, must be bound both
ways, and have the bond tied faster than those of a contrary constitution. If
the veins be very small and little, that they do not fully and sufficiently
apeare by binding, as it happens in the veins of the hands, feet and ankles.
We soke them in warm water, or pour warm water upon them: that the skin and
flesh may wax soft, and the veins beseene: and then we bind them, and so
they bleed the better. If the vein yet appear not, we search for it, in the
place where it should be with our singars until partly thereby, and partly by
the flux of blod we well perceive the same. We bind the neck, but softly,
when we take the vein of the forehead, or the veins under the tonug. Yea,
many times in these we take a table napkin, and putting it about the neck,
cause the party himself to hold both the ends, as he may suffer or endure
the same. When we thoroughly and well perceive the vein, we strike the same
softly with the instrument, diligently taking heed, that he wound not in steed
thereof, an artery, sinewe, or some g^istly end of a muskle called a Tendon,
lying under the vein, or some other part near unto it. For sometime when we
bind hard with the bond, there appears a place puffed up with wind, and
there swells a thing like a vein that is no vein. And sometime, an artery
pressed down, does not move, and so seems to be a vein: and therefore to be
more sure, let him with the forefinger feel the place of the incision, and the
vein underneath. This done, let the Physician take his instrument at the very
fingers ends, with a good eye, and a good hand: and let him not put forth
more of the point than is sufficient to pearce withal. And that the vein
escape not the instrument, in one hand, let him hold the launcet, and with the
thombe of the other hand applied to the vein that is to be opened, let him
settle, press, and keep down the same, chat it start not aside: and so
softly without haste, put in the instrument sufficiently, and let the
Phlebotomer have good experience to open a vein with both hands: for a vein
of the right arm, is best opened with the right hand* and a vein of the left
with the left hand. The veins in the joints in the bending of the arm, and in
the hammes being cut in rectum that is right, grow together but slowly,
because the joints with motion do open still the lips of the wound. Neither
are we so to cut them, except when we need to reiterate bleeding* Veins
without the joints, as in the head, in the hands, in the feet, opened in rectum
are quickly covered with a skarre, because the sides do soon grow together
again.

There lies under the inner vain (called Basilica) also an artery: and under
the middle vein, a sinewe: and under both, for the most part, Tendons of the
Muskles. Cephalica vein albeit it be heard to take: yet it is most safely
taken of all the rest. For in opening thereof a man cannot light vp^^ any
Tendon, artery or sinew. When a Tendon or sinew is pricked, there follows
great pain, astonishment, resolution and convulsion of the atme, with a
swelling. When an artery is pricked, the blood is very hardly stayed: and
consequently through effusion of much blood: the strength of nature is wasted.
Neither does the artery heal up or grow again together: but part of it is
corrupted like Gangraena, which is a putrefying or rotting of the flesh, by
mortifying the sensible parts thereof: if a sinewe or Tendon be pricked, the same
is perceived by great pain, convulsion, and swelling following.

If there be doubt that a sinewe is pricked: let not the wound grow together,
till it be safe sro^ inflammation; and that two or three days ar over passed:
it may be kept from growing together, by bathing of it in warm oil. After
three days: if the pain cease, and that there come no new accidents, we may
permit the union, and suffer it to grow togethers again: if not, then we are
to use opening, and attracting things, and such as will help the pricking of
sinews, as namely turpentine, putting thereto sometime a little Enforbium. When
an artery is wounded there comes forth thin blood, red, fine and spinning
out. To help this case, make a plaster of Aloes, Mirrh, Frankencense,
Bol-armoniak, the white of an egg, and hairs of an Hare: lay over these a
linen cloth dipped in Rose Water, and fasten the plaster well with a bond that
it come not off in 3 days: then (this being gently removed) apply another like
unto it. If the artery will not grow together with these, cut the whole
arteri^ overthwart, that when the extremities are pulled up on both sides, the
place may grow, and be covered with soft flesh.

Touching the manner of the incision, and quantity of the wound: if we judge
the blood in the pacient to be thick, clammie and Melancoly: and that the
constitution of the air be cold; the wound must be reasonaby large and wide:
that the thick blood, and gross fumes, may the better issue forth: for the
wound in this case being little and strait; the most thin blood alone flows
out, the gross thick blood remaining still behind. A large wound therefore is
best in these three cases.

First, when the blood is gross, thick and Melancoly, that it may pass forth
with the more facility. Secondly, when there is great abundance of humors: for
they are better expelled with a large than a narrow or small wound. Thirdly,
when the country or season of the year is extreme cold, as in Winter, in
srost and snow: for cold makes the humors thick. Contrariwise, a narrow or
little cut is best, when the strength of the body is but weak: lest the wound
being too large, the vital spirits might immoderatly pass forth with the
blood. Also in a hot country or season, or when euacuation of subtle and
thin blood is requifite: Schola Salerni says: Fac plagam largam,
mediocriter, vt cito fumus, exeat vberius, liberiusque cruor.
The wound make mean, for meanly done:


The fumes may pass, and blood may ^unne. Melancoly and slegmatike complexions
bleed often times guttatim. i. drop by drop, and therefore a larger wound must
be made in the^ than in others. When the vein is opened, we often also loose the
band from the upper parts, that the blood may run the better. If the blood
run sufficiently, let it alone: if but slowly, and that through fault of the
incisio^, amend it. If through grosnes of the blood, or of any other cause; let
the patient bend his fist hard together, or turn the staff about in his hand,
or by coughing or loud speaking, let him enforce the sinews, Muskles and
sides. And if need so require, bath the wound with warm water. If he be
fearful or faint hearted when he sees the blood, and that it be stayed
through fear; leave off a while til the strength be recovered, by such means
as we shall declare anon: Yea, albeit the blood flow reasonably well; yet it is
good in the midst of bleeding, to stop it with the finger, both to recreat the
strength, that it be not too much wasted: and also that the filthy and corrupt
blood may with the more speed come from the inmost parts, and so be expelled.

The quantity of blood passed forth is to be considered, as we showed before
14 and 15 Chapters, that it may be stayed in due time: and in this behalf
thereof two regards are to be had especially. First, the necessity of the
disease. Secondly, the constancy and firmenes of natural strength: whereof
look in the foresaid places more at large. After good blood apeares, bleed no
more for fear of the crampe, convulsion, palsy, dropsy, and such like. In a
simple plenitude, to avoid imminent dangers, it shall be sufficient only to
abate the abundance: albeit, a mediocritie still remain. But in an universal
disease, as is a fever; a mediocritie will not serve, but blood is abated more
then so. And in inflammations we are not only to regard the quantity but in like
manner the alteration of the color and substance of blood, and when great
pain, or inflammation is in places near the incision: stay not the blood
before the pain begin to assuage, or the color of the blood to change. For
alteration of color shows that the same blood (unlike the other that good
is) proceeded from the inflamed part. If the humor cleave fast to the member,
or that by euacuation the strength of nature be wasted, then we are urged to
stay bleeding, before the blood do change in color, and to detract that
which remains by reiterating Phlebotomy, either the same day, or the day
after. Hyppocrates, 2. vict. acuto. 10. In the cure of the Pluresie writes,
that in the cure of that disease, the inner vein of the arm is speedily to be
opened, and blood plentifully to be withdrawn until the same appear far
redder than it did at the first: or that for pure and red blood, the same
appear swart and black, which both happen in Plurisies. If the blood were
before raw, crude, and undigested: and that it come from the inflamed place,
near an incision: it becomes redder, or yeallower, because this blood is
horter, than that which went before. If it were at the first thus colored:
namely, read or yeallowish, than when it comes from a member inflamed, it
turns to be black and swart, thorough adustion, and thus you see how to stop
the flux of blood, by the quantity, by the substance, and by the color of the
same*

As we are to consider the foresaid things, in the blood, so are we to
consider strength in the Pacient. Of defect of strength these are the signs:
The flux of blood relenting: pa^e color in the face: gapings: stretchings:
noise in the ears: webs in the cies: and defect of seeing: All these show a
decay of the spirits oflife; they show faintnes of the heart; and that the
bodily parts are forsaken of inward heat. To these may be added, the hicket:
and a desire to vomit, which comes of flux of the humor, to the mouth of the
stomach, as were already showed. But the most certain and assured mark, is
the alteration of the Pulse, which changing from thick to slow, from great to
little, from strong to weak, from equal to unequal; prognosticate defect of
nature, and a perturbation in the body, not much unlike Epilepsia: that is, the
falling sickness. If these come through fear, or of humors nipping the
stomach; stay bleeding, recreate and strengthen the Pacient a while: that
afterward the residue of the euacuation, may be perfected.

The ways to recover and fetch strength again, if the same give over before a
convenient and commodious quantity of blood may be taken, are these: to cast
cold water on the face of the Pacient: to sprinckle upon the face white
odoriferous wine, to put to the nose of the same party, vinegar, strong wine,
musk, or other aromatic things, if these help not, we must close up the
vein a while with the finger, and if need be, the euacuation is to be
imparted or divided. But to avoid all these accidents, the remedy is to let
blood, the party lying in his bed, for so the parts of the body are reduced
into one equality of position, whereby the principal parts mutually bestow one
on an other inward heat and vital spirits: if the Patient be not brought
again by the foresaid things, then provoke vomit by tickling in the throat,
or by pouring in a little oil, for the force of vomiting stirs up strength,
and draws away weakness of the stomach and heart, and presently after
recovery, renew the strength of nature, with wine, iuce of Pomgranats, broth of
flesh, with the receipt called Diamo^cho, and other cordial things.

The instrument may be anointed with oil, or other such liquor, that it may
inflict the wound without pain, and for the most part the wound must bend
somewhat aslaunt or crookedly. The incision is made two ways, as Hyppocrates
says: one straight Secundum rectum, or Edirecto, downeright: the other
contrary crookedly, or a swash. In these two ways we must use great
discretion, to use them as need requires, and not deceive our selves, using
the one, when we should the other, (as many are deceived in these days.) To
show which of these is to be preferred, would require a long discourse,
whereof read at large, Fuchsius in his Apology against Brachelius.

There is new kind of instruments to let blood withal now a days: as the
Rapier, Sword, and long Dagger; which bring the blood letters sometime to the
Gallows, because they strike too deep. These instruments are the Ruffians
weapons, more malicious than manly. But in this practice the vein must be
opened with a fine Launcet, no fleme with a beard like a bloud-iron wherewith
Smiths let horses blood, for they will sometime cut a veyn thorough on both
sides, causing a crampe and deadly convulsion. And here I give advise, that no
Surgion except he be very skillful himself, open any vein without the
counsel of the learned Physician, or the judgment of some others, that have
ancient and tried experience in the practice. Ignorant Barbers do great hurt
herein, taking that which comes to hand first, or which appears greatest
(perhaps a sinew for a vein) so letting out the vital spirits, and killing
many: and when it is done, this is all their defense, to say the sign was
there, and he would needs be let blood.

Unction or anointing, is often used in this practice: sometime we rub the
member, whose vein is to be taken with oil, that thorough the warmth thereof,
blood may be made the more flowing: sometime the instrument is anointed, as
was said before, to mittigate the pain of the inflicted wound. Sometime the
wound it self is anointed, that it may be the longer time, before it be
covered with the Scarre, and that the humors left behind* may with the more
liberty breath forth, and that the ill humors remaining, may be also the
better dispersed.

Drink, and especially wine, may be very well taken both in the bleeding, if
Syncope happen, and after bleeding, to cause good blood, and to recover again
the vital spirits.

Bathing two or three days before, is used in some causes (as was declared in
the former chapter) but not the self same day.

The common opinion is, that bleeding must be done fasting, and upon an empty
stomach: but this is not approved of the best writers, for many of them give
advise to eat before bleeding a soft or poched egg, with a draught of wine
about nine or ten of the clock ^n the forenoone: and then presently to open a
vein. For nature (the stomach being empty, and being altogether destitute of
nourishment) does mightily holdfast, and retain the blood: whereas when a
little nourishment is taken in small quantity, as is a poched egg, and a
draught of wine; she permits the blood easily to passeforth.

It has bin declared before Chapter 16. that if necessity urge, there is no
prescribed time of bleeding, but that if the disease require, the same may be
done at all times, yea even in the night. Yet the forenoone of the day is the
most usual time. There is an hour of necessity, which is any hour in the
day or night: and beside this, hora necessitatis, there is hora commodi^atis,
which is the morning or forenoone hour. viz. Galen. de Curan. r^tio per sang.
missio. cap. 13. and 20. and in praesagio experientia Comprobat^ cap. 4. Aetium
lib. 3. cap. 16. Oribasi. lib. 1. cap. 11.

Moreover, if a vein opened send forth blood whitish in color: stay the
same, for it appears that the humors in the body are raw, cold, and
undigested, through defect of natural and digesting heat. This is affirmed by
Aristotle lib. 1. and 9. de animalibus: and Hippocra. witnesses, that always
women's terms appear not in their proper color; and that by reason of
frigiditie and coldness of white blood, they oftentimesvomit, and have flux of
terms.

Finally, as in purging, so in bleeding, as we have already said, we are to
consider the standing of the wind, and in winter to bleed when the same is
Sowtherly: and in Summer when the same is Northerly. For the North wind with
cold tempereth the heat of the time.

The verses of Schola salerni.

Hac facienda tibi, quando vis Phlebotomari,
Vel quando minuas, fueris vel qua^do minutus,
Vnctio sieve lauacrum, and potus fascia, motus,
Debent non fragili tibi singula mente teneri.
Before and after letting blood,
all these are meet and requisite:
Unguent, a bath, strong drink and good,
with motion mean, and bonds most fit.
Remember all do none forgit.
A prescription, or regiment of the patient, after bleeding. Chap. 20.
WHen a sufficient quantity of blood is withdrawn, proportionable unto the
greatness of the disease, unloose the bond, and dry the wound: lest being
moistened with clodded blood, either it grow not together again, or bring
some doubt of impostumation. These things not done accordingly, enforces us
sometime the eight day after, to open the wound again. If any piece of fat
come forth, the same must not be cut off, but softly put again into the wound.
When the wound is wiped clean, and dry, close up the vein with linen dipped
in rose water, or sweet water; or with Oil, if we purpose to bleed again.
Let the same be tied on with bonds: not too^hard for writhing the skin, or
lips of the wound.

If a sinew or Tendon be pricked, ye heard in the chapter before what is to be
done. If there be doubt of flux of blood, or an inflammation through pricking
of a sinew, we may beside the premises, apply after the practice of others, a
plaster of Ceruse: and in compass about that, a Cataplasme of Housleeke,
Nightshade, Plantaine, and other cold things. After bleeding lie a while on the
back, for quietness sake, and to recreate the strength of nature, and to
recover the vital spirits. He must not frequent his accustomed affairs, nor
move his body hastily, nor exercise himself immoderatly, neither must he use
Venus delights, nor yet bath himself. For the blood and spirits natural,
vital and animal which have of late bin vehemently stirred by bleeding, are
now by rest again to be settled: else the same blood and spirits would by
these outward vehement exercises, be inflamed, and so wast and consume away.
Neither must the party presently sleep, lest either the languishing heat be
quite extinguished, or the lessened spirits, altogether overwhelmed. Let him
therefore watch, and rest void of contention, either in mind or in body. When
an hour or two is past after bleeding, a little meat may be given him: Little
(I say) in quantity, but of good juice, to nourish the body, and profitable
also to withstand the present disease: and when 2. hours are past this short
repast, he may then sleep, so as his keepers carefully take heed, that he
tumble and turn not himself on the arm that has bled, or that the bond by
tumbling and tossing be not removed, which may cause the blood to slow again
a fresh, or some other displeasure to fall out. Afterward the diet must be
increased by little and little, both in respect of the quantity, and of the
goodness of the meat. Neither as yet must we hasten to a full diet, for the heat
of nature being abated by bleeding, can not as yet receive or digest abundance
of meat. And again, the veins lately emptied, would exhaust out of much
abundance of meat, much raw and undigested matter, wherewith the whole body is
stuffed again. If concoction be perfected and accomplished, so that we may
eat great quantity of meat, yet use a moderation: for to what purpose is it,
presently again to stuff the body with juices and humors: for the abating
and taking away whereof, we did so lately let blood. Therefore after bleeding
the patient is to live more finely and exquisitly, and not to go to his old
intemperat diet again, as the dog to his vomit. Neither are these intemperat
persons meet men to be let blood, as we proved and showed before in the 8.
Cap. Fig. 1.

Of reiterating bleeding, which they call Epaphaeresis, this is the order.
First in inflammations, great pain, hot fevers caused of abundance of hot
blood: a vein must be opened, as is already showed, even presently at the
very beginning before the matter be gone to some principal member: not only that
the abundance and excessive quantity of blood, but that much more a great
deal, even plentifully, and generally may be euacuated, yea even till the
patient give over, if the strenght of the body so permit. And in diseases
caused of fulness, the bodily powers are firm for the mostpart: neither do
they shrink or relent much, by this plentiful bleeding. And when Hippo.
permitted bleeding so long, till the patient should give over: he meant it so,
when the strength thereunto sufficient, was able to bear it, and not
otherwise. For if fainting do happen when the powers of nature are firm and
constant, it does only wast the spirits in the arteries, those forces remain
still unhurt and vndamnified, which narure has bred in the heart, Liver or
brain. And albeit these decay in Lypothimia, yet of the settled forces other
like presently come in place whereby again the Patient is revived. But when
the strengh of the body is weak, and greatly enfeebled, because the forces of
nature settled and seated in the principal members, are also impaired.

If Lypothimia then chance, re^^itution will hardly be made. Therefore (I say)
the virtues of nature being greatly debilitated: beware of over coming or
fainting. And this is the order in great and urgent sicknesses.

In small general diseases, as in repletions, fulness, fevers, and such like,
whose cause and principal matter is contained in the veins: if bodily
strength permit, we must presently euacuat, and wholly at the beginning, and at
one time: not till the patient overcome, but so much as is needful* and as
the infirmity or malady requires. And this euacuation without any hurt to the
natural forces, withdraws the matter abounding, either before the same do
wholly putrify, or that it pos^es^e some notable member, or before any horrible
accidents happen. He that for fear or any other cause parts or divides in
these, the euacuation: he continues the disease long time, and does no good,
but great hurt to the sick patient. But if for imbecility of strength the
whole euacuation can not be accomplished or done: seeing it is better in this
case, to mark the strength of the party, then the vehemency of the disease:
we are enforced to use partition in the bleeding; and yet with a great
circumspection and care: and let the partition be within a little distance of
time, either by undoing or vnloosiug of the bound, or stay the blod with
applying the finger on the wound so long, as by the foresaid means, the forces
of the body may be recovered. Sometime an hours space is sufficient, sometime
more hours ^re required, to the restoring of the forces of nature. The best
way is not to defer the partition of bleeding past one day: yet (I say) if
strength permit, and that partition must be used, bleed twice in the self
same day, in general diseases especially: and except other imped^m^ts greatly
let, euacuacuat in one day, as much as is expedient, before the matter come to
putrffaction or that other evils do grow. But in partial diseases of
particular members, chiefly in inflammations, the parted or divided euacuation
may be put off a longer time, either to the day following, or to the day after
to morrow: that in this space, the corrupted humors, may go from the member
diseased into the veins exhausted: and so by the next incision, be euacuated.
The member of the body that is afflicted with grief or corruption, by little
and little, even in one day or two days at the most, sends down the humors
to the place where the incision was. And for as much as they are corrupted, they
are not there to remain: albeit the former pains be mittigated and assuaged.
But if the inflammation be pestilent and venomous, as is a pestilent botch or
carbuncle, the euacuation of necessity must be reiterated even the self same
day: lest the pestilent infection stick and stay any long time, in the veins,
to the great hurt of the party.

But neither must reiterating of bleeding be used: For thereby the vital
spirits, and in ward heat is diminished, and untimely age is hastened on
apace, and the same when it comes is made subject to grievous diseases, as
Chachexia, the dropsy, gout in the iointes, trembling, palsies, and
apoplexies. Yea when the natural heat is immoderatly cooled and natural
moisture wasted, the bowels languish, crudity and vndigestion begins to
bear rule, whereby are caused great and grievous evils in the body of man. And
thus much of the reiterating of bleeding, and order thereof.

But let us come again to our former matter of prescription, moderat motion,
and easy walking, as it was conuement before bleeding, to unloose, and make the
humors thin, so also the same is necessary after bleeding to disperse
abroad the relics of those vapors and humors which are left behind. And as
bonds of linen were used before bleeding, to the intent the veins might wax
big, appear full, and be the better perceived and seen: and that the
humor with the more facility might come to the place appointed for incision:
so afterward, they are also needful, to stay the flux of blood, and bind up
the wound.

It was already said that the party let blood must not sleep, that is to say,
not within the space of eight or six hours at the least* whereof this is
alleged as a reason, that the fumes caused by sleep, be not carried up to
the head, and so offend the brain* There may hereof be aleaged other caused
more, as namely: lest the vein opened should take hurt by tossing of the
patient up and down in his sleep: which cause was lately above specifyed.
Also lest in sleep the humors should flow to the member, where the incision
was made, and there apostumat. For pained places as Galen affi^meth Capit. 95.
medicinati^ artis and lib. de Curand, ratio. per sang. missionem. Capit. 7. are
by nature accustomed to receive fluxes: and chiefly in sleep. Auicen alleges
this reason: Because by sleep after bleeding (for the most part) there
chances in the members, a confraction or b^using. For while the member is
tossed hither and thither with inordinat and unorderly motion: the bonds are
unloosed, the wound unhealed, and (as it were) newly opened, notwithstanding
the late incision, it does afresh send forth immoderat flux of blood, the
party in his sleep not witting thereof* whereby (as all men know) the life
comes into great danger. Again, another discommodity by sleeping immediately
after bleeding is: that fumous excrementes through sleep are again inwardly
revoked to the principal members.

Again, the vital spirits, and natural heat, which by opening of a vein, are
drawn to the outward parts and members, by sleep are revoked to the center,
or mids of the body: and so very often, partly through a commotion made by
incision, and partly through that retraction made by sleep: such a boiling
happens in the humors of the body, that often thereby at length a fever is
caused and kindled. It is therefore apparent, that sleep presently after
bleeding is not good, and chiefly if in the mean season the patient have
received no meat. If after taking of meat he sleep an hour or two, or more
(disposition so serving) it hurts not at all, or very little.

But for as much as the commotion of humors can not fully be settled in short
space after bleeding, it is far safer to forbear sleep, as we have proved by
sundry reasons. If necessity and dispotition v^ge sleep, let the same be
short, and with a d^ligent circumspection, that the bonds be not unloosed, and
so the Patient brought in peril of his life. Some bring in a further reason,
yet of the fore said, namely, why we should not presently sleep after bleeding
and that is: because the matter through sleep* waxes thick, and so a brusing
or a confraction that way happens in the members: as is accustomed in a
quartan, through the thicknes and coldness of the matter. Again the veins and
sinews after bleeding, being now emptied, are become cold, and so the fumes
which are brought unto the veins and sinews in sleep, do also be come thick
and wax cold: because by sleep the whole natural heat of the body is
drawn even into the depth and profunditie of the bodily parts. And when the
veins and sinews are become cold, partly for defect of blood, partly through
cold fumes brought by sleep unto them: they do participate grosnes, coldness,
and confraction to the other members: for it is a principle, Simile a simili
facile afficit^r. Like of the like is easily affected. And thus much of sleep
after bleeding, which is to be understood of sleep only following immediately
after, and not otherwise.

The verses of Scola Salerni concerning this point are these.

Sanguine subtracto sex horis est vigilandum,
Ne somni fumus laedat tibi sensile corpus
Ne neruum laedas non sit tibi plaga profunda.
Sanguine purgatus, ne carpas protinus escas.
Six hours sleep not, when blood is let:
The fume by sleepefull hurtful is:
It hurtes the vein, if stroke be great,
To feed streightwaies, is far amiss.
The patient is a while after bleeding, to abstain from meat, till the motion
of humors be appeased. For in this case, raw juices and meat not yet
concected, is drawn with the blood to aid the member afflicted. Look Galen,
lib. 4. Cap. 10. de Sanitate tuenda.

Milk, and meats made of milk, after bleeding are to be eschewed: for
certain of those humors which were troubled and moved in opening the vein,
flow unto the stomach: and forasmuch as milk is otherwise of it self,
subject to corruption: being now in this case inwardly received, and mingled
with the foresaid humors: it is very soon putrified: and because of the
sweetness thereof, though it be unconcocted and raw, yet it is mightily sucked
up, and drawn in of the empty veins.

Irem, all cold things, either in wardly taken, or outwardly applied, are to be
avoided: of which sort are chiefly cold meats, cold drinks, cold bathings and
washings, cold air, thinness of clothes, bare sitting upon stones, coldness of
the head and feet: for by these the body would be immoderatly cooled; natural
heat being already diminished through bleeding.

Item, mistie and cloudie air is to be eschewed: for such weather ingendreth
Melancholy blood, and makes a heavy mind. He must therefore walk in clear,
bright and fair weather: for thereby the spirits of life are refreshed.

Item, immoderat motion is to be forborne, and a temperat quietness to be
embraced, both of body and of mind. For vehement mouings do yet more and more
still disturb the humors of the body, before excited and stirred up by bleeding*
and so consequently the same weaken too much the bodily forces: whereas quietness
and rest soon appeaseth this commo^on of humors.

Item, eating of salt fish is to be avoided after incision: for these salt
meats often times cause itchings and scabs* Simeon Sethi, depiscibus.

The verses of Schola Salerni, in these matters.
Omnia de lacte vitabis rite minutus,
and vitet potum, Phlebotomatus home.
Frigida vitabit, quia sunt in mica minutis,
Interdiclus eritq* minutis, nubulus aier,
Spiritus exultatque minutis, luce per auras,
Omnibus apta quies and motus s^pe nociuus.
White meats eschew, d ink not too much
Cold things forbear as ill for such*
Walk not abroad in clowdie days,
clear air does cheer the spirits always,
Be wholly quiet at all assayes.
Item, Beware of much meat, the first or second day. And let the meat be of
good digestion, and causing good blood: as soft eggs: good wine: chickens, and
such like. Therefore Isaac in dietis says of such as are let blood: that their
meat must be lessened, and drink increased: that is, the drink must be more
in respect of his meat that he eats daily, not in regard of that custom
which he observed before bleeding. Yea, he must now drink less than he did
before.

Some after letting blood, are very dry in the mouth: which happens through
the great motion of the humors, and by abundance and ebullition of choler,
whose fumes arise upward to the mouth and other parts. These are to drink
Barlie water, to mitigate the acuitie, sharpnes and heat of choler: and so
must they do in like manner that are in doubt of inflammation of the Liver and
stomach, through abundant boiling of chollericke humors: specially, if it be
red choler, that abounds in them.

If through hard binding of the arm, before or after bleeding, pain do
ensue, and so consequently sluxe of humors to the place causing apostumation in
the arm: then according to Auicen, let blood in the other arm: or according
to Rhazes, above the place in the same arm; and apply to the place
repercussiues to keep back the matter.

The wound in the arm after bleeding sometime heals but slowly, because the
instrument was anointed with oil, as we said before, that the same might
enter the better and do lest hurt to the pacient, as Galen says 9. Method. The
cause now of this slow healing is, for that the healing is much hindered, by
reason of the oil which is between the sides or the lips of the wound: For,
as the same Galen and other authors affirm, a wound is not cured or healed as
long as there is any thing between the sides or lips of the same. Another
cause why after bleeding the wound closes but softly is, that there has bin
too much euacuation of blood, whereby the force of nature is debilitated, which
hinders the continuatio^ or consolidation of the wound. A third reason hereof
may be, the often moving of the arm: for wounds do never heal, except the
member enjoy rest, where they are inflicted. Therefore let this fault be
remedied by contraries, as thus: Let not the instrument be oyled: euacuat not
too much ^loud: and lastly, forbear exercise and motion of the arm.

What veins are to be opened, both in general, and particular diseases. Chap.
21.
SOmetime are opened veins, and sometime arteries. Of opening of an artery
we purpose to speak afterward in a Chapter by it self. And now of opening
only of a vein; which is used in many members: Sometime in the arm called
Manus magna: sometime in the hand called Manus parua: sometime in the feet:
sometime in the nose: sometime in the forehead: lips: tongue: palate, or roof of
the mouth: sometime in the corner of the eye, toward the forehead: sometime in
one place: sometime in another: as this discourse following does plainly
teach. It is known to those that have seen Anatomies, that there are in the
body of man, two sorts of veins. General, and special.

Five veins are opened in Manu magna, in the great hand: that is, ab ascellis
vsque ad cubitum, that is, from the elbowe forward, or downward, as Rhazes
faith in 7. ad Almonsor. Chap. 21. and Auicen in quarta. i. Chap. 20. Where
note, that Phisicions by the great hand, do mean the whole arm, together
with the hand: as by the foot, the whole leg, from the hippes or huckle bone,
to the soale of the foot.

The common or general veins which appear in the midst of a man's arm, are
these: The first is Humeraria, or Humeralis, in Greek called Omiata, because by
the shoulder it comes to the hand. It is also called in Latin Vena
exterior, the outward vein, because it goes along on the outside of the arm.
It is again called Cephalica, or the vein of the head.

This vein is most apt and fit, and most safe to be opened, for diseases of
the vpp^r parts of man's body; it is less dangerous than the rest, because
there is no sinew or artery under it, to hinder or endanger the opening
thereof. If a man chance not to touch it at the first stroke, he may be bold
to strike it again: for there is I say, no ieoperdy to cut any muskle. It is
opened with a long cut to let out gross blood: and albeit there be no fear of
any sinew, artery, or Tendon underneath it: yet wound it not too deep, for
fear of apostumation. This vein is taken when the parts above the breast or
neck (as the face or head) are discased. Therefore it is opened profitably
for passions of the head, as Hemicrania: the Mygrame, and Mania: Madness,
which comes of too much abundance of good blood, having recourse unto the
head: And such other like hot passions of the head, proceeding of ho^e matter.

Also Cephalica is taken in headache: watchings: and pains of the eyes. If it
be opened for headache, purge a day before with a certain quantity of Pills of
Hiera simplex, according as the learned Physician shall appoint thee to take.
If you cannot find out this vein in the arm, take his branch about the
thombes end. Galen cap. decimo sextode Curand. ra^io. per sanguin. missio.
Cephalica opened, cuacuateth and pulls back from those parts which are above
the canell bone of the throat called Clauicula, and this it does with the more
celerity and greater speed, if it be opened in the arm: more weakly, and
with less speed, if it be taken but in the branch thereof: that is, between
the forefinger and the thombe. Inward and outward affects of the head, whether
they be but yet a beginning, or that they are in Statis maximo, in the greatest
force; are cured and drawn back, by opening Humeraria vein in the right
arm, if the affects be on the right part or side of the head: or in the left
arm, if the pain be on the left side. This practice may be done not so
speedily but at more leisure, only to prevent the foresaid cuils to come, by
opening the branch of Caephalica, just between the thombe and the forefinger.
These affects are often removed without opening of a vein, as are also sometimes
frensies, rauinges, apoplexies, even by scarrification of the shoulders, by
boxing and bleeding at the nose. Item eyes inflamed, and burned with sharp
droppinges, and cies that water, are remedied: First by opening of Humeraria on
that side where the pain is most: and afterward the matter of these affects is
pulled back, by applying cupping-glasses, to the hinder part of the neck and
shoulders.

The second general vein in the arm, is the inner vein of the same, called
of the Greeks Haepatitis: Of the Latins Fecoria, or Lienaris: late Physicians
call it Basilica or Regia in the right arm it is called Hepatica, the vein of
the Liver: and in the left arm Pulmatica the vein of the lungs: it is also
called vena interior, and it comes or grows thorough the armehole. Fuchsius
calls it Axillaris: that is, the vein coming from the liver to the arm
hole: Of Axilla which is the arm hole, or hollow place under a man's arm,
where the hair does grow.

The opening of this vein is very doubtful and dangerous, both for the
artery, and muskle that lies under it, and alfo for the manifold and
uncertain course of the sinews in that place: and specially it makes a man
more doubtful in the inner bought of the arm, than in other places, because
there the arm is less fleshy. Ignorant Barbers, thinking to open Basilica
open oftentimes a great sinew hard by it, which is like a vein, and so the
vital spirits, and life it self often runs out together with the blood, and
this do ignorant Barbers take in cure for headache, and want of sleep, when
they should take Cephalica, of whose dangerous boldness we spoke before, Chap.
19.

This vein emptieth from those parts which are beneath the neck, as are the
breasts, sides, lungs, heart, liver, spleen and marrow: yea, it emptieth from
the middle part of the body, vsque ad Clauiculam, to the canell bone of the
throat, and i^ opened to help passions of the breast, stomach, spleen, and
liver, and also to help Pluresies of the sides. If ye cannot spy it in the
arm, seek the branch of it between the fourth and the little singer: the
liver and heart are the roots of this vein.

Several fulness, being no affect of any particul^r part, without choice may be
withdrawn from any vein: yet most commonly it is done with greatest profit,
from the inner veyn of the right arm; which principally eu^cuateth from vena
caua: the hollow vein and the liver. So also is fulness of choler, taken
fromthe inner vein of the right arm, as melancholy repletion is abated from
the inner vein of the left arm, according to the s^ituation of the Milt. In
which regard, the Basilica of the left arm is called above Lienaris. That
repletion which comes of a filthy gathering together of raw and crude humors,
must equally be taken out of both arms.

In the cure of Fevers, this order of bleeding is to be observed: A simple
Sinochus fever, or a simple fever putrified or caused through putrefaction of
humors: requires to have the Basilicam of the right side, or arm opened. So
does an hot pestelenciall fever simple, and not compound. So does a tertian,
and a continual quotidian. A quartan requires the inner vein of the left
arm* This is also the Method in pure intermittant and discontinuing fevers,
if either the plenitude or accidents will have us to open a vein.

Revulsion of matter from those parts placed between the canell bone of the
throat and the raines: is done from the right Basillica or left, as the
disease requires, if the right parts be affected, open for revulsion Basilicam
dextri brachii: If the left, the other Basilica: Open this vein in the arm,
if great and speedy bleeding be needful. If a more slack and remiss
bleeding will serve the turn, seek the branch of it in the hand, between
the little finger and the fourth, as some say from the right kidney to the
left, and passing over the bottom of the stomach.

Inflammations in the gut called Colon, which is a great gut rising from the
left side to the right, or in which is the disease called the Colic, albeit
the same be under the raines, yet they are cured by revulsion; opening
Basilicam, or the inner vein of the arm. For so the beginnings, and
deriuations of the veins do show.

In inflammations of the lungs: take the Basilica or inner vein of the left
arm, rather than of the right, because the veins of the lungs, come from the
right side of the heart, which part of the heart is placed toward the left part
of vena caua, and so by the left wing, runs into the left arm.

This order of incision also helps spitting of blood, thorough extreme
coughing: the disease called Tabes: trembling of the heart and such like.

In a Pluresie, open the Basilica of the arm, according as the pain shall
happen in the right or left side. In a Pluresie of the right side, the right
Basilica, and so contrary. Item the interior vein is taken in inward and
outward apostumations of the breast, or midriffe, and in inward Ulcers, which
cause us to spit blood. Thus also by opening of Basilica, are cured
inflammations on the shoulders, and under the arm holes: except they come to
the very bought of the arm: for then it were very dangerous to open the very
part or member inflamed; but in this case we open a vein in the hand, e
directo: that is, straight.

In pains and inflammations of the Liver, we open the right Basilica: and so
the left Basilica when the Milt is inflamed, grieved, or ill affected: and in
all these we must take the vein in the arm if much bleeding be needful:
and if not, then the vein in the hand. Deriuation from the Spleen, is not
made as some do think, into the veins called Hymorroide, but into the belly.
So de^iuation from the hollownes of the Liver* is made also into the belly.

A postumations in the Raines, when the veins also all full of blood, are
repelled by the right Basilica, if the right kidney be grieved: by the left
Basilica, if the left kidney be ill affected.

If excessive fullness do not urge in these apostumations, the revulsion is
better attempted out of the lower veins, which are straight and right, as out
of the right or left anckle.

Affects of the belly, as immoderate flux of terms, are stayed by opening
Basilica in the arm, which draws the flux vpwardes: So do also
cupping-glasses, applied either to the paps or nauill.

That revulsion which is made by opening Basilica in the arm (specially the
right Basilica) is to be accounted general: because it draws from the Liver
(which is the fountain it self) from whence all flux of blood comes,
whether the same be flux of terms, or any other flux of blood.

Revulsion made from the lower veins, is particular: not euacuating first from
the Liver, the fountain of blood, as the other does. And forasmuch as things
universal, go before partiticuler things: therefore in inflammations under the
kidneyes, we must first pull back with direct opening of Basilica in the
arm: and afterward we are to open the lower veins, which also have some
force to reveal: but if either the fulness or the flux be great, it is not
best first to open these v eynes below.

Finally imminent diseases like to arise thorough plenitude of blood, are kept
back be opening the right Basilica: that is, the inner veyn in the bought of
the right arm.

The third general vein in the arm, is the middle vein, called of some very
properly and fitly venacommunis: of other Cardiaca or Cordiaca: venanigra: and
Matter: and of the barbarous Physicians, Mediana. It is called Media or Mediana
for three considerations: First, inregard of the scituatio^, having in the
upper part of the arm above it Cephalica vein, and in the lower part of the
arm beneath it the Basilica vein: and so these being as it were extremes, it
possesses the mids between them both: Yea, it is indeed a branch of them
both. And for this cause secondly it has the name Mediana, as if it were made
of them two, as the mean is made or consists of the two extremes. Thirdly,
it has the name Media or Mediana, for that it is Media: that is, in the middle
in respect of euacuation: Euaeuating both from above and from below, above the
neck, from the neck, and from beneath the neck: For it springs (I say)
from the division or parting of both the other veins, that is, Cephalica and
Basilica.

By opening this veyn, there is made a general euacuation of humors, through
the whole body. A general or universal euacuation I call it, not because it
springs from the heart as some affirm, but because the flux comes
generally from all parts: This vein being a branch (as ye have heard) both
of Cephalica and Basilica.

This vein is taken when neither of the other appears, and withdraws blood
from them both, according to the judgment of some: This vein is the same which
is called also Funi^ brachii. Cephalica and Basilica, are (as it were) the
Parents of Mediana: As often therefore as thou art determined to open Basilica,
and that the same do not appear, take rather the Mediana vein, than the
Cephalica. And if thou purpose to detract blood from Cephalica, and that the
same do not show conveniently; open rather Mediana than Basilica: and being
compact of Cephalica and Basilica, it withdraws blood indifferently from them
both: both from place and parts beneath, and also above.

Some give advise (upon what ground I do not yet see) not to open Cardiaca if
the Patient feel any weakness at the heart: but if necessiity of bleeding be
urged, the heart being enfeebled, we are rather to open Cephalica or Basilica.

This vein is opened to cu^e ^assions of the whole body, especially when they
proceed of heat of the heart, and of the Lungs* In opening whereof we must
be very wary and circumspect, for under it there is a certain muskle, which
being very deeply cut or pearsed, brings the Patient in ieoperdy of life:
and it is opened in pains of the breast right side, and in Pluresies; and must
be opened somewhat overthwart. The danger in the cut^ing for the sinew
underneath, is especially, if the wound be deep: and the same danger in the
Greek is called Aneurisma. Yet for all this, there is less peril in opening
of this, than of Basilica: and as being compound of Cephalica, and Basilica, it
euacuateth from them both: so it reuelleth and pulls back from them also,
and is for the most part deeply wrapped in the flesh, and appears not but as
it were Soboles, an offspring of Cephalica and Basilica. Where note that
albeit the opening of a vein, as Galen, and Auicen do testefie, be an
universal euacuation out of the whole body, yet not so of all veins a like,
but chiefly that is to be called and accounted a common and general
euacuation, which is made out of these three common and general veins in the
arm: And as affects of the upper parts are cured by incision of the upper
veins, in the arm; So are griefs of the neither parts, by opening of vey n
es in the h^ms and anckles, as Galen faith, and as we gave instructions before
in the eighteen and nineteenth Chapters. If we doubt whether the ^atient will
bleed effectually or no. First, bath the arm in hot water, and when the
wound is inflicted, draw the wound wide and abroad, that the gross
melancholy blood, may the more eassy pass forth. Note also that in all
sickenesses and times, except in time of pestilent infection: that veyn of the
three, must be taken: which appears biggest and most full: for by that ye
may perceive that the members appertinent to those veins, are most abounding
with superfluous hot* blood. And thus you see the profit of opening the common
veins in the arm.

Moreover a vein opened in the arm, stays flux of hemorroids: If any
inflammation be about the privy parts, Arese, Bladder, or other parts called
Obscaenae: so as there be no venombd matter in the same; the fulness and flux is
to be abated out of the upper veins in the arm. After the which if necessity
require, particular revulsion may be made out of the lower parts* And so in
fulness and fluxes of the thighs apostumated; first open a vein in the arm,
and afterward in the foot. If the plenitude or inflammation be but small,
omit the upper veins, that euacuation from the lower parts shall be
sufficient: And this is the order of opening a vein either in the beginning,
or in the state of diseases.

For detraction of blood, to withhold diseases like to come of present fulness
and repletion* to stay the Hemorroids, withdraw the fulness out of the upper
veins. If a member have full veins broken, or like to break, and that the
member readily receive fluxes coming unto it, and that there be yet no disease
bred: do not euacuat the matter at a vein ve^ie nigh the affected part, but a
far off, and direct as it were: whereby the future flux may be stayed, and
the accustomed force withdrawn another way. And thus much of the general
veins in the arm.

Now to proceed to special veins: we are first of all to call to mind:
especially the vein called Saluatella, or Salubris: this vein is called of
the Arabians, barbarous physicians, and of Auicen Sceilen. This vein appears
in the hand between the ring finger and the middle finger, where we are to
note that oftentimes among the Arabians and barbarous physicians, that vein
which shows it self, at the wrest, and is compact of a branch of Cephalica
or Humeraria vein, and the vein called Axillaris, is called Sceilen:
whereupon late writers call also the vein Saluatell^ Axillaris.

This vein is opened in the right hand, for obstructions of the Liver: and in
the left hand for obstructions of the spleen: where of as yet there is no
apparent reason, but that exper^e^ce proves it to be so. Moreover when we
open this vein, the hand of the patient must be put in warm water till the
vein be puffed up, and swell, and may easily be seen: and that the humor
may be made subtle. Yea when the vein is opened, it is again put into the
water, that the blood may the sooner issue forth: if it com forth but softly
as it accustomably happens to most of those that bleed at this vein. Again,
it is good to let it bleed in the warm water, lest the wound be too soon
covered over with the skarre. Rhaz. lib. 7. Cap. 21. ad Almons. and Auicen
quarta prim, cap. 20. When this vein has bledd as much as you will, apply on
it a little Oil and Salt, and there is no fear in it, because it is far from
the heart. This practice (I say) of opening Saluatella for opilations of the
Liver and spleen, has no manifest reason, but is grounded upon Galens
experience: who having a patient troubled with those diseases, deemed, that if
he did let her blood of Saluatella vein, she should recover: which he did
accordingly, and she was cured presently.

Saluatella in the right hand between the little finger and the next
adjoining, is opened in opilations of the breast, against gummy matter in the
e^es, perbreakings, yellow iaund^es, pains of the cholicke in the right side
of the belly. Saluatella in the left hand is opened against all diseases of the
spleen coming of repletion and oppilation: it is good to heal the Hemorroids,
frensies, and chollickes in the left side, diseases of the veins, and
abundance of terms. And I am here to advertise of the variety which I find
among writers touching the place where Saluatella is to be opened. For the most
part I take it to be opened between the middle fingar and the ring fingar.
Yet another place of his incision (as some hold) is between the ring fingar
and the ear fingar or little fingar.

Of the incision of Satuatella six vtilities are found and numbered. First it
purges the spleen: secondly it cleanses the Liver: thirdly it purifieth the
breast: fourthly it takes away impediment in speech: fifthly it conserueth and
keeps from hurts those parts called Praecordia. i. the strings of the heart,
the mouth of the stomach, and all the spiritual members near the heart: sixthly
it remoueth unnatural pains, even from the ha^t it self: Which commodities
are contained in these verses of Schol^ Salern^.

Ex Saluatella, tibi plurima dona, minu^a,
Splenem, hepar, pectus, vocem, praecordia purgat.
In naturalem tollit de c^^ de dolorem.
Vein Saluatel does profit all,
The spleen, the Liver, breast, and voice.
It purges parts praecordiall,
And makes the heart for to rejoice.
And thus you see from how many places the opening of Saluatella withdraws
blood: that is from the spleen, liver, breast, precordiall parts, and the heart
it self: in whose opening, no danger is to be feared, only with warm water
(as ye heard) we must both subtiliat and make thin the blood, and cause the
small vein, the better to appear in sight.

Although (as ye heard in Saluatella) that this name Axillaris, of some
writers be given to the vein Saluatella: And that the vein called Sceilen of
the Arabians, is also of some called Vena Axillaris: yet in truth, we following
the most approved authors, take here Axillaris to be a branch of Basilica, and
that it appears in the bending of the arm downwards, and for Physic helps
is judged to remedy those diseases, which are cured by opening of Basilica.

Funis brachii is like Cephalica, and is a branch of Cephalica descending, and
the judgment thereof in physic helps, is as the judgment of Cephalica
aforesaid.

Arteries, as in whom is the greatest danger, they are placed of nature far
more inwardly, and the veins are more outward, to keep the body from
dangerous hurts. Of Arteries we purpose anon to speak, in a distinct
chapter: now here we are yet to proceed further to more particular veins.

Item there are two veins in the hinder part of the head, good to be opened
against the fren^y, swimminges in the head, astonishment, and other passions of
the head.

Item, there are 2. veins of the temples of the head, which are opened in the
cure of Hemicrani or the mygra^, in great and contintal headache, in
distillations of humors to the eyes, in impediment of sight, and in diseases
of the cars.

Item, in the mids of the forehead between the two brows is a vein whose
incision profits in heaviness of the head, specially the hinder part of the
head: for infirmities in ^he face, as rednes, morphues, itch, scabs and in
affectes of the eyes, Cephalica first being opened.

Item, a vein in the higher part of the forehead is opened in all diseas^s of
the head and brain, specially if they be of long continuance: also it cures
the new begun leprie.

Item in the nose is a vein, in whose incision you must tie the neck with a
napkin until the parts of the head swell, and the vein appear, and this
must also be done, when the vein in the forehead is opened. This vein in the
tip of the Nose, is opened against apostumations of the head, rewmes, and
fluxes of the Eyes: it purges the brain, and comfort memory. This vein
must be sought for very suerly and wisely, for it lies deep* and therefore
he that will be sure of it, must find it even in the very mids between the 2.
sides of the nose end. The 2. veins within the nosthrils are opened against
heaviness of the head.

Item, there are veins between the l^ppes and gums which are opened in
apostumatio^s of the mouth and gums, Cephalica being first opened.

Ite^, there are veins under the tongue opened in diverse affects, chiefly in
Angina, the Cephalic^ being first opened: there are ^. of them in number, they
are also opened in fluxes of the head* palsies, squinances or quinsees,
scroplules, apoplexies, coughs, pains of the mouth, ^eeth* and gums,
impediments of speech: generally in all diseases of the breast, heart, lunges,
and arteries.

Item, there are 2. veins within the mouth, which be opened in diseases of the
head, toothach, pains of the jaws, mouth and throat: also against freckles of
the face.

Ite^ there are 4. veins in the roof or palate of the mouth, which are
opened in tothaches, reumes, and catarres of the head flowing to the teeth, and
causing the tothach: these veins are manifest enough. Ioha^. de Sancto Amardo,
an old practisioner, sets down a cure that he d^d on a woman grieved with
tothach. First ^ used percussiues to stay the rewme, and it did no good: the^
things mitigatiue, and they did as little: the^ maturatiues, nether did they
any good* Then I let her blood in Cephalica first, and opened (says he) these
^oure veins, when the matter of the flux was digested, and so she was cured:
but if the matter be not digested, the opening of these helps not.

Item, there are c^rt^i ^e veins in the watrie angles of the eyes, toward the
brow, which are opened in passions of the eyes, pains of the head: Opthalmia
that has long continued, and in wat^ie disti^lations of the eyes, the
Cephalica first opened. Item, hereby are cured webs, spots, clouds, mistes,
pearl, rednes, corns, and such other infirmities of the eyes, with weakness
of sight.

Item, there are two veins in the concauities and hollownes of the ears,
which being opened, heal shaking of the head, swimming of the eyes, dis^ines,
pypings and sounding in the ears, uncleanness of the mouth, a new begun deafnes.

Item, there are two veins behind the ears, which are opened to preserve
memory, to cleanse the f^ce, to take away the rewme and dis^^llations from the
head, generally in all deseases of the mouth and gummes.

Item, in the temples near the ears, are veins opened in the diseases called
Vertigo, and the Migram: and in great and continual pains of the head. This
incision makes a man barren, as Hipp. affirms* lib. de Genitura, and in lib.
de aere, aquis and locis, in these words: Quibusdam iuxta aures venae sectae
sunt. Hi^ cocunt quidem and ge^ituram emit^unt, verum manca^ debilem and
infae^undam. Some have certei^e veins cut, not far from their ears, w^ic^ do
the act of generation, and give forth seed, but the same is imperfect, weak,
and barren. Neither is this contrary to reason: for most of the seedie
moisture descends from the head into the marrow of the back. Hippo. also
af^irmeth, that the noble men of Scythia, by incision nigh their ears, become
unfruitfully. These veins Auicen called Iuueniles.

Item, there is a vein between the chin and the neithet lip, which is opened
in a stinking breath.

Item, there is a vein, lying right underneath the chin, which is opened also
against a stinking breath, and also in diseases of the head and breast: Polipus
in the nose, pains in the cheeks, stinking of the nosthri^s, spots about the
face.

Item, there are two veins in the neck, one before, another behind, that are
opened in a plurisie, in a new begun leprosy, shaking of the members, humors,
and distillations from the head, too much stifnes oflimmes. The Gre^ians call
these veins Sphagitidas: the Latins Iugulares, they are veins of the throat.
The Arabians call them Guidez: the barbarous Phisicions call them Subeticae: we
may call them Venae apoplecticae, or the sleepie veins: because being wrung
hard, or pressed down, they bring an heavy sleep, and a certain drousines
like the disease called Apoplexia. To speak plain English: these veins of
the neck or throat, being hard tied, bring Judas disease* i. very hanging.
These are opened (I say) in the beginning of leprosy, when the breath is very
short, in the beginning of Angina: in the disease called Asthma: in horcenes of
voice: in apostumation of the lungs: in Dyspnaea. i. pursines or stoppings of
the lungs, caused of much hot blood, in griefs of the Spleen and side. Vide
librum Anatomiae viuorum Galeno adscriptum* Cap. 28. Rhazen. and Auicen.

Item, there are two veins under the armeholes, which are opened in streitnes
of the breast, pain of the midrife, and the lungs, in difficulty of breathing
called Asthma.

Item, there are two veins above the elbowes, which are opened in all diseases
of the breast, swimming ofthe head, spalme, the falling sickness.

Item, there is a vein called Vena purpure^, or the purple vein, lying in the
right arm, next Hepatica, or Basilica toward the hand; which is opened against
diseases of the spiritual members, and of the bowels.

Item, there is a vein called Illiaca next unto the purple vein: which being
well taken, is good to heal pains of all the inward members.

Item, there is a vein called vena pulsatilis, or the beating vein, which is
opened in tre^blings of the heart, sowning, and Cordiaca passio.

Item, there are two veins in the thombes, which are opened in diseases of the
head, bleared eyes, and in most fevers.

Item, there is a vein between the forefingar and the thombe, which is opened
in stopping of the head, to purge superfluity ofcholer, also in agewes, and
diseases of the eyes.

Item, there is a vein between the ringfingar and the little fingar, which is
opened in diseases of the head, lungs, and spleen.

Item, there is in th right hand between the little fingar and the next
adjoining, a vein caled Saluatella whereof before. Item, Saluatella in the
left hand: look also before.

Item, there is a v eine in the right side, opened in Lienteria Dysenteria,
dropsies, and other infirmities of cold matter.

Item, there is a vein in the left side, which is opened in apostumations, and
excori^tions of the bladder, pains of the loins, swellings and stoppings of
the spleen.

Item, there is a vein in the belly, which is opened in diseases of the
raines, and to purge out the Melancoly blood.

Item, there are 4 veins about the place called Pecten. i. the place where the
hair grows about the privy members, on either sides which may be opened in
superfluous issues of the Hemorroids: to assuage pain and diseases in the
bladder and secret places: to stop bleeding at the nose and other members: to
heal Lyenteria, and Stranguria.

Item, there is a vein over the foreskin of the yard, which is opened against
the dropsy, and all diseases of the same member.

Item, there is a vein underneath the said foreskin, which is opened for the
crampe, spalme, colic, swelling of the coddes, strangurie, Dissuria, the
stone in the raines and bladder.

Item, there are two veins in the thighs, which are opened in diseases of the
raines and bladder.

Item, there are two veins in the legs, which are opened in dropsies, pains
and apostumation of the bladder, raines, and privy parts: in the gowt, and
swelling of the knees.

Item, in the feet there are three veins, Ischiatica, Saphena, and Vena
poplitis: the vein of the hamme behind the knee. These we open to revoke blood
downward, as in provoking of menstruous Terms. But among all these, the vein
in the ankle is most convenient, as Auicen says: For, vena poplitis, being
more nigh unto the womb, it draws blood better from thence than either
Saphena, or Ischiatica. When the plenitude in the body is not great, it is
better to detract the same from the right lower veins of the hammes, and the
ankle.

Vena poplitis opened, provoke Terms: so does it flux of Hemorroids: for
the force of the blood tending downwardes, as it were, opens the womb, and
provoke consequently both Terms and Hemorroids.

If there be any inflammation in or about the belly, at the biginning thereof,
draw the matter upward, and that directly: For from above, as from the head,
the flux proceeds. Neither in this case are we to fear in weomen stopping
of Terms, by opening a vein in the arm: if presently therewithal, we open a
direct vein in the hamme or ankle, which is the way to turn them aside, as
we hane said already. But if first you should open a vein below, the force of
the inflammation would therhy be incresed.

Affects in any part under the raines, are most speedily cured by opening the
greater veins of the hamme: the same are cured slowly, and with less speed,
by opening Saphena in the ankle. The raines are in the middle between the
upper parts and the lower: Yet I prescribe and appoint not the position, so
much by order of the member, as by the original and productio^ of the veins
passing into that part. And therefore inflammations in the right muskles, of that
part called Abdeme^ above the nauile. i. in the outward and upward part of the
belly or panch, are revoked by opening a vein below: and inflammations beneath
the raines in the gut Colon are pulled back, by opening the inner vain of the
arm, as before.

Saphena is opened to withdraw blood from the raines, matrix, womb, stones,
and yard, and from all members placed below. Saphena and Ischiatica are
branches of one vein as Galen says 6. Aphoris. Saphena, on the inner side of
the leg, is opened in stopping of terms, grief of the matrix, raines,
hippes and privy members of men or of women.

Ischiatica corrruptly called Sciatica begins above at the huckle bone, or
haunch, called Ischias. This vein may be called the outward Saphena,
descending from thence on the outside of the legs. It draws from the raines
and lower members that are outwardly placed: and is opened in pains of the
huckle bone, caled Sciatica: in griefs of the bladder and bowels: gout of the
hands and feet: pains of the joints: palseyes: in the disease called Vaux.i.
when a crooked vein swells with Melancoly blod in the temples, belly, or
legs, and in leprosy.

Ite^, there are two outward veins in the ankles, which are opened in stopping
of Terms, sicknesses of the Spleen, pains in the back, strangurie and stone.

Item, there are two veins under the little toa, which are opened to purge
superfluities of the matrix, in scrophules on the face and legs.

Item, there are two veins adjoining to the little toe, which being opened,
cure apoplexies, yellow Iaundies, and choler, palsies, and diseases of the
raines.

Item, there are two veins in the les^er joint of the little toe, which are
opened in old coughes, pustles, and Opthalmia.

Item, there are two veins in the middle toe, which are opened inscrophuls,
diseases of the face, spots, rednes, pimples, watrie eyes, canker, knots, and
stopping of the Terms.

Item, there is a vein on the left joint in the great toe, which is opened in
Opthalmia, spots of the face, and legs, ^^ch, evil ulcers and supersluitres
of the matrix.

Finally, I conclude with Venatalii, the ankle vein, called also Saphena, that
of the lower veins, it is of great profit, and to be opened in pains,
stoppings, and swelling of the matrix, or yard: and is opened the foot being
put in a vessel of water. The Sciatica vein, which is one of the middle veins
toward the outside of the foot, is next in use, for the disease caled Sciatica
in the huckle bone: So as first we purge with Hiera, and annoint the place
outwardly with oil of the same. And when blood letting i^ not convenient, (as
afterward you shall hear) as also in this practice for Sciatica, we may apply
boxes, with scarification: as the place, humors, and time requires, and as
affectes in the upper parts are cured, by upper veins, opened in the arm: so
they in the nether parts, are cured by lower veins, opened in the hammes and
ankles.

As we have hitherto declared the veins in general and particular, with
their profits in bleeding, for manifold diseases: So also, to the intent that
the practisioner may be furnished thoroughly with knowledge in this point which
is the most principal: and to know in every disease what vein to open, and so
not to take Hob for Gib (as the proverb says:) it shall not be greatly amiss
for the more perfectnes herein, to teach this lesson forward and backward, as
they learn their Gamma vt, both ways; that intend to be good Musicians: so
must those be most perfect in this discourse, that in this practice of letting
blood will be accounted skillful and good Phisicions. Now, therefore in a most
compendious sort, I will first set down the disease, and then the vein that
is to be opened for the same.

And first, touching a body that is not yet sick and diseased: but who that is
sick, either in his whole body, or in some particular member in the spring
and the beginning thereof, he may be let blood of any vein, of the great and
general veins, and so in the preservative intention, may be kept back,
continual and universal fevers, and a general or universal gowt: if there be
doubt of any particular inflammation in any particular member, let blood some
vein in some part far off, whereby the v^e and custom of nature, and also the
flux of blood may be turned from that member where the danger is very likely
to rest, into some other part far distant, and in these two points rests
the whole preservative intention of this practice.

Concerning a pacient sick and diseased, and the curatiue intention of this
practice: If he be sick, he is diseased also, either in the whole body, or in
some particular part: If the disease lie in the whole body, then the Basilica
or inner vein of the arm is to be opened, which directly answers unto the
Liver* which is the very fountain of blood.

If the pacient be sick in any particular part, the same is either above the
neck, as in the face, or in the head: or it is beneath the neck. The diseases
in the face and head are these 7. a Frenzy, an Apoplexy, the Letargus or
sleeping disease, the falling sickness, the Quincie, inflammation of the eyes,
flux of blood from the nose.

1 In a Frenzy, in the beginning thereof* blood must be pulled back from the
head by opening some veins, as will from far withdraw the matter: always
observing rectitude with the part affected: and this may best be done from the
Cephaliea vein. In the state of a frens^e, or when the force thereof is
somewhat abated, first take away the repletion of the whole body, and then let
blood, either in the member it self that is affected, or member very near
unto it: as in this case the fittest vein is the vein of the forehead, or
that vein which is between the nosethrils.

2 In an Apoplexy, first in the beginning therofopen Cephalica: If that
appear not, open Vena communis, or Mediana, or that vein which is between
the thombe and forefinger^ afterward if the disease be rooted and continue:
open the vein under the tongue.

3 In Letargus or the drowsy disease, first open Cephalica: afterward if the
same continue long* open the vein of the forehead.

4 In the falling sickness, open the self same veins that are opened for
apoplexy.

5 In Angina or quincie, first open Cephalica: then the vein under the tongue.

6 In inflammation of the eyes, first open Cephalica, then the vein in the
inner angle or corner of the eye.

7 In sluxe of blood from the nose, open Cephalica, or Mediana, the common
vein.

For diseases beneath the neck, they are either above the raines, in the
raines, or beneath the raines. Above the raines are these four: A Pluresie,
diseases of the lungs, inflammation of the liver, inflammation of the spleen.

1 In a pluresie, and the beginning thereof, open the Basilica or inner vein of
the arm on that side, that is pained abating and putting back the aboudance
of blood so long, till the blood change in color, if so be the strength of
body in the patient, will bear it.

2 In diseases of the Lunges, Vena Axillaris, or the inner vein of the arm is
to be opened, or if that appear not, the common or middle vein: or for the
more forcible reuultion, we may take the vein in the hand, between the ring
finger and the middle finger: or that vein which is between the ring finger
and the little finger: Always respecting rectitude of opening in the right
vein.

3 In inflammations and diseases of the Liver, do as is said for the lungs
Basilica vein: observing alwais rectitude of members.

4 In inflammations and diseases of the spleen do also as before, observing the
rectitude on the left side. If the diseases be in the rames themselves, that
they are inflamed: and that the same inflammation be but a beginning: open the
inner vein, or Basilica of the arm. If the infla^mation be in his state, or
somewhat relenting, open the inner vein of the ham, or anckle. If the diseases
be beneth the rains, they are either diseases of the womb or belly, or of the
bladder, or privy parts: or of menstruous terms, or of the Hemorroidae veins,
thigh, or haunche.

1 In diseases of the womb or belly, if the flux be a beginning, and that
there is repletion in the body: open a vein in the arm, to turn the flux an
other wax: when the flux is don, and the affect be not removed, open the
inner vein of the ham or anckle.

2 In diseases of the bladder, do even so: both in their beginning and in their
state.

3 In inflammation and diseases of the privy parts, do likewise even so.

4 In restraint of terms, open the vein of the ham or anckle, or scarrifie
upon the anckles.

5 In terms immoderately flowing, open the vein of the arm.

6 In restraint of hemorroids, open a vein in the hamme or shanke, which is
from the knee down to the ancklee.

7 In immoderate flux of hemorroids, open the Basilica in the arm.

8 In pain or ach of the thigh or huckle bone (called Sciatica) first open the
inner veyn of the arm, to pull back the matter: afterward open the outward
vein of the anckle, to euacuate the same.

Finally, remember always that when sulnes has adioined with it in the body,
corrupt humors, or that with increase of much blood, there is also some evil
and corrupted iuces: as happens in that fulness which is only Quo ad vires:
and in continual fevers, joined with putrefaction: than we are both to let
blood, and to purge, as was showed before in Chapter, 4.

Certain very old english verses, concerning the veins and letting of blood,
taken out of a very ancient paper book of Physic notes.
YE Masters that vsen bloodletting,
And therewith getten your living:
Here may you learn wisdom good,
In what place ye shall let blood,
In man, in woman, or in child:
For evils that be wood and wild.
There been veins thirty and two:
For wile is many, that must be undo.
Sixteen in the head full right:
And sixteen beneath I you plight.
In what place they shall be found,
I shall you tell in what stound.
Beside the ears there been two,
That on a child mote been undo:
To keep his head from evil turning.
And from the scale withouten letting.
And two at the temples must bleed,
For stopping and aching I reed:
And one is in the mid forehead,
For Lepry, and for sawcesleme that mot bleed.
Above the nose forsooth is one.
That for the frenzy mote be undone.
Also when the eien been sore,
For the red gowt evermore,
And two other be at the eien end,
If they bleeden them to amend.
And the web that comes through smoking,
I you tell without^n leasing.
And at the hole of the throat, there been two:
That Lepry and straight breath will undo.
In the lips four there been,
Able to bleed I tell it be deene,
Two beneath, and above also:
I tell thee there been two*
For sorenes of the mouth to bleed,
When it is flawne as I thee reed.
And two in the tongue withouten lie:
Mote bleed for the quiuancie.
And when the tongue is ought aching,
For all manuer of swelling.
Now I have told of certain,
That longer for the head I ween,
And of as many I will say:
That else where there been in fay.
In every arm there been fife,
Full good to bleed for man and wife.
Cephalica is one iwis,
Cephalica.
The head vein he cleaped is,
The body above and the head:
He cleanses f^o evil and qued.
In the bought of the arm also,
An order there must be undo:
Basilica his name is,
Lowest he sits there ywis: B^sili^^.

Forsooth he cleanses the Liver aright:
And all other members beneath I twight.
The middle is between the two, Cora^^ id (...) vena.

Coral he is cleppid also,
That vein cleanses withouten doubt:
Above and beneath, within and without.
For Basilica that I of told,
One braunched vein sty up full bold,
To the thomb goes that one branch:
The Cardiacle he will staunch,
That there branch full right goes,
To the little finger withouten oath:
Saluatell is his name, Saluatel

He is a vein of noble fame,
There is no vein that cleanses so clean*
The stopping of the Liver and Spleen.
Above the knuckles of the feet,
With two veins may thou meet,
Within sits Domestica: Dom^stic^. (...).

And without Saluatica.
Domestica cleanses well*
The bladder every deal,
Siluatica withouten doubt, Sil^atica (...).

He cleanses well for the gout*
In the hammes a woman shall bleed,
For stopping of her flours at need,
A man shall bleed there also,
For the Hemotroids to fordo.
Two veins if thou use I say,
The quartane thou may void away*
All the veins thee have I told,
That cleanses man both young and old.
If thou use them at thy need:
These foresaid evils they dare not dreed.
So that our Lord be them helping,
That all has in his governing.
So mote it be, so say all we.
Amen, amen, for charitee.
A profitable observation of the blood extracted. Chap. 22.
WHen the blood flows forth of the wou^d, the same is to be received in
clean wiped porringers of earth, glass, tin, or silver: not of brass, lest
the same cause alteration of the substance, color, or other quallity of the
blood, and so our judgment by that occasion be perverted and corrupted. Of
these little vessels, there must be many in number, that in each of them, the
variety of the blood may appear and be seen: and they are to be set in a
fair place, that no dust, smoke, wind, or Sun, come unto them. The first
observation 1. Substanti.
is the substance of the blood, which sometime is viscous, and cleaves to the
fingers like glue; this flows out but softly and slowly, because it is
thick, and it quickly again congeleth. This kind of blood is the cause of
obstructions in the body, and of such diseases as are caused by obstructions.
That blood which congealeth not so soon in the porringer, is thin blood. And
that which waxes not hard, being cold: is watrish and putrified blood. Thick
and viscous blood, and compacted hard, is hardly cut or divided, and thin blood
very easily: putried blood not at all: but as soon as it is touched with ones
finger, or a knife, it is torn and rent (as it were) into small pieces.

2. Serum.
Whey, which is (as it were) a yellow water swimming on the blood, wehn it is
clodded. shows eitherimmoderat drinking, or a weak Liver, as in hidropicall
persons: or weakness of the raines, and obstruction of the same. For these
diseases cause abundance of watery wheyish matter in the veins, mingled with
the blood. The thick blood is very hardly imparted, or distributed among the
small veins: for thereby they would soon be obstructed.

3. Spuma.
Froth swimming on the blood except the force of the flux have caused it,
declares heat, and inflammation of that humor, which the color expresses.
Red foam shows blood: yellowe foam choler: white foam ^^egme: swart some
melancoly.

The color of the congealed blood, being very red in the top, shows a good
profitable qloud. The color red and clear, shows hot blood: as that of the
arteries. An obscure red color expresses a mean or mediocritie, as is the
color of the blood in the veins. A citrine color. i* of the color of a
citron, gold, or or^nge, shows dominion of choler: white color, dominion of
phlegm: green color, superiority of adust choler: and a color swart, or like
lead, shows abundance of hurtful melanco^^e with mortification of the
spirits. A mixture of diverse colors, shows abundance of diverse humors:
whether the colored humors be putrified or no, the substance of the blood
declares. White color comes of good concoction, chiefly in those that have
full strength: whose vrins appear well concoct, with most white residencies in
the bottom. The blood of such persons in the veins through concoction wax
white. If the blood be white in color, and viscous in substance: it signifies
adust phlegm, by reason of burning heat in the same. If it be not viscous, but
thin and wat^ish, it shows natural phlegm. The best color in blood is red,
inclining to a certain obscurity or darkness. Purple color very thin and
clear, shows choler as Galen witnesses inpri. de Chrisi. If it be very dark,
it betokens gross blood. Green blood shows perfect adustio^.

When the blood flows soorthspedely, it is suetile and thin: when it spinneth
not forth, but comes guttatim, slowly drop by drop: it betokens that it is
gross blood: when meanly between both, then is it a mean blood, between
gross and thin. Again sometime it is quickly congeled, then is it g rosse
blood: sometime slowly compacted, and then is it subtle. Thick and gross
blood, shows thick and gross matter in the body: or it shows great heat
and drith, which has consumed the humidity of blood. If it be subtle and
thin, it shows want of digestion, and abundance of raw, unconcocted humors,
of hot humors, or of cold, as the color shall discrie.

If the blood be oily, it betokens either a future leprosy, or too much
fatnes in the body: for leprosy is caused of extremity of heat in the blood,
burning the same, and converting it into an oily substance. Again, take a bat
round in the end, and set it to the congeled blood, if it withstand it not, but
give place unto it, and be divided: it is an argument of drith. If the blood
greatly resist the entrance of the bat, then is it a very thick and viscous
blood. If between both* then is it a mean blood* And thus of the substance of
the blood, which should have bin inserted before. And touching the color in
like sort, this brief observation by the way, which was also omitted, but may
come in here yet in good sort a good blood is of diverse colors, according to
the diversity of the parts: for in the upper part and in the compass of the
vessel, it is of a red color: for the good blood (being light) always
ascends up to the higher parts: in the mids it is red, and not clear: in
the bottom it is black and melancolious. For melancoly (being heavy) rests
always in the bottom.

^. Pinguedo.
Sometime there swimmeth on the top of the blood a certain fat, or oily
matter, like a copweb. If the body be very gross and fat: this is caused of
the very blood, which is in such bodies inclining to fat. If the body be very
lean, it declares the same now to begin 8. Subsidentia.
to melt, and to languish.

In the bottom of the clodded blood there is resident an earthly and a filthy
substance, which being divided, or cloven asunder, appears in color, either
red, dark, black, bright, or green: whereby we may conjecture the nature of
the humor mixed with the blood: yea and by the color much or little, we may
know, how much each humor abounds in the veins.

Some say, if the blood be cut or divided, and 7. Grana.
that there be found in the same, certain grainees like small sand, that it
notes leprosy, or inclination unto it: which always has not been found true
by certain that have observed it.

It is sildome, that the blood coming from the veins, does sink: but if it
do, the same shows corrupt and stinking humors, and is a token of incurable
putrefaction and corruption.

No man does willingly taste detracted blood, but if by chance it come into the
mouth, and do taste sweet, it is according to nature, good, and of perfect
concoction. If it be bitter in taste, it shows abundance of choler: if it
be sour, sharp, and restringent, it denotateth abundance of melancoly: if
unsavory, abundance of phlegm: if salt, the blood is mixed with salt phlegm.
After observation of the substance and color of the blood, confer all the
small porringers, or vessels of blood together. If they show all equally good
blood, it is to be supposed that the rest in the veins, is like unto it. Yet
the same is to be withdrawn, if it offend in quantity, and grieve the body,
hurting the senses, and causing in the body putrefaction and other evils. If
blood appear corrupt, then with a greater profit, the same is to be
withdrawe^, because it hurts the body two ways: both with the quantity and
quality thereof. If it be not sufficiently withdrawn at one time, afterward
again, a vein must be opened: and beside bleeding, if Cacochymia concur with
plenitud: that is, that blood offend both in quantity and quality, as we
noted in the 21. Chapter: beside bleeding, the body must more over be purged
with inward medicine.

If that blood which came first were good, and the other corrupt: then suppose
that yet much such blood remains in the body, to be avoided by good order of
diet, and orderly euacuation. But if it fall out so in inflammations, it is a
good sign that the euacuation is absolute and perfect: quite taking away the
matter of the disease from the affected member. The blood poured into warm
water, has thereby his parts and substances divided: the wheyish and watrie
substance is confounded with the water, and cannot be known from it. Also the
thinner and more subtle part of the blood is mingled with the water likewise:
whereby yet notwithstanding after a sort, we may give judgment of the nature
of the humor. The thicker part of the blood rests in the bottom* which is
reputed good and natural blood: if so be it be whitish, thin, bright, and
cohering together. If the same be more gross, it shows the grosnesse of the
blood that remains in the body. If it be obscure, black, or otherwise
colored, after the difference of the color, judge the blood to be corrupted,
or not corrupted with ^ilthinesse of wicked humors. If it do not cohere, but be
distracted and divided: it betokens incurable putrefaction.

Last of all, remember that the more vnpure and unconcocted the blood
appears, being altered from the nature of good blood, the same is to be
withdrawn in the less quantity, and not so plentifully, as when the same
draws more nigh the substance of good blood: which is done otherwise, and
quite contrary by our common barbors and letters of blood. And look how much
the humors do pass and exceed, either less or more, the nature of blood: so
much more sparingly, are we to let blood. And when they exceed too far from
the nature of blood, either the one way or the other: then we are altogether
to forbear bleeding, as we have noted in a certain place already.

A short rehersall of eight ancient errors, touching bleeding, and a
sufficient confutation of them, by ancient authorities. Chap. 23.
FIrst, that blood must not be let, but in the morning. This is confuted by
Galen, lib. de Curand. ratio. per sanguin. Missio. Capitul. 12. saying: Fear
not to let blood by night: forit is ridiculous that some do maintain: only
letting blood, from the second hour of the day, to the fifth or sixth, and no
other time.

The second error is, that obstruction and putrefaction, are the causes of
letting blood. Galen also confutes this 2. Metho. Med. cap. 14. in these
words: Neither obstruction, nor putrefaction is the cause of le^ting blood,
but abundance of humors: for neither can stopping, or putrefaction be cured by
bleding, but require other remedies.

The third error. That opening of a vein is vnn^edefull, except the disease be
present. This also is confuted by Galen* de Opt. sect. ad Thrasis, Cap. 37. For
the most part (says he) we use remedies, as purgagion and bleeding, when the
diseas is not present but future.

The fourth error. That Phlebotomy must be done in the judgment day of a
disease. Auicen impugneth this in quart. primi. chap. de Phlebo. saying:
Neither must bleeding nor purgation be done, in the day of the moving of a
disease, nor when the same has Crisim. ^. judgment. But if it be possible,
let there be rest. This is also proved Aphorism. 21. Qua iudicatur vel iud^cata
sunt etc.

The fifth error. That bleeding dulleth the sight. Gallen remoueth this error,
li. de Curand. ratio. per sangui. missio. Chapitul. 7. Some have a weak sight,
having aboundauce of blood: Euacuate such, either with purgation, if there be
other humors beside blood, or by bleeding: and so detracting of blood does
good, not dulling, but quickening the sight.

6 The sixth error is, that in fulness always a vein must be opened. Gaben
confu^eth this error, 4. de vict* in morb. acut. Commen. 19. Plenitude is not
always cured by bleeding, but by rubbings, many and often batlings, and by
abstinence.

7 The seventh error is, that blood must be let, the womb being very
la^atiue, this Hyppocrates refelleth, 4. de vict in morb. acut. cap. 118. If it
be needful to withdraw bl^ud from any: you must stay the womb, and so let
blood, and Galen in the same place says: If the belly be flowing let not
blood: lest the flux continuing, the strength of the body be cast down.

8 The eighth error is, That there is no difference of the times of the year,
to let blood in. Galen contrary to this, writes ad Glanco. cap. 14. Those
Physicians which consider not of the state of the times, and withdraw blood,
they kill men. Et 4. de vict. in morb acut is Commentar. 19. If the Air be too
hot and dry, we refrain from bleeding, though the sickness be vehement, and
the age of the party youthful.

A sufficient confutation of the supposed necessity of annual bleeding. Cap.
24.
THere comes here to my mind, a common opinion among the ignorant people,
which do certainly believe, that if any person be let blood one year, he must
be let blood every year, or else he is (I cannot tell, nor they neither) in how
great danger. Which fond opinion of theirs: whereof so ever the same sprung
first: it is no more like to be true, than if I should say: when a man has
received a great wound by chance, in any part of his body, whereby he loses
much blood: yet after it is healed, he must needs have the like wound again
there the next year, to avoid as much blood, or else he is in danger of great
sickness, yea, and also in hasard to lose his life: which opinion (if I did
affirm to be true) albeit it be most false: yet I might use the like reason
and authority to defend it, that the common people use, in the defense of
theirs. For they can say nothing, if they be asked, why they think so; but
that they have heard many to say so. Therefore I would wish, that no man should
credit this folish opinion, being most false, unless he can show some good
reason for it, which I am sure no man can do.

This I think, that like as blood letting is not good against al diseases: so
is it not good in all persons (as we have set it down in the 9 Chapter) but
only in those that will be content to use afterward a moderat and convenient
diet. Those therefore that do abound with blood, and will be let blood to
preserve themselves from the danger of any disease that is like shortly to
ensue, must long time after be content to use a moderat diet: For intemperat
persons and gluttons, great drinkers and wine bibbers; they do not only
receive no commodity at al by bleeding; but often times greater hurt, than if
they had bin without it: For, within 3 or 4 days after, they fill and stuff
them selves with more raw juices and humors, by unmeasurable diet, than they
had before: and often times these die through convulsion.

And hereupon we are to note, that there is such force in moderat diet, to
eschew sickness, that without observation thereof, Phlebotomy is to no purpose.
And therefore if this common saying of the common people be true in any* namely,
that they must be let blood often, th^r are once let blood: it is only true in
such as keep ill diet presently after bleeding. Therefore to conclude this
Chapter, I council al persons to beware of excess after opening of a vein.

Ofincision of Arteries. Chap. 25.
AS a vein is opened, according to our former discourse hitherto: so sometime
also an artery is opened, that is to say, only such a vein, wherein the vital
spirits mixed with the blod do run and flow: but for the hard stinting of
the flux from an artery: Phisicions are in doubt to make insicion thereof:
and yet some sometime practice it (as in the disease called Vertigo.) If in
opening of a vein, we chance to stick an artery, we can very hardly by and by
stint the bleeding: and although the matter* fall out very well, that the wound
or incision be brought to a skarre by division: yet there will be a dilation,
or spreading abroad of the cut artery still: as Galen witnesses, lib. de
Curand. ratio. per sang. missio. Cap 21. and 22.

The bleeding of an artery is hardly stayed: partly for the heat of the
arterial blood, which is very quickly moved, and by spreading abroad, opens
the artery, whereupon incision of an artery greatly furthereth the bleeding
partly, because the motion of the arteries never cease, as Galen witnesses,
lib. 2. Cap. 20. de Sanitate tuend. whereby also it comes to pass, that the
wounds of the arteries, are the more slowly cured. For such things as are to be
healed, require rest and ease, Gal. lib. 5. Cap. 8. metho* medend. and commet.
6. lib. 6. Aphoris. The opening of an artery is to be used, when the body is
repleate with thin, windy, and very hot blood. For the seat of subtle,
thin and wind^^ blood, whereof the natural heat and vital spirits are
engendered, is in the arteries: and to is the hotest blood which comes from
the hotest member, that is the heart, and which is carried into the other
members of the body, contained likewise in the arteries. The receptacles of
the thicker blood, wherewith the ^^e^bers are nourished, is in the veins.

Upon what occasion Galen did cut an artery, he himself shows, Cap. 22. dv
Curand. ^at. per sanguinis missio. being warned (says Galer) by certain
dreams, of which, two among the rest, most plainly appeared unto me: I went
to cut that artery of the right hand, which is between the forefinger and
the thombe, and I let it bleed, till it stayed of it self: for ^o (says
Galen) I was warned by my dream: and there fl owed out not a whole pound and
the continual pain ceased, that was specially in that part where the Liver
lies in the midriffe. I know one long troubled with continual pain in the
side, freede thereof, by opening an artery in the arm: the same also being
attempted through the warning of a dream.

It is very dangerous, either willingly or un willingly, to cut the greater
artery under the vein in the arm, or under the vein in the hammes: For the
blood being thin, hot, and forcebly issuing out, will hardly be stopped,
and many have dyed of Gangraena, rising in the member where the incision has
been: as did a Gentleman of new Rumney in Kent, a year or two past: and so
much the sooner, comes this putrifieng, rotting and mortification to the
member, when the Phlebotomer goes about with a band to stay Haemorrhagiam:
That is the dangerous flux of the arteriall or vital blood. If the blood be
stayed, the wound cannot be brought to a skarre, without Aneurisma: by reason
of the continual pulse, and the thick and hard tunicles in the same place. If
necessity so require, it is best to cut the whole greater artery ouerth
wartly, for the blood is soonest staid, when the ends and extremities of the
artery cut asunder be pulled up, whereon the plaster of Aloe before spoken of
Cap. 19. is to be applied.

Without these dangers we may cut the lesser arteries, which are in the
outward lims or members: as in the head, hands, and feet. For these may be
fastened together, chiefly in soft, moist bodies, as of women and children.
These are opened in continual and great pains, about the uppermost skin of
any member: which pain, is like a pricking, or kind of shooting, because of
sensiblenes, and much feeling of the Membrana or outmost skin: and it is
therewithal a beating pain, by reason of the moving of the arteries. The
cause of these pricking pains, is abundance of much thin hot blood, enclosed
in the arteries of the pained place, and the same is taken away, when the
outward arteries, are found out and cut, which proceed from those inward
affected members.

Few in our days cut arteries, because they are not manifest to appear in
sight, nor easy to come by. Arteries cut in the temples do remedy, hot
biting humors, and fluxes of the eyes, in which cases* these arteries are
wholly cut, and burnt with an hot iron, or some burning medicine.

Arteries behind the ears are cut in swimmings, and continual pains of the
head, caused of wind and of heat: Also in rednes of the face, and in other
long continuing affects of the head.

The artery between the thombe and forefinger is opened with continual pains
of the sides, between the bowels, and the Midriffe.

An artery about the anckle is opened: in long continuing pains of the huckle
bones, always chose that artery, which is direct to the affected member, as
we advised before in opening of veins.

Of particular euacuation of blood, and first of bloudsuckers or horseleaches.
Chap. 26.
TO this discourse of opening a vein, which is a general euacuation of blood,
is to be added, the particular euacuation thereof, by leaches and ventosas:
whereof we will briefly speak in these two Chapters, and so conclude this our
present Pamphlet.

When blood is so in any member, that it cannot be pulled back by opening of
a vein or by some other practice: the same is to be withdrawn from the
affected member, by such remedies, as may outwardly abide upon the grief, and
so free the same of the present evil. Of this sort are Leaches. Launsing,
cupping or boxing: which apparently draw blood, from the member affected.

Leaches or bloudsuckers, are worms found in waters, which applied outwardly
to the member, draw forth blood: They make a three square wound, which
penetrateth not only the skin, but also more deeply if the skin be
tender* (as is the skin of children and infants.) These being empty and well
applied, suck out blood greedily and safely, and that so long, till they swell
with fullness, and so fall off: And sometime when they are off, the blood still
follows plentifully, especially if they were fixed upon so open and manifest
vein: In which case, they stand in steed of Phlebotomy. Thus applied to the
hemeroide veins, sometime they do so provoke blood, that to stop the same,
we are necessarily forced to use things astringent: yea, and applied to the
arm of children, they are equal to bleeding: And that extraction which is
thus drawn from a hollo we vein, is to be accounted for an universal
euacuation. But when they are fixed to the hard skin under which there is no
great vein, they only empty that place that these touch: extracting very
little from the nearer parts, and nothing at all from the members far off. And
therefore leaches are only usual in corruptions of the uppermost skin: as
in the scab in Vitiligo, which is a fowlenes of the body with spots of diverse
colors, whereof are three kinds: In Impetigo a disease which we call the
Ringworme. In the disease called Panus, which after Celsus is a kind of kernel
growing in the grind of a man, or behind his ears: In rednes of the nose and
face, and little swellings in leaprous persons. So oftentimes we apply them
to the Arse-hole called Anus, against melancholy diseases, caused of the
stopping of hemorroids. In scabs, itch, and wicked wounds, they are very
profitable: the body being first euacuated by letting of blood. Yea, the
drawing of horseleaches is more convenient in fulness of blood, than scarrifieng
is: Forasmuch as they fetch blood more deeply, and also that which is
withdrawn by Leaches, is more of the substance of blood: Albeit the opinion of
some is, that they draw no blood, but corrupt blood; and such as is not
agreeable, and proportionable unto our bodies. And therefore in griefs which
happen between the skin and the flesh, of blood corrupted, these are more
convenient than scarrifieng.

The attracting of blood by Ventosas and horseleaches, has this difference:
that these draw more deeply from the body: Ventosas but from the superficial
parts. Therefore let Leaches be applied to those places, from whence we would
draw humors more deeply.

Their use and application is this: First, before they be put to any part of
the body, they must be kept all one day before, and nourished with a little
blood, which we may give them in a little piece of fresh flesh: then we must
put them, and keep them in clean water, somewhat warmed: and before we use
them, with a sponge wipe away the skin that is about them: Rub the part of
the member affected whereto you will apply them with salt: or scratch the same
till it look red: or anoint the same with a little fresh blood. Some lay on
them a sponge, that when they be full, they may fall away. They are with most
safety let down in a reed or a pipe to the affected member, lest they might
touch together, and so by that means of end those parts that are sound and
whole. And first before you apply them, so press them and wring them out, that
they may utter and cast forth all their venom, so as their backs be green,
and their bellies reddish.

We are to choose such Leaches as are not in foul troubled black waters:
nor such as have long rays or strikes in them, like rods: called Hyrudines
Virgulatae. Nor such as are of the color of Lapis Lazulus: for these are
venomous. But we are to choose them, that be read, inclining to the color
of the Liver, having two red lines or strikes: or inclining to a certain
greenness, having little heads, and being very slender, and had out of clear
flowing waters. Let them not be black, nor having a certain white hearinesse
upon them, as we see there is upon certain herbs as Clarie, and upon
certain fruits, as upon the Quince: but (as ye heard before) take such as
have green backs, and red bellies.

To make them fall off if need require, put to their heads Salt, Lyme, Dust,
Ashes, or Vinegar: straw any of these upon them, and they will fall away, if
you will have them off sooner, put a horse hair between their mouths and the
place, and draw them away: when they are off, wash the place with a sponge. To
^^nt the blood after they be removed, if need so require: for sometime blood
flows out two hours after the Leaches be gone, straw upon the place,
powder of roses, or of bu^n^d ga^ls, or powder of a new tile, or powde^ (...)
straw, a little Sanguis Draconis: or lay on the place, powder of a sponge, and
pitch (...) or a linen cloth burned: or the herb (...) Pastoris bruised.

after the fall of the Leaches, apply cupping (...) to purge the venom, and
excrements which they have left behind, and to withdraw (...) blood, which
they have drawn somewhat outwardly, but have not quite euacuated.

Finally I give advise, that before you use them to the purposes aforesaid, you
apply them being hungry, which is done thus: by keeping them in water a day, so
that they eat nothing. If you will keep them longer, put in the same water
some Lambs blood; or such like, that so they may be kept alive some season.
For further matter herein, I refer thee to Galen, who has written a book De
Hirudinibus: That is of Bloudsuckers.

Of Cupping, or boxing and scarification, the other two particular euacuations
of blood. Chap. 27.
FOrasmuch as it is not convenient to be let blood often times in the year: for
that much of the vital spirit passes forth with the blood, and that the
blould being taken away, the body waxes cold, and the operations of nature
become weak and enfeebled (as we have before in a certain place declared:)
therefore I counsel (says Galen) that the baser parts of the body, as the
legs, be boxed or cupped, which is the most sure remedy, as well to conserve
health, as to repair the same being decayed.

For it cures the eyes annoyed with long distillations. It profits also the
head, and upper parts of the body, as the breast and back, and against
sundry other diseases. For in what member so ever the blood is gathered, the
body being first purged by cupping, the grief may be cured. Also Oribasius
affirms, that it helps Quincies in the throat: dissolueth stoppings of all
places. Notwithstanding application of boxes about the stomach, in hot fevers,
where reason is troubled, are to be eschewed, for fear of suffocation.
Likewise, put unto the head indiscreetly, they hurt both the head and the eyes.

Boxing helps swellings, lets forth wind, stops immoderate Terms,
and the bloody flixe: helps appetite: when a woman sowneth, it reuiueth her
^pirites again. It draws forth water: asswageth hard swelling: cleanses
Melancholy, and that chiefly in weak bodies. It will remove humors from place
to place: as from the head to the neck: from the neck to the shoulders.

Galen wrote a book entitled de Cucur bitula, t^a^ is* of the Cupping Glass:
and reh^ar^^ h^^p^^nese effects thereof, that boxing do^t^: Non solum materiam
euacuare, sed et^^m dolorem soluere, Phlegmonon minuere, ins^^t^onem discutere,
appetitum reuocare, ventriculo in firmo roburaddere, a^imi deliquio liberare,
ex al^o fluxiones transfer, sanguinis eruptiones cohibere, facultates mensium
corruptrices extrahere mensesque supprimere. i. not only euacuate the matter,
but also assuage pain, take away inflammations, abate swellings, recover
appetite, strengthen a weak stomach, revive those that sown, draw down
fluxes, and stop fluxes: withdraw corruption of Terms, and also stop the
flux of them. Which effects shall hereafter be reheased, with their cures by
this practice more particular.

There are three causes which persuade us to use this practice, and to refrain
letting of blood.

First, because our purpose is to euacuate from some one member, and not from
another: and therefore particular euacuation is done by boxing or Cucurbitulas,
which they that follow barbarous authors in Pinsicke do also call Ventosas.
Now particular euacuation cannot be made by Phlebotomy: for the same
euacuateth and emptieth from the whole body.

Secondly, because the strength is weak, or the age unfit to bleed: or that
there is some other of those impediments spoken of in the 8 Chapter. For as
Rhazes says in 7 Ventosas draw blood but from the little veins: and
therefore the heat and spirits are thereby but a little dimini^hed: whereas
opening of a vein greatly debilitateth nature, drawing from the greater veins
with the blood, much heat and vital spirits.

Thirdly, because our intent is to euacuate only from the baser members.
Bleeding euacuateth from the most noble members, and greater veins: Ventosas
from the mean members, and little small veins, which arein the outward bodily
parts, and lie without the greater veins.

Of boxings there are two sorts, the one gentle without scarification or
launcing: the other with scarification, which both in steed of bloodletting
are used, when age, debilitie, the time of the year, or other considerations
will not permit the op ening of a vein. Hereby is produced the thin blood
next the skin: and being presently used after scarification, when little
incisions and holes are made in the member, that blood and humors may easily
come forth: it mightily withdraws by force and flame of heat, not only the
thin and flowing humors and spirits which are about the member after
scarifying, but also that which is in places further distant. If the skin (I
say) be first exasperated with the Iron, it does this that we hear speak of
more manifestly. If the skin be whole and not scarified, it provoke blood
and humors from the furthest parts into the skin, and brings it to that
part, whereunto the cupping boxes are applied. The cupping glass infixed (the
skin being incided or launced) purges the outmost parts of the body more
mightily, than if to the affects we only used either scarification, or only
leches.

Boxings without scarification, which are called easy cuppings, do not
apparently withdraw blood, but only the spirits: yet it does pull back unto
it humors, and forcible fluxes: and applied to the contrary part, it stays
effusion of blood in any place wheresoever: chiefly, when infirmity of
strength will not permit revulsion, by opening of a vein. Moreover it stays
fluxes of the womb, or of humors: and applied to the member where the flux of
humors is, it turns the same anothet way. Also, it provoke outwardly that
flux of humors which lies deep in the body: and therefore it serves as a
remedy in astonishmentes, palsies, and in veterat pains: it wastes wind and
spirits, included in any member: and therefore quickly stays tremblings or
pantings of the heart, or elsewhere within the body, the hicket, colic, and
pains of the raines. And this present kind of remedy, is without danger:
neither hurting the body, nor weakening the strength.

That easy and light boxings are best for revulsion, as to pull back Terms,
appears by Hippo. 5. Aphoris. Aphoris. 50. Simulieri menstrua sistere
volueris, Cucurbitulam quam maximam, sub mammis defige. If thou would stay
Terms in a woman, apply a good great cupping glass near or above her pappes.
And Galen. 5. lib. There. Metho. with easy boxing, applied Hypocondiis. i. the
sides and short ribbs, above the nauill, where the Liver lies on the right
side, and the Spleen on the left: affirms bleeding at the nose to be stayed,
being applied on the Liver, or right Hypocondrion, if the flux come forth of
the right nosthrill, and on the left Hypocondrion, and on the Spleen: if from
the left, and upon them both, if it proceed from both the nosthri's.

Again, gentle cupping is used in such persons as are already euacuated, in
stuffed bodies, we use them not, nor in inflamed members, nor in the beginning
of other affectes, but where as nothing else has been before, or where the
body has been already euacuated.

In this case of revulsion by cupping without scarification, as in flux of
Terms, as ye heard out of Hippo, and in flux of blood from the nose, as ye
heard out of Galen, be very circumspect to apply the cupping glasses on the
member set over against the place, from whence we purpose to pul-backe,
according to rectitude of position: that the place cupped may have agreement
with the place, from whence we purpose to revoke. Otherwise we do no good,
as we showed before, speaking of revulsion in bleeding, Chap. 6.

Again, gentle cupping is used without scarification, when we will draw
humors from deep and inward parts of the body to the outward members.
Therefore Galen. 13. Method. Medend. says: that it is caeteris attractiuis
fortius: stronger than any other attractiues: thus in hard apostumations, it
draws the matter outward: yea, and by it, hard apostumations may be removed,
if general euacuation have gone before, according as the fullness in the
patient requires.

Again, it is used without scarification when we stay any member, or bring a
member to his proper place. Thus when the bowels fall down, we apply Ventosas
above the belly, to retain them or bring them back.

Also, it is used without scarification, to dissolve windines, as in the
colic: so a cer em fat woman troubled with the colic, took two narrow
mouthed pots, and did put them magret brazen vessel, and she did put the vessel
of brass to the fire, and afterward applied the two hot pots to her belly:
first covering the same with alynnen cloth, and so she was healed.

Item, it is used without scarification to mittigate pains, and that in all
apostumations and colliks generally, whether the same be cau^ed of cholenke
matter, stegme or windines. Galen lib. 13. Metho. Medond. Cap. a^firmeth: (...)
it wastes wind, and so cares the cause i^ it come thereof: or it mittigateth
the p^ine, a^beit it do not perfectly cure it, of what matter so ever it come.
With scarifying it is used, in inflamed members, stuffed or vexed with pain,
in the disease called Scirrhus, which is a ha^d^^^s growing in the fle^h within
the skin, called commonly kirnels: in fluxes that are stayed in a certain
place.

Also when the parts are filled with sharp matter, or outwardly infected with
venom: or when we will draw the matter from one member to another. Also, it is
used with scarification in sharp diseases, when the strength is weak, and
nature not able to tolerate bleeding. And thus you have heard, in what cases
boxing is used without scarifying, and with scarifying, which is a worthy and
profitable observation.

The difference between Ventosas and Phlebotomy is, that Phlebotomy euacuateth
the gross blood, and the other subtle and thin blood. Again Ventosas are
called attraction per vacuum, and differs from attractions made by medicine,
or not made per vacuum. Attractiue medicines which do purge, attract and
euacuat some certain determined humor. Phlebotomy all the humors
indifferently, and Ventosas, or attraction per vacuum, that humor that is most
subtle and thin among them all in that part.

The difference between the attraction made by Ventosas, and that made by
leaches is this: that the leaches draw humors from the profound and deep
places, and Ventosas but from the superficial parts.

Item, fat persons are not to use cupping: for it is with them, as with water
pypes in the ground, which being filled and stopped with earth or other matter,
stay the water course that it cannot run: so the veins in the body, are like
those water pipes, and are sometime so filled with fleshy fat, that the blood
cannot have his course through them, and therefore the veins in fat folk,
being either so strict, or so stopped, the Ventosas cannot withdraw from
them, but with great violence: and if they attract any thing, it is the most
subtle blood, the gross blood cannot pass through the stopped places.

Concerning the time, they are not to be used at the new of the moon, because
then the humors are quiet, and so hardly drawn, nor in the last quarter: for
this season being cold, the humors are not easily attracted: but in the middle
season: when the humors are flowing, and are not too cold: and use them in the
third hour of the day, for then by reason of heat, the poores are opened, and
the blood being then easily mooueable, is with the more facility attracted to
the members, and from the members,

After bathings we are not to use them, for there were to be feared, too great
a flux of blood, yet if we can perceive the blood to be too gross, we may
to subtiliate the same, use bathing before in such a case, as was said in the
rules of Phlebotomy.

That these points thus generally spoken of me hitherto, may in particul^r
with more profit yet now be set down, we will before we conclude, proceed
therein a ^itle further, to the application of Ventosas particularly, in eu^ry
practice.

Boxing without scarrification are used, to revoke and pull back matter,
called before revulsion: or to turn blood and humors aside, which was called
deriuation, cap. 6.

Thus cupping reuoketh blood at the nose, as ye heard above out of Galen, by
applying the Ventosas unto the sides: that is, upon the Liver and right side,
if out of the right nosethrills, and contra, as before.

Thus we stop flux of terms, applying a great cupping-glasse to the root
of the Paps, as ye heard out of Hyppocrates.

Thus the falling down of the womb or matrix, is revoked by application of
the cupping-glasse, near to the nauill.

Thus to revoke matter from the head, we apply them, to the inside of the
Thigh: where note, that this better provoke terms, than the opening of
Saphena vein. Thus against stopping of terms, we apply them, to the inside of
the Thigh: where note, that this better provoke terms, than the opening of
Saphena vein. Thus against stopping of hemorroids, we apply them, to the inside
of the Thigh: where note, that this better provoke terms, than the opening
of Saphena vein.
Cupping-glasses are not used for deriuation sake: that is, to turn blood and
humors aside another way, except when the body is first euacuated, or when the
humors are settled in any part, and that the member is swollen, in this case,
for deriuation sake, we apply Ventosas to the hinder part of the neck than to
the parts called Spatulae, which join to the neck; sometimes also to the but
tocks and haunches.

Boxing with scarrification is used, when some euacuation of blood is required,
standing in steed of Phlebotomy (as we said before) when certain occasions
hinder the same. First, in this practice we apply the Ventosas to the member.
Afterward we open that very part, in many places in the skin only, with a
small penknife, for the purpose, and so applying the glasses again, we
euacuate blood. But we must not do this before the body be first euacuated,
chiefly in unclean and corrupt bodies, lest too great abundance of humors be
drawn into that part. Boxing with Scarrification is used, either in the upper
parts, in the middle parts, or the lower parts of the body.

Cupping-Glasses applied to the forepartes of the head: offend the Senses and
understanding. Applied on both the middle parts of the neck, or upon Nucham
Puppis: they stand in steed of opening Vena Nigra, and they help heaviness
of the brows, and lighten the eie-lids: they help scabbines of the eyes: they
cause both the Parent and the child begotten by him, to be forgetful.
Vuerkerus.

Ventosas applied to the lower part of the neckwhich is called Acheal stands
in steed of opening Basilica: they help pains of the shoulders and gullet:
that is, the place whereby meat and drink passes into the stomach: they
help diseases of the breast, caused of blood: the crampe caused of blood, and
trembling of the heart.

Ventosas applied to the upper part of the neck: that is, the very joining
together of the head and neck: are in steed of opening Cephalica, and help in
affects of the head, as the shaking, and particular palsy of the head: yea,
and in affects of the parts of the head, and therefore it profits for
toothach: pains of the eyes and ears: but there must go before purging of
the whole body: lest matter be drawn up again to the head, and fill the
same, and so the diseases increase again: as Galen says, 13. Method. Medend.
cap. 4. we must beware here in this case, not to apply them thus too often,
because they hurt the memory.

Where as a little before we spoke of an application, which served in steed of
Basilica: so we say now that Ventosas applied above Spondiles, serves also in
steed of Basilica, and cleanses the breast: and yet hurts the mouth of the
stomach, and causes trembling of the heart: and therefore they are subject to
these diseases, must beware how they use them, and yet according to Rhases. 2.
ad Almonson. It helps in trembling of the heart, caused of repletion and with
heat. But it should seem, that either Rhases meant of application of Ventosas
to the lower part of the neck, called Acheal, which indeed (as we said
before) helps trembling of the heart. So confounding this application with
the former. Which the rather may so seem, because it is said: that they both
serve in steed of Basilica: or else (that this application hurts the heart)
is ignorantly added, and put to of some indiscreet writer.

Ventosas applied to or under the chinne, helps the teeth, the face and the
throat, cleanses the head and the Jaws: especially they cleanse the face from
scabs and itch.

Ventosas applied in the joining together of Spatula with the neck, profits
in passions of the face, as scab or itch, and in stincke of the mouth. It may
be, that this application is even the self same which immediately went before.
And thus much of particular application of Ventosas, to the upper parts.

Now of their application to the middle parts of the body, applied between the
two Spatula: his hands, or has allanderous tongue, and can do they help
diseases of the breast caused of blood, and a crampe coming of the same case,
and in these two, this application agrees with that, to the lower part of the
neck, before called Acheal: but this last application, has two
discommodities: for they weaken the stomach, and cause trembling of heart.
Where note, that this application seems one and the self same, with that
Super spondiles, and so it is true, that was there said, concerning the
offense of the stomach and heart thereby.

Ventosas applied above or upon the raines, help apostumations and pushes of
the thighs or haunches, scabs, gowt, and hemorroids, leprosy, windines of the
bladder, and matrix, itchings of the back, and all diseases of the lower parts.

Ventosas, applied under those parts called in Latin Cauillas, otherwise
Alchahab, helps stopping of terms: the gowt in the feet, and the Sciatica
gowt, and thus of application to the middle parts.

Thirdly, concerning their application to the lower parts. Ventosas applied
above or upon the thighs, or rather the shanke from the knee to the anckle:
which part of the leg in Latin is called Crus, they stand in steed of
Phlebotomy: they mundefie the blood, provoke terms, and are better than the
opening of Saphena, to provoke terms, in white, soft, and weak women.

Ventosas applied to the former part of Coxa: That is, the Thighs or Haunches,
helps apostumations of the testicles and wounds of the Thighs, Haunches,
and Shanks applied to the hinder part thereof, they help apostumations of the
Arse, and Buttocks: and goinges out of the fundament, and blames, and pushes in
the same part.

Ventosas applied between the two Anches: That is, hypsor buttocks: helps
the two Anches: and the two inner parts of the thighs or h^unches. Also the
hemorroids: the gowt in the fecte: and ruptu^s about the p^iuie parts of men or
women.

Ventosas applied upon the buttockes, attract from the whole body, and the
head, and helps the bowels: also they help corruption of menstruous terms,
and by means thereof lighten the body.

Ventosas applied under the ham behind the* knee, help beating and shaking in
the hams, caused of an hot humor: also wicked pushes, and corrupt ulcers in the
shanks, and in the feet: and thus much of the particular application of cupping
or boxing glasses.

There is another kind of boxing that we have not here to deal withal:
necessary and good sometime to be used, as for example sake: If you have any
sawsie Lowt, or loytering Lubber in your house, that is either too busy of
nothing but play one of the parts of the four and twenty orders of knaves,
there is no pretier medicin for this, nor sooner prepared, than boxing is,
three or four times well set on a span long on both the cheeks: and although
perhaps this will not alter his lubberly conditions, yet I assure you, it will
for a time change his knauish complexion, and help him of the green sickness:
and every man may practice this, as occasion shall serve in his own house to
reform them.

Because as we have said, boxing is often used together with launcing:
therefore a word or two of scarrification and so an end.

Launcing is done with a Lancelot or some instrument called in Greek
Epidermes: and in Latin Scalpellum. The member is cut by little and little with
this Chyrurginall instrument, ometime it strikes but the very skin: sometime
it goes in deeper. It euacuateth only out of the divided member, except by
hap it wound and hurt the vein. Scarrification causes the humor underneath to
pass forth, not forcibly extracting any thing from places distant and further
off: and the deeper the Instrument goes in, the more abundant is the effusion
of blood: It serves to purge the skin, and helps those affects which Leaches
do cure: and those which are in the skin, and stick stiffly unto the same:
As old inflammations of corrupt matter, as the disease called Scirchus mentioned
before as Gangraena, a cankerous mortification of a member, or part of a
member: as Sphacelus, which is when any part or member is mortified, through
inflammation and such like, in which diseases, natural heat being (as it were)
choked up, and strangled, desires (as it were) to be winnowed. Where note,
that Launsing does more plentifully draw blood, if presently upon it, boxing
be used, as was partly signified before.

A profitable and compendious Table of Phlebotomy or bloudletting containing
diverse points in this Treatise handled and discussed of, and setting down by
division the general and special considerations thereunto belonging. Chap. 28.
A principal rule and observation.
AS in other things, so in bloudletting the cause is first skilfully and
circumspectly to be considered, as that it be to purge the body of some
unnatural, naughty, and superfluous humor, whose substance is either simple,
or mixed: Simple, when it does of it self without the admixture of any other
degenerate, as blood does when it putrifieth in the vein, the Pores being
stopped: mixed, when it is mingled with some that is already corrupted, as in
the dropsy, where the blood is mixed with water The cause being thus allowed,
and certainly known for needful and good to the Patient otherwise letting
of blood is very dangerous, and opens a way to grievous infirmities, as ye
have heard in this treatise.

There remains to be considered, how it standesh with the Patient.
Inwardly For his Complexion. For his Age.

Outwardly For the time of the year, and month generally. For the time of the
day and diet particularly.

1 Complexion.
In the complexion is to be considered, whether he be Sanguine. i. hot and
moist. Colericke. i. hot and dry. Melancolicke. i. cold and dry.
Phlegmatic. i. cold and moist.

2 The Age.
In his age: whether he be In his youth. In his manly middle age. In his
elderly age. In his crooked old age.

3 The time of the year.
Concerning the time of the year, he is to be advised what parts thereof are
good, as the spring: from the midst whereof to the beginning of Summer, is
simply the best time: howbeit some think Autumn reasonable good, as no doubt
it is in regard of Summer or VVinter: being otherwise in it self, rather to be
rekoned for bad than good. Bad Very bad, as Summer and VVinter, for the
extremity of heat and cold. More tolerable, as Autumn, being somewhat more
temperate.


4 The time of the Month.
Concerning the time of the Month these general cautions are to be observed,
that he be not let blood in any member with chirurgicall instrument: The Moon
being in... * or the last half of. and first of. The Sun, the Moon, or lord
of the Horroscope being in the s^gne that rules that member. The Moon being
in any part of via lactea, or in via combusta, or in domo casus sui, or being
vacua or tarda cursu, or in terminis infortuniorum, or in the duodenarial
division of the 12. houses, placed either in 1. 6. 8. or 12. place thereof, or
applying to the lord of the house. The d^y before the day it self: the day
after the change of the Moon. Half a natural day, that is 12. hours before
and as many hours after the quarters of the Moon. A day before and a day
after the full of the Moon. A day before and a day after the conjunction,
quartile opposition of the with or. A day before the conjunction of the with..
or the head or the tail of the Dragon unfortunate, and evil.

The conuenienst time of the year. For the Sanguine: the Moon being in any of
the signs. For the choleric: the Moon being in. or. For the Melancolick:
in. and first half of. For Flegma^ick: the Moon being in. or. Howbe^t some
commend.. and. for blood letting.

Also the best and most laudible aspectes for this purpose are these, according
to our soundest writers. The conjunction of the Moon with. or. are simply the
best: so that. be not combust. The. or. of the. with... and. are good: but
especially with. or. The. or. of the. with. or. does well. The. or. of the.
with. are indifferent good.

The time of the Month for Youth: from the change to the first quarter.
Middle age: from the first quarter to the full. Elderly age: from the full to
the last quarter. Old age: from the last quarter to the change.

A reason of this rule is: Like reioyseth in his like. Howbeit as we have
taught in this Treatise no child would be let blood before fourteen years
of age* nor old man after threescore and ten, unless his strength be the
greater and somewhat more than ordinary, at those years.

5 The time of the day.
The time of the day must be either Morning: after the rising of the Sun, when
a man is yet fasting: which is simply the best, excepting the hours of. and *
and choosing the hours of * and. whose nature is most temperate. Afternoon:
after reasonable good, or rather perfect digestion and expulsion of of
superfluities.

Herewithall regard must be had of the air, that it be neither too hot, nor
too cold: or clowdy: but mild, clear, and temperate: the wind being then
either Northerly or westerly. The Southwind is counted no friend to Phlebot^my:
whereof this is the reason, heat looseneth too much: cold binds too much.

An Exception.
NOtwithstanding the premises of bloudletting before: The Frenzy, Squinancie,
Pluresie, and Apoplexy, or for a continual headache proceeding of choler or
blood, for any hot burning Fever, or other extreme pain and desperate
disease: A man in such a case may not tarry a chosen time regularly set down
by the Astronomer or Physician: for so the Patient might miscarry in the mean
season. But incontinently with all convenient speed, he is this way to seek
his remedy: except either he be very weak, or like to sown, or that the
Moon be in the same sign that rules that very part of the body. Where also
note, that in the foresaid case of extremity, blood is not to be let in so
great a quantity as otherwise it would, if a chosen time might conveniently be
expected.

As before bloudletting these circumstances of complexion, age, and times are
to be considered* So after the same, consideration is to be had of our meats
and exercise.

For meats such must be taken as are of an easy and light digestion.

For exercise we are to abstain from all exclusive, until the fourth day,
not only those that be vehement: as riding, running, leaping, vawting,
wrestling, fensing, tennise, etc. But also such as are more mild, as walking,
bowling, bathing, and especially Venerie: whereof we have spoken in the
twentieth Chapteer: and I doubt not but I may effectually conclude, (both
antecedent and consequent limitations duly and orderly observed) this ancient
practice of Phlebotomy to be very commendable both for the preservative and
curatiue intention of Physic.

Conclusio Operis.
And thus according to my simple skill, and poor talent, I have set down
those remedies, which withdraw blood, either from the whole body generally, as
Phlebotomy: or from certain parts particulerly, as Leeches, boxing, and
scarrification: which was my purposed determination at the beginning to do. If
any thing be here set down repugnant to sound skill, I crave pardon, having no
skill to judge, because Physic is not my profession: only drawn with a
delight in this practice: First, for my pleasure, now (I trust) for orhers
profit, I have further trau^iled herein, than I thought to have done. If any
fault or error be in the order, method, or disposition, I assign that unto my
self* (...) pardon for ought that is ami^se: protesting in truth, (which a man
may easily discrie) that this book is rather a collection from others, than an
invention of mine own. God grant that this my travail herein, (whatsoever it
be, may make unto his glory, and the comfort of his people, which are the two
impulsive causes, moving every good Christian, one way or other, to employ his
endeavor.

Deo laus honos and gloria in omne aeuum.
FINIS.
The Contents of the several Chapters in this Treatise.
Cap. 1 OF fulness, emptines, and their divisions. 2 What euacuation is, and the
kinds and diffeces thereof. 3 What Phlebotomie is, and from whence the opening
of a vein does euacuate. 4 Whether Phlebotomie must go before purging or
contrary. 5 Of the effects, that is, the profits and disprofits of bleeding. 6
Of reuulsion, that is, pulling back: and deriuation, that is, turning a side of
blood and humors by opening of a vein. 7 Whether purgation by siedge or inward
medicine received can not, or may not euacuate the blood, and the reasons
answered that are brought for proof thereof. 8 Of the impediments or lets of
Phlebotomy, and of the causes requiring and furthering the same. 9 Of such
persons as are meet or not meet to be let blood. 10 What corruption of
humors, bleeding remoueth from the veins generally. 11 A particular rehearsal
of those diseases present or future, which are cured by bleeding. 12 What
volu^tary eruption of blood profits in sickness. 13 How to know by certain
signs the greatness of the disease, and the firmness of the natural forces,
whereby conjecture may be made whether the patient be to be let blood or no. 14
To know by the greatness of the disease, and strength of the natural powers, the
quantity of blod that must be withdrawe^. 15 An observation of things present
and past, and also a foresight of things future, needful and necessary to the
further knowledge of the quantity of blood that must be taken. 16 Of the times
and seasons of the sickness of the year, of the day, and hour of the day, when
a man is to bleed or not to bleed. 17 Of Astrologicall observation in
bleeding, and of an other observation nearly annexed unto the same, showing
what members and parts of the body are to be opened according to the several
seasons of the year. 18 What preparation must go before bleeding. 19 What is
to be done in the very time of the incision. 20 A prescription or regiment of
the patient after bleeding. 21 What veins are to be opened both in general
and particular diseases. 22 A profitable observation of the blood extracted. 23
A short rehearsal of 8. ancient errors touching bleeding, and a sufficient
confutation of them by ancient authorities. 24 A sufficient confutation of the
supposed necessity of annual bleeding. 25 Of incision of the arteries. 26 Of
particular euacuation of blood, and first of bloodsuckers, and Horse-leaches.
27 Of cupping or boxing, and scarrification: the other two particular
euacuations of blood. 28 A profitable compe^dious table of Phlebotomy or blood
letting, containing diverse points in this Treatise handled, and discussed off,
and setting down by division the general and special considerations
thereunto belonging.
The names of the authors whose help is chiefly used in this Collection.
Aristotle, Actuarius, Aetius, Auicen, Alexius, Andernacus, Auerroes, Arnoldus
de villa noua. Bacchanellus, Bullein Anglus. Cornelius Celsus. Eliota Anglus.
Fernelius. Fuchsius. Galenus. Gesnerus. Hippocrates. Rich. Harueius Anglus.
Holl^rius. Johannes, de Santo Amando. Johannes de vigo. Mesue. Oribasius.
Paulus Aegineta. Rhasis. Rondoletus. Schola Salerni. Weckerus.
LONDON, Printed by William Hoskins and John Danter, dwelling in Feter-Lane.
1592.

^y^sts i^ (...) ^*




