THE BEAVTIE OF THE REMARKABLE Year of Grace, 1638. The Year of the great
Covenant of Scotland.

By T. H.

tree emblem

Printed at Edinburgh by George Anderson, 1638.

THE YEAR OF GRACE, 1638.
WHO'ill favor me with wings, that I may flee
To glories Mount, where Laureat Poets be?
Fill me with sacred fire, You gentle Nine,
Inspire me with your Gaities Divine,
Tune my Theorbe, sweet sisters, stretch the string
Yet higher, that she may more sweetly sing.
Hence all you Soul-dividing cares, go hence,
You heart afflicting griefs, and but dispense
A little with your Captive, let me play
Within a paradise but one poor day:
Remove your anger, your sad wrath forebear,
Till I do sing the beauty of a year;
In which luxurious amarous, Heaven does woe
His Mistres Earth, with smiles upon his brow,
And would invite each Gentle Sprite to be
A Poet of this epithalamie.
Here all you smyling fancies, hasten here
You nobler raptures of Apolloes Lyre,
And throng within my breast, all you Idees
Within his Cabinet, come if you please
And my poor soul enrich, come all which may
Teach a young wanton bashful pen to play.
For now great HE, who streach'd the azure round
About this hanging Ball, has all things crowned
With his best blessings, willing men rejoice
In liberty of soul with thankful voice
It Is he that is clothed with light, and dwells in thunder,
Displayes this gracious Year, great Year of wonder*
A year, which shall unto all nations be
A common talk, This our felicity
Shall be the measure of their souls desire,
And patter^^ of their wishes, when the aspire
At such (...) ^oy, peace, harmony, and bless
As this Great year of our Great Covenant is
In which are opened the eyes of Nations all.
And filled with wonder, thus when our Nephews shall
Ask at their fathers what this year did mean,
(For after years from hence shall date their time
In Almanackes, and in our history
This year of joy gold letters shall descry)
The Sage and Eldrs shall their children teach
How heavens the glade wings of their love did stretch
Upon the humble earth, and they shall tell
How in these blessed days the land was full
With sweetness of the Lord, even as we see
The waters great which covers the Sea
They shall inform them how contract did pass
'Twixt heavens, and earth, that so this great year was
Year of the feast, in sign that there shall stand
Betwixt them an Eternal Covenant;
And now each Soul is filled with joy, each Man
To tell posterity has pen in hand,
I wish to have as many souls and eyes
T'admire and gaze, as stars are in the skies;
And yet mine ecstasy would be but small
In such excess, to see this newborn All,
The wearied rolling heavens, the exhausted earth
Like to the Eagle has renewed their birth
And looks, so young, so gay, as when of old
The Eternal King cast them in virgin mould,
Or first came out of the eternal treasure,
Embellisht with the riches of all pleasure.
The heavens displayes a sweet and smyling grace,
Without a wrinkle, or spot in their face:
So do they shine, washed with a Crystal flood,
As then, before the first impostour wooed
The King of Creatures to taste the try
Of mistique fruit, thus teaching him to die:
So white the world new-walled did appear,
Not stained with debauches of the air
As yet, and in their serene infancy
Of winds and raines, knew note the luxury.
How thy embosome the enamored earth
So kindly now? See how a gentle breath
Does feed all living things? What sweetness*
In this so universal Amity.
O livelie brighnesse! O the beauty rare!
O force of Sun, and moon! O kindness dear
Of favoring heavens! And where then was your skill
Till now, that would not make your court'sie kill
Our fears and poverty, now you do show
More sweetness then both Arabees do know:
You have rained floudes of Manna, the earth does swell
Pamp'red in richer balm. What time can tell
Celestial powers so strongly all combinde,
As in this year we wanton worldlings find?
Heavens treasures have been shut till now, but lo
In golden floudes of pleasures now we flow,
Powered from the cabinet of him who reigns
(Which this great year proclames) above all Kings:
With sublunarie pleasures drunk, we see
What Heavens can do, and what the Earth can be
When she has sucked best influence from above,
Or when the Sun with crisped rays makes love:
When hot flame masculine does him inspire,
And makes the earth pregnant with his vigorous fire.
Tell me thou Gentle Planet of the day,
Who through star-poudred Scarf of heaven do stray,
Who gilds the heavens, and paints the earth with flowrs,
And flames of life through Neptunes bosom powers,
Art Thou the same shyn'd in our Fathers days?
Has any brighter soul given thee new rays?
What new things has this earthly globe reveald?
What from Thy sight till now has it conceald?
What change discovers thou in natural things?
That thus thou flies 'bout us with glader wings?
Indeed the Taper which we had before thee
Was but a sparkling diamond to thy glory;
Or like the thin squibes of thy Sisters face,
When she the cold and silent vault does grace:
We must forsooth confess (Prince of the day)
Thou obleidges heaven and earth in a strange way:
Thou have daign'd to'unvaile thy face, and now we see
Thy naked die, which masked wont to be.
Ah gallant Sun, thy wanton dangling hair
Provokes the Frolic Earth t'embalme the air,
Where numberless golden atoms of the day
Has hanging at each one pearls to array
Proud Flora, looking like a glorious Bride,
Attyr'd with Majesty on every side;
On which the Sun darts many an amorous look,
Reading his active beauty on Heavens Book,
And dressing in Neptunes glass his jollier hairs,
Each day courts hotlier, and more fine appears:
No more the Guelded Son of this blessed Year
Need now the anger of barbarous season fear,
For his rebuke is taken away, and now
Those fields to which retiring Sun did show
His fainter face, do laugh as well as those,
Who can boast of possession of the rose;
Nay this whole yeere's but a continued May,
Luxurious in her pride, and best array;
And look how much the Heavens do the fire
Excel, or yet how much the tender Air
Exceed the grosser Water, even so
Each Time, each Thing surpass their own kind too;
The Clouds weep no more, and forget to rain,
The Sun to leave us, and to turn his waine;
The Southern Pole does wonder at his stay,
And 'gines to question what moves him to play
So long within this artick circled clime,
It Is cause he would see the great change of the time;
Which all the Elements do preach; which are
Not of so ley a metal as they were.
But more ennobled, and less discordant.
For in this great year of the Covenant
An all-embracing sweetness does enlive
Each place and season, now all things do thriv^
A sweet calm influence every where we see,
As if each of the Stars had drunk a sea
Of nectar, and inebriat every flower
With their benign aspects, and heavenly power.
Where would you send your large enquiring eyes?
Would you them feast on the earth, or on the skies?
Or spring through the air, where Bird briquils and plays,
And sings to natures king, with natured lays,
But every where you's find a strange beauty,
And reverend sweetness kiss your conquered eye;
Each glorious object fills our curious soul,
There Is nothing now which our desires control:
The smyling Heavens, flattering, seem to praise
The strong-beam'd Sun, with his refined rays,
The fethered voices, Birds, devoutly bends
Their keen and learned bills, which nimbly indents
Thousand of various checkred conquering noates,
Darted from mignon pretty warbling throats:
The stately trees where these sweet woodnymph lodge,
(These harmless painted Sirens, which disgorge
Their mutual flames) being wounded with the joy,
And sweetness of the espoused harmony
Did amber tears, weep, cause they could not know
Either to dance or sing, else they'ld do so
And keep a part, yet look they gladly shake
Their curled topes, throwing blossoms to awake
The sleeping Naides in their crystal streams
And join their mirth with their natures athemes,
Wherein each pity nature courts the great
Their own discords, and passions do forget.
The swelling angry winds, who whipped the Sea,
The terror of the woods which wount to be
Rolling a lowering Horror through the deep,
Afrighting Mortals in their harmless Sleep,
With soft and silken wings now gently creep,
Soliciting the winter flowers to peep,
And with authority as Heavens cool Fan
Correcting proud Don Phoebus melting flame.
Their spicknard breathes do laughing blossoms blow
To our laboring trees, and fruits upon them throw,
And gently call out from their cloistered gemmes
Our Pestan Roses glorying on their stemmes.
The Arabian winds which boasted that they were
Composed not as other meteors are
But made of Amber Spirits, now do give
Their best elixer, and do murmuring strive,
Which shall our flowers most kindly entertain,
And flatter Flora in an amourous strain:
You pride of nature, glory in the year,
Svvet flovvres, what Genius bade you appear
In your best garments? Would you be renovvnd
'Cause each of you is worth a dyamound.
If Pythagorick transmigration could
Amongst flovvres, and trees established be, I would
Say that these lovelie souls this year are come
To inhabit you from the Elezium,
Your swet Sabean odours choke us now,
You have Arabian perfumes stiffled too:
Rare Beauties of rare Favor, whence be you,
With your so pretty pride and uncouth hew?
I think you be descended from that race
Of Floraes People, which did Eden grace,
Your Pompe's unusual, and ye seem to come
Natures Ambassadors, for to tell some
Strange glory of this age, t'assure the land
Of Heavens acceptance of this Covenant,
Which it has sealed with our common King,
This is belike the Sermon you do bring
Your painted faces, and your pleasant light
Makes of our Earth a constellation bright:
Shine boldly Daughters of this blessed year;
Rejoice you glittering Troop, and do not fear
That Summers angry Heat, and fretting Cold
Of your sad enemy darre be so bold
Zou to importune, or to robe your glory
Never ear did hear, never eye did read in story
Such year as this you're come to celebrate,
Appointed by dear Providence, not Fate,
Wherein Heavens spheres do give a prettier dance,
And the great Mover will have no offense
Given to any sublunarie Creature
(Sweet trees and flowers) but that your joy and pleasure,
May be secure, and full, fred from the fear
Of unkind Sun, or injuries of the year.
Put forth aspiring Mountains these your lillies
White as the snow in Salmon, you O valleys,
Which with your violets like a garment are
Most proudly cled, and fragrant as the myrre,
You likewise solemnize this happy year
And stretch your carpets which embrodered are
By natures hand, who with Sydonian dye
Thrice drunk does entertain the danceing eye:
Behold this is the year of our great feast,
The world is beautified, and we are oppressed
With riches and delights, which do as far
Exceed before times, as the Idalian star
Outshines the lay meteors in the air
Or shrinking shrubes, o'retopes the Cedars fair.
Those Heaven-beloved trees do drink no more
The vulgar vapors, as they did before,
But feeds on Spirits of the Nobler Rose
Alambiqued by the enquiring nose
Of Phoebus steeds, who snaring flames and light
Do yield a relish of a strange delight.
Now intertwist good Trees your amarous arms,
Freely possess your self in those your charms,
No Shriv'ling wind dare now to tear your Hair
Now does your freiz'ld beruques sprusse appear,
The incivile Zephyres who were wont to rove
Amongst your treasures, rushing from the Cove,
Who all your dainties riffled, and threw down
Your Pride, your children humbled to the ground:
Those winds which your yet tender fruit did make
All orphans, and your self did cause to shake
For very fear, now they do no more so,
But kindly taim'd more mercifully blow.
If any of our forefathers should arise
From natures cold bed, and lift up his eyes
Behold the Heavens renewed, the Earth refined
The glory of all the Elements sublimed
The beauty of the never-lowring Sun,
The sweetness of the ever-pleasing Moon,
The riches of each tree, blush of each rose,
The treasures which golden Ceres does disclose,
And that before her time, he shall straight smile
And say, This must be sure the fortunat I Will
Or the Hesperids, blessed with the dew
Of Heaven, wherein most lavishlie did grow
The golden aples; or else he would conceave
Both Roles, were changed, and the Spheres to have
Some other motion, or the Sun to approach
From Southern people his eternal Coach,
And us below the Equator for to ly,
Where loftier Sun darts his directer ray;
And where he does dispense a prouder light
From his sublimer Throne flaming more bright.
This good oldman, revived, which never saw
But ordinary years, would stand in aw
To call this Scotland, nay, sure he would be
Like One transported to sweet Arabie
From some cold hungry melancholic clime,
To see the charge of season, place, and time.
All other years being paragon'd with this;
Nor soul, nor life, nor beauty have, nor bless;
And looks but like a winter, when these days
Do glory in triumphing matchless rays.
Like as the hoastes of stars do shrink away;
When gentle Phebe comes forth to play,
At whose appearing in her fuller grace
Ashamed, like silly people they hide their face,
And does retire to a distance, for if she
Approach too nie, drowned with her glore they die:
So other years that were the lights of time
The glory of Chronicles, must now think shame,
And hold themselves but rags when this shall be
A dyademe to all Eternity.
The former years to this were but Aurore,
And served to usher forth this great years Glore,
Were but thin shades to that great Majesty
Which now appears clothed with felicity.
Nature has spent her Spirit for to trime
Her self with Buskings, and to grace the time,
Strained all her Force and Riches for to show
Unto the world what wonders she can do,
She has taught heavens spheres to'utweave a year so fine
That of this Twist they have no more behind
Which sweetly does erect it is stately head,
O'relooking other humble years as dead,
Termines the Worlds hopes, who wondering gaze:
And crowns it worthy of immortal Bays.
Who so the beauty of this year would show
And paint it all exactlie, he must know
First, how to outstare the Sun, with his faint eyes,
Number the Sand, and Dyamounds in the skies,
For every Season, every Month and Day,
Each blushing apple, at the Suns proud ray
Each forest, Garden, each embrodered Bray,
Each rose, each lilly, each brave busked tree,
Each of their leaves, each atome of the Sun,
When he is newborn, or when he is going down;
Each twinkle of a star, or her sweet smile,
Who did the boy Endimion never beguile
Would be too thronged in a volume great;
And craves more lines then my poor pen can get,
The Pagnim Poets who can magnify
A silly rose, and base things deifie,
Who nature rude think that they do obscure,
Metamorphosing, violets in stars pure
Can no more reach the glory of this time
And seasons beauty, nor they can confine
The boundless Ocean in their narrow quill,
Or with few atoms all this All can fill;
Yet let us admire what we cannot attain;
And prattle as we may with thankful, strain
While that the rest of Nations all do burn
With jealousy, holding themselves forelorne.
You Mistres of the world, and Europes eye;
You Land, which does in natures bosom ly;
And you, who never saw our Chairles-waine
Lazy Boots, and Cassiopea shine;
And you who look alike to both the Poles,
Whose double Summers no angry Heavens controlles,
All you who thought Heavens spheres did roll for you,
And you alone, be not offended now;
And spare your grudging, if we honored be
More by the Heavens, dearer to them nor ye.
Stand by neglected Nations, Trouble not
Our feasting, and our mirth, nor interrupt
Our just conceaved joy, learn to admire
Heavens power, and our felicity this year:
And you beloved Indwellers of the land
Crowned with advantages, Come hand in hand
Let Us shout till we do drown the Spheres in Heaven
Arrest the Sun to stand, and Planets seven,
And make the God of the fifth Sphere throw'way
His foolish sword, descend, and with us play;
Each thing within the Universe express
A sympathy of our joy and blessedness
Come blow the trumpet, blow you heavens, rejoice,
Be glad O Earth, Proud Sea, lift up your voice,
Come with your olive garlands, come with palms
Or with Uranias flowers, and sing your Psalms
You Virgin daughters, come you damesells all,
And Syons mountain enter shall the Ball;
Reach me my warbling lute, and I Will accord
The espoused veins, solicit every cord;
I Will court the Ladie'f lyres, whose sacred womb
All Graces, all sweet Melody does entombe,
Bring me my pleasant Harp, my Gythare dear,
And I will join with you, I Will strain an air
So sweet, so full, as shall you Hills entrance
And make their Trees come laughing here, and dance,
So does a Candle help the Sun to see,
So does a silly Stream ingrosse the Sea;
So does the Heaven in Arras work appear,
With every emprison'd Star and silent Sphere,
As my Rash Muse has now diffused her lays
And whispered as she could the great years praise
Awaking highbred sprites that wear the Bays,
To stretch their numbers, their proud notes to raise.
Sic erat in fatis.
FINIS.

