A LEARNED SERMON HANDLING THE QVESTION of Ceremonies, controuerted in our
Church: By Roger Hacket Doctor in Divinity.

AT LONDON Printed by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold
at his shop at the sign of the Swan in Paul's Churchyard. 1603.

Psalm. 122. v. 6. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love thee, etc.


THE Hebrew word (...) signifies either to desire to pray for, and that
earnestly: or diligently to enquire and seek after. In the ^^^^nce David, one
thing I have desired of the Lord* Psalm. 27.4.
and that I will require even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life. Likewise Anna speaking of her son Samuel, 1. Sam. 1.20.
I desired him of the Lord, and in this sense the word is five times used in
one verse, in that answer God makes to Solomon: 1. Reg. 3.11
because thou have asked this thing: and have not asked for thy self long
life, neither best asked riches for thy self, neither have asked the left of
thine enemies, but have asked for thy self understanding to hear judgment:
and that it imports an earnest desire may the better appear: because that
from this root is derived (...) the grave of hell, which still craves but is
never satisfied, Hab. 2.5.
as the Prophet Habacuck speaks, he has enlarged his desires as hell.

Or this word signifies sometime to ask and inquire after, in which sense the
Princes to Baruch, when he had read out of a book, that which Jeremy called
him to write, Ier. 36.17.
they asked, and as commonly it is read, they examined Baruch, saying, hour
did thou write these words, out of his mouth? so when the Gybeonites had told
to Joshua, and the governors of Israel, a fair tale about their old bottles
and garments; It is said of Ioshuah and the Governors, that they gave credence
to their speech; Ioshu. 9.14.
and did not ask and enquire of the mouth of the Lord. In which sense also God
spoke by his Prophet Isaias, I was found of them which did not seek or inquire
after me. Whether this? Isa. 6^.1.
to show unto you that out of this two fold signification of this word,
Austin, Jerome, Prosper, in their comment. on this place.
the ancient Fathers, as other, read: some pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
regate, some inquire after Interrogate. The word (...) that signifies peace,
notes some time, that outward peace, in which men freed from all scare of the
enemy, live in quietness: sometime that inward peace of soul and conscience,
in which the godly; are at peace with God. In the first sense, this word is
taken in the 29. psalm, where David says, the Lord shall give strength unto
his people*, Psalm. 29.11.
the Lord shall give unto his people the blessing of peace. In the same sense
Ieremies place is to be understood, where he advises the Jews, to seek for
the peace of Babel, into which they were to be carried captive; Jer. 29.7.
because in the peace thereof they should have peace.

So again in some places it is taken for that inward peace of conscience, in
which the godly are at peace with God. In which sense: Elipha^ to Iiob,
acquaint thy self, Job. 22.22.
I pray thee, with thy God, (...)
and make peace; thereby thou shall have prosperity. So God to Jeremy, Ierem.
16.5
mourn no more, nor pray for this people, because I have taken away my peace
from these people, even my mercy and compassion. Whether this? even to show,
that they must pray and seek after, not only for the outward peace of
Jerusalem, in which being freed from fear of outward violence she may live
in quiet; but for Hierusalems inward peace, by which she is at one; and peace
with God.

From the word (...) here, which signifies love, is derived (...) which
signifies love, and (...) which signifies holiness, out of which we may
gather, that they that love Jerusalem must love her with an holy love (...) is
derived from (...), which sometime signifies to be peaceable, or to pacify;
in which sense Tremellius here reads tranquilli sunt ama^tes tui: that is,
the lovers of thee are of a peaceable disposition. The Chaldee Paraphrast, they
shall rest in peace. Sometime to be happy or fortunate, to abound; in which
sense the Septuagints here read (...) abundance to them that love thee. Our
translation, Let them prosper. Jerome, Prosper, in their commentaries on this
place, let it be well with them.

This then is the meaning of the Prophet David, Pray, and earnestly desire, yea
and by seeking inquire after those things which may make for the outward and
inward peace of Jerusalem: surely they that love her, in an holy love, they
are of a peaceable disposition, and shall abound with all things that are good.
Yea O Lord give to them of thy peace, and let it always go well with them.

In the unfolding of which the Prophets meaning, that we may the more orderly
proceed: consider I pray you with me, first the occasion which moved David to
deliver this speech; secondly to whom he delivered this speech; It was to the
Priests that attended on the arc; to the people, that by their tribes came up
to Jerusalem, and to the Governors of the people, that sat upon the thrones
of David the seats of judgment. Thirdly, the speech delivered to the Priests,
O pray for, to the people earnestly desire, to the rulers and governors, by
diligent inquiry seek after, for those things which make Jerusalem to be at
peace, principally with God, then with the world. Fourthly, the reason of the
exhortation, they that love Jerusalem, they will be of a peaceable
disposition, and will seek for her peace: or as some read, they shall not
only be hereby known to be lovers of Jerusalem; but it shall be well with
the^, they shall abound with all things that are good. Of which when we have
briefly spoken, we will seek to fit it to these present times.

Of the first let us first entreat: The occasion which moved David to deliver
this speech of exhortation, to the Priests, People, and Rulers. When the Lord
God had Deuteronomy. 12. 5.6. and 7. v 16. c. 14 v. 23. c. 16. v. 2.11. c. 31. v. 11.
often spoken by his Prophet Moses, concerning the arkes that he would choose
him a place amidst the tribes of Israel, to put his name there; where the arc
the Sacrament of his presence should for ever abide. And when David a thousand
years after that the arc was made, Ps. 132.2.
had vowed a vow to this mighty God of Jacob, that he would not go up to the
tabernacle of his house, nor come up upon his bed; that he would not suffer
his eyes to sleep, nor his eielids to slumber, until he had found out a place
for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. And when he 2. Sam.
6.1.
with thirty thousand chosen of Israel, v. 5.
with Psalteries, singing, and much melody, took the ark of God out of the
house of Abinadab, with a v. 9.
purpose to place it in Mount Sion: but feared then to do it, because v. 6.
and 17
the Lord in wrath had killed Vzzah, for staying the arc with his hand, when
the oxen shook it. And when after he had heard from many that God blessed the
house of Obed-Edom, where for three months after the death of Vzzah the arc
remained, 1. Chro. 15 3.
he charged the chief fathers of the Levites (whose office it was and none
others to carry the ark of God) v. 12.
to sanctify themselves, and their brethren, v. 1^.
for the Lord had made a breach amongst them, because they were not there at
the first, and because then they sought not God after a due order, v. 27.
who being sanctified and having on them linen garments, like as had all the
singers, yea and David the king, v. 25.
they together with the Elders of Israel, and captains of thousands, brought
the arc of the covenant, with shooting, melody, great joy, and the sound of
trumpets, and 1. Chr. 16.1.
placed it in the midst of the tabernacle, which David in Mount Sion had
caused to be pitched for it. And although even then 2 Samuel 6.16.
Michol David's wife, did therefore despise him, because so arraied he daunced
before the arc, saying, v. 20.
O how glorious was the king of Israel, which was uncovered to day in the eyes
of his maid servants, as a fool: yet he did not only approve his fact by
reproouing her, but glad to see, that after a thousand years the Lord had
accomplished his promise; that the Ps. 132.8.
arc of his strength was come into his rest, v. 14.
that the Lord had chosen Sion and loved to dwell in it, saying, this is my
rest for ever, here will I dwell. Ioying also at the heart to see the ready
obedience of the Elders, Worthies, and people, in seconding the command of God,
and furthering him in his godly desires: he makes this congratulatorie psalm
of praise and thanksgiving; saying, Ps. 122.^
I was glad when they said unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord: and
after in this psalm speaking to the priests that attended on the arc, to the
people that by their tribes were to come to Jerusalem, there to offer before
the Lord: and to the Elders, which on the seats of judgment gave sentence
there; to them all he says, O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them
prosper that love thee.

This was the occasion that moved David to deliver this speech. Now let us in
the second place consider to whom he spoke it, even to the priests, people,
and rulers. To the priests, for since the arc was now placed in Jerusalem,
there to continue his abode, Exodus 28.1.
upon which it was their office to attend, not only there to offer the daily
sacrifice, but there also to make atonement unto God, for the sins of the
people. It behooved them greatly, to pray for the welfare of that holy city;
yea and above the common manner of the vulgar people, 1. Sam. 2.8. Exodus 29.4.
to sanctify themselves; least for their sakes God should abhor the
sacrifices which he himself ordained, 1. Sam. 2.17.
as in the days of Helie, or make a breach with his people, 2. Sam. 6.17.
as in the late slaughter of Vzza. And yet not to them only does the Prophet
David here speak, but to the people also; for when Exodus 23.17.34.23.
God had appointed them that thrice every year on their solemn feasts, they
should appear before the Lord Jehovah, in that place which the Lord shall
choose to put his name there: and accordingly they did, 2. Chro. 8.13.
the feast of unleavened bread, at the feast of weeks, and at the feast of
tabernacles, to which David in this psalm gives witness, v. 4.
thither the tribes, even the tribes of the Lord go up, a testimony unto
Israel: to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. Theirs it was also, as well
as the priests, in their godly desires, to wish for the peace of Jerusalem,
and in their holy obedience to procure that God might still continue favorable
unto her. And because the welfare of Jerusalem consisted, not only in the
prayers of the priests, obedience of the people, but in the wel-ruling of the
chief governors: to them as to the third and chief estate of this body
politic, David here speaks, that they should carefully seek for those
things which should make for Hierusalems peace: for Deuteronomy. 16.18.17 5.21.19.
Ruth. 4.1.
although in their several cities, the tribes of Israel had their rulers, and
such which heard the causes of the people yet Deuteronomy. 17.8.21.19.
in Jerusalem was placed the chief seat of justice, there was the Senadrim,
the counsel of the seauentie Elders; unto whom were referred all causes of
weight, both in matters concerning God, and his worship, v. 5.
as the state civil of the kingdom: the which David in the verse before
shows, where be faith there is ordained the seat for judgment, even the
seats of the house of David. Therefore called the seats of David, because he
was then their king, and from him had they power to command. Thus much for the
persons, priests, people, and rulers, to whom he addressed his speech.

Now thirdly, let us speak of the speech it self, of that which he requires
of them Of the Priests, that they should pray; of the people, that they should
desire; of the rulers, that in the best of their endeavors they should seek
for those things that should make for the inward and outward peace of
Jerusalem: that should make Jerusalem at peace with God, and at peace with
the world. Not only for her outward peace and happiness, that she may be
freed from violence, and live in security, without all fear of foreign
enemy, as Comment. on this place.
Chrysostom speaks: but that her children, as the twins of Rebecca, do
not struggle within her; for that cannot be but with her great pain, and
greater grief: nay abode all that she may be at peace with her God. The which
all Calvin fitly expresses, saying, Comment. on this place.
he exhorts all the Christians, worshippers of God, that they make their
prayers for the happy estat of that holy city: for paraphrast on this psalm.
since as Beza truly observed, the safety of Prince, Priest, and People,
seemed to consist in the preservation of that city: let all sorts pray for
Jerusalem, and for the safety and welfare of all them that love and favor
her. As if he had spoken first to the Priests, O ye Priests which should be
peacemakers, and seek to reconcile the people to their god, by whose holy
prayers, Ex. 17.^^
as by the prayer of Moses, not only Israel prevails, and Amalech is put
unto the worst; but by whose holy life, and lovely conversation, the people of
God are mightily persuaded to honesty of life, and a brotherly unity; seek
ye the peace of Jerusalem, and do not ye either by your variance trouble and
make muddle her pure and silver waters, or cause by your ill lives and
dishonest conuersations, the people to abhor the sacrifices of the Lord, and
therefore to be abhorred of the Lord. As Moses to Aaron, Ex. 32.21
what did this people to you, that you should bring so great a sin upon them.
And to you O ye people of God, seek ye the peace of Jerusalem; do not ye
by your inconsiderate zeal, your vnholied hands, seek to stay the tottering
arc of Gods troubled Church; 2. Sam. 6.17.
lay to your hearts the death of Vzza. Your good intents must have warrant from
the Lord, go up to Jerusalem, there co^sult with the mouth of the Lord; for
flesh and blood are ill aduisers in matters concerning God. As the Lord spoke
to Israel, so to you, if so be you will prevail with him; Exodus 23.1. Deuteronomy.
5.1.27.9.
hear O Ismael and hold thy peace, rest content with his good pleasure, and
say with Samuel, 1. Sam. 3.10.
speak Lord thy servant hears: And to you the Governors of the people,
Deuteronomy. 1.16
which sit on the seats of justice to judge for God in the cause of right: the
peace of Jerusalem must be the scope of your judgments, the forth and end of
your desires. 2. Chron. 19.6.
Let the fear of the Lord be always with you and since you are the eyes of
the kingdom, prouidently foresee the arms of authority, powerfully procure
the peace of Jerusalem: it is not enough for you with the Priests to pray, or
people to desire; but you must, in the best of your endeavors seek, and
seeking find, and finding work forth the peace of the Church and kingdom
which you govern: for you execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord.
Therefore 2. Chro. 19.9.
thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully, and with a perfect
heart. In this manner David advises Priests, People, and Rulers, to seek the
peace of Jerusalem. Thus much for the exhortation: now let us speak of the
reason, why Priest, People, and Governors should seek the peace of Jerusalem.

The reason is twofold, which is gathered out of the words that follow, They
that love her shall prosper. First, if they seek her peace, it will be an
evident argument that they love her. Secondly, they shall not leese the fruit
of their labor, God shall make them to prosper: as if he would have said,
seek the peace of Jerusalem, thereby show forth your love unto her, and cause
the God of blessing for the peace you procure her, to pour down his blessings
upon you and yours: they that love her shall prosper. Otherwise know, that as
there were many in the days of David, which for all their fair shows, as
Chrysostom speaks comment. on this Psalm.
had evil will at Sion, yea and that as Musculus observes, Comment. on this
Psalm.
who in hearts were joined with the professed enemies of Hierusalems peace, and
under hand fought to trouble and unquiet her estate: so certainly, although
for a while they were not seen nor discerned of men, but were honored of
many, as men of a deep reach and politic carriage; yet were they then
despised of the Lord, and in the appointed time, God shall cause them to be
taken in their own wiles, and will preserve his Jerusalem from harm. This is
that which Isaiah after prophesied of the Church, Isa. 54.15.
Behold the enemy shall gather himself, but without me says the Lord,
whosoever shall gather himself in thee against thee, shall fall. Behold, I
have created the smith, that blows the coals in the fire, and him that
brings forth an instrument for his work; I have created the destroyer to
destroy; but all the weapons that are made against thee, shall not prosper: and
every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn.
Pray for therefore, and seek the peace of Jerusalem, in so doing, you shall
show that you do love her, and for this your love in seeking her peace, God
shall make you prosper. Thus much for the opening of this text: now let us
seek to fit it to these times.

This Jerusalem is a figure of our Church, this David a figure of our king,
the placing of the arc on Mount Sion, which before wandered here and there,
through the tribes of Israel, and had no settled and abiding place; a figure of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus, which although it has had long abode in this land,
(as the arc in Israel) yet it seemed to many of us, to have no sure ground of
a continual abode: till the Lord God in love to our nation, and favor to his
Church, settled (as the arc on Mount Sion) the imperial diadem of this
kingdom, upon the person of our renowned Sovereign, and of his most royal
and ever blessed issue. The which, as it has of all sorts of people been most
gladly acknowledged; so the better to remember us of this and other our loyal
duties, let me speak unto you as sometime did David unto his people, O pray
for the peace of our Jerusalem, the Church of England, let them prosper O Lord
that love her.

In which my discourse, that I may the more distinctly proceed: observe with
me, first, the cause of this my exhortation; secondly the exhortation it self:
first to you my brethren of the ministry, as David to the Priests: secondly to
you of the people, as David to the tribes of Israel: thirdly to our Governors,
as David to them that sat on the seats of justice. Thirdly, the reason why
all estates should receive this exhortation, because they that love Jerusalem
and seek her peace, they shall prosper.

Concerning the cause of this my speech, since this Jerusalem resembles the
Church whereof we are members; which as Ierom speaks Ierom comment. on this
psalm.
is not fully builded, but is daily a building: wherein, not dead but lively
stones are laid, on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus
being the head corner stone. And whereas during this our building, many the Ezr.
4.2.
adversaries of Judah and Benjamin (of God and of his truth) have come to our
Zerubabell and chief fathers, and said unto them, we will build with you, for
we seek the Lord your God as ye do: But purpose indeed Ezr. 4.4.
to discourage the people, and trouble this building: Nay since we cannot say
of our Church and builders, as David there of that Jerusalem, Ps. 122.2
that it is a city which is builded at unity in it self; but we may every
where hear men complaining of, and taxing our many iarrings and idle
disagreements; Let no man ask the reason, why I take unto me these words of
exhortation, O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love
her. When many in our Church walk after the flesh, not after the spirit;
seeking to serve their own phansies and worldly respects, and not the truth
of Christ Jesus in the singleness of their hearts. When many as we may see
stumble at strawes and leap over blocks, strain at gnats and swallow camels,
tithe minte and commyn, and leave the greater matters of the law neglected.
Nay when many in stead o^ a good zeal, for Gods glory and for his truth,
bring strange fire, such which never burnt on Gods altar, but was fetched from
the fire of hell it self; as though without it Gods truth could not stand, nor
we be known to be the servants of God, except we wear the cognizance of the
devil. When the words and deeds of many are full of malice, hatred, and bitter
speakings; Let no man marvel that I plead the cause of our common mother, I
mean the Church of England, which is racked, nay torn with our dissentions;
and yet which carefully seeks the quiet of her children, but they will not be
quieted. And yet without offense, let me speak unto thy motherly affection, O
mother Church, 1 (...) 3.25.
which can not abide to have thy life-child divided, nor can brook in
patience the cries and skreeches of thy natural children. Although thou
lullest them in the lap of thy motherly compassion, and danliest them in thy
arms of joy; although thou feedest their eyes with goodly shows, and their
cares with pleasing sounds: nay although thou give them to suck of the
teates of thy breast, yet thou shall not still their cries, nor assuage their
sorrows, except by thy diligent inquiry thou seek, and seeking find, and
finding pluckest out the pinnes that stick in, and are so grieve some to the
flesh. Arise O Lord, and come unto thy rest, Psalm. 1 32.8.
thou and the arc of thy sanctuary, let thy Priests he clothed with
righteousness, and let thy Saints rejoice For so long as Jonah be suffered to
sleep in his sin, to go to Tharsus when he should be at Nineveh, there to
do the work that he has vowed, and the Lord has enjoined him: So long as
many congregations are as sheep without a shepherd, and do neither hear at
home, not may well bear abroad their Chhristian duties, the things that make
for their peace. So long as many of our brethren, have put themselves to
silence, or are silenced by other, leaving to preach, nay to instruct their
flock in the first elements and principles of Christianity: So long as those
monthly sermons imposed by Canons are not performed; and those wonted Lectures
in the head towns of this (...), where the congregations are great and the
preaching seldom, are wholly neglected. Insomuch that with us it is now come
to pass, that we have less preaching, but no more praying. How can we but
complain our selves unto our mother Church; and show unto her that the
Jesuits, seedmen of sedition, and brochers of impiety, by this our silence
do make their advantage: and that the envious man whilst we thus sleep sows
amongst us the tares of profaneness and wickedness of life by which the
peace of our Jerusalem is in likelihood greatly to be impeached, and the
ship of this Church and kingdom to be troubled? Marvel not then, why to you;
I use these words of exhortation, O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them
prosper that love her. In a word, since the recusants and half recusants are
multiplied in this land, make mention with joy of the fall of our brethren; and
even toward us, men otherwise conformable, but impugners of their errors; by
their false suggestions and slanders do show their enmity: seeking by the
disgrace of our persons, to work a dislike of the truth we teach: Since there
are many Michols sooffing at our David's, because they are arried in white
linen garments: many Vzzaes of the lay people, which in a blind devotion
thrust themselves too far in Clergy causes: many oxen which in quiet should
bear the arc; the Church of Christ Jesus, which through their boisterous and
troublesome carriage, do cause it even to shake and totter; Let no man farther
seek and inquire, why as David then, so I now, to the priests, people, and
rulers should say, O pray and seek for the peace of Jerusalem, (...) them
prosper that love thee. Thus much for the causes of this exhortation: now let
us speak of the exhortation it self.

First to you my brethren, which do refuse to yield unto conformity, remember
you are the masons which have in your hands these living stones, which are to
be laid in the house of your God: for your brethrens sake, and the love you
have unto the house of your God, neglect not your calling: you know that the
enemies of our Church are many, that your silence gives way to their
proceedings; why should this be spoken of you in Gath and Askalon, that you
will no more labor in the vineyard of the Lord? Why should you withdraw your
blessed help, and defraud the people of your charge, of that sweet comfort
which by your ministry they once received? Should a cross and a surplesse
thrust you from your needful labo^, and make you forget what Paul said, 1.
Cor. 9.16.
We is me if I preach not the Gospel* should a cross and a surplesse cause
you to rend the seamelesse coat of Christ Jesus, not to regard the peace of our
Jerusalem.

What is a linen garment? for let me first speak of one, when with one breath
I cannot speak of both: is it simply sinful? thou do not so think. For
then Exodus 28.40. 1 Samuel 2.18
God would not have commanded it unto the Levites, neither would 1. Cro. 15.27.
David being no Leuite, in bringing the arc unto Mount Sion, of his own
proper motion, without any special warrant from God, have worn it. Fear not
2. Sam. 6.21.
Michols scoff; although she therefore repute thee a vain man, yet was David
therefore approved of the Lord. It is true, the Leuiticall law, together with
her rites and ceremonies are abolished; neither has Christ or his Apostles,
expressly commanded the use of a white linen garment unto us: what then? should
nothing be used, or received in the Church, which is not warranted by the
express letter of the word? where then, as Austin speaks, August. Nebridio
epist. 1 17. Basil de Spirit. Sancto. c. 27.
do thou read in the scripture, that good friday, the feasts of Christ's
Nativity, resurrection, ascension, and coming of the holy Ghost are to be
celebrated? which yet of all Churches are kept and observed. Where that thou
should receive the sacrament of Christ's body in the morning and not after
supper? where that it should be ministered to women? where that children should
be baptized? where that they should be baptized in the Church? where that water
sprinkled on their faces should serve for baptism? where that there should be
some, which at their baptism should witness for them? all which and many of the
like quality, are not expressly set down in the plain letter of the word;
yet are they, and from all ages have been continually used in the Church of
God. In regard whereof, although the use of this linen garment be not disertly
mentioned, and so warranted in the express letter of the word; yet since god
Loui. 8.13 16.4.
commanded it to the Jews, and Ren. 4.4.
the four and twenty Elders, a figure of the Church triumphant, were arraied
all in white: since it serves to decency and order, which are always
commendable in the house of God: since the minister by his white garment, is
remembered to bring a white heart, when he is to offer the prayers of the people
unto God: and that a small sin in him, as a small spot in his garment is soon
discerned: the fathers in the Primitive Church might well command, and so put
in use the wear of the surplesse, or some such linen garment to be used of
the minister, in the time of divine service in the Church. Yea unto the use of
this S. Bernard advises, saying, Bernard of the resur. ser. 2.
Ad altaris officium, nemo accedat in vesti communi, sed quisquis accessurus,
albis induatur: Let no man come to minister the sacrament, in a common garment;
but whosoever is to come, let him be clothed in white. Yea not only the
ministers were arraied in white, but ex catechumenis competentes, such which
came to be baptized in those great weeks of Easter and whitsontide, were also
clothed in white linen garments. In so much, that Ioannes Diacon. de vit. D.
Gregor. lib. 2. c. 49.
Gregory the great sent certain sums of money to Boniface (the first
conuerter of the Saxons to the faith) to be employed for such of the poor,
which desired to be baptized, but yet lacked money to buy those garments. Yet
did not the Fathers enforce this garment, as absolutely necessary to be worn
in the Church, but commended it rather as fit, by serving to decency and
order: the which may appear out of Augustine, speaking of these garments.
August. ser. de temp. 163.
Oftentimes there may lie hid a pure soul under a black habit, neither
does it matter much, if any has not a white garment. The reason of this
Celestinus, the first of that name, bishop of Rome, gives, in an Epistle that
he writes to certain bishops of France, when under their charge some
clothed in cloakes served in the church, leaving that garment which in former
times was used. Caranzu. epit. council. inter decret Celest.
We are to be distinguished from the people and other by our doctrine, not by
our vestiment; by our conversation not by our habit; by the purity of our
minds, not by the ornaments of the bodies. And therefore shortly after
infers, we are not to induce the simple minds of the faithful unto these,
for they are rather to be taught, then to be illuded. Since the^ this garment
has been in this manner commanded and used by the godly fathers in the first
Church, why may it not in the same sort be commanded to us, and used of us? If
here thou shall infer, because it has been superstitiously abused, many
putting that holiness in the garment, that without it they think no service
or sacrament can be rightly administered. That is their error that are so
miscarried; whose misinformed consciences are to be instructed in the truth.
Yet I pray thee ingeniously speak, must nothing be used that has been
superstitiously abused? then must we have no Church, no word, no sacraments, no
prayers, for they have all been most fowly abused. When Augustine was
consulted, whether the temples of the Pagan Idols might be turned to the
Churches of the living God? August. publis. epist.
he asks whether of Pagan men there are not made believing Christians: thereby
inferring, that as the worshippers of idols may become true worshippers of God,
the temples of idols churches for God: so things superstitiously abused may be
freed from their superstition, and retained in their use.

But other reformed Churches, have not thought meet that in the time of divine
service they should be used. Be it so. Yet thou hear that our Church is of
another mind: to wear or not wear is a thing indifferent, we give no laws
to them, neither may their fact prescribe in matters of this nature a law to
us. They do that which in their seeming best fitted the polity of their
Church: and our governors that, which best fitteth ours. When Monache the
mother of Augustine came to Millan, she was troubled in conscience, because
that at Rome on the saturdaie they fasted, at Millan they did not fast: whose
troubled conscience Ambrose soon eased, showing unto her in things of that
nature, that when she was at Rome, she should do as they did at Rome, and
when in other places, as they did in those places. Unto what Church soever ye
shall come, Aug. epist. 88. Casula.
observe the custom of that place, if ye will not have other to be offensive
unto you, or you become an offense unto them. Mark the reason of his advise,
in the end he concludes, do not resist the bishop herein, but without all
scruple or dispute, follow that, the which thou see him do. Which advice of
Ambrose, Gregory the great in the like approoueth; for being consulted by
Austin the conuerter of our English nation, whether he might not bring into the
Church of England, certain rites then in use in the church of France, which
yet were not used in the Church of Rome; received for answer, It pleases me
that whether in the church of Rome, or in the French church, Greg. August.
interrogat. c. 3. Beda de gest. Anglor. lib. 1, c. 27.
or in any other Church, thou have found any thing, that may more please
almighty God; thou would carefully choose it: and that which thou have
gathered out of many Churches, thou would above all other establish in the
Church of England, which is but newely converted to the faith: for not the
things for the places, but the places for the good things (that come from them)
are to be loved. Much rather would Gregory have approved those rites, which
had been before in England received; although they neither had bin nor were in
use, in the Churches of Geneua and Scotland. The which also Hierom confirms,
in his epistle he writes to Licinius, Hierom. Licinio. epist. 28.
saying, This I think briefly to admonish thee of, that those rites of the
Church (especially which are not hurtsome to faith) are so to be kept, as they
have been delivered from their Elders: and that the customs of some, are not
to be subverted and overthrown, for the contrary usage and manner of other.
But above the^ all, notably Augustine clears this question, in a discourse he
makes of the use of ceremonies: for having showed that some were generally
received, such which were either by the Apostles appointed, or concluded on in
general councils: August. Nebrid. epist. 117.
at length he says, there are other also, which do vary according to the
diverse use of sundry places and countries: as that some do fast on saturday,
others do not: and of which after he thus concludes: all this kinds has free
observations (may be used, or may not be used) neither is there any other ride
(or caution to be given) to a grave and wise Christian, then that he so do, as
he sees the Church to do, unto which soever he shall happen to come. For when
that which is enjoined, is not against faith, nor against good manners, it is
to be reputed indifferent, and to be kept for the peace of them amongst whom
we live. Since then it cannot be denied, but that the surplesse is commanded,
and for the most part used in the church of England; that Ambrose, Austin,
Gregory, Hierome (sometime reputed the four pillars of the western Church)
advises you, for the peace of the church in which you live, least you become
an offense unto other, and other unto you, notwithstanding the contrary vsages
of other Churches, to conform your selves, and to use the same. And unto them
all, which ask the reason, why some Churches use this garment, others do not:
I answer as Austin, who being demanded why Paul circumcised Timothy, but did
not circumcise Titus, although thereunto he was required: August. epist. 27.
that he might show those sacraments, neither as necessary ought to be
desired, neither yet as sacrilegious ought to be damned. So I to them which
ask the reason why some churches receive this ceremony, others do not:
surely that the faithful of God may know, that this ceremony ought not to be
required as absolutely necessary, nor yet to be damned as sacrilegious and
naught.

Yet thou insistest and alleadgest as a reason of thy refusal, that many good
men will not wear the surples, or minister baptism with a cross; my love
toward them persuades me that many of them are good, and that they do
appertain unto the Lord. Yet I pray thee answer, are they all bad that have
conformed themselves, and use these ceremonies? thy Christian charity will not
harbor such thoughts: nay I am persuaded, that if God should send among us a
fiery trial, that as this kingdom did affoard in the days of Queen Marie,
Cranmer, and Ridley, Hooper, and Latimer, Bishops then varying even in these
ceremonies, to give their bodies to be burned for Gods truth: so this Church
would affoard many, whereof some yield to conformity, and some do not, which
with joint consents would witness the truth, that has been, and is now
preached amongst you, with the lost of the liuelihoods and their lives,
Wherefore look not always so much on that which good men does, but consider
rather whether they are in that good, they do: neither let this seem strange
unto thee, that God suffers his servants to fall in judgment, and although
they would, not to see his truth; call to mind the errors of the holy
fathers: and why does God this? even that all flesh, as Chrysostom observes,
might give glory to the lord, and not ascribe to the worth of man the blessed
work of man's salvation. Wherefore, since the use of the surples is merely
indifferent, which the magistrate may command to be continued in the Church:
since it is no new thing, but ancient, which a long time has been used in
the Church, and approved of the fathers, as serving unto deconci^^ and ^^der:
since it does not contrary any principle of faith, or any way impugn the
honesty of ma^ners; although it was superstitiously abused, and of some
reformed Churches therefore not admitted, and of some good men therefore
refused, let it in all obedience and love be used of us, and for it, let us not
break the peace of our Jerusalem, or trouble the Church in which we live.

Yet thou say, thou can not for thy conscience: what of the thing? thou
can not that art learned be so grossly deceived; it is in his nature merely
indifferent, neither good not evil: for if it had been absolutely evil, the
holy fathers and martyrs would not have used it, or approved it as lawful in
the Church of God.

Why then do thou refuse it? thou say for thy conscience; what thy
conscience? that have so much labored in the word, thy conscience that have
taught the magistrate commanding in things indifferent is to be obeyed. No man
knows thy conscience but thy self; gloss not with God, nor with thine own
soul: but if thy conscience do mis-giue thee, ask of her her reasons, weigh
them with thy self in the balance of Gods word, thou know she may err
and be deceived. It is no shame well to vnspeake that thou have ill spoken, or
to retract with praise that thou have fondly justified. Follow wise and well
minded Austin, seek to guide thy zeal with knowledge, and in the spirit of
meekness confer with thy discreet and learned brother, and above all, in
the humblenes of thy well meaning heart, pray unto God, that he would open thy
eyes, and teach thee his truth: it may be he will show to thy misinformed
conscience, that he did to Peter, Act. 10.15.
that which I have sanctified call not thou unclean: but if the Lord shall
withhold this grace from thee, and thou Romans 14.5.
can not in this be resolved in thy mind, I may not persuade thee to sin
against thy conscience. But as Paul of meats that were sacrificed to Idols, so
I of these; although in their natures they be clean, yet Romans 14.14.
to thee that iudgest those things to be unclean, they are unclean. And yet
then remember whose thou art, and in all meekenes possess thy soul, and show
to us that are contrary minded, that although thou can not wear this white
linen garment, nor brook the cross required in baptism, that yet for the
peace of Jerusalem which thou do seek, thou art content to take up Christ's
cross and follow him. And yet when thou hear that they Mat. 5.10
are blessed that suffer persecution, remember it is added, as Augusst. epist.
50.
Austin observes, for righteousness sake. It is not the punishment, but the
cause that makes a martyr.

But it may be as some pretend, they refrain from this, not for conscience of
the thing, for they hold it indifferent; nor for their conscience, for of it in
their mind they are well persuaded; but for conscience of their weak
brethren, which with the use of the surplesse are offended: unto whose waking
souls thus I answer, that To. 14.15.
although Christian liberty should yield to love, that 1. Cor. 6.12.10.13.
that which is lawefull to them is not always expedient, nay To. 14.21.
that they may not eat flesh, not wear a surplesse to offend their brother:
yet when the magistrate commands them in the things of this nature, then is
their liberty restrained; and that, which if they were free they would not
do, nor indeed should with the offense of their brothen ^^^e they are bound to
do, least they should be despisers of him, whom God has set over them: for
as thy liberty must veild to love, so must thy love and liberty to the rule
of faith, which requires of thee, Romans 13.5
to obey the magistrate commanding in things indifferent, not only for fear,
but for conscience sake.

At the which thy discreet carriage, if thy weak brother shall: be offenned,
it is an offense taken, not given: better it is by thy word (...) ens^mple to
lead him to the truth, then by thy nice mammering to confirm him in an
untruth: as Act. 5.19.
Peter, better to obey God then man; so I, better to obey thy magistrate
lawfully commanding, then thy brother fondly sweruing: the Canons of our church
thus decreeing, then the fancy of some fewe^ otherwise speaking. Whe^^^^ to
conclude, find neither for the conscience of the thing, thy conscience, nor
the conscience of thy weak brother, thou must (...) by the command of the
magistrate, in things of this nature as David in this (...), so I (...) you,
O^^^ and seek for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love her.

Now to you my fellow laborers, which have yielded your obedience to these
outward ceremonies, and have conformed your selves unto the time: seek for the
peace of Jerusalem, rejoice not at the fall of your deceived brethren, neither
let your egar tongues, be ouer-fretting in their smarring soars: as Christ to
his disciples, so let me to you, 1 Luke 9.55.
If at any time you suffer in you the affections of men, remember of what
spirit you are: as it is good that your zeal should be guided with knowledge,
so much better if it be moderated with love: let your fire come from heaven,
not from the earth: And when you have to deal with any either of your charge,
or appertaining to the stock of Christ Jesus, whose minds are distasted with
these new conceits, Gal. 6.1.
instruct them with the spirit of (...); and although at the first they admit
no counsel, yet let your words of wisdom, as the sweet dewes of heaven still
shewer upon them, till God by your ministie open their hearts, and they with
you seek for Hierusalems peace. Yea and since the Lords vineyard has lost
many painful laborers, whose mouths spoke for God against the corruptions
of the world; and for his truth against the errors and superstitions of
Popery: 1. Tim. 6.5.
stir up the grace of God that is in you, double your diligence, enlarge your
zeal, that their wants by your labors may be supplied: for if (which God
forbid) this our Church of England be ouergrowne with the corruptions of sin,
or poisoned with the superstitions of deceiving popery, Jerusalem will never
be at peace. And to you also let me speak, which have the rooms of Gods
messengers, but cannot carry his message unto his people, which in your black
lives, do not answer the whitenes of your garments; and who, although you use
the cross, yet are a cross unto the Church of God, and a scandal of your
calling: seek for the peace of Jerusalem, enlarge not you your mouths
against the afflicted, their falls will not justify yours: and if you will
needs be meddling Mat. 7.^.
with the motes in their eyes, forget not the beams that are in yours, least
you hear from some like spirited to my self, as Iehoram did of Iehu, when he
asked whether it were peace, 2. Reg. 9.22.
what peace? whilst the whoredoms of thy mother Iesabel and her witchcrafts
are in great number, what peace can you procure for your selves and for your
people? when by your ignorance, ill ensample, and neglect of duty, you lead
and confirm them in your sin. Awake therefore with Jonah out of the sleep
of your sin, and although it be somewhat to your loss, with him seek a
calm for our ship, a peace for our Jerusalem in which you live. Thus much
to you my brethren of the ministry, seek the peace of Jerusalem.

Now let me speak to you of the people (as David did to the tribes of Israel)
which are beholders and hearers of the troubles of our Church, seek for the
peace of Jerusalem; and when you come into the house of god, to talk of
matters belonging to god, and to his Church: Eccles. 4.17.
take heed to your feet, as the Preacher speaks, and be more ready to
hear, then to offer up the sacrifice of fools, for they know not that they
do evil. Remember what the Lord speaks by his servant Malachie, the Mal.
2.7.
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and men should seek the law at his
mouth: if at our mouths ye will seek it, then hear O ye people: the things in
question, the cross and surplesse are merely indifferent, such which may, yea
and should be used, when authority commands, and again may be disused, if
authority forbids: if any herein despise authority, and will not obey the
decreed orders of our Church, he is not wholly fit to be a guide and leader
unto other; he procures trouble to our Jerusalem, and to himself. But as for
you my brethren, walk in the light that has been showed you, and show your
holy obedience unto the Lord: remember the times not long since past, when God
took from us our late blessed Sovereign, how gladly then you would have been
contented, (if so be there had been any that could have assured you) to have
enjoyed the religion now professed, although it had been with the purchase of
much money, and with many inconveniences, from which you are now freed: and
shall we now, as though we had forgotten those times, show our unthankfulness
to God, disloyalty to our Prince, so waywardly impugn his princely
proceedings in the cross and surplesse, as though all our religion were
corrupted by these; the Lord give us better minds, yea be has given, and
therefore as ye have begun, still seek you for the peace of Jerusalem in
which we live. The peace of Jerusalem you do then truly seek, when Heb.
13.17.
you submit your selves to them which have the oversight over you in the Lord,
and suffer the good word of God, not only plentifully to dwell, but to
fructify amongst you: for as when they of Judah and Ieruselem 2. Chro. 36.16.
mocked the messengers of God, despised his words, and misused his Prophets,
the wrath of the Lord arose against his people: insomuch that he gave
Jerusalem to be spoiled by the Chaldees, his temples to be burnt, his people
to be slain or carried away captive. So when they hearkened to the Prophets,
and set their hearts to seek the God of their forefathers; then God made their
enemies tributaries to them, and themselves to prosper in all things that they
took in hand. Hearken therefore unto God speaking unto you, by the mouth of his
servants, for this is to seek the peace of Jerusalem, and to make her
prosper. But whereas it cannot be, that in our congregations all should be
obedient unto the heavenly voice; but that there should be some which by their
lewd lives, and cross behauiours, shall disturb and trouble the peace of
Jerusalem. Yours it is which are the guerdio^s of the church, and Sidemen
chosen to second them in that office, diligently to see, and faithfully to
present whatsoever crime and offensive disorder: for as the sin of some few,
causes the Lord to be angry with many; so does the punishment of the wicked,
reconcile the Lord unto his people again. Seek therefore the peace of
Jerusalem in making presentment of the notorious offenders. Many good laws,
both lately, and long since has been made, for the suppressing of sin; yet
when you, which are the eyes of the Judge, will not see the disorders, nay when
you, which are sworn to detect, will not present them, how can sin be
suppressed; and in the suppressing of sin, how can the peace of Jerusalem be
procured? When Iehosaphat was much commended for his forward zeal in the cause
of the lord; yet it was said, that in his days the high places were not taken
away: and the cause is showed, 2. Chro. 20.33.
for the people had not yet prepared their hearts unto the God of their
fathers: even so, if we ask why in the days of our Iehosaphat, these crying
and offensive sins go uncontrolled, are not punished, but soothed up,
continue as before: one cause is in you the churchwardens and sidemen, you do
not prepare your hearts unto the God of your fathers, you will not take nor
give notice of them. Wherefore as Christ to the angels of the seven Churches,
so he speaks unto you. Reu. 2.4. v. 14. v. 20.
I have somewhat to say against you, in that you foster the wicked in their
sins, nay in that ye make the sins of other your sins, and by your winking
at, and cloaking of them, pluck the curses of God upon your heads, and upon
his Church: Ier. 48.10.
for as Jeremy speaks, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently: this is Gods work, and the cause of his Church you have in hand:
show your diligence in the search of sins, that God may turn his curses from
you, and you may see Jerusalem live in peace. Neither let the offendour take
to wrath, that for his crying sins he is presented; but rather let him humble
his soul, bewail his faults, and thank God, that this occasion is given him
to amend. Thus let them that present, seek the peace of Hierusaem by
presenting the offendour; and let the presented seek the peace of Jerusalem
by repenting their sins; and let the god of peace be at peace with our
Church, because she wincketh not at the faults of her children, but reprooueth
and punishes them, in them; to the example of other, and for the amendment of
their wicked lives. Thus much to you of the people, the tribes of Israel, pray
and seek for the peace of Jerusalem.

Now are we to speak unto the governors of the people, facti estis seeds
domini iudicatis, Aug. comment. in Psalm.
as Austin speaks, ye sittel on the seats of the all-iudging God, and have
authority to command from the throne of David, the scepter of the king: because
they that judge do ask (as Austin there notes) they that are judged are
asked: Interrogate, inquire after those things which make for the peace of
Jerusalem. For as Prosper after him writes, Prosp. comment. in punc locum
ad ipsas seeds propheticus sermo dirigitur, vobis ait, qui iudicaturi estis,
per quos fiet conscie^tiarum interrogatio: discernite a superbis humiles ab
implacidis separate pacatos: that is, to the very seats (of injustice) the
prophetical speech is directed; unto you be says which are to judge, by whom
is to made the examination of consciences, discern ye the humble from the
proud, and put a difference between the troublesome and the quiet. It is not
enough for you with the priests to pray, or people to desire; but you must by
diligent inquiry seek, and seeking find, and finding, further the peace of
our Jerusalem, which is of God. The unquiet of our Church makes us to pray,
and the people to desire, that the God of peace would dispose your hearts, to
seek for the things that make for our peace: as Athanasius, Non pugnamus
Caesar, sed rogamus, O ye rulers, we do not fight, the weapons of Christians
are prayers and tears. Genesis 18.27.
Yet as Abraham to God, so I to the Governors of our Church, Behold I have
began to speak unto my Lords, and yet am but dust and ashes: yet not with my
words, Hierom. comment. in hunc locum
but with the words of Hierom, Seek after those things which make for the
peace of this city, and follow it; that by the love of peace, ye may attain
the fruit of everlasting bliss. Remember you must give an account of your
doings to the Lord. Wherefore let us make bold to remember you of your duties,
and upon what disturbers of our peace you are principally to look. First, upon
the whole and half recusants, and other favorers of the Romish superstition,
which if they come, are drawn to our Churches; which backbite our persons,
deprave our preachings, and speak in corners against the profession of the
truth: let them not boast themselves of your favors, for of them many unto
this day have showen, that they seek not the peace of this Church and
kingdom, in which they live. Secondly look to the open and notorious
offenders, which are either publicly infamed, or detected in your courts:
whose evil ensamples imbolden other to sin, and are an offense unto the godly
with whom they live, and a note of rebuke and shame unto our church, when they
escape unpunished: for by their crying sins they disturb the peace of our
Jerusalem, in provoking the Lord to be angry with this land. Lastly, look to
the proudly wilful and forwardly disobedient, which speak evil of authority,
and contentiously broch and maintain their follies, contrary to the wholesome
laws and orders of our Church: these are seedes-men of Schism, fathers of
contention, whose troublesome and ever varying humors, cannot brook the quiet
of our Church. Thus seek ye the peace of our Jerusalem, O ye our Governors,
and then do ye which thus seek, the priests that pray, the people that
desire her peace, hearken to the words that follow, They shall prosper that
love her.

This is the soul and life of the exhortation, and a forcible motive to move
all estates to seek Hierusalems peace: they shall prosper that love her. Hear
ye my fellow brethren, and ye the people of God, the tribes of Israel, and ye
the fathers and Governors of our Church, and look into the bosom of your
hearts; if ye love our Jerusalem which is our Church, ye will seek for her
peace, nay if ye love her ye shall prosper, and all things shall go well with
you: but if ye do not love her, nor yet in truth, for all your fair shows,
do seek for her peace; you shall not prosper. And if for a while God suffer
you to flourish, yet the sun of your prosperity shall soon set, and all
your glory shall be as the flower in the field, which is soon withered and
gone. Hear O ye sinners, which with your crying sins trouble the peace of
our Jerusalem, and cause the Lord to be angry with his people, what the Lord
spoke to Achan by the mouth of I^^^^h (for whose sin Israel turned his back
before his enemies) when he willed the people to stone him, and his, even to
the death. Josh 7.25
In as much as thou have troubled Israel, the Lord shall trouble thee his day.
They that love not Jerusalem nor seek her peace: they shall not prosper.
Hear O ye Seminaries and Jesuits, and you Romish favorites, which with your
seditious practices, and unholy devotions, have hindered the success of the
word, interrupted the peace of our Church; and have furthered, if not
fathered, many the rents and divisions, that have sprung up amongst us: that
they that Ezr. 4.4.
hindered the building of the Temple, in the days of Zerubabel, discouraged the
people of Judah, and procured v. 23.
of the Kings Counsel to work the King to forbid the work; heard after to
their rebuke, Ezr. 6.11
the decree of Darius, that the Temple should be builded, and that whosoever
should after seek to alter this sentence, the timber should be pulled from
off his house, and should be set up, and he to be hanged thereon. They that
love not Jerusalem, but seek to hinder her peace, they shall not prosper. Let
ill spoken Martin hear and Martius Apes, which through their scandalous
libels, and scurrilous iestings, have sought to insame the Fathers of our
Church, and have set the sons against their fathers, and the fathers against
their sons, to the great unquiet of our Church and kingdom: that duty
lacking Cham, Genesis 9.23
the discouerer of his fathers shame, for ever bears in his unhappy race the
curse of his father: and that railing and seditious Shemei, 1. Reg. 2.9
was by wise Solomon not reputed innocent, but adjudged to carry his hoary
head with blood into his grave. They that love not Jerusalem, but hinder her
peace, they shall not prosper. Yea let all heretics hear, which make fair
shows to color their errors, and make semblance to one thing, when they mean
another: that Arius, the trouble of the Church, (swearing to maintain the
Nicen faith in open show, Zozom hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 28. Epiph. haeres. 69.
but privily meaning in truth that confession of his, which under his hand he
covertly had hid) that very night in steed of his excrements voyded his guts,
and died in a filthy place a filthy death. They that do not seek the peace
of the Church they shall not prosper. Yea hear, O ye my brethren which thrust
your selves out of Gods work, and seem to make a rent in this our Church;
that the Meletians which severed themselves from their Patriarch of Alexandria,
because in the time of persecution, he received some upon their repentance,
and penance given, which for fear of torments had denied the faith: that this
fact of theirs is noted by godly Epiphanius, Epiph. haeres 63.
the sixty eight heresy, and they heretics without an error. Nay their
followers (although they took unto themselves the title of the holy Church)
yet were so far forsaken of the Lord, that they joined with the Arians to
persecute the Catholics; and were the greatest procurers, by their false
suggestions and untrue reports, of all the troubles of Athanasius, which in the
reign of Constantine he suffered. They that seek not the peace of Jerusalem,
they shall not prosper. 1. Sam. ^, 30.
Yea and let wincking Hely hear, which would not see the lewdnes of his
children, nor regard the people abhorring for his sons vileness the very
sacrifices of God; that God will say unto him: I said unto thy house, and to
the house of thy father, Ye shall walk before me for ever: but now it shall not
be so: for them that honor me, those will I honor, and as for them that
despise me, those will I despise. 1. Sam. 4.
According to this which the Lord had spoken, Hely broke his neck, Ophny and
Phyneas were both slain in one day, the Ark of God was taken, and the glory
was departed from Israel. They that do not seek the peace of Jerusalem, they
shall not prosper. Yea let Jeroboam hear, which has erected his calves of
gold in Dan and Bethel, and said to the people, 1. Reg. 12.28.
it is too much for you to go to Jerusalem, come worship here: that v. 30.
this thing shall turn unto him for sin, that a man of God shall cry
against the altars that he has made, nay that 1. Reg. 14.6.
Ahliah shall be sent unto him from the Lord, with heavy tidings, even that
God will bring so great an evil upon his house, v. 10.
that he will sweep away his whole family, as a man sweepeth away dongue,
till it be all gone. Thus as David speaks, Psalm. 129.6.
are they confounded and turned backward; as many as have evil will at Sion,
thus shall they be, as the grass that grows on the house top, which
withers before it be plucked up. On the contrary, they that love Jerusalem
and seek her peace, they shall prosper. This you may see verified in this
kingly prophet David, to whom 2. Sam. 7.9.
God gave a name like to the name of the great men of the earth, and of whose
loins concerning the flesh, our Savior came. This in Constantine the great,
the peacemaker of the world, Zozom. hist. Eccl. l. ^ c. 16.
who did not only for the quiet of the Church, assemble the first and great
council of Nice; but before the Bishops faces burnt their inuectiue libels,
which to him the one had tendered against the other, and delivered unto them
that worthy speech, most worthy himself, Ecclesia dei discensionem quonis malo
graniorem censeo: Zezom. did. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 16.
I repute the discension of the Church of god, more grievous then any evil.
Unto whose grave sentence let all estates subscribe, and as much as it is
possible seek the peace of the Church and kingdom in which we live. Yea O
Lord let this be in our prayers, desires, and best endeavors, that so we may
prosper, and it may go well with us. Amen.

FINIS.

