A SERMON PREACHED AT NEVVPORT-PAIGNELL in the County of Buckingham. By R. H.

2. COR. 5. 20, 21. Now then are we ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's steed, that ye be reconciled
unto God:

For he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin: that we should
be made the righteousness of God in him.

LONDON. Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop at
Grayes-Inne new Gate in Holborne. 1628.

To the right worshipful, M. John Tompson Esquier, one of her Majesty's
auditors in the Eschequer, and justice of Peace and Quorum in her Majesty's
shires of Buck. and Bedf. all increase of worship with all spiritual good.
WHereas (worshipful Sir) God has given you, not only by your counsel to
further, but also by your good ensample to provoke, many careless people to
the hearing of the word: we cannot but reverence this grace in you, and wish it
many ways multiplied for our countries good. For when prophanes has so
poisoned the hearts of many, that they ask who is the Lord that they should
hear his voice, and the world has so swetned other, that they do run to it,
when they should post to God. In vain were our labors, except God stirred up
the hearts of some, which might be leaders to the people, to bring them into
the house of God. And although at the first many more savage then this beast,
are hayled perforce into the Arc, and come unwilling, like such which are
muffled and would not be touched of the sun: yet when through Gods mercy
they shall see all drowned which are without, and shall taste of some of that
grace God gives unto his; they will not a foot from the door of his
tabernacle but as me^ whom the zeal of the Lords house has eaten, they shall
fall down and worship confessing that the Lord is God. In regard whereof be not
weary of well doing, but stir up the grace God has given you, and know that
God has made you, not only for your self, and for your household: but also
for the good of other. In the view of which your goodness as I much do joy, so
in lieu of duty with all desire of your farther good, I have emboldned my
self, to offer to your Worship this small treaty of that great peace and
reconciliation we have with God. The which, although now long fithence, in a
great assembly, it has been most gravely handled by that blessed man of
reverend memory John Fox. Yet since our course is diverse as the learned may
judge, to satisfy other rather then my self, I have suffered this although
unwilling to be drawn into the light. Thus commending it to Gods blessing and
your Christian favors, my prayer is unto this God of peace, that he would give
us peace with him and with our selves, that we may joy in this covenant of
peace, witnessed in his word, and assured our hearts by the earnest of his
spirit, Amen.

From North Crowly, Maiij primo. Your worships in all duty, Roger Hacket.

A Sermon preached at Newport Paignell in the county of Buckes. taken out of
the 2. Cor. 5. ver. 20.21.
Now then are we ambassadors for Christ, 2. Cor. 5. ver. 20. and 21.
as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ steed, that ye
be reconciled unto God:

For he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin: that we should
be made the righteousness of God in him.


AS many Scriptures thorough the body of the Bible, do most plainly lay
forth, the work, I should say wonder, of our redemption and reconciliation
with God the father: so there is nothing, wherein a Christian soul should
rather seek to solace her self, then in the sweet meditation of this most
heavenly doctrine, by which she may see that God is now reconciled unto her,
and that she may through Christ merit, have access with boldness unto the
throne of grace, for as this makes a man's heart to melt, and his knees for
fear to beat together, to consider that God is his enemy, and that he will
call him to judgment for all his sins: so this fills the heart with joy and
bones with gladness, to record that God has put away his sins, and in great
favor has respect unto him for his good. In regard whereof it stands us in
hand that our hearts may be silled with this sweetness, and our souls have
their part in this most heavenly solace, attentively to consider the Apostle
in this place. In the unfolding of whose words, my purpose is, first briefly
to lay down his meaning, and then more amply to stand on those points, which
make for reconciliation between God and man.

Now then are we ambassadors for Christ: as if the Apostle would say now then
we come not of our own heads, without lawful warrant, for God has put this
word of reconcilement into our mouths, he has sent us in embassage unto you,
and given us in commission thus to speak: Wherefore for Christ sake if you
will do any thing for him we pray you, nay Christ prays you, for his place
now we do supply, and not only he but God in us, and by us prays and
beseeches that you would be reconciled unto him. If you desire his friendship,
but yet fear his presence because of your sins; behold his mercy, he will
not impute unto you your sins, but unto you they shall be as though they had
never been. If yet you doubt how this may be, since that you know that God is
just and punishes sin wheresoever he finds it; look on your savior, and
that which God in mercy pardons in you, he punishes with all justice in his
son. For he which was most innocent and knew no sin, has your sins
imputed unto him, and not only imputed, but he is made sin for you, that is
a sacrifice for your sins. Thus the chastisement of your peace is laid on his
shoulders, and for your sins he has suffered, an hell of torments in his most
blessed soul and body. If yet you dare not presume his presence, because you
want your wedding garments: consider, that he was therefore made sin for you,
that you should be made, (you cannot make your selves) not the righteousness of
man which is inherent in you, but the righteousness of God which is imputed to
you. And to make all without doubt you are made this righteousness of God, not
in your selves, but in him, even in Christ Jesus, which for your sake has
sanctified himself, and fulfilled all righteousness for you, so that as your
sins were not inherent in him, but in your selves; yet so imputed to him, as
though they were his: so this righteousness, by which you are reputed righteous
before your maker, is not inherent in you but in him, yet as if it were yours,
through Gods great mercy it is imputed unto you. Wherefore now let every good
Christian, in a good assurance of hope, come with boldness unto the throne of
grace, since now to his endless comfort he feels, that Christ has borne the
punishment of his sin, that he might enjoy the fruit of Christ's
righteousness, which is all grace in this world and hereafter everlasting life.

Out of this short explication of the Apostles words, and light touch of this
most wounderful doctrine, we may for our better instruction observe, first who
are to be reconciled, that is God and man: secondly by whom they are to be
reconciled, that is by Jesus Christ: thirdly by what means Christ reconcileth
man unto God, which is by taking away from man that which is man's, that is his
sin: and by giving unto man that which is not man's, but Gods, even the
righteousness of God in him.

Then first the chief party that is to be reconciled is God, and he Mat 23 3
(...) Ier 25.4
sent his servant early and late, to recall his people from their sins;
and although they were evil entreated and put to shame, yet in the abundance
of his love he protests that Eze ^3.1
he would not the death of a sinner, but with great grief demands of his
people Israel why they would die, nay after his servants he sends his son,
who Luke 19 41.
weepeth and would have Mat. 23.37.
gathered them as the hen gathers her chickens, but they would not hear,
nor know the things that made for there peace, John 11.53
but killed the heir of the vineyard, and Mark. 13.9
persequuted such which believed in his name. Yet for all this God full of
mercy and ready to forgive, gives, in command Act. 1.8 Mat. 28.19
to his Apostles, and to other successors the pastors and teachers in the
Church, not to command but to pray, not in there own name but in his, that
yet at the length they would be reconciled unto him. Behold O careless flesh
the wonder of the world, that the almighty Job 4.9
who by the breath of his nostrels, could destroy al flesh, Mat. 3 9.
and can raise out of stones sons unto Abraham, Exo. 32.10
and make of Moses a mighty nation, should so far stoop as it were unto man,
and beseech him that he would be reconciled unto him. It is he O man that is
injured, Isa. 5.4
he has not injured nor wronged thee, Mic. 6, 3
testify against him if thou can: yet he which bears thy rebukes, Joel
2.11. ^ob 9 5 ^er. 10.12
and whose wrath if thou weart armed, with the powers of heaven and earth thou
could not sustain, is not only Ps. 86.5
ready to forgive, but beggeth at thy hands, that thou would be forgiven,
and reconciled unto him: Thy enmity can do him no hurt, thy friendship no
good. Yet when thou art dumb, nay scornest his help that is thine own
health, he for thy good not for his, entreats, beseeches, that thou would
be reconciled unto him. O Lord Exo 34 6 P^. 145 8
great in patience and of much mercy, that thou should so friendly deal
with sin full flesh. I would that we could so deal with our brethren, as thou
O Lord have dealt with us. But alas our fleshly minds and malice feeding
stomachs, are so sharpened to revenge, and to bandie back an ill turn with a
worse, that if any has but once trespassed us, we are ready forthwith to have
him by the throat. We are so far from entreating his love, that we disdain
to speak to him, nay cannot abide that any should speak of him to us. But O
man look on thy maker, he has not dealt in this sort with thee: thou have not
trespassed Mat. 18.2^
him once, but often: and that not after a light, but most grievous manner, yet
before Ier. 31.10 Ezech. (...) Romans 10.20
that thou art sorry for thy fault, or once desire to have his mercy, he is
not only content to speak, but as one that has written thy injuries in the
dust, desires thee to be reconciled unto him. O blessed savior whilst yet
thy hands and feet were bleeding, and thy mouth tasted of the gall and
vinegar, whilst yet thy eyes saw there vileness, and thy ears heard the
reproach with which they reproched thee: thou criedst, Luke 23 3
forgive them father, forgive them, they know not what they do. And thy
faithful Stephen whilst yet he sighed under the violence of the stones, he
Luke 9.54
called for no fire from heaven, neither did his Genesis 4.10
blood call for vengeance from the earth, but seeking to do good to them, of
whom he had received evil, Act. 7.60
O Lord lay not this sin to there charge. True it is that which the Disciples
spoke of another matter, so sinful flesh speaks of this, John 6.60
this is an hard saying who may abide it. Insomuch that if flesh and blood
ask counsel of it self, he will Leu. 24.20
have a tooth for a tooth, and yet not content, he will never rest, till he
has set his feet on the neck of him that has offended, and his eyes see him
a despised creature trampeled in the dirte. For if Hest. 3.6
Haman see that Mardoche shall not arise and make obeysaunce unto him, so
mightily rages malice in his heart, that he will not only prepare a gibbet to
hang him: but yet not satisfying his revenging soul, he will labor to
destroy with him his whole nation. If once the women shall ascribe to David,
more 1. Sam. 18.8.29
glory then to Saul, although David ve^tured for Saules defense, and this
fault (if so be a fault) is in other not in him, yet Saules soul so burns
with revenge, that it can not be cooled by 1. Sam. 20.33.
entreaty of friends, or any whit aswaged 1. Sam. 24.12.
by the merits of his servant, nor yet quenched, although he 1. Sam 34. verse.
2^
knows all this to be the only work of God. Thus does malice and revenge
bear rule in fleshly minded men.

Neither does this furious passion only reign in fleshly minded men, and such
which have no feeling of God, but even this takes hold sometimes of the
children of God, and so mastereth the good spirit that is in them, that in the
fury of their affection they seek revenge, and the spoil of him whom their
humor does not like. This may be seen in Elysha 2. Reg 2.23
who cursed the children because they mocked him, this in Genesis ^^.29
the Patriarchs which forgate nature and sold their brother, this Genesis ^^ 8
in Lot who snuffes at Abraham for the quarrel of his men, this Luke ^ ^4
in the Apostles, who wished for fire to come down from heaven, this 1. Sam.
25.22
in David who rashly vowed, that he would not leave in Nabels house one to
make water against the wall, and this also in many Gods servants, who now live
in the flesh, too much yielding to their flesh. Unto whom what should we say
but that they Gal. ^.^^
would walk after the spirit, not after the flesh, that they would Gal. 2.2^
leave to live unto themselves, and suffer Christ to live in them. That they
would say of Shemei cursing as David did to the sons of Seruiah, 2. Sam. 16 11
suffer him to curse, for ye Lord has bidde^ him, or that they would answer
not only with words but tears of kindness, as Joseph did to his brethren
which acknowledged their fault, Genesis 50.19
all is for good, fear ye not am not I under God. And not only let them
acknowledge that it is God that has stirred up enemies, against them for their
good, but yet whilst they smart with the injuries they have received, and the
other take pleasure in the wrongs that they have done; let them not only
forgive and beseech them of love, the which God does here, but let them pray
for those their enemies as did our Savior for his, because their affection
has so blinded them, that they well know not what they do. Thus much for the
first party our merciful God that beseeches man to be reconciled unto him,
now follows that we should speak of the second party, which is Man and his
demeannor in this reconciliation toward God.

Now Man in the verse. 19
verse going before is called the world, the which word is sometime taken for
the wicked of the world, in which sense our Savior speaks when he says I
John 17.9
pray not for the world, and the Apostle says, God 1. Cor. 11.3
chasteneth us in the world, least we should be condemned with the world. In
which sense if we take man, so far is he from seeking to be reconciled with
God, that sometime in the pride of his heart, he asks with Pharaoh Ezod 5.2
who is the Lord that I should hear his voice. Yea, when we preach unto such
Ier. 11.21
the glad tidinges of peace, they say unto us preach to us no more in the name
of the Lord, thus when we speak of peace Luke 19.42
they care not for those things that make for their peace, but prepare
themselves to war with God laying sin upon sin, as though with the
Giants they would pluck God out of heaven. Indeed before such swine, it is
unmeet that we should Mat. 7.6
cast forth heavenly pearls, or publish the things that make for their peace.
Because God in his justice has so blinded their eyes, that now they are hidden
from their sight. Yet because such which are reprobate 1. Reg. 8.39 Reu. 2.23
are known only to God, because he by his will revealed, 1. Tim. 2.4
would have all men to be saved and come unto the knowledge of his truth, and
has commanded us to Mark 16.15
publish this word of Reconcilion unto all: it stands us in duty to harken
to the heavenly voice, and Luke 8.5
in scattering the seed of this his gracious promise leaving the success unto
the heavenly blessing of himself. Thus must we do because God may call Mart.
20.9
them at the last hour of the day and who knows whether now. For he can
make the Exo. 17 6
stony rock to gush out with water, and Luke 5.6
Peter (after his fruitless labor) at once to catch a great draught of fish.
It is true men are loath to sow where they shall not reap, and against all
likelihood to bestow their hopeless pains: yet let such know that that ^at
19.26
which seems impossible to them is possible with God, which Genesis 1.3
brings light out of darkness, and Rom 4 17
calls things which are not as though they were, nay John 11.^
which gives life to them which are dead in sin, yea although they lie
stinking in their graves, and as unlikely to be clothed with Gods grace, Eze
37.3
as were those bare and dried bones that the Prophet saw scattered before the
grave. Thus then you see, that of some, unto whom this word is preached, in
the eye of man there is small hope, and yet God in great mercy will have this
word of reconcilement published to them.

Now if we take the world for the elect of God in which sense the John 12.47
son of man is said to be sent not to condemn the world but to save the
world, and again that the John 17.2
world may believe that thou have sent me. A wonder it is to see, how we
prepare our selves unto God; for it is so that amongst us their are some, that
are content to be made friends with God and this they make a part of their
desire, but yet they Eccl. 11.9
feed God with delay Reu. 3.20
and put of from day to day, and will have God to wait their leisure. But if
such would consider their own damnable estate, if God should prevent them with
his justice, and call them to accomptes before they are ready, they would add
wings to their feet, and with all post speed would make haste to come unto
their God. For if Mat. ^5 1^
once the bridegroom be passed before they have provided oil, (...).
if once the red tents be pitched up before they have accepted of his peace,
if once the Gen 2^. ver. 38.
blessing be given before they come, the Romans ^^.11.
gate of his mercy shut and his throne of justice erected up, then should they
come but all to late, and since they would not accept of Gods favor when they
should, they cannot taste of his mercy when they would.

Others there are that are content to command with the first, and rejoice in
the light that God has given them, but they are so humbled with the conscience
of their sin, and with such dread and sorrow tremble at the name and
remembrance of God, that they shut their eyes at the glory of his majesty,
run Genesis 3.^
into the thicket with Adam from his presence and cannot abide to appear
before him. Unto whom if God in comfort dra^e near and speak kindly unto them
Genesis 45. ^
as did Joseph to his brethren, yet they have no power to hold up their heads,
or to look God in the face; and tearing up their wounds as men of despair,
at the view of Gods mercy they speak unto him as Peter did to Jesus, Luke 5.8
go away from me for I am a sinful man. Whose case herein is so much the more
happy, by how much they seem to themselves to be more miserable. For when GOD
has in this sort searched their wounds, and launced them even unto the
quick, then he powers in oil, and makes them to feel the sweet of his
mercy, then he takes away their sins the cause of their fear, and so clotheth
them with the robes of righteousness, that now in a good confidence of hope, and
that with all boldness they come into the presence of God their father.

A third sort their are which come willingly when God does call, and take
pleasure in the mercies that God has shown them, which have accepted of the
covenant of peace that God has offered in his son, and has promised to be a
friend to his friends, and open enemy to all he does not like: and yet if
sin comes in the way, and shows her self in pleasure to them, for old
acquaintance they must have her by the hand, and renew some tokens of their
former love. So soon do they starte aside and make love to that which God does
deadly hate, true it is that when they first gave their names to God to be
enrolled for his friends, their purpose Man. ^4 ^^
was not to forsake God although all other did: but to (...) 21
hate the^ whom he hated, even as though they were their enemies: yet
nevertheless as though they Genesis 41 4
were like to those lean kine, who had eaten the fat and were never the
fatter: had tasted of Gods grace and were never the better. And they do not
only favor (...)
Gods enemies, but change there colors and Mat. 2^ ^6
forswear their master whom they before served. It is true that they
therefore Ier. 31.19
strike themselves upon the thighe, and are ashamed of their dealing toward
God. Insomuch that they do 1. Cor 9.27
not only seek to bring under this body of sin, are to make the law of
their members obedient to the law of their midde: but when they see it is a
matter beyond their power, and Romans 7.24
that they cannot leave undone that evil which they would: then they desire to
be delivered from this body of sin, and sigh with much sorrow that they
cannot serve God with that purity as they would Whose sins and imperfections
God will not see, neither repute them as any breach of that covenant they have
made with him, but he will so forgive them in his son, that unto him they
shall be as though they had never been. Yet out of this which has been spoken,
you see the demeanure of man toward his God, that he is either of the wicked
sort which either care not at all for coming unto God, or which is worse
appose themselves in defiance against him, or if he be of the better sort,
then either he thinks himself unworthy to be a friend of Gods, which is a
ready step to his future blessedness, or if he purposes to be Gods friend he
either means to be hereafter, or if forthwith, yet then he will have God to
receive with him his earthly pleasures and desires, and howsoever in his
greatest faith and friendship with God, he has a liking sometime unto sin
and although he be sorry for it, yet he never leaves loving and liking her,
till he be delivered from this body of his flesh, and is with Christ: thus
much for the parties God and man which are to be reconciled.

Now if we look to the person Jesus Christ, by whom God reconcileth himself
unto the world, in him every Christian soul, shall not only find comfort to
assuage his griefs: but a full direction to guide and govern him thorough
this vale of misery, unto his spiritual and everlasting rest. For when their
were two things in man that made him to fear the presence of his God, his
sin, and the want of that original justice after which he was sometime
created: this Jesus in whom we trust does not only 1. John 1 7
purge us from our sin, but He^. 1.3 1. Cor. 4 4
being the very image of God and the engraven form of his fathers substance
1. Cor 15.49. Col. 3 1^
he restores the image depraved in us, and makes it most perfect even as at
first it was. The which when a Christian shall well consider, he must needs
confess that there is but 1. Tim. 2.5
one mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus. For when there is
Mark^ 2 7
none that can take away sin but God alone, or restore the image Romans 8 29
that man has depraved save he only that made the image. Much may be spoken
of the gross papists, to maintain their fancies of many mediators. But all to
no purpose as you see, for without all question, Acts 4.12
amongst men, there is no other name by which a man shall be saved, save only
the name of Jesus Christ. And he that will not be content to be saved by him,
but will have an other with him for his savior, shall neither be helped by any
other, nor yet find saving health in Christ. And in truth 2. Cor. 1.20
in whom are all the promises of God yea and men, but only in Jesus Christ Col.
1.20
in whom did it please the father to reconcile all things to himself, and to
set at peace with him both the things in heaven and the things in earth, but
only by Jesus Christ, and the blood of his cross, thus is he made not only
the Heb. 12 2
anchor but the finisher also of our faith, Mat. 1.21
Jesus because he saves us from our sins; that one, yea Ephesians. 1.10
only in whom God does regather all things, both which are in earth and which
are in heaven. Wherefore we John 14.1
that have believed in the father, let us believe in him, Genesis 27.21
for in him the father is well pleased, and for his sake will be well pleased
with us. True Heb. 9.7
Jacob had not obtained the blessing, if in his own raiment he had come, and
not in the robes of his eldest brother. True none but the Reu. 12.1
high priest and that but once in the year might enter into the holy of
holiest. True, none of the people might offer sacrifice unto God, but by the
priest, yet Reu. 12.1
when now Christ clotheth us with his righteousness, when he has rent the Luke
23 45
veil and broken down the partition wall, when he Reu. 1.6
made us priests, and leads us by the hand unto his father, we cannot but
hold up our eyes and thank God of this his great mercy showed to us in him.
Thus we look on him as Exo. 12.35
our only Moses which has delivered us from the bondage of our spiritual
Pharaoh thus we look on him as our blessed Jesus which has given Josh. 14.1
us right and will inuest us in the possession of our promised Canaan. Thus
when we behold Matt. 8.14
him curing every sore and every sickness, we cannot but confess that he is
sent of the father in whom only for every malady and every sin we should
find but one yet all sufficient remedy Wherefore that which Barnard spoke
ravished with the comfort he felt in our Savior, let us say Pern. in ^ant.
ser. 15.
he is honey in the mouth, melody in the ear, and a song of Iubile in the
heart. And Josh. 24.15
as Ioshuah spoke to the people, when he had laid Gods manifold benefits
before their eyes, now choose you what God you will serve, whether the Lord, or
the Gods of the nations that are rouund about, but as for me and my house we
will serve the Lord: in like sort let every right Christian say, choose you what
saviors and mediators you will have, whether the Lord Jesus, or the gods of
the papist: as for me and my house Jesus shall be a mediator, and that only unto
us. The whith if we shall do as we seem to say, God shall say to us as he did
of Marie which sat at the feet of Jesus and heard his voice, Luke 10.4^
Martha is troubled about many things, but Marie has chosen the better part.
Thus you have heard, that this Jesus is the only mediator of this covenant, by
which man is reconciled unto God.

Now Jesus is the man by whom God in his goodness does save the world, and whom
he has made the mediator of this covenant of peace: so it is expedient for
the full satisfying of all Christian minds, in him to consider his two
natures, his Godhead and his Manhood, for except he had been God, he had not
been able, and except he had been man, he had not been fit to accomplish
the work of our redemption and to reconcile us unto God his father.

Wherefore let us first, consider that this Jesus is God, and the reasons why
it was expedient that he so should be: he is God, for Col. 2.9
it pleased the father that in him should dwell the fullness of the Godhead
bodily and in truth, being the Mat. 3.17
son of his father, not by adoption as are we but by essence, not by grace
but by nature, being Col. 1.35 Hebr. 1 3
the very image of the father, and the engraven form even of his substance, he
could not but be God. For as every creature brings forth their young after
their kind, so the creator of all, must needs bring forth after his kind God
of God even of the substance and essence of himself. And therefore Paul
speaking of our savior says Phil. 2.6
that he was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, for although the person of the father is distinct from the person of the
son, yet in the essence and nature of the dietie, they are one, John 10.30 1.
John 5.7
I and my father are one, wherefore as Christ spoke to the disciples of John,
which came to know whether he were that Messiah that should come, Mat. 11.9
go tell John what you have heard and seen: Even so may we answer to them,
that doubt of the d^etie of our Savior, go tell what you have heard of him.
For when thou hear that the dead were raised by him and restored to life,
that the devils were cast forth, and stood at his command: that he cured all
sickness by his word, that he calmed the waters when they did rage, and made
the winds be hush when they did bluster, how can thou but with Thomas fall
at his feet and speak to his glory and thy souls good John 20.28
My Lord and my God: how can thou cry out with that elect vessel, 1. Tim.
3.16
of a truth great is the mystery of godliness, God is manifested in the flesh.

Now as our Savior is God of the same nature with his father, so it is worth
our labor to consider, that it was most expedient yt he so should be. For
otherwise how could he satisfy the wrath of his father due to our sins, for
when our sins were infinite according to the infinite majesty of God whom they
did trespass: it must needs be that he which is to satisfy for those infinite
sins, must either be of an infinite nature, or must for all infinity be for
ever punished. But now since the Act. 2.24
sorrows of death are fully losed in our Savior, Ioh. 19 30
and he himself spoke of them Consummatum est, it is finished, it must needs
be since Hebr. 2.14
he conquered death, and him that had the power of death which is the devil,
2. Tim. 1.10
also as S. Paul speaks he abolished death and brought life and
immortality unto light, it must needs be that he should be of an infinite
nature and therefore God. For as none Mark 2.7
can forgive sins but God, so none can bear the burden of sin but God, for
it drove Genesis 3.23
Adam out of paradise and Jude 1.6
the angels out of heaven. So that since Christ was to bear the burden of our
sins, which man and angel was not able to do, it must needs be that he
should be greater then man or angel and that is God. Nay when he willed us
which John 14.1
believed on his father to believe also on him, and when we may not Ier. 17.5
believe on any saving on the Lord of host, for if we do we bring a curse upon
our souls, most convenient it is that our savior should be God: especially
since the Lord says of himself that Isa. 43 11
beside him there is no Savior. To conclude if he were not God how should his
ears be open to our prayers, 1. Sam. 1.14 1.19
how should he see our sighs and inward gronings, how should his merit be
auailable to all except he were omnisufficient of himself, and and through the
infinity of himself, did make his merit of infinite price. Wherefore that he
might be able to bear the burden of our sin, and to satisfy for the infinity
of the same, that we might believe on him as we do on the father, and that his
merit might be made auailable to all, it is expedient that he should be God.

Now as he was God so is he also man, and therefore the Apostle, when he had
showed that their was but one mediator betwixt God and man, he after adds 1.
Tim. 2.6
the man Christ Jesus, for who Genesis 3.15
was to bruise the Serpents head, but the seed of the woman, Genesis 17.19
in whom was al nations to be blessed, but in the seed of Abraham and Gal. 3.16
this seed as the Apostle speaks was Christ, from Ier. 23 5
whence came that righteous branch that should reign as king, but from the
Rom ^.3
seed of David according to the flesh. So that if to be the Luke 1 4^
fruit of Mary's womb, the which he was although most blessed, if Gal 4.4
to be made of woman the which he was and became for us most cursed: if ^att. ^
2^ 9.6.11.19 Luke 9.22 12.10 John 3.13
to be the son of man, with which name he often intituleth himself does
prove him to be man: nay if Luke 14 35
to have flesh blood and bone the which we have, if to hunger and thirst the
which we do, if Ioh. 19.3^
to die and go the way of all flesh does prove our savior to be man, then was
he man, Heb. 2.2^
in all things like to us his brethren except only sin, even man not in
phancie but in truth, of the very substance of his mother not of her shadow,
which had not only a body but a soul too, so that we may truly speak of
him as we do of Adam, Abraham and all the rest, he was man.

And as you have heard out of the Scripture that he was man, see was it most
necessary that he should so be, for how could he die if he were only God,
since Damascen de pass.
the godhead is impossible, and can no more suffer then do the beams of the
sun which shines on a tree suffer when the tree is fallen and cut down.
Surely as Cedrinus ^pist. hist.
Alamandurus answered the Manichees that would enforce him to believe that
Christ was not man, that he received a letter that Michael the archangell was
dead, to whom when they replied that that could not be, because he was an
angel. In like sort said he no more can Christ die if he be as you say only
God. And although he had some other nature than the nature of man wherein he
might suffer, yet when man in Romans 5.19
his nature had offended and trespassed God, it stands in reason that God in
man's nature should be satisfied. For as Chrysostom. ^er. in Leu.
Chrysostom reasons that Christ could not be the Savior of our souls,
except he had a soul, in which he might satisfy for such sins we had
committed in our souls: even so we may conclude that he could not satisfy for
the sins of man, except that he had been also man. Nay when this was the end
of his coming to make us of the sons of men the sons of God, for, John 1 ^2
but by Christ we have no power to be called his sons how could he effect
this to our good, except he which was ye son of God should first become the
son of man, wherefore that he might have a nature wherein he might suffer, and
might satisfy Gods justice for the sin of man, in the nature of man, that he
might make us of the sons of men the sons of God, it was most expedient
that our Savior should be man.

Thus have you heard of the mediator that is betwixt God and man, the man
Christ Jesus, now are we to harken of the means, by which this Christ
reco^cileth us unto God his father: which is first in that he which knew no
sin was made sin for us, secondly in that we which knew no righteousness
were made the righteousness of God in him.

In that our Savior is said to know no sin, his meaning is not that sin
is to him a matter strange, a thing which he did never know, for Mat. 21.45
he takes knowledge of sin, else how should Mat. 22 12
he reprove the world because of sin, how should he be the Act. 10 42 2. Tim 4.8
judge of the world to give to every one according to his works. But as it is
said of the virgin Mary which knew man, Luke 1.34
and did converse and live amongst them that yet notwithstanding she knew no
man, that is after a carnal fleshly manner Genesis 41. and 2^
like as Adam is said to know Eve, and 1. Sam. 1.19
Elkanah Hanna which was his wife. In like sort it is said of our Savior that
although he took notice of sin, and did reprove it, yet he knew no sin as
other men, by loving and liking of it, by being many ways polluted and defiled
with it. And therefore he says unto the Jews which John 8.46
of you can reprove me of sin, nay although the prince of the world which is
the devil come even to winnow and sifte our Savior yet John 14 30
he can find nothing in him, for as the author speaks to the Hebrews, he is
Heb. 7.26
holy harmeles, undefiled, separate from sinners and made higher that is purer
then the heavens. And in deed how should he holy others which is unholy in
himself, and sanctify other when himself needs to be sanctified, he needed
not to be sanctified but for us, John 17.19
and therefore that we might be holy even as he also is holy he holied and
sanctified himself. Yea that he might purge our consciences from dead works,
through the eternal spirit he offered himself Heb. 9.14
without spot, unto God his father. Thus he 1 Pet. 2.22
knew no sin neither was there guile found in his mouth, thus neither could
the Jews reprove him of sin, neither the prince of the world find sin in
him, thus was he pure, holy, undefiled, separate from sinners, and without spot.

And in truth so it behooved him for to be, that so he might be made a sacrifice
for sin, that is as the Apostle here speaks sin for us. For as in the old
law it behooved Leuit. 1.10 Number 28.31 Deuteronomy. 15.21
that the sacrifices for sin, should be most pure without spot and blemish,
so it behooved that he which gave himself a sacrifice for our sins, should be
also Heb 19.14
without spot or blemish, and as in the old law the sacrifices for sin were
called sin, not because in their natures so they were, but because they had
sin imputed to them; even so our Savior here is made sin, not because he
has committed sin, or sin was inherent in him as in us: but because he was
made not of man but of God, a sacrifice for our sins, which were imputed unto
him. And therefore Austin. l. b. 2. contr. Maxi.
Austin when Christ was no sinner, he made him sin for us, read the place
diligently (says that father) and least happily thy book be corrupted, or thy
Latin interpreter have erred, look in the Greek, and thou shall find not
Christ to have committed sin, but to be made sin of God the father for us,
that is a sacrifice for our sin, (and a little after) for thou shall find in
the books of the old testament, the sacrifices for sin to be called (...).
Exo. 29.14
In this sense the calfe which was to be offered at the consecrating of a
priest, Catath
is in the English called a sin offering, but in the original a sin in
like sort, if any of the people had wittingly sinned then he was to offer an
he Goat, if by ignorance a she Goat; and the party that had sinned was to
lay his hands upon the head Leui 4.29
of the sin offering, and to slay the sin offering before the Lord, and
the reason is added because it was a sin offering. Catath
In like manner the he Goat in Number. 7.16 and 22. and 28. and 34 and 40. and
46. and 52. etc.
sundry places of the seventh chapter of the book of Numbers is called in our
vulgar translation a sin offering but in the original sin. Now then if the
sacrifices in the old law were called sins, when yet in their nature they
were not sins, but sacrifices only for sin: in like sort may Jesus Christ,
the John 1.29
only unspotted and immaculate lamb Heb 10 1
of God in whom all the sacrifices in the law were but figures, and Romans 10.4
in whom they had their end and accomplishme^t: like as they were called also
sin, especially when he is the only sacrifice auailable for to put away
sin, Hebr. 10.4 and 11
their was no power in all the sacrifices of the law to do away sin, but only
in this that they had respect and reverence unto him. Thus then you see how
that Jesus Christ which knew no sin, but was most pure and most holy, and in
all parts obedient to his fathers will, is yet notwithstanding made sin,
that is a sacrifice for sin.

And in this that he which knew no sin is yet notwithstanding made a
sacrifice for sin, apparent it is, that he was not made a sacrifice for the
sin of himself, for he knew no sin; but was most innocent and free from
blame: but he was made a sacrifice for the sins of other, and had not only
their sins imputed to him, but bore the punishment of them in his most
blessed soul and body. From hence begins every Christian to comfort himself
in the mercies of his God, when he sees his sins imputed unto Christ, and
therefore cannot be imputed unto him; for when man had sinned, that which was
done could not be undone, yet such is the mercy of God showed toward man in
the favor of Christ, that he imputes not unto man his sin, but has it in
that account as though it had never been, so that although as the scholeman
spoke a thing done cannot be but done if we respect the act; yet in the repute
of God, which never thinks nor accounts of it, it is as though it had been
never done. The which that the Lord our God might persuade unto us, sometimes
he says Psalm. 85.2
our sins are bound in a bundle and cast into the bottom of the sea, sometime
Isa. 44.22
that he has put away our transgressions as a cloud and our sins as a mist,
sometime Psa. 103.12
they are removed from him as far as the East is from the West, sometime Isa.
38.17
that he has cast them behind him, sometime Isa. 43 25
that he will remember them no more, that they shall be unto him, as though they
never were: yea and that we might the better conceive of his goodness toward
us, concerning these our sins which make us to hang down our heads, and to
fear to come into his presence, he shows that he Reu. 20.12
has crossed his books in which our sins were written, nay that he has Col.
2.14
cancelled the handwriting that was against us, that he has Austin. retract.
lib. 1. c. 19.
acknowledged the receipt and given us our quietus est. Insomuch that now we
may safely walk abroad, because we know he has no writ to serve on us, or
action to commence against us. Thus the fear of Gods displeasure is
ouerblowen, and the sun shine of his favor rests on us, because our sins
are not imputed to us. And to that end records the Romans 4.6
Apostle, that heavenly note of that most kingly Prophet, blessed is the man to
whom the Lord imputes not his sin, and although it is true of man that he
will repent him sometime of his kindness the which he has showed, and will
seek to call back his former goodness, yet to the consummation of our comfort
it is not so with God he will not cast us in the teeth, nor lay to our charge
the things he has once pardoned, for whom he pardons once he pardons ever,
Isa. ^5.8
his thoughts are not as our thoughts, neither are our ways his ways, he Number.
23.23
is not as man that he should lie, or as the son of man that he should
repent. Wherefore we may with boldness now lift up our heads, since we do most
perfectly know that our sins neither now are, nor yet ever shall be imputed
unto us.

And if this be the first step by which we begin to grow into favor with our
God, not to have our sins imputed to us, surely th^se marchandizers of men's
souls, do but abuse the world when they teach, that they ought not to look
for this favor of gods in pardoning our sins, but to seek to satisfy his
justice for our sin, the which we are as well able for to do, as to move
mountains out of there places, or to number the drops of water in the Ocean
sea. Nay this for to attempt is not only to build up the babell of confusion
unto our selves, but under the show and color of peace to give defiance unto
God, and to make void the means of that reconcilement which he has offered in
his son: for if the Lord of mercy when he saw no other means to satisfy his
justice, and to save man, sent his only son who in his blessed body, should
satisfy his justice for our sin, surely herewith not to be content, is to
despise the wisdom and counsel of God, and to repute other their vain
satisfactions, of greater merit then is the merit and passion of the Son.
They answer for excuse, that they content themselves with the ordinance of
God, and rest in the merit and satisfaction of the son, but they say all
that he did was for their original sin, and such sins which were committed
before they were baptized; but as for their actual sin which follow
baptism, and those which they commit after they were entered into the covenant
of grace, for them they say Christ has not satisfied, but has merited only
that for them man himself, by his fastings and prayers, his watchings and alms
deeds, should satisfy the justice of the father. The which their most impious
assertion how abhorrent it is from all Christian truth, I pray you a while
harken and consider for of whom spoke the Apostle John but of the regenerat,
and of what sins but of their actual, and when committed but as well after
baptism as before, and who is then the propitiation for them but Jesus Christ
the righteous, 1. Ihon 2.2.
if any man sin we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not only for ours
but for the sins also of the whole world. Wherefore as this would give small
comfort to a Christian soul, to hear that God would pardon one fa^lt but not
another, so this would make but a little for the glory of our Savior, to
hear that he saved from some sins but not from other* wherefore herein they
eclipse the glory of Christ, and magnify their own, for when our actual
sins both in quantity and quality are far more grievous then is the
original, in which we were borne. The satisfaction for this one which is the
less they ascribe unto Christ, but the remedy of the other they challenge to
themselves, but beloved we have not so learned Christ. But we knew that he is
a Jesus Matt. 1.21
which saves his people not from their sin but from their sins, even al
their sins as John speaks the 1. John 1.7
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin if from all, then from our
actual as well as original, from this which we daily commit as well as from
that in which we were borne. So that as we find in scripture, Mat. 4.23
that Christ cured every disease and infirmity of the body, and some of that
quality which could not be remedied by the power of man, even so he cures
every sickness of the soul, and has made himself John 3.14
a brazen serpent to be stinged one sovereign medicine for all. John 5 4
Descend therefore into this poole not of water but of the blood of Christ not
stirred by an Angel, but by our Michaell who is as the Lord, Ephesians. 5.14
and although thou werst dead in thy sins, yet stand up and the Lamb of God
John..29.
which takes away the sins of the world shall take away thine, even thine
actual and original all that thou have, and leave none to be satisfied by
thee.

All this some of the Papists will confess, but yet yt they may still maintein
this devilish doctrine of man's satisfaction, they are not afraid to say, that
although Christ has satisfied for our actual and original sin, yet it is
but for the guilt and filthiness, it is not for the pain and punishment of the
sin, so that although they grant that our sins by Christ in respect of the
guilt are taken away, yet they leave our sins in respect of the punishment to
be sustained and satisfied by us. The which if it were so, how is it that the
Scripture says Isa. 53.5
that he was wounded for our transgressions, broken for our iniquities, that
the chasticement of our peace was laid upon his shoulders, verse. 8
that he made his soul and offering sacrifice for sin, and that with his
stripes we are healed. Surely this wounding, breaking, chastising, scourging,
infer a punishment which was inflicted not for his sins, the which he never
knew, but for ours which were imputed unto him. And therefore S. 1. Pet. 2.24
Peter speaks he bare, they were a burden not his own sins but ours, and not
the guilt only but the punishment too, for it was on his body, whilst yet he
hangs on the cross. And alas that at so great a light we should shut our
eyes, why was he buffeted and scourged, why was he nailed and pierced, why was
his head crowned with thorns, and himself crucified among thieves, why was
his soul sore troubled within, and frighted with the fear of his fathers
wrath, why did he pray to his father to remove this cross from him, and cry
out as a soul that was forsaken, my God my God why have thou forsaken me: but
that the Lord in his great mercy to us ward, but justice toward him, did
punish in his blessed soul and body the sins of all the faithful in the
world surely beloved if we were to bear the punishment of our sins then
has not Christ suffered for our sin, and if he has then do the Papist
accuse GOD of great injustice, that he would punish us for such sin he has
already punished in his son. But God is just let the Papist blatter what he
will, and because he has said it shall surely stand, for it is part of that
new covenant which he promised to make, Ier. 31.34
I will forgive their iniquity and will remember their sins no more, if he
forgiueth how does he call them to punishment, if he will not remember, how does
he require satisfaction for them Austin. retract. lib. 1. c. 19.
can a creditor forgive the debt and yet require satisfaction for the debt, no
more can God be said to forgive us our sin, and yet seek to punish us for
our sin. 1. John 2.2
If any man sin says the Apostle, we have an advocate Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, not he says the papist
but we, now whether the Apostle or papist is to be believed judge you. And to
speak to men whose eyes affection has not wholly blinded, and from whose
hearts wilful obstinacy has not taken away all sense of reason, is this
rightly to consider of the weight of sin and of his filth? is this equally to
balance the justice of the almighty, and the fiercenes of his wrath, kindled
against the wickedness of men? surely if the punishment of sin could so have
been satisfied, and the wrath of the father has so been appeased, thou had
not sent thy son O blessed maker, neither had thou needed to have died for
us O Emanuell. For we by our watchings and fastings, we by our hairie weeds
and other penance, we by our many prayers and consecrated water, we by
hearing of Masses and going in pilgrimage, will satisfy for all such
punishment that is due for our sin. O foolish flesh that thus presumest
before thy maker, if God should deal with thee according to justice, and the
greeuousnes of thy sin thou should stand as Job 9.3
a man wholly confounded, not able to satisfy one of a thousand; no not the
least that ever thou co^mittest in thy life, for when thy sin even the least
of thy sins is infinite, because it was committed against the infinite majesty
of thy God, thy punishment therefore must be infinite, and therefore not to be
satisfied by thee in this finite life: and if thou can not satisfy for one
how will thou satisfy for all, especially when not only in this that thou
seek to satisfy, but also in the most holiest of thy works and sorowest
penance, thou often sinnest and trespassess God. Wherefore that which Cain
spoke in despair thou ought not only to speak in the humblenes of thy
soul Gen 4.1^
my punishment is greater then I am able to bear, but withal thankfulness to
receive the mercy of thy maker, who has given his son to bear in his body
that which otherwise for ever thou should have borne in thine* Look
therefore with the eyes of faith upon this brazen Serpent which has not only
taken away the stinge of the serpent which is your sins, but even all your
swellings and rancklinges, all your pains and maladies, the punishment due to
all your sins.

This also some of the papists do acknowledge, but yet not resting on the good
word of God, they distinguish between eternal and temporal punishments, and
they are content to confess that Christ has satisfied for their eternal
punishment, but as for the temporal they say that they must satisfy for it in
themselves. It cannot be denied but that God lays on the sons of men, many
punishments in this life, the which are to be reputed temporal, because they
are in this life, which is but temporal, but yet these temporal punishments
endured by men in this temporal life, or neither in part, nor in whole any
part of satisfaction, for our infinite and eternal sin. For if we consider
this as they are in the godly, some say that they are not punishments for
sin, but rather fatherly admonitions that they should not sin, because for
their sin Christ has been punished, and has satisfied not in part but in
whole whatsoever the justice of God could require for them, or if we consider
these as they are in the wicked, true it is that GOD sometime begins to
deal roughly with them, and to inflict in this life some part of the
punishment which for ever hereafter they must in most grievous manner suffer in
hell. But yet since there is no proportion betwixt a finite punishment and an
infinite sin, since of the punishment and satisfaction of these no Papist
speaks: but of such for whom Christ died, and for whose eternal punishment
Christ has satisfied, we leave to speak farther of these wicked ones, and
call now enquire whether Christ has not fully endured all punishment due for
the sins of the faithful, but has left some temporal punishment, as part of
the satisfaction due for their sins, to be endured and suffered by
themselves. The which if it be so as the papist speaks, not only blasphemy
follows our Savior because his satisfaction is made insufficient, and the
sin of man of greater filth then the merit of his most blessed passion: but
also man speaks, with over great pride, that he presumes to satisfy where
Christ has not satisfied, and to make perfect which he has left imperfect
unto us, or if it be true the which our Savior speaks Ioh. 19.2^
Consummatus est, it is finished, even the work of our salvation, and
redemption of the world, if he as the author speaks to the Hebrews by one
sacrifice not by many, has made perfect not left imperfect, Hebr. 10.14
and that not for a time but for ever, and that not some but all which believe
in his name why do we seek to make imperfect the satisfaction of Christ or to
turn away the destroying Angel by any other means then Exo. 12.3^
by the blood of this immaculate Lambs sprinkled by faith on the door posts of
believing hearts. The Apostle Paul says, Gal. 3.13
Christ was made a curse for us that he might redeem us from the curse of the
law, now when the justice of God did inflict upon the transgressors of the law,
not only eternal punishment but temporal too, and when Christ endured in his
most blessed body, even all the punishment due to the transgressors of the law,
it must needs follow there is no more temporal punishment to be suffered and
endured by us. And therefore Austin in his book against Faustus, Austin co^tr.
Faust. Mana. lib. 14. c. 4.
discourcing on those words of the Apostle (he was made a curse for us) says,
for Christ without all guilt of sin took upon him our punishment, that he
might from thenceforth do away the filth of our sins and made an end of our
punishment. The same Austin after many words, Beda in epist. Romans c. 8.
Prorsus prorsus Christus dominus noster, without all doubt Christ our L. Jesus
our Savior our redeemer was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, if thou ask how (says that father) hear the
law for in the law the sacrifices which were offered for sin were called
sins, for thou have that when the sacrifice for sin was brought* that the
law said let the priests put their hands upon the sin, that is as he
expounds upon the sacrifice for sin, and what is Christ else but sin it
is a sacrifice for sin. If Christ then be made sin that is a sacrifice, on
whom the punishment of sin was inflicted, and so made sin that he may put
an end unto our punishments, without all question there is now no punishment
for our sin, left to be endured and suffered by us. Thou will say what are
our inward griefs and torments of mind, what the conscience of our sin and
fear of Gods justice, what the calamities and miseries of our friends, what
our sicknesses, yea and death, nay sin it self, and a thousand other evils
more common to the saints of God, then other, but punishments of our sin. I
grant whatsoever other says, that the Scripture calls these Gen, 3.17 2 Samuel 12.10 Number. 12.14
the punishments of sin, and after a sort they are, because they are the very
fruits and effects of sin, although God sends not these Heb. 12.5
to punish sin in us which he has punished in his son. But either to make
Job 1 9
trial of our patience as he did of Jobs, or 2. Sam. 12.14
to show how he hates sin as he did to David, or to drive us from 2. Cron 23
12
our sin as he did Manasseth, or Luke 16.17
to win us to himself as he did the prodigal child, or 1. Reg 19 4
to make us loath the world as he did the godly, Romans 7.24
and to grieve that we cannot serve him with that purity we should and as he
requires. Wherefore as Chrysostom speaks, Why do thou wayle that thou
do suffer, Chrysostom. de paenit. confess.
it is a medicine to thee not a punishment, a castigation no damnation. But yet
they reply that God sends miseries on his children for none of these ends,
but to punish sin which they have committed be it so as they say, yet I deny
as is before made manifest, that which all the Papist do so greatly labor that
these endured punishments, make any recompense to God for our sin, or any
whit satisfy the wrath of the father conceived against them. True it is that
in the infancy of the Church certain temporal punishments were inflicted on
offenders, and canonical satisfaction was required, but yet not to satisfy
God but the Church, not to make due recompense for the sin committed but by
this public submission, to declare their unfeigned sorrow and repentance for
their sin, Tertull. lib. de paenit.
the which kind of discipline as then, so now it is most behouefull for ye
church and house of God. For by those means not only the Church is in some
sort satisfied, which much grieueth at the fall of her children: but the
offendant himself is better occasioned to consider his wretched and miserable
estate, and forced as it were to hate his sin, and to take held of the great
mercy of his God. And not only is this discipline behoueful for these, but for
other also whereof some are in, other out of the Church of God. For they that
are in the church, by the punishment of other, are made more wary, lest happily
that which they see in other should be also sa^pled in themselves; and they
that are out have no cause to slander the good word of God, or to speak evil
of his spouse, because she winketh not at the faults of her children, or
proposes unto them liberty to sin, but guides their steps in the way of
righteousness, and punishes the^ when they go awrie. But to let this pass as
a matter not pertinent to our purpose, out of that which has bin spoken you
see, that Christ Jesus has our sins imputed unto him, and that by his
obedience and blessed passion, he has delivered us not only from some sins,
but from all: not from the guilt and filth of them, but from the pain and
punishment too: and that not from the pain eternal only, but also from all
pain temporal in this life.

Now then as you have heard how that he was made sin for us, so now it
follows that we should declare, how we are made the righteousness of God in
him, where not what the Apostle speaks he was made sin not a sinner but
sin: nether was he made by man but by God, and to what end, that we should
be made, we cannot make our selves, for we are Gods workma^ship, and what not
righteous but righteousness, not of man but of God, and that not in our selves
but in Christ. The which speech of the Apostle does most manifestly declare,
the means by which we are reputed righteous in the sight of God the father,
even by the righteousness which is in Christ not in us, yet by Gods mercy
imputed to us, and thorough faith received of us, neither is not this sense
enforced on the Apostle besides his meaning, but witnessed by most ancient and
catholic fathers, before this question of inherent righteousness, was ever
moved and debated in the church. Austin. enchi^id. ad La^^es. c. 41.
And therefore Austin, In the old law the sacrifices for sin were called
sins, the which sacrifice for sin, he (that is Christ) was truly made, of
whom the (sacrifices of the law) were but shadows. And after showing how
Christ was made a sacrifice for sin, he says, God to whom we were to be
reconciled made him sin for us, that is a sacrifice for our sin, by whom he
might reconcile us so to himself, he therefore was made sin, that we might be
made righteousness not ours but Gods, not in our selves but in him, even as he
that is Christ was made sin not his own but ours, not in himself but in us.
And in the end he concludes, this is that righteousness of God not by which he
himself is just, but by which we are made righteous before him. So that as our
sins cannot be said to be inherent in Christ, but only imputed unto him, no
more is his righteousness inhere^t in us, but only by Gods mercy imputed to us.
Yet so that as he actually endured the pains of our imputed sins, so shall we
also actually enjoy, yea and in part now do, the fruit of his imputed
righteousness, neither was this once barely spoken of this godly father, but as
the Apostle Paul in his epistles showed, that Christ 1. Cor. 1.30.
was made unto us our righteousness, and that we are Ephesians 2.8 Gal. 2.16
justified only by faith, that is by Christ apprehended by faith. So he
speaking of Christ says, Austin. de ciuit. li ^7. c 4
he is only just and the iustifier made that he says the only iustifier. And
again in an other place Blessed are Aust. tract. 26. in Job.
they that thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, now the
Apostle Paul (says he) does show that Christ is our righteousness, 1. Cor.
1.30
and therefore he that hu^greth after this bread, hungreth after righteousness,
that came down from heaven, which God gives not which man makes to himself.
And in the end concludes, This is righteousness of God not by which God is
righteous, but by the which God gives unto man, that man might be righteous
before him. Thus then you see that if we seek to be found righteous before God
we must bring not that righteousness which is of our works, but that
righteousness which we have not in our selves, but by faith in Christ Jesus.
Chrysostom co^. in hunc loc (...).
For as Chrysostom speaks, this is Gods righteousness since not of our
works. And as virtuous Bernard discoursing on the merit of man, and the
comfort of christians, in the midst of their troubles. Bernard. sup. cantic.
ser. 61.
My merit, says he, is the mercy of God, and so long as he shall not be
without mercy, so long I shall not be without merit: what then shall I sing of
my righteousness, nay I will remember thy righteousness only even the
righteousness of God which he gives in Christ, for by this he justifies the
world. Mat. 22.11
For as there is no sitting at the supper of the great king, except we are
clothed with our wedding garment, so there is no coming into the presence of
the Father, but with this robe of righteousness the righteousness of the son.
The which Pighius seeing in this wise writes: Pig. in co^tr. 2.
Therefore it is that our righteousness is placed in Christ's obedience, because
the same is imputed to us (which are incorporated into him) as though it were
our own, so that by it even we are accounted righteous. And Ambr. li. 2. de
Jacob. and beat. vit. c. 2.
as Jacob being not the first borne, yet covering him self with his brothers
sweet smelling garment, did so insinuate himself unto his father, that under
an other person he obtained the blessing of the first borne: even so is it meet
that we lie hid under the pureness of Christ our elder brother, that we smell
of his sweet, and cover our imperfections with his perfections, that so coming
into the presence of God our father we may receive the blessing of righteousness
from him. And the same Pighius after not well understanding the favorers of ye
truth, would seem in this cause to conclude against them but with them as his
words do speak: Pigh. de fide and inst. cont. 2.
But we say if we speak formally and properly, that we are not justified
before God, either by our faith or by our love, but by the only righteousness
of God which is in Christ. And that which Pighius speaks the same we speak,
with our Apostle, we are made the righteousness of God in him. Wherefore as Beda
notes out of Austin Beda in ca. 10. epist. ad Romans
upon the 126. Psalm. Away with thy self away I say with thy self, for thou
do but hinder thy self, if thou shall build thy self thou buildest thy
ruins, for except the Lord build the house in vain do they labor that does
build the same, do not therefore will to have thy righteousness least thou be
voided of the righteousness of Christ.

What then will thou say shall I live losely and be nothing studious of good
works, God forbid for you are Ephesians. 2.8
Gods workmanship created to good works, which God has prepared that you
should walk in them. Although those thy works Romans 8.14
do not make thee righteous before God, yet James 2 22.
they are fruits of that righteousness which thou have in Christ, and by them
thou causest Mat. 5.16
thy father to be glorified, and 2. Pet. 1.10
sealest up thine election to thy self. Mat. 7.17.
A good tree is known by his fruit, and a true faith by his love. What should
we say they that are justified in Christ Gal. 5.24
do live in Christ, nay Christ Gal 2.20 Ephesians. 5.8
lives in them, and his good spirit makes them fruitful unto every good
work, but this is not questioned at this time, what we should be in this life,
or how we should be justified before man, but by what means we should stand
justified before God: and that we say is not by our works, but by the
righteousness of God, which is found by faith in Jesus Christ.

But yet the weak Christian will say, how can this be, one man may pay an
others debt, but how can one satisfy for an others sin, the Scripture says,
Ezech. 18.2
the father shall not eat a sower grape, and the childs tooth shall be turned
an edge, verse. 20
but that every one shall bear his own burden, and that the soul which
sins shall die the death. How then is the justice of God satisfied, that he
which knew no sin should be punished for our sin, and that we which are
full of sin, should reap the fruit of that righteousness that is in him.
How? even very well, because he is not an other from thee, but is one with
thee? for if we look upon that blessed union by which al faithful souls are
iayned unto Christ, the man is not more joined to his wife, nor the science to
the stock, nor the food unto the body which it does nourish, nor in the body
one member to one other, or they al unto the head, as is Christ Jesus unto his
Church, and to every faithful soul, that trusts and believes in him. And
therefore sometime we are said to be Romans 12.4
one body in him, sometime Ephesians. 4.16.
to grow up into him which is our head, sometime 1. Cor. 6.15
to be members of Christ, sometime to be Ephesians 5.30
bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh, sometime to 1. Cor. 3.16
dwell in him and he in us, sometime to be John. 17.20
one with him, what should I say this the faithful know and thus we must know,
except as S. Paul speaks, we be reprobats 2 Cor. 13.5
know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be
reprobates. Thus beloved are we his unworthy members Chrysostom. ser. de spirit.
sanct.
united unto him which is our head, by those two most blessed hands, his
spirit which he gives unto us, and our faith which we reach to him.

Then go to let this be granted that Christ and the faithful are but one,
that he is the head of that mystical body whereof they are members, and then
let us see how the justice of God is violated, whilst he is punished and we
rewarded. Thou say in thy usual speech that man sees and man hears, yet
it is his ear that hears, and eye that sees, even so thou may say that
it is man that has borne the punishment of sin, although it is his head Christ
Jesus, that has borne and endured the same. For as in the natural body that
which is proper to the eye and to the ear, is attributed unto the whole, in
respect of that near conjunction which each part has with the whole: so in
the mystical body of Jesus Christ in respect of that spiritual and blessed
union, that which is proper only unto Christ is attributed also to his Church.
And therefore as we see in civil policies, the wife is advanced to the
honor of her husband, and made either Countess or Lady according to the
honor of her husbands state: even so the church which is the spouse of Christ,
although she be of her self a daughter of the earth, a woman of no price, yet
in respect of Christ who in marriage has advanced her, she is full of honor
and pertaketh of all the honor of her head. So that of the faithful we may
say that we John 1.16
all have received of his grace even grace for grace. And as the Psa. 131.2
oil that was powered on Aarons head ran down to the skirtes of his garments
and perfumed them, so the righteousness of our Aaron that is Jesus Christ,
although powered on his head yet perfumeth us, and makes us gracious in the
sight of God. So that now as every member is lived of the head, and has their
sense and moving from it: even so have we our life from him, and all our
sense and motion which is unto good. Nay as the viler parts of the body do
partake of the worship and glory of the head, and are then honored when it is
honored, and then despised when it is despised: even so in this spiritual
union betwixt Christ and his faithful members, although they be more vile in
comparison to Christ, then are the basest parts of the body inferior to the
head: yet are they honored when he is honored, and with the crown of
righteousness that sets on his head, are they also crowned and made
righteous. Thus then you see that it is not an other that has suffered for
you, nor an other by whom ye are made righteous, but it is the head that
suffers for his members, and the head that in himself crowns every member,
with the crown of righteousness and of glory.

Wherefore comfort your selves you that mourn in Sion, and are feared with
Gods wrath, and the filth of your sin, for GOD which was your enemy is
become your friend, and beseeches you to be reconciled unto him: and although
your sins have kept you back, and defaced image has made you ashamed to
approach his presence, yet now he has sent his son the brightness of his glory
not only by his suffering to take away your sins, but by his obedience to
restore you to your former bewty, and to present your faultlesse unto himself.
Let us therefore rest on the goodness of our God, and accept of his
reconcilement performed in his son, let Reu. 4.10.
us cast down our crowns, and fall on our faces, and give all glory to him
that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for evermore, Amen. Reu. 7.12.
Praise, glory and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might be unto
our God for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

