THE VANITY OF THE EYE, First began for the Comfort of a Gentlewoman
bereaved of her sight, and since upon occasion enlarged and published for the
Common good. BY GEORGE HAKEWILL Master of Arts, and fellow of Exeter Coll. in
Oxford. The third Edition augmented by the Author.

Eccles. 31. 15. Nequius oculo quid creatum est^ AT OXFORD* Printed by Joseph
Barnes, Printer (...) the University. 1615.

The Contents of the severa^^ Chapters following.
1 THat the eye is the instrument of wantonness, gluttony, and covetousness.
2 How Idolatry has a kind of necessary dependence upon the eye. 3 How pride
is begotten and nourished by the eye. 4 That often seeing is the means to
draw both things and persons into contempt. 5 How curiosity and prying into
other men^ business is bred and maintained by the eye. 6 Of bewitching by the
eye. 7 How the general rebellion of the body is occasioned by the eye. 8 How
the eye was the chief occasion of original sin and of examples in all those
mischiefs which formerly are proved to arise from it. 9 Of the false report
which the ey^ makes to the inner* faculties in the apprehension of natural
things. 10 A general discourse of the delusion of the eye by artificial
means, ^a also by the passions of the mind. 11 Of the delusion of the sight
in particular by the immed^^^e working of the devil. 12 Of the delusion of the
sight by the enchantments of sorcerers. 13 Of the delusion of the fight by the
exo^cismes of ^oni^rers. 14 Of the delusion of the sight by the knavery and
impos^ure of Priests and Friars. 15 Of the delusion of the sight by the
distemper of the brain. 16 Of the delusion of the sight by the smooth carriage
of Hypocrites. 17 Of the delusio^ of the sight by stratagems of war. 18 Of the
delusio^ of the sight by painting. 19 That the eyes serve not only as
treacherous porters and false reporter^ in natural and artificial things but
also as secret intelligencers for discovering the passions of the mind, and
diseases of the body. 20 Of the insinit diseases and casual^ies which the eye
it self is subject unto. 21 That the eye is not so useful for the gathering of
knowledge, as is pretended; whether we conside^ it absolutely in it self, or
respectively in regard of hearing. 22 Containing an answer to an objection
that man alone has therefore giv^n him an upright figure of body to the end
he might behold the heavens. 23 Setting down at large the hind^rances of the
eye in the service of God. 24 That supposing the sigh^ did not hinder* yet is
it proved that it furth^r^ little in the matter of religion; together with the
particular answers to sundry objections. 25 That the popish religion consists
more in eye-service then the reformed. 26 That the sight of the creature
helps ^s little in the true knowledge of God. 27 That the eye of the sense
failing, that of the understanding and spirit w^x more clear. 28 Treating of
the diverse privileges of blind men. 29 That blind men need not co^plain of the
want of pleasures, especially the sense of many g^iefes, being by blindness much
lesned, which is proved by the strong impression of those objects which to the
inner faculties are presented by the eye. 30 That blind men need not complain
of their disability in serving the common wealth which is proved by some
reasons but chiefly by examples in all kinds. 31 A conclusion of the whole
discours^ by way of meditation or soliloquie.
THE VANITY OF THE EYE.
CAP. 1.
That the eye is a special instrument of want onnesse, gl^ttony, and cove
tousnesse.
THough many and singular be the commendations of the nature and frame of the
eye, and the use of it in the ordinary course of life be no less diverse then
excellent as well for profit as delight, yet the dangerous abuses which arise
from it not rightly guided, are so general, and almost inseparable, that it
may justly grow to a disputable question whither we should more regard the
benefit of nature in the one, or the hazard of grace and virtue in the other.
For if we consider the testimony of scripture, and current of times, we shall
meet with more examples of running into mischief by the suggestion of this one
s^nse, and more prayers, and precepts bent against the abuse of it, then any of
the rest severally, or all of them jointly; the same being often taken (as well
in scripture, as in common speech) for all the other four, as S. Au^^stin^
has wittily observed in (...) 112 Epistle, for we say no^ only see how it
shines, but see how it sounds, see how it tastes, see how it feels, see how it
smells and the same godly father has written an entire chapter of this subject
in his book of confessions, which he entitles the allurement of the eyes. His
words are so sweet, and so fit for the present purpose, that I cannot pass by
them without setting down a part of them, howbeit they cannot but loose much
of their grace in re^dring. L* 10. ^. 34*
Mine eye longs to look upon beautiful, and various shapes fresh, and pleasant
colors, but let not these possess my mind, let God possess it, who indeed
made these things very good, but he o^^y is my good, not these; and whiles I
speak thereof, I am miserably inta^gled, but thou, o Lord, do free me
mercifully. Hence David having prayed God to turn his heart to the keeping of
his testimonies, imm^diat^y (...), turn away my eyes (O Lord) from regarding
Psalm. 119. v. 37.
vanity, as su^posing this latter the readiest means, and best way for the
attaining the ^orme^. But Job steppeth yet one degree farther, from a prayer to
a vow. I have made a covenant with mine eye, Ca. 31. v. 1.
why then should I look on a maid? And, which is ^ore, from a vow to an
imprecation. If mine heart have walked after Ca. 31. v. 7.
mine eye, let me sow, and let another eat, yea let my pla^ts be rooted out.
After these holy men of God came Solomon, behind them indeed in time, but
before the^ in wisdom, who, being led partly by a special illumination from
heaven, and partly by his own great experience, lays down this position, as
a rule without exception, Prove. 23. v. 33.
Thine eyes shall look upon strange women, and thine heart shall speak lewd
things. And in another place, Eccl. 9. 5. 8
gaze not on a maid, lest thou fall by that that is precious in her. Turn away
thine ey from a beautiful woman, and look not thou upon others beauty, for many
have perished by the beauty of women, and through it love is kindled as a fire.
Whereupon S. Peter marking out unto us the badges and cognizances of false
teachers, forgets not this one among the rest most notorious, Having eyes full
of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin, Ca. 2. v. 2.
where we see the very chair, and throne of adultery, to be seated in the eye;
howbeit it be in truth but the passage, and pipe to convey it to the soul. The
word in the original is full of an adulteress (a phrase of speech usual in
holy writ for the full expressing of the suparlatiue degree) which some
interpret to be meant of the pupil of the eye, and the rather for that the
latin, and greek give it the name of a young maid, and the Hebrew, and Spanish
term it the daughter of the eye. To proceed, our Savior in the Gospel
affirms thath Man. 5. 28.
whosoever looks after a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery
with her already in his heart, where i^ doubt not but lusting eve^ upon here say
without looking, is no less justifiable; yet it pleased our savior to instance
in looking, as well knowing himself, and withal intending to make us known,
that lusting for the most part follows looking. Which the very heathens well
understanding in the dedication of the several parts of man's body to their
several Gods, and Godesses, as the ears to Minerua, the tongue to Mercury,
the arms to Neptune, they leave the eye to Cupid their God of lust, as being
the fittest for his use, the proverb holding alike in inordinate lust, as in
ordinary love, out of sight, out of mind. For as the finger ever waits on
grief; so does the eye on love. Whence in the greek, the sa^e word only by
the change of a vowell signifies both to see, (...)
and to love, and as they come near in name, so, says Plutarch, their
cognation, L. 5. symp
and sympathy is in nature so marveilous, that they seem not to understand
the strength, and force of it, who wonder at the property of a chaulky
brimstone mentioned by Pliny, Lib. 2. cap. 105.
which snatcheth fire to it self, though removed from it by a competent
distance, the eyes drawing it to the soul (which is not so much where it
lives, as where it loves) in a far larger distance, and by a nimbler kind of
working: upon which consideration, Valerius Max. fitly calls the eyes the spies
which lie in ambush for the under mining of other men's marriages, Lib. 2. ca. 1.
and Alexander using a different phrase shot at the same mark, when he named
the Persian maids, the griefs of the eyes, Plut. in vita Alex.
and thereupon in my judgment he justly refused that Darius wife (whose beauty
the Macedonians so much admired) should be once brought in to his presence, as
fearing least he that had manfully subdued so many nations, should in the end
himself be shamefully conquered at the sight of a woman; which was also the
reason, as I suppose, R^d^g. l. 3. cap. 38.
that Procopius the Emperor went always with his eyes fixed on the ground.
This sense being therefore rightly termed by Mercurius Tresmegistus the tyra^t,
or butcher of reason, leading it captive in triumph, and delivering it over as
a prisoner to the lower faculties, forcing it of a Queen, and mistress to be
come an homager, and base vassal, being then none otherwise harkened unto, or
observed, then a magistrate in a state shaken, and torn with civil discords,
to which purpose the fathers bring those two passages of I^remy, pertine^t
enough in regard of the matter, but whether natural from the text I doubt? (
Mine eye has de^oured my heart) and in another place, Lam. 3. 31.
Death has climed up by the windows, Proph. 9. v, 21.
for by the eyes (says Clemens Alexandrinus) Lib. 5. p^d* Cap. 11.
love first enters the lists to challenge combat with reason, that being it
which is first tainted before any other part of the body be corrupted: and
therefore the comedians (says he) bring in on the stage the wanto^ Sardanapalus
sitting in an ivory chair, reaching out his hand for his purple, and casting
his eye in every corner, his co^clusio^ is that i^ is a matter of les^
consequence to fall by the foot, then by the eye, since the one is only
dangerous to the* body; but the other to both body and soul. Let us then for
preventing this mischief, embrace the grave advise of S. Gregory; In co^men^.
super. 31. I^bi.
bridle thy soul (says he) for fear that unadvisedly running, it fall not
vp^^ the sight of that which may stir it to lust, lest afterward being hood
winkt, it begin to covet that which it saw; and so in the persuit of things
visible, it make shipwreck of invisible graces. How many have we seen, and
heard of, who after the sight of women have grown peevish? and some stark mad,
others have raised armies, and razed whole Cities, and towns to make away
their competitours, and at length have laid violent hands on themselves? Nay if
we proceed yet one step farther in ripping up, and searching out the abuse of
the eye, we shall easily discover it to be an immediate in strume^t, not only of
wa^tonn^s, but of gluttony, covetousness, ^^eft, idolatry, jealousy, pride,
co^te^pt, Psa. 112. ^10.
curiosity, b envy, witchcraft, (...). 26. v. 8.
and in a manner of the whole rebellion, and apostasy, as well of the body,
^^ccl. 14 v. (...)
as the mind. Which assertion though it seem larg^, and by consequence bold;
yet I find the way chaulked out unto it by Gregory Nissene in his exposition
upon the Lords prayer, in the article of lead us not into temptation. For the
first then of these particulars, Solomon gives an excellent precept, Look not
thou (says he) upon the wine when Pro. ^3. 31.
it is red, and when it shows his color in the cup, in the end thereof it will
bite like a serpent, and hurt like a cocatrice, and in an other place, stretch
not out thine h^nd wherso* Eccl. 31. 13
ever thine eye looks, and thrust it not with it into the dish, as giving
thereby to understand, that inte^perat pouring down strong drink and inordinate
devouring delicious meats, arises oftener from the greediness and vncontent of
the eye, then from any real want, or desire of the appetite. For the second,
the same Salomo^ in an other place makes it as clear as the former. Eccles.
4. v. 8.
There is on^ alone (says he) and there is not a second, which has neither
son nor brother, yet is there no end of all his travel, nor can his eye be
satisfied with riches, noting the chief cause of the restless discontent of
the mind, and needelesse spending of the body to arise from the
insatiablenesse of the eye. Eccl^s. 1. v. 8.
The ear being never filled with hearing, nor the eye satisfied with seeing.
For a covetous man's eye has never enough of a portion, and his wicked malice
vvithereth his own soul, which the devil well understanding in his last, and
hottest assault upon our Savior, tempted him by the eye, in showing him all the
kingdoms of the world, Mat. 4. 8.
and the glory of them. Which word no doubt is expressly added to signify the
chief bait, by which the tempter had well hoped to have caught our Savior.

CAP. 2.
How Idolatry has a kind of necessary dependence upon the eye.
I had thought to have passed over in silence the rest of those particular
vices, which flow from the eye, without any farther opening of them, only
contenting my self to have pointed at the^, with some brief references in the
margin, but upon farther search, I found some of them, and those of the higher
degree to depend upon the sight in a more necessary, and immediate manner, then
at the first I conceived: among the chiefest of which rank is Idolatry, which
as it had his original from the eye, so is it still nourished by the same, the
very name giving us to understand that primarily, Steph. in These. Z^^. de Re^
lib. 2. cap. 17.
and properly in the nature of the word, it is no^thing else but the
representation of somewhat, in a material shape, apprehended by the eye, and
adored by the mind; whence it is in my judgment that among all these
idolatrous nations, which worshipped false Gods, and went a whooring after
their own inventions, ascribing the honor due to the creator, to some
cre^ture; the greatest part have ever consented in worshipping the host of
heaven, the sun, the moon, or the st^rs, which among all creatures the eye
most admireth, and delights in as the Egyptians, the Assyria^s, the
Phoenicia^s, the Medes, the Massagetes, the Persians, and in a word, as
Macrobius has learnedly observed, Saturn lib. 10. cap. 21.
all the heathen; howebeit they differed much about the names of their Gods,
yet really, and indeed they consented in the worshipp of some of these, and
mothinkes for this present purpose, it is worth the considering that they which
held the sun for their God, adored him not at noone day, walking then as a
giant in his full strength, not to be gazed on; but either at rising or ^alling
because then he appears most glorious to the eye; and the greatest part at
rising; because his glory after the darkness is most acceptable to the sight, it
being therefore compared by the Psalmist, in rising, to a bridegroom coming
forth of his chamber, who in passing by draws every ma^s eyes after him. For
this cause does God by his Prophet call Esa. 20. 78
the Idols of Egypt the abomination of the eyes, twice within the compass of
2. verse, and in the 15. of Numbers, Ver. 39.
you shall not seek after your own heart, nor after your own eyes, after which
you go a who ring, 4. 15.
but that of Exodus is in my judgment yet much fitter for this present
discourse. Take therefore good heed unto your selus, for you saw no image in the
day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire, that
ye corrupt not your selves and make a graven image, or representatio^ of
figure, and least thou lift up thine eyes to heaven, and when thou see the
sun, and the moon, and the stars, with all the host of heaven, shoulst be
driven to worship them. Which words in the weakest apprehension, at first
view, cannot but enforce a very powerful, and active operation of the eye, in
drawing the mind from the contemplation of the fairest visible creatures, to
the fow lest of all sins, if it find not the grace of God, and the sense of
true religion planted in it. I will conclude this point with that notable
speech of Job; 31. 26.
where amongst the rest of his imprecations upon himself, he inserteth if I
did behold the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in her brightness, this
had been iniquity to be condemned, for I had denied the God above, which words
the common stream of interpreters understand to be meant of the danger of
falling into this spiritual fornication, and sinning against the Creator, by
too much doting upon, and admiring the beauty of those glorious creatures.

CAP. 3.
How pride is begotten, and ^o^r^shed by the eye.
THE next particular that offers it self vvorthie consideration is pride,
which in nothing shows it self more, then in the pomp, and magnificence of
maskes, pageants, triumphs, monuments, theaters, amphitheaters: I speak not
against their lawful use, but of their abuse: when they tie the eye in such
manner unto them, as they withdraw the mind from the contemplation of that
glory, which neither Praeter, T^m. 3. c. 1
nor Consul can exhibit (as S. Cyprian speaks) but he only from who^, and by
whom we live, and move; The like may as justly be said of giving of alms to be
seen of men, of all manner of excess in building, in household stuff, in
apparel, as well for matter, Cap. 3. 18.
as fashion. Of which the Prophet Esaias has named some, taken up by the women
of his time. As the ornament of the slippers, the calls, the round tires, the
bracelets, the bonnets, the tablets, the earings, the wimples, the crisping
pinnes, the fine linen, the launes; of all which surely the greatest part are
devised rather for pleasing the eye, then for use either in covering
nakedness, or in garding the body, against scorching heat, or pinchinge cold.
Some notwithstanding there are, who instead of purchasing the applause, and
admiration, they pursue, incur the censure which the Anemolian Ambassadors
found among the Vtopians, Ca. de commer.
who as Sr T. Moore sets it down thinking to dazel the eyes of the poor
Vtopians, with the luster, and glistering of their chains, and precious stones*
the children playing in the streets, took them for great boys, which had not
yet laid aside their brouches, and bables? the women for the Ambassadors
iesters, and the me^ for their slaves or servants; saluting those which were so
indeed^, instead of their masters, but misliking the chains, and bracelets, as
being to little, and to lose, which by that means might easily either be
broken, or cast of. But in this point, me thinks it is worthy special
consideration, that nature having so framed the eye, as it can neither behold
it self, nor the face, in which it is set, yet have men invented for the
supplying of that use looking-glasses, as the artificial eyes of pride; the eye
being as it were a living looking-glass, and the looking-glas again a dead
eye, by means whereof many Narcissus like become enamored of themselves, by to
to much admiring their own beauty, or Pigmalion-like fall in love with their
own images, or on the other side, with Io, and Acteon in the fable, stand
amazed at the ugliness of their own shapes; and sometimes with the Camel, and
Buc^phalus (in stories) grow in regard at the sight of their own shadows. In
which kind, I remember I have heard, of a young Gentleman of this University,
who being newly recovered from the small pox, and by chance seeing the change of
his face in a looking-glass, for mere grief fell into a relapse, and within
short time died. And sure I am persuaded, that the use of it in the art of
seeing, is not of such consequence as it can in any sort countervail the damage
arising from it, in the art of manners, nether are there by it so many stains
and blemishes discovered in the face, as imprinted in the soul.

CAP. 4.
That often seeing is the means to draw both things, and persons into contempt.
The 5. considerable particular is contempt, whence it is that those things
which we most fear, and reverence, are most removed from our sight as God,
and the devil, heaven, and hell, among the Papists the relics of their Saints,
and in the Egyptian temples the God which they worship. For which cause also,
(as I suppose) God himself considering the weakness of man in this behalf,
in the leviticall law comanded, that none should enter into the holiest of al,
^. 9. 7.
save only the high Priests alone, and that once in the year only, and upon
the same ground, no doubt it is, that the great Turk suffers not his subjects
to look him in the face, when they speak unto him; and that those Eastern
Princes the Duke of Mus^ovia, the great Cham of Tartary, and Praester John (as
Boterus and Paulus Venetus report) present themselves to be seen of their
subjects but once, or twice in the year at most; as well remembering that
presence much weakneth report; and that 4. good mothers bring forth four bad
daughters: virtue, envy; peace; idleness; truth* hatred; and familiarity,
contempt. To this effect also is that excellent discourse which Comineus has
in his second book, to prove that enterviewes between great Princes for the
most part prove more dangerous, Cap. ^.
the^ profitable. The examples he brings, happened all in his own time, and some
of them himself, had been present at, as that between Edward the 4 King of
England, and Jews the 11 King of France, and of the rest, had he been
credibly informed. Among which, the first and chiefest for our purpose, is that
which was held between the forenamed Jews, and Henry king of Castile, in the
conclusion of which those two confederate nations (says he) began to scoff,
and jest, each at other; the king of^ Castile was deformed, and weak of
behavior, and the French misliked his apparel wherefore they derided him:
Again the French king wore his apparel very short, and mavelous uncomely,
and was sometimes clad in very course cloth, and besides wore an old hat,
differing from the rest of his company, and an image of lead upon it, where the
Castilians i^stiested, as if this proceeded from b^senes, so that these two
kings being ever before this entervew co^federats, and good friends, parted
discontent on both sides and never loved heartily after^ that meeting.
Notwithstanding I deny not, but that there may be^ Solomon, the very sight of
whom may add much to heresay, and report, as the Queen of Saba who ca^e to
see him witnesses, in these words, Kings li, 2. Ca. 10. v. 6.
it was (says she) a true word which I heard in mine own country of thy
wisdom and of thy sayings, howbeit I believed not their report until I came,
and mine eyes had seen it. The like issue had that renouned entervew (if I may
so term it) at that King of Denmark his coming over, to see his Majesty,
the true Solomon of this age of who^ I may as justly say, that his presence in
this University, bred a greater admiration, and reverence the^ the report
which was sent before him, which howbeit it were almost beyond credit, yet his
presence much ou^streched it. But howsoever some on such Phoenix may arise in
an age, yet for the most part (which arts, and precepts only consider) I durst
confidently maintain my first position, grounded as well upon reason, as common
experience, that presence much weakneth report, and diminishes reverence,
as well toward persons, as things.

CAP. 5.
How curiosity and prying into other men's business is bred and maintained by
the etc.
THe 6. particular is curiosity, for such is the condition of most men, that
although nature have seated the eye in the inner chamber of the face, yet are
they prying always into other men's business; sharp sighted as Eagles in
ce^suring other men's actions, but bats, and moles in their own. Not unlike
those witches called Lamiae, Cap. ^^
of who^ Plutarch speaks in his book of Curiosity, who were wont to put up
their eyes in a box whiles they stayed at home, and never to set them in their
heads till they were going abroad. Insomuch that the oracle of truth it self,
has pronounced it for truth, that those who ca^ see a mote in their brothers
eye, Mat. 6. 4.
ca^ not yet discern a beam in their own, and the second wise man that ever
lived, has laid it down for a maxim, that a wise man's eyes are in his head,
but a fools are peeping in at every window: which lesson it seems Antoninus
the Emperor was to seek of, when curiously casting his eyes about in another
man's house, 'twas freely told him, that it became a (guest as he was) in that
place to be deaf and blind; to which purpose also we read in the Acts of the
Apostles, that our Savior being taken up in a clowd, Cap. 1. 10.
out of their sight, they were checked by the Angels, for gazing curiously
after him, and in a kind of reproof styled with the name of men of Galilee.
1. 6. 19.
Yet more memorable is that instance out of the book of Samuel, where it is
said that the Lord smote the men of Bethshemish, because they had looked into
the Arc, and as it is added in the text for that very fact he slew among the
people fifty thousand 60. and 10. me^, But for a plesa^t example in this kind
I have not met with any answerable to that of Rablais, Lib. 3. c. 33
who reports that Pope John the 22 being in France and passing by the nu^nery
of Fo^thenrant, the Abbess with her Nuns presented unto him a supplication
that it might be lawful and sufficient for the^, to confess one to another,
since many secrets fell out among them which they durst not either for shame,
or fear, trust the Priest withal; The Pope gave the^ the hearing, and told
the^ he would consider of the matter; and at his departure delivers to the
Abbess a little box (in which he had put a Linnot) to be kept without opning
(under pain of exco^municatio^) til his return; his holiness had no sooner
turned his back, but they with one consent, set al upon the Abbess, for the
opening of it, to see what was in it (such was their curiosity of prying even
into the Popes secrets) she being easily persuaded, did so, by which means
the Linnot escaped; the Pope presently returning (under pretense of some other
occasion) demands his box, but finding the bird gone, tells them that if they
could not keep his counsel, upon so straight a charge, they would hardly keep
one another, and so inioines them their wonted form of confession.

CAP. 6.
Of bewitching by the eye.
THE seventh and last particular in this kind which I will speak of, is
bewitching by the eye, to which the Apostle S. Paul alludes in his Epistle to
the Galathians, where he demands [ who had bewitched them?] ^ap. 3. v. 1. (...)
(...).
the word in the original is found but this once only in the new Testament,
and (as I think) in the Canonical scripture, and (as the learned Beza has
rightly observed) properly signifies a kind of fascination, or bewitching by
the eye, and therefore the Apostle in the same verse, continuing his metaphor,
opposes thereunto as an amulet^, or preservatiue, the cru^ifying of Christ in
their sight: and Tertullian in his book of the vailing of Virgins, De velandis
Virginibus.
brings this as a reason to persuade the^ to the use of their vailes, least the
heathen might thereby take advauntage to bewitch them, in finding their faces
uncovered, and by that means subject to malign aspects. Arist. sec^. 20.
prob. 34.
And the chief secretary, or privy counsailour of nature as also his
followers in their problems, Alex. lib. 2. prob. 54.
or questions, of the secrets of nature, have inserted among the rest, one of
this kind of bewitching; not as doubting of the truth of the thing, but as
searching only into the manner of it, and remedy against it; but the best
that I have met with, for discovering this mystery, is Plutarch in the fifth
book of table-talke, where he witnesses, Prob. 7.
that whole families, and nations have been tainted with that disease; and
Pliny gives the reason of placing Satyrs, and Antikes to be looked on, in the
entries and portales of great men's houses, to have been the possessing by that
means, of the thoughts of that malicious kind of people, by which their
strength in hurting might either be diverted, or abated. Some write that women
that have a double pupil in their eye, do most harm this way; but upon what
certain grounds of experience, I cannot affirm; only in this, I find most of
ancient heathen Philosophers to concur, and some of the latter christian
Physicians, that not only men and women, Vlmus de occultis remediis c* 10
do interchangeably hurt one an other in this kind (as has already been
showed,) but both of the^ unreasonable creatures, and they again, both men,
and women. For the first of which sort, Plin. li. 30. cap. 11.
it is in my judgment worth the observing, which many natural historiographers,
(and these of the chiefest rank) report, and Plutarch adds, that himself
has tried, that a man being sick of the yelow-iandise, if he steadfastly
look upon the eye of the bird Icterus* or Galgalus, him self may perhaps
recover, but the bird dies instantly, without fail; And on the other side it
is as commonly received not only among the vulgar, but the learned; that the
Basilike by his eye kills a man: Picolom. Zabarel in lib. de visu.
which the 2 greatest naturalists of this age* take as granted, when as having
set down their state, that the act of seeing arises from somewhat received
into the eye, they object this experience against it, and answer it rather by
vvai^ of exposition, then denial, granting indeed that he hurts a man by his
eye, but rather by some pestilent vapor, which proceeds from it, the^ by any
ray, or beam, which helps it in seeing, which resolution of theirs, as it
salveth their former assertion, so does it plainly make for our present
discourse, of poisoning by the eye* I here pass over the fresh bleeding of a
dead corpse, at the looking on of the murderer, as also Medusaes turning men
into stons, by her looks alone, which though it be indeed but a Poetical
fiction, yet their meaning doubtless, stretches farther then the ordinary
reader at first blush co^ceaveth; in shadowing under that fable, the sudden
astonishment of men, at the rays of her rare beauty. But for the full clearing
of this point, let us but consider the common experience of infecting one
another, by bleare eyes, and the spotting of a looking glass, especially if it
be new, Arist. li. de insom. 2. c. 2.
and clear by the looking on of a menstruous woman, and this case^ (as I
think) in an indifferent* Lemnius lib. 2. c. 13.
judgment, not possessed with prejudice (howbeit Vairus and Vallesius ^unne a
contrary bias) will pass for current.

CAP. 7.
How the general r^bellion of the body is occasioned by the eye.
NOw for the general rebellion of the body, the words of our Savior are
plain, if thine eye be evil, all the body is dark; Mat. 6. 23.
and in the chapter going before, he instanceth: in the eye, and the hand, as
the two most offensive members of the body; the one a^ the counsailour to the
heart, and the other as the executioner; whence S. John fitly comparing all
worldly vanities to a three headed Cerberus, or 3. shapte Chimera, places the
lust of the eyes* between the lust of the world, and the pride of life; to
which middle head (in my judgment) may fitly be reduced, that excessive
delight, which we naturally take, in beholding one beast cruelly to wo^ry, and
devour another. And which is worse, in seeing one man combating with an other;
nay with wild beasts, and that even to the pouring out of blood, and sometimes
the life it self, which among the ancient Romans was usual, De vero cul^u l.
6. cap. 2.
as may appear by that complaint of Lactantius in his time, They are angry
(says he) with the combaters, unless one of the^ be slain, and as if they
thirsted after human blood; they are impatient of al delay, they require fresh
me^ to enter the lists, that they may instantly glut their eyes with an other
bloody spectable. It Is an excellent observation, that S. Augustine has of
Alipius his friend in frequenting these sports, Confess. l. 6. cap. 8.
that being by his advise, once withdrawn from them, and by company drawn
thither again; he told the^, that they might force his body thither, but his
eyes, they should not, which protestation he indeed made good; until at
length, a grievous wou^d being give^ by one of the Combaters, a great shout was
sudd^^ly raised, through the theater; at which ( Alipius not able any longer to
forbear) opened his eyes and seeing the blood trickling down, drank in
cruelty with the sight, receaving a greater wound in his soul, then the
co^bater did in his head, neither was he now the man that came thither, but
one of the many* unto whom he came; and a true companion, or rather captain,
of those who drew him thither by force. Hither also may be referred, the lewd
masking, which the Papists use in their Carnivals, or rather Bacchanals, at
Shrouetide; the women marching through the open streets, in man's apparel,
and the men in women's; as also the Jesuits exhibiting of heaven and hell, God
and the devil, the damned, and the elect, upon their stages: to which may be
added, the beholding of vain and wanton pictures, such as Aretines, ordinary
among the Italians, and west Indians. But for their dangerous effect, I refer
the reader to that example, Lib. 2. c. 17 Ex Ter.
which S. Augustine alleges in his book of the city of God, Of a certain
young man, who looking upon a painted table, in which was described Jupiters
descending in a golden shower, into Danaes lap, takes hold of the next
opportunity, of running into the same kind of sensuality, and defends his
fact, by the Example of Jupiter the great Monarch and governor of the world.
Lastly, here might challenge its due place, that lascivious gross action,
which is ever represented, in the French Comedies and daunces* and sometimes in
our common Mercenarie interludes here at home, when at the greatest part, would
surely otherwise rather blush, then laugh; but that they hold that place in a
manner privileged: Against this abuse in plays and the christians frequenting
of the^, being acted by the heathen, composed of heathenish matters, and
instituted in honor of there heathenish Gods^; the fathers are eloquent, and
copious but especially the golden mouthed Doctor, Hom. 3. de David* and Saul
sparsim*
Art thou not afraid? (says he) do thou not tremble to behold with the same
eye, with which thou lookedst on thy bed, where the foul adultery was
represe^ted, the sacred table where the tremblable mysteries of the sacrament
are performed? Whiles thou accustomest thy self to see such spectacles,
insensibly, and by degrees, bidding adue to shame and modesty, thou beginnest
to entertain and practice the same. Those very women, whom their own lewdnes,
and unhappiness, has prostituted to the common use, are notwithstanding covered
with the dark, and secret retiring places: and even they who have sold their
blushing, yet in such actions blush to be seen. But this Monster enters the*
theater, dares mount the stage, and does take a pride, to play his part, in the
public view and face of the world; and not only to speak and do naught, but to
glory and boast in it, and which is worse to profess himself a Master and
teacher of Art; so that in regard of this boldness, the brazen forehead of the
stews, may justly challenge the title of Modesty.

CAP. 8.
How the eye was the chief occasion of original sin, and of exam^es in all
those mischiefs which ^ormerly are proved to arise from it.

NOw for original sin, which was the first personal in our first parents, and
cleaues to all their posterity as natural, Genesis 3. 67.
we ^inde the first outward occasion of it to have been the fairness of the
apple apprehended by the woman's eye, and the punishment first inflicted on it
to have been the opening of the eyes, whether of the mind or the body I
dispute not. (...)
Whence it may be in the Hebrew the same word signifies as well an eye as a
fountain; to show that from it as from a spring or fountain did flow both
sin it self, the cause of sin, and misery the punishment of both; and
because by the eye came the greatest hurt, therefore God has placed in it the
greatest tokens of sorrow. For from it comes tears, by which the e^pressing of
sorrow is peculiar to man alone: in which regard i^ were to be wished that
men would often pervse that excellent treatise of the government of the eyes
written by M Grienham, a work undertaken upon like reason no doubt, as was
that practical discourse of the government of the tongue, by the late
reverend, and ever renowned Mr Perkins. The former of which we doubt not but is
so much the more acceptable, and useful, as the subject is more large and
error dangerous; for the tongue discloseth what evil ^loweth unto it, but the
eye keeps it close which is a thing more perilous. But to proceed from
reasons and precepts to examples (the most popular arguments) there does not
want in holy writ a clowd of witnesses to bring in evidence of the necessity
and use of the precepts before laid down. Of covetousness in Achan, of
fornication in Sichem, in David and Putaphars wife of adultery, of gulttony in
our first parents, of anger, envy, and revenge in Soul: in each of which
particulars it pleased the holy Ghost (no doubt that he that reads might
consider) to set down in express terms the sense of seeing, as the first
motive which drew the^ into these particulars. 1. for Acha^ we have it
registered under his own confession. los 7. 21.
I saw among the spoil (says he) a goodly Babylonish garment and 200 shicles
of silver and a wedge of gold of 200 shicles weight, and I coveted the^ and
took the^. 2. for Siche^ the text it self is clear. Then Dinah the daughter of
Lea. the which she bare to Jacob, Ge^. 34. 1.
went out to se^ the daughters of the Cu^try who^ when Sichem the son of Hamor
Lord of the Country saw, he took her and lay with her and defiled her. 2. Sam.
c. ^ v. 2.
3 for David we find it in the forefront of this te^ptatio^, and when it was
evening, says the Text, David arose from his bed, and walked upon the roof of
the Kings Palace, and from the roof he saw a woman washing her self, and the
woman was very beautiful to look upon, then David sent messengers and took
her away and she came to him, and he lay with her. And for Put aphars wife,
the Text says that she cast her eye on Joseph, Genesis 39. 7.
and said, ly with me. 4. For Saul, the scripture is very rema^kable, where its
said that afte^ the slaughter of the Philis^ians the women sang by course, 1 Samuel 18. ^
Saul has slain his thousand; and David his tenthousand; wherefore Saul had an
eye on David from that day forward. Lastly for our first parents Moses, the
penman of God or rather the spirit of God inditing to Moses, rather then that
circumstance should be vnvrged in content to thrust it into a parenthesis. Genesis
3. 6.
see the woman (says the Text) seeing that the tree was good for meat, and
that it was pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be desired to get knowledge,
took of the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave it also to her husband, and he
did eat. To these may be added, as Apocripha the example of the 2 Judges in the
story of Susanna of who^ its said That they saw her walking daily in her
husbands garden, Verse. 8.
and from thence their lust was first inflamed toward her, and to conclude
this point for making up the music full to this universal diluge of sin may be
added the cause that drew the general flowd of waters upon the old world,
which in the letter of the Text is expressed to be, that the sons of God saw
the daughters of me^ that they were fair, Genesis 6. 2.
and they took them* wives of all that they liked, and sure it is to be
thought that from the eye first sprang the sin of the Sodo^^^s conceived
against the Angels which Lot received because from thence their punishment
first began, Genesis 9. 11.
according to that rule of the C^vilians; L^si quis de servi^u^e*
who advise not so much the fact i^ self, as the first original cause from
whence it springs to be looked into. Upon which ground was founded that more
wise the^ strict law of Zalencus in commanding the eyes of an adulterer to be
put out as being either the chief guides or counselors in that work*
Valerius.
and his own son afterward offending in the same kind, rather then his law
should be broken, content he was good man to loose one of his own eyes, by
that means to redeem one of his sons. And upon the same reason of Justice
did Oedipus in the Poet execute upon himself the same kind of punishment:
Sen. in oe. ^ipo act. 5.
and in the same member, though in the appearance of men for a different
offense, was Henry the 2. king of France stricken by the finger of God, having
that eye put out by the splinter of a staff broken in Tilting, with which not
long before he had vowed to see Anne of Burge one of the Preside^ts of the
Parliament of Paris, and some other of his associats of the reformed religion
to be burnt, (if they persisted in that opinion) as Serres, and Thuanus, both
French, and excellent historiographers of this age have left recorded. But to
return to the matter, once of this we are sure, that the pleasing of Herod's
eye by Herodias daughters dancing was that which cost John Baptists head, Mat.
14. 6.
the mind of man ever conceaving great and little spots by the media^ion of
the eye, as Labans sheep did their young at the sight of the pilled rods which
Jacob laid in the watering trough. Genesis 30. 37*


CAP. 9.
Of the false report, which the eye makes to the inner faculties, in the
apprehensio^ of natural things
NEither do our eyes only* serve as panders, and brokers, or rather
traitorous porters, for the inletting of these enemies upon the soul, but also
as false reporters in natural, and artificial things, and secret
intelligencers in moral matters for discovering her weakness to the world:
the former of which we daily try in discerning magnitudes, distances,
proportions, Colors, in which reason by conclusions drawn out of her
principles often checks and controules this sense for false reporting; for
instance we need go no farther the^ those colors which appear in the
rainbowe, or on a Doves neck by the reflection of the sun beams, those
night-chas^^s and gapings in the firmament. The seeming of Comets to be in the
same distance from us, that stars and one star from another; the sparkling in
the dark of precious stones, of the eyes of certain beasts, of glo-wormes, of
ro^ten wood, of fish bones, and the like. S. Basil in his hexameron demaundes
the question, who it is* that in his own experience has not often tried, that
throw in the water a little piece of silver, seems to be double in quantity?
and straight things crooked? that from the topps of high mountains, heardes of
cattle seem to be but Ants, and from a* watch tower a far of, ships under
sail, but as flying doves; large square towers like little round pigeon
houses, and the sea and heavens to embrace and kiss each other. These things
all men know, and the greatest part acknowledge, to be errors of the eye,
Though the learned only, Vi^^llio ln opricis Ar^st* in lib. de sensu and
sensibili and in (...)
search into and find out the causes of it; the discoverl^ of which because it
falls not naturally within the compass of this discourse, I will not enter upon
the unfolding of it; it being withal a theme (as I conceive it) of
difficulty, and tediousness alike; but will only ad a conclusion most
undoubted out of the rules of art, though hardly believed of the vulgar; that
the sun (which the sharpest eye cannot possibly judge to be above 2. or 3.
foot broad) is found by just calculation, ^laviu^.
to exceed in bigness the whole globe of the earth and water above 166. times.
Hence is it that Charron in his Treatise of wisdom (a book second to none in
this age for moral discourses) and the French Academy, insisting herein in the
steps of the Stoics and Academicks; hold this sense rather to hinder* then
further true, and sound knowledge: though I confess Eusebius in his
preparation to the gospel, Lib. ^. c. 7.
and Tertullian in his book of the soul labor the contrary, but rather out
of a zeal (as I conceive it) offreeing the works of God from imperfection
then out of any deep philosophical discussing of this point: neither (to
speak a truth) do I see how in granting an imperfection in the work we
should or ca^ from thence draw an argument of want of goodness; or wisdom in
the workman, especially if the work be of such nature, as that it have in it
self free will, to retain, or deface that perfection, in which it* was
created.

CAP. 10.
A general discourse of the delusio^ of ^he eye by artificial means as also by
the passions of the mind.
I Might here take occasion to enlarge of the delusion of the sight by the
subtil^ie of the devil, by the cha^mes of sorcerers by the spells and
exorcismes of coniurers* by the legerdemaine of Iuglers, by the knaverie of
Priests and Friars, See Sco^. (...) l 13. (...)
by the nimblenesse of ^umblers, and ropewalkers, by the sleights of false and
cunning merchants, by the smooth deportment and behavior of Hypocrites, by the
stra^agems of generals, by the giddiness of the brain, by the distemper of
phrensies, and lastly, by the violent passions of fear, and melancholy; besides
a thousand pretty conclusions drawn^ out of the bowels of natural Philosophy,
and the mathematics; by the burning of certain mixed powders, oiles, and
liquors. By the casting of false lights, by^ the reflection of glasses, and the
like; of which kind I will only set down one conclusion, which my self have
seen often practiced, to the great astonishment of such, as beholding it,
understood not the reason o^ it. The practice is thus; take a study, or closet,
where (by closing the wooden leaves) you may shut out all the light: then bore
an hole, through the midst of one of the leaves to the bigness of a pease, and
cover it with a piece of spectacle glass, and when the sun shines on the
ground before the window, hold on the inside right before the hole (to the
distance of two foot or thereabout) a sheet of white paper or a large piece of
fair linen; and you shall perfectly discern by the shadows; the shapes,
and motions of men, and dogs, and horses, and birds, with the just proportion
of trees, and chimnies, and towers, which fall within the compass of the sun
near the window.

To this artificiall^ Conclusion, of deluding the sight may be^ added a
pleasant merry i^st out of Cashlios Courtier, Lib. ^.
of a gentleman who having lost all his money at dice, and getting to bed in a
great chafe, instead of praying fell a cursing, and so a sleep; which his
fellows perceiving, thought to put a trick upon him by putting out there
ligh^s and making a noise as if they had continued there play, whereat he
suddenly awaking out of his new sleep, falls to his old railing, that having
gotten his money they were set upon it purposelie to vex him, having no light
to see what they did; they told him he was either mad or blind; to think that
they would play without light or not to see it standing full in his eye; to
which he replies that if they spoke in earnest he had indeed lost his sigh^
supposing it to be a plague of God sent upon him for wishing it so often on
others: they to ripen the rest confirmed him in his opinion till at length they
brought him to vow to our Lady I know not how many fasts and pilgrimages for
the recoverie of his sight; which being performed falling heartily to his
prayers he falls a sleep; now was the time to work the feat; his Companions
cause lights to be conveyed into the chamber and renewing the former noise,
awake him the second time, Le d^nger pass Le Saint est ^rompe.
who now perceiving the lights which he saw not before gave God and our Lady
solemn thanks for the recovery of his sight, but performed his vows at
leisure.

CAP. 11.
Of the delusion of the sight, by the immediate working of the devil.
NOw for the other particulars above named, I will not dwell upon any of them,
but will only point at some choice examples in the chiefest. First then for the
devils sub^iltie in deceiving the sight, it is a matter agreed on on all hands*
that he has the power, ( Vertum^us or Proteus like) to turn himself into
any shape, or (Chameleon like) into any color: nay which is more, whereas the
Chamaeleon cannot change himself into white; yet can the Devil transform
himself into an Angel of light: and not only himself, but other things in
such sort, that sometimes he makes them seem to be present when they are
not, and sometimes not to seem when they are, and at other times again, to
appear in another shape and fashion than they are indeed, and in their own
nature. In all which kinds I find among the Dutch writers plentiful and rare
examples, De spectris Von Zau. ^erey*
but chiefly in Lavater and Whitikind, who has written the best in this kind
of any I have met with; but in Dutch and under the name of Augustine Larcheimer.
For the practice then, of making things appear to be present which indeed are
not; the former of them brings this story. Lau. part* 1. de de spect^is ex Alb.
Cran^z^o l. 4. c 5.
Henry the second Emperor of that name, vchemently suspecting Chunegund his
empress, for using false play with a Courtier too familiar with her, his
jealousy was (as he thought) justly increased, for that the Courtier was often
seen to come forth of her chamber, early in the morning* and alone; but the
good Empress, being put to her purgation by the Ordalian law for the
clearing of this unjust surmise, walked over fire hot culters, with naked feet,
unhurt, which discovered to the world, as well her innoce^cie, as the devils
policy, in counterfaiting such a shape and using it in such sort, as might most
incense the Emperor, and draw the Empress, with others, into undeserved
suspicion. The same author, in the same book, relates that himself had
heard of a wise, and grave man, one of the chief governors of the Tigurin
Canton; that himself, and his servant, travailing in a summers morning,
through the meadows, he saw (as him seemed) one of his neighbors committing
bestiality with a Mare, but knowing the good honest report of the man, and
thereby misdoubting his own eyes, he gets him p^esently to his house; where
he finds him good man, in his bed, fast a sleep. Wherein we may see, as in
the one, the devils business, in abusing the weakness of this sense, so in the
other Gods providence in clearing the innocent. I urge these examples to this
end, that if these men had trusted there own sight, and not made farther
search they had surely incurred what the devil by those ^leights hunteth
after, the offending of God, and the endangering there own souls in the
shedding of innocent blood. If I might without tediousness, I would add one
history more, of the devils cunning in making things appear which indeed are
not, which took effect according to his design. (I confess I urge it not so
much for the fitness, as the strangenes of the story.) It fell out in the
year 1282. in a town named Hammel, under the Duke of Brunswikes dominion, an
od mate coming thither under the habit of a Rat-catcher, and having done good
service to the town, for which he was but poorly rewarded; one day he
walks through the street; playing on his tabour and pipe, by which mea^es, a
number of the children of the town, flocking after him, followed him so far,
till at length coming without the gates, he led them al into a little
hillocke, where they all vanished together, and were never seen after to the
number of 130. The relation I know cannot but seem very strange, and therefore
will hardly paste for credible, but Wierus a Germane borne and chief Physician
to the Duke of Cleues and (as his works show) a professed enemy to monkish
fables, Li. 10. 16. de prae^lig. daemonum
constantly affirms, out of his own experience, that the act is at this day to
be seen registered in the records of the town, and painted forth in the
glasse-window of the cathedral* church, and besides that the street through
which they passed, bears his name of the accident, and their ancient public
instruments of law, as bands, and leases bear date, as well from the year of
the departure of there children, as from the incarnation of Christ; which
induceme^ts me thinks, are able to make a man swallow a greater difficulty.

Now for the devils second practice, in deceiving the sight, by making things
not appear which indeed are present, I find a memorable example, which
happened not long since, Whitikin. dus cap. 6.
at Francfort upon Odera an university belonging to the Marquess of
Brandeburg, where a certain maid possessed as they thought, would often
thrust her empty hand into the open air, and draw it back full of (...) ven
this is nothing else but a delusion of the sight either by fitting the skinns
of such beasts to the bodies of men and women, who by a deep strong
imagination, or natural disease, suppose themselves to be such indeed, as they
seem to be; or by applying to them aerie bodies; which sometimes to be so is
manifest in that being torn with the teeth of dogs, or strike^ with staves,
their former shape soon vanishes, but the print of the blow remains. To
which purpose Whitikind I remember makes report of an old woman in the Dukes
of Meckelburges country, 12.
who appearing in the shape of a great Mastiue dog the hounds espying her,
ran with full mouth upon her, and the country hinds with pronges, and pike
staves, fell about her, til at length she being sore wounded, the shape of the
Mastiue vanished, and nothing was left to the slake, out a poor silly old
woman, begging mercy and pardon: this news being brought to the University of
Francford, where our Author then lived, Iodochus Willi^hius their professor of
physic, from thence took occasion to discourse of this point now in hand, and
in the end approved that conclusion which we have above proved. The patrons of
the contrary opinion, as Bodin, and Sprenger in his book of the hammer of
witches, urge the real transfiguratio^ of Ulysses followers into beasts, (...)
Diomedes soldiers into birds, and that unsavory ridiculous tale, of an egg
which a witch in the kingdom of Cyprus, near the city Salamin sold to an
Englishman, and by the same transformed him into an ass; and made him her
market Mule three years, and that at last she remetamorphised him into the
shape of a man again. Besides these they bring the transformation of diverse
passengers in Italy in the time of S. Augustine, being there, into carriage
horses, by certain alewiues, but chiefly they stand upon Nabucadnesars change
in to a beast, and Lots wi^e into a pillar of salt: to which I answer that
these changes are either to be understood to have happened rather in the
affections of the mind, then in the figure of the body, or if so, rather by
the immediate finger of God, the^ by the working of the devil and for those
real true effects, which seem to be the inseparable companions of a real
change, as swift running, devouring of children, undergoing of great burdens,
and the like; I hold some of them to have bin performed by the devil himself
in a seeming fantastic body; others in the bodies of beasts, possessed by
himself; and lastly not a few, by beasts themselves* suddenly conveied into
the place of such; as witches suppose they have transformed all by the delusion
of the eye, and none of them by any real or true change: it being no more
possible* for the reasonable soul of a man to dwell in the body of a beast,
then for the unreasonable soul of a beast to dwell in a man's body; which if
we^ should grant, I see no reason but upon the same ground, as well a gap might
be opened, and way be given to Pythagoras dream of the interchangable recourse
of souls, from beasts to men, and from men to beasts again.

CAP. 13.
Of the delusion of the eye, by the exorcismes of Coniurers.
FOr the exorcismes of Coniurers, and Necromancers, in raising the dead, that
one example of the witch of Endor is sufficient, (...). 1. 28.
to prove them all mere delusions of the sight, it being not to be thought,
(besides the general reason, that the souls of the righteous, are in the
hands of God) that the true Samuel would be drawn to answer him, whom God had
denied to answer by dreams, by Vrim, or by Prophets; or that Samuel would
have suffered Saul, to have done him worship by inclining his face to the
ground, and bowing himself; or lastly, understanding that Saul was rejected of
God, would notwithstanding* have assured him of being with him the next morrow,
except we should affirm, the good, and the bad, the castwaies, and the chosen
to go both to one place. Though the Papists indeed, to maintain their Limbus,
and their purgatory fire (which except, they still keep in, that of the Popes
kitchen will sone go out) would needs have it to be a true real apparitio^,
grou^ding themselves upon these words, V. 14.
and Saul knew that it was Samuel, which in my understanding, enforce not so
much a certain knowledge, as a full persuasion which grew no doubt, out of the
cunning and artificial counterfeit, which he saw represented before his eyes:
the Devils art being strange in that kind, as may appear by the apparition
of, Mary Duchess of Burgundy to her husband Maximilian afterward Emperor,
raised by Trithemius Abbot of Spainheim at the Emperors own request out of a
vain curiosity of seeing her once again. The Ghost (as the story sets it
down) did in all parts so living represent the dead Empress that not so much
as a little black warte, which she had in the hinderpart of her n^cke, was
wanting* as both the Emperor himself and the standers by did well observe
Cornelius Agrippa, and John F^ustus were renowned in this kind, for under this
head may fitly be ranged the showing of the vi^age of such in a lookingglasse,
as had stolen any thing, or committed any villainy, and lay unknown; the
pre^enting of banquets only for show to please the eye, by deceauing it; nor
for substance to delight the taste, or content the stomach. But of all I have
heard, or read of this nature, the rarest was that of Albert us Magnus, who
living at Colen, and the Emperor William Earl of Holland passing that way,
from his coronation at Aix, and hearing of ^his merry Monk, (...) cap. 8.
desirous to see some of his tricks, sent for him, and after kind
entertainment, acquainted him with his purposes the Monk not scrupulous of she
wing his art, thus drawn in began to set the spirit of his wits, or rather
the wit of his spirits aworke; and not long after caused the chamber, where was
the Emperor, with his Courtiers about him, suddenly to be flored over with
green gras^e, herbs, plants, flowers, roots, and trees among: upon which were
delicate fruits, and birds; some singing, others chirping, to the great
admiration, and astonishment of the beholders; It being in the dead of winter,
a perfect representation of the spring.

CAP. 14.
Of the delusion of the eye by the imposture of Priests and Fri^rs.
FOr the knavery of Priests, and Friars without doubt the gretest part of those
Ghosts, faires, pixes, hobgoblings, that have been seen to walk in former
ages have bin set a foot by these people; partly to get money to their coffers,
in causing them ever to beg somewhat for the Church; and partly reputation to
their order in showing the virtue of their exorcismes upon them: The like may
be said of the sweating, and weeping of their images, of the rolling of their
eyes, and nodding of the heads. It is worth the remembering which Erasmus
recounts to this purpose, of a Priest* who a little before Easter in the night,
Lib. 22. Epist. penu^t.
conveied into his church yard live crabbs, fastening little wax candles
burning* to their sides, they creeping in this sort about the graves, made a
fearful show in the night, and none du^st come near to discover it. The
report being cast abroad, was entertained with a fearful kind of reverence of
the most, and the wisest were content to be hudwinckt for company. The next
sunday comes the Priest, to play his part, and out of the pulpit tells them
very seriously that these walking spirits were the souls of their dead
friends, who being sore tormented in purgatory begged to be loosed from those
pains, by masses and alms; this persuasion went current, until at length by
the negligence, or forgetfulness of the Priest, two or three of the crabbes
were found in the day time among the rubbish, with* the candles sticking to
their sides, by which means the knavery was detected and the Priest punished.
To these may be added those* comicall impostures for the casting out of devils
practiced by Priests, and Jesuits, in which the principal part is proved to
be nothing else but the delusion of the beholders sight; and Geffry Chaucer,
who had his two eyes, wit, and learning in his head, spying that all these
brainelesse imaginations were the forgeries, and legerdemaine of crafty and
lecherous friars either to mask their vene^ie, or to enrich their treasures,
plays upon them thus* For there as w^nt to walken was an Else
There walks now the limitor himself
In every bush and under every tree.
There is no other inc^bus but he.


CAP. 15.
Of the delusion of the sight by the distemper of the brain.
FOR the distemper of the brain the case is clear in Aix, who ran upon an
heard of Swine, with his drawn sword in his hand, supposing it to have bin the
army of the Graecia^s. and hung up the two greatest hog^* taking them for
Agamemnon, and Ulysses, the former as his competitour, and the latter as a
partial Judge; the like we read of Pentheu^ who in his mad mood* thought he
saw two suns, and two cities of Thebes; of Orestes* who saw his mother in his
sister and Agaue wild beasts in her children. These mistakes were in raging
persons; but others there as much mistaken* howbeit in a merrier vain, as he
of whom Aristotle speaks in his book of wonders, who living in the City of
Abydos in Asia* would spend whole days by himself alone in the empty theater;
commending the Actors, and clapping his hands as if he* had seen some stately
tragedy.

CAP. 16.
Of the delusion of the eye by the smooth carriage of Hypocrites.
FOR the smooth and cunning deportment of hypocrites, and dissemblers, I need
not go farther then common experience, to show that there special skill
consists in casting a mist before the eye of the world: which the Cynicke, no
doubt, well understood when he cried out that the grave beard, and the long
cloak he saw, but the pholosopher he saw not. Whence it is that these kind of
men, are ever painted forth unto us by the resemblance of things, which most
deceive our sight; as of Wolves masked under Sheep skins, of tombs, or
monuments, which on the outside are whited over, and sometimes set out with
curious works, in metals and carved stones, of diverse colors, but within are
full of rottenness, and dead men's bones: of Apothecaries boxes which without
are fairly painted* but within are full of poiso^s: of tragedy books which
without have covers of velvet, with stringes of silk, and claspes of silver,
but within are full of periuries, and murders, and incests: of those apples,
which are reported to grow in the land; where Sodom stood, Solinus.
which appear exceeding fair, and beautiful to the eye, but being once
touched with the finger they moulder into ashes: of the hill Etna which without
is ever cold and white with a mantle of Snow but within burns with continual
flames* of the Aegyptia^ temples, which without shine with gold, and ^cat, and
marble, but have within some secret isle, a Crocodile or serpent for the God,
unto which they are dedicated: of those pictures which on the one side
represent a fair gentlewoman, and on the other, an horned Satyr: Lastly of
Cebes tables in which pleasure, and good fortune are seated in^ the forefront;
but grie^e and punishment, and revenge, and despair, lie hidden in a dark
obscure corner behind. So that except a man had the eyes of those Spaniards
(which Delrio in his magical disquisitions reports himself to have seen at
Madrid) who could see into the bowels of the solid earth, Lib. ^. Cap. 3. Qu. 4.
and there discern minerals, and quarries, and springs; It is impossible but
that in our ordinary conversing with men, we should often with Esops dog
catch at shadows, and let go substances.

CAP. 17.
Of the delusion of the eye by stratagems of war.
LAstly for stratagems of war I will instance only in two, the one of our own
chronic^es devised by Stygan, Archbishop of Canterbury, and put upon William
the Conqueror at his entrance into Kent; by commanding his soldiers ready
armed to range themselves into their squadro^s with young trees, or big boughs
in their hands, and so to attend the coming of their enemy; the conqueror,
(according to the Archbishops project) supposing he had seen a wood before
him, and still marching toward it, found himself to be wrapped in the midst
of his enemies, before he could discrie where they lay in camped. The other is
out of the Roman history, Livie.
invented by Hanniball, and put upon Fabius, by tying wads of straw to
Oxe-hornes, which being fired, and the Oxen let loose toward the enemies camp,
in the dead of the night, some of the^ affrighted with the sight, as it drew
nearer and nearer toward them, withdrew themselves from there tents, and by
little and little drew the rest after, till at length Hanniball found a clear
coast to escape with his army, being before hardly beset, and in great
straits. To these may be added two other famous oversights in war, of the
same nature with the former, but differing in this, in that they were rather
incurred, then imposed; The former by Charles Duke of Burgu^dy, Comines.
who lying at the siege of Paris; and having certain intelligence of the kings
drawing toward him, for the raising of it, sent out his scouts to discover the
coast, but the day being somewhat far spent, and clowdy withal, they took a
field not far of, overgrowne with high thistles, 9. 26.
to be the kings pikeme^ (as Gaal in the book of Judges took the shaddows of
the^ tops of the mountains to be men) which errour^caused afterward in the
Dukes army much trouble and some loss. 2. King. 3. 21.
The latter is of the Moabites who mistook the morning shining of the sun upon
the waters for the coloring of blood: the words of the ^ext be these, and
when the Moabites hard that the kings were come up to fight against them,
they gathered all that were able to bear harnes, and upward* and stood in
their border, and they rose early in the morning, when the sun arose upon the
waters, and the Moabites saw the water over against the^, as red as blood, and
they said the kings are surely slain and one has smitten another: now
therefore Moab to the spoil; and when they came up to the host of Israel, the
Israelits arose and smo^ the Moabits so that they fled before them, but they
invaded them and smot Moab, not much unlike this serious narratio^ is that jest
which d' Accords puts on the Duke of Vandosme, the common tabour of the french
wits; who (after their fashion) having caused his wine (in the heat of summer)
for the better qualifying and refreshing of it, to be let down in a bucket,
into the bottom of his well, and not long after going forth to see the manner
of ^^t having never before seen his face in the water and then suddenly
espying it, but not understanding from whence it should proceed, runs in in all
have, and cries for help for the beating down of the Antipodes, who were
drinking his wine in the bottom of the well.

CAP. 18.
Of the delusion of the eye by painting.
THESE later examples may not unfitly be reduced to the delusion of the
sight, wrought by the ignorance of natural causes; but among al artificial
deceiving of the eye, (whereof I intended in this place chiefly to speak) that
of painting, and limming is the most noble; by which not only unreasonable
creatures, as birds by flying at painted grapes have been deceived; but men
also, nay (which is more) a painter himself; bidding his Corrival (if he
feared not shame) by his work, to draw his curtain, and present his table to
the public censure; whereas the curtain was indeed but counterfeit; and by
that means was the price adjudged the latter, for that the one had deceived
birds only, the other men. For so it is that this sense which I find not in
any of the rest, is so bewitched that its then most delighted, when it is most
deceived, by shadowings, and landskips, and in mistaking cou^terfaits for truths

CAP. 19.
That the eyes serve not only as treacherous porters, and false reporters in
natural and artificial things, but also as secret intelligencers, for
discovering the passions of the mind and diseases of the body.
NEIther do our eyes only serve as false reporters to the mind, in natural
and artificial things, but as secret intelligencers, in moral matters, for
discovering her weakness to the world. Thus by a fierce sparkling eye, we
discover anger; by an open staring eye, vnstaidnes: by a rolling unsettled eye
wantonness; by a hollow wan eye, envy* and jealousy; by a hautie skornfull
eye pride; by a narrow dejected eye, baseness; by a dull fixed eye, heavines
of spirit; many times to the shame, and sometimes to the disadva^tage of him
that is discovred; his enemies by this means gaining adva^tage to work upon
that passion, by which they see him Possessed, or to which they judge him most
inclined: Prove. 17. 24.
to this agrees that of Solomon, wisdom is in the face of him, that has
understanding; 3. 16.
but the eyes of a fool are in the corners of the world, and of Esar, Eccle.
9. 7.
the daughters of Sion are hauty and walk with stretched out necks and with
wandering eyes, wherefore the ^on of Sirachs council is good, go not thou
gazing about in the streets of the city, neither wa^der thou in the secret
places thereof, for a wise man will easily discrie thee, and he that has
understanding will know thy thoughts. Nether are passions of the mind alone,
but withal the diseases of the body, and in them their increasing and
decreasing, by the eye more the^ by any other part, laid open to the view of
the world: whence it is that Hippocrates out of his own observations rightly
cou^sails practitioners in physic in visiting their Pati^nts to view the face
well, and in it especially the eye, be cause by nothing sooner is the ability
or weakness of the inner faculty discerned; and hence it^ is that Orpheus
terms the eyes the looking glass of nature, Aphrodiseus the casements of the
soul, and Blemor the Arabian went so far as to affirm that the soul had her
principal dwelling and mansio^ house in the eyes. Here the^ let Momus be
summoned to natures court, and pay her honorable amends, for having
injuriously accused her, that in the fabric of man's body there wa^ted
crystal windows in the breast, to discover the thoughts, and diverse passions
of the heart to the world.

CAP. 20.
Of the infinite diseases and casualties which the eye is subject unto.
NOW besides this secret intelligence, which the eye gives the world of the
souls weakness, and the bodies imperfecto^s; I find themselves subject to far
more diseases from within, and casualties from without, then any other member.
Lib. 1. c. 11
Charro^ in his book of wisdom counts the diseases only to be sixscore, Lib.
7. c. 20
but Rhodigin, who runs over the particulars, bringes in a catalogue of a
greater number, and Laurentius in his treatise of the eye, purposing to speak
of this matter begins in this manner. I will not undertake (says he) in this
place to set down any exact description of the diseases of the eye, it being an
enterprise to tedious, which would require at least an hundred several
chapters, the particulars are so infixit. And sure if we consider aright the
diverse pieces, and parcels of the eye, as the three humors, the 7 tunicles,
the muscles, the veins, the arteries, the nerves, the spirits, and withal
understand that each of these has his several diseases proper to it, besides
those which are many times imparted from the diste^per of the brain (with
which the eye holds a marvelous correspondence) and those which are incident
to the whole bal of the eye as excess, or defect in quantity, improper
situation, or figuration, or the like, cannot but conceive as much as is before
affirmed, especially if to these internal diseases we join those external
accidents, offe^siue to it, wind, dust, smoke, gnats, strains, stripes,
bruises, sometime to the diminution, and sometime to the depravation, and not
seldom to the total loss and perishing of the sight. But above all it is
most co^siderable that light the very object in which it most delights, and
comfort it self, it notwithstanding most hurtful, and dangerous to it by
dispersing and dissolving (as it were) the opticke spirits; as may appear by
S. Paul stricken blind, with a light from heaven, which suddenly shoane round
about him: and by Zenophons soldiers who traveling many days, through the
snow, the greatest part of them lost their sight; To this end, it is worth the
remembering, which Galen mentions in his tract of the sight, Lib. 10 de vsu
partii^. Cap. 3.
that Dionysius the tyra^t of Sicilie being disposed to punish any with
blindness, would first cast them into a deep dungeon in which was no crevise,
or chincke for admission of the sun beams, where having kept them by the
space of certain days, they were in a clear sunshine weather, immediately
from thence brought into a higher chamber full of lights, and all pa^ieted over
with a bright kind of plaster; by which means surfiting (as it were) and
glutting their eyes upon this new fresh luster, within a while ^according to
the tyrants design) they became flarke blind. The truth of this assertion is
also proved by the experience of seeing the stars at noone day, from the
bottom of a deep well, or when the sun is eclipsed (as Thucydides witnesses it
happened in his time) the sight being otherwise so dazeled with the cleerenes
of the sunbeams, that it cannot possibly apprehend or discern those lesser
lights in presence of the greater. But beside these assaults of the sight from
without, and diseases arising from the natural disposition from withint;
diverse kinds of meats, and sauces there are, in our ordinary diet, which
serve as much to diminish or deprave the sight, as to nourish or augment the
body. Of these D. Baily in his treatise of the preservation of the eye sight,
has mustred up a fair troop; which mixed withsome other accidents, the
school of Salerne has notwithstanding summarily, and pithily comprehended in
a few verses, and and because they are happily rendered by S. John Harrington, I
will set them down in our own mother tongue. Wine, women, bathes, by ar^ or
nature wrought,
Onions, garlic, mustard seed, ^ire, and light,
Smoke, bruises, dust, pepper^to powder brought,
Beans, l^tiles, strains, wind, tears, and Phoebus bright.
And all sh^rpe things our eye sight do molest.
Yet watching hurts them more then all the rest.
Among which one has unhappily marked two things, as offensive to the sight,
which notwithstanding are most necessary in the life of man, hic and haec
ignis, the one to the preservatio^ of mankind, and the other of particulars.
The former of which notwithstanding is found to be less offensive to the eye
^ight in other countries, especially in the higher Germany then it is here with
us; there being ever in their hypocausts a convenient warmth, howbeit the fire
be never seen; so that, the scorching heat (which is it that dries the
christalline humor,^ and by that means hurts the eye) is not felt in those
parts. Others there are, who note two other things, as useful in another kind
and yet as offensive to the eye, ^ to that purpose allege the authority of the
same author. She that ha^h hap a husband ^^d to bury,
And is therefore in ha^t, not sad, bu^ meri^;
Yet if in show good manners she will keep,
^nions, and mustardseed will make her weep^.
But for my part I took especial notice of watching, and tears, the one
being the readiest means to gain knowledge and the other to give vent to our
grie^es, to which may be added fasting, as hurtful to the sight and yet more
useful in a Christian man's life then any yet named.

CAP. 21.
That the eye is not so useful fon the gathering of knowledge, as is pretended,
whether we consider it absolutely in it self, or in respect of the hearing.
AND surely for the gaining of knowledge, I durst confidently a^^irme, that
were the eye never so inde^atigable in watching, or informed the inner
faculties aright in all it apprehended; yet in most things (...) it not possibly
without the help of hearing, hunt out the truth, since as well in the works of
art as nature, that which has greatest force in actuating, and quickening the
thing we see (as the soul in the body) is notwithstanding it self for the
most not seen; the stateliness of houses, the goodlines of trees, when we
behold the^, delights the eye; but the foundation which bears up the one,
and the root which to the other ministers sap and juice, is in the bosom of
the earth concealed. And generally the sight is not capable, but of corporal,
accidental, particular things; and in them only of their crust, and surface,
and that only in direct objects, and by help of the light: whereas the hearing
apprehends all manner of sounds, from all difference^ of places, as well from
behind as from before, and that at all times as well in the dark, as in the
day, and that which chiefly makes for the increase of knowledge, vniversalls,
immaterials, and the inward parts of things. Therefore Socrates as for other
things, so for this among the rest was adjudged by the oracle the wisest
living; that casting his eyes upon a fair but silent face, he bid him speak,
that he might see him: as if he had said in other terms that the sense of
hearing, makes more to the understanding of the true nature of things, then
that of seeing; and in this case one care witness is of more value then ten
eie-witnesses. Thus do we judge by the hearing only of the temper of metals,
the sou^dnesse of timber, the emptiness of vessels, the deepnesse of waters;
and ordinarily, in the course of life^, we find the hearing to be the sense
of precept* and rule, safe, and certain alike; but^ the other of example, and
imitatio^ no less dangerous* then uncertain. Whence it is that we have heard
of many blind men who have become famous for wisdom and learning; but of
deaf men we have not heard of any: for which cause (as I suppose) in our
common law such as are borne dea^e^, though they see perfectly well, yet are
they ranked among mad men, lunaticke persons, and children, whom (as Bracton
affirms) in cases of felony, their very want of common reason and
understanding priviledgeth from the ordinary punishment inflicted by law: but
for such as are borne blind^ I find no such privilege* the law supposing the^
to be as capable of reason as others, and no^ only capable to conceive reason
but to express it as well by speech as writing, which in men borne deaf is
not only vnvsual, but (in mine understanding) impossible. Whereupon in the
civil law, though they be indeed excluded from intercession or postulation as
they call it, (though upon a blind Quod in signia magistratus vider^ ^on
p^ssi^^^^ p. 1. l. 3* ^. 1.
reason in my judgment) yet are they not forbidden to supply the places of
judges, or magistrates, it being not the blindness of the body, but of the
mind, Lib. quaest. illust.
which takes away the faculty of judging; as the judicious Hottoman has well
stated the question; Quest. 28.
affirming withal, in the same place, that he sees no Canonical hindrance,
but that me^ blind from their very birth, may be sufficiently instructed in
the civil law, and other liberal sciences. Upon which grounds I well remember,
at the last commencement save one held at Cambridge, it was proved, and defended
that a blind man might lawfully supply the place of a judge. And thus much my
self da^e confidently affirm, that want of sight is many times the occasion
of cutting of partial respects, then which nothing is more inwardly necessary
to the office, and rightful proceeding of a judge. Now how forward we are to
pass our judgment according to the outward appearance, let that one example of
Samuel (one of the vprightest judges that ever Israel bred) su^fice to prove,
1. Sam. 16. 27.
who being commanded by God to anoint one of the sons of Ishai, king of
Israel: when they were all come before him, he looked on Eliab the eldest and
said, surely the Lords anointed is before him but the Lord said unto Samuel
look not on his countenance nor on the height of his stature, because I have
refused him, for God se^th not as man sees, for man looks on the outward
appearance, but God beholds the heart, 2* ^*
which in effect is the same thing that Saint James co^de^nes in his Epistle to
the 12. tribes, if there come into your company (says he) a man with a gold
ring and goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment
and you have a respect to him that wears the gay clothing are ye not
partial in your selves, and are become judges of evil thoughts? When the
Evangelicall Prophet Esaias speaking of the Messiah; 10. 2 3.
tells us that the spirit of wisdo^e and counsel shall rest upon him* and
immediately ads this as an effect flowing from it, or a ^igne to discern it by,
he shall not judge according to the sight of the ei^s. Commend not^ therefore a
man in his beauty, Ecclesiast.
nor despise a man in his outward appearance. Now besides the cu^ting off of
these partial respects in a judge, blindness also occasioneth (as is already
proved at large) the taking away of lustful looks, which as often pervert the
course of justice, as may appear in the story of Susanna, and by that worthy
speech of Pericles to Sophocles, who admiring and commending the fair face of
a boy that passed by, Pericles tells him plainly, that not only the Praetors
hands ought to be clean^ from bribes, but his e^es too (and that much ^ather)
from lustful looks. But now to return again from the particular office of a
judge, to the general point proposed which was the gathering of knowledge and
wisdom: we read that Democ^itus supposing the sh^rpnesse of his sight to
hinder the quickness of his wit; was content to pluck out both his eyes for
the better compassing of that one end, which he attained so^wel, Tuscul. 5.
that (as Tully witnesses of him,) though he were not able to pu^ a
difference between blackes and whites, yet was he able to distinguish between
good and bad, just and unjust, honest and dishonest; and without the variety of
colors could he live happyly, without the knowledge of things he could not;
and when others saw not that which lay before their ^ee^e, he traveled through
al infinity, setting no stint^ to his boundless conceit: and surely I for my
part am clearly of opinion that howbeit his practice in this case, be not
allowed, much less his example to^ be followed, yet the reason and ground of
the action was not so strange, and ridiculous as some men have conceited it, it
being a necessary certain means for the unity of the thoughts, and by it
redoubling of their force, which by the sight are commonly distracted in the
variety of objects; and by consequent loose much even of their natural
st^e^gth; the truth of this assertion partly appears in that little but
excellent description of the Spaniards life, in which among all the masters of
al conditions who^ Lazarillo de Tormes served we find none comparable to his
blind master, for the smelling out of his knaveries; but yet more fully in our
night meditations, which by reason of the restraint of our sight spring from
our most retired thoughts; and by that means for the most part savor as much
of judgment, and ripeness, as those of the morning of quick and ready
dispatch; for which cause (as I suppose) the Greeks have given the same name
to the night and good invention: (...).
and one of the sharpest Philosophers that ever put pen to paper, Sco^us.
borrowed his name from darkness. Besides it is noted of our Savior (whose
imitable actions, Man. 6. 6.
ought ever to be our patterns) that he prayed oftener in the night, or alone
in the garden or upon the mountain, then in the day or in the presence of
company; and himself commands us the practice of the same exercise retired a
part and our chamber door shut: and surely reason me thinks teaches us thus
much, that the soul being shut up, and kept in from peeping out, and as it
were gazing abroad through the casements of the body, she must by co^straint
reflect her beams upon the con^emplation of her self, and such things as
she has before apprehended.

CAP. 22.
Containing an answer to an objection, that man alone has therefore given him
an upright figure of body to the end he might behold the heavens.
IF any here object that God has given man above all other creatures an
erect and upright countenance, and (as the Anatomists have observed) one nerve
more the^ to bruit beasts, for the turning of the eye upward, to the end he
might behold the heavens, and in them, (as in large characters drawn in fair
velom) the glory of their maker; I answer that man indeed considered in the
state of integrity, might and would have made excellent use thereof; but in the
state of corruption the greatest part, either thereby are induced to Idolatry
(as has bin before showed) or which is no less pardonable with Thales whiles
they look up into heaven, fall into the ditch of curiosity, and presumption,
and from the contemplation of the stars (notwithstanding that in producing
particular effects, they co^curre only as universal causes) (rushing into the
chair of God) have peremptorily decreed of the alteration of whole states, the
destinies of Princes, and private men: secrets no doubt sealed up and fast
locked within the bosom of the eternal wis^dome; but only when it self
pleases upon extraordinary occasions; to disclose and to impart them to the
sons of men; and (which is worth the observing) whiles these men pretend to
^ee in the stars the notable actions, and events of the whole world, (as
Menippus is ^abled to have don from the circle of the moon,) yet know they
not many times what is acted in their own closets, by their own servants, and
children, or with their wives and daughters in their own houses. Parallel with
these figure-flinggers may not unfitly be matched those fortune tellers, who
undertake to foretell men and women's marriages and fortunes by their pretended
art of Physiognomie and chiromancie, the one co^^isting in beholding the traies
of the visage, and the other the lines of the hand; but the folly of both
appears in that one wise answer of Socrates to a professor of these arts,
who looking steadfastly on him, and out of the grounds of his profession
pronouncing him to be vitiously given, Socrates replies that indeed he said
somewhat, if a man lived as a beast, and followed the disposition of his inbred
corrupt nature, not rectified by education or moral verture.

CAP. 23.
Setting down at large the hindrances of the eye in the service of God.
NOW to proceed from the little service which the eye performs us in the
gaining of knoweledge to the ill offices which it supplies in spiritual
exercises, let every man in this case but examine his own conscience, either
when himself speaks to God in prayer, or when God speaks to him in preaching
(which two are as it were the ascending and descending Angels in Jacobs ladder)
and he shall surely find, that the div^l takes occasion to withdraw his mind
from the ^crious thoughts of those exercises by nothing more then by the
wandering of the eye. For the prevention of which mischief we see those that
are appointed to die in commending themselves to God before the stroke of
justice, and others, as well at thansgiving at meals, as other public prayers,
close their eyes, and cover their faces; which howbeit so^e others censure, yet
do I nothing doubt but the practice of it first grew out of a sensible feeling
of this kind of temptation. 1. Cor. 1^* (...)
Whence it is that S. Paul commands women to be covered in the church, by reason
of the Angels either least the bad Angels, by that means take occasion to
stir up ill thoughts (as some interpreters think) or lest the minister who
is elsewhere named the Angel of God* should thereby take offense (as others
are of opinion:) which custom remained among the Corinthians (unto whom S.
Paul wrote this epistle) unto Tertullians time, as himself witneseth in his
book de velandis virginibus, in which he disputs excelle^tly for this present
purpose. Such (says he) are the eyes of the virgin that desires to be seen,
as those that desire to see her, the sa^^ kind of eyes desire interchangably to
see one another, and it proceeds from the same root, the forwardnes to see and
to be seen; wherefore let the virgin fly to her head co^ering as to her helmet
or targ^t, by which she may defend her self against the assaults of te^ptatio^
and against all the darts of sca^dall, suspicion, surmise, and emulatio^. I
beseech thee, whether thou be a mother, or a sister, or a daughter, cover thy
head; if a mother, for thy sons sake; if a sister, for thy brethrens sake; if a
daughter, for thy fathers sake; for all ages are inda^gered in you: put on
therefore the armor of modesty, entrench your selus within the bulwark of
shame facenesse, build up a wall for the weakness of your sex, that neither your
own eyes may pierce through it, nor admit others; for I cannot imagine how she
should escape unpunished, who is unto others the cause of falling, for he
perishes through thy beauty, and thou art be come a sword to him. The Arabia^
women the^ shall judge you, who cover not their head alo^e, but (as Susanna
before the judges, and Rebecca before Iscac) the whole face in such sort as
they are content rather to see with one eye, then in seeing with both to have
their whole face seen. In regard whereof for ought I know, it is no
discomme^dable order which the Jews (who derive the name of a virgin from
retiring and hiding her self) observe at this day in their Synagogues, (...)
that their men have their seats in a room apart, and the women apart by
themselves, there passing only a thin partition between the^, in imitation
of which there is a Church lately built in the Duke of Wirtenberges country, at
the Dukes own charge, the fashion of which is so co^triued, that nether the
men see the women, nor the women the men, and yet both hearthe minister
sufficiently alike; and surely to speak a truth) for ought my self have seen
or heard by report of others, or read out of written relations) I think no
where in Christendom is the like freenes for the promiscuous sitting of men
and women together, as in our English churches; especially our women wearing no
manner of veil, which in other countries is useful not only in their Churches,
but in their streets too; Villamont lib. 3. cap. 1
in which kind the very Turks as a french gentleman reports (who lived long
among them) are so precise, that if a woman passing by discover any part of her
body naked, if but her hand, they esteem her little better then a curtisan;
and the same gentleman in his first book of the same work, discovering the
manners of the Venetian women notes that their virgins being once passed 14.
years of age, until the day of their marriage, never step over the threshal
of their fathers door, but only upon Easter day, to hear mass and receive
their creator (as they term it) which done the poor souls return
immediately into their former prisons, there to remain, and expect the coming
of a husband. So that it is to be feared ^east those Arabians, and Jews, and
Turks, and Papists, shall one day rise in judgment against those Christians,
who present themselves before God and his holy Angels; in the assembly of his
Saints, with painted faces and naked breasts, as if they came rather to be
seen of men, then (as David speaks) to see the beauty of God in his Temple.

CAP. 24.
That supposing the ^ight hinders not, yet is it prooved that it furthers there is
little in matter of religion, together with the answers to sundry objections
belonging to that purpose.
NEither, to speak a truth, see I what great use we have of our seeing though
rightly guided in the furtherance of the service of God or our own salvation,
but only in beholding the outward circumstances of the sacraments, the want of
which may also sufficiently be recompensed by the other senses of feeling and
smelling, but especially hearing and tasting; whence it is that men borne deaf
are excluded from this sacrament by the common consent of divines but not
blind; howbeit Danaeus in his book of the sacraments affirms that M. Beza and
himself, ^ib. 5. ^. 15
living in Orleans, admitted one Merardus borne deaf to this sacrament; being
induced thereunto by reason of certain signs which he made for the
demonstration of his faith; but how he should come to the knowledge, which
might guide him to the making of such signs, or how the minister by them might
apprehend his conceits, neither does Daneus express, nor (to speak a truch)
can I imagine. First then for faith which S. Paul defines to be the evidence
of things not se^ne, He^. 11. ^. 2. Cor. 5. 7.
and by which we walk, not by sight, we find it to be bred by hearing only
as the ordinary means, and nourished by the same alone, as by the ordinance
of God, that only caseof the sacraments excepted; and therefore it is not said
that a color or a shape took flesh, but the word that was incarnate, that was
God, 2. for hope, Paul in an other place speaks thus, Romans 8. 24.
hope that is seen is not hope: for how ca^ a man hope, for that which he
sees? but if we hope for that which we see not, with patience we abide
whiles we look not on the things which are seen, 2. Cor. 4. 18
but on the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. Lastly, ^. 18.
for charity the third theological virtue, S. Peter highly co^mends the^ to
who^ he directs his Epistle, for loving the Lord Jesus, who^ they had not seen,
Luk* 10. 24 Mat. 13. 16
and reioicing in him with joy unspeakable and glorious. To the wish then of
those Prophets and kings, or as the other Eva^gelists have it righteous me^
(making the^ reciprocal,) who desired to see the day of our Savior, and saw it
not, I answer that their desire concerned not so much the beholding of him face
to face, as a distinct and particular knowledge of the Messiah and the virtue of
his incarnation and passion: in which sense Abraham is said to have reioiced to
have seen his day, and he saw it, and was glad, and the Apostles eyes are
pronou ^ced blessed for seeing those things which they saw. ^oh. 8. 5^.
For otherwise Judas that betrayed him, P^late that condemned him, the Priests
that accused him, the faithless Jews that s^ i^ him in the face, crowned him
with thorns, buffered him with their fists, whipped him with rods, railed on
him; and nailed him to the cross; should be more happy then we, to who^ the
light of the Gospel is fully revealed; or then Moses, and Paul, of whom the
one was a faithful steward in the house of God, and the other, the doctor of
the gentiles, in nothing inferior to the chiefest of the Apostles; neither of
them, notwithstanding having ever seen our Savior in the flesh: and for the
song of Simeo^, Luke 2. 30.
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, because mine eyes have seen thy
salvation, I am surely of opinion that his peace co^sisted not so much in this,
that he had seen our Savior with his carnal eyes, and embraced him with the
arm of flesh, as that he saw him by the eye of faith, and embraced him in the
arms of spiritual affection; as it is truly said of the blessed Virgin, that
her blessedness consisted not so much in bearing our Savior in her womb, as
in her heart: and for that speech of S. Augustine (if it be his) where he is
said to have desired to have seen three things, Rome in her flower, Paul in
the pulpit, and Christ in the flesh; I may justly suppose his meaning to have
been rather in living in those times of the purity of the church for the
fuller clearing of some controversies then afoot in his time, then out of any
curiosity of seeing the person of our Savior.

CAP* 25.
That the popish religion consists more in e^e service then the reformed.
OUR adversaries indeed, place a great and maine part of their superstitious
worship in the eie-service; in the magnifike and pompous fabric, and furniture
of their Churches and attiring their Priests; in gazing upon their dumb
ceremonies, which with very multitude as leaves cover the fruits, in beholding
the daily elevatio^ of their Idol in the mass, (for the greatest part hear
nothing) and lastly in fixing their eyes upon pictures, and images; giving them
the Titles of remembrances for the learned, and books for the laity. And surely
I am persuaded that it may very clearly be showed out of the history of the
Church, that images never came to be of that use, and in that request which
now they are, before the preaching of the Gospel grew so cold; that the Idol
Priests not able to suffice their auditorie in hearing; were forced to set up,
and the people content to receive those Idols, for the satisfying of their
minds by seeing. But S. Paul was of an other iudgem^nt in this case, as we may
see in the third chapter of his Epistle to the Galathians, where he affirms
that Christ was described (the original word is painted forth) before their
eyes, VI. (...).
and among them crucified, which was not (as some Priests have sottishly urged
in mine hearing) any corporal crucifix or picture upon a wooden table or
glass-window with material colors, but a lively demonstration in the
evidence of the spirit; as may be gathered by the words themselves, besides the
drift of the place: and besides all this they have framed to themselves,
instead of an invisible head in heaven, a visible head here on earth, as if the
not seeing of a thing took away the not being or working of it; and those
glorious titles which are given either to the invisible triumphant Church
above, or the militant truly consisting of the elect here below, they for the
most part attribute to a visible congregation of the Pope, and his Cardinals in
their consistory, or to the assembly of an oecum^nicall Council.

CAP. 26.
That the sight of the creature helps us little in the knowledge of God.
LAstly for the sight of the creatures and frame of the visible world, as S.
Paul shows in the first to the Romans, it shall rather serve for the
inexcusablenesse and condemnation of those that bel^eue not, the^ for the
furtherance of the salvation of them that believe: neither, (to speak a
truth) is the sight of the creature so much availeable to the knowledge of the
creator, as the understanding of its depending from him, and working by him,
which notwithstanding is rather gotten by hearing then by seeing: and to grant
all that may be reasonably required in this case yet still on the other side
must it necessaryly be yielded unto, that in all the articles of Christian
religion (howbeit some of the^ may be prooved by conclusions drawn from the
sight) the words of our Savior to Thomas ought to prevail with all true hearted
christians, blessed are they that have not seen, and have believed, it being
then most acceptable to God, to yield our consent in believing, when the
experience of sense, and the reach of reason most fail us, and when they
serve us best not to assent so much for their sakes, of which we have use only
as men, as for our faiths sake alone which properly belongs to us as
christians. There are (^aith S. Augustine) in the beginning of his book of the
faith of invisible things, wh^ think Christian religion rather to be scorxed,
the^ to be held, because in it nothing is demonstrated which may be seen, but
the faith of things which are not seen is commanded: but for us, we know that
we ought to believe many temporal things, which we see not, that hereafter we
may be counted worthy to be admitted to the sight of eternal things which we
now believe: whence it is that men utterly void of the sense of seeing, bring
with them minds for the most part better prepared to religious exercises, then
the common sort, remember more, and practice it better.

CAP. 27.
That the eye of the sense failing, that of the understanding and spirit wax
more clear.
SO ordained it is, in a manner by God, and nature; that as when one eye is
deprived of sight, the other sees better then it did before; or as John Baptist
decreasing Christ increased; and as the house of David waxed stronger and
stronger, the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker; so when the eye of the
outward sense, grows dull, and dim, the intellectual eye of reason, and the
spiritual eye of faith, grow more fresh, and clear; between which three I
find the like proportion, as between the life of man in his mothers wo^b, the
world, and the kingdom of heaven. Thus we see Paul's blindness in the eyes of
his sense, and the opening of the eyes of his understanding, to have happened
in a manner at the same instant: and in the Ecclesiastical story, R^ff. lib. 1.
Cap. 17.
Paphnutius co^forts Maximus his friend with this speech, that the mortal light
of their bodyly eye beein extinguished, they had gaine^ a fuller^ fruition of
heavenly and immortal brightness. And in the gospel we read not of any on
whom our Savior wrought so many miracles, as upon the blind, in restoring
their sight, which must needs argue in the^ an extraordinary strength of
faith, the virtue and effect of his vvorking being ever proportioned to the
belief of those on whom he wrought. To which we may from thence be the more
casilie induced to grant assent, for that among all those blind men which the
scripture names and commends to our consideration we find none of them branded
with any notorious vice: but on the contrary, many of them of excellent
virtue, renowned in their ages, and commended to posterity: as Eli and Sampson
both types of Christ; Abiiah though blind yet counted worthy to be one of Gods
seers; Isaac and Jacob both chief patri arches and pillars of Gods chosen
people; of whom the one though he knew not his sons when he blessed them,
yet in the manner of blessing he deserved to know them; by his blindness
being occasioned, the effecting of Gods purpose, in the preferring of Jacob,
before Esau; and the other, Genesis 27.
having laid his hands athwart, Genesis 48.
upon his two Nephews Manasses and Ephraim would not remove them according to
the advice and desire of their Father Joseph; but fixed the^ according to the
guidaunce of that light which directed him from within, and when he could
hardly see with the eyes of his body his sons which stood before him, yet
with the eyes of his mind did he foresee and foretell what should become of
each of them and their issue for many generations ensuing.

To these may be added out of the new Testament the blind Bartim^^us, Mat. 10.
46
who left his cloak behind him on the earth, and with it his earthly
affections, to follow our Savior: and out of the Apocrypha Tobias, of whom S.
Augustine speaks on this wise, Oath light which T^bias saw, when his caruall
eyes being shut, he set his son, Conf. 10. 34.
notwithstanding into the right way of life, and trod out a direct path before
him (as a guide) with the never-erring foot of charity.

CAP. 28.
Treating of the drvers privileges of blind men.
Our Savior himself gives testimony of him that was borne blind, that neither
his, nor his parents sin was the cause of it, but that the works of God might
be made manifest, Job. 9. 30
which testimony I find not given to any other infirmity of the sense or
disease of the body. But yet more observable seems the last verse of the same
chapter, where our Savior not only excuses blindness, as not proceeding from
sin, but makes it in a manner the cause of not sinning ( if you had been
blind (says he) you had not sinned) both which passages I confess to be
subject to interpretation, and for their full clearing to need many
distinctions; yet for my purpose is the letter alone sufficient, in which no
doubt but under the very rind of it (as in the whole scripture beside) the
speaker being the engraven form of the godhead, and the eternal wisdom of his
father, intended some special thing, besides the general drift, and scope of
the place. His meaning in these words may somewhat the better appear, if we
compare them with them in the gospel, where speaking by way of parable of the
great supper provided in the kingdom of heaven, Luke 14. 21
when the bidden guests refused to come, he expressly by name commanded the
blind to be brought in, and placed at the table; and in a verse or two
immediately going before, to make known his care and respect even toward
those who are indeed bodily blind, he exhorts his disciples and followers,
that when they make a feast, one of their chief cares should be to invite the
blind, as their principal guests; besides reason and law exempteth them from
personal serving in the wars. And in the Levitical law of the Jews we find an
heavy curse, to be laid on such as should lay a stu^bling block before the
feet of the blind, Lev. 19. 14
or turn him out of his right way: and the ancient Romans imposed on some of
their chief families the surnames of blind and lame to this end (says
Plutarch) that the people should not skorne at those imperfections, In vita
Coriol.
and by that means condemn or neglect those excellent gifts of the mind
which many times reside in such bodies. Hence Job when he would make his
innocency clear to the world, knew not how to expres it more effectually, or
in better terms; the^ by professing himself to have been an eye to the
blind. And Jews the 8. of that name who was the only Saint, or at least one of
the two in the whole three races of the fren^h kings; how beit he won many
glorious conquests against the infidels, and erected many goodly buildings for
religious persons, yet was he thought worthy that honor for nothing more,
then for instituting the college of the 300. blind men, upon occasion of so
many of his soldiers, who were taken in his wa^s against the Moors, and sent
home with their eyes put out: the college is yet standing in Paris, and at
this day devote to the same use* how beit not replenished indeed, as it has
been.

CAP. 29.
That blind men need not complain of the want of pleasures, especially the
sense of their grief being by blindness much lessened; which is proved by the
strong impression of those objects which are presented by the eye.
NOW besides this respect which God and man seem to bear toward his
infirmity, me thinks it need not much complain of the want of delight^s
even in this world. Besides those proper to the night, the mantel of defects and
imperfections, and by consequent the mother of union and love; the repose and
closing up of the days labors, as the morning is again, a fresh entrance and
overturne to therenewing of travail: our daiely cares in this case being
likened to the marygold or dazy which opens with the rising of the sun, and
shuts with the setting. And where as the Poet witneseth of the Carthaginian
Queen that her care had always recourse toward the evening; I suppose it not
so much to be meant of a sober and settled, as of a distracted, and distempered
mind; such as he supposes hers to have been; if then the night bring not
tediousness with it, why should a day which is like a night be thought to
bring it? Though I deny not but to the pleasures of the night may also be
added those which we use as commonly in the day; in hearing of books read, in
playing upon musical instruments, in discoursing with friends, in exercising
many pastimes, which require not the use of seeing. Nay in those very sports
which seem necessarily to require it, as bouling, shooting, coiting,
shoufgrating, and the like; how many have we seen beyond expectation excellent?
in which kind I hard reported by those, to who^ I give credit; that one Mou^s.
Guimins a gentleman of good note in the province of Britanny, when any of his
acquaintance or other strangers come to visit him, he takes a singular delight
in describing to them his mappes, and pictures, as they hang in order in his
galler^e, and in conmmending unto them such or such a piece or proportion, for
rare workmanship: and surely in my understanding those delights which blind
men conceive to themselves must needs affect them much, as being freed from
that loathsomenesse, shame, te^rours, grief, antipathies, and fearful d^eames
which by the glassy gate are often convaid in and presented to the mind; whose
objects as they are in number more, and in action quicker, so are they for
certainty more undoubted; and for impression decper the^ those of any other
sense this faculty needing less helps in working and apprehending her objects
in a farther distance and presenting them to the common sense, and from thence
to the imagination with greater life and assurance; insomuch that the best
Poets and Orators lead by art, and common people by nature, when they would
make known a deep passion they have conceived, are wont to express it by
these or the like terms, I my self was an eye witness, or I saw it with
these eiet which Mark Antony well under standing in his funeral oration upon
the death of Iuliu^, Casar that he might (thoroughly ince^se and inflame the
people against the murderers; opned the hearse where the corpse lay and showed
them the fresh bleeding wounds which Casar had received in the Senate, as the
Lacedemonian women were wont often to present to their sons the bloody shirts
of their Fathe^s slain in the wars, thereby to make the^ more sensible of the
injury and mindful of revenge. Since then the operation of the sight upon
the imagination be thus forcible, it is no marvel that Pigmolius a grave Roman
prelat living not long after the ^primitiue church, being fallen blind; was
wo^t solemly to thank God, that by that means he was freed from seeing the
enemies of his church, and especially Julian the Apostate. And Petrarch a man
renowned a like for variety of reading, Dial. 9^.
dexterity of wit, and soundnes of judgment in his dialogue of blindness,
co^forts the affected and afflicted in that kind with this meditation; indeed
(quoth he) thou can not enjoy the pleasure of seeing the corny valleys, the
airy mou^tains, the shadowy groves, the ^lowry banks, the clear sou^tains, the
cristall rivers, the green meddows. and (which is held most delightful to
look upon) the face of man; but consider withal that thou can not see filthy
dunghils heaps of dirt, and excrements, ugly mishape^ mo^sters, raw, and rotten
carions, and the like: the very sigbt of which is many times as offe^siue to
the stomach, as loath some to the eye. And if there were no^e other commodity
in blindness, yet for this alone, were it eve^ to be wished for; that since
there is no hope of flying from the beholding of base and shameful spectacles
which at every turning present themselves (the reign of vice, and banishment
of virtue, being every where alike) the loss of the sight, may serve for a
kind of flight and avoidance of the^: and by consequent to a mind virtuously
disposed, of comfort and contentment; 2. King. 12 v. 20*
and therefore God when he would pronounce a blessing upon Josiah by the mouth
of Huldath the prophetess delivered it in these terms behold therefore I will
gather thee to thy fathers and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and thy
eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place: now as these
kind of objects are offensive to the virtuous, so on the other side good
divines are of opinion that, in the consummatio^ of the world, it shall be one
of the greatest terrors to the unconverted Gentiles, Mal. 24. 30 Revil, 1. 5.
to behold our Savior coming in the clouds with power and great glory, and to
the unbelieving Jews to see the son of man, and to look upon him who^ they
have pierced through, and to both to see Abraham I saac and Jacob, Luke 13.
and all the Prophets in the kingdom of heaven and themselves shut out. And
some think that Dives his seeing of Lazarus in Abraha^s bo^ome was no less
torment, Luke 16. 23
then his sensible feeling of hell fire and that that Zedechias seeing his sons
to be slain grieved him more then the putting out his own eyes, ^. Kin. 25. 7.
etc that the Samaritane Capta^ne was more punished in beholding the abundance
of Corn after the great dearth then in being pressed to death before he could
^ast of it. Thou shall see it with ^hine eyes but shall not eat thereof. Rev.
7. 19. ^. 7.
And lastly that the mother of the Machabees was more worthy of prais^ for
looking on the martyrdom of her seven sons with a constant and patient eye,
then for suffering it in her own body once of this am I sure that it, had
been far better for Attili^^ Regulus if he had bin born^ blind and never
seen the sun then to have endured that punishme ^t by seeing it which the
Carthaginians laid on him by cutting of his eie-lids and binding to a post with
his face opposite to the sun beams, annd I doubt not but the same might as
justly be affirmed of Ham, Genesis 9. v. 23. 19. 26.
Noaths son and Lots wife, of which the one had his fathers curse for looking
forward when he should have gone backward with his brethren, and the other Gods
curse for looking backewarde when she should have gone forward with her
husband and if I might presume so far upon the readers patience, I would here
set down the story of ^ dissembling knave discovered by Duke Humphry for whom
no doubt it had been better to have bin indeed blind then to have pretended
the recovery of his sight by such a no torious cousenage; the story is
recorded word forword, by Fox as follows. In the young days of Henry the 6.
being yet under the governance of Duke Humphry his Protector, there came to S.
Albones a certain Beggar with his Wife, Act and Mo^ p. ^705 Col. 1. Edit. 1583.
and there was wall king about the Town, begging 5. or 6. days before the Kings
coming thither, saying that he was borne blind and never saw in his life, and
was warned in his dream, that he should come out of Barwike, where he said
he had ever dwelled to seek S. Albon, and that he had been at his Shrine, and
had not been helped, and therefore he would go and seek him at some other
place: for he had heard some say, since he came, that S. Albones Body should
be at Cole^, and indeed such a contention has there been. But of truth as I
am surely in formed, he lies at S. Albenes, saving some Reliks of him, which
they there show shreyned. But to tell you forth, when the King was commen, and
the town full, suddenly this blind man at S. Albones shryne had his sight
again and a Miracle solemnly rong, and Te Deum song, so that nothing was talked
of in all the town, but the miracle. So hapened it then, that Duke Humfry of
Gloucester, a man no less wise, then also well learned, having great joy to see
such a Miracle, called the poor man unto him; and first showing himself
joyous of Gods glory, so showed in the getting of his sight, and exhorting him
to meek^esse; and to no ascribing of any part of the worship to himself, nor
to be proud of the peoples praise, which would call him a good and go^ly man
thereby, at last he looked well upon his eyne, and asked whether he could see
nothing at all, in all his life before. And when as well his Wife as himself
affirmed fastly no, the^ he looked advisedly upon his eyne again and said: I
believe you very well, for me thinks ye cannot see well yet. Yes sir, quoth
he, I thank God and his holy Martyr, I can see now as well as any man. Yes
can? (quoth the Duke) what color is my Gown? Then anon the Beggar told him.
What color (quoth he) is this man's Gown? He told him also, and so forth
without any sticking, he told him the names of all the colors that could be
showed him. And when the Duke saw that, he bad him* walk M, Fox indeed says
Traitor, but the word in Sr T. Moore out of who^ he has the story is Fay
tour. S. Th Moore dialogue of the venerat and worsh: of images. l. ^. c. 14 It
is in his works in English. p. ^34. Edit. ^557.
Traitor, and made him to be set openly in the stocks: for though he could
have seen suddenly by miracle the the difference between diverse colors, yet
could he no^ by the sight so suddenly tell the names of all these colors,
except he had known them before no more then the Names of all the men that he
should suddenly see.

CAP. 30.
That blind men need not complain of disability in serving the common wealth,
which is proved by some reasons, but especially by examples.
OThers* there are who having lost the use of their eyes, complain not so much
of the loss of pleasures with it; as of their indisposition, by that means to
steed their friends, or to serve the common wealth as they desire. To whom I
reply that what is necessary, is also of necessity pardonable, and when we
cannot do as we would, God and good men accept the will as the deed; and what
is wanting in actual performance, may be supplied with tears, and prayers for
the public good, 2. to some end no doubt it is, that both the Poets, painters,
and comedia ^s of al ages, have consented to represe^t the 4 great monarchs of
humane affairs, the God of riches, the God of love, justice, and fortune all
blindfold. 3. I find partly by credible report and partly by written history,
that many famous men have lived (besides such as are before upon occasion
named) of all estates, and of all ages, who having lost the light of their
eyes, have notwithstanding remained as lamps and torches in the world, to some
by their good example, and to others by their counsel and good advise. For
Emperors I sacius, and Constantine the 6. of that name, surnamed the
Imagebreaker, both Emperors of the East. For kings, Alphonsus the 4 king of
Spain, and John king of Bohemia, Petrarch. D^ al. 96.
who siding himself with the French in a set battle against the English, and
understanding that our men were in great hope to have woone the glory of the
day, commaundes himself to be led into that part of the fight, where the
king of England was, whither being brought, spu^ring his horse into the
thickest ranckes of the enemies, by his example, drew his followers after him,
and so purchased the victory to the French, though by his own death. For a
Prophet, Tiresia^, the light of whose eyes being taken away, it was replanted
with usury in his breast; wher^ore the Poet never brings him in complaining of
his misfortune in the loss of his sight, but Polyphemus that unreasonable
monster he describes, making a dialogue with a Ram, and commending his estate,
in that he could go and come whether and when he listed, Tus^ 5.
but in that (says Tully) he was surely little wiser then the ram, to which
he spoke. For an Archbishop, Robert Wau^op* a Scot by birth, Carrion. a^^. 1551.
who notwithstanding he were borne blind, profited so well in the study of the
Divinity; that he deserved and obtained the degree of a Doctor in that
faculty; in the University of Paru; and not long after going to Rome, was by
P^ule the 3. consecrated Priest, and within a while Archbishop of Armach in
Ireland, and at length Legatus a latere, by Julius the 3. his monument is to
be seen ^in* the monastery of the minorits at Paris. For a Bishop Richard
Fox fou^der of Corpus Christ^ College here in Oxford; whose foundation has
yielded oil to mani^ rare lights for learning and religion, among which were,
Cardinals, Poole, Ludovicus Vives, I^^ll, Hooker, Wotten, and that rare
President of industry and pieti^ John Raynolds; Behind the rest in deed in
time, but inferior to none of them in variety of reading or strictness of
life. For professed divines venerable Bede, and Jerome Zanchy an Italian, the
principal reformed schooleman; who during his blindness wrote that excellent
tract of the spiritual marriage of Christ and his Church; And in one of his
sights Paphautius; which was put out by the Arrians for with standing their
heresy, whom for that very cause (as Ru^^in Ru^^. 1. 4.
witnesses in his ecclesiastical story) Constantine had in that reverence,
and estimation, that he would often send for him to his court lovingly
embracing him and greedyly kissing the eye, which had lost his own light, for
maintaining that of the catholic doctrine* For a lawgiver Lycurgus: Aeneas
Sylvi
for renowned generals Timoleon and Ziska that worthy Bohemian, who after that
he had fought, and won many pitched fields against the enemies of Gods Church,
lying on his death bed, willed that after his death, of his skin should be made
a drum, which his enemies hearing, they might as well fear him after his death,
as they did fly from him alive. Not inferior to Ziska^s courage was
Belisarius his patience, general of Iustinia^s army, who having brought the
Vandal^s on their knees, triumphed over the Persians, swept the Goths out of
Italy, growing by that means into reputation with all men, and by conseque^t in
to suspicion and ielousi^ with the Emperor, was first dismissed from his
offices, and then his eyes put out; insomuch that afterward living in a little
base cottage, near a beaten high way, he was wont to beg in this form,
Passenger give Belisarius an half penny whom virtue raised and envy blinded.
To these may be added the example of Tyrrhenus who having lost his eyes in a
fight with Lygdamus commanded his body to be set right against the face of the
enemy as great pe^c^s are wont to be mounted that so he might discharge his
darts upon the^ and at leastwise in receaving his deadly wou^d supply the room
or spare the turn of a valiant and seeing soldier* Lastly among the ancient
Captains (as Plutarch has worthily observed) four of the greatest warriers,
and that have done the noblest exploits, by wit had but four ^ies, Philip
Ha^^ibal Antigonus and Sart^riu^. For a statsma^, Appi. Cla^d. surnamed the
blind whose counsel against Pirr^^^ had it not prevailed, the eye of the
common wealth had been extinct. For a Lawyer, Caius Drusius whose house was
freque^ted at the oracle of the city, and by who^ those that guided him to the
pleading place, were themselves guided to the winning of their pleadings. For
Poets Thamyra, (...).
Stesicherus, and Homer who was not only blind, but took his name of
blindness, and yet gave light to all that writ since in that kind, having in
such sort described every creek and corner of Greece, the ra^ging of battles,
the manner of fights, the situation of towns, the passions of men, that though
himself saw nothing, yet has he caused us to see all these as in a table or
glass. For a thetorician, Passeratiu^, who not long since in a public lecture
in Paris made a learned and eloquent oration in the commendation of blindness,
Orat^vl^.
which is printed and extant in his book of orations. For Philosophers, Strab^
lib* 14.
Zenarchus sometime in ward with Augustus and Asclepiades who made none other
account of his blindness, but that being wont to walk alone he had now a boy
ever attending on him, and as the Persian kings used other men's ^ares, so did
he ^ther men's eyes; to these may be added Nich^laus and Lippus both
Florentines, and well known (as it seems) to Iovianus Pontanu^, Lib. 2. c. 7.
who reports of them that the one every holyday was wont to recite out of the
pulpit some history of the bible, or the annals of their country in Italia^
verse, with an extraordinary co^curse and applause of all the learned, who then
lived at Florence; and the other being but young daily frequented the schools
of the Rhetoritians and Philosophers; marveilous was he in the study of
antiquity and perfection of the Latin tongue, and for behavior in accosting
his friends exceeding pleasing; yet to his blindness was also added poverty and
to both youth, of all ages most impatient of misery, both which notwithstanding
he bore with such indifference of mind as he seemed to be sensible of
neither. Cael. lib. 2.
For Historiographers, Cap. 13.
Aufidius Praetorius and As^onius Paedianus. Tus^. 5.
For a Mathematitian, Di^dorus the Stoike, who lived in Tullies own house, and
which seemed strange, would in that case exactly prescribe to his auditors from
whence, how far, and in what manner their geometrical lines were to be drawn.
And lastly for the work of the ministry, my self have seen more then once in
this University a blind man in our solemn meetings, making a godly and
profitable sermon to the body of the University assembled: and sure I am
persuaded he spoke by so much the more from the conscience, and by consequent
to the conscience, by how much the less he trusted his papers or his mind was
distracted by the sight of his auditors: tending to which purpose it is a merry
jest howbeit seriously related by him who has written Bedaes life, that his
guide persuading him one day as he passed by an heap of stones, that the
people (according to their wo^ted manner) were there assembled to hear him
preach; the good old man moved at his speech, was content to give them a
sermon, but there being no body present to say, amen, at his conclusion, the
very stones cried out amen venerable Priest, by which means being then
baptized by the name of venerable, he has retained it ever since. Of better
use and more certainety is that history which S. Jerome in his Epistle to
Castrutius (written upon like occasion as this present discourse) ^ecordeth to
have fallen out during his infancy, Epist. 33:
which he reports in this manner; S. Anthony being sent for by S. Athanasius to
come to Alexandria for the refuting and beating down of the Arrian heresy the^
a foot, Didimus an excellent divine but blind in both his eyes, came thither to
visit him; the sharpness of whose wit S. Antony admiring demands of him
whether he conceived any grief or no for the want of his sight; which Didimus
seeming by his silence and modesty to confess, the other replies that he
could not but much marvel how so wise a man as himself could be moved with
the loss of those eyes, which were common to him with mice and flies and
gnats, and not rather rejoice in the fruitio^ of those which were proper to
Saints and Angels.

CAP. 31.
Containing a conclusion of the whole discourse by way of private meditation or
soliloquie.
THese and the like considerations may in some good measure, serve to qualify
the grief conceived for the loss of that sense, which by just proof we find
in use to be more dangerous then necessary; and withal rouse up our thoughts to
these, or the like heavenly meditatio^s. I have lost I confess the fruition of
the fight of the heavens; but by that loss I know the worth of that fruition
the better; and now mine eyes is ever fixed upon the soon of righteousness,
the fra^mer and governor of the heavens. Mine eyes were the guides of my body:
but now mine advantage is that whereas mine eyes at their best could not
prevent many casual mischiefs, now all the eyes of my friends as a
continual sentinel watch more tenderly over me, the angels pitch their tents
about me, and he that neither slumbreth nor sleeps is my keeper. True it is
that I cannot read good books as I was wont, but my children can supply that
with less pain to me, and more profit to them; well then, I will not be
c^st down for the loss of my sight which is subject to so many diseases from
within, and casualties from without, but I will rather rejoice for the use of
my hearing the sense of wisdom and religion, by which God speaks to me out of
his word, and of my tongue by which I speak^ to him again in prayer. Good God
how many in the world are blind in faith and religion? As Atheists, and
Pagans, and Turks, and Jews, and Heretics, and Idiots; how many in
judgment and reason? As children and fools* and mad men, and dotards, and
drunkards; what infinite numbers in their affections, with anger, with fear,
with love, with malice, with envy, with pride, who like the Idols of the
heathen have eyes and see not? All which kinds of blindness, as they are in
extent more universal, so are they in their nature more dangerous then that of
the body, unto which also, all flesh in time must subject it self, when the
keepers of the house shall tremble, and they wax dark that look out by the
windows. Why should I then lament as if I were alone or with a few only
unfortunate? We see when the great eyes of the world, the sun and the moon
are eclipsed and darkened, they still shine notwithstanding upward, and after a
while recover again their light downward. Why should I the^ murmr if the
eyes of this little world be ecclipsed, since I know that inwardly toward
mine own soul and vpwardly toward God, the light of my mind is enlarged? And
which is more, am sure that my Redeemer lives and he shall stand the last on
the earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see
God in my flesh, which I my self shall see and mine eyes shall behold him and
none other for me. Thou o Lord wilt lighten my candle the Lord my God will
lighten my darkness, thy word o Lord is a la^terne unto my feet, and a light
unto my paths, teach thy servant the way o Lord, and lead me in a right path,
for with thee is the well of life and in thy light shall we see light, even that
light which shined in the darkness, and the darkness co^prehe^ded it not, it
being the brightness of the everlasting light, the undefiled mirror of the
majesty of God, and the image of his goodness, more beautiful the^ the sun above
the order of the stars and the light of the heaven is not to be compared unto
it for night comes upon that, but wickedness cannot overcome this. Thou which
opneds the eyes of Ionatha^ after the eating of the honey co^be, and of Agar
that she saw a well of water springing up for the refreshing of her self and
her young babe; and of Elishaes servant that he saw in the mountain horses and
charets and fi^e round about. Sweet Jesus thou which openedst the eyes of thine
Apostles when after thy resurrection they took thee for a spirit, of the two
disciples in the way to Emmaus when they knew thee not but in the breaking of
bread* of Mary Magdale^ when in seeing thee her Lord and Savior she supposed
she had seen the garden (which showed the^ all the dullness of their carnal
eyes, in discerning spiritual things.) Open thou the ^ies of mine understanding
that I may see the wonders of thy law, which is my delight, the honey and honey
comb are not so sweet. I will lift up mine eyes the^ unto the mountains from
whence mine help shall come, the Lord shall preserve me from al evil he
shall keep my soul, he shall preserve my going out and my coming in, he will
guide me by his counsel, and after receive me to glory to the mount Sion, the
city of God, the celestial Jerusalem, to the company of innumerable Angels,
and to the congregation of the first borne, whose names are written in heaven,
and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and to
Jesus the mediator of the new testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that
speaks better things then that of Abel and to unspeakable ioies, which
neither eye has seen, nor ear has hard nor have at any time entered into the
heart of man: now we see through a glass darkely, but then shall we see face
to face even as we are seen. Then shall God wipe away all tears from our
eyes, and there shall be no more death nether sorrow, neither crying, neither
shall there be any need of the sun or moon to shine in that City, for the
glory of God does light it, and the lamb is the light of it. Now unto the
Father of lights and yet invisible God who dwells in light, that no man can
attain unto, whom never man saw, neither can see one in e^^ence and three in
persons, be all honor and power for ever and ever. Amen.

Rode caper vites, tamen bic cu^ stabis ad ar^^ In tua quod sundiCornua,
possit, erit.

FINIS.
BEing not willing to burden the text with these ensuing collections, and the
margin not able to receive the^, I thought good in this third editio^ as well for
the contentment of the Printer, as the learned reader to reserve them to this
place.

CAP. I.
That the eye is the instrument of wantonness.
Mars videt hanc visamque cupit polilnrque cupi^a.
Ov^ Inscius Act^eou vidit si^e vest Dianam
Praeda ^uit canibus n^c minus ille suis.
Ovid. I. Caninis affectibu^
Phoenissa: ardescitque tuendo
Virg. Foemina. Vri^que videndo
Idem Gig^itur exvis^, non ergo sirmice caecus
Nascitur, ex o^ulo cum generetur, amor.
Ovenur. Nasonis Quamvis teneram perlegeris artem,
Nescis inexpertu, dicere quid sit amor.
Natura non a^te docetur, scilicet in cor
Ex ocul^s non ex auribusintrat amor.
Idem. Cynthia prima sais miserum me caepit ocellis
C^ntractum nullis ante libidmibus.
Prop. Oculi sunt in amore ^^ces.
Idem^ I have seen a dialogue between the hear and the eye touching this
point, which in the end reason decides thus,

Ratio litem compu^at desinitivo cale^lo,
Vtrumque reum reputat, sed non pari pericul^.
Cordicausam imputans, occasionem oculo.
Of Jealousy which passion the Poets have there fore expressed by the hundred
^ies of Argus.

Constiterat qu^cunque loco spectabat ad I^,
Anteocul^s Io quamvis aversus ^abebat.
Ovid. Of Envy.
Videt ingratos inta^cscitque videndo*
Successus hominum.
Idem. Livor tabisicum malis ven^num,
Intactis vorat ossibus medullas,
Su^at srigidus intuens quod odit.
Vir* The wicked shall see it and be angry, he shall gnash with his teeth and
con^unie away. Psalm. 112. 10. CAP. 2.
How Idolatry has a kind of necessary dependence upon the eye.
Ad de^u^ctorum vultus per imagine^ detine^d^s expres^a primo simulachra. Cyp
de van Idol. Again, the ambition of the crafts^man thrust forward the ignorant
to increase the superstition* for he peradventure willing to please a Noble
man, labored with all his cunning to make the Image of the best fashion, and
so through the beauty of the work, the multitude being allured, they took
him now for a God, which a little before was but honored as a man. Wisd. 14*
18. Ad simulachra mu^a abripiebamini. 1. Cor. 12. 2. (...) si^^appellatur
quicquid est quo nob^^ repraese^tatur forma alicuius rei vel fictae vel etiam
verae: apud ecclesiasticos autem scriptores (...) peculiari significatione
vocantur simulachra numen aliquod representa^tia quod honor and cultu
affic^atur. Step^.

Certum est omnes Idololatras solitos semper fuisse, ^eque Deum vel verum, vel
falsum, vel v^lam creaturam externa adoratione colere ni^i sub and in aliqua
^igura illum repraesentante. Zanch de red. lib. 2. cap. 17. Of worshipping the
sun and the stars.
Illi ad surgentem conversilumina solemn
Dant fruges manibus salsas.
Virg. They thought the lights of heaven to be the governors of the world, but
though they had such pleasure in their beuty, that they thought them Gods, yet
should they have known how much more excellent he is that made them, for the
first author of beauty has created these things. Wisd. 13. 3. CAP. 3.
How pride is nourished by the eye.
Spectat inexplet^ mendacem lumine formam
Perqque oculos perit ille suos.
Ovid. of Pigm* CAP. 4.
That often seeing is the means to draw both things and persons into contempt
Continuus aspectus minds verendos ipsa sati* etate facit. Live. lib. 35.
Maiestati mayor ^ longinquo reverentia. Tac. 1. Annal. Hence do the Gramarians
derive (...) which signifies venerable from (...) which is invisible

CAP. 5.
How curiosity is bred and maintained by the eye.
Cum tua p^rvi leas oculis male lippus iniunctis
Cur in amicorum vitiis tam cernis acutum,
Quam aut Aquila, aut serpens Epidaurius?
Hor. Pallas Erichthonium prolem sine matre creatam
Clauserat Actaeo texta de vimine cis^a
Virgimbusque tribus gemino de ce^rope natis
Servandam dederat sic inconfessae quid esset
El legem dederat sua ne secreta viderent.
Abdita ^ronde levi densa speculabar abvlmo
Quid facerent, commissa duae sine ^raude tuentur
Pondrosos alque Hearse timidas vocat vna sorores
Aglauros nodosque manu diducit and intus
In^an: emque vident apporrectumque Draconem.
Ovid. CAP. 6.
Of bewitching by the eye.
Lupi Maerin videre priores.
Ovid. Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi falcinat agnos.
Virg. Non illic obliquo oculo mea commoda quisquam
Li^at.
Hor. Vuaque conspecta livorem ducit abv^a.
Iuven. (...)
Theoc. Dum spectant oculos laesilaeduntur and ipsi,
Multaque corporibus transitione nocent.
Ovid Quandoquidem memini Tusci altain rupe viterbi
Ipse se^em vidisse serum, cui dira vigebant
O^a* graveque oculi s^ffecti sanguine circum
Ille truci (scelus) obtutu genus omne necabat.
Reptantum tenues animas parvasque volantes.
Quinetiam si quando hortos ingressus ibi omnes
Cernere erat subito a^^latu languescere flores.
Vida. Quondam puleher ^rat crinibus Entelidas.
Sed sese ipse videns placidi^ in sluminis vndis
Livore infamis perdidit invidiae,
Fascinus attraxit morbum fermamque peremit.
Plut sympos quaest. 7. Physicians affirm a get and coral to preserve against
this kind of witchcraft which gave occasion as it is thought of hanging it about
childrens necks.

Nimirum quia sunt G^llorum in corpore quaedam
Semina quae cum si^t oculis immissa ^conum.
Pupillas interficiunt, acremque dolorem
Praebent vt contra nequeant durare seroces.
Lu^re^. Flatu perimit lethalis ^celli.
Bart. de Basilis. Unto thine Almighty hand that made the world of naught, it
was not impossible to send among them a multitude of beastsque or fierce Lions,
which should breath out blasts of fire and cast out smoke, as a tempest or
shoot horrible sparks, like lightning, out of their eyes, which might not
only destroy them with the hurting, but also kill them with their horrible
sight. Wild, 11. 14. CAP. 7.
Of the dangerous effect of beholding vain pictures.
Quae manus obs^aenas depinxit prima tabellas
Et posuit casla turpia visa d^mo
Illa pu^llarum ingenuos corrupit ocellos
Nequi^iaeque suae noluit esse rudes.
Non istis ^lim variabant tecta figuris
Cum paries nullo crimine pictus crat.
CAP. 8.
How the eye was the chief occasion of original sinue.
Nitidique cupidine pomi
Declinat cursus.
Ovid. Met. Fueru^t haeretici qui humanum genus serpenti plurimu^ debere
affirmarunt, quod eius suasu aperti suerint primorum parentum oculi, sed isti
improbe audent damnare deum qui serpe^ti maledixit. Pet. Mart. Com. in Genesis Of
tears the greatest token of sorrow.
Vana videndo vagus quicquid commisit ocellus
Abluit erratis illachrymanda suis.
Oren. Himaritales statim
Fodiantur oculi, debitas poe^as tuli,
Inventa thalamis digna nox iadem meis.
Sen. in oed CAP. 9.
Treating of the false report of the eyes in natural things.
In quo diversiniteant cum mill colores
Transitusipse tamen specta^tia lumina ^allit.
Virg. Quadratasque proculturres cum cerminus vrbis
Proptere^ sit vti videantur saeperotundae
Angulus obtu^us quia long cernitur omnis.
Lucret. Terraeque vrbesque recedunt.
Virg. Phaebe bis oct ^gies terra pulcherrime mayor
Innumerabiliter cum videare minor:
Qui mi^i tantillus vermi sol tante videris
Tantulus heu videor quantulus esse tibi.
Oven. CAP. 11.
Of the delusion of the sight by the immediate morking of the devil.
He causes that we see to seem invisible,
And make of things not scene a shape to rise.
Ariost. Modo te i^venem, modo tevidere Leonem,
N^nc violentus aper, nunc quam vid^sse timerent
Anguis eras, modo telaci^bant cornua taurum,
Sepe lapis, peteras arbor q^oque saepe videri,
Interdum saciem liquidarum imitatus aquarum
Flumen eras, interdum vndis contrarius ignis.
Ovid. Hu^ referri potest illud Plautinum. In faciem versus Amphitruonis Jupiter
Dum bellum gerrer^t cum Thelebois hostibus
The renewing of the sight and travail both together.
I am C^dmaeis incly^a baccis
Aspersa die dumeta rubent,
Labor exoritur durus and omnes
Agitat curas apcri^que domos
Pastor gelida cae^a ^ruina
Grege dimisso pabula carpit.
Sen. Of the deep impression which is wrought upon the mind by the objects
presented by the eye.
Vidi puduitque videre.
Ovid. Qu. eque ipse miserr^ma vidi.
Virg. Vidi Hecubam centumque nurus and
Quam soe'ix esses situ qu^que luminis huius
Orbus ait ^ieres nec Bacchica sacra videres.
Ovidius. Vidi inquam vidi and illum hausi dolorem velacerbissimum in vi^a, cum
Quintus Metellus abstraheretur e sinu gremioque patriae. Tul in orat coeli.

Quocunque in loco quisquis est idem est ei sen^ sus and eadem acerbitas ex
interitu ^eru^ and publicarum and suarum tamen oculi augent ^olore^ qui ea quae
cae teri audiunt intueri coguntut nec avertere a miserijs cogitationem
sinunt^idem ad Torqu. famil. 6.

Oculos, germane, nocentes
Spectato genitore fero.
Luc. Ge^^ata per vrbem
O^a ducit, quae trans fixo sublimia palo
vidimus.
Idem CAP. 31.
Of the blindness of the understanding by ignorance.
O coecas hominum m^ntes, o pectora caeca
Qualibus in tenebris vitae quantisque peri^^is
Degitur hoc avi quodcunque est?
Lucr. Idem induit Virgilius cum iter designat quo insistebant Aeneas and
Deiphobe tendentes ad Elysium.

Ibant obscuri sola sub nocte per vmbram
Q^^le per incertum lumen sub luce maligna,
Est iter in sylvis vbi coelum condidit vmbra
Jupiter and rebus nox abstulit atra colorem,
Virg. Of the blindness of the mind by the sway of passions.
Hine metuunt, cupiuntque dolent, gaudentque nec auras
Recipient clansitenebris and carcere caeco.
Idem. Ante pedes caecis lucebat semita nobis
Scilicet insanonemo in amore videt.
Prop. In Amphitruone Plauti Amphitruo i^. se inquit Blepharoni.
A. vbi illic sceles^us est? B* Quis? A. So^ia.
B Eccum illum A. vhi? B. A^te oculos,
Non vides? A vix video prae ira
Adeo me isthic delirum fecit.
Non hercle te praevideram quaesone
Vitio vortasita ^racundia obstitit oculis, ide^ in
Asi^^, Tu queque si vis
Lumune claro
Cernere v^rum,
Gaudia pelle
Pelle timor^m,
Spemque fugato,
N^c dolor ad^it,
Nubila men's est
V^ct^que fraeais
Haec vbi ^egnant.
Boet. FINIS.

