THE DEVIL of the Vault.

OR, The unmasking of Murder In a brief declaration of the
Cacolicke-complotted Treason, lately discouerd:

Persius. Sat. 2. Ocuruae in terris animae, and caelestium inanes! I. H.



LONDON Printed by E. A. for Nathnaiell Butter, and are to be sold at his Shop
near Paul's Churchyard, at Saint Austens Gate. 1606.

To the Reader
MVst I have recourse in this apologeticall Project; to intercept the snarling
censure of calumniating Zoylus; and entreat him to excuse me for diuulging
this monstrous Subject in so naked a style, and unaccustomed strain: attribute
it not altogether to the debility of my shallow capacity: for I could have
invested it with more polished roabes (without ostentation) had not the times
brevity prohibited my invention, and other accidental occurrences intercepted
my intention: therefore vouchsafe aequi bonique consulere: seeing but some
three hours limitation was exhibited unto me (upon serious occasion) for the
composing of it, and because Non vacat exiguum tempus, to suprauise it, was so
rough-hewne exposed to the Press.



Farewell. I. H.

The unmasking of Murder: OR, A brief declaration of the Cacolike-intended
Treason, lately discovered.
COME thou obdurate flintly heart, with mournings melt in twain:
To hear my weeping pen houle forth, Melpomens Tragic strain:
So dreadful, foul, Chymera-like, my Subject must appear:
That heaven amazed, and hell disturbed, the earth shall quake with fear.
If murder, furies, fates and death, beclad with bloody weed:
Would all concur with Nights black hours, to plot some dismal deed:
Let them but congregate themselves, and silent stand awhile:
To draw deaths samplar from the sense, and sequel of my style.
Exstracted from the Stratagems, of Pope and Popish name:
That every letter in these lines, may Character his shame:
Whose strict Religion grounded false, on proud rebellion stands;
Which does subborne his hel-bred troop, with blood t'imbrue their hands.
Whose faith's but faction, though ore veiled, with holy pure pretense:
Suggesting men with doctrines damned, sell souls for Peter pence.
These Tygrish blood-sworne Jesuits, Spanized British slaves:
Through errors dark poor Layicks lead, blindfold down to their graves.
Ambition boiling in their breasts, like Nylus raging flood:
Bids them erect their cursed Church, on Prince and Peoples blood.
Which they in each precedent age, have exercised so:
As God and man, heaven, earth and all denounce against them, woe:
The original of putride Popes, from Murder first arose:
For Phocas did Mauritius, by treacherous hand depose.
And therein still perseuer'd have, with Vultur-minded hate:
Which would be to prolixious here, to recapitulate.
Glaunce but on stories pristinate, (Murder in Myrrors see:)
And there perspicuously discern what Romes religions be.
No innouations, stratagems. Treachery against state or King,
But Papists ranckt on Deaths black stage: as the Actors still they bring.
Yet Protestants they Tyrants term, who laugh to see men bleed:
Pursuing them, their corpse t'immure with Deaths cole pallide weed.
But nere it was read that Catholic for Conscience lost his breath:
But for Conspiracies against Kings, dragged to immediate death.
Nor ever heard* that Protestant, his Princes blood acquired:
Nor by rebellious vproares rude, the Papists deaths conspired.
For pregnant instance let us suruay, those inbred broils of France:
When they by barbarous butchery thought, their Papal Sect t'aduance.
Where cursed Guize rang deaths alarmes, in deep of silent Night:
Protesting to the Protestants, for God and them to fight.
But his intent far dissonant, deprived them all of life:
And massacred three thousand souls with Murders slaughtring knife.
There Papists tossed harmelese babes, upon their spears sharp point:
Then did their wombes euiscerate, and tear them joint from joint.
Dragging their woeful scritching mothers, through every street by th'haire:
Which to the near adjacent Isles, did argue wondrous fear.
Now let us reuert and home retire, to view Queen Mary's days:
How Protestants by Popish plots, were murdered various ways.
Some rackt, exposed to torments strange, some judged to stroke of sword:
And many sacred Martirs burnt, for Christ's soule-sauing word.
Draw nearer to Elizaes Reign, (true Map of honored fame:)
Behold* how Papists sought her death, to their nere*sleeping shame.
By Phylters, Poisons, and by sword, they strove to work her end:
But against them all, heavens powerful God, did still her life defend.
Thus have they left in bypast times such murdrous marks behind them:
As we in these our modern days, by strange experience find them.
Now let the deeds of th'vgly dark, stand as examinate
With each immane prestigious plot, which were unmasked of late.
A Treachery so with blood repleate, so Nero *like devised,
As it through th'carths immensall Globe, nere can be equaliz'd.
A fact (for famous infamy,) that Cyclops does excel:
By Papists shame on earth begun, never to end in hell.
Let Rumor vent his flatuous cheeks, with Fames Pegatian speed:
And through the spacious orb diuulge their thrice accursed deed.
From th'Articke, to th'Antarticke Pole, sound this through the earths wide
ears:
Papists at once would have consumed Britains King, Prince, and Peers.
With mercy-wanting powder fired, to wound them with deaths blow:
Yet whence their fatal doom was drawn, not any wight should know.
At that self time when this complot should executed be:
The like accurrence wondrous was displaied in Germany.
At Minden in Westphalia, (as Fame diuulg'd of late)
Th'Electors seven assemled were, to treat of public state:
They were no sooner congregate, into the Council Hall,
But straight a Sulphur-sauoring air, their senses did appall.
They with conjectures strange ytost, with fear disammate:
Proroag'd their ponderous state-affaires, and rose from whence they sat.
But ere these Dukes (drowned in suspense) could to their Courts repair;
Their Senate house with thundering noise, was blown up in the air.
Whereby th'adjacent strong-built Towers, were battred to the ground
And men wrapped in Deaths pallide robes, with mangled corpse were found.
Thus (as a prisoned Lion starved runs roaring for his prey*)
The Papists through large Europe ranged, the Protestants to sley.
Armed with impetuous Toad-swolne hate, diffused from murdering heart:
For France with us and Germany, had shared deaths bloody part.
Examplyfied by that complot, gain'st Burbon, the French King:
Attempted by two Jesuits, as true report does bring.
Who lurking close on Paris bridge, like black incarnate Fiends;
Their glowing eyes bewraying still, their murther-plotting minds.
Attended there like fatal Owls, the Serjants of stern death:
As he with his courtly train should pass to stop his vital breath.
No sooner he approached was, in pomp and regal state;
But one of them with poisoned knife, struck him with furious hate.
Yet man's great Governor did so, infatuate his arm:
That penetracting through his clothes, on's body wrought no harm.
But when this Devil quite frustrate saw, his bloody hopes success:
Resolved to have smoothed his horride crime, with forged Frenzinesse.
Thus deemed these cursed Catilines, t'affirme their vows with blood:
And turn large Europes silver streams to purple lakes of blood.
But God his great'st omnipotence, in deepest danger shows:
And metamorphiz'd their deseignes, to their own overthrows.
Heauen's grant, that these perfidious plots, Popes Period may portend:
And that Romes Hydra headed sect, may have conclusiue end.
The triuial Proverb then pronounced to murdering slaves; is this:
Thou art almost so bloud-bestain'd, as a damned Papist is.
Let Christian hearts hold them at gaze, as Nights Sun-shining Owls,
Are wondered at by warbling Birds, and light-embracing Fowls.
What dismal terror had it been, to each teare-trickling eye:
To view dismembered corpse dispersed, and dissipated lie.
To see such royal and Noble shapes, blown up in th'whisking air,
Here arms, there legs, disseuered quite, lie mangled every where.
Some stoned with fear, some raging run, some volley forth shrill cries:
T'appall black hell, amaze the earth, and penetrate the skies.
Some swift pursue wars murmuring noise, be clad with clashing arms:
Some fired with fury entertained, Rebellions fierce alarmes.
Then many headed multitude, confused flock together:
As though Devils, furies, grizly ghosts, were all assembled thither.
To see the strengthlesse sucklings brains, bedasht against flinty stones:
And pampred Palfreyes steel strong hoofes, strike fire on dead men's bones.
Some wounded deadly, dead-aliue, living cry out for death:
Some dying live, some living dye, and gape for liuelesse breath.
Some groueling wallow on the earth, in blood half suffocate:
And every street be purplefied with goares coagulate.
To see stern Tyrants recking blades, bedide with Britains blood:
Hurling along the Channels, like a Scarlet colored flood.
To see mountains of slaughtered men, whose crimson-tonged wounds:
Against Papists, vengeance dread proclaim, with hideous dreadful sounds.
Confusion with hels horride howles, denounce grim deaths alarmes.
While leane-fac'd Famine all ingirts, betwixt her icye arms.
To view black Murder sans remorce, rush raging through each street:
Massacring with impartial sword, the next he haps to meet.
Then should each heau'n-affecting soul, by deep destruction fall:
The Preacher, Saint, religious man, merchant, mechanicke, all
By Popish Sectaries, then should have, been dragged to deaths dark Caves:
Matrons defiled, Virgins deflowered, by base unhallowed slaves.
One scud through strange Meandred paths, to some vast vaulted Cave:
Another climb some Rockie Mount, his desperate life to save.
Others more stern, resolved t'indure, wars tyrannizing blows:
And all distract, enuiron'd with inexecrable woes.
Then Britons Angel-garded gates, had opened to their hand:
And entrance made for foreign powers, to ruinate the land.
Then had these sight-depriued Moales, (who vndermin'd the ground:
Peece-meale to riue the Parliament, with sense appalling sound;)
Brought Gospellers and Protestants, to undeserved shame:
Diuulging by their forged declaimes, that they had wrought the same.
Thereby t'incurre a general grace, to steal the vulgars hearts:
And by the blood of innnocence, to act deaths tragic parts.
O Catesby, Pierey, hels black fiends, these were your working frames*
So that each child does scritch with fear at mention of your names.
These are the fatal accidents, that would from treason rise:
Sought by the Papists damned designs and faithless fallacy.
Thus would they gormandize man's blood, with unrelenting fell:
Like Fiends rowz'd from the tenebrous deepes, of Sulphur-flaming hell.
And fraught with universal rage, against earth connex'd in one:
Typhous-like hoisse Rock on Rock, Heau's great King to dis-throne.
But he that from the Chaos dark, produced both life and light:
Did explicate their plots composed, in th'adumbragious Night.
And urged them to reveal themselves, conceal they could not choose:
For murder still it self condemns, fore truth stands out t'accuse.
Remarke how God, with semblant plagues, their crimes recaliate:
Who did with hels ambitious drugs, their souls inebriate.
For they the death of Prince and Peer, by Powder did intend:
So pitiless powder did conspire, their never ending end.
And those heads, which those engines framed, erected are on hic.
Exploded from the sight of heaven, and loathed of earthly eye.
Therefore to Heauen's Jehovah yield, all vniformall praise:
Laudate sing with joint assent, his powerful glory raise.
Who has preserved our lives, traduced, to direful Harpies claws:
Exhaled us from the chaps of hell. and death's devouring jaws.
Thou great composer of earths frame, with Cherubs guard our King:
And shroud him from conspiracies, with thy all-couering wing.
Protect him from all foreign force, from homebred broiles and jarres:
And let the number of his days, surmount the countlesse Stars.
With courage simpathize his power, corroborate his arms:
Prescribe the means t'infatuate Romes minacing alarmes.
Inspire the hearts of Christian Kings, t'vnite their force in one:
And drag that triple-crowned Beast, from out his monstrous rhrone.
Europe can nere Heavens Requiem sing, with peaceful amity:
Till these bloud-bathed Romish Wolves, quite extirpated be.
Then let each Christian subiugate, discute the papal yoke:
And with a heau'n-bred high resolve, blind haeresies revoke.
Vlisses-like t'heau'ns Mast adhere, when Popish Sirens sing:
Confide not in Romes Crocadiles, who weeping, wound and sting.
Let Us serve one God, one Gospel preach, one faith profess each one:
That we may shine like glorious Stars, fore his maiesticke throane.
That at the great and general Doom, when Mortals rise from dust:
We all may reap immortal Crowns, reserved for the just.
FINIS.

