A DECLARACION of the state, wherein all heretics do lead their lives: And
also of their continual indeuer, and propre fruictes, which begins in
the.38. chapter, and so to the end of the work

By John Gwynnethe clerk.

Prouer. 16. Est via, quae videtur homini recta, et nouissima eius ducunt ad
mortem.

There is a way, which seems to a man straight, and yet the ends thereof
leaden to perdicion.

LONDINI. 1554.

To the readers.
WE WILL disposed and good christen readers, so it is, that about. xvii. or xviii.
years past, I began to write against Frithes book which he made against the
veritee of the holy sacrament of the Altar: And I being then, where a print
was in use and occupacion, procuryng the same for the puttinge forth of that
I did intend, by that time ii. or iii. chapiters of that I had written was
printed for assaie, to see how the printer would and could set it forth, I
fell so sick, that I was feign to get me to London, for the remedy and help
of mine infirmitee, where I lay a long time in great danger. And before I
was able to go abroad, the printer (as I suppose for lack of work) being
where he might come by my scrowes and papers, printed up the rest of that I
had done, after such sort, as he could pike it out of my first draught
thereof. And sent me the book, before I was able (as I said) to come out of my
chamber: wherein, he displeased me so much, that I did not intend to go any
farther with the matter. And that not only because he did so much with out my
consent, but also specially because it was done, before I had perused and
dewly examined that I had written, as that and other like things, does always
require. For I think there be no writer, that wills any matter of weight to
pass his hands, before he has made with him self, upon the first drawght, a
dew examinacion thereof, whereby, he may perceive and see, whether it should
need, either any addicion, or diminucion, or else alteracion, and better
disposicion of order, whereby the work may be the more compendious, and of
less difficultee or tediousnes unto the readers. For my intention was (if I
might than have had time) to digeste, dispose and order the matter after this
sort: First, that it should appear by it self, what the state of an heretic
is, and in what condition he leads his life. And after that, what manner of
foundation it is, where upon Frith (as he says) does build and frame his
purpose. Thirdly, that it should appeared also by it self, how falsely and
foolishely he does take, not only the holy scripture, but also the old holy
fathers and ancient doctors of the catholic church, whom he bosteth so much
to make for him, not withstandinge that they are all directly against him.
Fourthly, what his reasons and arguments are, which he pretends to be no
less then invincible, and yet so false and foolish in deed, as are not worth
the heringe. Fifthly, what is to be said unto him and all his adherentes, in
that they hold, that one body can not be in two places at once. Sixthly, that
the possibilitee thereof (when they have all done) is yet probable, by very
natural reason, one principle granted, which no reasonable man can deny.
This was mine order, which I did intend. And although I were then disapointed
thereof, through the hasty rashness of the printer (as is aforesaid) intending
therefore to go no farther with all, little thinking then, that the venim of
Frithes book would have spredde so far abroad, as the lamentable experience
thereof does presently declare: yet now upon that, and other such urgent
occasions, as I have since and daily do see, I have returned unto my first
purpose ageyn, and so gone forward with all, that I have new written all that
I wrote before, with such alteracion thereof, as the time and change of things
has since ministered great, and worthy occasion. Wherefore most gentill
readers, use therein your indifferent judgment, and impute of my labor no more
unto me, but only a mocion or occasion given unto other, that can do much
better. And thus I commit you to god.

The arguments of the chapters.
AN introduction of the matter. Cap. 1. That no heretic can know, or so much
as believe or think, that he is an heretic. Cap. 2. The cause why, that an
heretic can not know, believe, or think that he is an heretic. Cap. 3. What
is the cause that heresy is so sildome or never amended. Cap. 4. That these
words of the prophet (The folish man said in his heart, There is no God, are
well and trewly understand of every heretic. Cap. 5. Whether the trewthe of
all the whole feithe, be contained in every singular article or no. Cap. 6.
That the trewthe of the feithe is no more in the whole, than in the least part
of it, nor no less in the least part, than in all the whole, nor none other
in any one part of it than in any other, or in them all together. Cap. 7. That
the trewthe and the thing, wherein it is, are not both one. And therefore
although the things differ, yet the trewthe in them diffreth not. Cap. 8. That
trewthe is inalterable, and that all heretics are deceived, not only in those
articles, which they directly deny, but also in those, which they seem and
think they grant. Cap. 9. That such difference is between the trewthe of one
article, and the trewthe of an other, as there is between John, the name of one
man, and John the name of an other. Cap. 10. That there is but one trewthe in
all and every manner of thing. And therefore what need it to be sought in so
many things as it is, when the sekers thereof have it all ready in some thing.
Cap. 11. That trewthe, which is not diverse, does diversely behave it self in
diverse things, and is more expedient to be had in some things than in some.
Cap. 12. What is to be understand of these words of christ, I am the way,
trewthe, and life. Cap. 13. When these three, The way, trewthe and life, are
all but one truth, why they are so put, as though they were otherwise. Cap.
14. That more or less of trewthe, does much differ from more or less than
trewthe. Cap. 15. That he which seeks after trewthe, seeks for none other,
but that he has all ready, and yet labors not in vain, nor without need.
Cap. 16. If one trewthe be indifferent to both the colors of black and
white, why may not the black be trewly called white, and the white black.
Cap. 17. That the scripture does speak often times after the commune manner of
them, to whom it speaks, and not after the proper perfection of the thing,
whereof it speaks. Cap. 18. That if there be but one trewthe in all and every
thing, it seems to follow, that who so ever denies the trewthe of any thing,
must needs be an heretic, because he denies the same trewthe that an heretic
does. Cap. 19. That truth byndeth not like in all things: and how a man may
deny the same trewthe which an heretic does, and yet be no heretic at
all. Cap. 20. The cause why that the denial of one article does more hinder
and lose, than the confession and grant of all the rest, is able to get or
save. Cap. 21. That who so ever denies Christ, as the Turks do, to be
very god, denies him also therein, to be a veraie man. Cap. 22. How the
propre significacion of this name Jesus, and this name Christ, do the differ.
Cap. 23. That it differs much to deny a thing to be the same that it is,
and to deny it to be in this or that, or here or there. Cap. 24. That the
unity of any thing can not be denied without the denial of what so ever is
included or contained therein. Cap. 25. That the unity of Christ's person can
not be denied, without the denial, both of his deitee, and also of his
humanitee. Cap. 26. After what sort diverse heretics have suffered death in
certain points of the feythe. Cap. 27. That no credence is to be given to
their judgment, which think an heretic so err in no more of the feithe,
but in those points, which he does directly deny. C. 28. Whether he that
says in his heart, There is no God, denies god directly, or consequently,
and whether a man may think that he him self is not ware of, or no.
Capitulo. 29. That to deny god but consequently, is proved by scripture to be
no less evil, than it is, to deny him directly. Capitulo. 30. How it may
stand together, that all heretics denies the truth of all the whole feithe,
and yet grant and confess so many articles thereof as they do. Cap. 31. That
an heretics grant of the trewthe, is not like an other man's grant thereof.
Cap. 32. That a direct grant can not stand with a denial consequent. Cap.
33. That before god, there is no differrence between an antecedent and a
consequent, that is to say between before and after. Cap. 34. That far wors
is he, that directly denies but some part of the feithe, than is he that
directly denies all together. Cap. 35. That the trewthe of Christ is no
oftener denied in many articles, than in one alone: and therefore no more fault
is the one than the other. Cap. 36. That he which denies Christ directly,
does it no more ware and wittyngly, then does he, which denies him but
consequently. Cap. 37. What the continewall endeavor of heretics is, and what
success they have therein. Cap. 38. That heretics do good, and thereof take
hurt. more over how strangely they work, and after what spirit. Cap. 39.
That although heretics do no miracles, yet they do show meruailes. Cap.
40. That heretics taunte us with commune fautes, to thintente they might
thereby cloak and hide the rest of their own propre and special fautes. Cap.
41. What fruictes they be, which Christ our savior doothe teach us to know
heretics by. Cap. 42. Whether a general descripcion of heretics can
displease heretics or no. Cap. 43.
FINIS.
An introduction of the matter. Cap. 1.
CCATHOLICVS, Hark I say cuntreman, a word with the.


HERETICVS. Speak ye to me sir?


CATH. What question is that, where there is none, but hou and I?


HERE. What would ye with me?


CATH. Shall I tell the?


HERE. At your pleasure.


CATH. Trewly, When I saw the cumminge this wai alone, thou made me therewith
very glad.


HERE. Why so?


CATH. Doutles because I have been a great while very desirous to talk with
the.


HERE. With me sir?


CATH. Ye with the. And yet could I never find the time and place, but by
reason of company, or one thing or other, there was alwaie some occasion to
interrupt and let my purpose? Therefore now, while it has chanced us, thus
luckily (as I hope) here to meet in this quiet place, where there be no such
impedimentes, but that we may say, thou to me, and I to the, what so ever
shall like us best: I shall for my part (if thou will abide and harken well to
me) show the some things, perchance not a little beyond thine expectacion.


HERE. Sir of such things, would I be glad to here. But yet I marvel
greatly, that ye should be so desirous to talk with me. For I suppose ye
know me not.


CATH. Yes well enoughe, by sight and here say.


HERE. why, what have ye herd of me?


CATH. In very deed, I will not long hide it from the. How be it thou
know, that deliberacion gives sometime, a great occasion of wisdom: where
as haste does often times the contrary. For that thing, which a man doothe
some time judge, well and mete to be done or said at the first, by further
leisure and deliberacion taken therein, he perceives at length to be far
otherwise, which I do now find by experience.


HERE. How so?


CATH. I shall tell the. When I was first moved and be came desirous to commune
and talk with the (let hitherto as I have showed the) I did then inte^d to
have asked of the a certain question, which I perceue now (by reason of a more
deliberate consideration conceived since in the mean space) had been but very
superfluous and to no purpose.


HERE. Why so?


CAHT. what avails it, to ask a question of him, which can not tell the
trewthe thereof?


HERE. Think ye that in me?


CATH. Ye trewly.


HERE. Why, what is the question?


CATH. I have told the a cause why, it were but in vain to show the.


HERE. yet I pray you, since ye have gone so far with all, let me here it,
and it were but for my fantasy.


CATH. So may thou do and never the nere. How be it I will not stick with
the, for more then that. And therefore the question is this, I had thought than,
to have asked the, whether thou be an heretic or not.


HERE. That is a strange question to me, but yet nevertheless, do you think
that I can not tell the truth thereof?


CATH. I think so in deed.


HERE. Then who can do it, if I can not, specially when it towcheth me only,
and no man else?


CATH. yet who so ever can, sure it is that thou cannest not.


HERE. why so?


CATH. Because there is no heretic, that can tell whether he be an heretic or
not.


Cap. 2.
HERE. A sir, well concluded. For now I perceue ye take me for an heretic.


CATH. I say not so. But yet for so much as I have herd the often reported,
to be an excedyng great favorer and defender of Frith, and feign would know
the crewthe thereof, thinkyng (at the first) that no man could tell me better
then thou thy self: I thought therefore then, to have asked the question of
the, and of no man else. But upon farther consideracion thereof had, because I
now find no man more, nor yet so much unable, to answer the question as
thou art in deed: I therefore thought to pass it over, and not to trouble the
with all, at this time.


HERE. Ye but could ye none other wise inquere of me, whether I were a
favorer of Frith or not, but to ask me, whether I be an heretic or not?


CATH. That is no matter, for all is one.


HER. Then can I gather no less of your saiynge, but that ye take (at the
least) Frith or me, For an heretic, or else both.


CATH. In deed thou have hit me therein, with such a truth, as I am not able
to avoid.


HER. Well sir, I will be plain with you, how so ever ye take it, Frith was a
man, whom I loved with all my heart, and shall do while I live.


CATH. I love the, for that, never the better.


HER. And I love my self never the worse.


CATH. Thou cannest not tell that. For the scripture does say. Psalm. 10.
Qui diligit iniquitatem, odit animam suam. He that loves iniquitee, has his
own soul. And yet many a one, that so does, thinks the^ selves to love their
own souls well enough. But nevertheless, credence is to be given to the
scripture, what so ever they say or think.


HERE. Think you, that I love iniquitee, in that I love Frith?


CATH. I think so in deed, if thou love him (as I believe thou do) for his
heretical opinions.


HERE. A ha, then it is plain enough, that ye take him for an heretic. For
what makes an heretic but heriticall opinions?


CATH. Nothing else, that I know.


HERE. Therefore feign would I here of you, what heriticall opinions ye can
find in him, to prove him an heretic by.


CATH. Before we come to that, let us first (as I think it best) search,
try, and prove, what the state of an heretic is. That upon the knowlage of
what case or condition he lives in, we may the better perceive, what he is,
and consequently whether Frith were any such or no.


HERE. With that I am content.


CATH. Therefore, the first notable thing, that I find in the state of an
heretic is this, that it is not possible for him to know, that he is an
heretic.


HER. I marvel greatly what should move you to be of that opinion.


CATH. Trewly I have therein, none opinion at all.


HERE. Why than do ye speak it?


CATH. Not because of any opinion thereof, but because I do certainly know it,
which passes opinion. And therefore, because thou think the matter so
straynge, I will add unto it this much more, that there is none of them, that
does or can so much as believe or think, that him self is an heretic.


HERE. What not so much as believe or think it?


CATH. No trewly.


HERE. It is to far against reason, for any man may think, what so ever he
lust, whether it be true or false.


CATH. Thou art therein much deceived. For all though, to think and to believe
may be taken all one, yet to think and to imagine, are not both one. For thou
may imagine, all steples and towers to have spronge out of the ground as
trees do: and also every thing to be otherwise then thou know it is, if
thou will. But yet thou can not so think or believe, although thou would
never so feign. For thou can not (if thou mark it well) believe or think any
thing, against thine own knowlage. But yet for all that, Thou may so
imagine alwaie at thy pleasure. Whereof it appears plain, that imaginacion is
one, and thinking or beleuyng is an other. Therefore although an heretic may
imagine him self to be an heretic, (as perchance he will not) yet (as I
said) he can never (for all that) so believe or think, although he would.
Much less then, is he able to know it. And who therefore would ask him the
question?


Cap. 3.
HERE. Yet may he as soon believe and also know that, as I can believe you,
when ye say that he can not, except ye show me some good reason why.


CATH. Thou must needs grant me this, that there is no man an heretic, but
because he believes amiss in some part of the faith.


HERE. That is true.


CATH. Therefore if he could believe that he were an heretic, than might he
believe that thing, which he does not believe, and that both at once, which
were impossible. For it is not possible for a man to believe any thing, to be
even than any other wise than he does believe it is. As thus, suppose one so
wicked, as to believe our savior Christ to be but only a pure man, and not also
very god: as in time paste, some heretics did.


HERE. What of that?


CATH. Even this, if he that so believes, could believe, that he were therein
(as he is in deed) an heretic, he should than believe and think, that he
believed therein amiss. Wherefore, if he did believe and think, that he believes
amiss, in that he believes our savior Christ to be but only a man, plain
it is, that he should therein believe him to be both god and man, when he does
think him self to believe amiss, beleuyng the contrary: and so should he
believe and not believe one thing both at once, which (as I said) is
impossible. wherefore it must needs follow, that an heretic can never believe or
think, that him self is an heretic.


HERE. Sir I do now somewhat perceive the thing my self. For if I be not
deceived, it is like, as if you did believe and verily think the great Turk to
be now here in England in deed, it were not possible for you to believe, that
ye believe therein amiss, when your believe is utterly, that it is even so. For
when ye believe, that he is in England, if ye could believe, that ye believed
therein amiss, than might ye believe, that he were not in England, when ye
believe him to be in it, and so should ye believe and not believe one thing (as
ye said) both at once, which I perceive were against all reason and trewthe.


CATH. Doutles thou speak herein very well to the purpose, and that
perchance would yet more plainly appear by this. Believe is such a thing, as
can never wittyngly be deceived, for as soon as thou dooest think, that thou
beleuest in any thing amiss, furthe with in the same instant thy believe
therein is clean altered and chainged, and is not the same that it was before.
And therefore because heresy is none other, but in some part of the faith, a
missebeleue, and a miss believe is not possible to be perceived of him, in whom
it is: it must needs follow, that no heretic can believe or think that him
self is an heretic, because he can not believe or think, that he believes
therein amiss.


Cap. 4.
HERE. Sir this is now far from the need of any more probacion.


CATH. Ye but yet, thou see not all.


HERE. Why so?


CATH. If thou mark it well, this conclusion may take away no small wonder
from many men.


HERE. what wonder is that?


CATH. Trewly what should be the cause of the rare and seldom amendment of
heretics: whereof partly has spronge this comune opinion, that heresy,
fransie, and ielosie be three diseases incurable: Not because they be al
utterly so in deed, but because they be so sildome seen, to be thoroughly cured
and healed again. And specially of heresy, what wonder is it, although it be
seldom or never forsaken and amended? wha^ it is (as thou have now herd) to
every heretic (as to one in a continual trance) utterly unknown and
incredible, that him self is any thing therewith infected. for he thinks
verily, yt he is in the straight way, not remembringe thereof, what the holy
scripture says, Est via que videtur homini recta, Prou. 16.
and nouissima eius ducunt ad mortem, That is to say, There is a way which
seems to a man streighte, and yet the ends thereof leads him to perdicion.
And therefore who can expel and put that away from him, which he can not
believe that ever it came nere him? who can desire to be healed of that
infirmitee, wherewith he can not think that ever he was diseased? or who can be
willing for to amend, wherein he can not so much as think, that ever he did
offend, specially when we may daily see the amendemet of manifest evils, very
seldom or never brought to pass in some, when they both believe and know
them selves to be infected with them. Yet much easier it is (be it never so
hard) to leave and amend that is perceived and known amiss, than it is (be
it never so easy) to avoid and forsake that, which is clean hid, unknown,
and incredible. Who therefore, or what can purge, cure, or heal this most
perelous and insensible sickness, but only the great mercy of him, which of a
blind and crewell persecutour, made a most pacient and excellent preacher?
Act. 9.
but how should his most merciful medicine be opteined, where it is never
desired? and how can it be desired, where the cause why, another is, nor can be
perceived? By this therefore thou maiste have some understanding of the
lamentable state of an heretic, who of all men is in most danger: and yet
fardest of, from all good remedy, help, or succor.


HERE. Have you any worse to say of him than that.


CATH. In deed I have more, whether it be worse or no, I will refer that to
thy judgment, if thou will tarry the hearing thereof.


HERE. Yes sir that will I do, if this day will serve the turn.


Cap. 5.
CATH. Then what will thou say, if this fellow be he, whom the prophet does
mean, where he says: Psalm. 13.
Dixit insipiens in cordo suo, non est deus, The foolish man said in his
heart, there is no god?


HERE. What heretic can we find or read of, that ever said in his heart
there is no god.


CATH. Reckon which of them thou will, thou canste not choose amiss.


HERE. By that, ye will make it every one of them.


CATH. I will not make it, but so it is for all that.


HERE. It were hard to make me believe it.


CATH. The due order of invincible reason, shall bring the to it, if thou will
stand to that: For the probacion of the thing, is easy to be made, ye and
(soberly herd) more easy to be understand.


HERE. When I here it, I will tell you more of my mind.


CATH. Of this thou art assured by the scripture before alleged, that some
there be, which say in the he^te, there is no god.


HERE. That I do now take to be true, For else the scripture would not speak
thereof, as it does.


CATH. Therefore what other thing is it, to say in the heart, there is no god,
then even secretly in the heart, to deny god?


HERE. I take that to be all one.


CATH. If thou so do, thou take it right. And therefore because it is sure,
that Christ is very god him self, it must needs follow, that he, which
denies god in his heart, denies Christ.


HERE. Of that conclusion, feign would I here some better prose.


CATH. An other thou may, but no better.


HERE. Then an other.


CATH. That shall be this. Thou know (I suppose) that Christ in diverse places
of scripture, 1. Pet. 1.
is declared to be (as he is in deed) the very son, of god the father? 1.
Joan. 1.



HERE. That is true.


CATH. And even so is this, that he, which denies god, denies any such
father, for that which is not, can be no father. And he that denies any such
father, denies also therein any such son. For no such son can be, of no
such father, nor no such father can be, of no god. And therefore of no such
father and no such son, must needs follow no Christ, for he were not Christ,
if he were not the very and only son of god, whom in the heart, (as the
scripture says) the foolish fellow denies. And therefore consequently even
Christ also.


HERE. Now I perceue and grant the same.


CATH. Then further says the dew order of reason this, that he, which denies
Christ, denies the very truth of all his whole feith.


HERE. Perchance that may be true.


CATH. There is no chance in that point, for it is more plain, then shall
need any farther probacion. And therefore he, which denies the truth of all the
whole faith, denies therein some part thereof, or else he could not deni the
whole.


HERE. That is out of all question.


CATH. Then must this follow, that he which denies the truth of any part
of the faith, denies therein the trewthe of all the whole.


Cap. 6.
HERE. That I must needs deny, because it folowith not. for although this must
needs follow, that he which denies the truth of all the whole, denies therein
some part thereof, yet (of the other side) it is not possible for this to
follow, that he which denies some part thereof, denies therein the truth of
all together. for these two latter proposicions, can never be conuertible.


CATH. what meanest thou, by proposicions conuertible?


HER. Two saienges, whereof each must needs follow other, put before or
behind, which of them ye will.


CATH. And do thou think, that these two, be none of them?


HERE. I think so.


CATH. Thou art therein deceived: For they be conuertible in deed, and so are
all the rest that went before, whereof these two, do justly follow. And that
shall thou see straight, for I will go backward with them again, and begin with
this, which thou shall not deny: who so ever is an heretic, he denies some
part of the faith at the least.


HER. That is true. for else he were no heretic at all.


CATH. And who so ever denies any part of the faith, denies therein the truth
thereof.


HERE. I must needs grant that also.


CATH. And who so ever denies the truth of any part of the faith, denies
therein the trewthe of all the whole.


HERE. That I must and will (as I said) utterly deny.


CATH. Then must I prove it.


HERET. Yea sir if ye can: but I think it will be a good while first.


CATH. Then it shall be long of the. For if all the trewthe, of all the whole
feith be contained in every part thereof, who can avoid this, but he that
denies any part thereof, denies therein, the trewthe of all the whole.


HERE. Ye sir if it be so, but first prove, that it is so, And then afterward
conclude as ye may.


CATH. It shall need no very great proof, after a certain declaration made, of
such three things, as I shall show the.


Cap. 7.
HERE. Which be those?


CATH. The first is, what is more then trewthe. The second is, what is less
then trewthe. The third is, what is other then trewthe. These three, that is
to wit, more then trewthe, less then trewthe, and other then trewthe, are
all and each of them, even as far from trewthe, as trewthe it self is from
no trewthe: which be direct contraries.


HERE. How shall this appear?


CATH. Uery well and plain enough. For perticularly, to begin with the
first, of this we may be well assured, that trewthe can be no more then
trewthe.


HERE. That I must needs grant.


CATH. Thou can do no less. And therefore when trewthe can be no more then
trewthe, it must needs follow, that more then trewthe can be no trewthe.


HERETIC. To that I assente also.


CATHOLICVS. Then secundarily, we be likewise assured of this, that trewthe
can be no less then trewthe.


HERE. That is more plain, then can be denied.


CATH. Therefore when truth can be no less then truth: as plain it is, that
less then truth, can be no trewthe another.


HERE. To that I must needs agree.


CATH. Then thirdly we may not doubt, that truth can be any other then
truth.


HERE. That is out of all question.


CATH. Therefore when trewthe can be none other than truth, does it not
therefore justly follow, that other then trewthe, can be no trewthe?


HERE. Well sir, all this hitherto, I will not deny.


CATH. Then to the purpose, and as touching the first, if the trewthe of the
whole feithe, were any more, then the trewthe of the least part of it, then
were it more then trewthe. For the trewthe of the least part is trewthe, and
true to be more then trewthe, is all ready proved impossible. Wherefore the
trewthe of the whole feith, can be no more, then the truth of the lest part
of it. Agein, for the second, by like reason, if the trewthe of the least
part of it, were any less, then the trewthe of the whole feithe, then were it
less then trewthe. For the trewthe of the whole, is trewthe: but trewthe to
be less then trewthe, is well known can never be. Therefore the trewthe of
the least part of the feithe, is no less, then the trewthe of all the whole.
Now thirdly, if the trewthe of any one part, were not the very same, but an
other, then the trewthe of any other part: then were it an other then truth.
For the truth of any other part is truth, and truth to be any other then
truth, is scant imaginable. Wherefore there can be none other trewthe, in any
one part of the feithe, than there is in any of the other, or in all the rest
together. Therefore because the denial of any one part of the feithe, is none
other but the denial of the trewthe thereof. And when there is no more, no
less, nor none other trewthe in all the whole feithe, then is in every
singular part thereof: it must needs follow, that who so ever denies any
part of the feithe, denies therein the trewthe of all the whole. And ciere it
is, that he which denies the trewthe of all the whole feithe, denies
Christ: And he that denies Christ, denies god. And thus does every heretic
with out fail. Wherefore of every one of them all, these words of the
prophet, The foolish fellow said in his heart, there is no god, may well and
trewly be verified. Psalm. 13.



Cap. 3.
HERE. Sir I believe this matter will yet trouble us both, ere we part, for
all this.


CATH. Why so?


HERE. Because there comes now to my remembrance, such, and so many things
to the contrary, as makes me think, that all this can not hold.


CATH. Then thou haste but a sclender wit, or a fickell mind, that will so
quickly be moved, or with any thing allured, from so well approved trewthe, as
this is. Thou might rather have said, that there comes many things to thy
remembrance, which causes the to marvel, how they with this can agree
together: because there is no truth in any one thing, that can be against the
truth of any other. For truth against truth, is no more to say, but trewthe
against it self, which is not possible. Therefore if these things, which
now so comes (as thou say) to thy remembrance be true, doubtless they with
this, may ioigne and agree together well enough, although thy knowlage can not
see how. Of the other side, if they be not true, they must be rejected and
refused: because this, by them or any other like, can not be avoided. Wherefore
to exclude all manner of tergiuersacion herein to come, let this, which is (as
thou have herd) so dewly proved all ready, be fully agreed and stablished
between us in the mean time, as a most sure truth and ground to rest upon:
or at the least, till thou have found some good cause why, it ought not so to
be taken. which I am sure thou can not do. And therefore, let me now here
what things those be, which moves me to the contrary.


HERE. Sir I will tell you. And first for example, the resurrection of
Christ, ye know is one part of the feithe, and thascension is an other.


CATH. All that is plain.


HERET. Then, if the very same truth, no more, no less, nor none other, were
in the one article that is in the other, it must needs follow, that the
resurrection and the ascencion should be both one.


CATH. How so?


HERET. Ye will not deny, but when I say Christ rose from death to life, I
say trewthe.


CATH. What else?


HERE. And when you say, that he ascended, you say truth likewise.


CATH. Agreed.


HERE. Then if these be not two distinct truths, but are both one, so that
the one is none other, but even the very same that the other is, then say you
the very same that I do. And I the very same that you do.


CATH. Ye but what same is that? I grant, I say the same trewthe, that thou
do: but yet not the same thing, wherein the same truth is. But thou take
the trewthe (I perceive) and the things, wherein it is, to be all one. And
therefore because the things differ, thou think the trewthe in them to
differ likewise, which is not so: for if the trewthe of the resurrection were
not the same, but an other then the trewthe of the ascension, it should be an
other then trewthe: And truth to be an other then trewthe, I told the before
can never be. For an other then truth, is no truth. Wherefore, since it can not
be an other, it must needs be the same. And therefore who so ever denies the
trewthe of the one article, denies therein the truth of the other. And so (as
I said) of all together.


HERE. Yet is it strange to me, that one trewthe, which has in it (as ye
say) no difference at all, should be in both tharticles, which have a
difference.


CATH. And well spoken, for even so strange it is, as the only truth of the
resurrection, which has no difference, is in all true Christen hertes at
once, which have a difference, and that of many thousands mo then we can
tell. Therefore will thou say, that the truth thereof, which is in one heart,
is not the same in each of the rest, because they are so many and diverse?
Dooest thou not know, that one thing may be comunely known of thousands at
once?


HERE. Yes that is plain.


CATH. And nothing can be known, but by the truth thereof.


HERE. I grant the same.


CAHT. Then it must needs follow, that the same one truth, may be in a
thousand heads at once. And therefore why not one trewthe, in many articles at
once likewise?


HERE. Ye but sir, ye must consider, that although this one trewthe of the
resurrection, be in your head and mine both: yet it is not the trewthe of
your head, nor of mine another, but of an other thing. And therefore because (of
and in) are two things, which makes no little difference, I say, the trewthe
of the resurrection, allthoughe it be in your head and mine, as it is in many
thousands mo, yet it is not the trewthe of your head or mine, or of any other
beside, but of that same one article only, and of none other. for although the
truth of one thing may be in an other, yet it can not be the truth of an
other.


Cap. 9.
CATH. In deed thy talk renneth from one thing to an other, for when our
purpose in this case, is no more but to prove the same truth to be in one
arcicle, that is in an other, and so in the rest of them all together, straight
thou leapest from the only being of the truth, unto the perteinyng or
belonging thereof: as though we sought, whereof the truth should be, and not,
whether the being thereof in diverse things at once, makes in, or of it self,
any diuersitee or difference, or no: when that is herein our purpose, and
nothing else: unto the which, I add also this, that truth, wherein or whereof,
so ever it be, is yet no more nor less, nor none other, then truth, without
any manner of diuersitee: for it is not but one pure single, simple, and
indivisible thing, of this nature and propertee, that although there be
nothing, which does not perticipate the same, yet the numerositee or
bigness of things, wherein it is, (be they never so many or great) can not
make it any mo, or more: Nor the paucitee or littelnes of things, any fewer,
or less. Nor yet the diuersitee or alteracion of things, any other or
otherwise, but even one and the same truth stille, as every where it is, and
always has been, and ever shall. Therefore, who so ever denies a part of that,
which has no parts (as the truth it self has not in deed) other he denies
all the whole, because the very same, which seems a part, is no less but all
the whole, or else he denies thereof nothing at all, because that, which seems
a part, is thereof no part at all. And such (as I said) is the truth of the
faith: which although it have no parts in deed, yet I will not say, but
parts it seems to have, and that is only by reason of the diuersitee of
tharticles, wherein it is. And not in respect of it self, which is whole (as I
said) in the whole feith, And yet never the less whole also in every singular
part thereof. And therefore because it is in every singular article, which are
diverse and many, it is thought (of such as understand it not) that it self
also is diverse and many likewise: which (as it does by reason apere) is
nothing so. wherefore when that, which an heretic denies in any part of the
faith, is not nothing, but with out question some what in deed. And when that
same some what, can be no part of that, whith has no parts, it must needs
follow, that the same, which he denies, is no less then all the whole: And that
is none other but only truth, whereof the whole feith can have no more, then
the least part of it has: And therefore in that part, which he denies; he
denies the whole truth of all the whole faith: whereof this must also follow,
that all heretics are deceued, not only in those articles, which they
directly deny, but also in those, which they seem and think them selves to
grant, as here after it shall more plainly appear.


Cap. 10.
HERE. Yet I shall say to the contrary, more then perchance will like you to
here.


CATH. I care not for that: And therefore spare not, say what thou will.


HERE. I told you before, that the trewthe of one thing, can not be the
trewthe of an other: what say you to that?


CATH. I say to it this: if thou had said as much of the propre being of
any thing, whereby it is made not the same that an other thing is, I would have
holden well with all. For in deed the propre being of one thing, can not be
the propre being of an other. But to say, that the truth of one thing, can
not be the truth of an other, is even as true, as it is to say, that the
name of one thing, can not be the name of an other: when most manifest and
commune experience does declare the contrary.


HER. I will not deny, but that the name of one thing, may be the name of an
other. As John may be and is the name of two men, and of many mo: yet in whom
it chances so to be, there is John and John at the least. But John and John
can be no less the^ two, and two can be no less then one and another: And
between one and on other, there must needs be some difference: wherefore, there
is a difference, between John and John. And even so likewise there is, between
the truth of one thing, and the treuth of an other. for between two articles,
if they be both true, there can be no less, then truth and truth: also truth
and truth can be no less then two: And two (as I said) can be no less then
one and an other: and between one and an other, there must needs be a
difference. Wherefore there is a difference between the trewthe of one article,
and the trewthe of an other: and this is directly against all that ye have said.


CATH. yea but yet because all that I have said, is well proved and fortified
by invincible reason, it is meet to try, whether all that thou haste said
herein, may be so proved likewise or not, as I wot it can not: for where thou
say, that John and John can be no less then two: what two meaneste thou
(two men, or two names? If thou mean two men, it is nothing to the purpose. If
thou mean two names, which be they?


HERE. John and John.


CATH. and is John and John two names?


HERE. it is one and an other.


CATH. That is false: for John and Thomas, is one and an other, where as John
and John, is but one and the same, which differs much, from one and an
other. For one and an other makes diuersitee: but one and the same, can never
pass unity. Wherefore as it is between John, the name of one man, and John the
name of an other: even so it is likewise, between the truth of one article and
the truth of an other: wherein I grant there is truth and truth, and yet not
one and an other (which as I said makes diuersitee) but one and the same,
which passes not unity.


HER. Yet since ye grant that there is trewthe and truth, if there were therein
no difference nor diuersitee, what does this word (and) between them, which
is a copulative and ioigneth two together?


CATH. Therein thou must consider, that this word (and) does not so couple
trewthe and trewthe together, in such sort as thou take it. Forhere, truth
in the second place, is but the only repeticion of the same in the first
place: and the repeticion of a thing, in respect that it is a repeticion,
does alwaie somewhat differ from the thing it self, which is repeted, as it
does clearly appear by this, that the one may be without the other: wherefore,
this copulative (and) does ioigne together truth, and the repeticion of the
same, and not trewthe and trewthe, as two sundry things, which in deed is
but one repeted agein.


HE. Sir although this be pretily excused, yet when it is said, there is truth
in the resurrection and truth in thascencion, truth in the second place there,
ca^ be no repeticio^ of the same in ye first place: because there is another
relacio^, nor yet repeticio^ of any of the^ both, but only a demo^stracion and
a showing wherein it is. And yet there, the copulative does ioigne them
together never the less. Wherefore they are, and must needs be of some
difference.


CATH. Thou art yet deceived. For there, the copulative has respect to
tharticles, ioignyng them together, in the posession of trewthe, and in the
rehersall of the same: And not to the trewthe, which in them both is but one
in respect of it self. For where it is said, there is trewthe in the
resurrection, and trewthe in thascencion, doubtless the very same sentence may
as well be said in these words: The resurrection, and thascencion, have the
truth in each of them: wherein it does well appear, what the copulative
ioigneth together: And that is not trewthe and trewthe, which is all one: But
one article and an other, which are no less then twain.


HER. Yet all this does not satisfy me.


CATH. That is because thou art perchance one of those, that will not be
satisfied.


HERE. Naie sir I am none of them.


Cap. 11.
CATH. Then because thou do wade so far in the matter, tell me what is the
trewthe of a thing?


HERE. I might therein tell you my fantasy, which perchance ye would not
like. And therefore I had rather learn it of you.


CATH. I think thou will not deny, but that the trewthe of any thing, is
what so ever may trewly be said thereof.


HERE. Then will I say this, that of any thing it may trewly be said, that
it is.


CATH. Thou say well therein: And therefore the same at the least, is the
trewthe thereof. For if the thing were not, this could never be true, to say
it is. Wherefore, name thou some certain thing, wherein this truth may appear.


HERE. Ye may name what ye will, although it were but a stick or a stone, it
is enough (as I think) for the purpose.


CATH. Then a stone be it, if thou will. For of a stone, as of any other
thing, it must needs be true, that it is.


HER. That is out of question.


CATH. Therefore if this trewthe of being, were not in the stone, will thou
say, that the stone could be?


HERET. No not so.


CATH. And is not even that same trewthe, in, and of an other stone, as well as
in, or of, this or that stone, yea and of every stone beside likewise?


HER. In that I will no farther contend.


CATH. Therefore, why say thou, that the truth of one thing can not be the
trewthe of an other, when this is plain, that a flint stone is one thing, and
a marbell stone is an other. And yet may thou here clearly perceive and see
one truth, in and of them both: and verifieth the being, not only as well of
the one as of the other: but also of all other things beside, of what sort or
kind so ever they be.


HER. Naie then, if it be so, that one trewthe do (as who say) inhabit all
manner of things (as you say now it does in deed) I pray you tell me, how
comes this to pass, that so great peigne, labor, and travel, has ever been,
and daily is taken, in counsels, courts, schools, universities, and diverse
other ways, for the search and trial of the truth? when (if your saying be
true) there is no sort of men, having the use of reason, but has it in some
kind of things all ready. And therefore what would they have more, or what need
any farther labor for it?


CATH. although they have it alredie in many things. Yet they have it not
therefore in all things. Among the which, it is sone had in some of them, by
experience: And in some of them, not without some labor, but in some of them,
not without a long and studious diligence, and that specially in diverse cases
of lernyng: by reason whereof, there is often times had in schools many great and
grave disputacions: and for the fortifiyng of the dew order of reason therein
(by the which the trewthe so travailed for, must needs be gotten, or else it
will not be had) there are brought in many sundry and strong principles and
rules, which bear in them selfs, such an inevitable and manifest trewthe,
as no man with reason, can or will deny.


HERE. Sir I pray you stay there a while. For this will I say, that if there
be among all those principles and rules, which ye speak of, any diuersitee
of truth, that is to say, any other truth in any one of them, then there is
in any of the other, or in all to gether: then have I my purpose. Of the other
side, if there be no diuersitee of truth among them, but that the same truth,
which is in any one of them, is also in each of the other and in all to
gether, then are they all, (one except at the most) but even vain and very
superfluous: when that same one, has none other, but the very same and as
much trewthe in it, as has all the rest beside. And therefore that one were
enough and sufficient of it self without need of any more, but even of that
alone: and yet not of that another, if it be well weighted. For when that
serves but only to the findyng and obteinyng of the truth, which is (as you
say, had in the same and some other things all ready, what is it else but as
though I might go seek that thing in the field, which I am sure of before in
my chamber? And therefore if there be but one truth, in all and every thing that
is: and every man has the same all ready in one thing or other: vain and
superfluous are all counsels, courts, scoles, disputacions, inquisicio^s,
serches and such other industrious indeuers, made for thobteining thereof.


Cap. 12.
CATH. Depely reasoned and well fro the purpose: for I have told the already,
that although they have it in some things, yet they have it not in all things.


HERE. What is that to the purpose? for when they have it all ready, what need
they seek (as I said) any farther for it?


CATH. Now I perceive it plain, that little do thou consider, how diversely
truth (which is not diverse) in diverse things behaueth it self: for return
thy consideracion but even to stones ageine, and of the which, thou shall
perceive in some, the truth to show it self so manifestly, that no man
douteth of what sort or kind they be. And in some, it keeps it self so
privily, that few me^ knows the very true stone from a counterfeit, except
he be a good lapidarie: Also in some other kind of things, it behaueth it
self, yet so much more darkely: that it chances to the cource but of few
men therein to come to it, and yet that not without much difficultee. And
farther, it lies in diverse and many cases so secretly, that all the wits of
men, can not atteine to the knowlage thereof, except it be coniecturally. And
yet is it in some of them, for us, and of us to be had, most expedient and
necessary: And therefore among them, where the capacitee of man's wit does
fail, it pleases the goodness of god, that true faith, with good zele, shall
yet catch hold, and therein much prevail: And therefore, when this is most
plain, that man has much more gretter need of truth, in some things then in
some: and ageine, when those things wherein he has most need thereof, are of
that sort, which (as who say) keeps it most secretly, and fardest from his
knowlage and understanding, how should he therein come by it, but by such
wais and means, as are most mete and convenient for it? and what wais and
means ar those, if wit and truth be not two of them? for who, without
sufficient capacitee of wit, can therein prevail or atteine unto it? Of the
other side, who, without truth, is able to seek, and come by truth? except
thou will say, it may be sought and gotten by falshed, which is not possible:
Therefore no man without truth, is able to seek and come by truth, John. 14.
specially when these be the words of truth, I am the way, truth, and life.


Cap. 13.
HERE. The way, truth, and life, what are those three, to this purpose?


CATH. Uery much, if thou mark this well, that the speaker thereof, must needs
be one of those three at the least: for when the speaker does say (I am) and
declares what, that is to say, the way, truth, and life, it can not be
avoided, but of the three, truth at the least (which is one of them) must
needs be the speaker of it, because it is not possible, for this to be trewly
said of any speaker (I am the truth) but even only of truth it self: And
therefore, because trewthe says also here of it self, that it is the way: it
must needs follow, that the wey, is the truth to: for the truth, could not
trewly say, that it self were the way, except the way were the truth: And
yet more over, because it says farther of it self, that it is the life, the
life also must needs be the truth likewise, although it bears here (as the
way does) an other name: for the trewthe could not trewly say, that it self
were the life, except the life were the truth. And for so much as there is no
way, that tends not to an end, clear it is therefore, that this way, must
needs have an end: wherefore, as this way, which is the way of truth, far
passes al manner of ways, even so it must needs have an end, far passinge
all manner of ends: And because there is no end comparable to perfitte life
without end. Therefore that same life, must needs be the end of this way, and
yet not so, as though the same were not also the truth it self. for when it is
plain, that farther then truth, truth can not go. Truth must needs be the
end of truth also, which (as I said) is perfect life without end. wherefore,
this I may well conclude and say, that truth is the way wherein, and truth is
the beginning from whence, and treuth is the end whereunto, for the which cause
(as I suppose) the propre name of trewthe is there placed in the mids between
the other two, as who says indifferente or the same, to and with them both.
wherefore by this thou may perceue and see, that these three, ar much to the
purpose, which is to show, that the treuth of one thing, is the the very way,
to come by the truth of an other.


HER. ye but what need a man to seek it in one thing, when he has it all
ready in an other?


CATH. Because he has (as I said, and as it is plain) not only much more
need of it in one thing, then he has in an other, but also because, for the
straieng, and diverse behavior thereof, it is therein, more hard to come by,
then it is in an other.


HE. Then sir all this notwithstanding, if the way, truth, Joan. 14.
and life, which are three, be all but even one truth, why is it put so
diversely, as though it were otherwise?


Cap. 14.
CATH. That question will make but a digression nothing to my purpose.


HERE. yet it shall be somewhat to my purpose for all that, if ye answer it.


CATH. Then for answer take this, thou shall understand, that truth, in
respect of the propre essenciall and very being of it self, can neither
receue either more or less, that is to say, it can neither increase, nor
decrease, augment, or diminishe: But yet in respect of the being thereof in
man's understanding, it may do both, as of the one side we may well and
easily perceue it, by the fruictes and profit of that industry and diligent
labor, which many bestows about the same. For to what intent are children
set to schole? or to what purpose does all students labor and traueil in
any science? More over, wherefore are all inquisitions and serches made? but
only to come by the more truth?


HERE. For to come by the more knowlage ye may say.


CAT. Why, what is knowlage without truth? specially when this is most true,
that nothing can be known, but only by the truth thereof. for as the power
of sight with out light, nothing can do, And therefore, no light, no sight:
Even so the power of knowlage without trewthe likewise can nothing do another.
And therefore no truth, no knowlage, except thou will call this knowlage, to
take one thing for an other, or any thing to be otherwise then it is, which is
in deed but very blind ignorance, and nothing else: wherefore, who so ever
seeks after the knowlage of any thing, seeks in deed nothing else, but the
trewthe thereof, which obtained, the thing is known, and otherwise not.
Ageine, who so ever seeks the trewthe of any thing, has all ready the
trewthe, of some other things, or else it were not possible for him to go
about it, as it may well appear, by the cause why, that young infantes are not
compelled to schole, or other feats of knowlage, unto the time, their
potencial capacite of trewthe, become to some actual possession thereof.
Therefore because the deligent industry and labor of all students, of the one
side, and also thintencion of all inquisicions and serches, of the other side,
does plainly prove and declare, that some men alwaie do seek after truth,
and that not in vain, as it does appear, by that they do therein more and more
increase, and daily obtain. And agein, because they another would, nor could
so do, if they had not alredie, the truth of many things before, to set
them a work therein: it must needs follow, that truth in man's understanding
does, and may daily grow and increase more and more.


HERE. And what of all this.


CATH. I shall tell the what, because this is plain, that increase can never
be, but from the less to the more. And agein, for so much, as from the less
to the more, can be no passage, but by a right convenient mean and way
between them. Therefore is man herin so taught the way, that there can be no
mistrust or any dout thereof, when truth, which can not lie, does say of it
self, I am the way. And yet because, there is lightly no way, but may other
by the ignorance, or some other imperfection of the straieng trauelar therein,
be soon missed and lost, with out a suer guide. Therefore is he taught also,
to take none other, but even the same to be his guide, which has trewly told
him the way, because there is none, nor none can be to a man, so good and sure
a guide in his iourneie, as the true teacher thereof, which is also the very
trewthe, as it self does say, when it says, I am the way. And yet farther
more, for so much as there grows in a iourneie of long and tedious labor,
such a werinesse, as might chance to cause the trauelar to feint, slake, and
cease to continue therein, and so to give over his purpose, except there be
some such notable thing, to be looked for in the end, as may well and justly,
so kindle his desire thereof, that for the which he sets all his labor at
nothing: the trauelar therefore in the journey and labor of this way, is most
trewly instructed, and thoroughly assured of such a benefit and commoditee to
follow thereof, as is of all things most excellent and in comparable: for what
is comparable to perfect life without end, which above all things is most
desiderable? And therefore that is the veraie end, where unto this way doothe
ever more lead and directely tend: whereof the trauellar (if he hold on his
iourneie and go through with all) is most assured by the promise of no less
than the very mouth of truth it self, which doothe say: I am the life. And
therefore by this it may well appear, that in what so ever is rightly done and
well brought to pass, Trewthe is the beginning, The end, and also the weie
between them: that is to say, the way wherein the purpose is followed: The
truth, whereby it is first set a work. And the end, whereunto it is finally
brought. And yet all three, no more, no less, nor none other, but even one
trewthe: without the which, what is the way? what is the beginning? or what
is the end of any thing but all vain and nothing worth? And therefore to
show, that trewthe is the only perfection of all and each of them three, it
does here set furthe and daclare it self accordyngly with this triplicite of
words, John. 14.
sayng I am the weie, truth, and life: as much to seie, as without me, There
is no weie straight, no beginning good: nor no end profitable. Wherefore now
thou have herd for answer to thy question (as I suppose) a good cause why,
that truth, which is but one, is here so diuersely put, as though it were
other wise: Much more hereof there might be seide, but this is enough for the
purpose.


Cap. 15.
HERE. Sir I am glad I have herd you say so much: for ye concluded before,
that what so ever is more or less then trewthe, can be no trewthe at all. And
yet here now ye say, it may be more and more: as your sayings thereof does
plainly declare.


CATH. Said I, more and more?


HERE. Yea more and more.


CATH. Whereof?


HERE. Of trewthe.


CATH. That is well said: And put thou no difference between more or less
of trewthe, And more or less then trewthe?


HERE. What difference should I put therein?


CATH. Ask thine own eye, whereby thou may learn it. For by more of light,
thou may see the better. But by more then light, thou can see nothing at
all. For what is more then light, but utterly no light? and what is no light,
but the contrary, which is veraie darkness? And again, what is less then
light, but also even the same likewise? therefore more or less of light, and
more or less then light, are two things. For by more then light, light is
excluded: but by more of light, light is but increased. And even so likewise
of trewthe. For by more then trewthe, trewthe is clean excluded: but by more
of truth, truth, (where it may) is but increased. For he that tells the
but part of a true tale, does tell the less of the trewthe, then doothe he,
that trewly tells the, the whole tale: And he that tells the, the whole
tale, does tell the more of the trewthe, then does he, that tells the, but
part of it: and yet both true. But if thou perceive, that he does tell the
more then the trewthe of the whole: or less then the trewthe of any part:
would thou not take him for a lier or a misreporter of the matter? Yea and
that justly: Because he is no less in deed.


HERE. Then by this, it does yet appear, that one article of the feithe may
have more or less of trewthe, then an other has.


CATH. No not so another, for the trewthe is not seied (as I told the before)
to be other more or less, for any thing that is in it self, but only in
respect of and for the number of things wherein it is, and whereof it is had:
Because that same number of things, wherein it is, and whereof it is had, is in
owre knowlage, sometime more, and sometime less. And for that cause it is seide
to be more or less: and for nothing else. For when it is seide that a man
knows more of the trewthe to day, then be did yesterdaie, it is not properly
to be understand and taken, that he knows more trewthe, but the truth of
more matter, or of mo things to day then he knew yesterdaie, and not more of
the truth it self, which can not be, other more or less. And beside this,
although more or less of truth may be seide in respect of the being thereof
in man's knowlage, by reason of the coming and going of things to and fro, as
thexperience thereof does declare: yet it can not be so seide in any other kind
of things, which have no such actiuite or capacite of understanding or
discernynge one thing from an other, as the privilege of man's nature has.
And therefore all this, makes nothing for thy purpose.


HERE. it is no marvel as ye do handell it.


Cap. 16.
CATH. So long as I handill it acording to truth, there is no fault to be
found therein. And therefore although thou have driven it of, very long: yet it
may this very well appear, that it is another vain nor superfluous, that
learned men take with them in their disputacions many rules and principles of
trewthe, to conducte eyde and keep the dew order of reason, from all deuiacion
and error, until it come as it were to the port and final conclusion of
that, which thereby is intended: for as a man having a far long, and a
strange journey to travail, had need some time of sondrie guides, because it
may chance one, which can conducte him twenty miles, can not yet guide him
three score, by reason his knowlage of that way extends not so far, and
therefore must needs be had an other, and perchance diverse more, after as the
case requires: even so man's wit and reason, having vrgente occasion, to
search and seek trewthe, in such necessary things, as keeps it veraie
secret, and far from his knowlage: has much need of certain and sondrie
such guides, as are for that purpose most convenient and necessary, that is
to wit, diffinicions, distinctions, respects, and diverse other like rules of
in fallible trewthe, to lead and conueie it directely from one thing to an
other, until it come there, where it obteineth, the same it desires. And
though there be therein, none other sought nor yet found, but even the veraie
same trewthe, which was had before in many things: yet is it not labored in
vain, nor without need another, because it was hid, and not had before in
that one thing, wherein it was perchance, more expediente to be had, then in
diverse and many other things beside: Wherefore, when no man can come to
trewthe, but by the wey and mean of truth (for truth will in no wise be
obtained or towched, but by the way and mean of it self) why do thou
think it so strange a matter, that men labor therein, so sore for the same
which they have already? that is to say, for the same truth in one thing,
which they have already in an other, when the truth of one thing, is the way
and mean, to come (as I said) by the truth of an other. for otherwise it
will not be had. Wherefore now I suppose, thou art in this case, sufficiently
answered.


Cap. 17
HERE. Sir let that way as it may here after, for I dout not but ye will yet
grant me this, that black and white, as in ynke and paper are two distinct
and contrary colors.


CATH. Agreed.


HERE. Then if there be no more, no less, nor none other, but even the very
same truth in the black, that is in the white, and the same in the white,
that is in the black, why should it not be as true to say, the black is
white, and the white black, as it is to say, the black is black, and the
white is white, if there be (as you say) but one indifferente truth of them
both?


CATH. There is no more in deed, but yet because the self same one truth
which does verify the black to be black, and the white to be white, is also
as well in the difference of both those colors, and so does verify the same
likewise, as it is in each and both the colors them selves, it does therefore
vtterle forbid it so to be said, as thou speak it. because if thou say the
black is white, or the white black. The truth of the difference betweue
them, is clearly against the, which trewthe is al one, in all three, as it is
and must needs be in all other things likewise beside.


HERE. Then will I leave all these kinds of things, and go to the very
scripture, which in this case, is directly against you.


CATH. How so?


Cap. 18.
HERE: have you not read in the psalter, Psalm. (...).
where this is written, Quoniam diminute sunt veritates a filiis hominum? that
is to say, trewthes, ar minished from the children of men, or trewthes are
falen awey from the children of men. Here ye se, it speaks not of truth
singularly, but of trewthes in the pluraln umber, wherein is contained many,
which can not be without diuersitee, and this is therefore clean against your
saying.


CA. To this I will first answer the, with the words of Saint Austen, and
afterward as I can beside. For saint Austen upon the same text, does say this,
truth is one, with the which, holy souls are illustrate, but because there be
(he says) many souls, in the^ there may be said many truths, as in glasses
appears many images of one face. Here thou may well perceue, by saint
austen, that although there may be said many truths, and that by reason, of the
diversity of things wherein it is, yet there is but one truth for all that. For
do thou not know, that as one thing may have diverse and sundry names, so
may diverse and sundry things have one name?


HERE. As how?


CATH. Bread, drink, fire, water, etc. are each but one thing, and yet has
either of them, almost so manny sundry names, as there be sundry languages,
wherein they are used to be spoken of nevertheless the diuersitee of the names,
does not change the unity or simplicitee of the thing, nor the unity or
simplicitee of the thing, the diuersitee of the names. And again of the other
side, thou may easly find some where (as in some town or parish) twenty
men of one name, yet the unity of the name, does not change the diuersitee
of the persons, nor the diuersitee of the persons, the unity the name. And
even so is it likewise (as I told the before) between the unity or simplicite
of truth, and the diversity of things wherein it is. For as the simplicite of
truth, does not alter or change, the diversity of things, wherein it is. So
the diversity of things, does not alter or change, the simplisite of the
truth which is in them. Therefore truth in how many things so ever it be, is
yet (as saint Austen says) but one, al though of the commune sort (for the
causes before said) it be otherwise taken.


HE. yea but yet, that commune sort, does so take it, as the scripture speaks
it.


CATH. Nay, thou may say this, that the scripture speaks it, even as they
do take it. for that the scripture does so speak it, is not the cause why,
they so take it, but that they so take it, is the cause why the scripture does
so speak it. for to whom (say thou) does the scripture speak it?


HERE. To whom but to men?


CATH. Therefore even after the commune manner, and capacite of men it speaks
it, And none other wise. wherein it does not there teach any pluralitee, nor
yet singularite, for it does but show after the manner of men's speaking, what
state the children of men are in. And proves nothing else. wherefore this text,
makes nothing for thy purpose.


Cap. 19.
HERE. Sir will ye give me leave to talk my mind a while?


CATH. Spare not.


HERE. Then, if there be (as you say) no more, no less, nor none other, but
even the very same one single and simple truth, not only in all and every
singular article of the faith, but also in all and every other thing and
things, what so ever they be beside, this must justly follow, that who so
ever denies the truth of any one thing, whether it be of the faith, or not of
the faith, denies therein no less then the truth of all and every thing that
is. For when you will have it needs follow, that he which denies the truth
of any one article of the faith, denies therein the truth of all the whole,
because there is (ye say) no more, no less, nor none other truth in all the
whole, then there is in each and every part thereof. It must needs follow
likewise, that he which denies the truth of any other manner of thing,
denies therein the trewthe, both of all the faith, and also of all other
things what so ever they be beside. Wherefore sith there is no man an
heretic, but be cause he denies the truth of some part of the faith. And
again because the very same trewthe which he denies (if it be as you say) is
in all and every other thing beside: it must also neds follow, that who so
ever denies the trewthe of any other thing, is also an heretic even likewise,
as well as he, because he denies no more, no less, nor none other, but even
the very same truth, which the heretic does deny. And yet farther,
because there is all most no man, but some time he denies the trewthe of one
thing or an other. Wherein, because they do all deny (by your saying) none
other but even also the same truth, which an heretic does deny, how can
this be avoided, but that all other men be heretics likewise, even as well as
he?


CATH. And do thou believe that to be true?


HERE. Nay sir, nor no man else I think.


CATH. How then?


HERE. Marie this, by the manifest falsitee of this conclusion, I do perceive
the falsitee of the posicion, whereof it follows.


CATH. Which is that?


HERE. Even this that ye sey, trewthe is no more, no less, nor none other, in
every singular thing by it self, then it is in them all, even hole to
gether: which (as ye may now see) can not be true:


CATH. Art thou at that point ageyn now?


HERE. who can be otherwise, when it does here so plainly appear?


Cap. 20.
CATH. How so ever thou make it appear to thy self, yet it appears not so,
to any man else, that follows reason: for did not I tell the before, that
truth, which is but one, and not diverse, doothe yet diuersely behahaue it
self in diverse things? As I declared unto the, so far as the case did then
require?


HERE. What of that?


CATH. I shall tell the what: because I see the herein, so curious and
insaciable, that thou leuest nothing unsought (so far as thy wit will serve
the) which may seem to make for thy purpos, thou shalt yet understand this
much farther, that all manner of things (Wherein the trewthe is (as aforesaid)
may be divided, in to these three sundry sorts, that is to wit, one
contingent and casual: an other more certain and natural: And the third
divine and spiritual. And therefore in these three sorts, the trewthe behaueth
it self so diuersely, that in things contingent and casual, it may be
denied, without any danger or peril at all: as if thou and I should now
contend, whether the turk be at Constantinople or no: if thou sey ye, and I
naie, or I ye, and thou naie, the one of us both, denies the trewthe plain.
Also if thou seie the price of grain will not fall, but rise before the year
come about: And I seie of the other side, that it will not rise but fall: if
it do either the one or the other, the one of us both denies the trewthe
likewise: And so in all other things of that sort, what so ever they be: yet
what parell, hurt or daungier can thou find herin? when trewthe in this
kind of things, behaueth it self to all men (for diverse causes) so
indifferently, that they may therein grant or deny, according to their
opinions, and yet not offend therein. Ageine, in things which are more
certain and natural, the truth of as many as are unknown, leueth it self
to the same libertee of judgment, as it does in things contingent and
casual: but of the rest, which be manifest and well known, the trewthe can
not be denied, of such as does know them: as by exaumple, who can deny the
fire to be hot? no man I think, except he were out of his wit.


HERE. Yes sir, for a man may deny the fire to be hot, if he will, although
he know the trewthe of it never so well.


CATH. If he would so do: what fault were that seiest thou?


HERE. Such and the same fault, as is the denial of trewthe?


CATH. yea in that thing thou maiste say, and in such other like: but not as
it is in every thing beside. For the denial of trewthe in some things, is
(as I doubt not, but thou will confess) no less then a damnable fault.


HERE. That is true.


CATH. And dooest thou think it a damnable fault, to deny the fire to be hot?


HERE. No not so.


CATH. Yet thou think it a more fault, then to deny the trewthe of what
price, corn shall be the next year.


HERE. I must needs think so.


CATH. And why?


HERE. Because this denial is of a thing certain, manifest, and directely
ageyn the perfect knowlage of the deniar: where as the other is but of a thing
incertaine, contingent, casual, and to the deniar but coniecturall: wherefore
it can not be such a fault, to deny that I know but coniecturally, as it is
to deny that I know most perfectely, as I know the fire to be hot.


CATH. Then, to deny the fire to be hot, is worthy more blame, then the
other is.


HERE. It must needs.


CATH. And yet thou seist it is not damnable.


HERE. No.


CATH. Therefore since it may this apere, that trewthe binds not like nor so,
in all things, but that (as thou do grant thy self) the denial thereof,
in some thing is damnable, and in some things not. And clear it is, that the
damnable danger and damage thereof, consists not in things contigent and
casual: nor yet in things more certain and natural, but only in things
concerning our feithe, which are divine and spiritual, how clearly makes it
against this that thou seiest, who so ever denies the trewthe of any manner of
thing, is as well an heretic as he is, which denies the trewthe of any
article of the feithe, because the one denies no more, no less, nor none
other, but even the same truth, which the other does? This (thou may
perceive) can not follow. For it is not the denial of trewthe only, that
makes an heretic: but it is the denial thereof, in such or such a thing,
and that of our feithe only, and not in every or any other thing beside our
feithe.


Cap. 21.
HERE. Sir I seid not as ye take it, but I seid this, that so it must needs
follow of this your seeing, that there is no more, no less, nor none other
truth in any one thing, then there is in any other, or in the whole multitude
of things all together.


CATH. I would grant as much, and the same my self, if truth behaved it
self in every thing a like, as thou did think, and take it at the
first: but now because thou may right well perceive, how much thou were
therein deceived: the truth therefore being (as I said) but even one in all
things, does yet behave it self so in tharticles of the feithe, that the
deniyng thereof in any one of them, makes no less than an heretic in deed.
And further again, after an other sort, it behaueth it self so, in such
certain and natural things, as be apparent and sensible, that the deniynge
thereof in some of them, makes a wilful and a we^warde fool, but yet no
heretic for all that: because there is in it no perell of damnacion. And
finally, it behaueth it self so, in things contingent and casual, that the
deniyng thereof in them, makes little, or no fault at all: and this diverse
behavior of truth in diverse things, is not without reason, and good cause
why. For in the first case, it commits it self, only to the perpetual
health and welthe of man's soul. In the second case, to the temporal
necessite of this life, and exercise of man's wit and reason. And in the
third and last case, only to the libertee of man's opinion: In which
three, the denial thereof, can not be of one degree but of diverse. And therefore,
of so far unlike parell and ieoperdie, as there is difference between
eternal da^nacion, and in some case no penaltee, wherefore it is plain, that
the denial of truth, is not heretical, but wherein it behaueth it self, only
to the health and wealth of man's soul, and that is not in things (as I said)
contingent and casual. Nor yet in things of any cource natural, but only in
things theological, that is to say, in things divine and spiritual. Now
therefore, tell me where are all thy sore objections be cum, which thou have
hitherto made, against the pure inuinsible unite and simplisitee of truth?
wherein thou have caused, a much more wast of time thou neded by a great deal.
And al to excuse color, and hide the most miserable stat of an heretic,
which, when thou have all done, will yet appear, and ask the no leave. For when
the articles of the feith, are diverse and many, And the truth of them all but
one (as thou may now perceue thy self) how can this be avoided, but he that
denies the same one, denies the truth of them all together? when they, both
each and all together, have no more, no less, nor none other, but even the
same one, as it is declared and proved unto the before. For else, how comes it
thus to pass, that the denial of one article, should purchase damnacion,
rather then the grant and confession of all the rest, should purchase
saluacton? It seems much more reason, that the grant and confession of many,
should be more able to help and succoure, then the denial of one, should hurt
and hinder, being (as they are) of like and equal power. yet because in this
case, it is far otherwise then so, tell me why does one denied, lose more,
then all the other granted, can get or save?


HERE. I would know that of you.


CATH. Trewly there is none other why, but only because the truth of them
all, is perfect and whole in the same one, which is denied. And therefore the
rest can not help, in whom, there whole and only truth is so refused. and to
this it may well be applied, 1 Corin. 5.
which tholy apostle Saint Paul does say, Modicum fermentum to tam massam
corrumpit, that is to say, a little leven changes the taste of the whole lump
of dow. whereof has risen (as I suppose) this old, and very true proverb,
one vice destroieth many virtues. And why so few as one? but only because, the
perfection and unity of truth, (which is not only, in all virtues whole
together, but also in each and every one virtue by it self alone) is refused
and contemned in the committing of any one mortal vice, that chances to fall
in man. And therefore because in vices, there is multiplicitee of error, and
contrariwise in virtues, very simplicitee of truth, when so ever any one
virtue is contemned, all the rest can not help, because in that one, there
whole perfection and indivisible truth, is clean despised. This the holy
scripture does well confirm, which does say, Iaco. 2.
Quicumque totam legem seruauerit, offendat autem in vno factus est omniu^
reus, that is to say, who so ever does keep the whole law, and offends but
in one part, he is yet made guilty of all together. Now therefore content thy
self with enough, and take this for an infallible truth (as I told the
before, and now is sufficiently proved) that who so ever denies any part of
the faith, denies therein the truth of all the whole. And who so ever denies
the truth of all the whole feith, denies the truth of Christ. And who so
ever denies the truth of Christ, denies him. And who so ever denies him,
denies God him self. And this (as I said) does every heretic without fail.
Wherefore now, judge thou thy self, in what case they lead their lives.


Cap. 22.
HERE. Sir herin I must needs make with you a great stay before we pass any
farther.


CATH. What yet ageyn?


HERE. yea trewly.


CATH. why so?


HERE. Because the Turks and diverse other nations, deny Christ, and yet they
deny not god.


CATH. Think thou so?


HERE. Ye and so does every man.


CAT. That is not true, for so do not I.


HER. why?


CATH. Because I know the contrary, for this can not be avoided, but who so
ever denies Christ to be the same that he is, denies him utterly. And most
true it is, that he is very god, wherefore who so ever denies him denies god.
And even so does the turks.


HERE. Then how comes it to pass, that they do otherwise think?


CATH. What speak thou here, of a turkish thinking, while we be in matters
of our faith which they refuse?


HERE. Sir I speak it not but because it seems very repugnant to this your
saying, that who so ever denies Christ denies God, when the Turks does the
one, but not the other, so far as I perceue.


CATH. ye there thou say well, so far as thou perceuest. But I and many
other, perceue more.


HERE. That more, would I feign here.


CATH. Then thou must well mark and consider this, that this word Christ,
does not properly singnifie, his only humanite, nor yet his only diuinitee
severally or perticularly. But it signifies indiuidually and indistinctly one
proper and singular person made of them both, like as this word, John or
Thomas, signifies properly, another the flesh, nor yet the soul perticularly.
But the very unity and singularitee of the person made of them both together,
although it be some time otherwise used, or rather abused, by reason of a
certain manner of speech, which signifies sometime the whole by the name of a
part, and contrariwise, some time a part by the name of the whole, but yet
never so taken properly. And therefore as he, which denies that same person,
which is properly signified by this word John or Thomas, denies not only
the flesh, but also the soul, nor only the soul, but also the flesh, and
that for the very unity of person, wherein they are knitte, made, and be come
both one (both one I sey) not in, or for any confusion, mutation, or
alteration of there propre natures or substance, but in and for, the very
singularite and pure unite of person. Even so he which denies that same
person, which is properly signified by this word Christ, denies not only his
very humanitee, but also his very diuinitee, nor only his very diuinitee, but
also his very humanitee. And that for the propre unity of person, wherein they
are knitte, made, and be come both one, (both one I say) not in, or for any
confusion, mutacion, or alteration of their propre natures, or substance, but
in, and for the very propertee and unity of person. Wherefore, when the Turks
deny Christ, they deny both god and also the man. for Christ is none other but
even both together, and for that cause, the one can not be denied, with out the
other.


HERE. Yes sir, for they grant Christ to be a very manne, but not very God.


Cap. 23.
CAT. Now I perceue, thou do not even very well, understand the matter. for it
seems by thy talk, that thou put no difference, between ye signification
of this name (Jesus) and ye signification of this name Christ when the one
(beside the high and mystical interpretacion thereof) signifies nothing else
but only the man. And the other, nothing else, but only that person, which
was made both of god and man. For of the name of Jesus, there has been diverse:
but of the name of Christ, properly never but one acordyng to thexample thereof
taught and given unto us, by thauctoritee of our holy mother the catholic
church: which exaumple she daily sings and seithe, as the reasonable soul
and the flesh is one man: so god and man is one Christ: wherefore, as he that
grants me to be a body, and denies my soul, or grants me to be a
soul, and denies my body, does yet both ways deny me utterly to be a
veraie man, which consists only in the composicion or copulacion of them
both to gether. Even so he, that grants Jesus of Nazareth to be a very man,
and denies him to be very god, or grants him to be very god, and denies
him to be very man, does yet both the ways deny him utterly to be very
Christ: which consists only, in the composicion or copulacion (if I may
so call it) of them both together. And therefore, if thou had said this,
that the turks grau^teth Jesus of Nazareth to be a very man, but not very god,
thou had seemed to have said somewhat like to the purpos: but when thou seist
they grant Christ to be a very man, but not very god, thou reportest them to
do, that is impossible. For it is no more possible, in this word Christ, to
do the one without the other, then it is possible in this word man, to
deny the soul without the fieshe, or the flesh without the soul, which can
never be done. For in this word man, the denial of the one, does alwaie
included, the denial of the other. For no flesh no man, no soul no man, and
lykwise in Christ, no god, no Christ, no man, no Christ. And therefore I
say, as I said, that all those, which deny Christ, denies god him self.


Cap. 24.
HERE. Yet me thinks for all this, it does not even so fully follow as ye
make it for.


CATH. I pray the tell me why.


HERE. Because, although the Turks deny god to be in Christ, or in Jesus of
Nazareth, choose you whether. Yet for all that, it follows not, that they
deny god. For it is two things to deny god, and to deny him to be in this,
or in that. And therefore when he is not denied to be the same that he is, clear
it is, that he is not denied in deed. For a thing can not be denied, except
it be denied to be the same that it is.


CATH. Yea but I sey this, that they deny god to be the same that he is. For
when they deny him to be joined in the unity of person with Jesus of
Nazareth, what do they else, but even deny Christ at the least, when they will
none of that, which is Christ in deed? and when they (as they do) utterly
deny Christ, what do they else, but clerelie deny him to be the veraie same
that he is? Therefore what is the same that he is? will thou, or any true
christen man answer and sey any other, but very god and man? wherefore, when he
is both the one and the other, what thing is it, that ioigneth them both so
to gether, but even the very unity of person, which is proprely signified by
this word Christ? And therefore when they deny Christ, what do they else,
but clearly deny both? and when they deny both, may we not justly ley to
their charges, the very denial of which we list? wherefore true it is (as I
said before) that they deny god for all this.


Cap. 25.
HHERE. I will not say so, for any thing that I have yet herd hitherto.


CATH. what will thou say then?


HERE. I will sey this, that they deny nether of them both, that is to say
another god nor the man another, but only any such unity of person, as is made
of them both.


CATH. Even as I might say, I another deny thy soul nor yet thy body, but
even only, any such unity of person, as is made of them both. Wherein, what
do I deny, when I deny that but utterly this, that thou art a man? For what
is a man, but even one whole complet person aduned and made of a body and a
reasonable soul? therefore, when I deny the unity thereof, I deny the whole
complete person. And when I deny the whole complet person, which thou art
what is by nature in the, that I deny not? for when I deny in the, no less
then the whole: is there any part of it left, that is vndenied? for the
denial of the whole, does ever more clearly exclude thexcepcion of any part
or parts thereof: wherefore when the denial of the whole, does alwaie include
the denial of all the parts. Clear it is, that the denial of all the parts,
must needs follow and be agreeable to the denial of the whole, whereupon it
depends. Therefore when the denial of the whole, tends utterly to the not
being thereof: the denial of the parts which are included therein, must of
necessitee tend to the same, that is to say to the not being of them all
likewise: except thou will say, that a man may deny the whole tree: and
deny not the bark or the bows thereof, or deny the whole apple, and deny
not the coore or the kernel thereof: wherefore herein thou make but a mere
cauilacion, nothing to the purpose.


Cap. 26.
HERE. Yet I will not so give it over: for suppose, that yesterdaie, there died
a man, whose body is yet unburied: may not I therefore now, deny the unity
of his person, who is clearly dissolved and clean gone, and yet not therein
deny his body nor his soul another, which were the parts thereof, and now
remain a sonder.


CATH. Yes well enough.


HERE. Why than say you the contrary of the Turks, which deny but only the
unite of Christ's person, wherein ye say they also deny both god and the man,
which are the parts thereof.


CATH. So I sey still, and not without cause.


HERE. That cause would I feign here?


CATH. Then mark this, their denial and thine in this case, does include two
contraries. For thy denial runs no farther then upon the unite of a person,
which is dissoliued deed and gone. And therefore it must needs be true: But
their denial runs upon the unite of a person, which both is, and ever shall
be. And therefore it must needs be false. Also the parts of that which thou
deniest, are clean untouched and not denied, by reason that thy denial
extends no farther, then to the not being of the unite. whereof, although they
were the parts, yet so they are not now. For they can not be the parts of
that, which has no being, and therefore in that they can not be denied. But
the parts of that, which they deny, are denied in deed. Because their
denial extends, nor to the not being, but to the very being of the unity,
wherein and whereof they are now the parts and ever shall be. And therefore
thou must consider, that it is two things to deny the being of that which
is: and to deny the being of that which is not. Thou deniest no more but the
unity which is not. And they deny the unity, which both is and ever shall
be, which can not be denied (as I toulde the before) without the dedeniall of
what so ever is contained therein, And that is both god and man. And therefore
thine example in this case will not serve, because it is nothing like.


HERE. Yet if all this, be as ye say, I marvel why the turks do not perceue
it. for I think they be men of as great wits as we be, and have among them
learning also.


CAT: Thou should nothing marvel thereat, if thou did well consider, these
words, (after some translacion) of the holy prophet Isai, Isai. 7.
Nisi credideritis, non intelligetis, that is to say, Except ye believe, ye
shall not understand. Wherefore, their infidelitee is the cause of their
blindness, which is such and so great, as drives them, to grant the same,
that they deny, and to deny the same that they grant. And yet see it not
another, as the same holy prophet does say, Isai. 6.
they see and see not, they here and understand not.


HERE. Ye but how do they grant the same they deny. And deny the same
they grant?


CATH. I have told the so much already, if thou be remembered: For when they
grant Jesus of Nazareth to be but a very man and no more, they deny the same
ageine, when they deny Christ, because Christ is not only the same but also
imcomparable more. Ageyn when they grant god to be very god, and no less,
they deny the same agein, when they deny Christ, because Christ is the very
same, and also much less, Isai. 8.
as of him the prophet to god does say, Minuisti eum paulominus ab angelis,
That is to say: thou have made him some what less then angels. And therefore
when in him they deny, both the more, which is god, and also the less which
is man, what do they else, but of both sides, deny in deed, the very same,
which they wene and seem to grant, that is to say, even all to gether.
Wherefore let this be sufficient (as it is in deed) to repel thy great stay,
made agein this that I said before, whosoever denies Christ, denies god,
which saying is most true, as it is now sufficiently proved. And therefore who
so ever denies god, although he do it not with his tongue, yet at the least he
does it in his heart. And so with out fail does every heretic, in whom, (as I
said before) these words of the prophet, the folyshe man said in his heart,
there is no god, are well and justly verified. Psalm. 13.
Wherefore thou have now, by this much, a farther occasion, whereby thou may the
better perceue and see, what manner of state it is, wherein every heretic
leads his life.


Cap. 27.
HERE. Yet sir when ye have all done, because the effect of your conclusion is
this, that there is no heretyke, but he denies the truth of all the whole
faith, and therefore of Christ and god him self also. How therefore (I pray you)
may this agree with all, (which is not unknown) that all heretics does both
hold and confess, diverse and many articles of the faith, as ernestly, and as
vehemently as any other man can, seeing and also thinking them selves, as verily
to believe them, as any men do, yea and would suffer death therein, rather then
deny them.


CATH. Suffer death? nay soft, therein thou go to far, for thou art not
able to defend that seying, by any authentical writing, reason, or example.


HERE. Yes sir by example, for ye can not deny your self, but many have
willingly suffered death, for the truth of diverse points of the feyth.


CATH. Yea but what many were those I pray the? any heretics trowest thou?


HERE. why not?


CA. No trewly, for is there any death so precious and profitable, that may
come to man, as to die for the truth of any part of the faith?


HER. I think not.


CATH. Therefore when it chaunseth any man to suffer death for that cause, is it
to be thought to cum of the man him self, or else of the great grace and gift
of god?


HERE. when all that is good, cummeth of god, that must needs be ascribed unto
him also.


CATH. Thou say well therein, Psalm. 115.
And therefore: when this is written, Presiosa in conspectu domini, mors
sanctorum eius, that is to say, in the sight of god precious is the death of
his saints. And when no death among them is so precious, as to die for the
truth of the faith (in so much, that the gift thereof, is not given to all
those, which holds the truth of the whole faith, nor yet, but to few of
them another in comparison) will thou think, that ever any heretic, which has
directly forsaken (at the least) some part of the faith, other did or shall
obtain that gift? sith so many of them goes with out it, which cleueth to
the whole faith all together. Beside this, wh eneuery heretyke, which
forsakes directly (as I said) some part of the says, does it freely, of
his own wilful mind, with out any coaction or compulsion at all. will any
man think, that he would stick at the denial of any other part thereof, if
he were constrained unto it, with no less then the fear and pain of death?
Specially when tholy gospel does say Qui in modico iniquus est, Luc. 13.
et in maiori iniquus est, he that is (he seyeth) unjust in little, is also
unjust in more? for he that would deny the, of one grote of thy duty, with
out any provocation of need, I think would not stycke, soon to deny the of
twenty, if he felt any need prick him there unto. Therefore, never sai or
think that an heretik, which has with out compultion, forsaken and directly
denied, some part of the faith all ready, would suffer death, for any other part
thereof, when the most part of those (as I seid) which has and holds the
whole faith altogether, shall not reach or attene to that gift of most precious
death, which is not given (as I said) but to few in comparison. And yet those,
in whom there is the confession of the whole faith, (thou may well know) must
needs be nere it, then those, in whom there is the denial of part. extepte
thou will make between them this difference, that in the one there is some
possibilite thereof, and in the other none at all.


HERE. why sir, yet I have hard say, that there have been diverse heretics,
which has suffered death for some part of the faith.


CATH. Yea but how?


HE. How say you?


CATH. In very deed as a thief, when he is hanged, does suffer death, for
some part of the commune wealth.


HERE. That is a proper similitude.


CATH. Most meet for the purpose that I can find.


HERE. Why sir, a thief is not hanged, but for that he does steal


CATHO. Thou art therein deceued. for if he steal, money, horse, kyne,
sheep, or such other like, because his life is much better then any of those
things, it were therefore no Justice nor equitee, but rather very crudelitee to
take his life a way for any of them, when that punishmente so far excedeth
the value of that he stole. And therefore he is not hanged for any such
things.


HERE. Wherefore then?


CATH. Because he and all such, are so injurious and hurtful to the commune
welthe, that if they should live and continewe, it should by them, so decaie,
and be trodden under the foot, that no man should be able to keep that he
has, and to live one by an other, except it were such as could and would,
play (as they say) catch that catch may. And therefore they be not hanged,
but for the commune welthe. And yet not because they make with it, but because
they make so sore, and all that they can directly against it. And even so
likewise, I will not seie naie, but many heretics have suffered death for
some part of the feithe. Not because they held with it, but because they went
from it, and held extremely against it. And much more mischief therein would
have done to it, if they had not been therein, by such worthy death, prevented:
And therefore any other death of an heretic, for the trewthe of the feyth then
this, thou shall never be able to prove.


Cap. 28.
HERE. Sir herein ye have said your conceit: but how sey you to my question?


CATH. What is that?


HERE. Have ye so soon forgotten, that upon yur conclusion, that all heretics
does deny the truth of the whole feithe, I asked you, how might that agree
with this, that all they hold and manifestly confess so many articles thereof
as they do? seiyng and also thinkyng them selfs therein as verily to believe
them, as any men can do?


CATH. I marvel greatly that thou will have (in this case) any manner of
respect to their seeing or thinkyng other, ageinste so manifest and invincible
reason as I have therein showed the. For in this, be thou now judge thy self:
do they, other say or think them selfs any more suer of the trewthe in any
point, then they say and think they be suer in the very same, wherein they
do directly err in deed? how ernestly do they think, that they be not
therein deceived? shall we think so to, because of that? Those which did
murder and sleie thappostles (as our savior him self did prophecy) thought
they did therein great service to god. John. 16.
But yet for all their thinkyng, was it as they thought? or did their thinkyng
excuse their fault, because they thought it was none? Therefore why speak
thou to me of an heretics thinkyng? when it is not possible for him to think
that, which were of all things most expedient for him to think. That is to
say, that him self is an heretic: what thing might he think more trewly:
and yet he is not able so to do. Therefore never let his seiyng or thinkyng,
what so ever it be, stand in thy weie, between the and inevitable reason:
whereof in this case thou haste hard enough.


HERE. In deed I would not so much pass upon that, as I do: if it were not
more for other men's thinkyng, then for theirs, which are no heretics in deed.
For many of them, yea and that the most part, does utterly believe and
think, that no heretic does deny the trewthe of the whole feithe, nor yet
any more of it another, but even only of those points, wherein he does directly
err, and differ from other faithful people.


CATH. I pray the who be they that so think? any other but such as are not
able to discern and understand the thing? or any other but such, as judges
more by conjecture, then by any dew order of reason, whereof little skyll they
can? far a sonder it is, to judge things as they seem, and to judge them, as
they be in deed: which very few in respect can do: specially when the
matters be somewhat dark, as they be in this case. And therefore, what is the
judgment or opinion of such, to be pondered herein?


Cap. 29.
HERE. Sir will ye believe me?


CATH. What is the matter?


HERE. In very deed, I my self can not yet think, that an heretic does deny
the truth of those articles, which he does so manifestly grant and confess.
And more over utterly believe and think therein as he says.


CATH. What not yet?


HERE. No trewly.


CATH. Than we must have a farther talk, then I thought we should need. For
now I wot what thou do lack herein well enough.


HERE. What?


CATH. Thou do not consider (I perceive) any diversitee of denials: but as
though there were no mo but even bare one, when there is one direct, which is
so comune and also plain, as can gender do doubt thereof: And an other,
indirecte or consequent, which is more obscure dark and secret. and therefore
not so easy to be perceived. By reason whereof, a thing may sometime seem to
be granted, when it is never the less denied: as it is now in this case. And
more plainly does apere, in that I said unto the before of the Turks: who (as
thou say) does grant god, but how? none otherwise but directly, deniyng the
same ageyn consequently: as they do, when they deny Christ, which makes
their grant nothing worth. For a direct grant, can never stand with a
consequent denial, which plucketh away the truth and perfection, of what so
ever is granted before.


HERE. I thought all this while, that there was some subtiltee in this denial,
which ye have so long spoken of, or else it were not possible, for that ye
have said to be true.


CATH. If thou call yt, which is very conseque^t, but a subtilte, thou shall
yet find it a subtiltee of such a sort, as wherein, all heretics deceive not
only them selfs, but also as many as follow them.


HERE. That deceit makes but a small fault, so long as their denial renneth
not again the thing directely.


CATH. So thou would have it taken: but thou shalt find it far otherwise
for all that: wherefore, although it will make some digression before we come to
the very solucion of thy question, yet to see the trewthe hereof, will thou
call that but a small fault, which the holy prophet does note in him, that
seith in his heart, there is no god?


HERE. No mary sir, Psalm 13.
for I think there can be no greatter fault then that, because he that so
does denies him directly, and not consequentely.


CATHOLI. how know thou that?


HERE. Uery well. for he that seithe in his heart there is no god, can never
deny a thing more directly, then he denies that.


CATH. If thou say so, tell me how does he, say that in his heart?


HER. He says it, with the word of his thought, which is conceued within,
although it come not out with the voice.


CATH. What is that word of his thought.


HERE. What so ever he thinks to be so or not so.


CATH. How many shall we find, that does with that word, even sey in the
heart, there is no god?


HER. First how many so ever there be, that so seith in the heart, I think
there be none of the^, that dare and will so say with his mowth, or yet so
writ with his pen. And therefore when the word of thought alone, is not open,
but only to him, in who^ it is: how should we find any such, although there
were many, as I think there be not?


CATH. Dooest thou not think there be many of them.


HERE. No trewly.


CATH. Why so.


HERE. Because the prophet speaks it, but of one person singularly. For he
does not sey, (the folishe men) but the folishe man said in his heart, there
is no god.


CATH. Thou may not take it so, for the prophet perceuing a multitude
wrapped in this horrible and abominable blindness, does here touch and open
the venomous cursidnes of all the whole sort, in the person of one of them, as
it may well appear by his own words immediately following, which are these.
Corrupti sunt et abhominabiles facti sunt in studiis suis. Psalm 13.
They are (he says) corrupted, and become abominable in there fancis. This he
says (as thou hierest) not of one, but of many, That is to wit, of the whole
sort, whose most pestilent wickedness, he towcheth before, (as I said) in the
person of one of them. Wherefore thou may not take it, that he means it of
one person alone, or of few mo, but in deed of very many. And now therefore to
the purpose ageine, whether this folish fellow, which denies god in his heart,
denies him directly or no.


HERE. There is no doubt of that, as I showed you before.


CATH. Ye but yet thou must make me a better proffe thereof then so.


HERE. Then my proffe shall be this, when he says in his heart, there is no god,
and the same saying in his heart, is none other, but in his heart so to think,
And because no man can think any thing in his heart to be so, or not so, but
even directly, it must needs follow, that this folish fellow in his heart
denies god directly.


CATH. That follows not, for where thou say, that no man can think in his
heart, any thing to be so, or not so, but even directly, that I deny. For it is
not true, except thou add unto it this condition, if he be ware of it.


HERE. Why, is it possible for any man to think, that he him self is not ware
of?


CATH. why not, as well as to speak, that he him self is not ware of? for
have thou not some time hard this report of a man, that he spoke he wist nere
what? and yet neither mad, drunk, nor an Idiot another, And why therefore,
may not a man think, he wot nere what as well as so to speak? when so
speaking can not proceed but of so thinking?


HERE. yea but yet, when a man does so speak, it is not said he speaks he
wot nere what, because he is not ware what he says, but because he is not ware
what of necessitee follows of his seying. For of his saying it self, he is
ware what it is well enough, or else he could not repete the same again, which
ye know he can do, although he be not ware what must follow thereof: for that
is it, for the which it is said, he speaks he wotteth nere what, and for
nothing else.


CATH. Let it so be. And yet, what so ever does so follow, that same both is,
and must needs be, contained in his saying, or else it could by no means follow
thereof.


HERE. That I grant.


CATH. Then take even the same of his thinking, because the reason and truth
thereof is all one, for as he is ware of his saying directly, and yet is
ignorant and unware thereof consequently, That is to wit, as he woteth what he
says, and woteth not what does follow thereof, which is contained therein, Even
so it is of his thinking likewise. for both saying and thinkinge have in them
commonly, a duble understanding, one direct, and on other consequent. And
therefore when the name or report of saying or thinking, proceeds and is taken
very often, as well of that understanding which is but consequent, as of that
which is direct, what have thou more to prove, that this folishe fellow which
says in his heart there is no god, denies him in his heart directly, rather
then consequently? for all this that thou haste hitherto seyde will not serve.


Cap. 30.
HER. I have this of the prophet to prove it by, that he seyth in his heart,
there is no god.


CATH. ye but yet, when this same saying in his heart, is (as before said) the
very thynking in his mind, and the same thinking having in it as it has, not
onley a direct sense, but also a consequente, whether does the prophette
mean it of the direct sense, or else of the sense consequete? for therein does
lie all the doubt: because the saying of the prophette behaueth it self
indifferently unto them both.


HERE. Sir the prophet must needs mean it of the direct sense of his
thinking only, as it may well appear by these words, which he speaks also
of him, so plainly in an other place, seying, Non est deus inconspectu eius,
Psalm. 9.
There is (he says no god in his sight. And because the prophet does here not
mean the sight of the outward eye of the body, but the sight of the inward
eye of the mind, whereby, a man does directly think, what so ever he takes
to be so, or not so, it must needs follow that the prophet means it of that
sense of his thinking, wherein he thinks directly, what so ever he does
think. For if he had in that sense of his thinkinge, that there were a god:
doubtless the prophette would not have said of him this, that there is no god
in his sight, which is as much to say, as there is no god in his meaning, or
so far as he does directly think, wherefore clear it is, that he denies god
in his heart directly.


CATHO. That follows not, for thou must consider, what the prophette says
also of him, but a little after in the same psalm, Psalm. 9.
which thou do allege, wherein his words be these, Dixit in cord suo
oblitus est deus, auertit fuciam suam ne videat in finem, that is to say, he
said in his heart, god has for gotten, he turns away his face, and will
never see it. Also a little after that, the prophet inueieth farther against him,
with this question, Propter quid irritauit impius deum? dixit enim in cord suo
non requiret, which is this much to say, why does the taityfe attempt or
provoke god? for he says in his heart, he will not look upon it. Now by these
words of the prophet, thou maiste perceue again, that he means it not of
this fellows denial in his heart directly, but of his denial consequently.
for if the foolish fellow had thought in his heart there had been no god
directly in deed, he would not have said in his heart, that god has
forgotten, and that he turns away his face and will never look upon it. For
that which is not, can do none of all those things or any other like. Therefore
he did not say in his heart directly, there is no god, but yet he said it
consequently, that is to say, he conceived (as every heretyke does) such
things in his heart directly, whereof it must needs follow, that there is no
god consequently. Wherefore, so does the prophet mean, and none otherwise.


HER. Sir herein ye be deceued, for this is not that foolish fellow, which the
prophette spoke of before. But in very deed, it is an other, as it appears
plain by the prophets words, which does clearly show, that the one does say
in his heart, there is no god, and the other the contrary.


CATH. That is not true, for the contrary is to say in his heart, there is a
god, but he says not so, for in his heart he says no more but that god has
forgotten, and will never look upon it, which is as muthe to say as this,
that god is not just. As he were not, if he would other forget, or never look
upon the punishemente of iniquitee. And therefore the prophet does say, there is
no god in his sight, because he sees no justice in god: whereof (if there were
none, as he judges in his heart) it must needs follow, that there were no god
in deed: as there is not in the consequence of that he says in his heart.
Wherefore this place of the prophet does but expound and declare the other.


HERE. No sir not so, for the consequent denial of god, is discribed in this
place, which you do here now allege. And the direct denial of god, in the
other two places alleged before.


CATH. Let it so be: I will not greatly stick with the therein, since the
descripcions of them both be such, as declares the consequent denial, to be
at the least, as evil as the other is.


HERE. That I deny again. For the scripture: of as many as be of his sort,
which says in his heart, there is no god, does plainly say, they are
corrupt, and become abominable in their fantasies.


CATH. Then take this with all, Psalm. 13.
that of as many as be of his sort, in whose sight (as the scripture do say)
there is no god, it says also, their ways are ever more, Psalm. 9.
filthy, polluted, or corrupted: and what makes any sort abominable, but
only such ways?


HERE. Yea but the scripture in both those places, does speak only of
them, which denies god directely, and not of them, which be of his sort,
that says in his heart, Psalm. 9.
god has forgotten. etc. And therein denies him not, but consequently.


CATH. What if I grant the same? yet thou must mark as well what it says
also of that sort, as of the other before, although they deny him not (as
thou say) but consequently.


HERE. What is that?


CATH. These be the words, Epurge domine deus, Psalm. 9.
and exaltetur manus tua, ne obliuiscaris pauperum. O lord god (he cries)
arise, and lift up thy hand, and forget not the poor.


HERE. What is this to them?


CATH. More (I may tell the) then all that is alleged before, is to the other.
For the prophet knowing the cursed iniquitee of these that denies god but
consequently to be such, and so much more gretter then could be expressed
with any direct, proper or special words, was compelled to declare it, with
only exclamacion ageine them to god, for lack of any other sufficient way or
mean to express it by.


HERE. Then, if the prophet so me^t it agein them as ye say, why does he add
unto it this, forget not the poor?


CATH. Because these are, to the poor, the greattest peril and pestilent
plage, that ever was or is possible to come among them. In so much, that if
god would permit and suffer them to continewe, they would not fail, if it
were possible to de^^roy and devour them all: Math. 24.
And therefore the prophet does exclame and cry unto god, to lift up his hand
to overthrow them, that the poor might escape their mischeuous endeavor, and
wicked purpose.


HER. which poor are they?


CATH. The poor in lernyng, the poor in knowlage, understanding, and
judgment, specially of divine mysteries. The poor also in their own
conceit: the poor in spirit, of whom it is written, beati pauperes spiritu,
Math. ^.
blessed are the poor in spirit: so poor, as knowth nothing of their own,
reme^bryng alwaie these words of thapostle, 1. Cor. 4.
quid habes quod non accepisti? what have thou (he seith) that thou have not
received? and therefore so poor, as causes them, never to cesse beggyng and
crauyng of god, in who^ (they know) consists all the whole help and succor
of their pouerte: wherein, dwells such a number, and so many, as moves the
holy prophet of very pitee, to exclame (as I said) and cry unto god, for their
defense and deliverance, (among all other) from these, most specially, which
denies not god, but consequently. For of the other, this poor, can much
better beware then they can of these, for the secret behauour of their
mischief, which is much more open in the other, and therefore less perelous.
wherefore, thus it may well apere, that to deny god but consequently, is at
the least no less evil then it is to deny him directly.


HERE. Sir I will omit, for a while, what so ever I have more to say herein to
the coutrary. And in the mean time I would yet be answered to this my question,
how it may be (as you say it is) that an heretic does deny the truth of
those articles, which he does so directly grant and confess, ye and more
over, utterly believe and think therein as he says.


CATH. have thou not forgotten that yet.


HERE. No mary sir, for there has been nothing hitherto that makes more
against ye pith of your purpos, the^ that does.


Cap. 31.
CATH. Then for the solucion thereof, thou can not say naie, but now thou
see a manifest difference of these two denials, whereof the one is direct,
and the other consequent.


HERE. All that I perceive well enough.


CATH. Therefore if thou bear that well in mind, thou shall se thy doubt
thereby, clean put away. For when an heretic denies the truth of some part
of the faith directely, and the same trewthe (as it is proved before) is no
more, no less, or none other in any part thereof or in all together, then it
is in the same part which he does directely deny, this must needs follow,
that he denies the trewthe of all the rest consequently.


HERE. Sir then for example, take thascencion, for one of the articles, which
an heretic does directly grant and confess.


CATH. Content.


HERE. Therefore when he does grant and confess the assencion directely, ye
will not deny but that he does grant and confess the truth thereof.


CATH. Yea but how?


HERE. Mary directly.


CATH. yea and yet the same truth I say, he denies consequently for all that:
because he denies it, in some other article directly, for else he were no
heretic at all.


HERE. Then he does grant and deny one thing both at once.


CATH. Yea, directly and consequently?


HERE. How can that be?


CATH. In deed very sildom in a just man, I may say to the.


HER. In whom then?


CATH. In an heretyke very communely.


HERE. How so?


CATH. Because the articles of the faith be diverse and many: And the trewthe
of them all, but one.


HERE. What is that to this purpose?


CATH. not nothing, if thou consider a difference between them, and the trewthe
that is in them.


HERE. Whereby should I consider a difference between them, and the trewthe that
is in them, when there is no article, that can be without truth?


CATH. Yet thou may well consider it by this, that if there were not a
difference, between every article of the faith, and the trewthe which is in
each of them, there should be other so many diverse trewthes, as there be
articles, (which are many in deed) or else so few articles, as there be
trewthes, which is but one. wherefore this well considered, it may sone appear
how an heretic does grant and deny one thing both at once. That is to say,
grant it directly, and deny it consequently, as he does in what so ever
article he does grant: and that thou may the better perceive it, suppose an
heretic, which grau^teth the passion of Christ, and denies his resurreccion,
as some of them did in time paste.


HERE. Agreede.


CATH. Then when he grants the truth of the passion directly, does he not
deny the very same truth consequently, in that he denies it in the
resurrection directly? for when both those articles (as all the rest) have but
one very simple and single trewthe, which is in each of them, how can the same
trewthe be denied in the one article directly, but that it must therefore be
also denied, as well in the other consequently? as in case, if thou were now in
diverse places at once, as the truth is in diverse articles, how could I
deny the, in this place to be a man, but that I must therein, deny the to be
the same, as well in all other places, where so ever thou art beside? how be
it, in this place directly, and by reason of that, in all other places,
consequently. For the direct denial of a thing to be the same that it is,
must needs follow the thing, whersoeuer it be. For one thing denied and not
denied both at once, in respect of it self, can never be. And therefore no more
can truth, which is but one.


HE. Sir yet as I do now perceue, in respect of the two sundry articles wherein
it is, it may be.


CA. Ye but not in both directly, for thou must yet farther consider that this
direct denial, runs not only, to where or wherein, but also to what the thing
is, which is in, for it is two things to deny wherein a thing is, and to
deny, what the thing is, as if I deny thy soul to be in thy hand, yet it
follows not, that I deny it to be in thy foot, or in any other member of thy
body beside, because that denial runs not, but only to where or wherein it
is, but if I take occasion of thy hand to deny thy soul which is in it. And
therein deny it directly to be the same that it is (as every heretic takes
occasion of one article or other to deny the truth that is in it, and therein
denies it to be the same that it is) it must therefore needs follow, that I
deny thy soul, where, or wherein so ever it be, that is to say, as well in thy
foot as in thy hand, and in every other part of thy body also, because that
denial renneth not only (as I said) to where or wherein, but also directly to
what thy soul is, which is as well in every sensible part of thy body, as in
thy hand, and all one. And therefore, although it be not directly denied, but in
that part only, wherein the occasion thereof is taken, yet is it also
consequetly denied, where so ever it is beside. Wherefore even such is an
heretics denial of the truth, in what part of the faith so ever he denies
it, for his denial renneth not only to where or wherein the truth is, but
also directly, to the truth it felfe. For that same trewthe he houldeth
directly to be no truth at all, which only makes him an heretic. And
therefore that same only truth, once directly denied, can not be but denied (as
I said) where, or wherein so ever it be. How be it, directly in that part,
wherein the occasion thereof is taken, and consequently in all and every other
part wherein so ever it is beside. Wherefore denied (as I said) and not denied,
in respect of it self, can not be defended or borne, by any diuersitee of
things, in how many so ever it be. For it is not possible that one very simple
thing, being in deed directly denied, should or might, by any means, all
that while, be of the same denier verified or vndenied. And therefore this it
may apere, how an heretic does deny the truth of those articles, which he
does grant, that is (as I said) grant them directly and deny them
consequently.


Cap. 32.
HERE. Then can I say (I may tell you) even as much of the other side, for when
ye say, that he denies the truth of the passion consequently, in that he
deniethe the trewthe of the resurrection directly. By the same reason, I say
that he grants the truth of the resurrection consequently, in that he
grants the truth of the passion directly.


CA. That will not follow, in him specially.


HE. why not in him?


CA. Because he is an heretic.


HERE. why will it not follow in an heretic, as well as in an other man?


CATH. Because, when an other man grants the truth of the passion, or of
any other part of the faith directly, he grants therein the truth of the
resurrection and also of all the other articles consequently, and that not
only because there is none other but the same truth in the passion, that is
in the resurrection and in all the whole faith thoroughly, but also specially,
because he denies no part of the faith directly: But when theretyke grants
the truth of the passion directly, it can not so follow in him, that he
grants the truth of the resurrection consequently, because therein he
denies the same truth directly, which does resist and exclude his
consequent grant utterly: and therefore thou may not take the grant of an
heretic to be such, as is the grant of an other man, for they be far
unlike.


HERE. Yet then by your saying, since the truth of the passion, and the truth
of the resurrection is but al one, that same one, does he directly grant and
deny both at once, which is plain contradiction.


CATH. In deed it were no less, if that same direct grant, and direct
denial of the truth, met both together in one article, as they do not. But
now because the direct grant of the truth is in one article. and the direct
denial of the same in an other, therefore by that, the contradiction is clean
put a way. And all by reason of the diversity of the things, wherein the truth
is so granted and denied. Nevertheless, although the same direct denial of
the truth, can not mete and join together, with the direct grant thereof,
in one article, yet in the same one truth of both tharticles, the direct
denial, crepeth so nere the direct grant secretly, that it does infect and
poison it with the propre venem of it self consequently for all that, and
makes the grant of no efficacy, much like, as where a wicked mother can not
come her self, she sendethe a daughter of her own, as evil or wors then she:
for a direct denial, is as a very mother, of a denial consequent.


HE. And even so, is a direct grant, of a grant consequent.


Cap. 33.
CATH. That is to be taken, where a direct denial, makes no impediment: for
thereof rises to an heretic, the same special privilege to him only dew and
convenient, that what so ever he grants of the faith, as an other man does
directly, there shall never grow and come unto him any profit thereof finally.
For the just grant of a thing directly, does never so much prfitte and set
forward, as the denial thereof consequently, does hurt hinder and pluck
backward: for if I grant the to be an honest man directly. And after many
words thereof rehearsed accordingly, yet if I say thou vseste thy neighbors
maliciously, and clean against charity: do I not therein deny thine honestee
consequently? what profit therefore does my grant therein directly?


HE. But little.


CA. Nay none at all, if thou mark it well, for how can the profit or
perfection of a thing abide, where the truth of it is in deed denied? and
therefore although there be never so many articles granted directely, yet it is
not enough, except it be so provided that none be denied consequently: And
that can never be done justly, so long as any one of them is denied directly.
For that is able to infecte them all (as I said) with a denial consequently.
According to the saying of saint Paul (before alleged) modicum fermentum totam
massam corrumpit: ^1 Cor. 5.
a little leven soureth the whole lump of dowe. Therefore (as thou may now
perceive thy self) it can not follow, that an heretic has trewely in deed,
any part of the faith, other because he does directly confess and think
many articles thereof to be true (for he does no less both say and think of
his own faith, wherein he is deceived) Nor yet because the more part of true
christen people, does not think him to err in any more, then he does
directely deny. For farther then that (as I said) littell do they perceive or
consider, because of such things, what must follow, they seldom look after:
For beyond their senses, few of them does reach. And as for any secrets of
nature, they are scant able to touch: What place therefore can their judgment
have, in things supernatural? Wherefore what so ever he or they do say or
think, or how so ever to any of them both, it does seem and appear, take
this never the less for a suer conclusion, that every heretic (although it be
a thing to him self incredible) is yet for all that, no less then out of the
trewthe, of all the whole faith thoroughly. That is to say out of it in part
before men: and out of it all together before god: with whom every thing does
appear, not as it se=meth, but as it is in deed.


Cap. 34.
HERE. Yet sir, if it appear before god, as it is in deed: then it appears
before him, with this differens, that where as he denies some part directely,
he denies all the rest but consequently.


CATH. And make thou no more but a but of that.


HERE. What should I make of it else?


CATH. Thou should make of it this, that there is no difference between them
at all, before god.


HERE. What not between a direct denial, and a denial consequent?


CATH. No trewly.


HERE. Then are they both one.


CATH. I grant the same before him.


HERE. And not before men?


CATH. No.


HERE. Why so?


CATH. Because men can not so come by them both, as god has them before him.


HERE. Then if they be but one before god, and two distinct before men, other
god, or men, does take them otherwise then they be in deed.


CATH. No not so.


HER. Yes sir, for if they be but one, they can not be two: if they be two,
they can not be so little or few as one.


CATH. Therein thou art deceived. For that which is but one in some respect,
may be two in an other respect well enough: as thy body and thy soul are but
one, in respect of thy person. And yet they are two in respect, of their
distinct and proper natures. And therefore likewise, although a direct denial,
and a denial consequent be two distinct before men, in respect of their
knowlage. Yet they come both to one before god in respect of his knowlage,
wherein there is nothing consequent, but all present,


HERE. Then by that, he knows not all, that men does know.


CATH. Will thou say so?


HERE. It seems no less by your saying.


CATH. Wherefore?


HERE. If all things be present to him, and nothing consequent: how can he
know a consequent, when (if it be as you say) there is no such before him,
that is to wit in his knowlage. and yet in men's knowlage there is.


CATH. Men does know the succession of days, how one follows an other. And
how they can not, but pass over the first, before they come to the next, as
the sondaie before mundaie, and mundaie before twesdaie, and so forth. Yet the
days do not so pass and succeed one after an other before god in his
knowlage, as they do before men, and in their knowlage. For he does not (as who
say) tarry and look after such or such a day or time as men do: but has
mundaie as soon as sundaie, and twesdaie as soon as mundaie, and so even the
last as soon as the first, and all at once: And therefore what succession can
be of them before him?


HERE. Then even as I said before of a consequent: if there be no succession
of them before him, he does not know, that they seccede and follow one an
other, which men doothe know, and so by this, he knows not all that men
knows.


CATH. That follows not, for he does most perfectly know: that they succeed
one an other in respect of their natural cowrce, and of men's knowlage and
understanding thereof: but not in respect of his own proper and infinite
knowlage, wherein the last (as I said) comes not after the first, nor yet
the first before the last: wherefore in respect of that knowlage, the days
have no succession at all: And even so in like manner, he knows a consequent,
to be in respect of it self, as it is in the order of nature, and of man's
understanding and knowlage thereof. but not in every condition so, in respect
of his own proper and infinite knowlage, which passes all: wherein (as I
said) there is nothing before nor after, preceding nor following, first nor
last, but all things together at once, even very present and premanent: and
therefore how is it possible for a direct denial, and a denial consequent, to
have any difference between them there? since there is no difference between
them here but only, that the one follows the other? as when thou see a
servant following his master. Although there be a difference between their two
motions in this respect, that the one, which comes after, follows the other,
that goes before in their own proper being, Yet there is no such difference of
before and after between them, in respect of their being in thy sight, which
does receive, complet, and comprehend them both to gether at once. For therein,
they have nether before nor after, as they have in their own proper being. For
if they had, thou should not see them both at once, as thou do, but one
after an other as they are.


HER. If I do not see them as they are, then my sight in the^ is deceived.


CATH. No not so, for thou see the^, not only as they are, in respect of
their being in them selfs, but also far otherwise then so, in respect of their
being in thy sight, for the behauor of their being in the^ selfs is one thing.
And the behauor of their being in thy sight, is an other. And that not only
because the one is as who say natural and the other accidental, but also
because that, which is successiue and consequent in the one being, is all
together very present in the other. For else, thou should not (as I said) see
them both at once and eue^ to gether: wherefore since it may by this apere that
the sight of man is able in some kind of things, as sone to reche that, which
follows and comes after, as that which does precede and go before, and to
see that, even present, which in it self is but co^sequent: how much more is
the sight of all mighty gods most provident and infinite knowlage, able so to
do in any kind of thing, what so ever it be? Therefore before him (as I said)
there is no difference between the direct denial going before, and the
consequente denial whith comes after. But as well the consequente as the
antecedent, are there become, even both like present, and therefore what
difference between them in that respect? wherein rests the s^ertee, of most
perfect judgment.


Cap. 35.
HERE. Then if there be no difference between them, but both one before God, it
must needs follow, that it should be as great a faut to deny any part of the
faith consequently, as it is to deny it directly.


CATH. Have thou spied that now?


HERE. I have spied this, that it follows of your saying.


CATH. I told the as much before, if thou hadest marked it well.


HERE. yet I can not believe it, for all that.


CATH. No can?


HERE. No trewly.


CATH. Wherefore?


HERE. Because then it were as good for an heretic, to deny all the whole
faith directly, as to deny directly but the least part of it, when therein is
denied (by your saying) all the rest consequently.


CATH. I will not say, it were as good, but I will say, it were not so evil.


HERE. what not so evil to deny all the parts of the whole faith directly as
it is to deny directly but some of them?


CATH. So I say, although the same some, were but one of them.


HE. I think there be very small reason therein.


CATH. How small so ever thou take it, yet so great thou shall find it.


HERE. That would I feign see.


CATH. Then suppose two heretics, of the which, one denies all and every part
of the faith directly and the other derectly but some, or one part thereof.


HERE. Content.


CATH. Then thou must grant me three things, which no man will deny.


HERE. what are they?


CATH. The first is, that the more evil any man does, the wors he is. The
second is, that every man's euel, is other to the hurt of him self only, or
else to the hurt of him self, and of other also: And the third is, that his
evil, which extends to the hurt of other, is wors to him self, the^ is his
euel which extends no farther then to the hurt of him self alone.


HERE. To al these, I must needs agree.


CAT. Then there is no doubt, but that heretic, which denies but one part
of the faith directly, is a thousand fold worse, then the other is, which
directly denies them all together. For how could his evil that denies
them all together directly, hurt any mo but him self? In so much that if he
would, how should he be hard? I will not say or ask what good man, but what
other heretic is there, beside any one of the same sort, that would abide the
heryng of him? yea what good christen man, would not be moved with a more
thankful mind toward god, for the gift and preseruacion of his own faith,
and with a more diligente respect to the conseruacion and keeping thereof, for
that he sees one so far gone, as has lost his altogether in every point?
so that other folk should by him, take rather good then hurt. But as touching
the other heretic, which denies directly but part, look how much it is
less, that he directly denies, so many mo there be, that does not perceue it.
And the more there be, that does not perceue it, the more therewith be the
sooner deceued. And the more there be, that be therewith the sooner deceued, tho
more catch hurt and be therewith infected And the mo there be, that be therewith
infected, the more his evil must needs be, which is the cause of it. And
beside this, how has any heresies ben sowed, multiplied, and increaced, so
greatly among the people (as to many has been) but by him, which seemed to have
so much of the faith, that he was long thought, to lack thereof nothing at al?
But yet he did for all that, As the lamentable evil, that followed thereof, did
at length more and more, plainly declare: But by him which denies altogether,
there could never any such thing be brought about: for he (as I said) is one,
that no man would here. Believed therefore how could he be? if he could not be
believed, no man by him could be deceued, if no man by him could be deceued,
clear it is that his evil, could hurt no more but him self, if his evil could
hurt no more but him self, far wors is his evil, which hurts not only him
self but also many other beside. And that does he, which directly denies but
part.


HERE. Yet he that directly denies all, and can hurt therefore, no man else, but
him self alone, is yet as willing as the other is, to hurt as many as the
other does. Wherefore he must be as evil as the other is, because his wilful
intencion therein is no less.


CATH. That folowith not, for when that evil intencion, which can not extend
to the purpose thereof, for lack of power or libertee to perform it with
all, Can not be so evil as that, which has no restraint or let of coming
unto it, by reason whereof, it never fails to take effect: his evil must
needs be worse, which is able to extend, both to the hurt of him self, and
also of many other more, then is his evil, which can extend no fardir, but
only to the hurt of him self, and of no man else: And therefore because no man
which his own evil can hurt an other, but that he does farther hurt him self
also in the same. And the evil of him, that denies but one article or two,
hurts some time many thousands mo: It must therefore needs follow, that his
evil, is even to him self, so much worse then is his, which directly
denies them all, whereby he hurts no man else but him self a lone: except
thou will say of evil workers, the more mischife they do, the less evil it
is to them selfs.


HERET. Ye may be sure I will not say so.


CATHO. Then evidently by this it may well appear, that far wors is he (as I
said) both to him self and also to other, which denies but one perte of the
faith directly, then is he that directly denies Christ him self, and
altogether.


Cap. 36.
HERE. Then how may that agree with this, that the oftener Christ be denied,
the more wickedness (ye know) it is.


CATH. That I grant: But herein is no such case.


HERE. yes, and that will I prove, for he that denies any one article of the
feith, denies the truth thereof. And he that denies the trewthe thereof,
denies the truth of Christ. And he that deniethe the truth of Christ,
denies him. Therefore it must needs follow, that he which direttly denies the
truth of Christ in many articles, denies Christ therein more oftener then
does he, which directly denies it, but in one article or in two. Wherefore he
that denies directly most articles, must needs be so much worse, then the
other is.


CATH. That follows not, for the one denies not the truth of Christ in so
many articles directly, but the other denies it in as many, conseqently: And
as evil it is to deny it consequently, as it is to deny it directly, and so
proved before. Therefore, as evil is he that denies it directly but in one
article alone, as is he, which denies it directly in mo, or in all together.
And beside this, I sai that none of them both, denies the truth any more but
once. For as he that kills a man with twenstrokes, kills him not likewise
twenty times: but in very deed no more but once: And as much does he, that
kills him at one stroke: so he that directly denies the trewthe of christ
in twenty articles, denies it not twenty times because of that: but eue^ very
once in deed. And no less does he, that denies it directly but in one article
alone. For a thing is not alwaie so many diverse times denied, as the denial
thereof is vocally spoken, and outwardly expressed: for the voice whereby the
denial is showed forth, is not the very denial it self, but only a mean
to show it by. For the denial it self, when the voice is gone and paste,
abides still within, all one and the very same, that it was even then and also
before, at the first. Therefore when there is none other denied in this article
or in that, then there is in any other or in all the rest, the deniyng of the
trewthe in twenty articles, can no more make it twenty times denied, then the
writing of one sentence in twenty places, does make it twenty sentences. For
when the trewthe being but one in all articles, is once denied in one article
alone, how many so ever of them beside, be denied afterward, they make not so
many denials of the trewthe that is in them, but they make (as it were) so many
shewynges, rehersals, or repetitions of the same, and nothing else. For when the
very denial of a thing, does consiste in the mind, and not in the voice,
which is but an instrument to express it with all, and is not in deed (as I
said) the denial it felfe. Clear it is, that the thing being but one, can
never be twice denied, except it be once granted between. For otherwise, it
is but one continual, and not diverse and several, although it be never so
often expressed, or in so many things or sundry ways rehearsed. For it is two
things to show the twenty times or in twenty things, what I deny, and to
deny that twenty times, which I show the. Because in ye one, there is twenty
denials, and in the other but one.


HER. Yea but what say you to this, that most men do think, every thing that
is denied, to be so often denied, as they hyer the denial thereof expressed,
and represented unto their ears.


CATH. That is no mattier, for therein consider not they, whether it do still
continue and abide all one, as well when it is not expressed and showed forth,
but kept before and after within, as when it is most manifestly and openly
disclosed.


HERE. Let it so be. But yet, what says the gospel?


CATH. What say thou?


HERE. Math. 16.
Mary that Peter denied Christ thrice, which is also clean against this your
saying.


CATH. No not a whit. for his denial was of an other kind than this is. For
of that could never follow no Christ, as there does and must needs do of this:
for that was in deed but feigned, restyng in words only, and not in mind:
for although it seemed, and so be said (as right well it may) that he denied
Christ. Yet may it be trewly some way said the contrary. For he denied but
his own knowlage of him, and nothing else. for it is two things for me to
deny the, that is to say, to deny what thou art, and to deny that I know
the. Which kind of denial, no heretics does use, that is to wit, to deny
that they know Christ: although they might well enough, since they be of that
sort, or far wors, Math. 25.
then to whom christ says, I know not you. Nevertheless, they do not so.
For all the mainy of them, seems to grant him, and no men in manner more: but
yet for all that, they do in deed, deny, not that they know him, but that and
what he is, which is ten times wors: For seint peter denied not what he was,
but only that he knew him. Which was but a feigned denial, and did only
consiste in words. For it was far otherwise in his mind, because he did
both think and know that he knew him well enough. And did for fear but
feign the contrary: wherefore all such feigned denials, which has there being
not in mind but only in words, may trewly be said alwaie to be so many, as
they be sundry times rehearsed. But so may not this heretical denial, that we
now speak of. which is of an other sort, and does rest in the mind
continually, much more subtly, much more secretly, and therefore a thowsande
fold more perilously, then is possible even for the inuentours thereof them
selfs, to perceive or think: And therefore all this considered, it is not
hard for the to see, that the truth being once denied in any one article
alone, it is not the denial in many or all the rest of the articles
afterward, that can make it ever the oftener denied by reason of that: when in
that one, it stands so full in denial before, that it can not be denied
again, except it be one (as I said) granted between: wherefore clean
against thine opinion, no oftener does he deny the trewthe of Christ, which
directly denies al ye articles one after an other, then does he which directly
denies but one alone. And what therefore can thou find else between them, but
that he is yet as evil as the other, whom thou take to be much wors.


Cap. 37.
HERE. Even this I can find, that a fault can never be so evil, when it is
done unawares and ignorantly, as when it is done, both ware and willyngly. And
therefore he that denies Christ but consequently, doubtless denies him unawares
and ignorantly against his will. For with expressed words, he does both grant
and confess him plainly: but he, which denies all tharticles directly
(wherein he denies him also with apparte words manifestly) denies him even
very ware and willyngly, wherefore he must needs be much wors, then the other
is.


CATH. Yea but how can thou prove, that he which denies all the articles of
the faith directly, does therein deny Christ both ware and willyngly, as
thou say he does?


HERE. How say ye that?


CATH. Thou have hard.


HERE. In deed your question therein makes me now consider with my self, that
if I should take Ipon me to prove it, by his denial of this article or that,
even from the first to the last, ye would say perchance, that he denies him
but consequently, and so unware and ignorantly in any of them all. wherewith I
would hold my self, if it were not for this article of the Creed. I believe in
Jesus Christ his only son. etc.


CATHH. And think thou, that any heretic does directly deny that article?


HER. That heretic which directly denies all, must needs therein, directly
deny that. and therefore he denies christ both ware and willingly.


CATH. Yea that heretic: But there is none such. For he that so does, is not
properly an heretic, but other a Pagan or Apostata, which is farther of, and
more strange unto us, then an heretic is.


HER. Then have you lost much labor.


CATH. why so?


HER. what have you done all this while, but gone about to prove, that he,
which denies directly hut one article of the faith, is wors then that
heretic, which directly denies them all together. And now ye sey there is
none such?


CATH. So I sey, for such an heretic, was and is, but in case supposed,
whereof, do thou not see, what follows?


HERE. What.


CATH. Even this, that he which directly deuieth but one article of the faith,
is far wors then is a Pagan or Apostata. For when he is wors (as it is
proved) then the other is, which directly denies them all. And none directly
denies them all, but other a pagan or apostata, it must needs follow, that
he is wors, then any of them both.


HERE. I pray you what call ye apostata?


CATH. He that has been once a christen man, and yet has utterly forsaken the
religion of christ ageyn, and is gone clean away to the pagans and follows
them.


HERE. Trow ye there be any such?


CATH. There is no doubt of that.


HERE. Then ye grant that he, and such as he is, denies Christ with a part
words directly.


CATH. What else?


HERE. Then he denies him even ware and wittingly.


CATH. No trewly, for be thou right well assured, there is no man living that
would deny Christ directly, if he wist, and were even ware therein, what he
denies: For so ware is he what Christ is, which denies him directly, as he
is ware, what the whole faith is, which denies all that directly. And so ware
is he, what the whole faith is, which denies all that directly, as he is ware,
what one article of it is, which denies directly but that alone: and that
alone does he not know, nor so much as believe another. For suer it is, that if
he did, he would never deny it: no more therefore does he know or believe the
whole says, nor Christ him self another, which denies both him and it,
directly altogether, what warnesse or wittingnes therefore is there here, more
in the one, then in the other? also there can no man be an heretic, but
because he denies at the least (as I said) some one article of the faith or
other. And that would he never do, but because he believes utterly that it is
no part of the faith at all. whereof it folowith clerly, that if he knew it
were, he would never deny it. Therefore look what lack, both of knowledge and
also of believe, he has in one article, which directly denies but that alone,
and even the very same has he in both, which denies twain. And also in each
of them likewise has he, which denies three. And so forth after the same
sort, from one to an other, until it come to him which directly denies Christ
and all together. Therefore when he that directly denies Christ and al
together, has no more faith or knowledge of him or it, then has he, of that
one article, which directly denies but yt same one alone, what more warely or
wittingly does the one, then the other, but even both ignorantly together? And
beside this, when the greatness of faith may be such, as is of it self
sufficient and able to houlde and keep, who so ever have it, from the denying
of Christ in every condition. And when it is suer also, that the very knowlage
of him is thereto, much more able then that is. How clerly does it follow
thereof, that who so ever denies him directly, never does it ware and
wittingly? wherefore notwithstanding this, or any thing else, which thou haste
hitherto said to the contrary, I will yet say as I said (because the truth is
so in deed) that as evil is he, which directly denies but one article of the
faith alone, as is he which directly denies Christ him self and all together,
as evil I say, not in this or that respect, but utterly in every condition.
And in diverse caces (as I have declared unto the) also much wors, both toward
him self and other also: This differens between them only except, that the
contrary remains in the gross and ignorant judgment of the commune sort.
The cause whereof, I told the before (as it is in deed) even to be this, that
they are able to see and perceue (as they do) the whole evil of the one: and in
comparison thereof, obscurely so small a part of the other, that some takes it
more, some less, sum very little, and sum no evil at al.


Cap. 38.
HERE. Sir, the day (ye may see) is far spente, and I have yet a mile or
twain to go.


CATH. A, now I perceue thou lackest matter, or else thou art weary of so much
talk.


HERE. Our talk has lasted a great while.


CATH. That is long of the, for if thou would have been content with enough,
it had been done, long ear this. But nevertheless, to make an end with all,
Thou shall have my friendly advise and counsel, not only well to remember, what
I have said unto the, concerning the miserable state of this vnfeithfull and
perverse generation. But also farther to consider of what condition and properte
it is of. which (so long as it may endure) never seaseth, to study, strive,
conte^d, and feight agenst that, which ever did, and ever shall, give it the
overthrow, and preuail against it, Math. 16.
according to this promise of christ, Port inferi non preualebunt aduersis
eam, that is to say, the gates of hell, shall not prevail against it.


HERE. Against what.


CAT. Against the holy catholic church, the pillare and stabilite of truth,
1. Timo. 3.
as saint Paul does call it. of the which truth, it is also written, Super
omnia vincit veritas, Truth prevails above al things. yet not with standing
all the old experience hereof, this perverse generation, according to there
accustomed properte, nothing fearing the loss and casting awey of them selves,
has sturred up (as all men knowith) there damnable war against this pyllare
and stabilitee of truth, even now in our time ageine, as it has done often
before, even to there own destruction. for such doctrine of late they have here
brought in and taught, as they never were, nor yet are, nor never shall be able
to defend, by any kind of thing, only secular power except, as it has apered
manyfestly all ready: For, before they gate that of there side, there was another
holy scripture, nor old ancient holy fathers, nor yet any scholasticall
lerning, that is to say, any dew and perfect order of reason, that could help,
or make any thing for them. But of the other side, when they came once to
power, and might, as they did, use that as they list, they were then so safe,
(say al men what they would) that it was neither holy scripture, nor nothing
else, that could prevail against them: for what so ever argument came in there
hands, they would be suer to make the conclusion thereof them selves, and that
should be, other the porters lodge, the fleet, the marcialcy, the kings bench,
the tower, or at the least, such attendance, as should make the respondent,
spend all, and more then he had: ye and sometime, two or three of those
conclusions brought in, upon one argument, and yet not so dispatched another:
And therefore, does not these and such other conclusions, plainly declare the
learning of such disputours, as can none otherwise finishe their arguments,
but after that sort? May it not be said, that these men be of a monsterous
generation? yes trewely although it were but for one thing (among many) that I
do know.


HERE. What one thing is that?


Cap. 39.
CATH. It may well be this, that there is no doubt but good they do, or else
the holy apostle would not have said, 1. Cor. 11.
Oporte hereses esse, it is expedient (he says, for heresies so to be. And
because heresies can not be, without heretics. Therefore as expedient is the
one as the other: and that were none of them both, except some profit rise
thereof: wherefore good (I say) they do, and yet they never the better, how
say thou to that? For in deed, the more good they do, the less worthy of
thank they are: the less worthy of thank? Naie the more worthy of blame,
which is more strange. And therefore is it not as it were a monstrous thing
in men to do good, and take no profit thereof: ye to do good, and take most
worthily hurt thereof, and be wors then they were before: In such monstrous
feats, consists all the policy and cunnyng of this generation. For they
never speak more trewly, then when they lie most falsely.


HERE. How prove you that?


CATH. It is sone proved, and we go but to this, that when they allege the
words of the holy scripture most trewly, they do yet deny the true meaning
thereof utterly. And what is a greatter liyng, then a false understanding, and
misconstruyng of holy scripture? Beside this, their procedynges renneth
directly against the dew order of their own nature. Which nature, alwaie
begins with the flesh, and ends with the spirit. for the flesh at the
first, is before the spirit. And the spirit at the last, is after the
flesh, when they are once parted: But their procedynges contrary wise,
begins with the spirit, and ends with the flesh, as it does now most
plainly appear. For when they first brought forth their newelties, which were
such and so strange, as of the most part, could not be known, where they
found them, or how they came by them, And upon request made unto them
thereof, they answered alwaie and said, we have them of the spirit: The
spirit is the doer. The spirit is with us, we have the spirit, for why may
not we have the spirit, as well as Peter or Paul? since it is written, Spiritus
vbi vult spirat, John. 3.
the spirit works where he will, and therefore well to conclude, they had the
spirit: by reason whereof, to such as objected any thing to the contrary, and
could not digest their doctrine. They always answered in corners and said, ye
have not the spirit. The spirit is not yet come unto you: but have a good
hope, he will come well enough at length, if ye be willing. etc. But now
would I feign know, where that spirit is become: for, although we hard of him
alwaie to much at the first, yet we here nothing of him now at the last:
Therefore this must needs be true, yt other clean gone he is in deed, or else so
shamefully turmoyled and sowced in the flesh, that he can no longer be justly
known, or caled by the name of a spirit, except he be (as there is no dowte
but he is in deed) the very same spirit, which the holy prophet Osee speaks
of, in his forth chapter, Osee. 4.
where he says, Spiritus fornicacionu^, decepit eos, That is to say, the
spirit of fornicacions has deceived them. wherefore, how there is this to be
true, that this is the spirit in deed, which they spoke of so much at the
first, who has so led the^ all this while, yt now they are ashamed to confess
him at the last, except it be where they hied him with lack of their words,
and confess him openly, with their manifest works. Therefore if any man dout
of this truth, let him but justly way and consider the manifest voluptuous
and fleshly conclusion of all their procedinges hitherto, and he shall see it
more plain, then can be denied. For what has all their practices finally
tended unto, but only to ye lust of the flesh, and such other things as makes
for the same? among the which, although I can find no miracles of their
doings, to defend their doctrine with all: yet I can find some great
meruails of their doings, to declare it withal.


Cap. 40.
HERE. What be those?


CATH. Of diverse and many, I will show the some, whereof this is one. Among
their married priests, diverse there be, which have learned such a cunning of
their spirit, yt they have taught their yo^g married wives of.iiii. or.v. years
old, to bring them furthe children, of.xvi. or.xvii. year old. Which is a
marvel, because it is worthy to be meruailed at, or wo^dered upon, those the
whether: And beside this: an other marvel I take it to be, that they have
brought many of their children to such a knowlage and understanding, that
through the help of their spirit, the daughter may trewly say to her mother,
I have been longer a maiden, then ye have been a wife, by a dosyne years:
which is a marvelous thing also, as thou woldst not fail to say thy self,
if thou might come to the heryng thereof. Therefore is it not an other
marvel, to see what a lack, that woman has, of the spirit of trewthe in
this case? for if she had him, she might soon answer her daughter, and say,
daughter thou art therein not a little deceived. For if all the truth hereof,
were so well known unto the, as it is to some other, thou should find that
I am yet hitherto, no very wife in deed, although I be thy mother. And therefore
thy conparison herin can not hold: Now consider with thy self, whether these
be strange maruels or no. Nuerthelesse, although these meruailes and many other
like, do plainly declare unto us, what manner of generation this is. Yet we have
a more special token and mark to know them by, then all this comes to: And
that appointed unto us for the same purpose, by our savior Christ him self,
where he says, A fructibus eorum cognosceris eos, Math. 7.
by their fruits ye shall know them.


Cap. 41.
HERE. Nay then sir if ye go to that, I must needs sai more then I thought to
do. For ye have here declared their fruits alredie, as in deed they declared
yours, from their beginning hitherto, alleged the same text to be mente and
spoken of you, and not of them: who, therewith, so peinted your petegrew in
deed, that a man might be ashamed to here it.


CATH. ye to here their shameful peintyng of their lack of charitee.


HERE. Nay to here of your fruits, as they declared them.


CATH. What fruits of ours, did they declare.


HERE. Your pomp, pride, ambicion, malice, envy, cupiditee, glotony,
lupurious living, and so forth, with many other vices, mo then the time will
serve me now to rehearse.


CATH. Why all these be but the comune fruits of ma^s frail pronitee. And
never fails to be found in some persons, among all sorts of men, in every
country, where so ever are any people at all. And therefore although they leied
all these fruits to our charges, yet are they no more ours, then they be
theirs. But in deed the trewthe to say, when obstinate error began to rise,
and sought about even for the^, his own most apt and very proper instruments,
he found the^ in deed, even among us. Where they had dug far more
deeply, in the planting, graffing, and gatheryng, of all these fruictes, then
ever did we. And therefore he caused them, as his own, most mete and apt for
his purpose, 1 John. 2.
to depart from us, according to the words of saint John, where he says, Ex
nobis prodierunt, sed non erant ex nobis, nam si fuissent ex nobis,
permansissent vtique nobiscum, That is to say, they went out from us, but they
were not of us, for if they had been of us, they should have remained verily
with us: Wherefore true it is, that they went out from us, and not we from them,
with whom we were never, for we are now, even where we were alwaie, and so are
not they. Therefore since it is plain and manifest, that their departure from
us, was not of charitee, it must needs be as plain and manifest again, that
it was of the contrary, which is none other but even mere malice in deed. and
that was it, that caused them, to taunte us with those evil fructes which are
commone, to the intent they might thereby, hyde the rest of their own, which are
to them, even propre and special: for they be not, the commone evil fruictes
of men, which our savior Christ taught us to know this special generation by:
for then we had been thereof never the nere. because a commune sign or token,
can give no certain or special knowlage of any singular thing. Wherefore,
because this kind of men, is so singular, as there is no more such, (although
to many by that) Christ gave us therefore, a special note and token to know
them by, when he says, ye shall know them by their fruictes. Math. 7.
That is to say, by those fruictes, which are there own propre unto them
selves, and to no men else. For (as who says) otherwise, ye could not discern
them from any other fortes of men, where as by those fruictes, which I mean,
ye shall not miss to know them in deed.


Cap. 42.
HER. What propre fruictes of their own have they, that no man has else beside?


CATH. Can thou not tell?


HERE. No not yet.


CATH. Then will I tell the my self, although not all, because I can not: nor
yet so many as I can, because it needs not. But nevertheless, some of them,
because the purpose requires it: And therefore do thou not know, that they
went alwaie about, to bring us in to thexperience of this true saying, Vbi
nullus or do, ibi sempiternus horror? Job. 10.
which may this be englished, Where is no order, there is continual fear,
trembling, astonishment, aduersitee, or thraldom. And therefore what order
left they (I mean not in profane places, but in no less then in the holy
house of god, wherein order ought to be most regarded and most constantly
houlden and kept) what order (I say) left they therein unshaken, or
vnouerthrowen al together? And that not only by them selves, of their own
deeds in some places, but also by their deceuable and false persuasions in all
places. For was it not they only, that cried away with all the old ancient
ceremonies of the church? and that so long, until they had therein prevailed
and brought it to pas? And sone after, went they not about to play the same
part, with all the holy sacraments likewise, only two except, saying there
was no mo of them sacraments in deed, but only two? and yet of those two, they
could not abide so much as the truth, and very right use of them ^other.
Farthermore, who devised the new alteration of the divine seruise, but they?
And when they had done it, I pray the what was it? any other or better then
such, as could not content them selves two years together? And therein to show
how loathe they were, in any thing to agree with us, where we had the Pater
noster, before the Creed, they put the Creed before the Pater noster: A
worthy occasion, of such an alteracion. Therefore how newfangled fa^ses reigns
among them, Their handling of their ( Communion table) does plainly declare:
for how has that been tossed from post to pillare, now east, now weast, now
north, now south, now up, now down, this way and that wai, and sildome in rest?
In so much that in many places, the chauncel could not hold it, but down it
went, into the body of the church, to draw somewhat nere the door: where as
men say, it had gone out and clean away, if they had be^ suffered but a
little while longer. Wherefore, if newfangled fassions, be contrary and against
the dew order of any honest man's house, as they be in deed: how much more
then, are they contrary and against the dew and honorable order, of the holy
house of god? how be it, by the^ we may see, what manner of heads these be,
from whence they come: which spares not in matter and place of so great
weight, to set forth, these fruictes of their own malicious and propre deceit:
For to whom may we trewly ascribe, the great spoiling and defasing of our
churches, but only to these newfangled ministers, of such falls doctrine, as we
see plain, has brought it to pass? for who had any such manner of
conscience, as durst once to venture upon it, but only these deniers of truth,
and such other as they deceued? who could have thought it to be well done (as I
think some did, or else they would not have done it) but throw the falfe
prechinges and other most crafty allurementes, of tbis peruers generacio^? who
be they, that bareth to Christ, such a secret love, and an inward zeal in
their hearts, that they can not suffer the picture or Image of his blessed
body, to stand in their sightes? Who be they, that went down with the arms
of his holy passion, and in the place thereof, up with the arms of men? who be
they, that put aweie, the holy sign of the cross, as evil or unprofitable to
look upon: And to supply the place thereof, brought in Lions, dogs and
dragons, as good and more mete for us to behold? who be they (I say) that are
and were, the doers and workers of all these things with many other like, but
only these very satanisticall teachers through their subtle pernicious and
most false persuasions?


HE. Sir that they did, they did it by a law.


CATH. will thou tell me that tale? when these be neither the makers, nor yet
the folowers, but always the chief and manifest breakers of laws, so far
as in the^ lies? For what laws, statutes, or orders, has been made, so
strong, so good, and so profitable, for the spiritual comune welthe in
especial, as they have not broken, and caused to be broken, contemned and
despised, so far as they might, for fear or shame? Therefore tell not me of
their obseruyng of laws, against the which, they have been so many ways,
open perswaders. In so much that I my self, have herd some of the^ in the
pulpit say, that they would go before the law, and bid the law, come after like
a daw. And even so they did in deed: For tell me by what law, went they down
with ye roode and the roode loftes to the great defasyng of churches? By what
law, went they down with the holy alters of god, to the desperacio^ of many,
in that they had well believed before? By what law went they down, with
twenty things more, then the time will now serve to reherce? Therefore these
be not those, that would follow the laws. But they be those, that would have
the laws follow them. And then should they be no laws at all, but only such,
as they would make them selves. For this by reason thou may well know, that
those, whose religion consists in the denial of trewthe, as the religion of
heretics does, can never away with their laws, whose religion consists in
the profession and grant of truth, as ours does. And therefore, what manner of
laws those would be, which these deniers of trewthe, would other make or
follow, if they might have their will, it is not hard to perceive: But to be
short in this case, what is amiss in all this land, other by reason of any
innouacio^s, alteracions, confusio^s, or otherwise, wherewith the most part of
the people are thiefly grieved, but that has risen and so come to pass, only
by these extreme enemies of truth, and their crafty means?


HER. Crafty means? what means are they.


CATH. Their falls doctrine, false teaching, false preaching, dissimulacion,
fraudulent flatteryng, crafty liyng, feigned holiness, promise of trewthe and
payment of falshede, promise of peace, and payment of discord, promise of
trust and payment of deceit, pretense of virtue and performans of vice, and
such other means, as are never to seek, nor out of use, with these most
capital enemies of trewthe: in so much, that if thou were not a man so
blinded withaffection toward them as thou art, Thou should clearly perceive
and see, all these means with many other like, in commune practice among them
daily: And therefore, is it hard to consider and understand, what kind of
fruits they are, which are alwai procured by these means, and many such
other as these be? I pass over their handlyng of the wyls and testamentes of
men, because I see them so strangely handle the most holy will and testament of
christ: for how much of that will, would they have trewly performed and kept?
They say them selfs, no less then all: And yet we may perceive, they mean
in effect, nothing at all. Nevertheless they would have all things referred
wholly and only to that will, to thentent they might then, way all things
them selfs, even after their own will. Thinkyng thereby, that their yea, and
our nay, and our yea, and their nay, should stand together upon an even
ground: for although they be in number far to many, and yet but few, in
comparison of all other men: Nevertheless in matters of the church, which be
not small, but greattest of all, look what all other men would, they will not:
what all other commend, they dispraise: what all other dispraise, they
commend: what al other do grant, they deny: what all other do love, they do
hate: what all other set forward, they would pluck backewarde: what mean
they by this? May they not be called a perverse generation?


HERE. It is a generation that bears some lies now and then.


CATH. In deed as thou say. one I confess my self. For where they be
said to leap from heresy into treason, although it were but a sorry leap,
yet the report thereof is not true. For they have not so leide hand upon
treason, that they have therein left their heresy, as the report does
sownde: But in deed not leaving the one for the other, they have so wrought
them both to gether, that those, which never took in hand, but one of them
alone, can not yet be compared unto them, in any of them both: wherefore,
they be untruely reported to leap out of heresy, into treason, when they
will be suer to keep them together, in a trust that the one shall help the
other: Therefore what wonder is it, although they rebel against their
governors here in earth, when they be such very rebellions against the
trewthe of almighty god in heaven? Job. 10. Psall. 21.
How have they handled the semeles garment of Christ? not casting lottes for
the whole, (as his persecutours did) to save the unity thereof: But a thousand
fold wors, snatchyng at the parts thereof, to tere, rent, and distroy it all
together. For what dissencion, division, discord, strife, contencion and
distraction of vnite^ and concord, they have made in christ's holy church,
all the world does know.


HER. I marvel what is to be found, among them, that ye will take in good
part.


CATH. Trust me trewly, even as much, as in them is worthy: which (without
question) in respect of the end, they apply it unto, is nothing at all: For
how bitter they make (or take) the sweet yoke of christ: And how heavy, they
make (or take) his light burden also, Math. 11.
it does well appear, not only by this, that they have so clean, shake them
both of, and cast them away for their own parts: but also by this, that they
have caused, so many other, to do the same likewise: for are they not, the
manifest enemies of chastitee? The perswaders of fleshly libertee? The
breakers of holy vows? The contemners of virtuous abstinence? The crafty
secret enticers from prayer, when they call it but liplabour? For what have the
done, under pretense of commune prayer, but brought the most part of the
people, from their devout particular, and special prayers? Also what a
malicious and spiteful part have they played, with no less than our blessed
lady mother of our savior christ, and with his holy apostles, martyrs,
confessors, and all the holy compenie of heaven? Any other then done what they
can, to bring them all, even out of regard, out of estimacion, yea and clean
out of memory? as it is of the prophet said unto god: Cogitauerunt aduersus
sanctos tuos, dixerunt, Psalm. 82.
venite, et disperdamus eos de gente, and non memoretur nome^ Israel vltra.
They studied (he says) against thy saints. They said, come, let us rid
them away from the nation, and let not the name of Israel, that is to say,
the name of ye beholders of god, be had any longer in memory.


HER. Sir, this was spoken of them in those days, which were against all
those saints, that were then but here in earth.


CATH. Thou say well, and therefore how much more was it spoken,
prophetically of these in our days, which are against all those saints that
are now in heaven? among whom, they spare not so much, as the most dear
mother of Christ. For why have they wyped so clean away, all their names out
of the letanie? why have they done the same likewise out of the calendar, as in
other places beside, and that very many? Why have they made away, with all
their images, out of the churches? And that with more spite, then I can
express? And therefore what is the cause that these hippocriticall teachers
has done all this, but only, under their falfe pretense of auoidynge
idolatry, to put both them, and their names, even clean out of memory? as
though it were good and best for us, never to have them in mind: And so in a
while not to believe, that ever there were any such. To this, their teaching
and doing does utterly tend. But herein, what do they else, but show them
selfs so far exiled out of the number of that holy company, That, to come
thereto, they have no token or lykelihode of any possibilitee? Wherefore, so
much of their purpose, as they have brought to pass all ready, may put us,
even clean out of doubt, what they would do in the rest, if they had time
and libertee. Any other think thou, but overthrow all? Therefore to what
sort of men, may this kind of fruictes, with many other like, be justly
ascribed, but only to this vnfeithfull generation alone? According to these
foresaid words of our savior Christ, Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetes eos, By
their fruictes (he says) ye shall know them. Math. 7.
For doubtless these fruictes, proceeds not of man's commune frailtee, but in
very deed, of a diabolical peruersitee: for without question these men be of
that sort, of whom saint Paul does say, Confitentur se nosse deum, factis
autem negant, Titu. ^
cum sint abominati et increduli, which may this be englished, They say, they
know god, but in their doings, they deny him, when they be abominable and
vnfeithfull: Therefore since it may also now apere, by the testimony of this
holy apostle, that they be abominable in their works, and false in their
faith, what remains in them, whereby so many (as we see) has been trained in
to their false fraternitee, ^ Cori. 11.
but only their crafty, subtle, feyned, vnfruictfull, and bare fantastical
words, with out truth or honestee? For there can be no truth in
vnfeithfulnesse, nor yet honesty, in abominacio^, by the which two terms, that
is to say, by unfaithfulness and abomination, the holy apostle (as thou see)
does here describe the^: Wherefore, consider with thy self, what a lamentable
fortune, and miserable chance have they, which has and yet does commit the
leading, of no less then their own souls, unto such a peruers generation,
such a peruers generacio^ I say, as has dissented and straied away, not
only from the commendable doings, of all good christen people: but also from
the pure veritee and truth of Jesus Christ, And has brought them selves, in to
such an vnfeithful, and abominable state, as thou maiste now perceue, not
only by so much as I have declared unto the already, but also, by the manifest
words of tholy apostle him self, which does say, they are both abominable,
and also vnfeithfull: And therefore, who be they, that yet does follow them? any
other but such, as therein, are most unfortunate? and what has brought them to
that infortunitee? any thing more, then that lack of grace, Prou. 16.
which causes a certain way that leads to perdiction, to seem very
straight? More ever what do they find in those leders which causes them to
be such folowers? any truth of faith, when the apostle does say they be
vnfeithfull? or any truth of virtue or honestee, when he says, they be
abominable? Therefore what is there in them, for the which they do so follow
them? any thing else, but (as I said) deceuable words, a most unworthy cause of
following? And yet they follow them nevertheless. But why? Trewly there is none
other why, but even their own ignorant and weiward wilfulnes: which does alwai
her ken and lean to a wrong spirit, directly against the words of saint
John, where he says, 1. Joan. 4
Nolite omni spiritui credere, sed probate spiritus si ex deo sint, do not give
credence (he says) to every spirit, but prove the spirits whether they be
of god, which were soon proved in those leaders, if these words of our
savior Christ, were well and trewly weid of their folowers, where he says,
Math. 7.
ye shall know them by their fruictes: Wherefore although this were enough to him
that had but half an eye, to see what manner of spirit those leaders has,
yet because we may see with our whole eyes, that it sinketh not, into such
minds as their folowers has, I wish therefore, that they would but well
behold, and consider, this plain and manifest monition and warninge of saint
paul, which he does give in this case, Hebre. 13.
where he seyth, Doctrinis variis et peregrinis nolite abduci, Take heed ye be
not led a wey (he says) with diverse and straynge doctrines: Mark, what
doctrines he speaks of, diverse and strainge he says. And therefore the
diuersitee and straingenes of their doctrines, conferred and considered with
this lesson of saint paul, me think should cause them to beware, not only of
the oneside what they do, but also of the other side whom they follow: for first
so strainge there doctrines are, that they the^ selves can not tell, from whence
they came, nor whither they will: as it may well apere by this, that they have so
often failed and deceued the^ selfs, in there proof there of: for where at the
first, they stifli said, that they came from no les, the^ out of ye holy
scriptures, they are therein found most false and obstinat liers, for the holy
scriptures makes clean against the^ and where, for a farther shift, they seid
(as sometime they did) that they came from the old holy doctors, therein they
lied as fast agein of the other side, for those holy fathers them selfs, do
testify the contrari: and where they had no farther to run, but the^ to say,
that they came from the primative church, the very books, of most godly
writers in that holy time yet remaining, does therein so convince their falshed,
that of there lieng they might be ashamed. wherefore yet unto this day, so
strange are there doctrines even to them selfs, that they do not, only not
know, from whence they came, or whither they will, but also that they are not
so much as willing, to learn it another: for when such as does perfitly know it
in deed, does daily tell them the truth thereof, they will another believe them,
nor yet so much, as quietly here them: Agein of the other side, as towching the
diuersitee of their doctrines, so diverse we know they be, that they differ not
only from the doctrine of the holy catholic church, (without the which there
is no salvation) but also they diffre, and not in a few things, even among
them selves: as it may most plainly apere, by the sundry and manifold
opinions, that reigns among them: For where so ever, one says one thing an
other an other, as they do in deed (the great matter of the most holy
sacrament of the alter to witness thereof) There must needs be diversity of
opinions: and where so ever there is diuersitee of opinions, (if it be, as this
is, in matters of the faith) There must needs be diversity of doctrines: And
where so ever there is diuersitee of doctrines, there must needs be lack of
trewthe, (of one side, or other, or else of both together) And where so ever
there is lake of truth, there the matter must needs be strainge, because
without truth it can not be known: Wherefore by this it cummeth clerly to
light, that the lack of truth is the very cause, of the great diversity and
strangeness of their doctrines: for the help whereof, this only monition of
holy seint paul, seying. Take heed ye be not led away, with diverse and
strainge doctrines, were of it self very sufficient, where enough were no less
then enough: But where much more then enough, is nothing at al, what remedy,
but patience and pitee? Therefore what shall I say of those their folowers, to
whom all this will nothing serve? any thing else, but that they are becum the
worthy partakers, of all the propre fructes, that proceeds of the leaders? of
the which fruictes, let this very little of a great deal more and wors
behind, be now sufficient for this time.


Cap. 43.
HERE. Sir wot ye what?


CATH. what.


HER. It chances well that ye have here uttered all this talk only between
you and me: for if it had been in writing and openly known abroad, I dare well
say, it would have displeased a great sort?


CATH. Why so.


HER. For two causes.


CATH. What are those?


HERE. One is the hardenesse of the matter.


CATH. What, when it is but all in english?


HERE. Although it be. Yet many would think it hard to understand, for all
that.


CATH. That would none of our english biblers dee, which sticks at nothing
in the holy scripture, wherein is most hardenesse of all.


HERE. Yet I am suer they would stick at this.


CATH. Than should they have but a good occasion thereof, to learn and see, how
vninete they are, before they could well away with this, and other like, to
go to an other matter, of a thowsande fold more hardenes than this is of, as
the holy scripture is in deed: wherefore the hardness of this, could minister
unto them no cause of displeasure at all, but rather the contrary: And therefore
what other canse is there else beside?


HERE. Without fail an other, far passing this, and that is not the hardness,
but in deed the very matter it self.


CATH. What caulest thou that?


HERE. The descripcion of the state of an heretic.


CATH. And would that displease so great a sort, as thou speak of?


HER. Ye without doubt.


CA. Thou art therein clean deceived: and I will tell the why. There is no man,
that will be displeased or grieved, with the true descripcion of an heretik, if
he him self, be not one of them in deed: wherefore, if it displease not an
heretic, it can displase no man: And an heretyke, it can not displease another,
as it may well apere by this, that he can not believe or think, that he is an
heretic. And therefore he can not believe or think, that this descripcion
touches him, any more than an other man: wherefore he can no more be grieved
with all, than an other man can.


HERE. Ough sir, never think so, for all they would yet conjecture and
shrewdly suspecte, that ye meant it of them, and of no men else.


CATH. What, when they can not so much as think, that it does any thing
touch them? There were no reason in that.


HERE. Sir, reason or reason not, so they would do, for all that.


CATH. As thou say, we have to much experience of them already, to look for
any reason, at their hands now: And yet because of thy saiynge, I wisshe that
this matter were in their heryng, to see how they would take it.


HERE. full grievously I may say to you.


CATH. Then, other they would keep their grefe secretly, or else they would
declare and show it openly: if they would keep it secretly, it were their own,
and no men's else: If they would declare it openly, they should but therein bewrey
them selfs, and plainly show what they be: for if thou should make a true
general description of all felons or thieves openly, and than, if any one of
the audience, should take it grievously, would thou not think, that he should
therein, show him self to be other one of such a company, or else at the
least a fauorer of that facultee, which in some respect is wors then he? And
therefore even so likewise it is, in this case of heretics. For if they would
needs herein, with the utterance of their grefe, show them selfs, what they
be: they must be content of the other side, that men should take them as they
be. For so men must needs do, without any remedy, because no man can take a
thing otherwise, then he does know it is. Wherefore now to conclude, because
there is no disease of the body (being never so lamentable) that can be
comparable to any mortal disease of the sowie. And no mortal disease of the
soul, can be co^parable to this pernicious plage of heresy, I do therefore
most heartily wish, that all men would temper and qualify, their consideracions
and remembrance thereof, with such earnest pitee, and daily prayer, as the
miserable state of this vnfeithfull generation does of necessitee alwaie
require: And therein to desire, that it may please almighty god, not only so to
stay thinfection thereof, that it sprede no farther: but also, with his great
mercy and grace, so to viset the hearts of such as are infected and vexed with
all, that they lose not the profit of the time and space, which to them he
has lent, therein to repent, and so to return, to the sweet pappes, of our
most blessed mother, his holy catholic church ageine. And therefore with this
I bid the now farewell.


HER. Sir, ye will not serve me so?


CATH. Why, what is the matter?


HER. Where is that, which ye did promise, to speak of frith?


CA. Thou said before, the day was far spent. And now it appears to be much
more, for thou see it is almost night: and therefore we have now no time, to
talk of so large a matter, as that would be, if we should once enter in to it.


HERE. Why sir, it can not be long for any fault ye can find in him, he being
so honest a man, as I believe he was.


CATH. What so ever he was, in thy believe, he was and is, in my knowlage, as
subtle, false, and folish, as ever was any of his most wicked enterprice,
that I have other red or hard of.


HER. Sir in your so saying, ye do kindell my stomach, more tha^ ye are ware of.


CA. What so ever I do therein, I say nothing but truth, which I am well able
to prove.


HER. That proof is it, that I would here.


CA. Thou know it can not be now.


HE. when then?


CA. when thou will thy self.


HE. Then, that shall be even to morrow morning by four a clock.


CA. What soft and feire, thou art very swifte.


HER. I think it long, I may tell to you.


CA. So it seems by thy have. but eight of the clock is a fair owr.


HE. Shall I not fail, to find you here then?


CA. If thou sai the word, thou shall not only find me here then, but also,
that to be true, which I have now said.


H. what, that frith was subtle, false, and folishe?


CA. Ye, as ever was any man.


HE. Why, subtilte and folishnes, can not well join together.


CA. Yet, whether they ca^ or no, he brought the^ so nere together, that in his
head, there was nothing between them, but even only falshed, which did knit
up the knot, of all his conclusiions.


HE. O sir I would it were morning as it is euenyng.


CA. why so?


HE. It greueth me to break of, and to leave this matter thus.


CA. Thou know the morning is not long hence.


HE. Well, since there is none other remedy, will ye remember your owre ye
speak of?


CA. double not thereof.


HER. Then for my part, I will not miss, I warrant you.


CA. Therefore, god speed the well, for this time.


HER. And you also sir.


FINIS.
Fautes escaped in the printyng.
Lefe. Side. Line. Fautes. Corrected..5..1..22. any denies denies
any.12..1..16. much darkely much more darkely.12..2..10. what when.12..2..11.
he way, trenth. the way, trewthe..16..1..11. pluralu plural number.16..2..8.
the name of the name.19..2..22. saluacton salvation.23..1..26. nor
not.33..1..19. the same this same..37..2..7. twen twenty

IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETESTRETE IN THE HOVS OF THOmas Berthelet.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


