A DESCRIPTION OF THE CHVRCH OF Christ, with her peculiar Privileges, and also
of her Commons, and Entercommoners.

WITH SOME OPPOSITIONS AND ANSWERS OF DEFENSE, For the maintenance of the Truth
which she professes:

AGAINST CERTAIN ANABAPTISTICALL AND ERRONIOVS OPINIONS, Very hurtful and
dangeroous to weak CHRISTIANS.

MAINTAINED AND PRACTICED By one Master JOHN SMITH, sometimes a Preacher in
Lincolneshire, and a Company of English people with him now at Amsterdam in
HOLLAND.

Whom he has there with himself Rebaptised.

By I. H.

REVEL. 22.13.14.15. VER. J am Alpha, and Omega (says the Lord) The first and
the last.

Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that their right may be in the
free of life, and may enter in thorough the Gates into the City. For without
shall be Dogs, and Enchanters, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters,
and whosoever ^^ueth or makes lies.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Fosbrooke 1610

The principal oppositions are these.
1 THat the Baptism of Children is the mark of the Beast. 2 That every member
of a true visible Church must be baptized again. 3 That none ought to be
Baptized before he be Regenerate. 4 That the members of their Church are all
so, regenerate and baptized, and is the heavenly Jerusalem. 5 That some of
these may fall away and perish. 6 That there is no true Church to be seen in
the world, but themselves at this day.
With diverse other false Doctrines which are grounded upon these principles.

TO THE CITIZENS OF THE HEAVENLY JERUSALEM. INCREASE OF TRVETH And heavenly
Wisdom be multiplied upon you, with Peace and prosperity in these latter
days.
And to all her well affected Friends, that desire to see her Beauty, and to
dwell within her Gates, happy success.

A Friend of yours sweet Citizens, unworthy to take part with you in your
rich peculiar things, makes bold to present unto your custody, treasures
which I have found. And also most earnestly intreates you to assist me against
your many enemies, who lay claim to your City and all your privileges. Pray
with me unto the Lord your God, that his truth may take place in the hearts of
men, and be regarded, and that all the hateful enemies thereof, and their lies
may be brought to confusion. These things I entreat at your hands, making no
doubt of your diligence herein. Go but up to the top of mount Sion, and you
shall see your enemies round about you with their shields in their hands and
their swords drawn: but be of good courage, fear nothing, your God will
deliver them into your hands, and their weapons shall you consume like straw
with the fire of his word, and the City shall be yours as it is, and it shall
not he taken from you, nor the treasures thereof out of your possession. The
days are come wherein truth shall prevail, And now dear friends to let you
understand my cause of writing to the aforenamed Master John Smith and his
company. It fell out of late that I being in company with some of them, had
some conference with them, wherein they seemed very well affected to the things
that I spoke unto them. One of them answering me in these words, I could
willingly let all these things which you have said, go down into me, but
only the going to the assemblies, another of them answered him instantly, you
heard what he said for that: And so they requested me that I would set the
things down in writing, which had been said, and they would either answer or
subscribe unto it, which thing I thought good to perform.

And beloved friends, though I be the least worthy of you all to plead your
cause, yet being moved at their request, I have made bold, and also seeing
afterward some writings of theirs published in Print, I was emboldened the
more, perceiving therein their desperate resolution, proclaiming open war,
challenging al, and therein the city of God: I was encouraged, seeing it was his
cause, persuaded he would be my protector in the defense of his own City, I
therefore took his word and promise for my shield, with this confidence that
he would not leave me till they were overthrown, other weapons I have none
except the sword of the spirit, The skill of the learned disputers of this
world look not for, that is not my profession. Truth I hope ye shall find,
but vested in a very low and simple Coat, Method I did forget, matter only
was in my mind, the enemy came so fast upon me that skill was laid aside.
Truth I hope has kept me company, though I could not garnish it with
Rhetorical ornaments. And therefore most noble and courteous Citizens, I have
made choice of you before all other to Dedicate this measure of truth unto,
because I knew, although you be the noblest Citizens in the world, yet are ye
the poorest in spirit, your hearts can stoop, and your eyes can look below,
you are come down from the hills of pride, to the valleys of tears, yet can
go up to the top of mount Sion; you look not after the glory of this world,
nor the wisdom thereof, It is foolishnes in your thoughts, which are seasoned
with heavenly wisdom, if truth come you embrace it, you look not upon the
coat of him that brings it, so that you justify I am pleased, what others say
and judge, (for my part) I pass not, but for their parts, I wish them to be
advised, and to give ear to the voice of the Spirit, and the Bride, which
cries, come whosoever is a thirst, and whosoever will, and take of the water
of life freely.

And to the end your Mother, dear Children of Jerusalem, might a little
refresh the spirits of her well affected friends, that have been so long time
wearied with the Iarres and contentions that have been about her visible
state: I thought good to publish this short description of her unto the open
veiwe, that they might see her fruits what they be, her light, her privileges,
and her marks, whereby she may be seen and known from the fleshly boasters
of these distasteful times, who having been so long accustomed to earthen
buildings, cannot discern nor taste that which comes from above, and although
not only the general, but specially the reformists, and reformers, will not
only distaste like wayward children but even spurn against, yet will I not be
discouraged, for there is a little remnant that thirsts for relief, so they
be refreshed, I pass not for the rest, for I know true wisdom which is
always from above, has been, is, and shall be for ever justified of her
Children, and they shall see Jerusalem to their great joy, whereas the other
groping in the dark, shall never behold that holy City, nor partake of her
privileges for ever. And although she has cried often, and uttered her voice
full many a time, and few or none regard what she says, yet can she not
hold her peace, but she must plead her Childrens cause, against those that
lay claim to their right and inheritance, challengeng them the field, and
setting up a flagge of defiance against the City of truth and the God of
Israel. Behold here comes one the least of ten thousand, that does accept the
challenge seeing others do hold their peace, and although he know not how to
bear arms in the field as the manner is, yet he promises in the name of the
God of Jacob, with a sling and a stone, to bring their champion on his knees,
for all his stout words, that his army who trusted in him, may be glad to take
their flight, and you enjoy your City in peace, And thus most noble Citizens
farewell.

Your faithful friend till death. I. H.

To M. JOHN SMITH, and to the Company with him at Amsterdam in Holland.
AH Master Smith, I would for your own sake you had not written with such
affirmation, Many things which you have also made so public, the which you can
never call home again: although you your self do find them false, whereby
also you have made your self more unable and unwilling to revoke them, though
they be proved so. Much better therefore had it been for you to have left that
Paper unstained by your hand, that should paint forth an untruth, and never
have set Pen to write, but to the unchangeable truth of God, of which you never
need repent, and whereof the Church of Christ is the pillar, Considering also
how great a danger every one does fall into, that is found to add or diminish
from or to the intent and purpose of the word of God.

I would therefore you had been better advised before you had published your
books. You thought your self as fully satisfied when you were of another
mind. You know, or at the lest, there be that know them that have three,
four, nay, five times changed their Religion, that thought themselves as fully
satisfied every time as you thnike your self now: what they are now (some of
them) I will not say. And if every man should publish books so often as they
change their mind, how many Religions then should spring from one man, and he
perhaps be author of so many sects, what heaps of books are there at this day
of several opinions? Make therefore no more matter for the fire, there is straw
and stubble enough already. Speak truth, for the day of burning is at hand.
And whatsoever you do, look to the maine, leave not the foundation as some
have done: Hold fast the beginnings least you never come to the ends. And I
pray God deliver you from the Curse of Sinai and her sons, Hagars children.
And bring you all unto the blessings of mount Sion and into the rest and
freedom of her children, even Saraes sons and daughters.

Your friend. I. H.

The Contents of that which follows.
1 A Description of the heavenly Jerusalem with her privileges, and of her
stability and of her Commons and intercommoners. 2 A veiw or search of Master
Smiths Church with a discovery of the unsoundness and Ruinousnes thereof. 3 An
examination of a principal answer of his, whereupon many of his other reasons
do depend against the Baptism of Children, and the confutation thereof: with
sufficient reasons and proof for the lawfulnes of Baptizing them, and that the
Baptizing of Children cannot be the mark of the Beast. 4 Of the Commonalty and
Commons of Christians in general, and wherein specially they are to be
distinguished, and how the Commoners ought to carry themselves toward the
little special ones, and how the special do, and ought to walk toward the
Commoners. 5 Of Christian liberty, and of the lawfulnes of the Authority of
Magistrates, and how all subjects are bound to obey. 6 Of Faith and Repentance.
7 A Reprehension of Master Smith for his bold Challenge. 8 An exhortation to
him and his company. 9 A short description of the contentions of these times.
10 Of Sions Restoration, the fall of her greatest enemy, and of her
everlasting glory.
To Master JOHN SMITH, and to the Company with him at Amsterdam in Holland.
ANd least I run into your fault, and fall into the same danger with you, as
of my self I have no strength to stand more then you: By the grace and
assistance of my God, I will take heed, and though I have not the skill of the
learned Disputers of this world, yet I hope the Spirit of Truth will so direct
me, that I shall rather say, I know not, then set down and affirm that for
truth, which shall be found a lie. This therefore I say and write, not
respecting what you have said, nor regarding your many Arguments to the
contrary.

That the Church which the Lord does build, consists of living stones: 1.
Peter 2. Mat. 16.18.
And the gates of Hell shall not prevail against that Church, or any one of
the stones thereof, Revel. 20.6.
but it shall stand and prevail against Hell, and the snares of the second
death, so that not one shall perish that is of this holy Temple.

For this Church of Christ and every stone thereof, 1. Pet. 2.4, 7.
is framed and fashioned from above, he himself is the foundation and chief
corner stone. And all the stones of this building are his brethren, reborne and
made a new, not in show, but in very truth, not for a time, but for ever not,
one of them shall ever fall off.

They are all of them everlasting, as is their foundation whereon they rest,
and whose strength does stay them up. Matt. 16.19.
Great privileges has this Church above all other, for to it he has given
the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, to open and shut, to bind and loose: And
where two or three of this universal Church of Christ, Matt. 18.18, 20.
consisting of stones of life, are gathered together in his Name, he has
promised and will not fail to be in the midst of them, And whatsoever they
bind in earth, is bound in heaven, and whatsoever they loose on earth is
loosed in heaven: And where two of them shall agree in earth upon any thing,
whatsoever ye shall, desire it shall be given you (says he) of my Father
which is in heaven.

This Church is one, Ephe. 4.5, 6.
the Faith is one, the Baptism is also one and the same in every stone
thereof, not on the skin, but in the heart.

Their Rock is Christ, that their one Lord, he is the Prince of their Faith
and Hope, and his Father is their one God and Father alone, who is above all,
and through all, and in them all, praised for ever. Gal. 4.26.
And this is Jerusalem from above, which (Saint Paul says) is the mother of us
all, and is free.

And this and all of them are those little ones, whom (the Lord said) whosoever
shall offend: It were better that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, Matt.
18.6.
and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea, so precious in his sight are
they all, And whosoever shall give but a cup of cold water, to any one of the
lest of these, Mark 9.41.
in my Name (says the Lord) shall not leese his reward, but shall have
eternal life, As it is written; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world: For I was an
hungry, and you gave me meat, I was a thirst and you gave me drink, etc. Ye
did it to these (says he) if but to the least of these my brethren, ye did it
to me; Mat. 25.34, 35, 36.
And again, Whosoever receives one of the least of these little ones in my
Name (says the Lord) receives me, and with me him that sent me. O happy man
therefore, that can perceive and do these things: But he that despises you,
despises me, and him that sent me. And this is it which John means. He that
says he is in that light, 1. John 2.9.
and hates his brother is in darkness until this time: But he which loves
his brother abides in that light, and there is none occasion of evil in him.
And again, Hereby we know that we are translated from death to life, because
we love the brethren, 1. John 3.16.
meaning the Lords brethren, the little Sheep, to whom he will say, Come ye
blessed inherit the Kingdom for ever: These love their enemies, Matt. 5.44.
If they hunger they feed them, if they thirst they give them drink, if they
curse they bless, if they persecute, they pray and weep for them.

And these are the light of the world, Matt. 5.14, 15.
the Candle on a Candlestick, the City set upon a Hill, whereof David spoke
when he said, Glorious things are spoken of thee, Psalm. 87.3.
thou City of God, and this if one will, he may visibly see, for a City set
upon a hill cannot be invisible.

And to this alone is power given to bind and loose, Ioh. 20.23.
to remit and to retain sins, even to these I mean are these Keys given,
whom God approves and will approve for ever: Indeed many are called, but
these are they that are chosen, these love one another, and thereby do they
know each other to be borne of God, and to be loved of God, and that they do
love God, I say, for that they love those that are borne of God: 1. John. 2.5.
As it is written, Hereby we know that ye are in him. And this is the kingdom
which the Lord says; John. 3.3.
No man can see but he that is borne again.

And this is that house of Leui, 1. Peter. 29. Hebrew. 12.23.
that royal Priesthood spoken of, the peculiar people, the congregation of the
first borne, who are all written in heaven. The chosen generation, and people
set at liberty: If you will receive it; Mat. 18.4 Revel. 3.12.
these are they that have the pre-eminence, these are all the Priests of God,
and serve in his Temple for ever: These he has made pillars in his house, and
shall go no more out: these are blessed, and holy, and have al their parts in
the first resurrection, and shall not be hurt in the second death. These are
they that are risen with Christ, Revel. 20.6. Revel. 2.11.
and seek those things which are above, who are dead to sin and crucified to
this world, these are they that have overcome the world, and have received the
white stone, and the new name of the Lord. And this is the little flock to
whom he says, Luke. 12.32.
Be of good cheer, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom. And
this alone is that City of God, Revel. 3.11.
which only is named the new Jerusalem, and these are the Citizens, and of
these the scripture means, which says, Where two or three be gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them, And behold I am with you
(says he) unto the end of the world.

But perhaps you will say, if this be the Church of Christ, which you have
here described;

It is true indeed, but what says it, Ioh. 2.19.
If they had bin of us, they would have continued with us: but of that Church
they never were, that has the pre-eminence, and unto whom those excellent
titles and treasures of God does belong: for although they did partake with
them in receiving the word, and believing the truth thereof, and of the
elementish Baptism, and the signs of the Lords body and blood, and all other
such like common things: yet were they never baptized in heart, returned and
became as little children; neither yet did ever eat his flesh, and drink his
blood, Mat: 18.3.
truly and indeed by faith: for want whereof, they could never enter into the
kingdom of heaven: nor yet had ever life in them, as it is written. And
therefore of that Church and kingdom they never were, John 6.53.
nor yet did ever partake with them in their peculiar things: nor never came
into their courts of rest, nor City of peace. But to the returned little ones,
do all those great things belong; those excellent privileges, even to them
that eat his flesh, John 6.54.
and drink his blood: who have all of them eternal life abiding in them, whom
the Lord Jesus will raise up at the last day, as he himself says.

But how then did that Church judge of them,

That Church did never so approve of them, Smith, to justify and approve of
those whom God does condemn: they are not so rash as you, and your Church, to
affirm they know not what: They are better advised, and better taught then so:
That Church and kingdom which we speak of, was never so deceived in her
enterco^moners, to account and approve them as borne again: because they did
partake with her children in all these common things: But she and her children
judged always the truth of them, and never were deceived concerning them.

They received the word with joy and gladness, Mat. 13.20. Acts 2.41. Luke 9
62.
They took the Plough by the hand indeed, The foul spirit was gone, the Sow
was washed, the blade sprung up: These things the Church did see, and know was
true in them; and so far it did approve of them, and did yield unto them the
common things, and were of one accord therein together. The Church and stones
of life looked for fruit from them, but fruit they never saw: They hoped the
best, till they saw the worst: They knew not the tree, but by the fruit, and
that not till it had brought forth, either good or bad. But by their fruit they
do know them as it is written, Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles? can a good tree bring forth bad fruit, or a bad tree good fruit? no
not possible. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, Mat.
7.16.17.18.19.20.
neither can a bad tree bring forth good fruit: every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. The Scripture does
never any where teach or speak like your Master Smith, That evil trees may be
known to be good trees, by bearing of good fruit, and yet be cut down and
cast into hell fire, for bearing of evil fruit: for you say, that a tree which
shall be hewn down, one that may fall away, does bring forth as good fruit,
as the good tree, or good ground does; and that there can no difference be
discerned by their fruits between them, contrary to the Scripture which says
to the children of the kingdom. Mat. 12.33.
Ye shall know them by their fruits, Meaning the good trees by the good fruit
which they bring forth, from the trees that bring not forth good fruit, and
from the evil trees which bring forth evil fruit. And as they know
certainly, the good tree by his good fruit, and the evil tree by his evil
fruit: so they do also know that those trees which grow in the Lords field,
Luke 13.6.7.8.
standing as branches in the vine, John 15.2.
and bring not forth good fruit are accursed like the fig tree, Mat. 21.19.
Mat. 3.10.
and must be hewn down with the evil trees, and cast into everlasting fire.

But perhaps you will say, Mat. 24.13.
He that endures to the end, shall be saved. And the righteous man may fall
from his righteousness (as testifies the Prophet) and die. Eze. 18.24.26.27.
And the unrighteous man turn from his unrighteousness and live. So that
there can be no such certainty as you speak of, until the end.

Here I would first know of you, Moses, Elias, the Prophets, and Apostles
might yet perish, for to that end they are not yet come: But they are and
shall be saved, therefore that end it cannot be: what then? the end of their
life in the flesh? that end is it which you intend, I dare say, Then indeed
there is no certainty, in this world to be had, till the hour of death: then
is the Doctrine of your fellows, the Dutch Anabaptists true, who affirm that
the most righteous man, lustified and borne again from above, may fall away and
perish at any time, even till his last hour: then should man's salvation depend
upon his last gasp. Then no man can rejoice, that his name is written in the
Book life, till he be dead: or else they may have their names blotted out
again, after they be written therein, as indeed they do affirm: But man may
be certainly assured of reconciliation with God, Romans 1.38.30.
and that his name is written in the book of life and sealed there, by an
indelible covenant, before the moment or hour, or day of his death, therefore
that end it cannot be.

But stay,

Such righteous men, as I told you of before, Mat. 13.19.20.21.22.
some by persecution are offended, and some the cares of this world do choke.
And so the righteous man does fall from his righteousness. The washed sow is
turned to wallow in the mire again. 2. Pe. 20.2.
The dog to his vomit again. He that took the Plough by the hand, has
looked behind him, and is made unmeet for the kingdom of heaven for, ever.
The unclean spirit that was cast out, Mat. 12.45.
is returned with seven worse then himself, and re-entereth the house swept:
and the end of this man is worse then his beginning: It had been better for
him, that he had neuerknowne the way of truth, his condition was better before
he took the Plough in hand, then it is now in this end of his, wherein he
has given it over, turned back and entertained his evil companion again,
with seven more worse then he.



The end therefore is the fruit, as reaping is the end of Ploughing: Psalm. 1.3.
which brings forth his fruit in due season, whose leaf shall not fade.

And this is the plantation of God, and these are his trees, and the branches
of his own Vine Christ Iesues: and every branch that berareth fruit in him he
purges like a good husbandman, Ioh. 15.1.2.
that it may bring forth more fruit. And if you ask what fruit that is, I
told you before: yet if you will have it again, It is Love, even that new
commandment, the perfection which the Lord commands, Mat. 5.48.
saying. Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect: It is the first
resurrection, which whosoever attaineth, is blessed and holy for ever. They
that attain to this end, are blessed in their life, Deuteronomy. 28.3.45.6 Mat.
9.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.
and blessed at their hour of death, and blessed at the end of the world, and
blessed for evermore.

These righteous men never fall from their righteousness, their names are never
rased out of die book of life, Mat. 18.14.
but unrighteous men may turn to their righteousness. And therefore these
righteous men, encourage all, exhort all, hope all things, endure all things,
forbear and are gentle unto all, 1. Cor. 13.4.5.6.7.8.
And wait with patience, laboring to see it by any means, they will bring
forth fruit, even the fruit of the good tree, The good fruitwhich when they
see, they do rejoice and embrace them, knowing thereby that they are borne of
God their own father, as Children of that holy Church Jerusalem their mother:
purged and purchased through his eternal Testament, in the blood of that one
Lord the Lamb, 1. John 3.14.
to be an holy habitation to himself for ever. And here is no love lost
between these brethren, such love between them as never was between earthly
brethren.

As the stock they came of in their new generation does excel in glory,
inriches, in power, 1. John 5.1.
in wisdom, in bounty, in mercy, and love: all Fathers and Mothers in nature,
be they never so high in place of this world, even that they can give
Kingdoms, and thousand thousands of Gold and Treasure, to their Children: and
possess them of all the pleasures that the world can afford: and with all the
signs of love that nature can express. I say, as the great God of Heaven does
excel the greatest that ever was on earth: And as his love is infinite beyond
theirs, and his ability also to perform the same: So do the gifts, the
signs and seals of his love excel theirs.

And as his children do come of a more noble stock then theirs and are more
honorably descended every way. So do they excel in love ten thousand
degrees, for ehey love for other and greater respects. And as love was the
beginning and cause of this happiness: 1. John 4.19.
even the love of the eternal God, as the Scriptures witness: So love is the
end of their conversation, Heb. 13.8.
in and through Jesus Christ, yesterday to day, and the same for ever.

This is that name so secretly written upon them, that no man can Read or know
it, but they alone which have it, Revel. 3.12.
and upon them only is his Name written: New Jerusalem; as it is written: Him
that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God: And he shall
go no more out; And I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of
the City of my God, even the new Jerusalem which comes down from heaven
from my God, And my new name. And this is the end, which whosoever endures
unto, is faithful to the death, and shall receive the Crown of life. Many
false Prophets shall arise and deceive many, Mat. 24.11.12.13.
and because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall be cold; but he
that endures to the end, even this true and perfect love, the contrary to
iniquity, and to love that is cold, he shall be saved.

And this is the Baptism of the holy Ghost and fire, Matthew. 3.11.
even the fire of Gods love, the coals whereof are fiery coals, and a burning
flame which much water cannot quench, neither the floods drown: But it
breaks forth and returns such a love to his God and Father, ^an. 8.7.
and to his Lord and redeemer, as no man knows, but he that has it. And such
a love to his fathers Children, those little ones, his and his Lords brethren,
as they never know nor shall know who are never borne again.

Yea, he returns love to al men even to his enemies. Prou. 21.22. Romans 12.20,
21. Psalm. 15.2, 4.
If he hunger or thirst he feeds and gives them drink, and so heaps coals of
this fire upon his head. He speaks the truth from his heart, and with his
tongue uses no deceit. He esteems not himself, but is vile in his own
eyes. He enuieth not. 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6.
The Sun goes not down upon his anger: He rejoices not in iniquity, but
always in the truth, and in doing good to others: Love seeks not her own.
And are not these fruits which may distinguish between the good tree and the
bad?

These fruits those righteous men never brought forth, which fell away. Heb.
3.14.
Their blade was never like this fruit: Their beginnings were never like these
endings. Those first were never like these last, Matthew. 22.14.
which are the first, even the first borne; For many are called but few chosen.

And this is Jerusalem, that poor little sweet holy City, Revel. 11 2.
which has been trodden under feet of those heathen Gentile Courtiers, and
outside Christians, not worth the measuring, these many hundred years. And this
is the Hill which once stood up above the Hills, whose light did shine from East
to West, Romans 1.8.
even to the worlds end. To it the Nations flock to hear, and see the things
that were of her so famous through the world. To whom she cried, saying: Come
whosoever will, and take of the water of life freely, Revel. 22.17.
whereat many rejoiced, believed and were Baptized. Of which some were made pet
takers of her peculiar things: And were not only believers of the truth, and
Baptized with the Baptism which thereunto belonged, but were Baptized in heart
broken and dissolved into a thousand tears: And believed in him who also
Baptized them with the holy Ghost and fire. The other hard and unbaptized in
heart, refusing that graceso freely offered them: Judging the common Faith and
Baptism which they had received, sufficient to serve their turn: Supposing
that one Talent safely kept, would stand them enough insteede when the day of
account should come; despised the little ones that were borne and Baptized from
above. Acts 20.29.
And thus began the mystery of iniquity to work, and grew up in time above
the Hill of God, and like Wolves spared not his flock, took possession
indeed of the outward Court, gathered strength, got a head: And trod down
that liberal free City, the true mother and nurse to the Lords lambs and
babes.

This head of theirs is that great Antichrist, Revel. 13.1.
that beast which rose out of the sea, with seven heads and ten horns: who
has reigned now twelve hundredth and three years, and yet still reigns, and
shall till seven and fifty more be come. And then his days his times, Revel.
11.3.
months and years, shall be accomplished, (even one thousand two hundred and
sixty.) and his Crowns pulled from his head, his City burnt with fire, and
upon that woman which says: I sit being a Queen, am no widow, and shall see
no mourning, shall come shame and confusion, howling and crying; and utter
desolation: even she which now calls her self by the name of the true
mother, and like an harlot challenges the husband of the true spouse to be
hers. Mat. 23.35.
And these are the offspring of Caine, the race and line of those Pharasies, at
whose hands the Lord said should be required the blood of all the Prophets,
from righteous Abell to Zacharias; yea, these are all one house with them. And
so are all the assemblies and congregations in the world, be they never so
clean without, doing the same works, being foul within: and do make one and
the same generation with them, and with all such heathen in the world, being
uncircumcised in heart like them. To fulfill the word of the Lord which says,
Revel. 8.24.
That in her should be found the blood of all, that ever for righteousness
were slain upon the earth. Proving indeed that all that are unclean in heart,
and do the same works, do make one generation, be they what they will. These
are all the evil seed, the children of the wicked* and of the bond woman, This
is Hagar and her son which must be cast out, These are the serpents seed that
never did love the seed of the woman.

But you Master Smith understand not these things so, you shut out Hagars house
from these times, you will have the Church of another fashion, you will have it
of your own building; you like not the frame which the Lord allows: you will
not have so many sorts of vessels in the Lords great house, 2. Tim. 2.20.
as the Scriptures do speak off, and yet you will have more in his little
spiritual house then the Lord allows. You will not have vessels of gold, of
silver, of wood and of clay; some to honor, some to dishonor, in his great
house, together in commons: And yet you will have vessels of dishonor to
partake in the peculiar things pertaining only to his little house, Mat. 16.18.
and to be of it. But the best is, the Lord has not made you the builder of
his house, he means to build still as he has ever done his little
spiritual house himself; Luke 12.32 Revel. 21.27
he will hau^e the vessels thereof all of gold and silver, prepared to honor:
build you and prepare the other of wood and clay; for although this great house
be all one in commons, yet it is two in specials: which shall be more at large
distinguished hereafter. But we will first see what fashion your house is of.

You say, all that you baptize, are first borne again; and being borne again,
and baptized, they are all Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and the
Congregation of the first borne: the peculiar people, and holy nation, those
returned little ones, which the Lord spoke of. And that none but such ought to
be baptized, Mat. 11.14
and that whosoever is baptized before he is reborne of the spirit: that
baptising is Antichristian, and must be revoked He must first be a new
creature, and then rebaptised. And yet you say some of these may fall away and
perish. This is your Church you say, and so it is constituted. Indeed, you
have framed it finely, but it will not stand.

The foundation is sand, and the top is so light, that the wind will carry
it away to perish: for so you say, and it may well be; for an error in the
ground work does argue slight work in the raising and finishing: for he that
is careless in laying the foundation of his house: will surely be very
negligent in the framing and ending thereof: and if a skillful workman should
search that house, he should doubtless find many unsound ioints therein.

Smithes foundation is very sound and sure, for he begins with regeneration,
and he will have none baptized into his Church, till he be borne of God: and
who can lay a more sure foundation then this?

Indeed a fair show it makes,

Your conclusion is, that some of your Church may fall away, and shall perish;
and yet you say, they are all of them those little ones whom our Savior
speaks of: this is even as contrary as salvation and damnation: for the same
Lord says. It is not the will of your heavenly Father, Mat. 18.14.
that one of these little ones should perish, but your will is, they shall.

The Scripture says, Heb. 12.23.
that the Congregation of the first borne, are written in heaven: but you say
some of them are written in hell. Christ says, the gates of hell shall not
prevail against his Church, and many other most sure promises, that the second
death shall take no hold of any one of the least stones thereof; Revel. 20.6
but you dare boldly affirm the contrary. And yet you will baptize none, but
such as are borne a new, you say: and that none ought to be baptized, but such
a little one; which is the beginning and foundation of your building. And how
contrary are these things? How weak and rotten is your work, from the top to
the bottom? For whereas you say, that none ought to be baptized, but they
must be first borne again, it is utterly false: for the Scripture says that
Jesus made and baptized more Disciples then John. And it says also, John. 4.1.
John. 6.53.60.
that when the Lord told them, that except they did eat his flesh, and drink
his blood, they had no life in them (which is the chief and principal point
of regeneration) they answered, It was a hard saying, who could endure it?
which proves evidently they were never borne again, and yet baptized: for
every Disciple was baptized. And they were Disciples, the text faith: and
whatsoever he were that did subject himself to learn, and came into the
fellowship, was one of the disciples, though he were not one of the newborn
babes. These things are as clear as the light throughout the scriptures: but
you being ignorant of the Scriptures through your wisdom, would delude us with
doubtful and double speeches, as you do some innocent, (as I hope) and upright
souls, that depend upon your wisdom and skill, whose consciences (I persuade
my self) do tell them, al is not well.

You strive so much to make your Church differ from the Church of the Jews:
because you mistaking, would have the whole estate of the Jews Church contain
the bond woman and her son, and the whole stateof the Gentiles Church to
contain the free woman and her son: so that you will have your Church not
only to differ from the Jews Church, but from the very word and practice of
Christ and his Apostles, and from the Church that then was.

You will not have a son of the free woman in the Jews Church, nor the son
of a bond woman in the Gentiles Church: but all must show forth the fruits of
regeneration that ought to be baptized, and so consequently being all reborne
and baptized, must needs be the children of the free woman. What a Laborinth
have you brought your self and your company into? You will have all your
Church to be the spiritual seed of Abraham: Romans 11.26.
and yet that some of them may, and shall prove cast-awayes, contrary to the
Scriptures which says, All Israel shall be saved: meaning all Abraham's
spiritual seed, Jews or Gentiles.

It is possible that ye can be ignorant, how in the Churches of the Apostles
times, there were many evil workers evidently known, vnreturned, earthly
minded; of whom Saint Paul says, Many wake, Phil. 3.17.18.19
of who^ I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, etc. Is not this
manifestly to be seen throughout all the new Testament?

Did the Lord himself who knew all things, entertain Disciples, John 6.64.
baptising them whom he knew did not believe in him, nor yet were returned;
yea one, whom he knew should betray him.

The Lord, I say, who could have made his choice, and have taken the best, and
left the worst at his pleasure: If he had been so disposed, or had intended to
make the outer Court of his temple, as pure as the temple it self, whereunto
none does come to sacrifice, but only his royal Priesthood. Did the Lord, (I
say still) who knew all things, do thus to teach us in these cases, what to
do to the worlds end? And dare you which know nothing in comparison, take upon
you to teach him, and to contradict his practice? Did he entertain all that
came to him into his outward Court, yielding unto them all the common things
thereof? And dare you so boldly to change his ordinance, rejecting such as then
he entertained: If he had intended, that none should be baptized, but such as
brought forth the fruits of regeneration, he would not have then baptized,
nor have suffered any to be baptized, that were not first regenerate, seeing
that he knew them one from another, he would have given us example both by
himself and his Apostles: and would not have baptized any one, Ioh. 8.39.
but Abraham's true spiritual seed, who should first have wrought the works of
Abraham, of whom not one son of perdition should ever have been found. This
would the Lord have done, I say, if his will and truth had so been in this
outward condition of his Kingdom, he would have performed it persectly. Seeing
he could do in this case what he would, he would not have been found
unfaithful in his house, (as it is plain he was, if that doctrine of yours
be true.) All agree that the sin of knowledge is greater then the sin of
ignorance. Did Christ know his Fathers will was, that none should be baptized
but Abraham's spiritual seed, and would he baptize those, Ioh. 6.60.
that knew not what it was to eat his flesh and drink his blood, which all
Abraham's seed did both eat and drink of, and therefore must needs know what
it is? would he have entertained Judas, and baptized him, seeing he knew from
the beginning that he was the child of perdition, and that he should betray him?

No, no, Christ our Lord would never have done all these things, if he had
known his Fathers will, to have been contrary, he would never have sinned so
highly against his Father with his knowledge (as he did, if that be true which
you affirm.)

But you are the liar and the sinner: be it known unto you. It is you that
break the law of God, and violate the word and ways of Christ, by your cursed
ways and doctrine. For his will is, that common things should be for the many
that are called, but his peculiar things for the few that are chosen: Wherefore
he compares the common Court and Kingdom of heaven, to a Net cast into the
Sea, Mat. 13.47.
which takes all sorts of fish both good and bad. And his spiritual kingdom
and holy temple, Mat. 13.31. and 33.
he compares to a grain of Mustard seed, to Leaven, To a field wherein lies
a treasure hid of great worth, which whosoever will enjoy, must purchase it
with all he has. Mat. 13.44.45.46.
Which Kingdom, the Lord says; Except a man be borne again he shall never
enter into, nor see.

Perceive you not these things M. Smith? John 3.3.
are they hidden from your eyes? Matt. 3.52.
Then are you not the Scribe which the Lord speaks of, which is taught unto
the kingdom of heaven, compared to a householder which brings forth of his
treasury, things both new and old.



John 15.1.2.
and every branch that brings forth good fruit, the same he purges that it
may bring forth more fruit? Did you ever read in all the Scriptures: that a
good man one of Abraham's seed, which brought forth good fruit, and did the
works of Abraham: that afterward proved an evil man? and brought forth
evil fruit, and was therefore cut of for ever from the vine, and from Abraham's
spiritual house? Has Christ given rules to this end, to cut of fruitful
branches, Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem? (for so ye call them all whom ye
Baptize) His rules are not for you, if you can rule no better then so.

But he has given them to his Church, you say,

Know ye not indeed? are ye altogether ignorant? What say you to Master Francis
Johnson and his company at Amsterdam?

I pray you tell us one thing Master Smith?

By what rule baptized you your self? what word or example had you for that
in all the Scriptures? Do you affirm the baptism of children to be the mark
of the Beast, because, you say, there is no word nor example in all the
Scripture, to prove that they may be baptized: And yet durst you presume
without either word or example, to baptize your self? If you go about to prove
that lawful which you have done, by any word, or example in the Scripture, I
say you cannot set one step forward to that purpose, but you must allow thereby
the baptism of Children. I marvel you did not prevent this objection: which
will be as hard a bone for you to gnaw upon, as you think the baptism of
Children is to us. It was wonder you would not receive your baptism first, from
some one of the Elders of the Dutch Anabaptists; but you will be holyer then
all, and see how you have marred all.

And you Church your selves, you say, and put a Church upon your selves. What
strange doubtful speech is this? What kind of Church is that you put upon your
selves, and Church your selves withal? Do you mean a Church of lime and
stone, made by men's hands? Such a Church you may Church you withal, and put
upon your selves when you will.

But that is not your meaning, I dare say, that is an abomination in your
eyes. Your mean (If I mistake not) Two or three gathered together etc; Do
pull Christ unto them, and so Church Christ, and not themselves; to speak
sensibly. And is this your meaning indeed sir? where read you or ever heard
you of the like?

Christ says to as good men as you (none dispraised) you have not Chosen me,
John 15.16.
but I have chosen you And upon this Rock will I (not Master Smith and his
company) build my Church, nor any company in the world else, And the gates of
Hell shall not prenaile against it. And will ye know now to what Church he
gives these rules, if ye call them so. And I give unto it, says he, the
Keys of the kingdom of Heaven. And where two or three be gathered together in
my name (I would you knew what this [In my name] does intend) there am I in the
midst of them, as if he had said, where two or three of these little returned
ones that believe in me, whom my Fathers will is, shall be saved, do at any
time or in any place gather together, in the same faith and considence put in
my name, there will I be in the midst of them; that is, there will I make my
habitation, my Church and my dwelling place. Psalm. 95.7.
This is the spiritual Canaan and land of rest, and this is the little house
whose vessels are all of gold and silver. Heb. 3.8.12.13.
But in the groat house there are vessels of gold, silver, wood, and clay, and
they are but one in commons together, but two in the special peculiar things:
Which are not distinguished by baptism, but by regeneration; 1. Cor. 12.13.
the birth of water and of the holy Ghost, and other such like great and
peculiar things.

And tell me are ye all entered into that rest? Are ye all the free woman's
Children? Are ye all borne of God? 1. John 29.
Is there not one amongst you that loves not his brother? 1. Cor. 11.19.
Is there not one among you that maintains Heresy, which is a thing
necessary, that those which are approved might be known? Is there never a
one weak amongst you, are ye all strong men in Christ Jesus? Heb. 4.1.7.
Is there none of you carnal and yet in your sins, that had need be exhorted
to vnharden his heart, and to study to enter into that rest, least he be
deprived of his expectation? Is there not one of all the to amongst you? Are ye
all as one, and one as al^^s there never a better, nor worse? are ye al
baptized with that one Baptism spoken of, and pertakers of that first
resurrection? Is this your saying indeed? Has the water of Holland washed ye
all so clean? ils Indeed if all these things be so, then there is no
to^parison between the Jews Church and yours, nor yet between the Church of
the Apostles days, and yours; but great difference. Though yet between the
Church of Christ in the Apostles days, and the Church of Christ under the law,
there was never any such difference as ye pretend. For they had all the same
Gospel and faith, Heb. 4.2. Heb. 3.18. 1. Cor. 10.2.3. Heb. 3.17.
preached the same baptism of repentance, and purging of the holy Ghost, even
the very same way of entering into his rest; and some were made pertakers
thereof, and entered thereinto; and had the same keys committed unto them, that
are still given to Christ's Church. Although with many of them that did partake
in Commons with them, God was not pleased, I mean those that were baptized in
the Sea, and circumcised in the skin, and offered their sacrifices in common
with them, as did Cain and Abel. And who might for bid Cain to offer or Ismael
to be circumcised, or the hard-hearted Isralites their baptism in the Sea, or
the whole house of Israel, to come and offer upon the brazen Altar, that stood
in the Court of the temple?

So now likewise and in all times, were and shall be common things for all, and
peculiar things for the peculiar. The least grace is to be cherished: none
ought to be discouraged; Act. 8.22.
Simon Magus was exhorted to pray: They that believed the Gospels truth, were
baptized, Acts 2.41.
and received the signs of Christ's body and blood also. 1. Cor. 11.21.
In these common things they did partake with Christ's holy Priesthood, his
peculiar Church. But you say these things are not common now. They were common
once when truth took place, as the Scriptures by examples prove: I mean, to
such as did believe the Gospel, and did not profess the practice of iniquity,
but professed the Gospel and the truth thereof; though they were not
circumcised in heart, regenerate and become as little children, Ioh. 6.66.
any more then the Disciples were that fell away from Christ: and those who
asked, who should be the greatest, and many other more which the new Testaments
examples prove. Mat. 18.1.


For tell me, shall every one that is baptized in the right form and manner
(for that ye stand much on) upon the skin, be saved? And every one that
receives the Communion of the Lords body and blood (I mean the sign thereof)
be saved? I think you will say no: then say I, they are common. As on the
other side, to believe in Jesus Christ, to put our trust in God through him, to
eat his flesh and drink his blood: is eternal life, and is peculiar to his
Church alone, John 6.54.
in the midst of whom he dwells.



Tell me I pray you, did ever Christ's Apostles and true Church affirm any to
be borne of God, that proved otherwise? Did they ever justify whom God
condemned, or condemn, whom God justified? Indeed the Lord says to the
Pharisees, you judge after the outward appearance: John 7.24.
but judge righteous judgment.

Ye make clean the outside, says he, but if you would make clean the
inside, Mat. 23.26.
the outside should be clean also. Luke 11.42.
They were strict in all small common things, but the weighty matters they
left undone: mercy and judgment they ought to have looked into, 1. ^win.
11.31. Mat. 5.7.
which proves men blessed, as it is written. If you would judge your selves,
you should not be judged: And blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy.

But you say,

I pray you is there one new birth to you, Ioh. 3.3.
The Lord says, Except a man be borne again (meaning once) of water and the
holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: Not twice, once to you,
and once to God. But you judge as far you see (you say) but why judge you
farther then you see? tell me that. For you say without exception, that all
those whom you have rebaptised, are reborne of repentance and of the holy
Ghost, Mat. 3.11.
according to the meaning of the Scriptures. And yet you say, that some of
these may fall away and perish for ever. Is it possible that a man may be
borne of God and perish for ever? It is as possible, the word of God should
perish (which says) blessed and holy are they that have their parts in the
first resurrection, for they shall not be hurt of the second death. Reu. 20.6.


I believe that some of those, whom you affirm borne again, shall perish; for
you affirm you know not what. If ye were guided by God and his truth, which
is his word, you would not affirm any man to be borne of God, except ye were
sure of it verily; nor yet deny any to be borne of God, except ye were as sure,
they are not. But you boldly affirm some to be borne again, which are not;
and as boldly deny many that are: in that you justify your selves, and
exclude all others from being, to you, borne again.

Wisdom, if you had harkened unto her, Pro. 2.4.5.6.7.8.9.
would have taught you to have judged better. For she gives great
understanding to her children, both sound and sure. They do not justify that
which she condemns, nor condemn that which she justifies. Neither dare
her children condemn, though she condemn, except she reveal it unto them:
nor yet justify, though she justify: except she declare it unto them. But if
she reveal it, then they dare speak, Joh. 20.23. Mat. 18.18.
and what they say is done: what they bind is bound, and what they loose, is
loosed.

But this error of yours, does arise from this false ground which you have
laid: namely, that no one may be baptized, that is not first a new creature,
reborne of the spirit, and sealed therewith: upon which ground also do almost
all your other errors depend: but I think it is sufficiently proved already,
that baptism has been administered by Christ and his Apostles, to many
Disciples who were not born again; yet because I will make it more plain, I
will set down some more examples for that purpose.

It is written, Act. 20.41.
As many as gladly received the word, were baptized. It is written again, the
thornie ground received the word with joy, therefore the thornie ground was
baptized. It is evident also that the stony ground was baptized, Mat. 13. All
these were or might be baptized.
and the high-way-side also: for they both received the word in their heart. And
who is not glad of that which he receives in his heart? And it is clear as
day (but that men will be so wilfully blind) that people were baptized
presently, as soon as they did believe and receive the word to be a truth,
without any further testimony of other fruits: as appears by the Iayler,
Act. 16.33.
who was presently baptized with all that did belong unto him. And who is so
blind, so much as to think, that they were all instantly borne again, but he
that never knew, what it is to be borne again? I dare boldly say, here are ten
thousand in England that do believe more, Acts. 8.13.
then the most of the Iaylers household did believe. And what did Simon Magus
believe more, then the Gospel to be truth, and many thousand more that were
baptized by the Apostles themselves? Acts 2.
But if you did understand one thing which was done by the Apostles, you should
easily be delivered of this error. And that is this.

There was a second supply made by the Apostles, (after the first preaching of
the Gospel, and baptising them) whereby they were refined and purified, such of
them, as in whom the first seed of the word took deep root, as appears by
Peter, and the Church of Samaria: who were baptized of the holy Ghost, by the
laying on of the hands of the Apostle, after they had believed and were
baptized by Philip. Acts 8.17.
Others also that came to the Apostles, who had believed and been baptized,
were afterward baptized of the holy Ghost, in the name of Jesus. Acts 19.5, 6.
And this is it which the Scripture intends, which says: Mark. 16.16.
whosoever believes and is baptized, shall be saved; meaning by baptism
there, the baptism of repentance and of the holy Ghost. As if the Lord had
said, whosoever believes the truth of the Gospel, and is regenerate shall be
saved, Baptism cannot be understood in that place of earthly water, for then
Simon Magus must needs be saved, for he believed, and was Baptized with that
water.

And also another time there came Certain Disciples to the Lord, asking him
who shouldbe the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven. The Lord answered them to
this effect. Do you come to ask me who is the greatest in the kingdom of
heaven, Matthew. 18.
and your selves are not so much as entered into it yet? Meaning by the kingdom
of heaven, that little spiritual house, whose vessels are all of gold and
silver: where is joy in the holy Ghost, and great rest and peace, not that
great house which is before described: for in that house they were already. The
Lord takes a little child, and sets in the midst of them. I tell you, says
he, though you do believe the truth of my word, and are baptized, and be my
Disciples, yet except you become converted, and reborne as this little child,
you shall not so much as enter into that kingdom of heaven, wherein I bestow
my secrets and greatest treasure. Whereby it is evident, as also by the other
examples, and many more that might be showed to this purpose; that many did
believe and were baptized, before they were returned and became as little
children: contrary to your false ground Master Smith, whereon depends the
whole frame of your house.

And if you would but search these Scriptures: diligently, and compare them
together, I hope you should find these things true: and then I trust you shall
see, that which we now see at this present, and which may appear also
evidently, to all that will weigh things uprightly without partiality, your
frame and building pulled down from the top to the bottom, The outer Court
and the Temple.
that common things are for the many, and the peculiar things for the few.

One thing remains but not of your building, which you call the Character and
mark of the beast, not worthy to come under the roof of your house Namely the
baptising of Children, against the which we will see and examine what you say.

I have seen a principal answer of yours, to an argument drawn from
Circumcision, to prove the baptising of Children: Wherein you deny
circumcision, to be a seal or sign of the new Covenant, and the righteousness
therein, of faith: Affirming that it was a seal of a carnal covenant made to
a carnal seed, and calling that carnal Covenant of yours, one of the two
testaments, and abusing them by your carnal conceit, who are both of them most
holy and spiritual, Romans 7.14.
and not carnal as you affirm. And therein you seem to your self, to be so
wise in your application of circumcision to a carnal covenant, made to a
carnal seed, that you by mere Ignorance and error to the charge of all, that
take it otherwise: and so almost in all your answers and reasons, this is your
principal objection still, that we mistake the covenants, and build the
baptising of children upon a false ground: but herein, by the grace of God, we
will see who it is that is mistaken, and that does err, and builds upon the
sands. And because that by the mistaking of the two Testaments, and the two
seeds; and by the false distinctions them, not only all your errors, but all
other false doctrine does depend: as in the true understanding of them, and
right distinguishing both of the two Testaments, and also of the two seeds all
truth does consist; we will therefore more carefully by Gods assistance set
down what the two Testaments are, and also distinguish between them: and what
the two seeds are, and also distinguish between them: that so we may the more
clearly discern the truth from that which is erroneous. And then we shall see
to which of the two Testaments Circumcision does belong and whether baptism
may not be administered unto children, as well as Circumcision was.

And although baptism is nothing, nor vnbaptisme nothing (as circumcision is
nothing, and vncircircumcision nothing) compared with a new creature, nor yet
is able to pollute any, though he had received it in the Church of Rome, and
though it be not worth the contending about, nor yet the speaking of, compared
with the doctrine of baptism, which is regeneration, the washing of
repentance, and the purging of the holy Ghost through Jesus Christ, and faith
in him: which is indeed the true beginning of every living stone of his Church
and Temple, whereof he is the foundation and head stone of the corner: because
you trouble Israel with your flashes and false lights, affirming from your
fleshly wisdom, that the baptism of children is the mark of the beast; we
will therefore discover, how you of mere ignorance err therein, by your
mistaking the two Covenants, and the two Seeds: and how by your false
distinguishing both of the two Testaments and the two Seeds, you deceive both
your self and others.

Master Smiths answer.
The sum of your answer is this, First you distinguish the two Testaments,
but very untowardly; for you say, one was made with Abraham and his Carnal
seed, and of that Covenant was Circumcision a seal.

Another Covenant was made with Abraham and his spiritual seed, and of that
Covenant was the holy spirit of promise, the seal: for the carnal Covenant
had a carnal seal upon the carnal seed: The spiritual Covenant had a
spiritual seal upon the spiritual seed: and circumcision which was a carnal
seal, could not seal up the spiritual Covenant to the spiritual seed. The
two Testaments being thus by you distinguished, you go on to disprooue the
baptism of children: for we under the Gospel, you say, do not receive that
carnal Covenant which was made to Abraham and his carnal seed, whereof
circumcision was the carnal seal, but that carnal Covenant and seal
together with the subject of that seal ( viz. a male of eight days old) is
taken away by Christ's cross. And in the room thereof, we have the spiritual
Covenant, typed by that carnal Covenant, and the spiritual seal ( viz. the
holy spirit of promise) figured by that carnal seal: and the spiritual
infant, viz. A newborn babe in Christ, in whom Christ typed by the male, is
newly formed, signified by that carnal infant. That all these particulars are
so, you prove it plainly, you say, by these places of Scripture.

There are two Testaments made with Abraham. Gal. 4.24.
For Agar, that is the old Testament, and Sara, that is the new Testament,
were both married to Abraham, and Abraham had them both. Ishmaell of Abraham
and Agar, who typed the carnal seed borne after the flesh: and Isaac of
Abraham, and Sara typed the spiritual seed, borne by promise.

There are two seals, Circumcision a seal of the carnal children: and the
holy spirit of promise, Gene. 17.11.
a scale of the spiritual covenant, upon the spiritual seed. 2. Cor. 1.22.


And as Circumcision was a seal from God, Ephe. 1.13.
to the carnal seed, of the promise, and from the carnal seed to God in
obedience: So the spirit of promise is a seal from God to the spiritual seed,
of the promise: Ephe. 1.13. John. 3.33
and from the spiritual seed to God in obedience. These thing are evident you
say, and so you proceed to prove and disprove accordingly.

And here I cannot but marvel what you mean by this carnal covenant you
talk of, which you call one of the two Testaments, and of which you make
circumcision the seal: and also what you mean by Abraham's carnal seed. Which
covenant, seal and seed you say, is taken away, by Christ's Cross. For you
speak so doubtfully, that one had need dwell in your heart, that would known
your meaning. But if you mean as the Scriptures mean which you cite, then it
is certain, you say one thing, and mean another. For the Scripture faith, and
means thus* Gal. 4.22.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.
that Abraham had two sons, one by a servant, and one by a freewoman; but
he which was of the servant, was borne after the flesh, And he which was of
the freewoman, was borne by promise: by the which things another thing is
meant, for these are the two testaments. The one, which is Agar of Mount Sinai,
which gendereth to bondage (for Agar or Sinai is a mountain in Arabia, and it
answers to Ierufalem, which now is, and she is in bondage with her children)
But Jerusalem which is from above, is free, which is the mother of us all, etc.

The meaning is, That as there were two feeds, even from the beginning; the
seed of the serpent, and the seed of the woman, Gen 3.15.
figured by Adams two first sons, Genesis 4.3.4.
Caine and Abell, ( Caine going before with his sacrifice, Abell coming after
with his) The one the son of the serpent* the other the child of woman; the
one the child of the law of death, the other, the child of the Testament of
life; (for these two Testaments were before either Caine or Abell came to offer
their sacrifice, and were figured by the two trees that were in the midst of
the Garden: Genesis 2.9
the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, representing the law oftenne
commanddements; For to the ten comandements, and the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, one curse belonged. viz. Reu. 2.7.
Thou shall die the death. And the Tree of life representing the Testament and
fruit of life, as the Lord himself proves, when he says, To him that
overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is, in the midst
of the Paradise of God.

And as God did set before Adam, life and death to choose, and he chose death to
himself, and all his posterity: Genesis 2.16.7.
so yet still and again, God has set the same before us, as Moses says:
Behold, Deuteronomy. 11.26. Deuteronomy 30.11.12.14.15.
I have set before you life and death, curse and blessing, to choose. And as
Adam chose death, even so his generation for the most part choose rather death
and cursing, Rom 10.6.7.8.
then life and blessing; and are the bond-womans children, and so will be, like
Caine and Ishmael.

I say as God did prefigure the two Testaments, Genesis 19.10.12.
and the two seeds to Adam, and his feed until Abraham: So did he then renew
his covenants to Abraham, figuring them by Agar and Sara: and their seed by
Ishmael and Isaac. Which thing (me thinks) you M. Smith should not be ignorant
of, seeing you take such great matters upon you. Now these two sons do not
represent the natural Jew, Deuteronomy. 10.17. Job. 34.19. Act. 10.34 35.
and the natural Gentile, but the Spiritual Jew and the Spiritual Gentile,
for God respects not of what Nation a man be of: so he fear and seek him, his
covenant shall be unto him wheresoever he be, as the Apostle proves, saying,
Romans 2.14.15.16.26.27.28.29.
If the Gentile do by nature the things contained in the law, that is, be
circumcised in heart, he shall be found a Jew: when the Jew circumcised in
skin, but not in heart, shall be found a Gentile. For he is not a Jew that is
one without, but he is a Jew that is one within: and that is not circumcision
that is on the skin, but that which is in the heart. And these are the two
seeds figured by the two sons, Ishmael and Isaac, and are not tied either
to times, or places, or Nations, but are in all times and of all Nations
wheresoever, less or more.

Now the mothers of these two Children, are said to be Hagar that is Sinai,
Gal. 4.
and Sara that is Sion, Jerusalem from above. The one representing the
Testament of commandments, the other the Testament of mercy: the one death,
the other life; the one cursing, the other blessing; and these are the only
two Testaments of God. And whether of these two you make circumcision to be the
seal or sign of, I cannot tell. To be a seal of the promise of life, or of
any thing pertaining thereunto, you flatly deny: And to be a seal of the
commandments, or of the curse pronounced with them, Is as contrary as cursing
and blessing; For circumcision was given to Abraham, as a seal of the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4.5. Psalm. 32.1.2. Romans 4.11.
which God performed not only unto him, but to all his spiritual children, as
well Jews as Gentiles, not only since Christ's death but long before. Not that
circumcision did seal all Abraham's natural Children, to be the Children of
promise: nor yet any one of them, nor Abraham himself. But it was given as a
seal, not of their faithfulness to God, nor yet to seal their salvation unto
them, but to seal God his faithfulness in his promise, to all those of Abraham's
Children that vnhardned their hearts like Abraham, Romans 8.15.
, Whether male or female, Jew or Gentile, which he sealed in their hearts by
his spirit of promise, whereby they all cried, Abba Father.

And as the rayne-bow does confirm Gods faithfulness to the world, not man's
faithfulness to God.
Even as Baptism now is a seal, not of every ones salvation that receives
it, but a seal of Gods faithfulness, in his Covenant of mercy, made to all
Abraham's seed, baptized and circumcised in heart like him, which he seals
unto their hearts by his spirit of promise, not by baptism: And so baptism
does come indeed truly in the room of Circumcision, not that Circumcision was
a type of baptism, but they are both types of one truth: which is Circumcision
or baptism in heart. As Hagar and Sinai were of another truth: Even of the
Testament of Commandments, which was given upon mount Sinai, which gendreth
or increases bondage: Which answers to Jerusalem, and Jerusalem to it: not
because it should be so, but because they would be so: Choosing rather to be
Hagars sons, Children to Sinai, which begets and brings forth to death:
Heb. 3.16.17.18.19. Heb. 4.2.
then children of Sara and mount Sion, which brings forth to life. For as it
is written, the Gospel and word that is preached unto us: was also preached
unto them, but the word which they heard, profited not them, for they when they
heard it provoked him: yet not al; but with whom was he displeased forty years?
even with those that hardened their hearts, and would not hear his voice: Even
Hagars sons. And as David cries out to them of his tnne, Psalm. 95.8.
(saying) To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation. For the most of all Abraham's natural seed, which possessed the
earthly Jerusalem, and earthly Canaan, did chuserather to be the children of
death and bondage, figured by the bond woman and Sinai: Then to be children of
life and liberty figured by mount Sion, and the free woman, being all for the
most part of them, Romans 10.3.
ignorant of the righteousness of faith, sought altogether to establish their
own righteousness, framed according to the Law of commandments (as they
pretended) which neither they, nor their fathers did ever keep: Joining
therewith the strict observation of the Ceremonial law, supposing their whole
life and salvation consisted therein, which were both given to another end,
then that which they intended. For the Law of commandments was given, Romans 7.8.
not to the end it should bring any man to salvation, by working thereafter, but
to make more plain and manifest man's cursed and lost condition. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Gal. 3.19.
And the law of Ceremonies: As circumcision, the Pascall Lamb, Gal. 3.21.
The land of Canaan, Jerusalem, the Temple, the Altar, the Priesthood, the
Sacrifices and Ceremonies whatsoever: Were not given them to the end that in
them, and by the observation of them, they should gain life and salvation: But
they were given for a time to teach Israel the substance contained in the
Testament of life: And did preach unto the faithful seed of Abraham, the
spiritual land of rest: Gal. 4.2.
which they entered into by vnhardening their hearts, and hearing the voice and
Testament of mercy, with all the children of Hagar, I mean the uncircumcised
in heart, utterly rejected, as they do still to this day, Mar. 13.30. Mat.
24.34.
for the same generation remains still: even the bond-womans children and
their mother also* And I am in fear of you Master Smith, and of your children:
for you have run your selves upon the same rocks with the^, justifying your
selves upon your carnal observations, framing a carnal regeneration and
faith, which may fail men like unto them which put confidence in works, and
observations of ceremonies which never could save them.

And as the bondwoman and her children did increase and get the upper hand in
the Church of the Jews, so that the bondwoman got the name of the married
wife, and of child bearing; and the free woman with her children trodden in the
dust, and as a widow forsaken was she accounted, and as a woman that had
neither husband nor children: even so it is now. And as Jerusalem that then
was, did an swear to Sinai, and Hagar, the mother of bondage: In so much as her
children did match theirs in hardness of heart and unbelief, persecuting the
sons of the free woman, as Ishmael did Isaac, and Esau Jacob; Genesis 21.9. Genesis
27.41
and as they did in the wilderness, whose carcases fell: I say as Jerusalem
persecuted the Prophets, and killed them, scoffing and deriding the free woman's
children: Yea though he were their King even David, Luke. 23.35 Mat. 23.29.30.
or Christ himself the free woman's eldest son: and is therefore said to be
in bondage with her children, as Hagar was with her son:

And as they doing the same works that he did, were cast out with her son
from inheriting the promise, with the children of the free woman: even so it is
now. For the Serpents seed is yet alive, the bondwoman has many sons, though
the free woman has few or none to be seen. Ismaels brethren have had the
upper hand a great while, even among Christians, as they had among the Jews.
And their mother has the praise of childbearing still, as she had then. And
Jerusalem from above, the free woman and her children: despised and trodden upon
(like a street) as they were wont to be, Reu. 11.2.
by such like obseruers and Pharisaicall boasters, who pretend obedience and
sacrifice, as much as ever did they: who are likewise in most cursed bondage,
and must also be cast out with them, and shall not inherit with the
free-womans children, nor enter into rest with them

But lerusalem from above is free, As she ever was from the beginning, and is
the mother of us all: even of Abell, Henoch, Abraham, David, the Prophets, the
Apostles, and all that ever are and shall be saved. And although she be as no
body, and no where, in comparison: Esa. 5 4.1.
Yet as Esaiah said unto her in his days, and as Paul said unto her in his
time, Gal. 4.27.
so be it said now, and still. Rejoice thou barren that bear no children,
break forth and cry in joy, thou that bear not: for the desolate has many
more children then she that has an husband. And this is the truth of the
matter.

These are the two Testaments, And these are the two seeds: To wit, the law of
Commandments, given upon mount Sinai, which gendereth to death and bondage,
And the law of life given on mount Sion, which gendereth to rest and liberty.
And the cursed generation of Caine and Ismaell, the seed of the one, and the
blessed generation of Abell and Isaac, the seed of the other. And so the
Scriptures and truth is the same, from the beginning to the end of the world.
And the two Testaments do remain still: yea, even that Testament figured by
Hagar and Sinai, and the children of bondage figured by her son. And the
curse also does still remain, and is not taken away by the Cross of Christ
from any of Hagars children. But only from the children of Sara the faithful
seed. And Circumcision, was not a seal, nor sign, of any other covenant
whatsoever, but of the Circumcision of the heart, and the righteousness of
faith and mercy, couenanted first to Adam, then to Abraham, and so from time to
time renewed: And at last confirmed by the Mediator himself, and by his death
upon the Cross: who has made all things clear and manifest unto us, if we
had but spiritual eyes to see them. But he came to save and to seek out all
the lost sheep, leaving the ninety and nine: even all Hagars proud sounes,
who thought them selves wise and safe enough: Even so now. This is the
judgment which the Lord has sent into the world, Ioh. 9.39.
and it is meruailously seen this day. The blind do see, and they that see
are made blind. Not the rich nor the full, but the poor and the empty,
receive the Gospel.

And now Master Smith, whereas you would disprove the argument drawn from
circumcision, to prove the baptising of children, by your doubtful speech of
mistaking the covenant, and by your unsound distinguishing the two Testaments,
which is your first and principal ground, whereon many of your other reasons
do depend, It may now be well seen, that you are the man, that do mistake.
For I pray you tell me, where you will bestow circumcision, and of what
Testament will you make it a seal? If you take it away from the new I estament
made with Abraham and his seed by promise? Will ye bestow it on the law of
commandments given on mount Sinai, and the sons thereof? I pray you then,
which does it seal unto them? perfect holiness which they never had, but
altogether the contrary: Or did it seal the curse, which says, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all these things to do them: which indeed
most justly did belong to all such servants to sin, and bondage, and rebels
to grace: As all Abraham's carnal seed, borne after the flesh were. I think
you dare not affirm any of these: But it should seem you mean, it sealed a
blessing unto the carnal seed, and not a curse.

Say you so M. Smith, Then where are you now? you have left the old Testament;
For therein lies no blessing. But cursed is every man by (that righteous law)
the old Testament. Take heed, make not another Testament, two is all. What
carnal covenant do you mean, The Scriptures never told us yet of a carnal
covenant. The two Testaments of God are both holy and spiritual, Romans 7.14.
as the Scriptures witness. Heb. 7.16.
Indeed there were carnal commandments, rites and shadows, belonging a
while as servants and Ministers to the new Testament, teaching and preaching
Christ Jesus: which are called Rudiments, impotent, and beggarly, Gal. 4.9.
in regard of their weakness leanenesse and poverty. Yet the best means that
then was to teach Christ, till Christ himself came. And were even as a
bondage, yea to Abraham's spiritual seed, compared with after times: yet great
things were taught by them, though very darkly and weakly. But when the
substance came, shadows were cast away. They are blind men, that can go as
well by night as by day. The day is come, the night is past, the true light now
shines. Who do not walk therein, but blind men? yet they say they see, and
therefore their sin remains; Night birds they are, and cannot see by day.
The day star never rose in their hearts. And Master Smith, though shadows be
gone, the substance still remains. The two Testaments are both whole and sound
as ever they were, Math. 5.17.18.19.
and still continue in their strength and force. And the children of cursing
and blessing do still continue. And whosoever they were, in any age or time,
that put confidence in works of any kind whatsoever: Either those contained
in the ten commandments, or any other letter, sacrifice, or ceremony, or any
other religious exercise, except the promise: were all in bondage, and were
children to Hagar. And also whosoever he be, and when, and wheresoever, since
Christ: that puts trust and confidence in works, whether works of the law, or
of the Gospel, or any ceremony, or shadow, or religious exercise whatsoever,
or knowledge, or faith, except the promise of mercy and love in Christ Jesus:
He, or they, whatsoever, shall befound the bond-womans children, of the race of
Came and Ismael, and inherit not with the heirs of promise.

And as then, before Christ, Jerusalem that should have been free, whose
children boasted much of their freedom: and in his days and the Apostles time
also, even till her destruction, was in bondage with her children: even so
Jerusalem that now is; who boasts (as much as they could do) of her beauty,
riches, and fullness; I mean the great and famous Church of Christians through
the world, fulfilling her works, answering unto her, as she did unto Hagar
and Sinai, is also in bondage with her children. Only Jerusalem from above,
with all her children; is free, though her name be hid, and her face covered
with dust: Arise thou captive daughter Sion, and put on thy garment of beauty,
for thy day is even at hand. Esaias 54.7.
For a little while in his anger, he hid his face from thee, but with ever
lasting mercy will he embrace thee.

And tell me yet, was the ceremonial law, the carnal covenant you mean, that
you say circumcision is the seal of? For I would willingly search out all your
holes, and not leave you one to run into: will ye say so? Is it possible that
a Ceremony, can be the seal of a Ceremony, or of Ceremonies? For I trust you
agree that Circumcision is a Ceremony, and did belong and make one with the
rest: What great thing was there in that law (besides the promise of taking
away of sins) that Circumcision was a seal of? for indeed the whole
ceremonial law, may as well be called a Gospel as a Law, insomuch as it
wholly intended Christ, and the whole truth in him: Exodus 25.40. Acts 7.44.
Heb. 8.5.
And therefore Moses is commanded to make and order all things, according to
the pattern which he saw in the Mount; and so Circumcision was a seal of the
promise and righteousness of faith, not only to Abraham, but to all Abraham's
spiritual seed, both male and female, Jew and Gentile: Howsoever in their
spiritual generation, there is neither male nor female, Jew nor Gentile, Gal.
3.28.
but they are all one Virgin and Spouse of Christ Jesus.

Mistake me not in my former speech, as if I intended to make another Gospel
of the law of Ceremonies, but I call it so, because it served the Gospel, and
kept aschoole (as it were) to teach Christ: and therefore it is said, they were
under Tutors until the time appointed of the father; Gal. 4.2.
neither is it another Testament, besides those two Testaments which are
described before, but was a shaddowing law, attending upon Christ, until he
had offered up himself, which must all then vanish: but the two Testaments are
firm and stable, spiritual, holy, and endure, as I have said before.

But to the matter again, for ten to one Master Smith will run to the land
of Canaan, and take it for his refuge: but if you do, truly it will leave you
in the same distress, that you were in before, for it is no land of rest for
you now: But tell me, was it the carnal Covenant you talk of?

If you remember, in the beginning of your answer, showing your skill in the
origmals, yet proving your self very ignorant in the two Testaments, as
appears by your distinguishing them, you say, the two Covenants or two
Testaments, for so you say: Tell me do you mean the two Testaments, which the
Scripture does set forth, and so often tell us of? And I pray you, was the land
of Canaan one of these two Testaments, because the land of Canaan was promised
to Abraham's seed? Is it therefore one of the two Testaments? If you will make
every promise that is in the Scriptures a several Testament, you distinguish
fair, you will have a hundred Testaments then at least: And is this the
Testament, Circumcision did seal to the carnal seed? What was the reason
then they were carried into Babylon captives? It should seem by your saying,
that God had forgot his Covenant quite, for they were Abraham's carnal seed
(as you mean by carnal) every one of them: Let me tell you, They were not
carried thither because they were not carnal, 2. Chr. 36.15, 26, 17.
but because they were not spiritual, they circumcised their sons then in
Babylon, and do still to this day: Are they so blind as you, to think that
circumcision does seal the land of Canaan unto them? Indeed it may well be,
for they are very blind, although experience might have taught them otherwise
long ere this day. Indeed the land of Canaan was promised Abraham's seed, and
they were set in possession thereof with a strong hand: but with what condition
was that inheritance given them, and for whose sakes? Had it not been for
Abraham his faithful one, and his spiritual seed Jacob his beloved, they should
never have possessed that land, Genesis 17.7.8. Deuteronomy. 4.37.38. Genesis 26.3.4.5.
God would never have cast out the Cananites for Esaues and Ismalites, but to
Jacob his beloved, he says, I have given Nations for thee, and people for thy
sake: And what was the condition? surely the keeping of his covenants and
walking in his testimonies; I do not mean the perfect keeping of the ten
commandments, Josh. 23.16.
given in two Tables of stone, that fiery covenant which neither they nor their
fathers were able to bear, for thereby the best of them were found even as a
bryer, and the most righteous like a thorn, but the testament and covenant
that he made with Abraham, when he said, I will be they God, and the God of
thy seed for ever, not his carnal seed, but his spiritual seed: not
consisting of one Nation but of many Nations, whereof God made him a Father,
commanding him to keep it, saying, thou shall keep my covenants, thou and
thy seed: And this shall be a sign (says he) of the covenant between you and
me: namely circumcision, signifying thereby that if they vnhardened their
hearts and harkened to his voice, and Covenant of mercy and love that he had
made to him: taking him for their God and loving him, trusting him, and putting
their confidence in him: which is the righteousness of faith. Then they should
inherit the land and possess it for ever, and many blessings more they should
have they should sleep lase and dwell in peace, a City of peace they should
have, no enemy should ever hurt them: and not only so, but rest to their
souls also, Heb. 11.13.14.15.16.
they should have, and peace which is the living By their earthly Canaan was
intended the spirtuall Canaan, the land of the living.
Canaan, the land of the blessed, the City of peace. But if they hardened
their hears, and resisted his uoice, despising his covenant of grace and favor
Justifying themselves as their Fathers did in the wilderness, of whom God says,
I have seen this people and behold it is a stiffnecked people, Heb. 4.8 9.
wherefore God was angry and said to Moses, Exo. 32.10
when he prayed for them, let me alone, for I will consume them. But I will make
of thee a mighty Nation, I say if thus they should harden their hearts, and
stiffen their necks, and despise his covenant, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18, 19.
then cursed at home and cursed abroad, and his mercies should depart from
them, and as he swear in his wrath, that they which provoked him in the
wilderness with their stiff and stubborn hearts, should not enter into his
rest neither earthly norheauenly: So they provoking him in like manner, though
they were in possession of that land of Canaan, (should neither inherit nor
enter into the spiritual Canaan thereby intended) nor enjoy it in peace, but be
destroyed and carried captive into other Nations, and their Country and City
taken as a prey of the Heathen: Leui. 16.31, 32.
And as the little spiritual stock of Abraham's seed, were kept forty years
long in the wilderness, from possessing the land for Hagars stiffnecked
childrens sakes: So poor Daniell and the rest of Sarahs little spiritual
house, were carried captive for the wicked Cananites sakes, and also for that
they were as good to live servants in a strange land, as be murdered and
persecuted for the truth and righteousness at home, for in Babylon they found
more grace, and favor for their truth and wisdom, yea even with Kings, then
they found at home, and also for that by affliction, they were brought home
from security to repentance: But God remembering his promise made to Abraham his
servant, after he had corrected and resined them, Ievem. 29.10.
brought them home again, and restored them unto their former state. But
within a while, the sons of Hagar increasing, his mercies were forgotten: and
his Prophets went to wrack again, and the Israel of God trodden in the dust,
until the Messiah came, which is called Christ, who set his feet upon that
holy Mount, and walked in the streets of his City of peace, bewailing the
disobedience of Abraham's children in the flesh, cried out, Oh Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.
thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that were sent unto thee, How
often, says he, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a Hen
does her Chrickens under her wings, and you would not.

Beloved, says he, thy house is left unto thee desolate, for thine enemies
shall cast a bank about thee, and keep thee in on every side. And wherefore
now was it Master Smith? even because they would not vnharden their hearts,
repent and hear his voice, so often crying and calling unto them by his
Prophets from time to cime, who still proceed in wickedness notwithstanding,
and fulfilled the works of their Fathers in the highest degree, and yet could
say, garnishing the Tombs of the Prophets, which their Fathers had killed.
Mat. 23.29.
Oh if we had lived in the days of our Fathers, we would not have done this,
and yet they could take that great Prophet and Prince of the covenant, and kill
him, stoning and killing his Apostles also: and therefore, I say, and for that
cause it was, that Jerusalem was made desolate, and the temple burnt with fire,
and not a stone left upon a stone vncast down, whereas otherwise if they had
heard his voice, and would have been gathered together like Abraham's
spiritual seed, and not have resisted, but embraced and kept his covenant and
righteousness of faith, which circumcision did signify unto them, they had
been a Nation until this day, and their land had yielded her fruit unto
them, their City had been a City of peace till now, and their Temple
undefaced: But because they refused, down with it, down with it, even to the
very ground. Deface it for ever, let their table be made a snare, and bow thou
down their back always.

And now Master Smith, whither will you go to rest your self, Canaan is taken
from you, Jerusalem is desolate; there is no abiding place for you any longer,
you have been there a great while: Will ye rest you at Amsterdam in Holland?
Indeed there was a people once, not many years ago, which came to Amsterdam,
with their wives and children in ships, with this belief and resolution, that
Holland was the land of Canaan, and Amsterdam Jerusalem, and therefore there
they would inhabit. I hope you are not of their mind therein, as they were of
your mind concerning baptism.

Although Amsterdam and Holland do entertain all sects of several opinions,
suffering them there in rest and peace: Yet is not Holland that land of rest,
nor Amsterdam that City of peace: but if ye will be safe indeed, and find
rest and peace to your souls, Fly to mount Sion, and to the City of the living
God, the caelestiall Icrusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and
to the assembly and congregation of the first borne, which are all written in
heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect
men, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new testament, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abell, whose blood cried
up to heaven (not for mercy and pardon) but for justice and wrath against
Caine, his natural elder brother, but indeed Ismaels eldest brother in evil
he was.

And now I hope by this time you see what the two testaments are, and also what
the law of ceremonies were, and what the land of Canaan and Jerusalem did
intend, and to whom it was promised, and for whose sakes it was given for an
inheritance, and for whose sins, and for what sins it was made desolate: you
have seen also the two testaments truly distinguished, and the two seeds also,
and what they are, according to the measure of grace, which God has given me.
I hope you see also, that circumcision did not seal the testament of ten
commandments to any, nor yet the curse that went with them, nor yet the law of
ceremonies, nor yet did it seal the land of Canaan and Jerusalem, to the
carnal seed: But it signed and sealed the new Testament, that was delivered to
Abraham in these words: Genesis 17.4. Romans 4.17.18.
Thou shall be a Father of many Nations, which could not be understood of a
carnal but of a spiritual seed. And I will be thy God says he, and the
God of thy seed after thee, meaning that seed which should walk before him
and be upright, as was and did their father Abraham: and keep his covenants,
Gene. 17.1
circumcising not the skin but their hearts, the true seal of the righteousness
of faith, confirmed unto them by the spirit of promise, signified by that other
upon the skin: And then he would give them not only the land of Canaan, but
that Canaan of Canaans the land of true and perfect rest, for an everlasting
possession, and be their God for evermore.

And now tell us Master Smith, why may not baptism of the element of water, be
administered to children (as well as circumcision) being but a rudiment as
circumcision was? If Timothy might be circumcised, to no end but to please the
Jews, in hope to win some of them: why may not children be baptized with
this hope, and to this end, that they might become Christians and be borne
again. If a son that was at the point of death, was restored to his perfect
health at the request of his father, that believed by the power of Christ: why
should not children be baptized, at the request of their parents which
believe, by the hands of his servants, seeing that baptism is neither able to
heal a body nor yet to save a soul. Indeed servants are very apt to think
themselves wiser then their masters: for when they brought little children to
Christ, his Disciples being very ignorant (then) of the Lords bounty: forbad
them that brought them, Mat. 19.13.
disdaining that a little child which they thought capable of nothing, should
be brought to Christ, as if he would regard it: whereas the Lord contrary to
their expectation rebuking them, said, Suffer little children to come unto me
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven, Mar. 10.13, 14 15,
16.
and laying his most holy hands upon them, blessed them.

And here I would know of you Master Smith, whether the hands of Christ, were
not more holy then any water in England or Holland, and whether the blessing
he bestowed one those children, were not greater then any grace or blessing,
that water with your hands and words can confer to any: on whomsoever you can
bestow it? I think you will acknowledge, and all men else, that Christ's hands
were holier and his blessings greater: If then children were capable of the
greater, why not then of the lesser? If Christ made choice of a little child
before all other, to represent and sign forth the conversion and new birth,
which baptism also does prefigure and signify, why may not these two signs
well and lawfully be joined together, seeing they are both as Preachers of one
truth: you will have a child capable of the mark and Character of the beast: and
yet you will not have it capable of the Elementish baptism: again you allow
the form of baptism used in England, but you call it the mark of the beast,
only because it is applied to a little child, whom you compare to a tree, a
madman and a fool: And thereby it does follow, that the mark of the beast
does wholly depend in the child for the form you justify: The matter which you
call the child, you only condemn, and lay to it charge, that it does receive
an indelible mark of the beast. A lack poor child, thou have a worse enemy
now then the disciples, who forbad thee to come to Christ? What a monster would
you make of a little water, and a little child, shall I tell you Master Smith,
if this be the mark of the beast, you are the beast: for there is no beast in
the world, does give this mark, but you and your fellow Anabaptists.

And as I said before, Acts 16.3
if Timothy might be circumcised, after circumcision was abolished by the
Cross of Christ, at which time whosoever received circumcision as a thing
necessary to salvation, deprived himself wholly of the benefit of Christ: I
say, Gal. 5.2.
if Timothy were circumcised, being a Christian, one to whom it belonged, not
only to please the Jews in hope to win some of them, and yet sinned not:

How dare you thenlay this heavy burden upon a child (although baptism did
not belong to it as you say) that it cannot be baptized but it receives the
mark of the beast, and is culpable of the wrath of God, and to be tormented in
fire and brimstone for evermore: poor children, if this be true, unhappy be
you above all creatures; seeing so many of you die in your infancy, with the
mark upon you unrepented of, for which you shall be tormented in hell fire and
brimstone, whereof ye are as innocent as the child unborn. O miserable law and
miserable consequent, God forbid it should be so: rather the lawmaker if he
repent not, shall be cast with all such maker of lies, into the lake of fire
and brimstome, which is the second death.

What a Jew Master Smith? and worse then a Jew, what a law maker? and a law of
bondage above all bondage: O touch not, wet not, eat not, death is at the
door. What? such a great man as you, afraid of bug-beares: Ah Master Smith,
give over childrens play now: you are a man, and a man that should be wise.
Consider things rightly: be not so hasty, say little but say well: learn to
come like one of these little children, Mar. 10.15.
whom you condemn: weep and lament for your sins, and scorn it not: Be
meek and of a lowly heart, and disdain it not: forbid not little children to
be baptized with water on the Skin: of whom you ought to learn to be
baptized in heart. be merciful to all and bountiful, as God is bountiful who
gives his sun to shine unto the good, and the bad, and the rain of his
word, to fall upon the just, and unjust: To teach you and me and all of us
what we should do. The spirit says, Revel. 22.17.
whosoever will, let him come. Take you heed, add not to, nor diminish from his
word, give to all that come, whatsoever you have power to give. Christ gave a
greater thing to little children, laying his own hands upon them, seeing
their parents came so willingly and requested him: them parents can now look
for at the hands of baptism, when they come bringing their children and
request it. Embrace little children therefore, and though you cannot give them
the greater, give them the lesser. Did the Lord compare his little returned
ones to a little child, and dare you compare that child, to a stone, and a
stock, a tree, a mad man and a fool, and say it is as lawful to baptize the
one as the other. If you had lived in the Apostles days and had bin one of
them, you would have bin glad if the Jews, or heathen, had come to you with
willing minds to have their children baptized, to this end, that they might
loose the name of a Jew, or heathen, and be called a Christian. But now it is
so stale it stinckes with you Master Smith, you are so bewitched with this
opinion, that baptism with water does give an entrance into the special
kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.
(which the Lord speaks of, when he says, Except ye return and become as
little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven) that you run
into a hundred errors: John 3.5.
Whereas regeneration only is the entrance into that kingdom of heaven; where
into none come, but such as shall be saved: And whereas baptism of water,
gives but an entrance into the common Kingdom of heaven: Mat. 13.47.
compared to a net which catches fish of all sorts, good and bad, Mat. 5.45.
and the bad have as much grace conferred unto them by that baptism as the
good, Mat. 7.22.
as they have of his Sun and rain: for the bad are oftentimes more full of
knowledge by the light, and can discourse more redily upon the word of God,
then the good. Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God by the
Spirit of regeneration, 1. Cor. 3.6.
that gives the increase.

Are you Master Smith, and your company, the children of wisdom? and discern
ye not, neither do ye justify these things. Are you a teacher in Israel, and
know not what it is to be borne again? Are ye those wise and prudent men of
understanding, from whom these things are hidden, that are revealed unto babes?
Is it not given to you to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, what has
God forgot himself, Mat. 11.25 Mat. 13.11.
are you that Jerusalem from above, and are these things hidden from you, does
he not give to his little ones, great things? Is he not the same to day, that
he was yesterday, and shall he not be the same to morrow again? Yea he is
the same for ever: and behold I am with you (says he) unto the worlds end,
Mat. 28.20. John 14.16. Mat. 5.18*
though Heaven and earth do pass away, yet his word shall not pass away
unfulfilled.

Believe ye not this? I know ye believe it, And I hope better of you, though I
so speak; for God has enlarged my heart, and opened my mouth unto you, which
puts me in great hope, that you are of that remnant which shall be saved.
But yet a little further, for I have somewhat more to say unto you which is
hard to be uttered, because I say, ye are dull of hearing, and because it would
take up much time to set down all wherein you miss, and also it being a
course wherein I take no pleasure, I will rather set down what is the truth,
then tell of your falsehood, that by the grace of God believing the one, we may
escape the other.

Now if you will know what difference there is yet more between the true
Spouse and Church of Christ, which he does build himself, against which, the
gates of hell shall not prevail, nor yet the second death, to whom he has
given the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and those her entercommoners, I will
tell you.

First let us consider how things were in the Apostles days on earth, for then
I am sure, truth was in place and practice both, and I will not labor to make
it agree with these weak times: but much rather labor and desire, that we
which live in these corrupt times, might agree with, and become like it. I say,
whosoever then gladly received the word (as it is written) were baptized, Heb.
3.1.
and were called of the Apostles generally by the names of holy brethren,
partakers of the heavenly vocation, etc. Insomuch as they were made partakers
of the holy Ghost, and consented to that heavenly calling, Heb. 6.4.5, 6: Heb.
10,29.
being enlightened and tasting of that heavenly gift: were called holy, in
regard of these good beginnings, which was wrought in them, whereby their old
life was reformed. (And therefore the Lord compares them that receive the seed
of his word, some to the high way side, some to stony ground, and some to
thornie ground, and some to good ground which brought forth fruit: Insomuch as
they were sanctified and purged of some uncleanness of spirit:) wherefore they
are said (by the Lord) to be swept and garnished: and (by Peter) said to be
washed, and to the Hebrews sanctified: and all this is wrought in them by the
ministration of the good word of God, which they had tasted of, and by the
operation of the holy Ghost whereof they were made partakers, whereby also some
of them wrought miracles, and some cast out devils.

Now these things are all common, Except the good fruit.
as well to those uncircumcised in heart, the unregenerate: As to the
circumcised in heart, the little ones, borne again. And although these things
be effected by the Ministry of the word and of the holy Ghost, and do tend to
his kingdom; (for the Lord does nothing against his own kingdom any more,
then Satan does work against his kingdom) yet it is not regeneration, Mat.
1^, 26. Ioh. 3,5.
the birth of water and the holy Ghost, spoken of, nor yet the first
resurrection; And though this sowing of the word of the Lord, and these effects
of the spirit do tend to the kingdom, yet is it not sown in the high ways,
nor in the stony ground, nor in the thornie ground, to the end it should bring
forth fruit like the good ground, Thirty, sixty, and a hundred fold. And
although these four sorts of ground, are Communicants in these commons
together, and little difference can be discerned between them, by these first
effects and beginnings, for the rain does fall on all, and the Sun shines
without respect.

Yet when the fruit does appear after this general blade, Mar. 4, 28.
whereby the good ground is known from the bad, as the wheat is from the
tares, and after this general rain and sunshine, the good ground, like good
trees, does bring forth good fruit: There does appear so great a difference
between them, as is between end and beginning, between first and last:
between the blade, and the fruit: Between the kingdom compared to a Net,
wherein all sorts of fish is caught, both good and bad; and the kingdom
compared to a field, wherein lay a treasure hid of so great worth, Mat. 13.44.
that whosoever could get possession of it (though it cost him all that ever
he had, if it were never so much) yet should his gain be great and infinite:
And between those little ones (who are borne again) whose love is great, for
great respects: Who know they are translated from death to life; And those
vnreturned ones, 1. Ioh. 3.14.15.
that love not, nor know whether they go. And as the difference is great, in
regard of the uncertainty of the one, and the certain everlasting happiness
of the other: So have they, a Charter so great, and freedom so strong, with so
many privileges belonging thereunto, as no City in the world, Reu. 21.
nor kingdom can afford the like.

And wherein, those entercommoners, on whom God has showed his bounty, in
giving them Sun and rain, and have not yet brought forth fruit, can have no
part nor fellowship: neither ought (any more) to presume to touch or meddle
with, then those that might not touch nor stay the Arc: or him to whom Peter
said, thou have no part nor fellowship with us, Act. 8.21.
nor in this administration.

But those poor, little, rich, fruitful ones, are the only Priests of God,
the stay and pillars of his Arc of Arks: not made of wood, Reu. 1.5.6.
which now is gone to wrack, but of heavenly enduring matter, and trees of
life: and although they be the pillars and stays of it, yet are they not the
builders: But the Lord alone, Reu. 3.12.
(who says) upon this rock will I build my Church. Mat. 16.18.


Now as these fruitful trees, and freeborn Citizens, do partake, and have
fellowship together, in the privileges peculiar to this holy Church and City
of God; 1. Pet. 2.9.
being (as one says) a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation,
a people set at liberty: So do they show forth the virtues of him that has
called them, whose love is perfect in them: whereby they know each other to be
borne of God (as S. John says) Hereby we know that ye are in him. 1. Ioh. 2.5.
And as these are known, either to other, by their fruit, which fruit I will
not speak of here, seeing it is as I think plainly described before: So out
of the great heap of Commoners, do sometimes appear evil trees, who are
known also to those that are borne again by their evil fruit, the fruit of
death, Luke 6.43.14.
to be incurable evil trees. That is, so seen against the light, and them
that walk in it, as that they shall receive, the sentence of eternal death,
even while they live, trees twice dead, Iud. 12. 1. Cor. 16.22.
and plucked up by the roots: of whom it is written, Let him be cursed.

And as the good ground or trees, do not appear all at once, out of the
general field of Commoners: but when it pleases him who gives the increase,
some sooner, some later: So, no more do the evil trees appear all at once,
but now, and then, when their evil fruit is ripe; some break forth betimes,
some stay longer, some not at all, (to the Church I mean) until the great day
of account: who then shall be found speechless, without the wedding garment.
And as the evil servant, Mat. 22.12. Luke 19.20. Mat. 25.8.
that hid his Masters talent: And as the five foolish virgins, who found no
oil in their lamps when the bridegroom came, supposing till then, all was
well: Even so likewise, is there many of his beloved ones, not known to others
(but the Lord himself) until that day: who then, with the rest of their
fellows, shall be made manifest to all: yea, even to those, who shall then
admire their glory and riches, when themselves shall lie in dust, and shame. So
that when the Lord says in his Parable: Mat. 13.26.27.
That when the wheat did appear by the fruit, then did also appear the tares:
his meaning is, not that in the general kingdom all the wheat appears at
once, and all the tares; but as I have said before. And therefore the servants,
must not go to weeding at the first sprout of the ear, though some wheat, and
some tares do evidently appear, least they pluck up wheat with tares. For
some of both shall remain unknown unto them, until the great harvest day.
And this is, Mat. 5.44.45.
fit for the Lords own barn: So ought also his servants to be kind to the
unkind, and merciful to all. Insomuch as in the first effects before
mentioned, there does appear little or no difference.

Now having thus distinguished, between Christian and Christian, Kingdom and
Kingdom, tree and tree: Let us see how matters do fall out between them, and
how they do agree: and also how they ought to walk and carry themselves
toward each other. And that we may the easier accomplish our purpose, we will
divide these great company of Christians into two parts, that is to say:

Some borne of God, returned and become as little children, to whom he has
given the keys of the kingdom, and all those privileges before spoken of,
and a thousand treasures more besides, on whom the second death shall never
have power, nor the gates of hell prevail. The other unregenerate, equal
partakers with the regenerate, in all the common first things before
mentioned, but not in the second effects the last and special things.

Now, these kind of brethren, do often times offend the little ones, and
despise them: because they are little in their own eyes, and poor in their
own spirit, and are returned and become as little children, and because their
fruits of love appear beyond theirs, knowing their own works to be evil, and
their brothers good, wherefore the Lord says to those brethren, Mat.
18.10.11.12.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, these lost sheep whom
I have sought out; for I say unto you, howsoever you esteem of them, Their
Angels stand always beholding my Fathers face who is in heaven. Nay,

After this, the Lord speaks to the little ones, the words of our Lord, which
follows: About the meaning whereof, there is so great difference and strife
at this day, which has caused great division and envy: And because, it being
a matter of great moment, and very necessary at this day to be known: we will
labor the more diligently (by Gods assistance) to dissolve the doubts, and to
bring the truth to light: that by this means, the wandering thoughts of those,
fled, and dispersed abroad, might be reclaimed and brought home. And our
contentious spirits at home also, better informed, that we may have a more
spiritual, peaceful, and heavenly proceeding, and increase from good
beginnings to most happy ends, the which I make no doubt of: if they will but
vouchsafe to learn at the hands of truth. To this end, 1. Ioh. 16.17.18.
verse of the last Chapter.
we will first see what S. John means, and then come to our Lords words.

If any man see his brother sin a sin that is not unto death, let him ask,
and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin
unto death: I say not that ye should pray for it; All unrighteousness is
sin: but there is a sin not unto death. We know, that whosoever is borne of
God, sins not, but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that
wicked one touches him not.

As if he should say,

Psalm. 59.5 1. John. 3.12.
serve him as Caine did his brother: because his own works are evil, and his
brothers good. And this sin is not to be prayed for, and may be discerned by
them which are borne of God, from the other: or else how could they tell for
whom they ought to pray, and for whom not.

All unrighteousness is sin, and all sin is included under the name of
unrighteousness: some of which, 1. John 1.8
all those that are borne of God are guilty of daily: and shall be so long as
they live, 2. Cor. 5.1.2
in this earthly Tabernacle, for which they sigh and mourn, longing for this
deliverance. But there is a sin not unto death: which none of these that are
borne of God do commit: as he affirms in the next words.

2. Cor. 1.22.
that seals that holy seed, the word of faith to his heart: whereby he over
comes the world, and that wicked spirit can take no place in him.

Now let us return to the words and mind of our Savior: now that we perceive
the meaning of his servant John, being all one and the same case, and see what
our Lord does mean, proceeding where we left.

Moreover if thy brother trespass against thee, thou shall tell him his fault
between thee and him alone, etc.

The Lord having from the beginning of the second verse, of this Chapter, to
the end of the foureteenth verse of the same: applied his speeches, Mat. 18.
altogether, to those unregenerate Disciples and brethren: giving them to
understand how necessary it is that they should convert: and that to the
converted little ones, the great things do belong: and to receive one of them
in his name, is to receive him: charging them with great threatenings, to take
heed that they offend not one of those little ones, showing them how
unrecoverable a sin it is: he pronounces a woe upon the committers thereof:
And that as a man cast into the sea,

I say the Lord having advised and charged the vnreturned ones thus, 1. John.
2.10.
does now turn his speech unto the little ones borne of God, in whom is no
occasion of evil (as Saint John says) showing them how they ought to walk
toward those vnreturned brethren. If thy brother trespass against thee, etc.

Here we must consider, before we proceed any further, what trespasses these
are, and to this end let us look back to that which has been said from
Saint John's words: As there is a sin unto death, 1. John 5.16.
not to be prayed for, nor yet to be admonisht of being known (for that man,
which they know they may not pray for, they do as well know it is in vain to
admonish:) So there is a finne not unto death, Leuit. 6.28.
which persecute you: as for him that sins wittingly, and willingly against
the light, and the obeyers thereof for the light and Gospels sake, after he has
known the truth of the same: Heb. 10.26.
there does remain no more sacrifice of sin, etc. Of whom one says, Psalm.
59.5
praying against the wicked. Be not merciful to them that transgress
maliciously:

So to him that sins, or trespasseth, unwittingly though willingly against
the light, and them that walk in it, as many often do revile and persecute
them, thinking they do God service: There does yet remain sacrifice, and he
may be both prayed for, John 16.2
and exhorted to repentance, and repenting find grace and pardon, both with God
and his true Church, Luke 23.34 Act. 7.60
and for such does the Lord himself pray, (saying) Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do, and another says, Lord lay not this sin to
their charge. So that this sin or trespass here, is not any sin committed
simply and alone, against the ten Commandments: But it is to sin against
the new covenant in them that obey it: For the Lord does not here give rules,
and directions whereby to learn men to keep the ten commandments, but to
teach them to obey the Gospel; yet not so, but that every sin committed
against the Gospel, is also a breach of the law; But one may sin against the
law and yet not against the Gospel, not that any man has leave to sin
against, or break any of the ten commandments, but in many things, (as one
says) we sin all, and love covers a multitude of these sins, and as it
is written, Iam. 3.2. 1. Pet 4.8. Psalm. 32.1
Blessed is that man whose iniquities are covered, so that as God in his love
does cover the manifold iniquities of his blessed ones, so do they all cover
multitudes of those sins in others.

And that it cannot be meant of the literal breach of any of the ten
commandments, experience may prove; for if a man see his brother commit
adultery, or murder, or theft, or hear him take the name of God invaine, or
see him worship an Idol, or any other such like gross sin, how may these
rules and directions, in this place, serve for this man, for after that he,
which only is privy to his fault (beside God and himself) has plainly
rebuked him: as the Scripture other where does command him so to do, Leuit.
19.17.
If he will nor hear him: Mat. 18.
how may he then proceed according to the direction of Christ if he take one or
two, and then tells him his fault, and reprove him before them or him, and
the other denies any such fault that he accuses him of, and takes him or
them, whom he brings for witness, to bear witness against him, to prove
him a slaunderer, and so he may proceed against him (in men's judgment) more
lawfully, and more agreeable to Christ's direction, then he may against the
other, because he has one or two witnesses, whereas the other has none: and
so those witnesses, whom he takes to bear witness against another, comes now
against himself: wherefore it is manifest, that no man may accuse another of
any sin (especially of that kind) though he saw it with his eyes, or heard it
with his ears, except he has other eye or ear witnesses besides himself,
least he be condemned for transgression, and punished for an evil doer:
Deuteronomy. 19.15.
for an accusation may not be received under two or three witnesses.

So then the Lord does not mean here, by trespass, any of the gross sins
of the Commandments, nor yet the smaller multitudes of them, which love does
cover, but he means the sins or trespasses committed against the little
ones, that are borne again, hating them or despising them, for that they walk
in the light, and so in despising them they despise the Lord Jesus, and his
father that sent him, and so they sin against that light which should save
their souls; which being done wittingly, is unpardonable. And as the law of
life and salvation is more excellent then the law of death, so does the sin
excel in greatness: (As it is written) If he that despised. Heb. 10.28, 29.
Moses law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses, O how much sorer
punishment suppose, ye shall he be worthy, that treads under feet the Son
of God, and counts the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, wherewith
he was sanctified, and does despite the spirit of grace! So then to sin
against the law is one thing, and to sin against the Gospel is another:
Wherefore by trespass here is meant pardonable sin, committed against the
new Testament; and those that walk in the light thereof unwittingly. And the
trespassers, are such as are not yet borne of God: for he that is borne of God
sins not, 1. Ioh. 5.18.
neither is there any occasion of evil in him: meaning by sin and evil; the
sin to death, and the sin not to death, before mentioned: for if he could
sin the sin not to death, he must needs sin the sin to death, because
he cannot do it ignorantly: As Paul did, 1. Tim. 1.13.
who said I was received to mercy, for I did it ignorantly, seeing he knows
the light, which Paul did not then; for how is it possible that he which is
borne of God, who loves God and his brother also, that is begotten of him, who
walks in the light (which is his life and salvation) that he should hate his
brother whom he so loves, or despise the light which his soul delights in,
or resist the same, seeing that his whole life and felicity does consist
therein? And we know that he that is borne of God, loves God, and he that
loves God, 1. Job. 3.9.
loves his brother also, which is begotten of God; and so he cannot sin,
neither is there any occasion of those evils in him (as it is written): 1. John
5.1.
Now let us proceed, seeing that the way (as I hope) is made clear.

If thy brother trespass against thee, go tell him his fault between thee and
him alone, Mat. 18.15.
if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother: That is to say, If any one of
those Disciples and brethren in common things, not regenerate, do despise or
speak evil of any one of you, that are returned, and revile or persecute you
for the lights sake, wherein you walk: Thou shall inform him of his fault
between thee and himself alone, and give him to understand, that if he
despise, speak evil of, revile, or persecute thee, he does it unto the Lord
whom he professes, and exhort him to humble his heart, and be converted, and
walk in that light himself: and then he shall love both it, and embrace and
love them also that walk in it: if he take knowledge of his faults, and
receives thy words of exhortation and counsel, and say unto thee, it
repents me: thou shall forgive him, seeing thou have won thy brother; but if
he hear thee not, Then can that one or two, witness against him, and will, if
that he will not hear them neither, (but first let them also admonish him)
that so every word that he speaks evil against thee, or the light in thee,
may be confirmed. And if he refuse to hear them, tell it unto the Church, and
if he refuse to hear the Church also, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man
and a Publican: that is, If he still like a scorner, refuse to give ear and
to receive instruction, at the hands of that one witness with thee or two,
tell it to the Church, These he has made Pillars in his house, and they shall
go no more out. Reu. 3.12.
that is, to those little ones borne of God, being gathered together in my
name, who only have this privilege to be my Church and Pillar of truth; for
if there were five hundred brethren more beside the little humble ones, yet
none can judge this cause but they. This Church does never condemn the inocent,
and let the guilty go free. This Church never decreed lies, and condemned the
truth. And if he refuse to hear this Church, let him be unto thee no longer
as a brother, and a fellow partaker in the common things of the kingdom,
wherein before he did and might take part with thee, as a disciple of Christ,
but let him be unto thee, and unto all the Church, even as a Heathen that
believes not the truth of the Gospel, and as a Publican that professes the
practice of sin: Verily I say unto you, written in you, with the bond of
death, and to shut the gate of mercy and love against them, as also to lose the
bonds of iniquity, and the cords and chains of their sins, that do repent:
and to open the gates of my kingdom of mercy and life unto them: so that
whatsoever ye bind on earth, is bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye lose on
earth, is losed in heaven. For if he escaped not, that despised him that spoke
on earth, how should he then escape, that despises him that speaks from
heaven? And as he died without mercy under two or three witnesses, that
despised Moses law: Much more lamentable, and fearful, is the condition of
him, that despises that law, and covenant of grace, whereby his soul should
live: resisting the voice of the bride, and of her children, which sought his
good. How much greater is his bondage, and sorer shall his punishment be, that
is condemned by that Church, (where the Prince of the covenant does sit) of
treason against his blood, by the testimony of two or three witnesses, It had
been good for that man if he never had been borne. And better for him, after
he was borne, that a millstone had been hanged about his neck, and thrown to
the bottom of the Sea, before he fell to despise the Lord in his Sanctuary,
and to resist his spirit of grace in his little ones.

Again, verily I say unto you, That if two of you my brethren, that beleene in
me, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name (if it be life, for him that
sins not unto death, or whatsoever else is necessary and good for the
kingdom) he will give it you.

For,

But there was evermore an Israel after the flesh, which persecuted that
Israel which is after the spirit, and shall be to the worlds end. For this
generation shall not pass away till the Lord himself come. Mat. 24.34.
And if there were not an Israel not of God, Paul would never have said. (To
the Israel which is of God) And if there were not an earthly Jerusalem, he
would never have told us of a heavenly.

Yea, there were two Ierusalems in all times: Two Isreal's in all ages, two
mothers, two test aments, two seeds, even from the beginning: As Caine and
Abell, Ismaell and Isaac, Esau and Jacob: Two lands of Canaan, heavenly and
earthly: Two rests, carnal and spiritual, As it is written, saying: To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, least ye enter not into this
rest: Even then while they were in possession of the earthly rest, Heb.
3.15.16.17.18.19.
which by vnhardning their hearts, and hearing his voice, they might have
entered into. Even the same way which ever was, still remains, and shall do to
the worlds end. Even the same rest, the same heavenly Jerusalem, the same
congregation of the first borne, the same holy City, the same Church, which
has had in it at all times, the same power from God to bind and loose, to
remit and to retain sins, And this is the bride, the Lambs wife, This is she,
to whom is granted to be clothed in white array: And these are they that watch,
and are sober, attending with their Lamps burning, to meet the bridgeroome
their husband. These all vnhardened their hearts, and heard his voice, and
entered into his rest. The rest and peace with God, rest to their souls, even
that rest which is said to remain to the people of God. Heb. 4.9.
And whosoever entered into that rest, did first hear his voice, that is,
received the word of faith. And whosoever received that word of faith; did
first vnharden his heart: that is, did first repent: was lost, and dead,
crying, and bewailing, with an vn-vtterable desire of life, his sins and
death. and these are the dead which hear the voice of the son of man, and
live. Ioh. 5.25.
And this is that one baptism spoken of, and is called the baptism of
repentance, Acts. 19.4. Mark. 1.1.2.3.4
and the beginning of the Gospel, the preparation to the word of faith. (That
one faith spoken of,) and they that are borne again of these two, Mat. 3.3.
Ephe. 4.5.
have all received that one spirit spoken of, even the spirit of adoption, and
are all servants unto that one Lord, and children to that one God their Father,
who is above all, and through all, and in them all. And these are entered into
the kingdom of heaven, Romans 14.17.
which is not meat, and drink, and apparel: but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost.

Now let us speak a little of the liberty and freedom of this kingdom. This
kingdom is free, not in bondage, but at liberty, wheresoever she lives in any
kingdom or commonwealth, and if the Magistracy thereof, say eat, they eat:
or drink, they drink: or put on, they put on: observe and keep, touch, or
taste, or handle, or pay, they obey: If they forbid, they also hear, and
forbear; both in these and all other things of the like nature. And so are
they obedient to all manner ordinances of man, for the Lords sake; against
whose commandment else they should sin, Luke 20.25.
who says, Romans 13.7.
Give unto Caesar those things that are Caesar's. And there is no kingdom, or
state whatsoever, where Christians are not in bondage (if it be a bondage) to
some of these. And if there were (which is impossible) then were it left to
their choice, to take or leave with moderation, as please them: as it is also
under a government, where many things of the same nature are so left, neither
commanded, nor forbidden And herein consists their liberty, in that it
touches not their conscience, For whether they eat, or eat not, they sin
not, for God requires neither the one nor the other, wherefore if we give these
things to Caesar, we do wrong neither to God, nor yet to our consciences, but
rather if we give not, being required: as the Lord himself said in the like
case, Mat. 17.27.
Pay it to them least we offend.

And as Caesar must have, and be obeyed in whatsoever belongs to him, so we
must give unto God whatsoever he requires, and obey him in whatsoever he
commands. Now the greatest difficulty lies in this, to distinguish between
the things of God, and the things of Caesar, that knowing them asunder, we may
the better know how, and wherein, to obey both God and Caesar.

And herein, by the grace of my God, I will not say any thing for any respect,
in and of the world whatsoever, but Gods truth and his Church: seeing that I
know, it shall come to the trial of such a touchstone which cannot err: Who
will weigh it, try it, and condemn it, if it be found corrupt, or too light,
And although it be a common fault in men, to respect the present and general
affection: and the approbation of the most and greatest, sway they as they
will: Yet insomuch as I know, that God is in all times and sees in all places,
be they never so secret, and also that he has eyes abroad that can see, though
many be blind, and lies go as current as truth with many: and seeing I know,
not only this time, but a better time shall try it, I will therefore be
advised and take heed what I say, for assuredly, there is no lie, made by the
cunningst inuenter of lies whatsoever, but shall once, either sooner or later,
suffer death at the hands of truth. And there is no stubble or straw
whatsoever, but shall be consumed with the flame thereof.

Now let us see, first what are the things of God, which does belong to him:
And then we shall the easier see, what are Caesar's things that belong to him.
John. 4.23.34.
The things of God are truth and spirit, John. 17.17.
his truth is his word, his word is his law: his law is of two sorts, and
therefore is called two Testaments. Ioh. 4.23.24. and. 17.17*
The Testament and law of death: and the Revelation and Covenant of life.

All the Scriptures are true, but all that is written therein is not the word
of God: For sometimes the holy Ghost sets down the sins and practices of
evil men: Ier. 28.
And sometimes he describes unto us the lying words of the false prophets:
which when we read, we must not take it for the word of God, but that it is
true, we must believe: for they which wrote it could not err therein, and
therefore truth it is, but not the truth.

The word of God then, and the truth we mean, Is that which came from heaven,
whether that just and holy law of commandments, which is called the minister
of death, because we could not fulfill it, and therefore it could not give us
life, but the just sentence of death; or that perfect law and testament of
life, Psalm. 19.7.
which conuerteth souls, I mean the Gospel, which is in a more special and
peculiar manner, called the word of God, then the law is or can be, as where it
says, Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. 2. Pet. 1.19.
and hearing by the word of God. And again we have a most sure word of the
Prophets, unto the which ye do well that ye give heed, etc. And in diverse
other places both in the new and old Testament, whereby, nothing is meant (by
any means) but the promise and word of life: And therefore he says, John.
17.17.
Sanctify them through thy word: thy word is the truth. Now, in these two
Testaments is declared whatsoever God requires: either due to himself from
us, whether it be faith or obedience: And also our duty to our neighbors, of
all sorts, high and low, good and bad, and all the holy Prophesies, and
Revelations which came from above: and sacrifices and shadows whatsoever, which
(...) scriptures do set forth unto us: do tend to one or other of these two?
and both and all, do tend either to show forth the riches of God, in his
bounty and mercy, and the condition of those that turn, obey his Gospel, and
love his law: or his severity and justice, in the condition of those that
disobey both law and Gospel. That the end of all might be the glory of God,
and of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now the special things of God, that do belong peculiarly to him alone, are
they that we must speak of. His peculiar things are these, first as from him
we are gone astray, and by his holy law pronounced dead: so to him alone we
must return to seek life: for he alone can give it us, In him alone we must
believe and put our confidence: to him alone we must pray, and he only must
be our God, and chief delight Him only we must fear as God: him only we must
love as God: him only we must acknowledge for our Savior, and Redeemer: his
commandments must be obeyed only above all: and he only worshipped with our
whole spirits. For he alone must have our hearts, and this is spirit joined
with truth, John. 4.21.
Neither this mountain nor that, does he require, nor yet forbid: what he
commands not, Caesar may forbid, what he forbids not, Caesar may command.
God requires every place alike: Caesar may command a place for the public so
he do forbid none in private. God requires not apparel: Caesar may forbid:
God forbids not: Caesar may command. Where there is no law, there is
liberty, we were in bondage once (indeed) when shadows were in place, but
now we are freed and set at liberty, by the Son who is free, and the very
substance is in him.

God commands all times for prayers and supplications: 2. These. 5.15.
Caesar one time, forbidding no time, breaks no law; for every (one, is
contained in all: And so in all other things, that are not either commanded,
or forbidden of God: and in obeying Caesar therein, we give unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars, whereas otherwise, if we obey him not, we are guilty
of the breach of the moral law, which says, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. And so breaking this one great commandment, we are guilty of that
other, the greatest of all. Thou shall love thy Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul; etc.

For although God does not appoint and command Caesar, in all, what laws he
shall make: yet does he confirm all those laws which he does made: which
are not contrary to his own laws, and commands obedience thereto at the
hands of all subjects to their Kings and governors, and all other their
superiors, be they good or bad, of what profession soever he be, whether
Prophet, or Priest, or Bishop true of false: so he have power, he must be
obeyed: or else we are guilty of the wole law of God, Romans 13.1
for all the powers that be (as one says) are ordained of God. And therefore
whosoever he be that lies in prison, or suffers any punishment (whatsoever)
for disobeying of any of these his governors, in any of those laws or Canons
not opposite to Gods laws, he suffers as an evil doer, and so depriueth
himself of that liberty, which the Apostle exhorts to, saying. Stand fast in
the liberty wherein Christ had made you free, and be not entangled again, Gal.
5.1.
etc. If you do well says one, who will harm you. 1. Pet. 3.13.
The daes are past long a go wherein there was a law which said, Touch not,
taste not, handle not, etc. wherewith consciences might be defiled, but thanks
be to God, who has freed us through Jesus Christ our Lord, that whether we
eat or eat not, tough or touch not, observe or observe not, we offend not,
so that we have knowledge, neither God nor our consciences, so that withal we
take heed and make not this liberty a cloak for sin. It is a good garment
for a Saint, but not for a sinner, for he takes liberty there-vnder, 1. Pet.
1, 6
to run into all kind of riot and excess, But we, as we must give unto Caesar
the things that are Cesars: So we must give unto God the things that are Gods:
And in those things which neither God nor Caesar does require, but is in our
own liberty to take our leave, as to eat and drink, to put on, to buy, and
the like: herein we must not exceed, least it overcome and rule our
affections, and so we turn our liberty to sin, much rather let us forbear,
finding them not expedient, for though all things are lawful (as one says)
yet all things are not expedient: 1. Cor. 6.12.
I will not be brought says he under the power of any thing. And look on the
(says he in another place) who walk so as ye have us for an example, Philip.
3.17.18.19.20.
for many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, who
are enemies to the Cresse of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God their
belly, and glory to their shame, which mind earthly things, but our
conversation is in he^auen. And therefore let us give unto God the things that
are Gods, and to Caesar the things that are Cesars. And if Caesar should require
any thing which belongs to God, let us give him our lives, if we had ten
thousand, before he should have it, 1. Pet. 3.17.
and then we should not suffer as evil doers, but for righteousness sake.

These things look unto, you that run from country to country, and you also
that stay at home, and trouble the proceedings of Sion. Know this that ye
suffer as evil doers, and cause others also to do the like, by following your
steps.

But some man perhaps will say, Caesar the King, but I cannot abide these
Prelates the Bishops to obey them (can thou not indeed?) Take love into thy
breast, and then thou shall see what thou can do. I but thou will say, He
is no Caesar, not yet a lawful governor, his calling and power is
Antichristian, and it came from the beast, The Pope of Rome, who received not
his power from God, but from the great red Dragon the devil. Reu. 13.2.


of Rome, is untrue: In former times indeed they did; but now they receive
their callings and power from Caesar our King, who has authority to determine
and appoint, Titus 3.1.
every public calling in all his kingdoms, 1. Pet. 3.13.14.
tending to the commonwealth of all his subjects, as well for the feeding of
their souls, as for the preservation of their bodies and goods. And this is a
charge laid upon him by God himself, as every householder is bound to provide
(to his power) all things necessary for his household, both for soul and body:
And as the King is bound to see all his great household provided for (to his
power) and to place over them the best and fittest for the purpose, I mean for
soul and body: So he may give power and authority to all sorts of them, to
perform the will of God, and to see his own laws kept and executed, without
resistance or disturbance.

Secondly, whereas thou say, that the beast, the Pope, received his power
from the great red Dragon the devil: Thou say true, but thou shall see, if
thou will look well upon the matter, how thou do deceive thy self, For
tell me, who was that great red Dragon? was it the devil himself alone, or
was it the Emperor in whom the devil dwelt, Reu. 12.3.
who is said to have seven heads and ten horns? wherewith the devil alone is
never described, but the Emperor it was that gave him his power, and his
Throane, and great authority, in whom the devil dwelt, as he does in all such
like bloody Tyrants: And as he has done in the beast the Dragons successor,
(in more cruel malice and deceit) above forty of his two and forty months:
Ren. 13.5.
wherein power was given him to do.

But tell me, who gave the Emperor his power? was it not God, Christ our Lord
says to the Emperors Deputy Pilat: Thou could have no power (says he)
except it were given thee from above. John. 19.10.
So then whether it be the Emperors Deputy Pilat: or his successor, the Pope:
or any other that has authority and power: Their power is given them from
above, whatsoever they be. And so one says true, All powers that be, Romans 13.1.
are ordained of God, and he that resists the power, resists the ordinance
of God: So that what power so ever it be, and in whatsoever they command or
forbid: They must be obeyed; always provided, that they command not that which
God forbids, or forbid that which God commands. And so we give to Caesar
the things that are Caesar's.

But these things are loathsome in your ears, and eyes, and this (of all
other) will go hardest down with you. For the power and authority of
Bishops, you hold, is Antichristian, and to obey their laws and ordinances,
you say, is to worship the beast: Though the things they command be never so
indifferently lawful in themselves, to be done or left undone, their authority
and command (you say) makes it abominable.

And this is not your saying alone: it is a sore that has festered these
thirty years in England, and has bred diverse Sects and infectiue errors: Our
Teachers and writers for pretended reformation, were the first planters
thereof, who through their ignorance (in their heat) not discerning between
the things of God, and the things of Caesar, for want of knowledge concerning
Christian liberty, conceived a law of forbidding, and gave it out, charging the
people upon pain of condemnation to be obedient thereunto: whereby they have
brought themselves and many hundred poor souls besides, (laden with sin)
into a further captivity and greater bondage then they were in before: For
whereas their sins only oppressed them, and remembering Gods promise, had
almost escaped: This law of their Teachers came so suddenly on the neck of
them, that they were driven into a harder straight, and under a more
unrecoverable burden then they were before: which has been so wearisome unto
them, that to ease themselves, they have made Sects, and running into them,
have fallen into many gross errors: some also falling to, and embracing this
present world: Only a remnant God has, and will deliver from these wayward
and distastful spirits, and give them to see, how Christians are free, and yet
subjects to Caesar, and how the conscience is no more defiled by the commander
(of what condition soever he be) in their obedience, then it should be by
leaving it undone, if neither man nor God require it: for as we are freed from
the law of Ceremonies (once in force before the death of Christ) that there is
now no more conscience to be made of them: but as to be circumcised is nothing
so to be uncircumcised is nothing, Act. 16.1, 2* 3.
as we may see by the example of Paul and Timothy, who after the death,
resurrection, and ascension of Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost was sent unto
the Church: after which time Circumcision was as absolutely abolished, with all
the whole law of Ceremonies, A^t. 21.24, 25, 26.
as ever it was since to this day: yet Paul did purify himself after the
manner of the Jews, and circumcised Timothy: To prove and show unto us, even to
the worlds end, That there is no more holiness or Religion, in making
conscience to abstain from Circumcision, then there is to be Circumcised: for
as it is nothing now to be Circumcised (seeing the end of it was accomplished
long ago) so is it nothing to be uncircumcised. 1. Cor. 7.18, 19.


So that if a man of God should now be circumcised, to the like end as Timothy
was, or should fashion himself like a Jew, 1. Cor. 8.4, 5, 6.
to the same end that Paul did, he should sin no more then Paul and Timothy
did. Neither should a man offend, if he should sit at Table in the Idols
Temple, and eat of the meat sacrificed to an Idol, so that he know that an
Idol is nothing in the world, and does esteem it as the dust under his
feet, he sins not: so that he bow not, nor give or show any reverence, 1.
Cor. 10.23, 28, 29.
either to the Idol, the Temple, or the Feast, but only receive the meat
with giving thanks to God: Always provided too withal, that there be no
weak brother that does make conscience for want of knowledge, which is
offended thereat, nor yet any Christian (as then there were some) that having
been bred and brought up, among Idolaters, and long accustomed to the Idol
service, did yet think that there was some conscience to bo made, 1. Cor. 8.
ver. 7.
and ieuerence to be had of it, that might be emboldened thereby in that their
sin, or encouraged thereby, to fall to worship the Idol again, 1. Cor. 8.
and to do service unto it. I say, Ver. 10.
all these things being considered, and conscionably regarded, and prevented:
It is no sin to sit at Table in the Idols Temple, and to eat the meat
sacrificed to Idols: But otherwise all these things considered, and done, (as
is aforesaid) If he eat meat sacrificed to Idols, or sit at the Idols Table,
he sins against the brethren, and so against God; and not only so but if he
yield any reverence, he is also an Idolater, Josh. 23.7.
and sins against God in a more high degree.

Now if these things may be lawfully done amongst the Idolaters, and in their
Temples, as then Christians lived for the most part amongst Idolaters: and as
these Scriptures do evidently prove was in their liberty: and as Paul says,
To the Jew I become as a Jew, that I may win the Jew; 1. Cor.
9.19.20.21.22.23.
to the Grecian, and the Grecian, etc. Yea, I am made all things to all men,
to the end that I might win some. And also that of the Assirian, when he
should go into the house of the Idol Rimmon, and bow down for his Master to
lean on, 2. King. 5.18.19.
when he was worshipping to the Idol: when he made doubt of it, the Prophet
bad him go in peace. I say if these things be thus far in our liberty among
the heathen, and in place of Idolatry, where the end and intent is abominable:
And also among the Jews concerning the ceremonies, whose end is absolutely
abolished: As also in Rome, whose commandments of all other have in them the
greatest abomination: so that we partake not with them in their sins, least
we partake of their plagues, Revel. 18.4.
If we may among all these, yield and obey, in things indifferent, whatsoever
the commander be, as those Scriptures before mentioned does witness: How much
more ought we to be obedient to the laws and ordinances of England, seeing
they intend not, neither Idolatry nor superstition. Considering also what great
difference there is between our Commanders (in profession of Religion) and the
commanders of the heathen, and of Rome, the City of abominations. For if I
should ask you, what King with his under governors, is there is the world,
that does command the truth of Religion, in general, like the King and
Governors of England: And you are reformers that stand so much upon terms?
What law is there in England imposed upon you contrary to Gods law? Consider
and tell us. I know what you have pretended a great while, and we have seen
the issue of it: but look a little better upon the matter, and search
thoroughly. If you find any contrary to God, and his law imposed upon you (but
look ye be in a sure ground) Obey them not, what King soever command you, let
him first have all, even your lives: If not, take heed, suffer not like evil
doers, as you have done a great while: and as you have pretended reformation in
the general, now reform your selves in particular: for be it known unto you,
your doctrines, and proceedings, have been the cause of much evil, you have
been the breeders of these sects, you have laid the foundation, and others
build.

Their buildings stand upon your foundation, and therefore you are no more able
to deal with them in this controversy, then one is able to deal with his
enemy, when he has yielded him all his weapons: For by the same reason that
you inuay against the ceremonies (as ye call them) will they come against you
for going to the assemblies in the Temple: and as you find fault with them for
want of an eldership in the ordination of their pastors: They defend their
proceedings by the same reasons, that you deny the Authority of your Presbitery
at home. And you would also have the Church of the same fashion as they: For
you agree with them that non ought to be baptized, but such as do first show
forth unto you the fruits of regeneration: Whereupon depends their Separation
and Rebaptisings, and then ought not children to be baptized, for they show
forth no fruits of Regeneration: so that if al be true which you say, that is
true which they do, and so you are the sayers, and they the doers, And
therefore you must of necessity, either join with them, or change your minds,
or else hide your selves for shame; for ye cannot fight with them, seeing you
are unarmed, and they have all your weapons. Therefore as you have troubled
many a poor soul with your doubtful Doctrines, under pretense of abstaining
from sin, and performing of holy duties, that many of you, and of your
followers, differ but little from the Sect of the Pharisees: So now at last, see
if ye can learn to give them better instruction.

And as you have been the Authors of Sects, and many errors, which has bred
much distraction, and trouble of spirit, as is to be seen this day both at
home and abroad, now at last seek to redress it, for it is lamentable to
behold, how many hundreds of people, (no doubt single and upright in heart,
hungring and thirsting for peace and rest to their souls) have been by you
seduced and brought into a spiritual bondage: And also throught their devotion
and bounty unto you, have brought themselves (some of them) into great wants,
and miseries: some with feasting of you, some with l^e^ding, some with giving:
and some to ease their conciences, which you had burdened, and to escape
trouble, have left their callings, removed their dwellings; sold their
possessions, fled their country, separating themselves from the Church of
England as from Idolatry, and the abominations of Antichrist. And being
beyond the seas (In Holland by name) beholding among the Sects of Separatists
there, The wranglings, the brawlings, the deuisions, the envy, and the gross
sins that has been amongst them, have been driven to their wits ends,
running from Sect to Sect, and from error to error, that some of them now at
last, are become carnal and blasphemous Familists: between whom and the
worldlings, there is little difference, but only in their doctrines and
blasphemies. Others (the better of the two) Embracing merely this present
world. Only a few have escaped, whom God has better instructed, who can tell
how, through his grace, to give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and
unto God the things that are God.

And now yet for all this, neither you nor your followers, have once called
into question, your beginnings and grounds of these things: but they are so
blinded with you, and you with your long accustomed errors, (your supposed
truth) and with the arguments you have so long maintained, against the Bishops
their titles, their places, and callings, The injunctions and ceremonies as ye
call them: that you have still proceeded, in your blind zeal: even to
silencing and imprisoning: and they on the other side, in their devotion and
simple zeal of your Doctrine and you, so that they have ministered so
bountifully unto you, and that out of their penury some of them, that you have
filled your bags with money, and your bellies with cheer, (some of you) when
some of your poor contributors, and followers, have sit with many a hungry
meal at home, with many a sigh and trouble in spirit, when as neither you, nor
your rich followers, have scarce ever enquired, or looked after them. And you
are so cunning some of you, that you can plead poverty to increase your store,
that you may have hundreds to spare against anotherday. And herein your
greatest and richest followers are so partial, they will give you a pound, and
plenty offeasts and cheer: when they will hardly give their poor hungry
brother a penny, a cup of cold water, or a piece of bread: And this they have
learned of you, who are also as partial as they, if not more: for they that
fill you with delicates, and that put pounds into your purses, you will visit,
and that often: you are well acquainted with their doors, whereas though there
be ten poor to one rich, of all your followers, yet you know not the way to
their doors, nor the place where they dwell: they are strangers, and unknown
except they visit you: Are not these your proceedings? I know what I say, it is
pitiful to see, how many of your poor followers, are in great and extreme
wants with their wives and children: Look unto it therefore, and repent: for
be it known unto you, God will raise them out of the dust (that you think
not) who shall Ecclips your light, Jacob is disquieted by your means, and
Israel by you caused to err.

And for you Master Smith and your company: here is news come to England
already, that you are divided: and you know what must come to a divided
kingdom, and a house against it self. That which cannot stand, must fall: and
that which cannot endure, shall come to naught. Seek strength of the Lord, and
request that you may stand in his Courts, and dwell in his house, whose pillars
endure for ever.

But perhaps some will say;

the law of our land does not persecute thee for righteousness sake? will thou
therefore be disobedient, and suffer for thy sins? Because a godly life and
persecution cannot be separated in this world asunder, as it is written, 2.
Tim. 2.12.
Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution: and
whosoever will be his Disciple, must take up his cross daily, and follow him,
will thou therefore (because thou know not how to take up his Cross, nor
how to live godly in Christ Jesus) Take up a Cross of thine own making, 1.
Pet. 2.12 13.14.15.16.17.
and because thou will be sure to suffer, speak evil of them that are in
authority, resist the ordinance of God, and so suffer for evil doing? If thou
be one of the Lords justified faithful ones, thou shall find adversaries enough
every day, though law and authority should be on thy side, and take thy part.

He is the Minister of God for thy wealth.
David, though he were King himself, and none in the world above him but God,
yet could he not prevent the mockes and taunts, and drunken songs that were of
him, nor yet the manifold enemies that pursued his soul night and day,
wherefore he crucified himself, and prayed often with a broken heart and a
contrite spirit, to him that was able to deliver him from all those his ghostly
enemies, watering his cheeks and bed full many a time and often with tears:
Learn therefore to take up David's Cross, to suffer and to be crucified with
him, and with Christ his Lord, learn to be Christ's Disciple and servants as
David was, and to love the Lord, and walk in his ways as David did, and thou
shall have enemies enough will find thee out, both natural and spiritual, thou
shall not need to go seek them, only take up thy Cross willingly and with
patience: and then if thou so suffer with him, thou shall be sure also to
reign with him.

Show me one word in all the new Testament, that requires thee to suffer for
those things that thou pretendest, or tell me which of the Apostles, or
Christians, in the Apostles times did suffer for speaking against, or
disobeying the law of ceremonies, except it were unjustly: Act. 25.7.8.
and then Paul (when the Jews laid many and grievous complaints against him
which they could not prove) answers for himself, That he had neither offended
any thing against the law of the Jews, Act. 24.14, 15.
nor against the Temple, nor against Caesar, only he sought Christ Jesus, in
whom all those things which the Jews called heresy, were accomplished, and the
use of them no more of necessity,but were then become all indifferent.

Luke 19.8.
separating your selves from others, being puffed up, knowing nothing, doting
about questions, and strife of words, whereof comes envy, raylings, strife,
and evil surmisings.

And are not those, Luke 20.21.
that edify themselves in the most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, and
that keep themselves in the love of God, looking for the mercies of the Lord
Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Mat. 5.11.12. 1. Pet. 3.17.
And if ye suffer for these things, blessed are ye.

Neither think that if thou give over thy contentions, about these
differences (of thine) and fightings with shaddows, that then thou must needs
take thy pleasure in this world, and shake hands with it, and look after
preferments in the earth, and promotions as others some do: Neither take me,
as if I justify those that have turned their heat into coldness; nor yet those
that can play with both hands, because they will keep their credit with those
that are zealous, and not lose that neither which they gape for whenever it
falls, who are fed till they are gross with fat, and yet gape for more: These
are the cunninger sort of subscribing Reformers, who speak evil of that in
private, which they conform to in public, who under pretense of preaching the
Gospel for the good of others, preach and preferments, who reign in their
spirits and word, more like Lords then many of those whose places, and titles,
and honors, they spite and speak against, because it is not theirs. Neither
do I justify any that having authority (more or less) do reign as Lords
over Gods heritage, that love salutations and greetings, delighting to be
called Lords, affecting greatly the Title Rabby, sporting themselves with the
afflictions of Jacob, that tread the holy City Jerusalem under their feet, as
the Popes and Lords of Rome have done, and do.

For as I condemn no one for his greatness of place, or Titles, or power and
authority whomsoever: so no more do I justify the evil works of any, but
know and am assured, that whosoever he be that does love the wages of Balam,
and does post after Balakes preferment, as Balam did, is no better then he.
And also whosoever does the works of the Pharisees and Scribes, and of their
generation (the sons of the whore of Babylon) shall be found (as indeed they
are) the very offspring of those Scribes and Pharisees: and the children of
that whore, their moher, though they disclaim her never so much: and therefore,
though they come like sheep, prophesying in the name of Christ, preaching
oftentimes his word and truth, as Balam did; and like those whom our Savior
speaks of, yet we must beware of them, as of false Prophets: And we shall
know them hardly by their clothing, which is their preaching and doctrines,
for therein they can and do oftentimes imitate the Sheep, But by their fruits
(says the Lord) ye shall know them.

And therefore (especially) this I justify, wish and desire, that all (that
profess Christ and his Gospel and the administration thereof) would take
heed, they resist not the power, seeing it is the Ordinance of God, and that
they would not be high minded, but fear.

And also that they, that have authority and power, and have a great place, as
they profess Christ and his Divine word, and the ministration thereof: that
they would do the works of Christ in meekness and lowlines of heart, loving
the righteous, and embracing the little ones, knowing that he that is the
greatest shall be as the least, and he that is chief, as him that serves,
then shall they be worthy of double honor.

Now let us speak a little of some of the greatest things that God requires
at our hands: the which we have greatest need to look after, to practice and
perform: and that is, to be borne again of water and the holy Ghost: I hat
is to say, the true tears of repentance, and the fire of Gods love, by the
power of the holy Ghost: without the which, we shall never enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. And though we should give to Caesar the things that be
Caesar's, yet are we never the nearer to the Kingdom of heaven, except we give
unto God the things that are Gods.

The first effect of the spirit in us, is to believe that God is, and is to be
found. Heb. 11.6. The second effect of the spirit, for which the promise and
word of faith is made and given, is repentance.
First therefore whosoever comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he
is also a rewarder of them that seek him: for no man comes unto God to be
borne again, and reconciled unto him, but he must first believe that he is,
ever was, and shall be, and is only able to save, and willing (also) and ready
to be found of them that seek him: Now then the first work which the Lord
does work in us effectual to salvation, is repentance, and is the beginning
of our regeneration, and the first step of seeking God after we believe that
he is, and is to be found. And this repentance is an unspeakable sorrow for
sins, and desire of reconciliation with God, with such a moulten and
dissolved heart, as yields forth thousands of tears, from the deep dug
well of water, broken up from the bottom of that his sorrowful heart, Act.
19.4.
washing, and baptising it therein, bewailing his woeful and lost condition in
his father Adam; and the loathsome uncleanness of his own life, which the
righteous law of God had most justly condemned him for, Sighing, and sobbing,
being borne and become, even as water, crying, and calling for mercy night and
day: John 3.5.
never giving over, till God takes pity upon him, and send down the
comforter unto his oppressed soul, The third effect of the spirit, is peace
and love The assurance of Gods favor and forgiveness of our sins.
with the fire of his love, to kindle peace therein, and to purge the same:
according to his promise, made in the slain Lamb the only mediator between
God and all such heavy loaded sinners, prepared, dug, and powered full of
water, like Elias his Sacrifice: which fire of heaven, does so consume, and
lick up, this wette and well prepared Sacrifice, Romans 8.26.
that the odor thereof is carried up by the comforter, (the holy Ghost) the
Angel which the Lamb did send unto him, who does carry and recarry, from
heaven to earth, and from earth to heaven: who (with golden censure) does
receive and present with much odors that is given him, the prayers, Reu. 8.34.5.
cries, and tears, of this poor sighing soul: offering them upon the golden
Altar, which is before the throane of God: where the fire of his love does
burn night and day: and the smoke of the odors, with their requests, the
cries, and tears, of this dry and thirsty soul, Ascend up before God out of
the Angels hand: who makes intercession for him, in the mediation of the
Lamb, Requesting grace and favor for him, for the mediators sake, and that
he would regard and pity his soul, whose messengers, Mat. 18.1^.
these cries and tears are, standing before the face of God, among his Angels
to beseene, which grace and love, God does grant unto his Angel for him: who
with speed takes the Censer and fills it with the fire of the Altar, and
hastes down to power it upon this and all such like poor thirsty souls. The
ioyfullest messenger that any man can have: bringing peace and comfort, love
and joy: Assuring him it is decreed in heaven, that he shall live. And this is
to be borne of water, and of the holy Ghost, and this is it which John means
when he says: Mat. 3.11.12.
I baptize you with water to repentance, but he that comes after me, shall
baptize you with the holy Ghost and fire, Psalm. 51.17.
The sacrifice of God (says one) is a broken and contrite heart: Esa. 42.3.
A broken and contrite heart (oh God) thou will not despise. Thou will bind up
the bruised reed: and give fire to the smoking Flax. Psalm. 24.6.
This is the generation of them seek him, yea of them that seek thy face oh
God, even Jacob my beloved. Psalm. 27.8.
Seek ye my face, my heart answered: O Lord I will seek thy face. The
secrets of the Lord are opened to them that fear him and his covenant, to give
them understanding. Psalm. 25.10.
This is the man that can not only give Caesar the things that; are Caesar's,
But to God (also) the things that are Gods, he offers eueryday, the sacrifice
of a broken heart, sighing, and weeping to see his sins look on him, Romans
7.35.
which he has cast behind him, mourning to see how his flesh does serve
sin, whereas his mind does love, and delight in the law of God his loving
father: who has his heart (night and day) attending on his grace: thinking on
his mercies still; never putting out of mind, what he has done for him;
always thinking, where ever he goes, of his most precious promises, wondering
at his great love. Uttering most joyful voices by himself alone:
inexpressible joys in the holy Ghost has he often times, and peace past
understanding, thus does he walk with God and please him. The night watches
does he prevent, and the Sun rising to give thanks unto his God, and does
salute him, before the day spring. Thus does God possess him, and he him.

Are not these things true Master Smith? (well, time will tell) peradventure
you will object, that I say but prove nothing: If here be nothing proved,
you may the more easily disprooue: for no man will gainsay that which he
takes proved, if he be not possessed with an evil spirit. But it may be you
think scorn to fight with one that has no weapon, counting it no praise, nor
triumph in such a victory: well, though you will neither fight nor yield, (as
one that disdaineth so mean an offer) yet truth shall win, though ye despise
to learn of her, and scorn to speak unto her: But if you do, yet bethink
your self, least you should be thought to be put to silence by a fool, and
take heed (I pray you) kick not against the pricks, let not the wisdom of the
flesh overrule you: It is better, a wise man should yield a little to a fool,
then that the wise man should die at the point of truth: for it is sharper then
any two edged sword. Take heed therefore, and mark well the things that are
here written unto you, and search the Scriptures, whether they be so or no:
for they are GODS witnesses, and they tell the truth, what ever man says: and
I pray you take heed, you mistake not the Lord: for his word is a mystery,
especially these things, which are called the secrets of the kingdom of heaven.

And beware that you affirm not any thing, which he has not said nor meant:
nor gainsay, or diminish any thing from his intent, and howsoever ye have
failed therein already: yet considering (as I persuade my self) you are not of
those, lovers and makers of lies, for I hope far better things of you M.
Smith, Reu. 22.15.
and therefore that we may understand the Lord, and see his secrets, even the
secrets of his kingdom: Let us entreat him with broken and humble hearts, for
the spirit of truth, that holy anointing, which is true, and not lying: that
as it does teach us, even so we may abide in him, and so let us write and
speak. Let us anoint our eyes with eye salve, that we may see, even with the
water of a dissolved broken heart, and we shall see better things, then form
and fashion. That we may discern, between those that have but the form of
godliness, and them that have the power thereof. That we may see and know
those little ones: whom to receive, is to receive the Lord: and to love them,
whom to love, is to love the Lord, and to love the Lord, is life for evermore.
And this is that love, without the which, all knowledge, and all faith, does
but make us as sounding brass, and tinckling Cimballs. For by this love, 1.
Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.
we shall know that we are translated from death to life, and by this love, we
shall approve our selves to the little ones, to have that one peculiar faith
with them, the assurance of the love of God unto us in Christ Jesus, and of our
reconciliation with God through him.

And this is the faith which one speaks of (in a certain place) to one that
would have been esteemed, Iam. 2.18.19.20.
and no doubt esteeming of himself too, as if he had that special peculiar
faith, which only the Lords redeemed have. Show me (says he) thy faith by thy
works, and I will show thee my faith by my works: Thou have faith I grant
thee, and do believe, but what? that there is one God (well) yea and one Lord
Jesus Christ also, and one holy spirit, and one faith, and one baptism, yea
and one Church, purchased and sanctified by the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ.
And do thou believe all these things indeed? thou do well: but I tell thee,
the devil does believe it also, and does tremble: for one may have faith,
though not that special faith, nor yet the fruits that follow the same. One
may by faith cast out devils, and that in the name of Christ Jesus, Mat.
7.22.23.
and do many great wonders, and yet a worker of iniquity.

What then,

Heb. 10.38. Haba. 2.4.
yea the just man, and his faith does make his works alive, as the branches of
a Tree receive their sap and life from the root.

But you will say,

Ioh. 3.15.
and one baptism to life (as it says) Whosoever believes in him, shall not
be confounded, and that whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have
eternal life: And again, whosoever believes and is baptized, Mar. 16.16.
shall be saved. What then (will you say) is there a faith and baptism which
men may have, and perish? Yea: for Judas believed, and was baptized: Act. 8.13.
Simon Magus believed, and was baptized: and many thousand more, which yet
shall be found the workers of iniquity.



It may: But first, Heb. 11.1.
and also the evidence of the things not seen. By faith men understand that
there is only one God, and that the world was created by his word. By faith
men believe, that whatsoever has been said, or done in the world, by God, his
servants, his Prophets and Apostles, are all true, and were done by the power
of God: yea by faith men have and do work wonders themselves. As all these
things may be understood, and done by faith, and yet such believers and
workers (for all their faithfulness) may go to hell.

So there is a mystery revealed, that whosoever does believe, shall not
perish, but shall have eternal life: Esa. 61.1.2.3.
that is to say, a word of great grace and mercy given out, a covenant of life
and peace, of pardon and deliverance, made to the poor, and broken in heart,
Mat. 11.5.28. Mat. 15.24.
the weary and heavy laden, the lost sheep, the hungry and thirsty, the
contrite and broken spirited, even to him that does repent. And none can
believe this word and promise of life and pardon, assuredly to pertain unto
themselves, but these alone. And of this seeker alone is God found, to him does
he look for his sons sake, the Mediator of his covenant, Mat. 5.3.
and does write him blessed, and does assure him pardon and reconciliation by
his promised spirit: whereby he is sealed, and has set to his seal, that God
is true: and is fully assured, that God is true: and is fully assured, that God
loves him in Christ Jesus, and that his name is written in the book of life.
And this is faith also which does believe this thing, and this is the thing,
that does distinguish between it and the other: and this faith if you will that
I shall define in few words: It is a full and certain persuasion, wrought in
the poor and broken heart, by the comforter, of peace and reconciliation with
God, in and through Christ Jesus his Lord: and this is the faith which works
by love, and this is that peculiar faith spoken of before, and is but one, and
was ever the same.

Now concerning that one Baptism a little more. As in the old time, there
was Circumcision of the skin, and Circumcision of the heart, but the
Circumcision of the heart was the only chief Circumcision, which whosoever
had, was only a true Israelite: So likewise, in this new time, there is the
Baptism of the skin, and the Baptism of the heart: but the Baptism of the
heart, is the only chief baptism, 1. Cor. 12.13.
and they that are so baptized, are the only true Christians and Israel of
God, and is but one and the same for ever: In comparison whereof, that which is
but outward on the skin, is none at all.

And tell me Master Smith, are not these things true indeed, dare you to
resist and gainsay them, do you not know that which is of God shall stand,
Act. 5.38.39.
and that which is of men, shall fall and come to naught? Take heed therefore,
least ye be found a fighter against God. But you may say to me, thou art a
sinful wretch, and if I write against thee, I write but against a wretched
one. It is true indeed, and therefore unworthy I am to write or speak of
these holy things: And as for me, spare me not for my sins, but yet let the
truth go free: for the Lords sake whose it is, and for his childrens sake to
whom it may come, and for your own sake least you die.

Smith is too wise (I trow) to fight with, or to yield to such a fool, that
has not one mayor or minor, but all minimes, too too little for his great
capacity. Alack, Master Smith regards it not, he scarce looked on it, it is so
mean, he will not file his hands, to answer such a clownish discourse, that
has not one artificial argument in it, and so void of learning, that it has
not so much as method, but plain like the plough. Alack, Master Smiths
bringing up has not been so Swineheard and Shepherd like: He is a Scholar
of no small reading, and well seen and experienced in Arts. If he thought his
answer to Master Clifton, would be the less esteemed, for that he is held a
weak man (but that his allegations and reasons are the best plea of the
greatest Rabbis themselves) Think not that he will weaken his cause to
answer thee. If it were any of the Rabbis of England, or any other harlot
whatsoever, you should see then what he would say to it: for although Master
Smith do publish answers to Master Clifton, one of the separation (on Master
Iohnsons side) chalenging them especially to the combat, yet he proclaims,
saying, Be it known to all the separation, that we account them, in respect
of their constitution, to be as very an harlot, as either her mother England,
or her grandmother Rome, out of whose loins she came.

Smith, if one might ask, where was he borne, and where had he his education,
and bringing up, In England? yea in England. Is this a kind son to use his
mother thus: not only to run away from her, like his follow brethren,
against whom also he does protest; but to rail against her so. Is this your
Logic sir, was this your bringing up, has Art caused you so much to forget
Nature. If not grace yet me thinks the light of nature should have taught you
better: If you had been borne in America, or in Rome it self: very nature
might have persuaded you, that some might be there, that had rather die, then
worship devils, or bow to Baal, Much more in England, though you be run out
for fear: tell me whether can any man run, in all the world, to mend
himself at this day? And although your mother England, has too many
disobedient and froward children, yet if you had been a Natural son, you
would have stayed at home, and if you had received a greater light then the
rest of your brethren: Love would have forced you to have laid down your life
for them, rather then they should have been untaught therein: (considering
also what great hope is to be conceived of England, above any one Nation in
the world,) and not to leave them in the dark, and cry out, a harlot, a
harlot, no Church visible, nor Christian to be seen: no faith, but the faith
of devils: no Baptism, but the mark of the beast, no Church to be seen in
the world, but I John Smith and my Company.

Is this your shameless voice? Dare you be so bold to set up a flag of
defiance against the City of God? Be it known unto you, that the least Citizen
thereof, is able to meet both you and all your company in the field, and
through the strength of the Lord thereof, (without either bow or shield) even
by the word of his mouth, put you all to flight. And for all your great
bragges, and flagges: Be it known unto you, and unto all the world this day;
That his holy City is in England, even Jerusalem that is from above, and
although she has many, yea and too many entercommoners, yet she has free
Denisons, who partake of her privileges, whose feet walk in our streets,
though the world regard it not: and if ye will not believe me, wipe but your
eyes with Sackecloth, and come and see, and if you will do neither, answer in
the field, and although here be neither Art, nor learning, and therefore you
know not how to frame your pen to stoop so low: Remember where once you were,
from whence you came, know that reason brought forth Art, and therefore was
before: Let Art then, being the daughter (although she be so high) look
down a little to her mother, and let both, and all, and every creature bend
and yield unto the word of the Lord, which shall endure for ever.

And although it be none of the Rabbis, but one of the unlearned babies, yet
meet him, seeing he does accept the challenge, but look well to your
forehead, for all your Artificial Arms and skill to use them, for little
David being a keeper of sheep, though he knew not how to stir himself in
such like armor, yet coming in the name of the God of Israel, from the sheep,
with his sling and a stone, stroke Goliath so deadly, that he fell down, and
with his own sword, cut of his head: wherefore look unto it, it is dangerous
striving with truth, for although Kings be strong, and Wine is strong, and
Women are stronger then either of both, who bear Kings and the planters of
Vines, and all Masters of Arts, and sciences whatsoever: yet truth is stronger
then all, and all must bend, and bow and yield to her, least they die at the
point thereof. And though it come out of the mouth of very babes and sucklings,
yet it is stronger then Goliath withal his forces. Not that I despise learning,
but reverence it, and do acknowledge my self to be unworthy thereof: but only
this, It must not be so proud, to think that truth should learn of it: or to
think that reason must not rule it, and if Art should think (for it is like
Nature, very blind) that truth and reason could ouershoot it self, yet were it
the part of an humble daughter, to answer her mother, with mildnes and not
disdain.

And now Master Smith, where you triumph and praise God, you say in the end of
your answer, published against the objections of one Master Clifton, assuring
your self of the truth of your opinions: so that neither he, nor all the
earth, shall ever be able to wring them out of your heart and hands.

So, and more then so, I praise the Lord my God, for that he has assisted me
against you and your lies: and I have received so much more assurance of the
truth of that which I have written unto you, then you have of that which you
have said, as there is difference between a truth and a lie. And I boldly (in
the name of my Lord, and for his chosen sake) challenge not all the earth, but
you, and all, or any one of your company, to answer directly and without
colloring or painting, to that which has been said, or else to subscribe unto
it according to your promise.

Though these things be not ratified by you, nor written in your books, yet
behold, they are true, and although they be but few, and go but simple, yet
they shall stand and be had in honor, when much and many things shall fail:
not that I presume upon the strength of mine own arm, for it is like a
broken bow, but my strength is the Lord, and in him I will rejoice, and that
he has written my name in his book of life: for which grace, and all other
his mercies, his name be praised for ever. AMEN.

And thus Master Smith, I thought Good to write unto you, and to the company
with you, of whom I have great hope, God will deliver them from the errors and
distractions of these times, and that others falls will drive you to look
better about you: and although I have been somewhat bold with you, yet I pray
you take it not in the evil part; for truly, God is my record, that for his
truths sake, and for his childrens sakes, and for your sakes have I written,
that you, and we, and all might perceive the truth, and walk therein, and for
no other respect: and howsoever these things may seem strange unto you, yet if
you consider them well, you shall find them not so strange as true. And
although those little ones, be now more rare, and more seldom seen then the
truth, in the field, yet that which has been said of them is true.

And let us not labor any longer, to cut and fashion the truth, like our
selves, but let us study and strive to become our selves, both in
understanding and in doing, like the truth: Let us not deceive our selves with
shadows, for they fly away, but let us take hold of the su bstance and root
it self, which is able to defend us in the stormy day: let us stoop, and put
on the yoke of the Lord, for he was meek and of a lowly heart, his dwelling
was among the little ones, and the least was the greatest with him, yea he
tasted his tears with them, and wept also for those whose hearts could not
afford a tear for themselves; he sought out that which was lost, and the
broken did he bind up: This was our Lord, let us learn of him; and these were
his companions, and on earth his dearest friends.

But now alack, where are these little ones become? Do the high look of these
proud times, make them ashamed to show their cast-downe eye? Oh come forth ye
habitation of the Lord, although (indeed) there boldness may make you blush,
and show your face, for we have heard, that he which is with you, is greater
then he that is with them: And what is the cause they are so seldom seen this
day? One thing is, they are few: Another thing is, they that sought them, mist
the way that led to their Tents: They sought them upon the Mountains, and in
the dry places; but they were in the Valleys among the water plashes, filling
the Lords bottle with Tears: They sought them among the great, but they were
of the little ones: They sought them among the learned, and men of great study
and long experience, but they were sitting among the little children, weeping
with the tender babes. And thus they sought but found not: How hard a thing it
is to suppress those hearts of ours: Ah let us tear them in pieces, and
entreat the Lord with thousand of tears, to dissolve the drowsy fatnes that
droppeth upon them, that we may find the way to the dwellings of his little
ones, where also his own habitation is, and see and enter into his Kingdom of
heaven, where also we may behold these his brethren, and love them, and be
known, and loved of them; whereby we shall all know, that our names are written
in the book of life. These things let us strive for, it is time now we should
be established in the truth, and not be carried about still with every wind.

Let us build upon the Rock, and then though the floods come, and the wind
blow, our building shall stand: we have pretended Discipline and Government a
great while; but where is he that is corrected? Where is the man that has
crucified the world to himself, and himself to the world, and has mortified
the flesh with the works thereof? Pharisees and Hypocrites can make clean the
outside, but let us make clean that which is within: Wolves oftentimes go in
Sheep skins, but Sheep never in Wolves skins.

There is a Controversy this day in the world where Christ should be, whereof
he has also foretold us, saying: Many shall come in my name, and say, here is
Christ and there, but believe them not.

One says, I am the first, and I have been of old, I have kept the says,
and have not erred to this day.

Another says, Nay thou lie, thou have lost the faith, and have erred from
the right way, and art become a Cage of unclean Birds this day: but I have
recovered that which thou have lost, and I have the right use of the Word and
Sacraments, which thou have polluted: therefore he is here.

The third comes and says, Ye are both liers and Harlots, and thou that spoke
last, for thou art not governed by his laws: he is a King, as well as a Priest
and a Prophet, and therefore thou lie also: but he is here with us, we have
his Ordinances and laws, and are ruled by them, we have also the word and the
Sacraments in their right kind, and so he is to us a King, a Priest, and a
Prophet.

The next stands up, saying, Who is this that boasts thus, and reteyneth the
baptism of the Whore? Must they not needs be her children, seeing they hold
her baptism sufficient, and refuse to be baptized aright? What? Can their
baptism be good, and their Church and Government naught? Not possible:
wherefore ye are also deceived, and he cannot be in the midst of you as you
suppose.

But he is where Antichrist with all his trash is quite abandoned, where all
is reformed, both life and doctrine: And that is here with us, for we have cast
off all, and have began a new; we baptize none but men of years, and that
do make confession of our faith, and are of upright life: we have struck the
right Covenant with him, therefore he is here.

Then steps up the fifth, with a high spirit, controuling al, epecially the
three last, accusing them for wranglers, and blasphemers, (saying) ye are all
liars, you are iangling contentious spirits, ye seek Christ without you, seek
him within you, you good thinking wise-ones, you do not so much as know what
Christ is, nor yet what Antichrist is: you condemn that holy ancient father,
the Pope of Rome to be the Antichrist: the beast and man of sin, and all the
holy orders of their Archpriests, Priests, and offices, of good intentions;
having all names of good signification: and all Images, Sacrifices, and
Ceremonies, of good information: to be all blasphemus, Idolatrous and
superstitious: and so blaspheme the holy things, used in the Catholic Church
of Rome. Not knowing, that as God did teach the world, by the orders,
Sacrifices and Ceremonies, used among the Jews, tell Christ came in the man
Jesus: So it pleased him also, to teach the world, by those Orders, Images,
Sacrifices, and Ceremonies, used in the Catholic Church of Rome, until the
Christ came again, now in the end of the world, according to his promises in
his obedient man, H. N. by whom he has appointed, to judge the world,
according to the Scriptures. Not with fire and brimstone, upon men's heads, as
we suppose, but with wise sentences, with dark, and parabolous saying,
delivering high things, with a high spirit: teaching, reproouing, and
condemning, the whole word, being the eight, and the last breaker of the light.
The Archangel and the last Trumpe, none in this third and last day wherein
Christ is perfitted. And is that Angel flying in the midst of heaven, having
an everlasting Gospel, to preach to them that dwell upon the earth: Saying
Christ is not, nor was not a man as ye suppose, but holiness is Christ: And
he that does believe it, is possible to keep all the ten commandments, has
the right faith in Christ, and they that do attain to the perfect keeping of
them, are risen from the dead, according to the Scriptures, and as holiness is
Christ and the son of God: So sin is Antichrist and the son of the devil
fight therefore against the Antichrist in your selves, over come the beast
which is the sin, and put on holiness which is the Christ.

Put away therefore all your good thinkings, and all your Scripture
learnednese, and come hither naked, for here is clothing enough for you, for I
tell your, whosoever comes to learn at his school must be as simple and hold
himself as ignorant as a little child: for the tree of knowledge, is the tree
of death, wherefore if ye will live, come hither, did not the devil tell you:
you should be as gods, and will ye believe him still: did he deceive you once
and will you not beware: wherefore become fools that ye may be wise. And
here, take this book: but keep it close, for H. N. has many enemies,
especially among this wrangling crew. And therein thou shall find, an
interlude, which if thou mark well, shall teach thee all: and harken no loner
to those disturbing spirits: who feed thee with nothing but the forbidden
fruit. Learn to live again in innocence, wherein thou shall not not be
ashamed, though thou should go naked, as thou did before? and thou shall
know nothing but love, which shall never fade away and when thou have attained
to this, thou shall be in Paradise again: and then take of the tree of life,
and eat, and live for ever.

And tell me now, Is no here Christ indeed, and the very true Christ, and have I
not also told thee what is the Antichrist, and many other worthy things:
wherefore stay here, and thou shall see wonders in the end.

These are strange and woeful times. Are not these the days which the Lord
foretold: here is Wolfes in sheep clothing on every side, and yet here are
not all, but let others tell the rest, for my part, I am weary telling of
these. But which way is it possible for the little sheep to escape these
Wolves? even through a very narrow way, and a straight gate, which their Lord
has appointed, and made easy for them, for they must escape: It is not
possible the Elect should be deceived, the know them by their fruits.

These are the contentions of our days, who shall end the controversy? This
we are sure of, he that has the bride, is the bridegroom, and she which has
the bridegroom, is the bride, wheresoever she be. She has begun to show her
face already, a little, and her voice has been heard even in our land: but
the Wolves came so thick about her, that she was glad to retire a little into
the wilderness again, but when her appointed time, and year, is once come,
she shall come forth, and end this controversy, whereby her little ones are so
much dismayed: in the mean time, let her poor little children rejoice and be
glad, for her light shall shine every day, still more and more: and as light
comes in, darkness shall go out, howsoever things seem to go.

The night is even passed, the day begins to break, it is but a little while
and the Sun will shine: for the morning and evening sacrifice must be
restored again, as in the former time, and in the days of old. And yet a
little while, and the King of Babell, and his City both, with all his army,
shall be overthrown. And the song of Moses, shall be sung again; for the
great City, Rome, shall be burnt with fire, and like the great millstone,
which the Angel cast into the Sea, be thrown down, and shall be found no
more. Then shall Israel sing in daunces as before, saying, Haleluiah:
Salvation, and glory, and power, be to our God, for he has triumphed
gloriously. The horse with his stately Rider is overthrown, and his pomp
turned to the grave. And then a very little while, and that day so long looked
for, shall show it self, wherein that poor distressed, and desolate woman,
tossed with tempest too and fro, who has so long attended, with many a wet
eye, and watchful look, and her lamp always ready burning, for the coming
of her husband to the wedding day: wherein he will give her a crown of life,
and wipe her eyes for ever weeping more: and give her joy and gladness, in
steed of mourning: and beauty, and everlasting life, and glory, in stead of
dust and desolation.

Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are
thy judgments, King of Saints, who shall not fear thee, oh Lord, and give
glory to thy name, for thy judgments are made manifest. Let us be glad and
rejoice, and give glory to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his
wife has made her self ready.

Esai. 14. 4. 8. How has the oppressor ceased, and the gold-thirstie Babell
rested! Since thou wast laid low, no hewer came up against us.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
ANd if any man think here is not so much said against them, as their faults
deserve: Let him consider, if one should lay open to others all his faults at
once, with their due deserts, he would take it very unkindly, and very hardly
ever receive an admonition (at his hands) in good part that should so serve
him. Therefore to prevent this evil, I have rather labored to tell them what
they should be, then to lay open what they are, for love hops the best, till
it see the worst. And this I assure both thee and them, that no man ever was
more forward and strict in outward observations, nor more ready to contend
about the form and manner of religious exercises, and carnal washings, and
all other commons of the Kingdom, then the very hippocrite, that never
intended the purging of his heart, nor yet to partake in her peculiar things,
though under the cloak of the one, he does pretend the greatest part in the
other. Make clean then the inside first, and the outside shall be clean;
for whosoever is cleansed in heart, need not be taught to wash his hands.


