THE ROMISH CHAIN. BY EDMUND GVRNAY, Parson, of Harpley.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his Shop,
near Saint Austins Gate. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lords, Knights, Burgesses, and what other
Suffragans, in the high Court of Parliament.
HIS Majesty (Right Honorable, if it please you to remember) in his Epistle
before the Remonstrance, does greatly magnify the third Estate of France, for
preferring an Article in their Parliament, against their Kings obnoxiousnesse
unto Papal Deposition: In the defense of whose judgment therein, his Pen has
flourished out such a Defense of Kings Rights, as shall never wither unto the
end of the world. Now howsoever the Parliaments of England were never inferior
unto those of France for zeal and vigilancie, toward the maintenance of their
Kings Supremacy; yet may it please you to suffer the words of exhortation, to
persevere in such vigilance and fidelity, toward the Lord and his immediate
Deputy: And as often as you shall hear any of the night birds, croaking for the
Roman forraigner, so often to double your industry, toward the treading out
those vermin and damming up their puddles. And it may be, your Judgment will
take some incitation thereunto, if you shall at some vacant time vouchsafe a
perusal of this treatise: the maine argument for the Romish Title consisting
of diverse propositions linked together, whereof not one is of force; as now
God-willing (my leave first taken of your Honors) I shall apply my self to
declare.

DEDICATED unto Sir ROGER TOVVNSEND; Knight-Baronet:
FOr Virtue, sound Religion, Lineage, Titles, Moderation, Chastity, Manhood,
Bounty, Industry, and governing so large an estate, in so green and vncuppled
years; without peer.

THE ROMISH CHAIN,
AS far forth as universal Supremacy is supposed to descend unto him which
now possesses the Roman Papacy, by virtue of this Chayne-argument.

1 The Church militant must always have some praticular person for the
universal Head thereof.

2 The Apostle Saint Peter in his time, was that particular person.

3 Only the Successors of Peter must be the like in their times.

4 Only the Bishops of Rome were the Successors of Peter in their times.

5 Only the Popes of Rome were the Successors of those Bishops in their times.

6 Only he which now possesses the Roman Papacy, is the Successor of those
Popes.

Ergo, He and only He, which now possesses the Roman Papacy, is at this day
universal Head of the Church militant.

So far forth we propound unto the world, this answer following.

Concerning therefore the first link of the chain, (and so to the rest in
order) our protestation against it is this: that neither does any Scripture
imply, nor strength of argument enforce, nor any writer for the space of five
thousand years from the beginning of the world, determine, that the Church
militant must always have some one particular person for the universal Head
thereof. For first concerning Scriptures; howsoever some particular text do
speak wondrous eminently of some particular persons; as amongst others these
following; Psalm ^^
I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance etc. Esaias. ^.
He shall judge amongst the nations etc. Esaias. 49.
Kings shall be thy noursing fathers etc. Psalm 45.
I will make thy name to be remembered etc. Psalm: 5.
Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him etc. Esaias. 45.13.
He shall build my City etc. Psalm 90.1^.
He will give his Angels charge over thee etc. Psalm. 90.13.
Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Dragon etc. and the like we answer:
that from the time that any Scripture was first given, until the last period
thereof, and for five hundred years after, (not to say a thousand) these kind
of texts were never expounded, but either of the Messiah himself (as the two
first quoted:) or of his Spouse the Church (as the third and fourth:) or of the
condition of mankind in general (as the fifth and sixth:) or of every godly man
in particular (as the two last:) but never of the pretended universal Head.
Secondly concerning strength of argument, that neither it can so enforce, we
prove; Because there cannot be imagined any benefit (use and benefit carrying
all the moment in moral necessities) which may redownd to the church by means
of such universal Head: but such as may as well and far better redownd there
unto, by the means of special and several heads according as the several
Continents, languages, and quarters of the earth, by the Divine providence are
distributed. For though their may seem to ensue great hope of universal Peace
and Unity, when all the strings of government shall thus be settled in one only
hand; yet such peace as is atteined only by the extinguishment of plural
excellency, will prove little better then Anarchy, or Pedancy, and such as
ignorant persons, wisd. 14.22.
yea the very brute beasts are capable of. For they having all their wit
confined unto one only head (the head of their keeper,) do by that means the
more quietly go in and out unto there pasture: But as it is not good for man to
be alone, so neither is it good for the Church to be so all-one as that one
parson Cow-heard-like, may rule in all alone: for that beside peace and unity
there is requisite also difference and variety unto the perfection of Christian
Society: Arist. pol. 2.2.
the very light of nature teaching us that too much unity dissolues a city (as
unisons drown harmony) and makes it degenerate into a family; much more, such
a degree of unity as shall reduce all Cities as it were into one family under
one pater patriae, So far therefore may it be that this universal Supremacy
should produce any desirable peace and unity, as that more lykely an universal
dullness and Lethargy would ensue thereof; and that as well in the pretended
head himself, as in the body. For what condition of life can be imagined,
more tedious, uncouth and uncomfortable, then that which this universal head
must continually abide in, when there shall not be found upon earth any peer
or consort, or helper for him like himself! whereas the very Deity, which
notwithstanding so infinitely excells for Simplicity and unity does entertain
plurality and Society; witness the Trinity: as also the Kings upon earth are
not without their brother-kings, (some elder and some younger) to consort
with-all. Yea besides this desolation and solitude, what incumbrancy and
servitude will ensue thereupon. For first concerning the head himself; how
intolerable his burden must need be, who can imagine? For if that renowned
Moses was so tired with the leading of only one people, and they of his own
language, into the earthly Canaan: how must he look to be tired, vexed, and
perplexed which shall have the leading of all people, nations and languages
into the heavenly Canaan? he being composed of flesh and blood (noe doubt) as
much as Moses was, and as much subject unto mortality, casualty, necessity,
infirmity and Sin; yea incomparably coming short of Moses (unless it be in
his own particular conceit) for all kind of graces and divine assistance: It
being expreslly said, that The Lord knew Moses face to face; Deuteronomy. 34.7.10.
that his like was never known, that he was the friend of God; that after six
score years his eye was never dim, nor his natural force abated; Moses also
having his brother Aaron to share with him in the maine business, and the
rulers over thousands, hundreds, and fifties, Exodus 18.^1
to save him the labor of inferior causes; The Lord also most miraculusly,
both raining daily unto the people a bread from heaven, and preserving their
clothing from waxing old, Deuteronomy. 8.^.4*
therein saving him the care for their temporal necessaryes: and yet not
withstanding so groned Moses under his burden as that sometime he brake forth
into this wish, Numb. 11.15.
that God would rather kill him then continue him in such misery.

And as for the bondage which the Body of the Church must likewise undergo, by
means of this universal Supreme, who can utter it? For the members of the
Church being dispersed over the face of the whole earth; some of them must of
necessity be as far in situation from their head as the very Antipodes; and
so by that means shall have no principles of Faith, no determinations of
controversies, and (in efect) no executions of Justice, but such as must be
appealeable, ane suspendable from, until a person dwelling in the furthest
parts of the world be made acquainted therewith* and shall have ratified the
same. Yea, (yet further) how scandalous must these courses needs be in the
eyes of Jews, and those which are without; and what a stumbling block in their
way? for when the Jew shall read in his (and our) Prophets, that under the new
covenant men shall so abound with knowledge as that they shall not need (in
comparison) Ier. 31.31. etc.
to go to their next neighbor for it, it shall be so written in their
hearts: will he ever be brought to believe, that the Gospel which the
Christians embrace can be that new covenant; or that our Christ can be that
Messiah, under whom knowledge is universally confined (at least for certainty
and infallibility) unto the breast of only one particular person? Or can he
justly be argued of obstinacy, if he resolves rather still to continue under
Moses Law, which never enjoined him to go farther then the bounds of Canaan,
(which for quantity exceeded not ours of England) for any kind of knowledges,
sentences, resolutions, appeals, or determinations whatsoever? And as for the
Infidells which are wholly without; can it be marueiled if they likewise
resolve, rather still to worship the Sun and Moon in the Firmament, which
once a day do supervise them, then this only Son of God; if He has but one
immediate vessel of his grace for all his followers to draw at, and that under
the lock and key of only one particular person, and he confined unto one
particular Angle of the earth? yea, what course can be imagined, more apt to
enforce and disperse contagion, Heresy, and Apostacy, through the whole body
of the Church, when the poluting, or perverting of only one particular person,
shall be the corrupting and infecting of the universal head thereof? yea,
finally what temptations or prouocations more forcible toward the erecting of a
second Babell; when all the world shall be brought to obey only one man, and
consequently to learn only one Language (perhaps the Latin) Genesis 11^
which God himself has branded for the maine cause of attempting the building
of the first Babell? These kind of dangers, difficulties, scandalls, bondages,
and abasements considered, and put in the balance against all imaginable
conueniences or benefits, which may redound unto the Church, by means of this
universal Head; if they shall ouerpoyze: we may thereupon conclude, that no
strength of argument can enforce the accepting thereof. Finally, whereas we
thirdly protested, that no writer (of what kind soever) for the first five
thousand years ( ab initio mundi;) did ever maintain the necessity of this
universal Head; we take, that to be sufficiently proved until instance be
made to the contrary* and that no kind of author of reckoning whatsoever, did
at any time so determine; this alone may be proof sufficient. For that all
the possible knowledge which writers can have, being either from Scripture or
from argument (that which comes by revelation being Scripture it self if (as we
have proved) neither of these two original lights acknowledge it, what good
writer can affirm it? much less maintain it for a principle of the faith?
especially considering how all the principles of the faith are so evident, as
partly both these lights acknowledge them, witness the decalogue: and partly
one of these lights (namely Scripture) does so abundantly acknowledge them, as
that ever since the Apostles time, they have been agreed upon, witness the
Articles of faith.

How then shall those pass for tolerable writers, which will avouch, not only
for a truth, but also for a principle, that, which neither of these lights give
any luster unto? yea and for such a principle, as rather should give light unto
all other principles, then need to borow light of any whatsoever. For it
erecting a Head for every soul upon pain of damnation to look up unto, and
depend upon; what less degree of light can be requisite unto it then that
which may make it clear enough even for runners to read it, and the most weak
sighted to find it even as readily as sucklings find the pappe: whereas on the
contrary it is not only destitute of such immediate, instinctiue and noone
shine light, but also is as utterly void and incapable of light as darkness it
self. Judge then reader of what validity the first link of the chain is;
which if it cannot hold; the conclusion must of necessary fall to the ground:
this being the condition of Soriticall and Chain* arguments that if but one of
the propositions fail the conclusion cannot follow. So, as were this first
proposition granted them, yet could it also be nothing for their purpose,
unless every one following be made good, especially the next, which is this:

The Apostle Peter in his time was this universal Head. Against which
position, our demonstration shall be this: The Kings and Governors which lived
in the time of Peter, had more authority over their Christians which lived in
their dominions, then Peter had: Peter therefore was not universally the
Christians Head. That those Kings and Governors had such authority more then
Peter had; we prove: because they stood more deeply charged from God, to
improoue those Christians unto the glory of God then Peter did. For the only
end why God gives authority unto men over one another, being this; that
Mankind may be the more fully improued unto his glory; he by that means
having the honor, not only of particular persons, but also of Societies,
Families, Cities, Countries and Kingdoms, it must of necessity follow, that
such as are more deeply charged to improoue a company unto Gods glory, must
also have the greater power and authority over that company which they so
stand charged with. Now that those Kings were more deeply charged so to improve
those Christians then Peter was, we thus prove; by they had greater means so
to do: every man's charge being answerable unto his means, Luke 12.
unto whom much is given (as our Savior tells us) there being much of him to
be required; and, the more mighty (as Solomon adds) being to expect the sorer
trial. Wisd* 6.8.
Now that the means of these kings were greater then the means of Peter, we
thus finally declare: first because it was in their power to protect those
their Christian Subjects from persecutions, and so to open a door unto their
preaching; whereas Peter was not able so much as to protect himself noe not to
save his own shoulders from the whipp. Secondly for that it was also in there
powers to indow those their Christians with privileges and Jurisdictions,
whereby such as were otherwise intractable unto the gospel might by the means
of such temporal hopes and fears (which the carnal minded are only sensible
of) be won or prepared thereunto. Thirdly, and principally, because rhey had at
their dispose and command (though only in the Lord we grant, and no otherwise
could Peter or any mortal man have at command) the gifts, abilities, and
mysteries of those their Christian Subjects; the Lord expressly charging every
soul (amongst them) to be subject unto the higher powers; and (even out of
Peter's own mouth) Romans 1^.1 1 Pet. ^.13.
that they should submit themselves unto every ordinance of man, whether unto
the King as the Supreme, etc. So as though those Kings were not in their own
persons indewed with such gifts and graces as were necessary unto Christian
government, at least not so abundantly endued as Peter; yet as long as they had
the dispose, and authority over such persons as were so endued; it was as well
in effect as if they had been actually so endued themselves; and of the two,
the better by the Philosophers rule, Arist. depor^. an. 4 10.
who judged man's condition in being borne naked, to be therein rather better
then worse then the Beasts; for that man might by that means turn his (naked)
hand into a Spear, a Spade, a Sword, a Scepter, a Staff, a Pen, or what he
list; and shift his garments when he list: whereas the beast has no shift but
must always sleep in his clothes and shoes, and with his weapons about him
of necessity. The means therefore which those Kings had for the improouing of
those Christians unto the propagation (yea plantation) of the Gospel, must be
acknowledged to be far greater then the means of Peter, and so consequently
there charge to be greater. For though it is easily granted that those Heathen
Kings did little regard or feel any such charge* but rather abused and hated
the means thereof; yet is not that material; our question being, not what
there feeling or practice was, but what their duty and charge was: which if it
was greater then Peter's, then also by the proportion of common Justice, their
authority also must be greater. And so finally if their Authority over those
Christians was greater then Peter's; Peter could not be their Head (and so not
universally the Christians Head) unless it should be supposed, either that
Peter was a subordinate head (which is indeed no head but a subject) or that
those Christians were under two several and vndependant heads, which both the
law of Nature, and also the law of Grace abhors: it being as well a proverb as
a text, Math. 6.
that no man canserue two Masters. For whereas it use to be pleaded that
though those Kings had a Sovereignty over those Christians in Temporal
Affairs, yet might Peter have it in matters Spiritual: Such distinction does
deal no better with the Subject, then that 1 Kings 3.26.
false Mother did, which was content that the Infant should be divided: the
thus dividing Soueraignetie being not only a cleaving of the Head* but also a
renting of the subject in twain. For admit that he which has Supremacy in
Spiritualls, should have never so little command, were it but of the least
finger of the hand, or the least digit of the foot, yet might he by means of
it, either draw the service of the whole body, or so crampe and torment the
whole body, as that he which should have the command of all the rest, should
have no joy, nor service thereof: much more then if he has so great a share as
the signification of Spirituals may be exte^ded unto; and that not only in
lawful sense, but also in a proper and necessary sense: there being no gift,
indowment or capacity in man, but which both may and also ought to be an
instrument of the Spirit, (then the which what can be more properly called
Spiritual) we being bound to serve the Lord, not only with heart and soul,
but with all our might; 1 Cor. 10.13.
even our very eating and drinking (the most common act that is) being charged
to intend the glory of God; which not only is a Spiritual end, but also the
end of all Spiritualls whatsoever.

If Peter therefore must have any Supreamacy at all (especially in spiritualls)
he must of necessity have all: Souerainty (like punctum or vnitas Mathematica)
being vndiuidable. For though Souerainty may be seated in diverse persons, as
namely in a State (as it is seated in but one in a Monarchy) yet must the
Authority in every mandate go together; as likewise every person must obey it,
not at halues, but with his whole man; and Eccles. 9.10.
whatsoever thine hand shall find to do thou must do it with all thy power.
This then being beaten out for a ground, that Peter either must have all the
Sovereignty or none; come we up cheerely (gentle Reader) close to the point,
and see what evidence can be brought for Peter's absolute and sole Supremacy.
And (not to say what is aleadged for this purpose but to say more then so) all
that can be aleadged must tend to the making good this Argument. He which in
his time surpassed all men for Spiritual gifts and holiness, good reason he
should ouerrule. But Peter so surpassed all men in his time: Peter therefore
must be the supreme. Whereunto we answer; that neither of the grounds are
found. For as we acknowledge no cause why Peter's gifts should be esteemed of a
more infallible and divine element then others of the time (as by and by we
shall more fully answer) so neither is the proposition to be granted which
presumes, that the more spiritual a man is, the more he should be possessed
with Authority. For as the wife oftentimes may be more holy then the Husband,
and excel him in virtue, both for wisdom, government, sobriety; yea even for
courage and bodily strength, (especially in his sickness and decrepite age)
and yet stands charged in conscience to give him the pre-eminence: So may a
Subject excel his Prince for personal virtues and spiritual mysteries, and
yet still remain charged to be a Subject; the maine reason hereof being this;
for that the virtues of a Subject are habitually in his Prince, and so more
properly his Princes then his own; as the virtues of the Wife are more her
Husbands then her own; 1 Cor. 11.7.9.
the Woman being made for the Man, and being the glory of the Man: and so a
dignity and reputation unto the man. When therefore it is urged for the
pre-eminence of the spiritual men (by Spiritual men whether we mean every
member of Christ, or only the Ministers of Christ it is not material) that in
Scripture they be usually termed the Shepherds and Pastors of the Church,
the Lights of the World, etc. we answer, that our question is not concerning
the excellency, but concerning the dependancie of their gifts; we maintayning
that the pastoral skill is subordinate unto that power which lays out the
Pastures, and assigns the Foulds, and keeps off the Wolves; which being the
proper offices of Kings and Governors, they are to be reputed (as in writers
both Divine and Humane they be ordinarily termed) the principal Shepherds.
Though truly and properly the Lord only is the Shepherd, in respect of whom
all Kings, Governors, and Pastors whatsoever are but as sheep before Him;
though of his grace and for his purposes, He will have them amongst men reputed
as Shepherds; some of them to be as his Pages, and some only as
Bell-weathers; whereof these have power to lead the flocks, so far as they
have ears to hear, and list to follow the tingling of their Bell: and the
Pages, to lead and drive them whether they have list or not. So likewise when
Spiritual men are called Lights; though the Scripture expounds them to be but
Candlesticks of such Lights, Revel. 1. and. 2.
yet may they be inferior unto those which follow their light, as much as the
Lantherne-bearer is inferior unto his following Master; or as the
understanding is inferior to the Will; whereunto though it be a guide, yet is
it also a Subject; the Will having power to in force both objects and
principles upon it. Axioma Theolog.
As therefore the Moon and not the Sun, is said to rule the Night, though
all the light wherewith the Moon rules, she receives of the Sun: So he
which possesses the Throne must be esteemed the ruler of the people, and not
he which is possessor of the Light; though it must be confessed that all good
rule is by the direction of the light. And as the Sun being beneath the
Moon, and under the Earth, can do nothing in the time of the night, but so
far forth as it can cast his beams into the lap and capacity of the
Moon, which by virtue of her conspicuous eminency has only the power to
disperse light unto all that are under it: so the Spiritual man during his
being (as it were under the earth) in an earthen vessel, and in a private
condition* can do nothing with authority, but in the virtue and power of him
that sits in the Throne: the maine reason hereof being this; for that the rude
and ignorant (for whose only ordering and government Authority is imparted unto
men) can incomparably better deserne who is a possessour of the Throne, then
who is a possessor of the Spirit* and so by that means more certainly know
whom they are to obey. For as in Wedlock, had the Lord ordained that the
holier or the wiser of the two should be the Head, there must needs ensue
continual discord and uncertainty in the Family, who should be the Head: the
woman often times being (seeming at least) the holier, wiser etc. whereas he
expressly determining that the man shall be Head (which with the least turn of
the eye is discerned) so all controversy is ended, and the weakest of the
Family easily resolved, who (in case of difference about things indifferent)
ought to be obeyed. So in greater societies, had the Lord ordained that the
most holy, or the most spiritual should be head, there must needs have insued
the like uncertainty and discord who he should be: he that is holy or
spiritual to day, being apt to be otherwise (at least in appearance) to
morrow; and such as be most unholy, being as apt to carry an appearance of the
holiest; whereas he expressly setting it down, that he which wears the
Crown, or sits in the Throne, or bears the the Sword should be Head, all such
strife is soon at at end; the weakest that is being able with ease to discern
who such persons be. For, though oftentimes Usurpers may get posession of the
Crown or the Sword; yet is that nothing so hard to discern, as who is a false
Professor of the Spirit: Time, place, person, descent, records, and titles
(which carnal men can judge of, and lay together) being of sufficient force to
detect who is an Usurper: all which though they be but circumstances, yet are
they such, as a man can have no better for the discerning his own father, whom
notwithstanding he stands charged in conscience to obey. Better therefore that
authority be tied to the Crown, then to the Spirit; and that not only in
regard of man's necessities, but also more especially for the effecting the
Lords own purposes; who by this means can correct or scourge a whole Nation,
and yet smite only one particular person: namely by suffering their Prince or
Head to become a Tyrant or a Babe: whereupon (as himself has taught us) a woe
must befall the whole Land: Esaias. 3.4.
whereas were the Crown continually kept and possessed by the Spirit, such a
kind of Rod should find no place. For as concerning those which think there
is no necessity for this consequence, because in case a Babe or a Tyrant
supplies the Throne, the whole Nation need not be obnoxious unto any smart
thereby, for that it is thought lawful, yea necessary to cut off such Babes
and Tyrants. We answer, that such opinion is not only most impious and
presumptuous against God, but also most preposterous, monstrous, unjust, and
ridiculous before men. First, most impious it is; because it is the common
Ordinance of God that we should obey and honor Princes; yea that we should
honor our particular Fathers, much more the Fathers of the whole Country: so
far must we be from abasing them, especially in case of their imbecility.
How impious then must they needs be, which will handle their Princes no better
then caityfes, and most desperate members? Secondly, most presumptuous it is,
both for that it puts him by, whom the Lord will have reign, namely that Babe,
or that Tyrant for the purpose aforesaid; and also for that it does interpose a
Judgment seat betwixt the Lord, and him whom the Lord will have his most
immediate, his very next, his own Anointed. And as for the monstrousness of
it, it appears in this: both for that it supposes a power in the Body above
the Head; namely that power which must cut the Head off; in the room of which
head, in case another head should grow up; yet must it still be under that
power of the Body; which is most preposterous; and also (in case no such head
grows up) for that either the Body must remain without a head (which will
still be monstrous) or some other member must supply the heads place which will
be miserably ridiculous: For when the inferior members which cannot discern a
Head from a Hand or a Foot, but only by the outward shape and figure thereof,
shall see (suppose) a hand or at least that which is like a hand to be in the
place of the head; they must needs a great while take it for but a fellow
member, and so not do it that respect and obedience which to the Head is due;
and then when at length after many admonitions they have learned to see the
power of an Head under the shape of an hand; yet withal when they shall also
learn how that hand came there; namely by cutting off the unsound or foolish
Head: what remains but that they think it necessary, (at least lawful) for
them to observe whether that Hand be found, or whether some fit of a Chyragra
be not growing upon it: which if they find; what else but that some other
member be thought of for the place? and then who perhaps so likely to put
forward as the Foot? which if it attaines to the place of the Head; as it must
needs be a miserable shame and confusion to the Domesticke members, so how can
it be otherwise then a most horrible scorn unto the foreign enemies? and as
good sport as the walking of men with their heels upwards, is to idle
beholders. Yea what more unjust even in the eyes of common Sense, then that the
Master Builder should be at this pass, either to give account of the
soundness of his work unto those which are beneath him; or else to be at
their mercy to have the Stage pulled from under him? But, Christian Reader, I
fear me you think I have committed an excursion; and yet I pray suffer me
to answer one Objection more, which is thought to be of Demonstratiue force for
the Intitling the Spiritual man to the Throne before any: and it is this. The
first Adam upon his fall did forfeit all the domini- and titles which the Lord
upon his Creation had set him in: Such therefore as have no other birth but
from the first Adam, can have no title to dominions or authorities whatsoever:
and therefore they which are borne of the second Adam (unto whom the first
Adams inheritance must lapse unto) must be the only true Heirs thereof; and
consequently as men are more or less borne of the second Adam (that is, as
they are more or less Spiritual) they shall more or less have titles to
Kingdoms, Lordships, properties or capacities whatsoever, and no otherwise.
Whereunto we answer; first, that though Adam upon his fall did loose the
sweetness of his dominions (the curse of God inuading it) yet does it not
follow but that he might still retain the state and title thereof; even as a
rich man when he falls into some tormenting desease, and so has no joy of all
his riches, yet still remains seized and possessed of his riches
nevertheless. Secondly, the estate and dominion which God gave unto Adam,
though it might be a joy and dignity unto him, yet was it principally to be
taken in the nature of a charge; which charge it was not in Adams power to
avoid or forfeit upon his trespass and fall, but rather to double and increase
it thereupon: a man's voluntary dashing his abilities, being no dispensation for
his duties; negligence being of no more force to discharge us, then voluntary
ignorance is to excuse us. Thirdly, that the Lord did make unto the first Adam,
a general grant of universal propriety and dominion, we expressly find ( Genesis
1.28. etc.) but that he did revoke the same we find not. Paradise indeed,
both the heavenly (the fruition of God) and also the earthly (the Garden of
Eden) we find expressly that it was taken from him: but we also find as
expressly, that it was given him only upon condition of his obedience: whereas
the donation of universal dominion had no such condition annexed unto it.
Fourthly, had Adam apprehended that superiority and dominion should upon his
Fall, be conveyed unto men by the course of Grace, and not by the course of
Nature: he would never have entitled his ungracious first borne unto all his
possessions, as the name Cain signifies, and left nothing for his best-borne,
but (the younger brothers portion) vanity, as the name Abel signifies. Fifthly,
the Lord every where so establishing the Hethen Princes in their States and
Kingdoms; as Pharaoh, Nabuchadnezar, Cyrus, Ahashuerosh, Darius, Caesar, etc.
who had no kind of right thereunto, but by the Law of Nations, which has his
original only from (consecrated reason) the Law of the first Adam, of whom
only they were descended (the second Adam being to them unknown;) it may
sufficiently teach that no reuocation of original Dominions did follow upon
the fall.

But finally and principally, and in stead of all, may be this; for that the
second Adam and his line (unto whom only such supposed forfeiture was to
extend) did never make the least title or claim thereunto: either when he was
first promised, or when he was first made manifest in the flesh. For as
concerning the time when he was first promised, so far was he then from
taking any vantage of the Fall; as that the first mention of him did promise a
Succor against our Enemy that gave the Fall; in these words: The seed of the
Woman, shall bruise the Serpents head. Hebr. 11.
Likewise his firstborn Abel (who by faith in him offered the the good
Sacrifice) was so far from attayning any superiority by virtue of his being
borne of him, as that it proved the only cause of his earthly ruin: his
Brother therefore hating him because his works were good; 1 Ioh. 3.12.
and his works (we know) being therefore only good, because he was borne of
him. So also the Patriarchs and holy men in their times; did they not always
account themselves rather loosers then gainers by this second birth? they every
where undergoing tributes and bondages more willingly and more faithfully then
any.

And as for the time of the second Adams manifesting himself in the flesh; so
far was he then also from claiming any of the first Adams rights, as that
upon all occasions, he professes the maine intent of his coming, to be for
the restoring of his losses, even though it were with the loss of his own
life: every where styling himself no better then The Son of Man; which the
meanest of Adams Race might assume as well as he: and finally, as often
telling us that his Kingdom was not of this world; that he came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister; that he had not whereon to lay his head, and
refusing so much as to arbitrate a matter betwixt two brethren (which the most
private persons that are may be allowed to do) least he should seem to take
upon him the Office of a Judge, and so leave a conceit in his followers that
some degree of Authority might be derived from him: every where finally
prescribing such courses, and aduising all that desired to grow great in him,
to exceed only in humility, preferring therefore a child before them all, when
they strove who should be the greatest: Mat. 20.25.
and telling them (in effect) that authority and greatness was to be derived
only from the Kings of the Nations. Mat. 28.18.
For whereas after his ascension he tells us that All power was given him both
in Heaven and in Earth, His meaning therein is only this; that now all power
both in Heaven and Earth should be under his humanity, as before it was under
his Deity; and that as all men, even Adam himself and all his race were
formerly under him as he was the Son of God: so now they should likewise be
under him as he was the Son of man. For the effecting thereof there needed
no alteration of States, or new conueyances* for that as all other creatures
both in Heaven and in Earth; whether Angels, Beasts, Worms, Plants, Stones, or
whatsoever; are likewise become subject unto this manhood, and yet still
retain their orders, natures, and properties as before: Angels remaining
Angels; Beasts remaining Beasts; Lions, Lions; Stones* Stones, etc. so does it
no otherwise follow but that mankind may likewise become subject unto the
manhood of God; and yet all men still to continue in their former properties:
Kings, remaining Kings; Princes, Princes; Fathers, Masters, Husbands, Wives,
Subjects, Sons, Servants, in their former condition; and (as the Apostles
tell us) Every man in the same calling wherein he was called, 1 Cor. 7.24.
as well after his birth in the Second Adam as in the first. For as the second
Adam did not think good to be the Father of a new generation by the course of
Nature; wherewith to propagate his Church, but made choice of the old Adams
issue to new graft upon. So may we conceive it to be a course most answerable
thereunto, that when he means to adorn and bespangle his Church with
Scepters, Crowns and Authorities, He will not make new Crowns or new Scepters,
or take away Crowns and Scepters from the old possessors, to adorn his
followers withal: but only new graft upon those old Crowns and Potentates;
and so most sweetly bring it to pass, that though he does not make his
followers Kings, yet does he make Kings his followers. Which as it is all one
for the outward glory and countenance of the Gospel, so it is far more
agreeing with the property and profession of the Gospel; namely in winning
Kings unto the grace of God, by gentle, easy, weak, and peaceable means;
making choice of Sheep, and not Wolves or Lions for his Ambassadors, and that
when he sends to Wolves and Lions and worse then Tigers: that so those Rebels
in the day of visitation when they see how the Lord has dealt with them, and
how in stead of sheep he could have sent wolves and Lions in their own
kind, to have worried and destroyed them; then as overcome with the coals of
fire which his long suffering had cast upon them, they with all their hearts
and souls, present him and his Gospel with their Scepters, Crowns,
Dignities, and Possessions: yea they thus break forth into most vehement and
sincere protestations (as our so Christian Sovereign has taught them) unto
his Majesty alone I have devoted my Scepter, Remonstr. Anglice. page 249.
my Sword, my Pen, my whole industry; my whole self with all that is mine in
whole and in part: I do it, I do it, in all humble acknowledgement of his
unspeakable favor, etc. Page vlt.
to whose service as a most humble homager and vassal, I consecrate all the
glory, honor, luster and splendour of my earthly Kingdoms. We conclude then,
that neither divine ordinance, nor Church benefit, does enforce or persuade
this ground (without which Saint Peter cannot be entitled unto Sovereignty;)
that the more spiritual men are, the more they ought to be possessors of
Authority: which conclusion also were it granted, yet would not Peter's
Supremacy thereupon ensue, unless it be also proved, that in Spiritual gifts
and graces Peter must of necessity be acknowledged to surmount all persons:
which we grant not. For as concerning the Text and collections which use to be
alleged for that purpose; as namely that Peter is ordinarily first named when
the Apostles are rehearsed. 2. That our Savior three several times gave him
charge to feed his sheep. 3. That our Savior particularly told him that he
had prayed for him. 4. That our Savior paid the tribute for him. 5. Did more
ordinarily discourse with him, then any of the rest. 6. Gave him a new name. 7.
Termed him a Rock, and promised to build his Church upon him. 8. Gave him
the Keys of heaven. 9. And finally, wrought especially by him in the Primitive
Church affairs. We thus shortly answer them in order.

Peter every where first named; both Gal. 2.
James and Ioh. 1.40
Andrew being sometime named before him. feed his sheep: we answer, That it
is rather a check then a grace, to be often called upon to do a duty: and
in that it is said that Peter was sorry when it was said unto him the third
time, etc. it may seem that Peter took it no otherwise; as perhaps conceiting
such tripling of his charge, to be in the way of a glance at his triple
denial. Peter's weakness (we answer to the third) might proceed our Saviors
telling him, that He had prayed for him. For no doubt our Saviors prayer was
as frequent and effectual for the rest, though he saw not the like cause to
tell them so much. Peter's poverty and subjection, then any kind of excellency
and dominion: the rest also perhaps not being liable to the tribute which was
then demanded; either because they were no dwellers at Capernaum, as Peter was;
and so it might be if it were the Emperors tribute; or for that they were not
the first borne in their Families, of whom only the other tribute (toward the
Temple) was demanded. Peter; we answer, that it is ordinary with natural
Fathers, to make choice rather of their little ones to oppose and discourse
withal, then their men grown sons; especially when their intent therein is
to teach standers by; the most ready answerers rather then the more wary being
fittest for such purposes. Peter; we answer, that diverse of the rest also had
new names given the^; as Leui being new-named Matthew; Saul, Paul; James and
John Boanerges; which name being by interpretation the sons of thunder, may
far better resemble persons of Authority, then Peter's new name of Cephas or
Petros; for that a Stone, as those names signify, is more fit to make a
Subject then a Head, if names should be regarded. Peter a Rock, and promising
to build His Church upon him; we answer, that neither does that Text give Peter
any higher pre-eminence, for that the rest of the Apostles were styled by
higher terms then so; even no less then absolute and several foundations of
the Church; the wall of new Jerusalem being said ( Revel. 21.14.) to have
twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles: Another Text
also ( Ephesians. 2.20.) making not only the rest of the Apostles, but also the
Prophets as deep in the foundation as he; when it says, that the Church was
founded upon the Prophets and Apostles; in which Text also it being further
added, that Jesus Christ is the Head Corner Stone; If Peter should so be
esteemed a Rock, as to be the Rock alone, he should so not only surmount
his fellows (contrary to those Texts) but also our Savior himself. 8. Nor
again does our Saviors giving Peter the Keys of heaven, any whit advance
Peter above the rest of the Apostles, unto whom these heavenly Keys, whether
the keys of knowledge, the keys of binding and loosing, the keys of
remitting and retayning, or the Keys of David (if there be any odds or
difference amongst these keys) were as expressly given. For first, as
touching the keys of Knowledge; those we find, even the Scribes and Pharisees
and common Lawyers not to be destitute of: and as for the keys of remitting
and retaining sin; those also our Savior does plurally give, when he
says; Whose sins ye remit, Ioh. 20.23.
they are remitted, etc. though to speak truly and properly, neither Peter,
nor any mortal man ever had power to remit sin, but only as the Priests in
the Old Law had power to cleanse Leprosy; which was only by pronouncing
according unto the Leuiticall Rules, Leuit. 13.
who were clean, and who not; the cognizance of Leprosy being confined only
unto them, and none in the Congregation being reputable for clean, (after
presumptions to the contrary) but only whom they so pronounced. Thirdly, the
keys of binding and loosing (if they must differ from the former) are likewise
found given to the rest, when our Savior says, Whatsoever ye bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven; where the Relative (ye) is thought to extend (in
the judgment of Theophilact: in Mat. 18.18. non solum quae solvunt sacerdotes
-- sed quae et nas -- sunt soluta et lig.
good Expositors) not only to the rest of the Apostles, but also (in case
there spoken of) to every member of Christ. Finally, concerning the keys of
David, which (our Savior in his glory professing himself to be the keeper of)
may seem to have the pre-eminence; Reu. 3.7.
we find long before Peter's time to have been committed unto the Prophet
Jeremy (under the name of Eliachim) in these words: Esa. 22.22.
I will lay the key of David upon his shoulders; he shall shut, and none shall
open; he shall open, and none shall shut: Wherein then consists the
peculiaritie of Peter's Keys? For though when our Savior promised him them,
he termed them the Keys of Heaven; yet for as much as the Keys of binding,
loosing, opening, shutting, remitting etc. do concern no other gates then the
gates of Heaven; such nominall explications annexed unto Peter's Keys, can give
no real Specialty unto them. Especially considering how the Key of Faith which
every believer must have as well as Peter, is also the Key of Heaven; yea and
such a Key, as without it, none of the other Keys can, and yet, it, without
all the rest, is able, to open Heaven Gates alone. Though truly and properly we
must always remember, that he only is able to open the heavens, which has
made the heavens; His precious blood being the only true Key indeed; and his
Word revealing so much, being the handle of that Key; and the faith of man
being the hand, which by means of that handle, His Word, does turn that Key
his blood, upon the maine boult, sin; which only has shut Heaven gates
against the Sons of Men. Peter's agencye and employment in the Church affairs
more then others, we answer: that the principal Agents and Speakers are not
always of necessity the principal persons: Advocates and pleaders, exceeding
Judges and Presidents in such Offices; Exodus 4.16. Act. 14.
the High Priest Aaron being as a mouth unto Moses, though Moses was as God
unto him: and the men of Lystra esteeming Paul to be therefore inferior unto
Barnabas (as much as Mercury was unto Jupiter) because Paul was the chief
speaker. Secondly, though we find Peter in the Acts of the Apostles, to take
up the occasions of Speech very often and abundantly; yet may we observe
diverse tokens of more eminency in others; especially in Paul, John, and both
the Iameses: the one of these being graced with no meaner term then the Lords
brother; Gal. 1.1^.
and the other being named of Paul (and before Peter) amongst those which were
accounted pillars: Gal. 2.
mention also being made of him with more authority then of any the rest: as
when James did but say ( Act. 15.19.) my sentence is etc. presently without
more ado the Text adds ( v. 22.) It seemed good unto the Apostles to send,
Act. 21.18.
etc. James also being only named when Paul was dispensed withal for his
co^desce^ding unto the Jewish rites. And as concerning John, we find; first
that he is usually called the Disciple whom Jesus loved; that our Savior
permitted him to lean on his breast at his last Supper: Ioh. 19.26.
made him the Son of his own Mother, and as a guardian unto her: gave him the
grace to write his Gospel in the diuinest manner; with answerable Canonical
Epistles: as also made him the immediate penman of his special Epistles to the
seven Churches: Reu. 2.
and finally revealed unto him the future estate of the whole Church unto the
end of the world. And as touching Paul; these peculiar excellencies we find
concerning him. First, Act. ^. Act 13.2.
that his calling was by the Lords immediate voice from heaven; was separated
by the appointment of the holy Ghost; was reckoned amonst the Prophets of his
time; abounded in unwritten revelations, as John did in the written; foretold
the immediate blindness of Elimas (which was answerable unto Peter's like
prediction of the death of Ananias) Took the care of all the Churches; 2 Cor.
11.28. Romans 15.
Labored more the^ they all; would not build on another foundation; had the
largest Province, namly over all the Gentiles; wrote most canonical Epistles;
most magnified his Office; stood most upon his Authority, affirming that who so
despised his Doctrine despised God; commending his own example, 1 These. 4.^
and citing his own authority ( behold I Paul, I say unto you etc.) and
finally rebuking Peter to the face. Whereas concerning Peter, as he is not any
where noted for spiritual excellency and infallibility more then others,
Galat. 5.^.
so on the contrary he is more expressly touched for infirmities and fails then
any. Witness both his ouerweaning of his own strength, and boasting that he
would never forsake his Master, when before the next morning he denied him and
forsware him. Witness his ignorance of the maine intent of our Saviors
coming (in dissuading him from suffering) whereupon he was called Satan.
Witness his ignorance of the Catholic extention of the Gospel; (in refusing
to admit the Gentiles thereunto.) And witness finally his timorousness in
using Christian liberty for fear of angring the Jews: with other fayles. For
though we reverence the memory of Saint Peter as a choice vessel of Gods
Grace; yet when we see him so advanced above his fellows, and that only for
the exalting his pretended Successors so inco^parably above their fellows no
man can justly be offended if we note that Peter was lefthanded no less then
his Fellows. But for a final answer, thus we conclude; that neither: Peter
nor Paul, nor James nor John, did sway the affairs of the Primative Church,
but jointly the Twelve together. For both the choosing the new Apostle, the
ordaining the seven Deacons* the deciding controversies, the disposing
Provinces, the sending Barnabas to Antioch, Peter and John into Samaria, the
taking account of Peter's going to the Gentiles (notwithstanding his Divine
warrant therefore) were all the joint Acts of the whole Twelve. The decrees
finally going forth in no other name but in the name of the Twelve. Act. 15.22.
and 16.4.
So as concerning any soueraintie, supremacye, primacy, or superexcellency (of
necessity to be granted) in the person of Peter; we may finally conclude; that
neither did our Savior ordain it, nor the Apostles acknowledge it, or inuest
him with it, (as there was no cause why they should, his common infirmities
considered) nor did Peter himself take it upon him, but rather exceeded them
all in subjection; as both his long journey into Samaria, Act. 8.4. Act. 11.2.
when the Twelve sent John and him; his giving account of his actions when they
were (though unjustly) excepted against; and his suffering a public rebuke at
the hands of one which was none of the Twelve, may testify; as also his so
express teaching submissio^ whether unto Kings as the Supremes, 1 Pet. 2.13.
or unto governors, etc. admonishing those of his own sort, not to carry
themselves as Lords over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.
and never in his Epistles intitling himself otherwise the^ a Servant of Jesus
Christ, or an elder, or an Apostle at the most. Whereas had he taken himself
to be in that Supereminencie as should make him Head of the Church (yea such
an Head, as should be the original unto a succession of Heads unto the end of
the world) not only without arrogance he might have inserted it into his
style, but also without wrong to posterity he could not have omitted so to do:
even by the same discretion wherewith S. Paul does more often term himself
an Apostle, then any of the Twelve used to do; because else his Apostleship
might have been doubted of: so there being doubt (at least) of Peter's being
such an head, had it not far more concerned him every where (at least once in
his life) to have prefixed his title? Leu. 22.24.
yea when there was a strife amongst the Apostles who should be the chief; was
it not then hie time for Peter to advance himself? or had our Savior ever
meant any such principality unto Peter, and that of such perpetual necessity,
would he have omitted so fair an occasion, to stablish a matter of that
moment, which both with a word he might have done; and also when the time was,
either then or never (in a manner) to be done, his departure and death being
so instant? yea, would he so on the contrary have generally forbidden them the
use of any Authority, when he told them that though the Kings of the Nations
did exercise authority, yet with them it should not be so? For, as for those
which expound those words ( with you it shall not be so) to restrain the
Disciples only from ruling so tyrannically, or so unjustly as the heathen; they
therein make our Saviors words to be nothing to the Disciples question: for
they might have answered again, that there strife was not who should rule
tyrannically or unjustly, but only who should be chief; whereas some one, or
diverse of them might be chief, and yet not only no Tyrants, but not so much as
lawful Governors. But to conclude; for as much as we can find no necessity
for the acknowledging such Supereminencie of Peter's Spiritual gifts; nor (were
that granted) any step to Authority thereupon; nor that the Kings and
Gouerners in Peter's time did loose there Sovereignty over their Christian
Subjects; it cannot therefore be, that Peter was universally the Head of all
Christians in his time: and so the second Link of the maine Chain proves of
no force. The next is this:

Only the Successors of Peter must be these universal Heads in their times:
whereunto we answer; first, that the Founder of the Church, Jesus Christ, did
never ordain that any Principality, gifts, or capacities whatsoever should be
conveyed to any of his members by succession: Secondly, that he never disabled
or excepted against any Line, Tribe, Nation, Language, or Continent whatsoever,
from taking as high place in his Church, as his Church afforded: Thirdly, when
his will was in the time of the Old Law, to have the Priesthood go by
Succession; He did both specify the Line wherein it should pass, namely the
Line of Aaron; Number. 17.
(confirming also the same by the miraculous budding of Aarons Rod) and also
expressly set down all the rites and ceremonies, which should be stricty
observed at every several consecration; yea, the very garments wherewith every
Successor at his anointing, Exo. 29.29.
should be invested, were determined. Since therefore in the new Law, no such
Line or Tribe is mentioned, no rites appointed, no garments or manner of
consecration enjoined; it must be a forcible argument to conclude that in the
new Law no such Succession was ever intended; for that the new Law being made,
not unto one People, but unto all people, not for a time but for ever; had much
more needed specifications of persons, places, ceremonies and circumstances
then that which was but for one particular People and in continual expectation
to vanish away. Fourthly, when in process of time the Church shall attain
unto such an amplitude, as shall reach unto all the corners of the Earth; If
none must then be head thereof but the Successor of Peter, it must follow that
Peter's Successor shall be intollerably surcharged: For either he must have
more gifts then Peter had, or no more; if more, then is he more then Peter's
Successor. But if no more; there is no equity nor proportion in it, that he
whose charge is a thousand fold greater then Peter's, yet shall have no greater
measure of gifts to discharge it then Peter had. Finally, for as much as the
Lord has told us, that many shall come from the East, and from the West, and
sit with Abraham Isaac and Jacob, and the children of the Kingdom shall be
cast out; Mat. 12. vlt.
as also, that whosoever hears his Word and keeps it, the same is his
Brother, and Sister, and Mother: and that it should not profit the Jews for
that they had Abraham to their Father: He telling us also in the Old Testament
by his Prophet, that an ungodly Son should fare never the better for his
godly Father, Ezch. 18.
nor a godly Son any thing the worse for his ungodly Father: the course also
of the times declaring unto us, how holy Kings had unholy Sonns to succeed
them: and on the contrary; as good King Iotham having a wicked Son Ahaz for
his Successor, and he a good Son Hezechia for his Successor; and he a wicked
Son Manasses for his Successor, and he a good grandchild Josiah for his
Successor; and he a wicked Son Iehoahaz for his Successor: It may
sufficiently resolve a Christian mind how far it is from the purpose of God,
that his gifts and graces should go by succession. For though often times a
good and godly Father had a good and godly Son to succeed him, yet was not that
by virtue of Succession, but by virtue of Gods grace immediately directing the
Son, as well as the Father: even as to day may be as fair a day as yesterday,
and yet not because it succeeds yesterday, but because the Sunn shines as
immediately upon it, as it did upon yesterday. Finally, (for a conclusion)
whosoever challenges Supremacy in the Church by virtue of Succession, does
plead no less then flat contradiction: For whosoever is Supreme Head of the
Church, must be immediate unto God himself; But whosoever claims any thing
by virtue of Succession, does of necessity imply, that there is a person
betwixt him and the Lord; namely his predecessor from whom his virtue is
derived.

Only the Bishops of Rome were the Successors of Peter in their times.
Whereunto we answer; First, that no divine record does avouch so much, or so
much as mention any by the name of Bishop of Rome: and therefore the knowledge
of any rites concerning that Sea, can not be material unto a point of faith.
Secondly, as it is not certainly agreed upon, who that Bishop was which
immediately Succeeded Peter, (some affirming Liuius, some Clemens, and some
Clitus to be the man) so can there be no cause shown, why some Bishop of Rome
must needs be he. For first, if holiness of life were sufficient to make a
Successor; so every Christian might be Peter's successor as well as any Bishop
of Rome. Secondly, if besides holiness of life there must also concur
soundness of Doctrine; yet so also any Pastor may as well be his successor.
Or if yet further such a quantity of charge as Peter had, be requisite unto
the constitution of his Successor; yet so also every ordinary Diocesan is able
to be his successor. Or if yet further, the four fold qualifications
Apostolical, namely Immediate calling, Generality of commission,
Infallibility of Judgment, and Universality of Languages must concur to make
such a Successor: yet, as the first Bishops of Rome are no where avouched to
be thus qualified more then others, if so much; especially if they knew no
Language but the Latin, and came to their places by Election, which is no
immediate Calling; So neither will such quallification make a Successor unto
Peter more peculiar, then unto the rest of the Apostles unto whom such
fourfold qualification was common: wherein then shall consist the marrow and
quiddity which makes the Roman Bishops the peculiar Successors of Peter? For,
should it be supposed that some peculiar imposition of hands did pass from
Peter upon the first Bishop of Rome (wherewith the Holy Ghost was given in the
time of the Apostles) or some portion of Peter's spirit was given to that first
Bishop (as the spirit of Moses was unto the Seauenty) or that Peter's garments
were put upon him (as the garments of Aaron were upon his Successors) or some
such like Rite of conueyance; Number. 11:15
yet for as much as those kind of ceremonies, Exodus 20.26.
when they were used had no virtue in themselves but were divised by the
wisdom of God, for the shaddowing and concealing his own miraculous and
immediate operations (as our Savior and the Apostles used Spitle, and Clay,
and Hemmes of garments, Napkins, Partlets, and Shadows) the intitling any
Bishop of Rome unto Peter's virtue, spirit, or privilege, by means of any such
outward passage which has no divine record to specify it, is no less
presumptuous then superstitious and ridiculous. Finally concerning their
argument from Peter's being the first Bishop of Rome (their cardinal argument
in this point) that therefore only the Bishops of Rome are his Local, and so
consequently his most proper Successors: we answer; that neither is local
succession of force to attain to the virtue of the predecessor; there being
no kind of place, whether natural, civil, or mystical, but which is capable
even of contrarieties; even the Soul of man (the purest vessel and continent
that is) being a receptacle of Sin as well as grace, and the Temple of God
being destinated for the Seat of Antichrist as well as for Jesus Christ. These.
2.4.
Nor again can the Bishops of Rome be proved (at least in any peculiar manner)
so much as his Local successors; both for that other Bishops, as namely of
Jerusalem and Antioch had Peter for their Predecessor (and that even by
Scripture inference) as also for that no divine (or approved) writer does
avouch, either that Peter ever was the Bishop of Rome, or that he was
personally present at Rome. For whereas upon Peter's dating one of his Epistles
from Babylon, 1 Pet. 5.13.
it is argued that he was then at Rome; for that mystically he might account
that City Babylon, yet considering how there were three Local Babylons, namely
in Syria, Caldea, and Egypt; which were far more nearly situate unto Peter's
Province then Rome was, there conjecture that Peter meant Rome by Babylon in
that Text has three to one against it. But if conjectures and good
probabilities may be allowed to carry any sway in this business, it is easy
to produce them abundantly, and that out of Scriptures, that Peter never was
(but as every Apostle was) any Bishop of Rome. Galat. 2.7.
For first it is apparent that Peter by the special appointment of the Spirit
was confined unto them of the Circumcision, whereof Rome was no part: Secondly,
it was well nigh twenty or thirty years after our Savior gave Peter the
charge of feeding his Sheep, that Peter abode about Jerusalem, Antioch, Ioppa,
and those quarters. Thirdly, Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, does tell them
that he always had a special care, Romans 15.20
not to build on another foundation; then the which Text, what more fair
argument can be framed, that Paul never esteemed the Church of Rome to have
any other founder then himself: as also his special Commission over the
Gentiles (whereof Rome was the chief City) his large Epistle to the Romans
(containing the foundation of the Christian Faith in all the dimensio^s) his
being free borne of the Romans, his appealing to Rome in his persecutions, his
abiding there diverse years, and that with favor for prisoner; his inditing
most of his Epistles there, and never making mention of Peter in any of them,
but always complaining how destitute he was, how all had forsaken him, how all
sought their own; how he had none was with him but Luke; how he had none like
minded unto Timothy (even when his death was instant) and such like
circumstances may infer. Unless it were to be supposed, that after the death
of Paul, Peter came out of Asia into Europe, to keep consistory at Rome (and
that 25. years by the rule of their own stories) there to begin an
universal Church-gouernment (which in his best years he never meddled with)
and in that City which he is supposed to esteem Mystical Babylon? To this we
may finally add that no writers, living in the time of the first Bishops, do
any where avouch that those first Bishops did ever challenge any such
Sovereignty, but rather they avouch the contrary. For why does Clement, (who
is supposed to be the first Bishop of Rome) in his Epistle to James, Epist. 1.
style James, Episcopum Episcoporum regentem Ecclesiam Hebraeorum Hierosolymis
etc? Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch.
why does a Father term Antioch, Caput Orbis? which, in that the Disciples
did there first begin to be called Christians; (Act. 11.26.) it might far
better be so termed then any other; Council. constan. 5. Act. 1.
a Council also having these words Apostolici throni Antiochenae magnae
ciuitatis. Or why was the Bishop of Alexandria entitled Iudex Orbis? Nyceph.
canon. 92.
Or why did the Council of Afric forbid appeals ad transmarina Concilia? A
Father also affirming non esse congruum -- that it is not meet for them that
are in Egypt to Judge them that are in Thracia: Chrysostom. ad Inno.
or why did the Council of Carthage forbid that any should be called the
highest Bishop? or why does a Pope of late times affirm that until the
Council of Nyce, Aeneas Sylu.
there was but parvus respectus ad Romanos Episcopos? In which Council also
(if he meant Nyceum primum) why was it decreed ( An. Coun. Nic. 1 Can. 6.
Dom. 323.) vt honor cuique suus servetur Ecclesiae? wherein also it is
expressly provided that the Bishop of Jerusalem should have his ancient honor:
Can. 7.
and why in the primitive Counsels had the Roman Bishops sometime the fourth
place, Sozomen. Hist trip. 2.1.
sometime the fifth place, and sometime the sixth assined them? yea finally, why
did Gregory (himself a Bishop and Pope of Rome) living about 500. Greg. 1.
Lib. 4. epist. 32.
years after Peter, notwithstanding avouch, that none of his Predecessors did
ever take upon him to use the ungodly name of Episcopus vniuersalis? yea and so
deeply to challe^ge the Patriarch of Constantinople for assuming it, as that he
termed him therein, the forerunner of Antichrist: every where not sparing in
his Epistles to brand that title with all the reproaches and execrations he
could devise; calling it tiphuum superbiae vocabulum temerarium, pompaticum,
scelestum, superstitiosum, profanum, nomen erroris, nomen singularitatis, nomen
vanitatis, nomen hypocrysios, nomen blasphemiae. Surely (a little by the way
Reader let me speak it) If Gregory so thought him to be defied which would be
called Episcopus vniuersalis, what would he have thought of that person who
ordinarily aduanceth him self in these manner of titles, properties, and
conditions: 1. Council. Lat sub. Leon. 10.2. Hostiensis.
1. In Papa est omnis potestas, supra omnes potestates tam coeli quam terrae.
2. Papa et Christus faciunt vnum tribunal. 3. 3. Ius Canon. S. 16.1. q. in gl.
4. Fran. Zabarel:
Papa potest dispensare contra ius diuinum. 4. Persuaserunt Po^tificibus quod
omnia possent, et sic quod facerent quicquid liberet, etiam illicita et quod
sint plus quam Deus. 5. Extrav. Ioh. 22. in glos.
5. Credere dominum nostrum Deum Papam non po tuisse provt statuit, hereticum
esse censetur. 6. Camotensis.
6. Papa praecipit Angelis, et habet potestatem in mortuos. 7. 7. Clem. in
proem. in glos. 8. Durand. l. 2.9. Bonif. 8. de maiorat. et ob.
Nec Deus es nec homo, quasi neuter es inter vtrumque. 8. Hic est ille
Melchisedeck, hic est caput omnium pontificum, de cuius plenitudine omnes
accipiunt. 9. Dicimus, definimus, pronunciamus, omnino esse de necessitate
salutis omni humanae creaturae subesse Romano Pontifici. 10. Cornel. episc. in
orat. ad. Synod in conc. Tried. 11. Step. Episcop. Petracens. 12. Host: de
sentent. excom. 13. Sylv. prier; contr. Luth. 14. Felinus extrav de constitut.
Stat. con.
Papa lux venit in mundum sed dilexerunt tenebras magis quam lucem. 11. Tibi
data est omnis potestas tam in coelo quam in terra. 12. Papa potest omnia quae
Christus potest. 13. Authoritate Scripturae licet non innotuere nobis
indulgentiae, at Authoritate Romanae Ecclesiae Romanorumque Pontificum quae
mayor est. 14. Nedum circa Coelestia, Terrestria et Infernalia Papa gerit
vicariatum Christi, sed etiam supra Angelos bonos et malos. 15. 15 In Conc.
Lat. dictu^ ad pap. Iul. 16. Stella clericoru^ sermon. 111.
Tu es omnia et supra omnia. 16. Sacerdos est creator creatoris sui; -- qui
creauit vos absque vobis, creatur a vobis mediantibus vobis. And if even a
Priest can create his Creator; what then can he not do which makes that
Bishop who makes that Priest that so makes his Maker? O fervent Gregory that
thou were but so long awake as to hear these manaer of voices of thy
Successors! for if thy zeal grew so hot against one for being termed
Episcopus vniuersalis; how would it burn up those, who with their Babylonian
Tops have surmounted even Lucifer himself? For Lucifers only sickness being
this because he was not ( sicut altissimus) peer with the highest. Esaias. 14.13
These most glorious birds of his, first making all mankind their footestoole,
have found the Highest to be their inferior, yea their very creature: and all
this for the fulfilling that Scripture. He shall exalt himself above all that
is called God. 2 These. 2.4.


Only the Popes of Rome were the Successors of those Bishops. Whereunto we
answer; that for as much as the Popes did differ from the Bishops, both in name
(the word Papa not being known amongst the ancient Latins or those Bishops)
and also in the form of Election, (the most substantial difference that
States can have) and thirdly in the quality of the persons both electing and
to be elected; only Cardinals (a College unknown until of late) being both
electores and eligibiles; and finally in the quantity and specialty of their
charge; it must of necessity follow, that those Popes were of a diverse kind
and original from those Bishops, and so consequently more or less then
Successors unto those Bishops, and so finally more or less then Heads of the
Church.

The last Link of the Chain is this: Only He which now possesses the Roman
Papacy is the Successor of those Popes. Whereunto we answer; first, that is
not only void of divine proof, but also that it is incapable thereof: namely
because it is grounded upon matters of fact which happened long since the time
when those proofs had their last period. Secondly, as it is incapable of
divine proof, so also is it incapable of the better kind of humane proof;
namely that kind of proof which is by operation of judgment; matters of fact
having only Sense and eyewitness to bear them out. Thirdly, whereas other
matters of fact are ordinarily proved with two or three witnesses at the most;
this proposition must have no less less then two or three hundred; every
several Successor (whereof there have been above an hundred) needing no
less then two witnesses (a Register being a double witness) to avouch the
canonical validity of his choice. To these exceptions we might add how
sundry times and ways the Succession from the first Pope to the now present,
has been interrupted. As first, for that the Papacy diverse times by the
space of an whole year, and sometimes seven years has been vnsupplyed;
secondly, that diverse times again, (no less then thirty several times) there
have been two or three Popes at once: thirdly, for that diverse times, the
Successor has contraryed, the Predecessor, and that so mortally, as that the
dead corpse of the Predecessor has capitally been proceeded against. Fourthly,
for that diverse have been elected and installed incompetently, indirectly,
fraudulently, and violently; in which cases the so elected are by the Local
Decrees pronounced Apostaticall, Decret. 78. Siquis.
and not Apostolical. Fifthly, for that diverse have supplied the place which in
their lives were most vile, Licencious, Monstrous, Homicidious, Incestuous,
Scismaticall, Heretical, Magical, and Diabolical: in so much as a Writer of
their own Nation has not spared to say that the goodness of a Pope is
commended when it exceedes not the wickedness of other men. Guiceardi. Lib. 16.
And finally for that their doctrine has continually been protested against,
especially this last hundred years and that maugre all kind of torturings,
murtherings, and massacrings that could be devised. These kind of allegatio^s
though we might insist upon, against the tenor of this pretended Succession;
yet because it cannot be done, but by the aid of humane writers, which for
that they be subject both to error and falsifications, when we have done
never so much it will not be of force to either satisfy or convince the
conscience, which is the only thing we aim at. To say therefore no more then
we mean to make the conscience a Judge of, and yet as much as conditionally
(particulars not being capable of any other but conditional demonstrations)
shall fasten upon the Conscience; thus we pronounce; that if at any time since
first the Papacy began, any of the Popes did ever inioyne upon Capital
penalty blasphemous or Idolatrus Doctrine; or (to make our instance more
special) if they did ever at any time capitally inioyne either the worshipping
of any kind of Image, or the bowing down thereto; or that men should
attribute more reverence unto any kind of Image (whether of God or man, Christ
or his Cross so supposed to be) then unto the meanest member of Christ upon
the face of the earth (yea the vilest man that is, having a deeper Character
and impression of God, then the colorings, caruings, or works of any mortal
man whatsoever): or finally, if ever they did capitally inioyne, that men
should esteem, that to be the very true and proper person or manhood of
Christ, which before the speaking afew words they confess was no better then
Bakers bread. In any of these cases we pronounce and challenge their
Succession to be extinguished and as utterly dead as ever Corpse was when the
soul was departed. And that every such Successor was no better the Successor
of Peter, then darkness is the Successor of the light, death the Successor of
life, and Antichrist the Successor of Jesus Christ. But admit none of these
Doctrines were ever taught in that Chair from the first to the last, (which
that is might be true, no doubt all that ever writ or reported to the contrary
would gladly be found liars) yet will not the maine conclusion follow
thereupon, upon, unless all the former Linkes of the Chain be firm and
inviolable: which if (Christian Reader) you find far otherwise; then judge
how it concerns you to beware how you venture the weight of your salvation
thereupon: least as the people of Israel leaning on the Staff of Egypt did
find it to be but Reed; so you bearing your self upon this Chain, do in the
end, when it is too late, find it to be made of Rushes: and while out of an
hope to be thereby haled up to Heaven, you suffer your self to be hoysted
out of that protection which God has lent you upon earth, you fall in the
midway without recovery. Which Judgment, God of his goodness keep you and
me from: and so Christian Reader commending these my pains unto your service
in the Lord: in him I leave you.

FINIS.

