A SERMON NEEDFVLL FOR THESE TIMES, WHEREIN IS SHOWED, THE INSOLENCES OF
NAASH KING OF AMMON, against the men of Iabesh Gilead, and the succors of
Saul, and his people sent for their relief.

Preached at Paul's Cross the 14 of Feb. 1590. by R. H. fellow of the New
College in Oxford.

Iud. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord, and in cursing curse
the inhabitants thereof: because they came not to help the Lord, to help
the Lord against the mighty. AT OXFORD. Printed by JOSEPH BARNES Printer to
the University. 1591.

TO THE NO LESS VIRTUOUS THEN HONOrable, Sir HENRY NORREIS Knight, Lord
Norreis, Barron OF RICOT, INCREASE OF HONOR, WITH ALL grace, and all felicity.
(*)
THERE is none so weak sighted (right Honorable) but now by long experience
they may see, the deep and unchangeable hatred of the popish faction, conceaved
against our dread sovereign, as the party most principal, and others the
embracers and professors of gods truth. The which has so depraved and poisoned
many their hearts, that it has not only removed from them, all loyalty to
their prince, and love to their country; but also has carried the^ so far,
against the stream of al goodness, and sense of nature; that they have by
sundry means, and sundry persons, attempted to do violence, upon her sacred
majesty; and farther have sought, so far as in them lay, to move rebellions in
the land, and with their own ruins, and ruinns of their families, to work
the overthrowe of this their country, and insufferable slavery unto a forre^
enemy. Whose wicked malice, although god of his goodness has hitherto detected
and blown abroad, to their own shame and and great confusion: yet there cause,
has been of late more specially commended, and undertaken by the great pation
of the holy league, who under a show and color of religion, and of yielding
succors unto there cause, does affect the soverainty and Empire not only of
the^, and of this our country, but of al other kingdoms here in the west.
Wherefore it stands all good people upon, which love their liberty, and would
not that a stranger should reap that they have sown to give ear unto the
calls of their superiors, by whose providence (under god they have bin
hitherto kept, and still may be continued in wealth and liberty. For if the
counsel of their rulers shall not fit their restles and vnco^te^ted humors, but
they will needs hearken, either to the sinister persuasion of some evil
disposed; or to the vnprovident miserableness, of their al coveting natures;
they shall not only thrust from them that good, which their governors would
procure: but by sparing of a little, put them selves in danger of leesing
more. For if (which god forbid) the enemy should be suffered, to make our
neighbor countries, the shops and center of his wars; and without
impeachement to prepare, his navyes and armies as before; and with fire and
sword, to enter and make some small ^^y in this our country: although he be
manfully beaten back, and forced to retire, nay fly without all order: yet
the havockes made by them, together with the spoils of lose persons, and of
others, not so well affected amongst our selves; would multiply the charges we
have hitherto been at: beside the dishonor of our country, hurre of the
people, and infinite damage of many our brethren, upon whomsoever it shall
light. All which as it suffices here for to remember so for the better
instruction of the people in this point, I commend this small treatise unto
their reading. And whereas (Right Honorable) your godly desires, have always
been for the welfare of your country, and advancement of gods truth, and you
have of your loins, many worthy children, set a part and marked of god to such
an end: I thought good both in respect of the matter, and my manifold duty,
to commend this treatise to your Honors favor and protection. Of which as I
nothing doubt, so I shall not cease to commend you and yours, to the gracious
guidance, blessing, and protection of God. From new College the 27 of March.

Your Honors in all duty ROGER HACKEY.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Paul's Cross.
ALTHOUGH these days of much contention and prophanes, do minister just
occasion to speak, of the several duties of each particular estate: yet in a
common woe and universal calamity, which has been threatened, practiced and is
still continued against our nation; it stands in wisdom to look rather to
the root, then to the branches, to the welfare and safety of the whole, then
the cure and remedy of some particular part. For since this if you consider is
the scope of all their counsels, to take from us not only our well being, but
our being, even church and kingdom, and to bring all into a miserable thral
dome both of body and soul: Aesops dog
let us beware least while we gape after the shadow we lose not the substance
and the shadow to: least whilst we would raise a tower to mount up to heaven,
we set not up a Babel the confusion of al. Genesis 11.
The which I speak not to rub and fret the sores of any, which mourn in
Sion for the sins of there people, Psalm. 122.3
and would have Jerusalem builded as a city that is at unity in it self. But
to advise our overheddy and hasty spirits, either for a while to rebate the
edge of their il tempered fury, or else to turn their keen and well sharpened
humors, against a known and most bloody enemy; which will none of our
Bishops, nor yet our pastors; no^e of our religion, nor yet our discipline;
none of our protestants, nor yet our puritanes; but which, to the grief of us
all, and especially of such, in whose hearts god has placed the se^ce of better
things, Matt. 24.15. Fox his monuments.
would set up the abomination of desolation in our temples again, and would
bring Ridly and Hooper Bishops and pastors, men though now variyng, again to
be fired and burned at a stake. In regard therefore of this most cruel enemy,
love of gods church, and tender of this our native country, I have chosen this
scripture as the fittest for me to speak of, and you to hear; God grant that
we may al follow it, as may be to his glory and our countries good.

The text is taken out of the first book of Samuel, the eleventh Chapter,
beginning at the fifth verse. 1. Sa. 11.5.
And Saul said, What aileth this people that they weep? and they showed unto
him the words of the men of Iabesh: then the spirit of the lord came on Saul
when he hard those words, and he was exceeding angry, and he took a yoke of
oxen, and cut them in pieces, and sent them into all the coasts of Israel, by
the hands of messengers, saying* Whosoever comes not after Saul and after
Samuel, so shall his oxen be served: and the fear of the Lord came upon the
people, and they came forth as one man.

IN the opening of which text we are to consider, first the occasion why the
people we peth and Saul is angry, and both king and people with so great an army
so speedily come forth: secondly this, that the people weep: thirdly the
demand of Saul, what aileth the people that they weep? fourthly Saules anger,
and he was exceeding angry: fifthly his summons, in which first his fact, he
took a yoke of oxen, cut them in pieces, sent them into all the coasts of
Israel: then his proclamation, whosoever comes not after Saul and after
Samuel, so shall his oxen be served: Sixthly the readiness of the people, they
came out as one man: Lastly what is the reason that Saul was thus angry and the
people came; the spirit of the Lord came on Saul, and the fear of the Lord
came upon the people.

In the occasion, you are to consider the city that is besieged, the party that
besieges, and that when, and upon what title.

Concerning the city besieged, The city besieged.
it is Iabesh Gilead, a city in mount Gilead, appertaining to ye half tribe of
Manasseth, whose portion was sorted with the Reuvenites and Gadites be^o^d the
river Iorda^, in those countries with Israel recovered from Og the King of
Bashan, and Sihon king of Amorites. As it is at large described Deuteronomy. 3. And
although the tribes of Deu. 3.12.
Reuben and Gad had half the mount of Gilead given the^ to inherit, Number. 32.33.
yet the rest of Gilead, was give^ by Moses to the half tribe of Manasseh: And
after the conquest of Canaan Ios. 13.31.
confirmed unto them by Iosuah. This city as it was 2 Samuel 2.5
commended by David, because they 1. Sam. 31 11.
recovered the bodies of Saul and Jonathan from the walls of Beth-schon of the
Philistines where they hanged: so was it wholly sacked by the power of Israel,
Iud. 21.10.
bicaus they came not with there brethren, but stood as neutrales, when they
went to do justice on the men of Gibeah for that villainous and barbarous fact
showed on the Levits wife. Thus much for the city that is beseeged.

Now concerning the Ammonites that did beseege, they coasted on the east of
mount Galead, and were nere borderers unto that part of the tribe of Manasseh
and unto the tribe of Gad. For in conquering of the land of Sihon king of the
Amorits, Nu. 21.24.
they are said to conquer even to the river Iabok, which is on the border of
the children of Ammo^, and this city as other about the river Arnon, Joshua.
12.2. Nu. 21.26.
and mount Galead, Sihon king of the Ammorites took from the children of Moab,
before that Israel came out of Egypt.

Now then as it is storied in the verses and chapters before, The time when and
upon what title.
when that Naash by his intelligence hard, that the people of Israel were at
varia^ce in themselves, 1. Sam. 8.5.6.
that they refused Samuel to be their governor, asked for a king, 1. Sam. 10
27.
and yet would none of him, whom the lord by Samuel anointed for to be their
sovereign: upon an ancient but Iud. 11.19 23 27. Iud. 10.8.
false title unto Iabesh and al mount Galaad alleged by his predecessors
before time unto Iepthah at what time they had conquered all that lay beyond
Jordan, and were ready with their armies to enter Judah because Israel took
my land, Iud. 11.13.
when they came out of Egypt even from Arnon unto Iabok and Jordan (he lays
seege to Iabesh Gilead: 1. Sa. 11.1. etc.
and although the city would have bin his tributary yet not content with this,
to show his malice and spite he had to the house of Israel, he would hear of
no entreatyes or conditions of peace, except they board out their right eyes, to
there own shame and reproach of al their nation, the which condition although
most ignominious in it self, and more to be shunned then a thousand deaths,
yet such was the baseness and vileness of this slavish and degenerate people,
that they yielded unto this proud and insolent demand, if within seven days
they were not succored: the report whereof when it was bruted in the ears of
the people they wept, but Saul burned with anger and gathered his forces for to
give relief. Thus then you see who is beseeged, Iabesh Gilead: who beseegeth,
Nahash king of Ammon: and upon what pretense, an ancient title, and that he
will admit no manner of submission, except withal he have their right eyes.
Now let us compare this story to the present time.

Not Nahash of Ammo^, but the great monarch of the west, whose treasures are
fed with the gold of Indy, The application of the story.
and desires with the conquest of the world, whose navy as a forest has
shadowed our seas, and the roaring of whose canonnes made the seas to rore,
and the son in his glory for to leese his light: having of late espied the
dissentions and preparations show the foorh of his desire, which is to have
the conquest of

When the children of Israel heard, that Ammon would show noe mercy to the
men of Iabesh, except they would bore out their right eyes, The peowept, and
why.
to their own shame, and reproach of all Israel: they lift up their voice
and wept. A loving and most kind people. But why do they weep? what it can.
When Mardochai heard that Hamon had procured, that by the command of the king
at a day appointed, all the Jews through al his provinces should be put to
death, he rent his clothes, Hest. 4.1.
put on sac kloth, went into the midest of the city, and cried with a great cry
and a bitter. When the friends of Iobe that came to comfort him, saw him
clothed with so great calamity, they lift up their voices and wept, Job. 2.12.
rent their garments and sprinkled dust upon their heads. In like sort when
Hazael was sent from Benadab to know of Elisha whether Benadab should recover.
Elisha wept and Hazael said why weepeth my lord? 2. Reg. 8.
and he answered even for the evil that I know, thou shall do to the children
of Israel. For there strong cities shall thou set on fire, there young men
shall thou slay with the sword, thou shall dash there infants against the
stones and rent in pieces there women with child: with the like affection
Jeremy foreseeing the captivity of his people, although he knew that his life
should be give^ him for a pray, Ierem. 9.1
yet he wishes that his head were a well of water and his eis a fou^tain of
tears, that he might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of his
people. Now whether this even to approve this weeping of the people here, and
to commend this Christian kind and brotherly affection in you, so often as
brethren of the same hope, members of the same body, fellow partners of the
same quarrel and the same success, do labor in their trouble, and are in
some distress. For as this has been a continued practice of all nations, at
all times to set up the ensigns of joy, for the good success of their well
meaning and confedered friends: so has it been the like custom upon any
hard eventes, to show tokens of sorrow, mourning, and of much complainte. In
truth whereof, say they be French, and not natural English, say they be
netherlanders, and not your brethren, yet the troubler of England is the
troubler of them; yet for the same faith, and in the same quarrel, and against
the same enemy, which means noe better to you then he does to them, nay
much worse: in that he has been not abroad, but at his own doers, and that
not once but often heated, fired, and inflamed by you. Wherefore if your stony
hearts can not be moved over their miseryes, although they are your brethren,
yet weep for your selves, and for your children, and for the evils which may
come upon you: for if that most large and mighty kingdom, shall not withstand
his furye, nor the force of them that are confedered with him: what shall
become of this our nation, when he shall again come, not with a navy from
Spain as he did before, but from the nigher havens of France and Flaunders:
nor with his own power only as before, but backed and strengthened with the
gentry of France? Livy decad. 3. li. 1.
Doubtless if Rome had occasion to weep, when Saguntum was taken, because the
walls of Rome were shaken, when Saguntum battered: if all Israel for Iabesh
Gilead: much more ought we to weep over their distress, since in their
safety stands ours, and their calamity is as the roaring of the raging sea,
whom wind and tide does hasten for to bring upon us. Weep. and if neither
the fellow feeling of their miserye which are our brethren in the faith, nor
the fear of our calamity which is linked with theirs, can move us to
tears: yet let the judgments of God, whom neither the wisdom of our
council be it never so wise, nor the valewe of our soldiers be they never
so hardy, nor the mountains of our money be they never so great, Amos. 6.^
is able to beat back or to turn aside: cause all sorts to tender the
affliction of Joseph, least God in his just judgment visit you upon your
Ivory beds, and clothe you with sackloth insteade of silcke, baldnes in
stead of beuty, lest he change your chains of gold into chains of iron,
strong drinks and delicate fare into water of trouble and bread of affliction,
and make you feel all those evils in your selves, which you would not rue and
pity in other. Weep.

The demand of Saul what aileth the people that they weep?
Thus much concerning this that the people wept, now let us consider the
demand of Saul what aileth the people that they weep? Saul was there king
they were his people, this is his motion what aileth the people that they weep?
In whom we may see, what lovely care and tender affection, princes and
maiestrates and other governors should carry toward the people commended to
there charge: for whereas they are the fathers of their country, they should
have the bowelles of fathers, and they should no more abide the cry or tears
of their people, then does the tender mother the screeches of her babe, or the
natural father the gronings of his pained child. Isa. 49.23.
For they are nurcing fathers, nurcing mothers, anointed by the Lord not for
their own, but for the peoples good; they therefore should learn to make
enquire with Saul what aileth the people, that they weep? and to pray with
Solomon when they are made rulers over gods inheritance, not for honor for it
shall follow them, nor for riches for God shall bless them, but for wisdom
and knowledge that they may go in and out before the people. 1. Cro. 1.10
Thou have made me king over a great people, give me now wisdom and knowledge
that I may go out and in before this people. 1. Sam. 17.34.
They should not suffer the harmeles sheep to be sp^iled by the ravening bear or
greedy Lions, but they should rescue them from admist their iaws, and learn to
say in the fulness of love with that kingly prophet. O spare and let thy hand be
against me and my fathers house, 2. Sam. 24.17.
but as for these sheep what evil have they done, for as it was said by
Mardochai to Hester, which for a while withdrew her help from her distressed
people. Hest. 4.14.
Who knows whether thou was advanced to the kingdom for such an end: so may
it be spoken to the rulers and governoures of al estates, in whose power it is
to wipe away the tears of the people, and to still their cries, not with who
knows, but that thou was advanced to thy government for such an end. do not
say for excuse, it is a work of envy and of trouble, liked of none but the
distressed sort, but go through in the power of god whose judgment you
execute, and if thou be an inferior magistrate prefer their plaints to thy
superior, and say with Hester to Assuerns. How can I suffer and see the evil
that is come unto my people? Hest. 8.6.
how can I suffer and see the trouble of my kindred? yea although thou may
make thy profit with the peoples hurt: yet defy that profit, that is gotten with
their tears, and gain that is accompanied with their curse. And although with
David thou long to drinck the water of the well of Bethel, to increase in
wealth, and leave a kingdom to thy posterity: yet when thou shall consider
that this water is gotten by the ieopardy of men's lives, thy riches by the
spoil of the needy, oppression of thy brethren, 2. Sam. 24.16.
power it forth, and do not drink: but say with that kingly Prophet, be it far
from me that I should drinck the price of blood. And let that be the croune and
fulness of your glory, wherein dying Pericles did most of all rejoice: Plu. vita
Periclis.
I have not clothed my self with the tears of the people there is none for me
has woorne a mourning weed. This if thou refuse, how can thou here with
Saul justly say? what aileth the people that they weep? when it is thou that
for thy gain, do wrest tears from their eyes, sighs from their hearts, and
forcest them in the bitterness of their soul, to curse thee, and wish that thou
were dead. And if all this can not move, yet come and learn ye Christians of a
heathen, ye captains of a captain, ye rulers of a ruler of the people, worthy
Camillus captain of the Romans, who when he saw the city of the Veians
which he had surprised flaming with fire, wept over the city, and lifting his
hands up to heaven said, If it be thy pleasure, o god, Livy decad. 1. li. 5.
bless our affairs, but if thou purpose evil to the city of Rome, and to our
nation, o spare them, and let al their evils end in my self. Even so and with
such affection should our princes and rulers speak, O lord if it be thy
pleasure bless our affairs, but if thou purpose evil to this city and to our
nation, O spare them, and let all their evilles end in our selves.

But alas, be it spoken with their patience, and in all reverence unto so
great estates, it is not thus with the rulers of our age, they do not say
What aileth the people that they weep? neither do they seek to yield
comfort to their heavy hearts, but like hard hearted nurces, they suffer them to
cry till they be weary. And when they cry hush hush, and would have them
still, yet then with their stripes do they occasion new tears. And although
they be not so evil as was Caligula, to wish one head to the people, Suet.
vita Caligulae sect. 30. Idem vit Nero. sect 38.
that at one stroke he might cut it of: nor so vain as was Nero to seek
their sportes in the firing of Rome, their pleasures in the spoil of the
country, yet they can not say with Samuel a ruler of Israel. Whose ox have
I taken? 1 Samuel 12.3
Or whose ass have I taken or whom have I done wrong to? or whom have I
hurt? or of whose hands have I received bribe? And I will restore it unto him
again: lest happily the people show their wrongs and their hurtes, call for
there oxen and there asses, their sundry gifts, and there be no power in the
maiestrate to restore. When the people of Israel had made unto themselves a
golden calfe, and turned the glory of god into the Image of a beast that eats
hay, the Lord said unto Moses, Exodus 32.10.
let me alone, this is a stifnecked people I will consume them at once, and I
will make of thee a mighty nation: but Moses said pardon their sin, Verse. 32.
or if thou will not, blot me out of the book which thou have written. Now if
for the sin of the people, god should threaten to root out the memory of a
nation from under heaven, would not many rulers be glad of this? so that of
there bowels god would raise a mighty nation, would they refuse gods offer, as
Moses does here? pray for the people and wish to be raised out of the book of
life, if god should not pardon the trespass of the people? and yet the rulers
should be as Moses, in preferring the good of the people before the good of
their seed, their lives and safety should be vile in their eyes, in regard of
the good and safety of the whole.

For doubtless if the people weep, and there be noe Saul to pity, but the
rulers speak unto them as did Pharaoh to the Jews, at what time they moved
and complained their greefes: Ye are to idle, go and work, Exodus 5.17
there shall be no straw give^ you, yet you shall deliver the whole tale of
brick. Hest. 4.14.
As Mardochay said to Esther, God may otherwise se^d comfort and deliveraunce
unto his people, Exodus 12.
like as here he did unto these Jews, and this over rough and cruel dealing,
may be sometime in cause of the peoples revolt. for not to speak of the
presede^ts of others, either lately in our neighbor countries shown, or
storied in the books of ancient record: if Rehoboa^ had mildly answered the
people after the counsel of the ancient, they had continued his servantes
forever: but when he followed the headines of the young, 1. Reg. 12.14.
and threatened to make the grievos yoke of his father, more greevos, to whip
the^ with scourges whom his father chastised with rods, and al Israel saw
they were not regarded; in a fury they brake away, and said: What portion have
we in David? verse. 16.
we have no inheritance in the so^ of Ishai, to your tents O Israel. Now see
to thine house O David. So they revolted from Rehoboam, and made Jeroboam their
king. Now whether this, even by the contrary to show, the happiness of this
our English nation, which has a Saul that harkeneth to their cries, which
preventes often the occasion of their tears, and is most desirous at the
first, notice to remove the cause of all their sorrow. Wherefore long may
England have part in her, and she in them, as may be to the increase, of her
glory, and farther welfare of this her realm.

But yet, if her under rulers and governors, Some known causes why England
weepeth. Nehe. 2.2.
to whom these things should be better known, do ask with Saul what aileth
the people that they weep? or with Artaxerxes of Nehemiah, why is thy
countenance sad? and why art thou of an heavy cheer, seeing thou art not sick?
sure this is nothing but sorrow of heart. We may answer with Nehemiah in that
place, o ye rulers live for ever, why should not our countenance be sad? and
our hearts heavy? since we may not safelye speak the abuses, that we know,
or if we do yet we shall not see them remedied. For if we may speak of
things known, and which are in every eye, let Saul look on the soldier
maimed in his princes and countries quarrel, whose hurtes will not suffer to
labor, and need with much shame enforces to beg. And why has not England
cause for to weep? to see her sons as beggars disgraced with shame, whose
maimes deserves to be graced with honor. From Lanow speaks of the offices and
governments of France, and ye as fast as they do sell by retaile, which use
them to their gain, I would we might also say to the peoples good, which
speak to the law, be silent, and it dares not speak; speak after this
fashion, and it speaks against her own meaning, eve^ what they will. And why
has not England cause for to weep? To see them to give her occasion to
mourn, which should procure her matter unnatural dealing of some overgredy,
which engrosse commodities into their hands, that so they might raise the
price, or keep the^ at a stay: or on the not multiplying duly, but biting
usurer, which gnaweth and teareth out his gain, out of the lands and
liuely-hoodes not only of the commonalty, but gentry, yea nobility of this
land: or in a word on the variable and most kind deceites, which with great
skill and little conscience are practiced in every trade, in every mystery.
Great cause has England for to weep, and to speak unto Saul, the rulers and
governors of her land, which ask, what aileth the people that they weep? Even
for the soldier that is despised, and the poor and needy that is not regarded
for the abuses of the lawier, disorders of the church, corruption of the
rulers, vncenscionable deceites which are of al sorts used, studied, and still
to be continued, it by Saul and his rulers they be not remedied.

Thus much for the demand of Saul, The anger of Saul for the injuries offered
unto the people.
what aileth the people that they weep? Now let us consider his affection.
Upon the report of the men of Iabesh, he wept not as the people, but as one of
a greater spirit, he was exceeding angry: and when they had showed him the
words of the men of Iabesh, Saul was exceeding angry. When these things were
told the people they wept, for the sword was not committed to their hands, and
being but private not public persons, they ought not for to seek revenge:
but from Saul anointed to be their sovereign, ca^e flames of fire not floudes
of tears, and whot burning and revenging anger, not fearful heavines and
coldness of heart; Tears and prayers for private persons, but wrath and revenge
for the rulers of the people, and the sword to strike, for him that has the
scepter and does wear the crown. They weept but Saul was exceeding angry.
Lactarius de ira dei c. 21.
To be angry is natural unto flesh and blood, for with it we are borne and
with it we are bred, and from it if we would we cannot be severed; for the
most dull and heavy spirited, the most meek and patient is sometimes sharpened,
and for injuries received hastened for to seek revenge. 1. Sa. 25.22
When Nabal answered churlishly the servantes of David, that came for relief,
David's wrath was kindled, and he swear that he would not leave in Naballes
house by the dawning of the day, one to make water against a wall. Genesis 27.4.
When Isaak had given the blessing to to Jacob, Esau was fired, and he
threatens the sword unto his brothers harm. Hest. 3.4.
When Haman had not his reverence from Mardoche, he fretteth, and practices
the death not only of Mardoche, Genesis 4.5.
but of all the Jews* nay if god does better like of the sacrifice of Abel then
he does of Cains, the people rather phausy the ministry of laboring preachers
then unskilled loiterours, Nu. 11.29.
although Moises like it, yet there are Cains which are angry and do seek
revenge. Insomuch that if we should speak to men of this age, as God did
to Caine, Genesis 4.6.
why art thou angry with thy brother, you should see that either it is for no
cause, or if for a cause for no great, or if for a great the^ not for a good.
And if the ministers should yet go further and say as the lord did unto Jonah,
John. 4.9.
do thou well to be angry for thy goord? They in the fury of their rage and
unbridled affection, will stamp and say, we do well to be angry eve^ unto the
death. It is true indeed that thou may be angry when thou have cause,
Lactu^^. de ira de c. 17
yet must thou not phansy a cause where noe cause is, nor when thou have cause
be moved above mean and measure. But as Saint Paul speaks concerning sorrow
for their friends that are departed you must not so weep as they that have no
hope: 1. These. 4.
eve^so you must not so be a^gry as they that have no hope. But as the same
Apostle to the Ephesians speaks, Ephesians. 4.26.
be angry but sin not. Thus it behooveth us which are but private persons, when
we are moved to choler and desire of revenge, to look that the cause be
weighty and not a trifle, of some importance and not a goord, that it be true
and not phansied, just and not supposed, and then that we keep our selves
within mean and measure.

But here is more in this ensample, in that Saul is a king, no private person:
and is angry not for himself or for his own wro^ges, but for the injury done
to Iabesh, and contumely intended against his whole nation: for as this was
spoken to the praise of David, Ps. 70.10.
that the zeal of the lords house had even eaten him: 2. Sam. 10.6.
so was this also unto his glory, that his zeal was kindled and anger
inflamed, for the outrage of Ammondone to his legated, and their armies,
gathred for his peoples hurt. Wherefore although it be said, Ephesians. 4.20. Lacian.
epit. livi. inst. cap. 3.
let not the son go down upon your wrath: yet this is spoken, of unjust and
private injuries, not just and public: of others, not of kings and princes,
which have the charge and guida^ce of public weals. Ester 9.12 13.
For their wrath must not go out, nor anger be abated, til they have wrought
the deliveraunce of their people, and have taken vengeance, on the enemies of
their god. Josh. 10.12
So that as Joshua prayed, son stay thou still in Gibeon, and thou moon in the
valley of Aialon, until the people* have avenged themselves upon their
enemies: so ought we to pray, that his son of anger, would stand on our
mountains, and this moon of revenge upon our valleies: til they have avenged
themselves upon their enemies, and brought deliverance unto their people. For
the son of anger must not only shine, but stay shining upon our mountains: and
they must not only be angry, but as Saul in this place, be exceeding angry.
When Elisha was sick, 2. Reg. 13.
Ioash the king of Israel ca^e down unto him, and when he saw him sick unto
death, then he wept, criyng, O my father, my father, the horsemen of Israel and
the chariots thereof. And Elisha bad him take a bow and arrows: and he took
and shot, and after he said again to the king, take the arrows and finite the
ground: and he smote the ground thrice, and so ceased. Verse. 18.19.
Then the man of god was angry with him, and said why do thou cease? Thou
should have smitten five or six times, so should thou have smitten Ara^,
til thou had consumed him: even so must we pray yt our Ioash would take the
arrows of deliveraunce into her hands, and would smite the ground, that is,
her enemies, not once or twice, but six times: eve^ til she has smitten and
consumed them. For as a little water sprinkled on the coals, does not quench
the heat, or put out the fire, but makes it to burn with greater flame: so
small succors sent for relief, and resistance sprinkled on their flaming
minds, does not quench their rage and revenging fury, but makes them to burn
with greater flames, and with greater force to seek revenge. Wherefore it is
to be wished that our rulers be not only angry, but exceeding angry, as here is
Saul. That they strike the ground not only three times but six times: that they
not only sprinkle, but power down the water of resistance upon their fury,
and that they never put of this worthy affection, till they have avenged the
people of their wrongs, and brought an happy peace, to the good of prince and
people, and the farther glory of this their country.

Saul heweth the oxen and sends the pieces thorough Israel
Thus much for the affection of Saul now follows his summons, where first we
are to consider what he did, secondly what he spoke: concerning the deed he
took a yoke of oxen, for they were his own, he hewed them in pieces, for he
was angry, and he sent them through all the coasts of Israel, least any
should say they did not know, with this proclamation, whosoever comes not
forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall his oxen be served. For he
thought, that if the case of their brethren which were besieged, nor their own
estate which stood next to danger; yet the command of himself which was
their sovereign, and the spoil of their cattaile sampled in his own: should
drive them from their houses, and make the^ with speed to come and follow him.
And because things spoken do not so much affect as things that are seen,
things reported as which move the eyes, not only this is barely denounced, but
the oxen are hewn, the pieces are sent, they see that done to others, which
they hear, if they come not is threatened, shall be done to theirs. To the like
effect when the Lord purposed to bring Judah and the realms adjoining, unto
the obedience of Nabuchadnazar king of Babel, Ier. 27.1.
he caused Jeremy to make bands and yoakes, to wear them upon his neck, and to
send them to the princes near adjoining. And when Hannaniah the Prophet broke
the wooden yoke, which Jeremy wore about his neck, and prophesied
deliveraunce unto the people: Ier. 28.1^.
the lord in steed of a wooden gave him an iron yoke, which could not be
broken, thereby to show, that their captivity was most sure. When the lord by
Ezechiel did foretell the destruction of the people, he caused Ezechiel to shave
his hair, Ezech. 5.2
and to devide it into three parts, to burn one third in the midst of the
city, the other to cut and hackle in pieces, and the third to scatter in the
wind. Thereby showing that the one part should be wasted with hot and fiery
disseases, that other by ye sword of the enemy, and that the third should be
led into captivity. Eve^ so the renting of Samuels garment did show the re^ting
away of the kingdom, 1. Sa. 15.28
from the house of Saul. And Zidkaiah with hi^ iro^ horns, 1. Reg. 22.11.
would have showed that Ahab should have so pushed the Syrians, til he had
subdued and conquered the^. Thus in the scriptures not only the message is
barely delivered: but the better to imprint and settle it in the hearers
hearts, under visible signs and shadows, is sometime represented unto their
eyes, that which the ear does hear, and they would have to be believed of the
heart.

The prince ought to command the people to follow, and to punish the^ which do
refuse.
Thus much for the sign in the summons: now let us hearken to the words.
Whosoever follows not after Saul and after Samuel, so shall his oxen be
served. He does not say, whosoever goes not before Saul, but whosoever
follows not after. An happy people if they knew their happiness: for there are
many, as sheep scattered without a shepherd, wc have none to follow for their
people and their countries good. They need not say, as the elders of Gilead did
unto Iepthah, Iud. 11.6.
Come and be our captain that we may fight. Or awake Christ which sleeps
when the ship is endaungered with help master or else we perish. Mat. 8.25.
But although Alcibiades ruler of Athens be but as a penthouse, Plu. vit. The:
whom no man cares for in fair wether, but al run under in time of reine:
although the wicked men say of Saul, 1. Sam. 10.27.
how shall he save us, despise him, and bring him no presents: Yet in time of
need and country danger, Alcibiades offers his utmost help, and Saul holds
not his tongue, 2. Sam. 18.5.
but he commands the people, come and follow me. When David offered to go
down in battle, and to be a fellow partner with his people in their dangers,
although it was his quarrel and not theirs, and his life was shot at and not
the peoples: yet the people said, Thou shall not go forth with us to
battle, thou art better worth then ten thousand of us, they will not pass
though half of us were slain: how much more then should they be ready to
come, when the woorthies of Israel venture for their safety, and the heads of
the people put their lives in danger, for their people and their countries
good. They should be ready, yea, and as the men of Ephraim said unto Gedeo^ and
chode him sharply, which without their help, Iud. 8.1.
had discomfited Midian; saying, why have thou served us thus, that thou
calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight against Midian? even so should the
people come, and chide sharply with their governors and say, why have you
served us thus? why did you not call us, when you went to fight against our
enemies? But it is far otherwise with the people of this land: they are so far
from chiding with their governors, because they are not called, when they go
to war: that they fret when they are called, when they go to war: that they
fret when they are called, and regard not them that are in peril abroad, so
they may sleep in safety at home. Wherefore being men of shalow heads, which
know not to rule nor well to be ruled, the ruler must call with his voice, and
to his calling add threats, and to his threats yet some farther pain, or
else he shall have neither men, nor money nor apt furniture for a needful
war. Wherefore as when Abimilech did beseege the tower of Sichem, he went
up to the mount Zalmon, Iud. 4.48.
took an axe, cut down bows, bare them on his shoulders, and said unto
the people, what ye have seen me do, make have and do the like. Even so
must the rulers and captains, that are content to take their axes, cut down
boughs, and bear them on their shoulders, say with authority unto the people,
in time of need and country service, what ye see us do, make have and do
the like. For as in a clock or watch, all the wheels should go, when the
Master wheel does move, and if any stay, the same puts all out of frame,
and must be mended: even so in public states and civil governementes, If
the prince do move as the chief commander and master wheel, the people
should follow, and if any stay and trouble the whole, the same is to be
mended, Mat. 22.21
and forced to his due and timely order. For as the people ought to learn to
give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto GOD that which is Gods. So
since the prince represents here the person of God, Psalm. 82.6. Dan. 18. Romans
13.6
and is his vicegerent upon earth, he ought to teeach the people if they will
not learn, that he bears not as the Apostle speaks the sword in vain.
Romans 13.4
But that, as he is the minister of God for the good of them that do well, so
he is also the minister of GOD for the vengeance of such as do evil.
Wherefore if any soul will not be subject to the higher power, and will not
pay tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, and that for conscience sake as the Apostle speaks, Romans 13.5
then are they to be made to do it for fear, for he bears not the sword
in vain. Yea the princes ought to speak to such, which with their
frowardness trouble and encomber all, Josh 7.29.
as Joshua did to Achan: In as much as thou have troubled us, the lord shall
trouble thee this day. For as when the people refused Samuel to be there
governor, the Lord said, they have not refused thee, but me to reign over
the^: 1. Sam. 87.
eve^ so when they refuse the powers whom god has set over, Romans 13.1.
and are not obedient unto their voice, in matters wherein they may command,
and which do concern the public good; they have not refused the voice of man
only, but of God, and therefore ought at the hands of man, which they shall, as
the Apostle speaks, Romans 13.2.
at the hands of god; receive judgment unto themselves. Wherefore as the Lord
willed to discharge him the army, Deu. 20.8.
that was afraid, and faint hearted, least he make his brothers heart to faint,
as does his own: so stands it with the wisdom and policy of the ruler, to
take away the froward and rebellious, from amidst the people, to remove such
as withdraw their help, and will not be ready when they are commanded: least
as ill suffered samples they mar other, and make them like unto themselves.
When Barak gave battle unto Iabin king of Canaan, Iud. 5.21.
after the victory he sang, Curse ye Meroz, says the angel of the lord, (a
place near Tabor where the battle was fought) and curse the inhabitants
thereof: (and why?) because they came not to help the Lord, to help the lord
against the mighty. And if they are cursed which came not to help being yet
uncalled, much more are they to be punished, which being called yet refuse to
come. When Israel went to punish the men of Gibeah, for their barbarous
leudnes practiced against the Levites wife, after they had by arms taken
vengeance on so foul a fact; they made inquiry, Iud. 21.5.
whether there were any of Israel, that came not up to help, and behold the
me^ of Iabesh Gilead came not to the host: therefore they sent thither 12000.
verse. 10.
men, and gave the^ in command, which they performed, to smite Iabesh Gilead
with the edge of the sword. And if an whole city yea women and children which
could not come, were yet destroyed, because the me^ came not, much more ought
some few be punished, and which are men: and if thus they were dealte with,
because they came not to fight against their brethren, much more if they come
not against a foreign enemy. 2. Sa. 19.26
When David fled from the face of Absalo^, Mephibosheth stayed behind (true he
could not come, for he was lame, and his servant had deceaved him) but had he
bin able to follow, and yet would not, although he was the so^ of Ionatha^
which honored David before a kingdom, verse. 30. Number. 32.
yet then had the sentence of David been good and right do thou and Ziba divide
the lands. When Reuben and Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh desired the land
beyond Iorda^ to inherit, verse. 17.
indeed they went armed before their brethren and returned not, til the land of
Canaan was subdued, and the other tribes had there to inherit: but if they
would have had their brethren gone to war, Verse. 29.
and they to rest in quiet: they should Josh. 22.4
not have had that land given them to possess, but should have Number. 32. v. 23
and 23.
been sinners against the lord, and against Israel, and the sin wherein they
had sinned, should have found them out. Wherefore since to disobey the prince,
when he commands for gods glory and the countries good, is not to disobey the
voice of man only but of god, and to refuse not only Samuel but God to
reign over them: since they should be made to obey for fear, which will not
for conscience: because the prince hereth not the sword in vain: since
Mephibosheth might justly have lost his land, Gad and Reuben their in
heritaunce, if they had not warred for their brethren when they were called
since Meroz was cursed, and that by the angel of the lord, because they did not
come being yet uncalled and this Iabesh Gilead was wholly dispeopled, because
being called they did not come. The prince ought to say unto the people, as
Abimelech did unto his, What you see us do make have and do the like; and if
either in covert or openly they refuse, to speak as Joshua did unto Achan, In
as much as you have troubled us, the LORD shall trouble you this day. And thus
much for the summons of Saul. Now let us consider the usage of the people.

And they came out as one man: The readiness of the people.
first they came, then they came as Iud. 20.1. 1. Sa. 11.3.
one man, and lastly they came, with speed^: or the men of Iabesh asked but
seven days (...), and before the seven days were expired, they came to their
succor three hundred and thirty thousand men. They came, they hired not either,
1. Sa. 11.8.
but they came in person, nether sent they their furniture and their money, but
they came with their furniture and their money. If Saul blow the trumpet, 1. Sa.
13.3 Verse 17.
with hear o ye Hebrews: the people gather together after Saul. Thus did
they. But now my brethren when your rulers do call, and country require, do
you come? If you do, this your coming does witness to the comfort of your
soule^ and glory of your selves, that you are Christians, which labor with
your neighbors harms? that you are wise, which see your danger to go linked
with chefes, that you fear God, reverence your prince, that you carry in you
the courage of the ancient English* whose glory was to rule not to be ruled,
whose eyes could not abide to see their children brended, nor hearts suffer
their country, whom they found most free, to be move thrall unto a foreign
enemy. Yet there are (suffer I pray you if I speak more freely, and consider
whether I speak the truth, and for that end that things might be remedied)
which neither have wits to conceive their countries danger, nor hearts to
regard their brethrens need, gods fear, or their princes commound. But which
either of ignorance because they know not, or of vile miserablenes* because
they are loath to spare, or of settled malice, because they wish for a day, and
wait for a change, with god grant that they may never see; do not at all come,
or if they do, they come not with speed but with leaden feet, not wholly but
by halues, for fear of their oxen, rather the^ for the regard of their prince
or good of their country. The which, as they are of two sorts, in quality
diverse and different in them selves, so they are to be distinguished in our
speech. Wherefore concerning the malicious and Hispanionated English, Mat. 3.7.
who like a vsperous brood seek their welfare in their countries thrall, and
their vprising in the downfall of other: for whose cause this great Naash is now
entered France, and assayed to put foot into this our country, we are to
pray that god would change their hearts, and the maiestrate is to look that
they may do no hurt. But for you whose hearts are English, and desires are for
your countries good if your desires had that force in them, which might move
you to perform your duties, or could accomplish the things that they do
desire, neither should you in much desiring, do little or nothing of yt you do
desire: nether should his forces without impeachment, thus brave it in the
realm of France, or settle themselves in Britain, unto our countries hurt.
For what time? or what better occasion do you seek? or when will you do those
things that you ought, if you will not do them now? for has he not attempted
the invasion of our land? and does he not intend the conquest of ye same? has
not your fires, which you have kindled, in the coasts of the Indies,
Portugalle and Spain, so inflamed, fired, and scorched his heart; that he will
not be cooled but by the water of these brytish seas, nor esed of his heat,
till he has spit it on your country, and fired your land? Remember that when
the Belgic Lion entitled Queen Mary your sovereignes sister, Air singer
the only lawful daughter of Henry the eight, and the voice was in Dalvas
government, that in the right of his wife, he might best begin the conquest of
Netherland, here in this realm: that then you wished, that they of Netherland
were become your friends. And behold they have yielded of their cites, and
would feine be subject to your sovereignes lore. After when the French was
doubtful, and the Guise practiced so many massacres in France, and continued
a professed enemy to this state: it was in your wishes, that the Guise wear
dead, that the French were become a fast friend unto your sovereigne, and if
GOD so would, that the Navarre might succeed him in the croune. And behold
this God has given him to your good. When the Navarre was proclaimed, then
remembering the great forces of the king of Spain, you wished, that he might
not be a neutrall betwixt Spain and us, but that he might be an enemy to the
Spanish popedom. Behold God has made him an enemy, inputting into the heart
of the Spaniard, to invade his kingdom, and a friend to you, nay suppliant, to
ask and require your help. Stand and view the works of GOD and wonder of
posterity, since God fights for you, refuse not you to fight for your selves.
If you speak of peace, the name is most sweet, and the treasure most
precious. For peace breeds plenty where war brings want. But it is not,
as the state now stands, in your choice for to have peace with Spain. For
there is no man of reason, that can yet look for peace, except such a peace,
which is like money that is taken at interest, which for a while makes the
borrower seem rich, and anon eats him out of house and home. But since this
is a necessity, that god has imposed, and the welfare of your posterity does
require, that you must have war, that so you may have peace; that you must
lay a sure and deep foundation, although to your cost, that so you and youres
may the better build upon. Whether is it better for you to war in France,
and with mutual forces to weaken and pluck down a common enemy: or to stay
till he has had his forth in the kingdom of France, and dukedom of
Britain; till he come not with his own forces only as before, but with the
flower of France and of other nations; nor from far places of Spain and
Portugalle, but from the neighbor havens and ports of France; and put in,
not into one, but into sundry places of your native country? Now whether of
these is better, I should say worse, I need not speak, and God grant that
you may never try. But why does the love of you, draw me to reach after
matters, that are to high for me? Since it is the glory of the ruler to
conceal his counsels, and these things that are known, are sufficient to
move all well meaning English: since it is for our Saul and rulers for to
govern, and for us their people to obey; since they say unto us as Iehu did to
the messenger of Iehoram, 1. Reg. 9.19
which asked, Is it peace? what have thou to do with peace, turn thee behind
me? let us turn behind and follow them: and let the rich come with their
riches, and offer frankly, that they may enjoy the rest in quiet: let the young
and abled, the guard of our country, come with their bodies, and hasten to their
glory; that their friends and kinsfolk may live in safety: let the leaders
and captains come with their troops, and redeem their honors, which some
have impeached: let all sorts come, and al sorts help, and all sorts pray
and wish well to the captains of Israel, and the armies of our god. And grudge
not to spend on them your money, which do not grudge for you to spend their
blood. Refuse not to give to David and his men some little of your store, 1.
Sam. 25. ve. 11. and 38 Paul. Iov. Hist. lib. 3.
least a Naballes misery find a Naballes end. Paulus Iovius shows, that
when the Florentins would have made Pisa tributary to their city, the women and
matrons did so love their liberty, that when money wanted, they gave their
chains and Iewelles, to maintain the wars, and so they procured both peace
and liberty. After Pisa was threatened by the Florentins again, and the
maiestrates moved a levy for the wars, the people thought al to much that
then was given, so that for want of money, there were not sufficient levied for
their defense, when their danger through their sparing grew, and they were
past recovery: in the end, they offered pounds in steed of pence, but al to
late, they lost their money, country, and themselves. Look to the ensample
and lay it to your selves: It was said, that although good Iehosaphat did
most seriously endevoure, 2. Cro. 19, verse. 4.
yet in his reign the high places we are not taken away: what was the reason?
2. Cro. 20.33.
yet the people had not prepared their minds toward the god of their
forefathers. Even so although our Iehoshaphat do labor and seek her peoples
good, yet she must needs be frustrate of her desire, except the people set
to their helping hands, except the people set to their helping hearts.
Wherefore set to both your hands and hearts, and let no man say unto you as
Abiathar did unto the elders of Judah, 2. Sa. 19.12.
why are you so slow to bring back the king? to bring in your levies? since as
of David the house of Israel said, it is he that has saved us from al our
enemies: verse. 10.
so may we say, which you know, that by your levies they are in part
maintained, which do save you from your enemies.

And thus much for this yt the people came: now let us consider what moved Saul
to summon the people, and what made the people upon Saules summons, with that
speed and readiness for to come. Both which are noted in the text: for the
spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, The spirit and fear of the lord moves
king and people to le^d succor
and then he was exceeding angry: and again the fear of the Lord came upon
the people, and then they came forth even as one man. It was not of himself,
it was the spirit of the Lord that made him angry, and zealous for his peoples
good. It was not of themselves, is was the fear of the LORD, that made the
people, with so great an army, upon so small a warning, with that speed and
value for to come. For let there be never so great occasions offered to do
good, and the need be never so urgent, and the opportunity such, that it must
be either now or never: yet if the spirit of the Lord come not upon Saul and
upon our rulers, they will sit still and sleep, they will not be angry,
neither will they summon the people for to follow them. Yea let Saul call, and
necessity urge, the Prince threaten and their duty command the people to come
forth and follow Saul: yet except the fear of the Lord do fall upon them,
they will step back, and seek delays, they will not come, but as bears that
are drawn unto the stake. So that, as it was the spirit of the Lord, Exodus
13.3. Neh. 1.1.
that made Bezaliel fit for the work of the material tabernacle, nay that
stirred up the heart of Cirus, for the rebuilding again of the temple
destroyed. 1. Reg. 22.
As it was a lying and evil spirit that moved Ahab to battle, 1. Sam. vl.
and carried Saul to his own destruction: 2. Sa. 17.14
so it was the good spirit of God, that brought to naught the counsel of
Achitophel, Iud. 11.29.
and stirred up Iepthah, to the repulsing of Ammon. O pray then, that this
spirit may fall upon our rulers, and this fear on our people, that the one
may lead with counsel, and the other follow with courage, for the relief of
Iabesh against Naash of Spain. Iud. 15.
For as Sampson whiles his locks were hanging, and not touched with razor, with
a iaw bone slew his thousand, and bare away the gates of the city, wherein he
was enclosed: but having lost his locks, did leese his strength, and became
then weak as an other man: even so as long as the spirit of the Lord, as the
locks of Sampson shall abide on our counsel and on our captains, so long they
shall be able to counsel and do for the best, even able to do al things,
through the power of him, which does strengthen the^: but if this spirit as the
locks of Sampson be taken away, there is no such strength in them as before.
So that if we seek, what made Caleb to Nu. 14.9.
despise the forces of the Cananites whom they came to expel, Nu. 13.34 Nu.
14.10.
who^ yet al Israel feared as the sons of Anack, invincible Giantes? even
this, he was of an other spirit: but Caleb was of an other spirit. Or what made
David being but a child, 1. Sa. 18.33
to offer the encounter to ye great Goliath? even this, he came not in the power
of flesh, or strength of man's arm, but in the power and strength of the
everliving god. verse 45. 1. Sa. 14.6.
Or what made Jonathan with one young man, to ventex on the garrison of the
uncircumcised? eve^ this; that the spirit of the lord was upon him, and he knew
that it was al one with the lord, to overcom with few as with many. Wherefore
let Achilles scoff at the counsel of his father, and say it is for dastardes
and not for him, to crave for victory of the gods; yet it is god that gives
strength, Psa. 68.35. Psa. 18.39. verss. 47.
that gives victory, without who^ we are most weak, and most certain for to
loose. For as Adam though he was made by the finger of god, Genesis 2.7.
and fashioned by the hands of the al making creator, yet had no power to show
the actions of a lively soul, til god brethed in his nostrels the breath of
life: even so although they be Achilles, men of limme and bone, although
leaders and captains, men of renoune: yet they are of no heart, no spirit,
except god breath in them the spirit of courage and of strength. They may say
with Pharaoh and the AEgyptia^s, Exodus 5.2.
who is the lord that we should hear his voice and let Israel go? Yet if the
lord shall strike them with his fear, they shall force the Israelites to depart
in have; Exodus 12.32.
and although they pursue with chariots and with horse, yet the AEgyptia^s shall
say every one unto his neighbor, Exodus 14.26.
come let us fly from the face of Israel, for it is the lord that fights for
them. Whether this, Iud. 7.2.
even that we vaunt not our selves and say, it is our right hands, that has
saved us, Hab. 1.16.
that we sacrifice not unto our nets and burn incense unto our yarne, and
say by them is our portion fat, and our meat made plenteous: that we ascribe
not the success to the wisdom of our council, value of our soldiers,
prowes of our captains; but unto him which gives a spirit to Saul and his
fear to the people, which works, Isai. 43.13. Dan. 4.32. 1. Cro. 29.11. 1
Sa. 2.30.
al overruleth all, gives victory unto whom he will. Thus if we honor him, he
shall honor us, and shall make us a glorious people in the sight of al nations,
Reve. 4.10
and he shall set crounes of glory upon our heads, which cast them down
before his feet. Yea let us know and acknowledge, that as it is he that has
given wisdom to our wise, Pro. 2.6. Isai. 40.29. Pro. 21.30 Isai. 29.14.
Ezech. 24.25.
and strength unto our valiau^t: so it is he that can take away the wisdom
from our wife, and counsel from our prudent, that can make our strong men like
children, and valiant as the water that has no power to stand. For as water
waxes whot, being heated on the fire, but being set apart, becomes key cold,
as it was before. even so although the sons of men are made whot and burn in
their valor, being warmed and fired by the spirit, yet if the fire of gods
spirit be once removed, and they be left unto their cold and watery natures,
they soon war key cold, as they were before, nether is there any heat or
courage in them. Yea as the earth is light, but not of it self, but as it is
illightened of the son: for if the son be set and departed from us, not only
the hills give long shadows, and the valleys darkness, but all is covered
with fearful night: even so the wise of the world, and the children of might,
they are like earth, which have noe light or might in themselves, but as they
are illightened of the son, and strengthened from god: for if the son depart and
take his rest, not only the valleys, which are the people, but the chiefest
hills, shall for all their might, for all their wisdom, be covered with
darkness, and with fearful night. Wherefore since gods spirit is a son to
illighten, and fire to heat us, which are but darkness and cold in our selves,
let us not quench this fire, nor put out this light: since all is in his spirit
that he has given us, and in the fear that he setleth in our hearts, let
us sacrifies to his praise, not to our selves, and still pray that he would
give his spirit to our princes, and fear to our people: that they may lead,
and we follow as one man against the enemies of the Lord. This is that which I
had to say. Now the Lord give you of his spirit, and send you of his fear,
that you may do the things, which may make for the good of your selves and of
your children, the safety of your prince, gods glory, and the welfare of this
your native country. Amen.

FINIS.

