I will sing mercy and judgment: etc *



KING DAVID'S VOW FOR REFORMATION of Himself. his Family. his Kingdom *

Delivered in twelve sermons before the Prince his Highness upon Psalm 101 *

By George Hakewill Dr. in Divinity *

London printed for Matthew Lownes 1621 *

TO THE PRINCE his Highness, my gracious Lord and Master.
WHat has heretofore been presented to your Highness ear, I here make
bold (with some little change) to present afresh to your eye: that you may
behold at one view the entire body of those discourses which were delivered
disiointly and by peece-meale; as also that you may revise that at leisure (if
ought therein shall be thought worth revising) which was sometimes of necessity
shuffled up in haste, though I must confess to mine own comfort and your
honor, never heard but with singular attention; and lastly, that I may serve
your Highness in somewhat, as well absent as present* specially now that your
frequent presence with his Majesty enforces your often absence from your
Family.

I adventure then, most noble Prince, to unfolde and lay before your view the
Vow of DAVID (as seasonable I hope to the times, as suitable to the person) for
the reformation and government of himself, his household and State; whether
made before his coming to the Crown, or newly upon it, it is not certain to
define, nor very material to know: once we are sure, it was DAVID'S Vow: which
one Motive me thinks were of weight sufficient to stirre-up all Christian
Princes (specially such as profess the defense of the Christian faith) to a
serious meditation thereon, even in that it was DAVID'S Vow; who so lived and so
died, as never Prince (I think, before him nor perhaps since him) so joined
together Valor and Virtue, Courage and Humility, Policy and Piety, Thrift and
Bounty, Solemnity and Devotion, Greatness and Goodness.

Without flattering the present times, I might safely and justly say unto you,
Et Pater Aeneas, and avun^ulus excitet Hector.

The former of which (as the world well knows) has added to his practice
singular precepts of this kind; by which he as much surpasses other Kings,
as Kings do ordinary men, or men the brute creatures. Yet I thought it not
amiss to add thereunto the practice and precepts of that King who received
such a testimony from the mouth of God as never did any; and far surpassed
that, in real acts, which Xenophon of Cyrus conceived only in imagination.

This King then if you please to propose to your self as a pattern, and his
Vow as a rule, we may by Gods help one day promise to our selves another
Charlemaine, or rather the perfections of all the Edwards and Henry's, and
Iameses your renowned progenitors united in one Charles: and, your proceeding
and ending answering your gracious beginnings and virtuous disposition (which
we all hope and pray for) we may rest assured thereof.

For the effecting of which, you cannot do better than perform in deed what
you have chosen for your word, Si vis omnia subijcere, teipsum subijce rationi;
which is truly to be a King. For, in so doing you will value Soveraignetie,
not by impunity of doing evil, but power of doing good; and in attayning it*
only be enabled for the doing of that good which before you desired.

And if this poor Work of mine, or any my endeavors, either have or shall
any way conduce to the furtherance of that public and important work, I shall
therein reap a sufficient reward both of my service and travailes; accounting
it my greatest happiness on earth to have been counted worthy to be

Your Highnesses first-sworne Chaplain, ever attending your Commands, GEORGE
HAKEWILL.

To the PRINCE his Family.
YOU, it was, mine Honorable and worthy Friends, to whom (next after our
Gracious Master) these ensuing Sermons were first and chiefly directed: You may
justly then claim a part in them: and I wish they may prove as fruitful unto
you, as they were intended. Sure I am, they will not prove unfruitful, if you
compose your selves to the Glass they hold forth, striving to present you such
to your Master, as they represent to you; that is, such as seek not to rise,
save to get the vantage-ground for the doing of more good: such, as prefer
their Masters good before their own gain; their Masters safety before their
own ease, their Masters credit before their own advancement: such, as in
preferring suits aim not at their private ends th^rough the sides of the
Public, nor use fair pretenses for the compassing of foul proiects or the
smothering of honest motions; nor, lastly, look so much to the purse and power
of Petitioners, as to their worths and necessities.

A Master you have, born (I hope) in a happy hour for the good of the
Christian world: of whom it may be truly said, Antevenit sortem meritis,
virtutibus annos,
Ingenio formam, relligione genus*


Who not only rewards and cherishes virtue, but traceth out the path thereof
before you with his own steps; best deserving that place, by his engraven
courtesy and many Princely endowments, which he houlds by lineall descent.
Why then should any seek that favou^ in the way of baseness and sycophancie,
which may more easily be won in the plain and safe way of virtue and honesty?

Provocations to vice (I know) are not wanting in the place wherein ^on live:
yet, seeing a religious Nehemiah may be found in Artaxerxes Court, ^ Daniel in
Nebuchadnezzars, a Joseph in Pharaohs, and some faithful Christians even in
Neroes house; what may we there expect, where from the Chiefest are so many
encouragements to piety? in that Family, whose Head (I dare say) rather glories
in being a member of the true Church, than the Second in the Kingdom; rather
in being baptized into the religion he professes, than in being descended
from the royal stock of so many famous Kings: and where religion is built up
(be it spoken without disparagement of other men's labors, or relation to mine
own) by as sufficient Master-workmen in their kinds* as the Land affords; not
thrusting themselves into the Place, but all of them culled out and called
thither: not posting to Preferment by indirect means; but, like sacred Lamps,
spending themselves to give you light, well testified by your singular respect
toward them.

Of my self, or this ensuing Work, I will say nothing. By the grace of God I
am that I am: and I hope it will appear in this Work, and the effects thereof
in you, that his grace in me was not altogether in vain. Whatsoever it be, it
is for your use: and whatsoever I am, I am for your service; ready to be
employed by the meanest of that Family, for which I da^ly pray as for myself

A poor member thereof, GEORGE HAKEVVIL^.

The 101. PSALMS, according to our last and most approoved Translation: which I
chiefly follow in my ensuing Exposition.
I Will sing of Mercy and Judgment: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.

2 I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way: O when will thou com unto
me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.

3 I will set no Heb. thing of Belial.
wicked thing before my eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside, it
shall not cleave to me.

4 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.

5 Whosoever p^ivily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off: him that has an
high look, and a proud heart, will I not suffer.

6 Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with
me: he that walks Or, perfect in the way.
in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

7 He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that tells lies
Heb. shall no^ be^stabl^shed.
shall not tarry in my sight.

8 I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off al
wicked doers from the City of the Lord.

Buchanani Paraphrasis.
PSALMVS CI.

Lenis irarum es, facilisque flecti,
Impiorum idem tetricus rebels
Frangere fastus.

Huc ferent omnes, opis in tuae spe^^
Semper ut castis domus institutis
Culta nitescat.

Porrigis dextram, tibi cord puro
Serviam; fraudum scelerisque pura
Serviet aula.
Nec mihi exemplum statuam sequendum,
Litibus siquis miseros iniquis
Vexet, aut causam tenuis clientis
Prodidit hosti.

Sit procul: saevi sceleris minister
Candidos nunquam mihi censeatur
Inter amicos.

Clam venenato iaculatus ictu,
Persequar, plectam, penitusque ab ima
Stirpe revellam.
Nec meae mensae dapibus fruetur
Mentis elatae tumor, arrogansque
Vultus, and cunctos veluti minores
Lumine spernens.

Hos amo, amplector, video libenter:
His mihi ^eros sociis senectus
Impleat annos.
Integer vitae mihi sit minister:

Nemo mecum intra mea commoretur
Limina mendax.

Finibus pellam: procul omne monstru^^
Civitas sancta ut Domini releget
Flagitioru^^.
The Analysis of the Psalm.


The principal Contents of the several ensuing Sermons.
THe first 1. Sermon upon the first verse. fol. 1.
treates chiefly of the pre-eminence of the book of the Psalms, of the Nature
and Conditions of a Vow, of the antiquity and excellency of music, of the
diverse kinds of Church-musick, of the abuse and good use of Songs and
singing, of Mercy and Justice, requisite in a Prince. Of the person to whom
both Songs and Vows are to be devoted, and to whose glory both Mercy and
Justice are to be administered. The second, 2. Upon the former part of the 2.
verse. fol. 38*
of the necessity of a Magistrates beginning Reformation from his own person,
of Wisdom required in him both Civil and Spiritual, of his patience in
waiting for the performance of Gods promises, of his imploring the assistance
of Gods Spirit of his Meditation of Mortality. The third, 3. Upon the later
part of the 2. verse. fol. 72.
of Idleness, of progress in good duties, of moderation, of the al^owance of
our own hearts in all our actions, of the perfection of the heart unfoulding
it self in Integrity and Sinceri^y, of the trial of a man's sufficiency for
public employment by the menaging of his household affairs, of being the
same abroad and at home. The fourth, 4. Upon the former part of the 3. verse. f.
101.
of presumptuous sins, of the sense of the word Belial, of the unlawfulness
of Images for religious use, of sundry temptations and intisements by the sense
of Seeing. The fifth, 5. Upon the later part of the 3. verse. fol. 120.
of the good use of natural affections in the soul, so they be rightly
moderated and applied; of a twofolde hatred of malice and zeal, of the hatred
of men's evil works, not of their persons, of the hatred of Apostates and
Apostasy. The sixth, 6. Upon the 4. verse. fol. 139.
of the frowardness of the heart, in rebellion and repining against God, in
harshnesse and bitterness toward men: of shunning evil company for fear of
Suspicion, Infection, Malediction. The seventh, 7. Upon the former part of the
5. verse. f. 162.
of the virtues and vices of the tongue; of slander in general, of privy
slander, of pri^y slander of a man's pretended friend or fellow servant of the
putting back and punishing thereof. The eightth, 8. Upon the later part of the
5. verse. fol. 188.
of the affinity between slander and pride, of discovering the secret
affections of the heart by outward actions and gestures; in special, the pride
of the heart by proud looks, of the proud heart it self, and wherein it
consists, of our Proph^ts not suffering it as a reasonable man, as a member of
the Church, as the Father of a family, as the Sovereign of a kingdom: of his
own freeness from it, notwithstanding his great and manifold gifts; and the
reasons thereof. The ninth, 9. Upon the 6. verse. fol. 220.
of domination and service, of fidelity in servants; in actions, when a
servant does that which tends not so much to the satisfying of his Masters
sensual appetite as his real good; when he preferres his Masters gain, his
ease, his liberty, his safety, before his own: secondly, in speeches, by
concealing his Masters secrets and imperfections, by giving him (if occasion
serve and he be called to it) wholesome and free counsel; of godliness
required in a servant as well in regard of his Master as himself: where, by
occasion of the proper signification of the word to serve, used in the Text, is
added a discourse of the disorder of States by the corruption of Judges and
Under-officers, even when there are good Kings: and lastly, it concludes with
the choice and reward of good servants. The tenth, 10. Upon the 7. verse. fol.
250.
of deceitfulness in general; of deceitfulness of servants in special; how
pernicious it is both to themselves and their Masters: of lying; in which are
handled the nature and several kinds of Lies, the greatness of the offense
how ^lightly soever we esteem of it, together with the punishment always due
unto it, and many times inflicted on it. The eleventh, 11. Upon the former part
of the 8. verse. fol. 279.
of diligence, dispatch and constancy in punishing malefactors, at his very
entrance to the Crown; yet not without advisement and discretion: of three
cases which by some are held unlawful, in which it is lawful to destroy; in
defense of a man's own person, in a just and lawful war, and by the sword of
the public Magistrate. The twelfth, 12. Upon the later part of the 8. verse.
fol. 308.
of three unlawful kinds of destroying, by some held lawful: namely
selfe-homicide, in Duel, for reason of State without due order of law, or
course of justice: of the right object and vnpartiality of his justice; and
lastly of his vowing to purge the City of the Lord (whereby is meant
Jerusalem) first, for example to the whole Realm, it being the Metropolis and
head City of the Kingdom, as also and principally by reason of the service of
God and exercise of religion, which by divine ordinance was in a special
manner tied unto it. I have the rather noted the distinction of these Sermons,
because the third and sixth are not sufficiently distanced from their next
precedents.
ALia sunt quae Prophetae tradunt, alia quae Historia, Lex quoque alia,
Proverbiorum etiam alia commonitio: Psalmorum vero liber quaecunque utilia sunt
ex omnibus contin^t. Futura praedicit, veterum gesta commemorat, ^egem
viventibus tribuit, gerendorum statuit modum; and, ut breviter dicam, communis
quidam bonae docotrinae thesaurus est, apt singulis necessaria subministrans.
Aug. in prologo in librum psalmorum.

THey be of one kind which the prophets deliver, of another which the
History, of another which the Law, and of another which the proverbs warn us
of: but, the book of the psalms contains in it whatsoever is profitable in any
of them. It foretells things to come, it records acts past, it sets a law to
things present, and prescribes an order for things to be done; in a word, it
is the common tr^asury of wholesome doctrine, properly administering necessaries
to each particular.

Psalm. 101. ver. 1. I will sing mercy and judgment: unto thee, O Lord, will I
sing.
AS the whole Scripture is by inspiration from God: so this Book of the
Psalms seems to challenge a kind of pre-eminence above the rest; inasmuch
as the Author of it was not only a Prophet and a King, but a man after Gods
own heart, a Figure of Christ; or, as Euthymius speaks, primi regis and ^or,
and lingua, and calamus, the tongue, and pen, and heart, of the King of Heaven.

The several passages of this book are more frequently and particularly quoted
by Christ and his Apostles, then of any other of the old Testament. It was,
and still is, more usually both sung and read, not only in the Jewish
Synagogues, but Christian Assemblies, as well by the People as the Minister;
and that with more outward reverence then any other part of holy Writ. It is
put for all the Books of the old Testament, as they are differenced from the law
of Moses and the Prophets, Luke 24. 44. And lastly, more Sermons, Comme^taries,
Meditations, Expositions, Enarrations, upon it have been made and published, as
well by the Jewish Rabbis, as by the Doctors of the Christian Church, then
upon any other scripture whatsoever. Nay, the very Turks themselves swear as
solemnly by the Psalms of David, as by the Alcoran of Mahomet. And in truth,
he that has either practically tried, or shall duly consider, what a rich
storehouse it is of all manner of Prayers, Precepts, Exhortations and
Comforts, how this one celestial Fountain yields all good necessarily to
be known, or done, or had; what a familiar introduction it is to beginners, a
mighty augmentation of virtue and knowledge in such as are entered before, a
strong confirmation to the most perfect; may easily conceive the reason why it
has in all Ages bin esteemed even of the best and most learned, as a rare and
precious Jewel, worthy to be laid up in that Persian Casket imbroidered with
gould and pearl, which Alexander reserved for Homers Iliads. In regard
whereof, our good King Alured translated the Psalter himself into his Saxon
tongue: and one of the Emperors caused this Book to be bound up in a little
volume by it self, for the special and daily use of himself and his
attendants, to serve them as a Manual, and always to attend them in their
running Library. And as I would not sooner commend the reading of any book to a
Courtier then this: so would I specially commend this Psalm to the careful
reading and serious meditation both of my Gracious Master the Prince, and his
religious Followers. They shall both find their duties lively expressed in it,
as in a mirror, howbeit it were indeed first composed rather to express the
former then the later, and my present choice of it be chiefly intended and
directed to that purpose.

This Psalm, by the consent of Writers, is a vow of David: whether made before
or after his coming to the Crown, it is not certain, neither skilleth it
much; but, that it is a vow, all agree. Since then, for the Person, the maker
of it was both of understanding and power to make it; since, for the Matter,
the thing therein vowed is both lawful and possible; since, for the Manner,
he made it both deliberately and freely with advice and without constraint;
and lastly, since the End of it was to serve both as a bridle to prevent and
redress sin, and as a spur to stir him up and incite him to virtue, and
keep him close to the duties therein promised: we are to hold it not only for
a warrantable but a commendable vow; nor only commendable in David, but with
like commendation imitable by us in like case. And as David made this vow, so
had he special care to pay it, 2. Sam. 8. 15. willing others to do the like,
Psalm. 50; it being indeed better (as his Son tells us, Eccles. 5. 5) not at
all to vow, than to vow and not perform. Yet in wicked vows, as that of the
Jews, Acts 23. or in rash vows, as that of Herod and Iephte, that of the
Canonists houlds true; In malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto muta
decretum: In wicked promises hold not thy word, in shameful vows change thy
purpose: whereupon St. Hierome worthily censures Iephte, that he was in vovendo
stultus, in praestando impius; naught in making such a vow as he did, but worse
in performing it.

The thing here vowed is either general, in the first verse: or particular,
touching his own Person, from the second verse to the fifth; touching his
Attendants, Counselors and Officers, from the fifth to the eight; and lastly,
touching the Church and Commonwealth, in the last.

The matter by him vowed in general is contained in the first verse; I will
sing mercy and judgment: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing. Wherein, without any
curious descant or division, we may observe first the manner of expressing
this vow: it is by way of singing, which implies cheerfulness and alacrity:
for, Is any merry, let him sing? James 5. And, How should we sing the Lords
song in a strange land? Psalm. 137. As God loves a cheerful giver: so does he
a cheerful vower. Secondly, the ditty, or rather the burden of this song:
Mercy and Judgment. Thirdly, the Person to whom he both sings and vows: it
is the Lord.

First then of his manner of expressing this vow; I will sing. As ancient and
manifold as is the use of Music, Genesis 4. 21.
so excellent was David in the use thereof; a thing which delights all Ages,
and beseems all estates; a thing as seasonable in grief as in joy; as decent
being added to things of greatest weight and solemnity, as being used when men
most sequester themselves from action. It is apt both to quicken the spirits,
and to allay that which is too eager; able both to move and moderate all
affections: yea, such is the force and efficacy thereof upon that very part of
man which is most divine, that some have been thereby induced to think, that
the soul of man is composed of harmony. Which being (to speak properly) of
high and low in sounds, a due proportionable disposition, whether it be by
instrument or by voice; our Prophet, the sweet Singer of Israel, having
singular knowledge in them both, as also in the art of Poetry, judged them all,
as very useful in civil affairs, so in sacred actions and religious exercises
even in the house of God it self not unusefull; leaving behind him to that
purpose a number of divinely indicted poems (howbeit their meter in the
original be now unknown) and adding unto his poetry melody, both vocal and
isntrumental, by ordaining some of the Levites skilled in music to praise
the Lord by singing and playing on instruments, to the number of four
thousand, 1. Chro. 23. 5. who, divided into several companies, by course
served the Lord in his Sanctuary for the raising up of men's hearts, and
sweetning their affections toward God.

The instruments they used in praising the Lord are most of them reckoned up in
the last Psalm: all which may be reduced to two sorts, whereof one is called
Negenoth, such as made a sound by touching; the other, Nechiloth, such as being
hollow made a sound by breathing. Sometime the musical instrument began, and
the singing voice followed, and then the song was called Canticum Psalmi:
sometime again the song was first sung with the voice, and the musical
instrument followed, and then it is called Psalmus Cantici: of which sort it
seems was this Psalm, both sung privately by David for his better remembrance
thereof, and by him appointed to be sung publicly in the Congregation; as for
the good of others, so thereby to oblige himself the more strictly to the
performance thereof.

Before David's time this singing of sacred hymns was in use, as may appear by
the songs of Moses and Miriam, Exodus 15. and of Deborah and Barach, Judge. 5.
After him, his Sons songs were no less then a thousand and five, 1. Kings 4.
32. And one special one of his we yet enjoy at this day, by the name of
Canticum canticorum, the Song of songs; setting forth unto us the mystical
union between Christ and his Church. Christ himself and his Disciples,
according to the custom of the Jews, sung a Psalm, Mat. 26. 30. Paul and
Silas sung in prison, Acts 16. 25. And, to show that it was a duty to continue
in the Church, Ephesians. 5. 19.
both S. Paul and S. James not only exhort us to it, Col. 3 16.
but give us rules for the practice of it. James 5. 13.
In consideration whereof, the Church of Christ does likewise at this present
day retain it as an ornament to Gods service, and an help both to our
edification and devotion: neither can they well be excused from profaneness,
who either scorn to do it themselves, or scorn others for the doing of it. I
will shut up this point with an excellent speech of S. Basils, touching this
use of singing psalms in Christian Families or Congregations. Whereas (says
he) the holy Spirit saw, that mankind is unto virtue hardly drawn, and that
righteousness is the less accounted of, by reason of the pronenesse of our
affections to that which delights; it pleased the wisdom of the same Spirit
to borrow from melody that pleasure, which, mingled with heavenly mysteries,
causes the smoothness and softness of that which touches the ^are, to
convay as it were by s^ealth the treasure of good things into man's mind. To
this purpose were those harmonious tunes of the Psalms devised for us, that
they which are either in years but tender and green, or touching perfection of
virtue as yet not grown to ripeness, might, when they think they sing, learn.
O the conceit of that heavenly Teacher! which has by his skill found out a
way, that, doing those things wherein we delight, we may also learn that
whereby we profit. And so I com from our Prophets manner of expressing his vow
( I will sing) to the burden of his song, Mercy and Judgment. I will sing
Mercy and Judgment.

The ditty or subject matter of his song he promises should be modest, and
grave, and useful; not light and vain, or unsavory and fabulous, much less
filthy and unclean, fit for nothing; but, as a sacrifice offered to the Devil,
to defile the mouth and heart of the singer, to corrupt others, and to offend
chaste ears. For, if evil words corrupt good manners, much more lewd songs;
which, the more artificial they are, the more dangerous and pestilent are
their effects; the pleasantnes of their tune with more facility and less
suspicion convaying their poison unto the soul. Use not the company of a woman
that is a singer and a dancer, neither hear her, lest thou be taken by her
craftiness, Ecclus. 9. 4. To which purpose it was not unfitly spoken by the
Roman Historian touching Sempronia a gentlewoman of Rome, Salust.
that she was taught psallere and saltare elegantius quam modestam decebat, to
sing and dance more gracefully then becam a modest woman. Besides, these
amorous and wanton songs and sonnets, as they serve the Devils turn to convay
poison into the mind: so do they abate the edge of the masculine vigor
thereof, bending and turning it by degrees from a manly martial disposition to
an effeminate softness.

Enervant animos cytharae, cantusque, lyraeque.
Witness the great Alexander; who among other monuments of Troy being presented
with Paris his Lute, replied, Achillis cytharam mallem. Witness Themistocl^s
that famous war riour; who, being desired at a banquet to touch a Lute,
answered, that he could not fiddle, but he could make of a little Town a great
City. And lastly, let Nero himself be a witness heerof; who, seeing apparent
death before his eyes, cried out, Qualis artifex per^o, in regard of his
extraordinary skill in singing.

Now, as the matter of our Prophets song was not fabulous or wanton: so was it
not diffamatory or libelling stuff, impeaching any man's reputation, such as
the drunkeards made upon him, Psalm. 69. 12; a lash which the greatest Princes
cannot avoid, and the best sometimes feel: but the known authors thereof are
by so much the more severely to be censured, as they deeply wound, and are
hardly discovered. Finally, the matter of his song was not his own triumphs and
victories, though they were many and glorious, as well against strangers abroad,
as rebels at home; he left that to others, Saul has slain his thousand, and
David his ten thousand. And thus having taken a brief view what the matter of
our Prophets song was not, though too too rife now-adaies both in Court, and
City, and Country; let us now consider what it was: Mercy and Judgment. And
first take them jointly: not Mercy without Judgment, nor Judgment without
Mercy, but Mercy and Judgment both together, like Rahel and Leah, which twain
did build the house of Israel; or like Moses and Elias at the transfiguration
of Christ, whereof the one was the meekest man upon earth, and the other the
most zealous of the Prophets.

As the badge of the Ship S. Paul ^ailed-in was Castor and Pollux, two twins;
so the badge of this Psalm is Mercy and Judgment, inseparable companions: of
whom it may be said, as our Prophet sometime spoke of Saul and Jonathan, they
were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their deaths they were not
divided. The two brightest Stars they are in the firmament of Majesty; the two
fairest Flowers, and choicest Jewels in the Imperial Crown; like the Carnation
and the Lilly, the Ruby and the Sapphire, or the Carbuncle and the Diamond,
yielding a mutual and interchangeable Iustre each to other, They resemble not
unfitly the two supporters of the Kings arms, or the two Seraphins stretching
out their golden wings over the Propitiatory; or the white and red Rose in the
same Escutchion.

We read, 1 Kings 7.
that Solomon set up two goodly pillars in the porch of the Temple, the one
called Iachin, the other Boaz; which signify Stability and Strength: such
pillars of the State are Mercy and Judgment. The Throne of the King is borne
up by them, as Salomons was with Lions of Ivory on each side. Therefore, as in
one place it is said, that the Throne is established by justice, pro. 16. 12.
so in another, that it is upheld with Mercy: pro. 20. 28.
Justice being as the bones and sinews in the body politic, and Mercy as
the veins and arteries. They are the two hands of Action, the two eyes of
Virtue, and the two wings of Honor. And as the eyes, if they be rightly set,
do both look one way: so do Mercy and Judgment; how-ever in the apprehension
of the vulgar they seem to look contrary ways. And as the Trebble and the Base
accord best in Music: so do they in managing the Common-weal^h. Wherefore
David promises to make them both ^ound tuneable in his song without jarre or
discord: I will sing Mercy and Judgment.

The answer of Apollonius to Vespasian is full of excellent instruction.
Vespasian asked him what was Nero's overthrowe: he answered; Nero could touch
and tune the Harp well, but in government sometimes he used to wind the
pinnes too high, and sometimes to let them down too low; thereby intimating,
that he applied Causticks and Corrosives where gentle Lenitives would have
served the turn, and again he applied Lenitives where Corrosives were
needful. Sometimes he administered Justice without Mercy, and sometimes Mercy
without Justice; Justice without Mercy being nothing else but cruelty, like
Esau red and rough, bitter as wormwood; and Mercy without Justice, but fond
pity and foolish partiality. As Mercy then serves to abate the edge and rigor
of Justice: so does Justice, to quicken the slownes, and sharpen the dullness of
Mercy. As Mercy without Justice is contemned: so Justice without Mercy is hated.

Astronomers conceive, that the Crystalline Sphere, which they suppose to be
the waters above the heavens (mentioned in the first of Genesis) is set next
the first Mover, for allaying the heat thereof; which, by reason of the
incomprehensible swiftnes of its motion, would otherwise set the whole world on
fire. This I take to be but a fancy of theirs: but Mercy, I am sure, is set so
near Justice, for the cooling and tempering of it. He that justifies the
wicked, and he that condemns the righteous, they are both an abomination to
the Lord, Pro. 17. 15. Now, he that pretends Mercy, but without Justice, will
be sure to justify the wicked; and again, he that pretends Justice, but
without Mercy, cannot but condemn the righteous: but the right mixture and
true temper of both, justifies the righteous, and condemns the wicked. Which
temper is by S. Paul commended to the public Magistrate, Romans 13: If thou do
well, he is the Minister of God for thy good; but, to take vengeance of thee,
if thou do evil. And by S. Peter in his first Epistle and second chapter, They
are sent of God for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that
do well. All precepts touching supreme Governors are in effect comprehended in
these two Remembrances; Memento quod es homo, and Memento quod es Deus, or vice
Dei: Remember thou art a man, remember thou art a God, or in stead of God; the
one to bridle their power, the other their will. From the former of which issue
the acts of Mercy, and from the other of Justice: nay, the very remembrance
that they are vice-gods, is sufficient to put them in mind of both, inasmuch
as Gracious and righteous is the Lord, and all his paths are Mercy and Truth,
Psalm. 25. He has not one path of Mercy, and another of Truth: but all his
paths are Mercy and Truth; like Crimsin and White Silk twisted together, or
woven one within the other. His red Cross of Justice is ever set in the white
streamer of Mercy; as the rod of A^ron and the pot of Manna were by his
commandment laid up in the same Ark.

Through the thickest and blackest cloud of his Justice always appears some
beams or sparks of Mercy: and the clearest sunshine of his Mercy is
overshadowed with showers of Justice. What infinite Mercy did he show in the
redemption of mankind, when he might justly have tumbled them down, as he did
the Apostate Angels to the bottomless pit of hel^ and yet withal, what
infinite Justice did he express in the same action, in laying the sins of
the whole world, and the punishment due to sin, upon the shoulders of his
innocent, best-beloved, and only-begotten Son! And thus did his wisdom find
out a way for the making of his Mercy and Truth one path: much like Zal^uchus,
who showed his Justice in causing one of his sons eyes to be put out for
comitting adultery, according to a law newly before made by himself; and his
Mercy, in putting out one of his own for the sparing of the other of his sons,
which the law also required to have been put out. Hence S. Peter represents God
unto us both as a Father and as a Judge, in one and the same verse, 1. 1. 17;
to show, that he is merciful as a Father, and righteous as a Judge. So ought
his Vicegerents here on earth; having therefore a scepter given them to put
them in mind of Mercy, and a sword that they forget not Justice; Scarlet and
Purple to think upon Justice, and white Miniver or Ermins to remember Mercy:
that so the people committed to their charge may sing with joyful and
thankful hearts, Mercy and Truth are met together; ^ psalm. 85.
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. And themselves at last may
find Salomons saying true; He that follows after Righteousness and Mercy,
pro. 21. 21.
shall find life, righteousness and glory: as holy Job did, who in his
prosperity did not only put on Justice as a robe and as a crown, by breaking
the jaws of the unrighteous, and plucking the prey out of his teeth; but,
expressed works of Mercy, in being eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame,
and a father to the poor, Job. 29. 14. 15. 16. 17.

Having thus handled these two Virtues jointly together, let us now take a view
of them single and apart: for, though they neither be, nor can be, really and
in action severed each from other, yet may they by conceit and imaginary
abstraction. First then of Mercy, because it is both here and elsewhere set in
the first place: and that not casually, but of purpose, and by due desert; as
Peter is commonly first named of the Apostles, like the Foreman of the Jury,
having a primacy of order before them, though not a supremacy of Jurisdiction
over them. And as Mercy is here set in the first pl^ce: so shall the Sentence
of Mercy and Absolution be first pronounced at the last Day. And it is a
laudable custom of Princes, at their first entrance to their Kingdoms, to show
Mercy, by hearing the mourning of the Prisoner, and delivering the children of
death, by loosing the bands of wickedness, by taking off the heavy burdens, by
letting the oppressed go free, and by breaking every yoke of former
extortions. Thus, our Prophet himself, as soon as the Crown was settled on his
head, made enquiry if there remained yet alive any of the house of Saul, on
whom he might show Mercy, 2. Samuel 9. O how fair a thing is this Mercy in the
time of anguish and trouble! It is like a cloud of rain that comes in the
time of drouth. But this Mercy, here spoken of in the first part of our
Prophets song, stretches further; unfolding it self in Clemency, in Courtesy,
and in Compassion: In Clemency, by pardoning malefactors; in Compassion, by
releeving the afflicted; in Courtesy, toward all. Of this later I shall
hereafter have occasion to speak, in handling those words, A froward heart
shall depart from me. For the present then it shall suffice to commend unto
your consideration and practice the two former; Compassion and Clemency.

Compassion is a virtue, says Aquinas, non qua mo^us est sensitivi
appetitussed intellectivi, a ratione directus and dirigens inferioris appetitus
motum; not as it mooves the sensitive appetite but the rational, being
directed by reason, and directing the motion of the inferior appetite. It
consists in releeving the afflicted, and righting the oppressed; by receiving
their petitions, by hearing their grievances, by granting their reasonable
suits, by dispatch of Justice, Cap. 32. 11.
by being unto them (as the Prophet Esaias speaks) a hiding place from the
wind, a refuge from the tempest, as rivers of waters in a dry place, and as
the shadow of a great rock in a wearisome land. It was well said of Augustus,
that Petitions should not be given to a Prince, as meat to an Elephant that
one is afraid of.

To these hero^call works of Mercy, may be added, as peculiar to a Prince, the
easing of the Subject from the burden of immoderate tribute; the protecting of
them from the rapine and spoil as well of homebred Pirates and Robbers, as foreign
nations; the redeeming of poor captives, especially from the slavery of the
professed enemies of JESUS CHRIST; the erecting of Hospitals for fatherless
children, wounded soldiers, decayed tradesmen, and aged or impotent people. In
which regard, James the fifth, King of Scotland, was worthily termed, The poor
man's King.

Now, as Compassion thus shows is self in releeving the afflicted, and
righting the oppressed: so does Clemency, in winking at some faults, in
pardoning others where is hope of amendment, in providing the punishment exceed
not the proportion of the offense; and, lastly, in pronouncing Sentence of
death with a kind of reluctance and unwillingnes, casting a severe eye upon
the example, but a pitiful upon the person: And heerin does Clemency include
Compassion.

It is an ungentle and inhumane thing for a Prince, delectarisono catenarum, to
delight in the rattling of of chains and fetters; as a Carter, that is never
well, longer then he is hearing the lash of his whippe. But a right noble
disposition it was in Augustus, quem dare poenas apparebat cum exigeret, who
seemed himself to suffer when he inflicted punishment on others; and in
Vespasian, qui neque caede cuiusquam laetatus, justice supplicijs illacrymavit
etiam and ingemuit, who was so far from delight in the death of any, that he
often wept and groaned even at just and necessary executions; and of Nero
himself at his first coming to the Empire, if he dissembled not: who being
importuned by Burrus to sign a warrant for the execution of certain
malefactors, his answer was, O utinam literas nescirem! I could wish I had
never learned to write or read. But above all, Nihil quicqu^ gloriosius
principe impune laeso, there is nothing more honorable for a Prince, than
sometimes to pass over injuries against his own Person. The patience of
Augustus herein was rare and singular: probrosis in se dict is arrisit, he
made himself merry with reproachful speeches touching himself; therein
manifesting as his Clemency, so also his Wisdom: in as much as convitia si
excandescas agnita videntur, spreta exolescunt: railings, where they move
choler, seem acknowledged; but contemned, they vanish. That memorable speech of
our late famous Queen to this purpose will never be forgotten; that, next the
Scriptures, she knew no Book did her so much good as the often reading of
Se^eca de Clementia: wherein she was taught like a good Surgeon not to
cut off any member, when any other remedy would serve the turn; and then to
do it not without sighs and tears.

These be the diverse tunes and strains, the several notes and steps of
Mercie's Song; then which nothing is more pleasing in the ears of Men and
Angels, nothing more acceptable unto God. For, though he profess, that he
prefers Justice before Sacrifice, Pro. 21. 3; yet of Mercy he pronounces,
that Sacrifice is no way comparable unto it: I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice, Mat. 9. 13. Nay, of Mercy S. James testifies, that it rejoices or
glories against judgment. And our Prophet, that as the Faithfulness of God,
which is a part of his Justice, reaches to the Clouds; so does his Mercy to
the Heavens, far above the Clouds, Psalm. 36. 5. Where there is no Mercy to
be hoped for, there men grow obstinate and desperate: but, where Mercy is
expected, there is Reverence and a filial Fear. There is Mercy with thee that
thou may be ^eared, Psalm. 130. 4.

And if Mercy breed Fear, much more Love, the most kindly and proper fruit
thereof, the surest guard of Princes persons and estates. Castles and
Fortresses, walled Towns, stored Arcenals and Armories, a Navy of Ships,
Troops of Horse, thousands of Foot, a mass of Treasure, Ordinance and
Artillery, cannot afford him so safe a defense in the day of trouble, as the
Love and Prayers of his Subjects, purchased by dealing mercifully with them. As
then he expects Mercy at the hands of God: so let him deal mercifully with
those whom God has put into his hands. And as the Mercy of God is over all
his works: so let the mercy of his most lively image here upon earth shine
above all his other virtues; above them, I say, but not without them: for,
though Mercy be here set in the first place, yet is it coupled with Judgment,
as milk and blood that mingled stood. Judgment, like another Jacob, lays
hold upon Mercie's heel: and though Mercy, like Pharez, be first borne, yet
instantly follows Judgment, like Zarah, with his red thread about his arm.
Nay, without Judgment, Mercy cannot subsist; in as much as by due execution of
Justice upon particular members Mercy is showed in preserving the whole body.
And as filial Fear is procured by Mercy; so is unfeigned Love by such Justice.
As Mercy then is the more beautiful, the more comely and amiable Virtue: so is
Justice at times the more necessary.

It has long been, and still is, a Question controversed between Physicians
and Philosophers, whether the Brain or the Heart be the more principal member;
in as much as the one is the fountain of life, the other of sense: so me
thinks, when I compare these two Virtues together, Mercy is like the Brain
qualifying the immoderate heat of those spirits that are bred in the heart; but
Justice, like the heart it self, the fountain of those spirits. Now, because I
am to speak of the administration heerof in handling the last verse of this
Psalm, I will pass to my third and last part proposed in my Text; the Person
to whom this Song and this Vow are addressed, and that is the Lord: Tibi O
Iehova psallam, to thee, O Jehovah, will I sing.

This Name Jehovah, anciently termed Nomen tetragrammaton, the name of four
letters, was to the Jews so venerable, that they never durst pronounce it (as
fearing to pollute it with their lips) but Adonai (which also signifies Lord)
in stead thereof. Of all the Appellations given to God in holy Scripture, it is
alone reserved as peculiar to himself, and never imparted to any Creature:
neither do we find it given to God till he had created man; thereby to teach
us, that as man was by him made a subordinate Lord of the other Creatures: so
was he the independent and absolute LORD both of him and them.

To this great Jehovah then, this most Sovereign Lord, this Lord of lords it
is, that David addresseth his Song and his Vow. He was himself a great Lord,
the grand Commander of a mighty and populous Nation: yet he acknowledges this
Lord to be by infinite degrees higher and greater than himself, and himself to
be but a worm in comparison of Him. First then, of his singing to this Lord,
then of his vowing unto him, and lastly of his vowing and singing unto him
Mercy and Justice.

We ought in our singing not so much to respect the delighting of our selves
or others with the sweet tuneablenesse of the voice, as to do worship to God by
it, and to edify our consciences. It is both ryme and reason, Non Vox, sed
Votum; non chordula Musica, sed Cor;
Non Clamans, sed Amans, cantat in aure Dei.
The Heart, not Harp; Devotion, not the Voice;
The Lover, not the Loud, GOD's ears rejoice.


Not so much the Lute-string, as the Heart-string; nor so much the shrill
Voice, as the zealous Affection, sounds in the ears of God. And heerunto
accords the Apostle; Singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts, Ephesians.
5. 19. And again; Singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord, Colos. 3.
16: not to your selves, but to the Lord; or, at leastwise, rather to the Lord,
than to your selves.

Now, as he addresseth his Song, so does he his Vow unto the same Lord,
according to his own Counsel; Vow and perform to the Lord your God, Psalm. 76.
11. The reason is, because all Invocation is due unto God; and a Vow is always
joined with invocation, either for the obtaining the good we desire, or the
avoiding the evil we fear. Besides, it is God only that knows the secret
motions of the heart. As then in that regard we pray unto him alone: so unto
him alone are we to direct our Vows, who alone is able either to punish us if
we break them, or to reward us if we keep them.

Lastly, a Vow being nothing else but a promissory oath: as we are to swear
by none but God; so are we to vow to none but God. And, as the properties of
an oath are, Truth, Judgment and Justice: so are they also of a Vow:
Judgment, for the avoiding of rash vows; Justice, for the avoiding of wicked
vows; and Truth, for the performance of such as are neither wicked nor rash,
but are made upon good advice, and tend to good ends.

Finally, our Prophet both sings and vows Mercy and Judgment to the Lord;
thereby acknowledging GOD, as his guide both in the entrance and accomplishment
of all actions, so in special of Mercy and Justice; and that he would exercise
these imperial Virtues not so much to content himself, or to gratify men, as
to please and glorify God: not so much because men expected it, or commended
it, as because God commanded it, and would take account of it. Concerning
actions of like nature done for humane respects, the Lord has said, they have
their reward, Mat. 6. 2; that is, acceptance, honor and reverence from men,
because they are done to men: but the Justice and Mercy, that have God for
their object, and are referred to his glory, and set him before them who is the
searcher of hearts; they, I say, receive their recompense from God. Many times
it falls out, that the Prince causes a wicked person to be executed: the
deed is good; but perhaps he is moved thereunto rather with desire of revenge,
or importunity of suitors, then with the detestation and vileness of the fact:
this work, I say, in it self is just; for, the malefactor by his sin
deserved the punishment: yet he that does it is notwithstanding unjust. So
much does virtue desire to be cherished for her own sake, or rather so much is
God, the fountain of all virtue, jealous of his honor, and jealous also of our
love, that he will have every thing, to the end it may be good indeed,
referred unto himself, and to the ends that he has appointed: as indeed all
is taken and comes from him alone, and therefore should be referred to him and
his glory only; as the rivers, derived from the sea by secret veins and
channels, disburden themselves with full mouth into the same again, Eccles. 1. 7.

To be short: the Prince above all should refer and approve his actions to
God, seeing that God alone, and not man, has set him up; and seeing also, that
he is not to be judged by men, but by God. And now to conclude this point:
great and excellent things, as we see, are comprehended under these two
terms, Mercy and Judgment: which are indeed the very sum and abridgement of
all that Kings should either learn or do. And, seeing they are of so deep
reach, and extend so far as they do, we may thereby plainly perceive, that
it is no light charge To be a King; neither is it an art easily learned, To
rule well.

Let not Mercy and Truth forsake thee: bind them on thy neck, and write them
upon the table of thine heart: so shall thou find favor and good understanding
in the sight of God and man, Pro. 3. 3.

Verse 2. I will behave my self wisely in ^ perfect way. O when will thou com
unto me! I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.
AS, before, he promised cheerfulnes in singing; so here he promises wisdom
in behavior: so that he would be both merry and wise. In the former verse
we have the general of his Vow: here he coms to the particulars; and begins
first with himself, in this verse and the two next ensuing, what he would be
in respect of his own life and conversation. Neither is it to be omitted
without observation, that, before he come to deal more specially about his
public Charge, he first promises the orderly government of his own Person.
He knew full well, that it was the duty of such as have the guida^ce of others,
to guide themselves aright, if they meant by their counsel and authority to
keep them in good order. For, as Poesy is a speaking kind of painting, and
painting a dumb poesy: so is the law a dumb Magistrate, and a good Magistrate
a speaking law. And indeed this is the common course: Men desire to find
occasions, whereupon to refuse or withstand the means ordained for their good:
if they can espy any faults in such as teach or govern them, they presently
imagine, that such should neither reproove nor punish them. And, to say truth,
with what countenance can we rebuke or chastise that in others, which our
selves make no conscience to commit* Quintilian defines an Orator to be vir
bonus dicendi peritus, an honest man skillful in speaking: and we may define a
good Prince vir bonus regendi peritus, an honest man skillful in governing:
which as it procures a revere^ce and credit to his place and person; so does it
strength and authority to his laws and admonitions.

Tum pietate gravem, ^ut meritis, si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus adstant.
Ill eregit dict is animos, et pector a mulcet.
To which effect, Job speaks of himself not vauntingly or vainly, but to
comfort himself in his bitter affliction, and to clear himself from false
accusation; The young men saw me, and ^idde themselves, the aged arose and
stood up unto me: Men gave ear and waited, and held their tongue at my
counsel. After my words they repl^ed not, and my talk dropped upon them: and
they waited upon me as for the rain and they opened their mouth as for the
later rain. Which power he got in men's minds, not so much by his greatness as
by his goodness. The Evangelists tell us of our Savior, that he spoke as one
having authority; and the rather, no doubt, because he did as he spoke:
whereas the Pharisees lost their authority, because they tought and did not. He
then that expects and desires, the people should do as he advises or
commands, must command in the style of Abimelech, Judge. 9: What you have seen
me do, make haste, and do like me; and advise in the style of Iosuah, I and
my house will serve the Lord, Iosuah 24. 15.

When Alexander would have punished one for his Piracy, he told him to his
face, that himself was the Arch-pirate of the world. Princes as they act their
parts upon an high^stage, so is the least error in their action presently
discerned; it being in every man's eye. A small fault in them is as a mole or
wart in the midst of the face, which cannot be hid. And as men most greedily
gaze upon the Sun when it is eclipsed: so do the multitude more willingly
discourse of the imperfections and vices of their Leaders, then of their
virtues; thereby hoping to justify themselves, and to escape unpunished. The
best way then to have a Law well executed, is for the Author of it first to
keep it himself in his own Person.

-- Tunc observantior aequi
Fit populus, nec far negat, cum viderit ipsum
Authorem parere sibi: --
-- nec sic inflectere sensus
Hum^nos edicta valent, ut vita regentis.
There the people readily obey, and follow after; willingly yielding their
necks to the yoke, where they see the Magistrate go before in the observation
of his own Edicts. Neither do any persuasions or threats prevail with them so
much as that; it being the nature of man rather to be led the^ drawn: to be
led by reason or example, then to be drawn by penalty and force of law. And
because it is to the Vulgar difficult to conceive the reason even of reasonable
Commands, the greatest part have ever bin led rather by example then by reason;
the Lives of their Superiors being by them esteemed the fairest and safest
Copy they can rule their actions by. Vita principis (says Pliny the younger)
censura est, eaque perpetua; ad hanc dirigimur, ad hanc convertimur: He might
have said, in stead of Censura, Cynosura; in as much as the life of the Prince
is the load-star of the Commonwealth, upon which all men fix their eyes, and
shape their course by it. I will conclude this point with the grave speech of
the heathen Orator, not unworthy a Christian pen: Qu^ perniciosius de
republica merentur vitosi principes, quod non solum vitia concipiant ipsi, sed
ea infundant in civitatem; neque solum obsunt, quod ipsi corrumpuntur, sed
etiam quod corrumpunt, pl^sque exemplo quam peccato nocent: By so much the
worse do vicious Princes deserve of the State they govern, in as much as they
are not only corrupted themselves, but convay the poison thereof into the
bowels of the State; doing more harm by their example, then their sin. Upon
which considerations, no doubt, our Prophet promises to begin at the welhead,
and to set in order the first wheel, by the reformation of himself. I will
behave my self wisely in a perfect way.

The first thing he vows touching himself, is wise behavior; prudence, not
sapience; not wise contemplation, but wise action. It is not wise thoughts, or
wise speaking, or wise writing, or wise gesture and countenance, will serve the
turn; but wise behavior: the former are graceful, but the other needful.
For, as the Apostle says of godliness, Having a show of godliness, but
denying the power thereof: so certainly there are in point of wisdom and
sufficiency that do little or nothing thoroughly, but magno cona^^ nugas, they
make much adoo about small matters; using all the perspectives of shifting they
can devise to make an empty superficies seem a body that has depth and bulk.

It has been an opinion, The French are wiser then they seem, the Spaniards
seem wiser then they are: and pity it is they should be sundred; but, if they
must needs, better it were to make choice of a wise behavior without seeming,
than of seeming wise without behavior suitable thereunto. The reason is,
because as the conceptions, so also the affections of the soul are more lively
and effectually charactered and unfoulded in deeds than in words; in as much as
words may more easily be dissembled than deeds: and true virtue consists not
in knowledge, but in practice; at least as often as occasion and opportunity are
offered, and means afforded. The hearers of the law are not justified, but the
dooers thereof, says the Apostle, Romans 2; opposing doing to simple hearing.
And, Blessed are ye if ye know these things, and do them, says our
Savior; opposing doing to bare knoweledge. The end then both of hearing and
knowing, is doing: it is the badge of our Profession, the pledge of our
Election, the assurance of our effectual Vocation, the fruit of our
Justification, a special part of our Sanctification, and the highway to our
eternal Salvation: Faith, without it, being but a vain speculation; and Hope,
but a vain presumption; and Charity, but a vain ostentation. Therefore, says
our Prophet, as some Latin Copies read it, Prudenter agam, I will do wisely.
It is a received axiom in Schools; Deus est remunerator adverbiorum, non
nominu^: God is a rewarder of Adverbs, not of Nouns. Their meaning is, that he
regards not so much a good action, as the doing of it well. For, a man may
do that which is good, either by chance, or by compulsion, or by starts: but,
to the well-doing of it, it is requisite, that he do it both wittingly, and
willingly, and constantly. As then we have action implied in the Verb: so have
we witting, and willing, and constant action implied in the Adverb. And as
such action is the life of religion: so is wisdom, of such action; being as it
were the knot in the string, the meddall in the chain, the gem in the ring of
Christian Virtues: sitting as an Empress in the midst of them, consulting,
judging, commanding, ordering things present, and providing for the future, by
comparing them with the bypast, prescribing circumstances of time, and place,
and persons, and manner, and measure, to every several virtue; by failing in
the least of which, they lose both their name and their nature: Humility, not
seasoned with Wisdom, being but baseness; and Patience, dullness; and Zeal,
fury; and Obedience, slavish subjection; and Bounty, wastefull; and Courage,
desperate: but, above all, Mercy and Justice require Wisdom. And therefore our
Prophet having told us, I will sing Mercy and Justice; he presently adds, I
will do wisely; Mercy and Justice being as the two scales of the balance, and
Wisdom as the beam between them: Mercy and Justice like the two eyes, and
Wisdom like the Optike nerve in which they both meet.

A good Surgeon, as they say, should have three properties; a Ladies Hand, a
Lions Heart, and an Eagles Eye: which may well serve as a fit Emblem of these
three Virtues, like the three Sister-Graces ever dancing hand in hand. But, of
the three, Wisdom is the more excellent, in as much as it moderates both the
other two, and all other virtues, in public, in private, in war, in peace, in
adversity, in prosperity, in health, in sickness, in diet, in apparel, in
speech, in action. Which Solomon knew right well, when he prayed not for
riches, or honor, or a long life; but for Wisdom, In whose right hand is
length of days, and, in her le^t, riches and honor: the merchandise thereof
is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof is better than
gold. It is more precious than pearls: and all things that thou can desire
are not to be compared unto her: she is a tree of life to them that lay hold
on her; and blessed is he that retains her.

As Wisdom is a singular ornament to all: so is it in a manner essential to
Kings, in as much as by it they reign, Pro. 8. There are few things presented
to their view in their proper shapes and colors: which requires in them the
greater Wisdom to find them out; it being the Kings honor to search out a
things as it is the glory of God to conceal it, Pro. 23. 1. 2. 25. 3. The
Wisemen of the East, who brought our Savior Presents, are therefore (as I
conceive) specially thought to have been Kings, because they were wise: and,
Rexilliteratus, said a King, what other is he, quam bos coonatus. It was the
speech of Lewis, the eleventh of France, to his son, Charles the Eight, that
he should learn no more Latin but this, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit
regnare. But surely, had himself learned more than he did, it may well be
thought, he would never have taught him that Lesson; learning, especially in
moral philosophy and history, joined with judgment and experience, being the
best mistress of Wisdom, which ever has been and will be justified of her
own children.

To let go the Living, for fear of flattery; I will only instance in Augustus
and Charlemain, both well learned, and both very wise and happy Emperors,
great rewarders of learning, and advancers of their Teachers. It will be said,
that many Princes have attained to rare Wisdom, without learning: yet can it
not be denied, but that learning wisely used would have added both grace and
strength unto their Wisdom.

Quale manus addunt ebori de^us, aut ubi^lavo
Argentum pariusve lapis cum cingitur auro.
For, as expert men can best execute, so learned men are fittest to judge or
censure. And as the Sciences are contemned by the crafty, and admired by the
simple, and by some abused to sloth or affectation: so wisemen only use them
aright, not only for delight and ornament, but for ability. As then that State
is happy which enjoyes both a learned and a wise Prince: so is that most
unhappy, Cuius Rex est Puer, whose King is neither learned nor wise. Yet is it
not all kind of learning or wisdom which is availeable for the true
happiness of a King or Kingdom (as may appear in the miserable ends of
Herod, and Julian the Apostate, both in their kinds wise and learned) but wise
behavior in a perfect way, that is, Wisdom mixed with Piety, guided by
Religion, and sanctified with Grace. Whence our Prophet adds, I will behave my
self wisely in a perfect way: I will so make use of the Wisdom of the Serpent,
that I forsake not the Innocence of the Dove.

The cursed Atheist thinks himself a jolly Wiseman, and all others fools
that make conscience of any religion: but our Prophet is bold to put the fool
upon him; The fool has said in his heart, There is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. The
Philosophers of the Gentiles thought themselves the only wisemen of the world:
but, while they professed themselves wise, they became fools, and their foolish
heart was full of darkness, Romans 1. 21. The covetous Worldling applauds his own
wisdom, and laughs at others for their simplicity: but, before he sleep, he
hears his Doom; Thou fool* this night shall they take thy soul from thee. The
Galathians thought themselves wiser than the other Gentiles, for the
observation of the legal Ceremonies: but St. Paul in his Epistle to them,
calls them fools for their labor. And likewise the Pharisees were held the
wisest of all the Jewish Nation: but our Savior tells them to their faces, they
were but formal fools. True Wisdom is then to be found, and only to be found
in the perfect way.

There is a Divellish wisdom, rather craft then wisdom, maintained by
dissimulation, and lying, and perjury: such as was that of Boniface the eight
Bishop of Rome, who entered like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and died like a
Dog; of Iezabell and Achttophel in practice, and Machivell in precepts. This
wisdom runs a contrary biass to this perfect way: it is directly opposite unto
it, and fights against it. Again, there is a Humane or rational wisdom,
enlightened at the torch of right reason, yet left amongst the remainders of
Gods image in man: and this, though it be beside the perfect way, yet may it
be reduced unto it; good use (no doubt) may be made of it. And lastly, there
is a Divine, holy, and heavenly Wisdom, whose beginning is the fear of God,
whose crown is the favor of God, whose guide is this perfect way, the word of
GOD: which is therefore called a way, because it leads us to our journeyes end;
and a perfect way, because the Author of it is the abstract of all perfection;
because it sufficiently contains in it all things requisite to bring us to
perfection both of body and soul, both of grace and glory; and lastly, because
it makes those perfect that walk in it, at least in regard of endeavor, and
the several parts of perfection, though not the degrees: as, a child may be
said to be a perfect man, in that he has all the parts of a man, though he
want the growth and strength of a man. And if this way were thus perfect in
David's time, what is it by the addition of so many parcels of Scripture since?
If it then gave wisdom to the simple, Psalm. 19. 7; if it made David, being
brought up but as a Shepherd, wiser than his enemies, than his ancients, than
his teachers, Psalm. 119; as an Angel of God in discerning right from wrong, 2.
Sa. 14. 17; able to guide the people by the skilfulnesse of his hands, Psalm.
78. 72; what kind of wisdom is there, which we may not now gather from
thence?

What depth of natural Philosophy have we in Genesis and Job? what flowrs of
Rhetorique in the Prophets? what force of Logic in Saint Paul's Epistles? what
Art of Poetry in the Psalms? what excellent moral Precepts, not only for
Private life, but for the regiment of Families and Commonweals, in the
Proverbs and Ecclesiastes? to which may be added in a second rank as very
useful, though Apochryphall, the book of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus? what
reasonable and just laws have we in Leviticus and Deuteronomy? which moved
the great Ptolomey to hire the Septuagints to translate them into Greek: what
unmatchable antiquity, variety, and wonderful events, and certainty of
story, in the books of Moses, Iosuah, the Judges, Samuel, the Kings and
Chronicles, together with Ruth and Ester, Ezra and Nehemiah, and since Christ,
in the sacred Gospels and Acts of the Apostles? and lastly, what profound
mysteryes have we in the Prophecies of Ezekiel and Daniel, and the Revelation
of Saint John? But in this it infinitely exceeds the Wisdom of all humane
writings, that it is alone able to make a man wise unto salvation, 2. Tim. 3.
15. Upon these considerations, Charles the fifth of France, surnamed the Wise,
not only caused the Bible to be translated into French, but was himself very
studious in the holy Scriptures. And Alphonsus, King of Arragon, is said to
have read over the whole Bible fourteen several times with Lyraes notes upon
it: though he were otherwise excellently well learned, yet was the law of God
his delight, more desired of him than gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter
also than honey and the hony-combe.

I will end this point with the Commandment of God himself to the King,
Deuteronomie 17: When he shall sit upon the throne of his kingdom, he shall
write him a copy of this Law in a book, out of that which is before the
Priests, the Levites: and it shall be with him and he shall read therein all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep
all the words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them, that his heart be
not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the
Commandment, to the right hand or to the left, to the end that he may prolong
his days in his kingdom, he and his children in the midst of Israel. And
look what was there given in charge to the King in general, was afterward
commanded Iosuah (a worthy Leader) in particular, Iosuah 1. 8. This book of
the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day
and night, that thou may observe to do according to all that is written
therein: For then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou Or
do wisely.
have good success. It follows, O when will thou come unto me!

The coming of God unto his children, is, either by the performance of his
promises, or by the special assistance of his Spirit, or by the receiving of
them unto himself. Such as think this Psalm was penned before David's coming
to the Crown, understand these words, of the performance of Gods promise in
setting it upon his head and settling him in the regal Throne, and then this
to be the meaning; O Lord I will tarry thy leisure, and keep my self within
the bounds of my duty, till thou have accomplished that which thou have
promised unto me; though thou delay the matter, and put me off, I will be
content to walk in the perfect way, and not once presume to step aside out of
it, to compass that which thou have said thou will give me. And according to
this promise of his, we may see how he carried himself: for, although there
were a great space betwixt his anointing, whereby he was by Gods own mouth
proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown, after the death of Saul, and his
coming to it; notwithstanding he had the hearts of the Subjects, insomuch as
the women in their songs extolled him above the King; though the soul of
Jonathan the Kings eldest son were fast linked to him, and so he might have
conceived hope to have made a strong party against Saul, who daily provoked him
by most cruel and unjust persecution: yet David kept himself in his
uprightness: he hasted not by any indirect attempt (as did his son Absolon
afterward against himself) to seek his own revenge, nor to displace the
King and his seed, which he knew in time were to be removed; but patiently
waited upon God, doing his will: yea, when God two several times had put Saul
into his hands (once in the Cave where David and his men were hidden; another
time in Saul's own Tent, where with such courage he had adventured) he was so
far off from taking away his life (which easily he might have done) that
his heart checked him for cutting off the lap of the Kings garment, at the one
time; and he sharply rebuked Abner for guarding the Kings person so weakly, at
the other. Thus did this holy man wisely carry himself in the perfect way of
patience and loyalty to his cruel Prince, and persecuting father in law, till
God himself (by the way that he appointed) had set him in the Kings seat.

The contrary is reported of Don Carlo, Infant of Spain, if the relation be
true; that he through impatience and ambition practiced against his Father,
and for that cause suffered in the year of the Lord made up in the numerall
letters of this old verse, 156^.
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos. Once we are sure that our late
neighbor King, the sooner to get the quiet possession of that Crown, to which
he had unquestionable right (if their Salique law be in force) forsook that
religion in which he was brought up; and such as were disposed to play with
his name, found in it while he stood out, Bonus Orbi, Borbonius.
but afterward, Orbus boni: but God dallied not with him, suffering him to be
dangerously stricken in the mouth upon the first abjuring of his religion; and
afterward in or near the heart, in the midst of his Triumphs, Nobility, and
imperial City, to the great astonishment of the Christian world.

Indeed, it was a speech borrowed frow Euripides, and often repeated by Caesar,
Si violandum est ius,
Violandum est propter imperium:


But, rather befitting the mouth of a Heathen, then a Christian: yet are our
own Chronicles but too plentiful in Examples in this kind, of such as being
heirs apparent to the Crown, rather snatched it before their due time, then
received it when it fell.

Among others, we read that Richard, eldest son then living to King Henry the
second, approaching the corpse of his Father as it was carrying to be interred
(adorned according to the manner of Kings, with all royal ornaments open
faced) the blood gushed out at the nostrils of the dead, a sign usually noted
of guiltiness; as if nature yet after death retained some intelligence in the
veins, to give notice of wrong, and check the malice of an unnatural
offender: at which sight Richard, surprised with horror, is said to have burst
ou^ into extreme lamentations. Neither was Edward the fourth free from this
imputation: who when his father and himself had voluntarily and solemnly
sworn, to suffer Henry the sixth quietly to enjoy the Crown during his life;
yet did he (as thinking the time long till he had it on his own head) set
his brother of Gloucester to dispatch King Henry, teaching him by the same Art
to kill his own sons and successors, Edward and Richard. For those Kings
that sell the blood of others at a low prize, do but make the market for
their enemies to buy theirs at the same rate.

On the other side, it is recorded in the French History, to the eternal
commendation of Robert eldest son to Hugh Capet the first King of their last
race, that being by his fathers consent and desire crowned King, and proclaimed
his Lieutena^t General in the kingdom, he notwithstanding still continued a
son without waywardness, a companion without jealousy, and a King without
ambition.

And we may speak it without flattery, that his Majesty now living and long
to live, has left to posterity a worthy pattern in this kind, by receiving
this crown of England even from the hand of God: having patiently waited the
due time of putting it on, howsoever he were provoked to hasten it, refusing
the assistance of her enemies, that wore it as long with as great glory as ever
Princess did; not entering by a breach or by blood, but by the ordinary gate
which his own right, and divine providence, set open. Neither would he, for
the settling of his right, admit the toleration of any other religion, then
that which he here found, and himself professed; protesting openly, that he
would choose rather, if he were forced to it, to spend the last drop of his
blood, than to enter upon such conditions. But, God would not suffer one drop
of that sacred blood to be spilt, which was so ready to be poured out for his
sake.

Now those, who think this Psalm was penned by David after his coming to the
Crown, conceive that at his entrance thereunto he* thus prayed for the
special assistance of Gods Spirit, as well in the private carriage of his own
Affairs and Person, as in governing the people committed to his charge; well
knowing, that without it he could not observe this Vow to which he had bound
himself, nor administer Mercy and Justice, nor behave himself wisely in a
perfect way, nor perform any duty belonging to the office of a King, or a good
man, as he ought. He therefore desires of God, that as he had set him in the
Kings Throne, so he would indue him with all manner of graces and royal
virtues fit for so high a place; and not only so, but to assist and direct him
in the exercise of those graces and virtues.

The Heart of the King is in the hand of God, he turns it as the rivers of
waters, Pro. 21. 1: he turns it to his good, if he flee to him for
assistance; but, to his confusion, if he stand upon his own strength. It
behooves all men to implore the aid of G O D, but specially Kings and Princes;
as in all their actions, so principally in negotiations and treaties of
greatest Consequence. That of King Solomon then chiefly concerns them; Trust in
the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own wisdom; in all thy
ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy ways Pro. 3. 5. 6. Princes
have fewer then private men, that dare freely tell them the truth (which is
indeed one of the great mischiefs of great places) whereas, on the other side,
their temptations are many and strong, and their actions of weight and
importance, drawing after them either much good or much evil. It behooveth
them then, above all, not to presume too much upon themselves, upon their own
policy and forecast; but rather upon the providence and assistance of him whose
substitutes they are. Their Viceroys dare do nothing of moment, without
consulting with them: so neither ought they enterprise any thing of importance,
without consulting with the Oracle of God, by religious invocation of him, for
the illuminating of their understa^dings, and guiding of their wills; following
therein the example of the Wise man, who treating of the excellency of true
wisdom, and acknowledging it to be the special gift of God, craved it at his
hands, and withal notably set forth the weakness of man's wit and judgment, with
the reason thereof, in these words: Give me that wisdom, which sits by thy
throne, and put me not out from among thy children: for, I thy servant and
son of thine handmaid am a feeble person and of a short time, and yet less in
the understanding of judgment and the laws: and though a man be never so
perfect among the children of men, yet if thy wisdom be not with him he
shall be nothing regarded: for the tho^ghts of mortal men are fearful* and
our forecasts uncertain, because the corruptible body is heavy unto the
soul, and the earthly mansion keeps down the mind that is full of ^ares.
Wisdom 9.

Seeing then the infirmity of man's foresight and determinations, together with
the uncertainty of humane affairs and events; it were good for all religious
Princes to take that as their Posie which our late renowned Princess made the
inscription of her Coin, Posui Deu^ adiutorem meum. Besides: it has been
noted, that those who ascribe too much to their own wisdom and policy, end
unfortunately. As, Caesar Borgia (whom Machiavell mak^s the mirror and pattern
of his Prince) his Motto was, A^t Caesar, a^t nullus: but, in the end he proved
both; Et Caesar, and nullus. And Timotheus the Athenian after he had, in the
account given to the State, of his government, often interlaced this speech
[and in this fortune had no part] was observed never to have prospered in any
thing he undertook afterward. Now, look what Fortune was to them, the same
is Gods Providence unto us: whereas on the other side, the most prosperous in
their enterprises, have ever most willingly ascribed their victories, their
deliverances, their success-full Counsels, and happy issues, rather to the
goodness of divine Providence, than their own valor or wit.

And surely, he that shall consider how a day, an hour, a moment is enough to
overturne the deepest plots of the gravest Senates, that seemed (as one
speaks) to have been founded and rooted in Adamant, cannot but withal
acknowledge it as exceeding folly and ingratitude in any man, so to dote upon
and admire the sufficiency of his own gifts, as to forget the Giver; so much
to rely upon the arm of flesh, that he neglect the direction of Gods holy
Spirit: which is, as if a man should set to Sea without a Pilot, or undertake a
journey through a dangerous Forest in a dark night, without a guide. I will
then conclude this point with that prayer of the People for their Prince, and
the Prince for himself; Give thy judgments to the King O Lord: and thy
righteousness to the Kings son, Psalm 72. 1.

A third sort understand these words of our Prophet, When will thou come unto
mee] of Gods coming to David to receive him to himself: thereby implying that
he would so behave himself, as he would always have an eye to the maine
chance; not only to the end of his actions, but of his life: which indeed is
an excellent means both to walk wis^ly, as he promis^th before; and
uprightly, as he voweth immediately after: When Princes look not so much upon
their plumes and trains, their present power and magnificence; as upon their
future condition, when their bodies shall become the like prey to worms and
rottenness, and their souls shall undergo the like strict examination, as
the bodies and souls of their meanest Subjects: When this great game at Chesse
is here ended, they must with others be laid up together in the common bag
of Nature; and then shall th^re be no difference between their dust, and that
of the poorest Beggar.

The rememberance hereof is like a bitter pill, to purge out the malignity of
many wanton and vain ^umors; or like a strainer, all our thoughts and speeches
and actions, which pass through it, are thereby cleansed and purified. As the
bird guides her body with her train, and the ship is steered with the rudder:
so the course of man's life is best directed with a continual recourse unto his
end. It is hard for a man to think of a short life, and to think evil; or to
think of a long life, and to think well. Therefore when Solomon had spoken of
all the vanities of men, at last he opposed this Memorandum, as a counterpoi^e
against them all, Remember for all these things thou shall come to judgment,
Eccles. 11. As if he should say, men would never speak as they speak, nor
do as they do, if they did but think that these speeches and deeds should
shortly come to judgment.

But an hard thing it is for them, who fare delicio^sly every day, who glister
like Angels, whom all the world admires, and sues and bows to, which are
called Sacred, Gracious, and mighty Lords, to remember the approach of Death.
They have no leisure to think of it, but chop into the earth before they be
aware; like a man that walks over a field covered with snow, and sees not his
way, but while he thinks to run on, suddenly falls into a pit: so they which
have all things at their will, and swim in pleasure, which as a snow covers
their way, and dazeleth their sight, while they think to live on and rejoice
still, suddenly rush upon death, and make shipwreck in the calm Sea. As it is
good therefore for them to hear they are gods: so it is meet they remember they
are mortal gods, They shall die like men, Psalm. 82. For when they forget they
shall die like men, they also forget to live and reign like gods.

Had they with Joseph of Arimathea, their tombs hewed out in their gardens,
where they use of solace themselves, it would make them so to number their
days, that they would apply their hearts unto Wisdom. O that men were wise
(says Moses) then would they consider their latter end, Deutr. 32. 29. So that
Wisdom brings a man to consider his end, and the consideration of his end
makes him more wise; As, on the other side, it is noted as a point of folly in
Gods people, that they minded not, nor remembered their end, Lament. 1. 9. Now,
as the remembrance of death made the Prophet walk more wisely: so did the
remembrance of judgment after death, make him walk more uprightly; as well
knowing he was to render an account to a higher Judge, who could neither be
terrified with stout looks, nor led with respect of persons, nor persuaded
with eloquence, nor blinded with gifts; But, as he was in greater place then
others, so should his reward be greater, and his Crown more glorious, if he
did well: but his punishment greater, and his torment more grievous, if he did
ill. Therefore, he presently adds, after, this ejaculation cast in between,
I will walk within mine house with a perfect heart.

I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. Walking is a word often
used in holy Scripture, and specially by our Prophet in this book of the
Psalms; yet more often figuratively than properly. It shall not be amiss then,
out of the property and nature of it, to consider the duties included and
implied in it. The natural acts of it then are three; motion, progress, and
moderation. As it includes motion, so is it opposed to lying, or standing, or
sitting: as it includes progress in motion, so is it opposed to jumping, or
capring up and down in the same place: as it includes moderation in a
progressive motion, so is it opposed to viole^^ running.

Motion is the common effect of all natural bodies: they all either move in
their place, or to their place. The heavens, and air, and birds move above us;
the sea, ^ivers, fishes, and worms, move under us; the beasts beside us; and
our own hearts day and night within us; And shall we alone stands still in the
midst of so many movers round about us? Every one of these Creatures seem to
cry unto us, Qui fecit me propter te, fecit te propter se, He that made me to
move for thee, made thee to moove for himself.

Why then stand ye here all the day idle, says our Savior to those loy^er^rs
in the Gospel: and I wish I might not justly say the like to many here
present; Idleness being commonly the best mark of a Gentleman and a Courtier:
whereas employment and action was enjoined man, even in the state of innocency,
Genesis 2. 15. but, then for recreation; afterward Genesis 3. 19. for necessity. To
which the Apostle seems to allude, He that will not work and exercise
himself in some lawful kind of employment, is to be held Telluris inutile
pondus, not so much as worthy to eat, 2. These. 3. 10. Diogenes, that he might
not seem idle in the midst of business, would needs be doing, though it were
but by rolling of his Tub: and these men to shun the imputation of sloathfull
persons become busy bodies, and so walk indeed, but inordinately, v. 11.
Like those walkers in the third to the Philippians, who^e end is damnation, or
like that Arch-ranger, who walks about seeking whom he may devour, they
wholly spend their time either mal^ agendo, or aliud agendo, or nihil agendo,
in doing naught, or impertinences, or nothing, which will quickly bring them
to the other two; The mind of man being of such an active disposition, that if
it be not set aworke in goodness, it will quickly set it self aworke in
mischief: if it be not manured with good seeds, it will soon be fertile in
weeds.

Pity it is, that three such good mothers, as Truth, Familiarity, and Peace,
should by the viciousness of our nature bring forth three such bad daughters,
as Ha^red, Contempt, and Idleness; the daughter indeed of Peace, but the
mother of Discord and War: of the war of the sensual appetite against
reason, as appeared in the filthy Sodomites, Ezekiel 16. 49. Of the Subject
against the Sovereign, as has often appeared in the rebellious Irish. It were
good then for a Prince to keep his Subjects in motion, either by employment of
trades, or discoveries, or some such action: which, as it tends to the ornament
and wealth of his Kingdom, so does it to the safety of his person; and the
rather, if himself be of a stirring humor: whereas, on the other side, his
standing still is like the standing of the Sun in the firmament; which, as it
cannot but breed admiration, so neither can it well be without dangerous
effects: it being known, that the two first Races of the French Kings were
extinct by putting off their Affairs of the State upon the Majors of the
Palace, that so they might betake themselves to a retired kind of life.
Industry has ever raised and enlarged Empires, but idleness ruined them. As
then Princely State does not become the Monks Cool: so neither does Monkish
retirednes, the Princes Crown. As the Lord has called every one, so let him
walk, 1. Cor. 7. 17.

Secondly, as walking implies motion, so does it progress in motion; when by
his motion a man gets ground and goes forward. It is truly said even in Civil
affairs, that the mind of man is more cheered and refreshed by profiting in
small things, then by standing at a stay in great: but* in the course of piety
and religion, Not to get ground, is to lose ground. Wherefore, H^b. 6. 1
leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection.
And forgetting the things behind, and reaching-forth to those which are before,
Phil. 3. 13.
let us press toward the mark. Turpis and ridicula res est elementarius senex,
It Is a shameful thing to see an old man in his Ab^e; but, dangerous for a
Christian not to go forwrad in the gaining of knowledge and practice of
sanctification. His first beginning is as the dawning of the day, his
proceeding as a fair sunshine morning, his ending as the Sun at high noone
in the midst of a Summers day; according to that of Solomon, Pro. 4. 18.
The path of the Just is as the shining light, that shines more and more
until it be perfect day.

Now the steps by which we mount this Meridian, are eight; answerable to the
eight steps going up to the Temple. Ezekiel. 40. 31
Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
tempera^ce, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity, 2. Pet. 2. 5. The
lowest step in this Christian Progress is Faith: and the highest, Charity;
faith being the groundwork, and charity the^ roof of our spiritual building.
In the world, the ambitious man never leaves his aspiring to honor, nor the
covetous man his scraping up of riches, nor the voluptuous man his hunting
after pleasure, nor the curious man his prying into the secrets of God and the
bowels of nature* they all either do or desire to go forward, though it be to
the Confines of hell; And shall we then be less active in our progress to
heaven? Ad quod multi potuerunt peruenire, nisi se putassent peruenisse, unto
which many undoubtedly might have arrived, had they not sat down in the
midway, and thought their condition for Travelers good enough: whereas the
exhortation, 2. Pet. 3. 18, Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, still has and will have its place and use so long as
we soiourne here below in this valley of tears, until our faith be turned
into vision, and our hope into fruition; until we come to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13; who being a child increased as in
age and stature, Luke 2. 52
so in wisdom and favor with God and men: which as all are to labor for, so
specially they that sit in his throne and bear his name, in that they are his
anointed.

Thirdly, as walking implies motion and progress, so does it moderation, as it
is opposed to violent running; which is more subject both to falling and
tiring, then moderate walking. Moderation is the salt that makes all our
actions relish to our selves, beneficial to others, and acceptable to God:
without which, business is rather burdensome then profitable, and exercise
rather a toil than recreation. As a man may eat too much honey, so pleasure
it self grows loathsome and distastefull by immoderate use. Nempe voluptatem
commendat r^ri^r vsus. Besides: moderation is the mother of duration; it is
like the steady burning of a taper, or the fire upon the Altar which never went
our: whereas headstrong violence like a squib or flash of lightning dazles the
eyes for a moment, but is instantly extinct.

The great Master of morality held it a great indecency in a Magistrate, to be
seen running in the market place: because he, who is to moderate others,
should himself observe a stayed moderation and gravity, even in his pase and
gesture, and countenance; much more in his actions. The Lion, they say, is
seldom or never seen to run; yet is he for courage and wisdom the King of
beasts: and the higher the Celestial Spheres are in situation, the slower they
are in their proper motion. It is commonly the fault of youth, by reason of
their strong passion and little experience, to make more haste than good speed:
and therefore it was good counsel of a Father to his Son, Parce puer
stimulis, and fortius u^ere loris: to be sparing of the spur, and to make use
of the bridle. Generally it is better to hal^ in the right way, than to ride
a-gallop out of it. And howbeit in the way of godliness a man cannot make too
much haste, nor come too soon to heaven; yet it were fit to remember that of
our Prophet, I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall have
enlarged my heart, Psalm. 119. 32; there being not a few, who will undertake to
run and flee too, before they are well able to go or stand.

Lastly, the ordinary effects of bodily walking, are, the quickening of the
appetite, the refreshing of the spirits, the warming of the blood, and the
exercising of the body: In like manner, by this spiritual walking in the paths
of Gods commandments, is the appetite of our soul quickened to spiritual
things, the spirit comforted and refreshed, our zeal warmed, and our benumbed
affections made more nimble and pliant.

Now follows the Rule of his walking; which is, the integrity of his heart. So
Tremelius renders it, Ambulabo in integritate animi mei: our last Translation
reads it, with a perfect heart. That same which he here promises for
himself, he elsewhere enjoins his Son; And thou, Solomon my Son* know thou the
God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, 1.
Chr. 28. 9. First then he voweth, that the Rule of his actions should be the
Dictate of his own heart; not the fancy of other men's brains, nor the example
of other men's lives, nor the report of other men's tongues: which is as
uncertain and variable as are the passions of their minds; some, speaking out
of fear; some, of ^lattery; some, of malice; and some, of faction. The best way
then for a man to examine his actions, is, To examine his heart; there being
no man living that knows or possibly can know thee so well as thou do
thine own self. For, what man knows the things of man, save the spirit of
man that is within him? 1. Cor. 2. 11. Though all the world acquitte thee, if
thine own heart condemn thee in that thou do, thou art guilty before God:
and though the whole world condemn thee, if thy own heart acquit thee, thou
art either guiltless, or thereby less guilty. For, as whats^ever is not of
faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23 (that is, whatsoever is don against conscience,
though good in it self, yet to me is made sin): so, on the other side, if our
heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, 1. John 3. 21. In a
doubtful cause, then, howbeeit perchance the applause of all men, the reasons
of Statists, together with the opinion of great Clerks, should give thee
allowance; yet, if thou can not resolve thy self of the lawfulness thereof,
attempt it not. For, as it is good for a man to begin with his own heart, for
consultation: so is it also, to conclude with it, for resolution; yet so, as
other good means ordained to inform the conscience (as, advice with discreet
friends, and conference with the Learned, if the matter be of moment, and the
cause difficult) be not neglected. Let thine heart then be the Line of thy
walking; and the perfection of thine heart, the Level of that Line. I will
walk with a perfect heart.

Perfection implies two things, In^egrity and Sincer^ty: Integrity, that it be
whole and sound; Sincerity, that it be single and upright. Sincerity is
opposed to that double heart mentioned by our Prophet, Psalm. 12. 2, With
flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak: (the Original is, with
a heart and a heart) Integrity, to that divided heart, whereof the Prophet Hosea,
Their heart is divided, cap. 10. 2; when a part is bestowed on God, and a part
on our own profit or pleasure. First then he promises to walk with a perfect
heart, that is, in the singleness and simplicity, the uprightnes and sincerity
of his heart, as God commanded Abraham, Genesis 17. 1* Walk before me, and be
thou perfect; or, as the Margent reads it, upright and sincere; a word borrowed
from honey, as the Grammarians will have it: which, the purer it is, sine cera,
without wax, the more pleasant and wholesome it is; as they likewise draw
simplicity, which signifies the same, from a garment, sine plicis, without
pleats or foulds. Now, this sincerity or simplicity is therefore called
perfection, because it is the greatest perfection we can possibly arrive unto
in this world. For, absolute perfection, in fulfilling every point of the Law
in that exact manner and degree as is required, neither does our Prophet
undertake, neither could he by any means perform.

He well knew, all that God expected, and himself could safely promise, was but
sincerity: without which, many good services are not accepted; and with which,
many great imperfections and infirmities are covered, as with a mantle. How
many infirmities escaped from our Prophet himself! his numbering the people,
his counterfeiting madness, his collusion with Achish, his rash anger, and
furious swearing, and vowing the death of Nabal, and his unjust dealing with
good poor Mephibosheth: these things were sins; yet sincerity was a veil
unto them, because it was not so shaken in these, as in his murder and
adultery. God that took some special notice of this last, would take none at
all of the other: The heart of David (says the Scripture) was upright in all
things, save in the matter of Vriah, 1. King. 15. 5. In like manner, some of
Asaes infirmities having been mentioned by the holy Ghost, as that the high
places were not taken away; yet the Conclusion is, Nevertheless his heart was
perfect with the Lord all his days. Lo, how all his infirmities are covered
with the mantle of sincerity, 1. King. 15. 14. Contrariwise, in Iehu, we may
observe, how the holy Ghost, after a large description of many excellent things
done by him, does at last draw as it were a cross-line, and dash out all
spoken before, with this Conclusion, But I^hu regarded not to walk in the law
of the Lord with all his heart. Lo, how all his other graces are buried in
the grave of an unsound heart, 2. King. 10. 31.

Great virtues, not sweetened with sincerity, are no ornament unto us: and great
infirmities not sowred with hypocrisy are no great deformities: those God
acknowledges not, these he imputes not. The reason is, because where sincerity
is, there in the meanest works that are, together with them the heart is given
to God* and the more a man gives of his heart to God, the more acceptable is his
work. The widows mite could weigh but little, but her heart weighed heavy:
and so her heart being put to her mite, gave it weight above the greater (but
far more heartless) largess of the Pharisee. Sincerity is to our works, as
spirit is to our bodies; which makes it far better then where there is more
^lesh, but less spirit. O rare and excellent virtue of sincerity! which can
make light drams and barley corns as massy and ponderous, as the huge talents:
whereas contrarily, the want of sincerity makes talents as light as feathers.
Hypocrisy (such is the filth of it) imbaseth the purest metalls, and turns
very gold, yea precious stones, into rust^y iron: whereas sincerity by a divine
kind of Alchymie turns iron into gold.

As in the natural body, to use Saint Augustines comparison, the case of the
sound finger is safer than of the blindish eye: the finger indeed is but a
little small thing, and cannot do such service as the eye, it is not of that
admirable nimbleness and quicknes, nor can it guide and direct the whole body
as the eye does; and yet is it better to be a finger and sound, than to be an
eye and dim or dark, ready to fall out of the socket. And Chrysostom says well,
that she is a worse woman that in hypocrisy blurs her face with tears, that
she might be judged an humble Penite^tiary, than she that beautifies it with
painted colors, that she might be reputed a fair and lovely creature.

Finally, sincerity as it is of all virtues the girdle, Ephe. 6. 14. and of all
other the most acceptable to God: so is it to us the most profitable in all
dangers, trials and temptations; begetting in us that Lion-like boldness spoken
of in Pro. 28. 1. It is not put out of countenance with false accusatio^s of
sland^rous tongues: it throws them off as Paul did the Viper, unhurt; yea, in
a holy scorn it laugheth at them. No, no: the breast plate of righteousness, the
brazen wall of a good conscience fears no such arrows. It says with Paul,
1. Cor. 4. 3. I pass not for man's judgment: And with Job, 31. 35. Though mine
adversary should write a book against me, I would take it upon my shoulder and
bind it as a crown unto me. That which made him thus confident, was the
sincerity of his heart. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let i^ go:
my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live, Job 27. 5. And as it bred
confidence in Job, in his trials, so did it minister comfort to Hezekiah,
being now stricken with the thunderbolt of the sentence of death. O Lord, thou
know (says he) I have walked with an upright heart, Esa. 38. 3. Though
those good works he had done, were in regard of his calling, of the highest
note, the restoring of the true worship of God, the purging of the defiled
Temple and Priesthood: yet he does not comfort himself with these so worthy
works; O Lord, thou know I have cleansed thy Sanctuary, erected thy worship,
repaired the decayed walls of Jerusalem, renewed the glory and beauty of thy
Sion. No: but, without instancing in any particulars he had done, he mentions
only the sincerity of his affection in doing them; I have walked with a
perfect or upright heart: which is the same our Prophet here promises, I will
walk with a perfect heart.

Perfect, as in regard of sincerity, opposed to a doubl^ heart; so likewise in
regard of integrity, opposed to a cloven or divided heart. The former implies
an unfeigned; the later an universal obedience: for the shunning as of
hypocrisy in respect of others, so of partiality toward himself. Blessed are
they that seek him with their wh^le heart, Psalm. 119. 2. And therefore are
they blessed, because it is commanded, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Those false harlots, the World, and the Devil, and
the Flesh are content to share with God in thy heart: but God, like the true
mother, will have all or none. The gods of the Heathen were goods fellows, they
could well enough endure inter-com-communing and partnership: but the true God
is the jealous God, who cannot away with halfes or parts. As himself and the
light (which of all visible things comes nearest his nature) are indivisible:
so is he most delighted with the Holocaust of an entire and undivided heart.
And as in nature, Solutio continui, the division of any member, is the mayme
and grief of the body, but the division of the heart is the present death of
it: so the division of the affections of the heart between the love of God and
the love of our selves, is undoubtedly the death of the soul.

With what face can we come before God, when with Ananias and Saphira we keep
back part from him? when with Zachary and Elizabeth we walk not in all the
commandments of the Lord? Doubtless, the old and sure way, not to be ashamed
when we present our selves before him, Psa. 119. ^
is, to have respect to all his co^mandments. Though we cannot keep all nor any
one indeed as we ought, yet we may and must have regard unto all, and that
equally without respect or difference of any. For, he that fails in one point,
is guilty of all, James 2. 10. His meaning is (says the most learned
Interpreter) Deum nolle cum exceptione coli, that God will not be served with
exceptions and reservations. As his law is one entire rule, though consisting
of many pieces: so ought our actions and affections entirely to be squared
thereunto. If we will go out of Egypt, we must not leave so much as an hoof
behind us. If we leave but one gate of our soul o^^n, our spiritual enemies
(who ly in ambush for all advantages) may as well, by that, rush in upon us to
our perdition, as if no gate were shut, no breach made up. If the Bird be
taken but by the claw, the Fowler is as sure of him, as if he had his whole
body in his hand. And the Ship is oftener sunk by some little insensible leak,
than by the violent dashingin of the waves unto it. Look, then, as to the
sincerity, so to the integrity of thy heart in Gods service.

He forbiddes us not to love other things besides himself; but we may love
nothing but for his sake: and so doing, we can love nothing in that degree
we love him. Above all, let us beware of the sins of our particular
vocation, and of our natural constitution, and of the times and places in which
we live: for, These, most men make their Idols, and are ready to say with
Naaman, The Lord be merciful to me in this. But, this is not to walk with a
perfect heart: which strives against all known sin, because it is sin; and
endeavors the keeping of all the commandments, because they are commanded:
and if we so do, for sins of pure ignorance and mere infirmity, God does
graciously vouchsafe us a daily pardon of Course. Who can understand his
errors? Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins; then shall I be upright,
Psalm. 19. 12.

To conclude: how-ever the damnable Politicians of our Age would persuade their
Prince, that the practice of outward Piety and civil Hon^sty is sufficient for
him; yet our Prophet and Prince promises to walk with a pe^fect heart, and
performed what he promised, so as he dares for that to appeal to Gods
examination and censure: Judge me, O Lord: for, I have walked in mine
integrity, Psalm. 26. 1. And again: Search me, O God, and know my heart, try
me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and
lead me in the way everlasting, Psalm. 139. ^3. And, lest we should think
This, presumption in him, the holy Ghost does him this honor, that those Kings
who truly feared God, and reigned well, are said to have walked in the ways of
David their Father, 2. Kings 22. 2; but, those that reigned ill, because they
feared not God, not to have walked in his ways, 1. Kings 15. 3. So that he is
not only commended for his sound and single heart, but is therein proposed as
a rule to succeeding Ages, for the trial either of the straightnes or
crookedness of his Successors.

Now, in the last place follows the Place of his Walk: which is, within his
house; or, as Arias Montanus has it, in interiori domus meae, in the inmost
part of my house. He would make a trial in the very managing of his Family
and houshould-affaires, of his ability and sufficiency for the government of
the Kingdom; as the Queen of the South made a ghess of Salomons Wisdom by the
government of his house, 1. Kin. 10. Every house-houlder is parvus Rex, a
little King in his own Family: and the greatest Monarch, upon the matter, is
but magnus Pater-familias, a great house-houlder, or a common Father of the
public Family of the State. As then a man may see the coasting of the whole
world represented in a little map as well as a great; the degrees of the Suns
motion, as well in a little Dial, as a great; the figure and color of a
visage, as well in a little picture or looking-glass, as a great; and the
convayance of a building, as well in a little frame or model, as a great: so
may a man's desert and sufficiency, for the governing of a Kingdom, be seen
and made known in the wel-ordering and disposing of his private house.

And, as it is a trial, so is it also a preparation to greater matters; it
being not safe committing a vessel of burden to his charge, who never guided
a bark or pinnace; nor to make him General of an Army, who never had
experience of an under-Captains place: But, he that first shows himself
faithful in a little, is both thereby counted the worthier, and is indeed the
fitter to be made Ruler over much, Luke 19. 17. whereas, on the other side, If
a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the
Church of God? says the Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. 5. He speaks indeed of a Bishop;
but so, as his words are appliable to the civil Magistrate, who is charged
with the government both of Church and temporal State. Quid authoritatis
poterit habere in populo, quem propria domus reddit contemptibilem? How shall
the people reverence him, whom his own family respects not, and his own
behavior therein makes him respectless?

Again: In that he promises to walk uprightly within his house, i^^ra privatos
parietes, as Iunius does paraphrase it, within his private walls; his meaning
is, that he would be no changeling: that amongst his houshould-people (where
few beheld him) he would be the same that he was abroad, where many eyes saw
him: he would be as godly in his Chamber, as in the Temple; in his Closet, or
Grove, or Gallery, as in the great Congregation: it being indeed the truest
sign of an ingenuous spirit, to practice the same alone which he professes in
company; and of a false heart, to be devout abroad, and profane at home; an
Angel in the Church, and a Devil in the house: such as they, who in open
place, where they may have praise of men, will do some good; but after they are
more private, they discover themselves in their kind, and run freely to
their own race, as the horse rusheth into the battle, ler. 8. 6.

I know, there is a time even for private men, much more for Princes* whose
bu^ then is greater, to unbinde the boaw of their serious thoughts; and to give
the mind some relaxation and refreshment from public imploime^ts, that so
they may be the fitter to return to them again: but, no time or place is there
in which they may loose the reins to their unbridled appetite, or securely
sin because they are private. No, He that is present with them sitting in
their Thrones, is likewise present with them lying in their Beds: as he is with
them in their Chapels, so is he in their most secret Cabinets and withdrawing
rooms. Like a well-drawne picture that eyeth each in the room, he eyeth in
that manner each one in the world; and all the ways of each one, as if his eye
were upon him alone. He sees all things, himself unseen of any; being so
without all things, as that he is not excluded from any; and so within all
things, as that he is not included in any. It is he, of whom our Prophet
speaks in another Psalm* Thou know my down-sitting and my ^p-^ising, thou
understandest my thought a-far-off, thou compassest my path and my lying down,
and art acquainted with all my ways: unto whom the day and the darkness, the
light and the night are both alike, 139. In whose sight the very intentions of
the heart are naked and open, Heb. 4. 13. The Greek word signifies so opened,
as the entralls of a man that is anatomized, or of a beast that is cut up and
quartered. Quare, sit peccar^ vis, qua^re ubi te non videat, and fac quod vis,
says Saint Augustine; If then thou will sin securely, seek ou^ a place where
he sees thee not, and there do what thou list: but, if his eye p^y into ^very
corner, then have thou reason rather to stand in awe of the presence of the
immortal God, than of a mortal man. So, do whatsoever thou do, says the
heathen Philosopher, (...), as if severe Cato stood by and looked on: but, if in
stead of Ca^o, he had put Deus (as if God stood by and looked on) his advice
might well have passed for ^ight Christian Doctrine: which was the Counsel of
Another, save tha^ he named gods for God; Quaecunque capesses,
Testes factorum stare arbitrabere divos.


What avails it to have no creature privy to our evil acts, when we have
him privy to them, who must one day judge them?

The forgetfulness heerof makes many men, and especially great ones, dig deep,
as if they would hide their counsel from ^he Lord; and contrive in secret
those things, which afterward being brought to light, cast shame in their
faces, a burden upon their consciences, a blot upon their name, and (without
repentance) everlasting confusion both upon body and soul. It were good, then,
to write upon their walls, and to engrave upon their windows, that short Mo^to
(which as short as it is, yet our memories are shorter); Cave, Deus videt, Take
heed, God sees it. But then should we chiefly call it to mind, and make use
of it, when, being enclosed within our walls, sequestered from company, occasion
and opportunity invite us to sin.

Verse 3. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them
that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me.
THe Original has it, if we will render it word for word, I will set no word
of Beliall before mine eyes. But* Word is there figuratively put for Thing; as
likewise, Psalm. 41. 8: and so is it rendered both by Montanus in the Margent,
and in the Text by ^unius; howbeit, in his comment upon this Psalm, he
precisely follow the Original, applying it against sycophants and flatterers,
the mice and moaths of Court. But, of these I shall find or take occasion to
speak hereafter, and for the Present make choice rather to follow the beaten
track of all the Translations, and other comments which I have seen; specially
considering, that (to speak properly) a Word cannot be the object of the ey,
but a Thing. Well then: one special point of that Wisdom which our Prophet had
promised in the verse going before, appears in not setting these things of
Belial, or wicked things, before his eyes.

As we turn away our eyes from that, or remove that from our eyes which we
like not: so, what we most delight in, we commonly set before our eyes, or at
least we fix and set our eyes upon that. True it is, that the eyes of the
Lord are said to be in every place, beholding the evil and the good, Pro. 15.
3: yet are they in a special manner set upon those places and persons that he
has a tender care of and respect unto, and loves in a special manner. Such a
place was the Land of Canaan* A Land which the Lord thy God ^areth for: the
eyes of the Lord thy God are upon it from the beginning of the year, to the
end thereof, he never took off his eye from it, Deuteronomy. 11. 12. Such a person was
David: I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way that thou shall go: I
will guide thee with mine eye; or as the Original, Mine eyes shall be upon
thee, Psalm 32. 8. Such are all those of whom Saint Peter speaks, The eyes of
the Lord are over the righteous, 1. Pet. 3. 12: and they are so over them that
he withdrawes not his eyes from them, Job 36. 7. Now then, as they are always
set before Gods eyes, whom he loves: so is God always set before their eyes
who love him. I have set the Lord always before me, Psalm 16. 8. Unto thee
lift I up mine eyes, Psalm. 123. 1. And as long as he thus set his eyes upon
God, and God before his eyes, he could not well set any wicked thing before
them. He could not at once intend two such distant objects; he might glance,
or squint upon both: but directly fix his eyes upon both he could not. This
made him so confident, I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes.

A bird may light upon a man's house; but he may choose whether she shall
nestle or breed there, or no: And the Devil or his instruments, may represent
a wicked object to a man's sight; but he may choose whether he will entertain
or embrace it, or no. So that upon the matter, for a man to set wicked things
before his eyes, is nothing else, but to sin of set purpose, to set himself
to sin, or to sell himself to sin, as Ahab did, 1. King. 21. The best among
us, God help us, are subject to sin. For if we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: yet by the grace of God we may
be kept from presumptuous sins, that they have no dominion over us, Psalm. 19.
13. And though we do the evil which we would not do, yet we endeavor to
do the good which we do not; and we delight in the law of God after the
inner man, though we feel in our members another law warring and rebelling
against the law of our mind, and bringing us into captivity to the law of
sin, Romans 7. In such, sin ever goes with some unwillingness, with some
wrestling and striving, with some remorse of heart and check of conscience:
whereas the unrepentant sinner sets wicked things before his eyes, he seeks
out provocations, and hunts after occasions of sinning, he goes on with an high
hand and a stiff neck, and is carried with a swinge, as a ship under full
sail: he drinkes-in iniquity as the beast licks up the water, or the fish
catches at the bait: he cannot sleep nor rest quietly in his bed, before he
have done some mischief: his only study is, to fulfill the desires of the
flesh: and, having his conscience seared with an hot iron, and being past
feeling, he gives him self over to work all manner of uncleanness, and that
with greediness: he returns to his former sins, as the horse rusheth into
the battle, Ier. 8. 6. He makes haste, he runs to all excess of riot, I. Pet.
4. 4. And being come to this pass, he gets him a brow of brass, a strumpets
forehead that canon blush, Ier. 3. 3. He declares his sin like Sodom, and
hides it not, Esa. 3. 9. And then, Peccator cum in profundum venerit,
contemnit, when he is thus plunged in the gulf of sin, he grows desperate,
he neither fears God, nor cares for man. Take heed then of setting wicked
things before thine eyes, that is, of sinning ex destinata malitia, of set
purpose, say always, and practice with our Prophet: Mine eyes are ever toward
the Lord, Psalm. 25. 15. And that shall keep thee safe, or cure thee being
wounded; as the looking upon the brazen Serpent did the Israelites, stung with
the fiery Serpents, Number. 21. 9.

N^ wicked thing] The original is a thing of Belial: which word, because we
do not often meet with, I thought it not amiss at this time to open the sense
and nature of it, so far as it makes for our present purpose. It is not
unlikely in my judgment, that it alludes to Baal, the common Idol of the
Nations, bordering upon the Jews, whom the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Penmen
of holy Scripture, changing some letters by way of scorn, called it Belial. As
the Prophet Hos^a, chap. 4. 15. calls Bethel, which signifies the house of
God, Bethaven, which signifies the house of an Idol; because there Jeroboam had
set up one of his golden Calves, 1. King. 12. 29. And to express a further
hatred to this Idol, and in it to all Idolarrous worship, they applied this
name of Belial to the Devil: and thus is it taken, 2. Cor. 6. 15. What harmony
or concord has Christ with Belial? They can never fall-in, or make music
together in one Quire.

The word is, by diverse, diversely derived. Some fetch it from a root which
signifies, not to profit; by reason of the great hurt and loss he brings and
intends to mankind, 1. Pet. 5. 8. Others from a root, that signifies, not to
rise or mount upward; because he seeks the fall of mankind, and to keep those
down that are fallen into his snares, 2. Tim. 2. 26. But Saint Hierome, who
studied the holy Lauguage, in the holy Land it self, for many years together,
and had a skillful Jew to his Master, fetches it from a root that signifies,
without a yoke, or lawless: and therefore the Septuagint commonly translate it
(...), as a man would say, altother irregular. And this I take to be the most
probable; in as much, as where we read of a son or a child, or a man of
Belial, through the Scriptures, for the most part, it is in regard of some
notorious disobedience, in casting off the yoke of subjection. Thus the sons
of Eli are called the sons of Belial, 1 Samuel 2. 12: and the reason is given,
because they hearkened not to the voice of their Father. In the tenth of the
same book, verse 27. a band of men, whose hearts God had touched, went with
Saul: but the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? and they
despised him, and brought him no presents. In the 2. of Sam. 20. 1. There was a
man of Belial, Sheba the son of Bichri, that blew a trumpet, and said, We
have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Ishi, Every
man to his tents, O Israel. In the 2. of Chron. 13. 7. those who stuck to
Jeroboam, against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, are termed vain men, the
children of Belial. And Saint Paul as I think, alluding hereto, 2. These. 2. 8.
calls Antichrist, Satan's eldest son, (...), because at his pleasure he shakes
off the yoke of obedionce to the laws, both of God and man; and such, as go
about to advance his kingdom by inciting men to serve other Gods, are called
the children of Belial, Deuteronomy. 13. 13.

Now as there are sons of Belial, so are there things of Belial, of which we
read, Deuteronomy. 15. 9. And here in this place, I will set no wicked thing, or
thing of Belial, before mine eyes: whereby may be understood any divelish
thing, tending to withdraw us from sobriety and godliness, whether it be so in
its own nature, or by our corrupt nature it be made so to us: as, lascivious
spectacles, wanton pictures, either dead or living, or images for religious
use, which some good Divines are of opinion our Prophet here meant. Nothing
more different from Beliall than God, than Christ, than a glorified Saint; and
yet than the representation of God, or of Christ, or of a Saint for religious
use, nothing more a thing of Belial, be it never so curiously wroght, never so
artificially graven or carved, never so lively colored, or richly attired:
nay, be it of massy silver and gold, garnished with jewels and precious
stones; yet beening put to religious use, it is still a thing of Belial. And
the more divine the person is who^ it represents, and the more artificial the
representation, the more dishonor it does him who is adored in it; and the
more it insnares him who does adore by it: and consequently, it still proves
the more a thing of Beliall.

Now, the best way for a man to keep himself free from this offense, is, To
keep him free from the society, at least the domestic and familiar society,
the inward bosom-acquaintance of those, who think it a main part of their
religion, to set such things before their eyes. The Ark and Dagon will not
stand together: neither can a Crucifix, ordained to such an use, and Christ
himself well dwell together under the same roof.

I read in the second of Samuel 16. 7, that Shimei called David a man of
Beliall: and being then guilty to himself of setting a thing of Beliall
before his eyes, in the matter of Bathsheba, though Abishai would presently
have taken Shimei his head from his shoulders, yet would not David suffer him
so much as to touch a hair of his head: he took it as patiently as he did the
reprooving of Nathan the Prophet; though the one came to gall him, and the
other to cure him. He saw the hand of God in it, that, having set a thing of
Belial before his eyes, one should not be wanting to tell him that he was a
man of Beliall. It was malice in Shimei, patience in David, justice in God. The
malice of Shimei was afterward justly punished, the patience of David rewarded,
and the justice of God ever admired. Nay, herein again appears the justice
of God, that, if we set wicked things before our eyes for the commit^ing of
sin, God in his season sets the guilt of it before our eyes; being committed
for the conversion of some: as, Psalm. 51. 3, I know my transgressions, and my
sin is ever before me; but, for the confusion of others, I will
reproovet^ee, and set before thee the things that thou have done, Psalm. 50. 21.
Therefore says our Prophet, I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes.

Before mine eyes. More danger there is of setting wicked things before this
sense, than any other: and therefore our Prophet, having prayed GOD to turn his
heart to the keeping of his testimonies, immediately adds, Turn away mine
eyes, O Lord, from regarding vanity, Psalm. 119. 37; as supposing this later the
readiest means and best way for attaining the former. But Job steppeth yet one
degree further, from a Prayer to a Vow, I have made a covenant with mine eye:
why then should I look on a maid? 31. 1. And which is more, from a Vow to an
Imprecation. If mine heart have walked after mine eye, let me sow, and let
another eat, yea let my plants be rooted out, verse 7. This was the Vow and the
Imprecation of this holy man; howbeit the common practice of men be that of
Solomon; Thine eyes shall look upon strange women, and thine heart shall
speak lewd things. I remember, I have read a Dialogue betwixt the Eye and the
Heart, which of them should work most mischief; and the conclusion of it was,
Ratio litem dirimit
Definitivo calculo,
Cordi causam imputans,
Occasionem oculo:


Reason takes up the matter, and decides the controversy, by imputing the
cause to the Heart, and the occasion to the Eye; the Eye being as it were the
Pandar or Broker, but the Heart the Strumpet: though S. Peter seem to impute it
to the Eye, Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin, 2. Pet.
2. 14; or, as the Original reads it, full of an adulteress. Where we see (by a
figurative manner of speech) the very chair and throne of wantonness to be
seated in the Eye; how^^it it be in truth but the passage and pipe to convay it
to the soul: yet such a passage as the Fathers generally understand of it,
those passages of Jeremy, Death has climed up by the windows, 9. 21. And
again, Lament. 3. (as the Vulgar reads it) Oculus meus depraedatus est animam
meam, mine ey has made a prey of my soul.

Which, the very Heathens well understanding, in the dedication of the several
parts of man's body to their several gods and goddesses (as, the cars to
Minerva, the tongue to Mercury, the arms to Neptune) they leave the eye to
Cupid, their god of lust, as being the fittest for his use; the proverb
houlding alike in inordinate lust, as in ordinary love, Out of sight, out of
mind: Vbi dolor, ibi digitus; ubi amor, ibi oculus: as the finger always waits
on grief, so does the eye on lust. Whence it may be in the Greek, the same
word (only by the change of a vowell) signifies both to see and to love.
Valerius fitly calls the eyes the spies which ly in ambush for the un^lermining
of other men's marriages. And Alexander, using a different phrase, shot at the
same mark, when he called the Persian maids dolores oculorum, griefs of the
eyes; and thereupon in my judgment, he wisely refused, that Darius his wife
(whose beauty the Macedonians so much admired and commended) should be once
brought into his presence; as fearing lest he who had manfully subdued so many
nations, should himself be shamefully conquered at the sight of a woman: but
on the other side, the Comedians, says Clemens Alexandrinus, bring-in the
wanton Sardanapalus, sitting in an ivory chair, and casting his eyes in every
corner.

Dinah goes a straggling through the country: whom when Sichem, heir to the
Lord of the country, saw (says the text) he took her and lay with her, and
deflowred her. It is noted of Potiphars wife, that she first cast her eye on
Joseph, before she enticed him to folly; and of our Prophet, that from the roof
of the Kings Palace (their houses being square and flat on the top) he saw a
woman washing herself. And what followed upon it you know: first goes videt
hanc, then quickly comes after, visamque cupit, and instruments will not be
wanting for potiturque cupita.

-- vidit sine vest Dianam,
Praeda fuit canibus nec minus ille suis.
This irregular glancing, or inordinate gazing, is that which metamorphosies a
man into a beast, and makes him a prey to his own brutish affections.

The Devil knew full well the danger of this sense, when he presented before
our Saviors eye all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and
Hezekiah learned it to his grief, when he stirred up such coals in the
Babylonish Ambassadors by showing them his treasure, that they never left, till
they came and fetched it away. I saw among the spoil a goodly Babylonish
garment, says Achan, and two hundred shekles of silver, and a wedge of gold,
and I coveted them, and took them. Thus as it is the instrument of wantonness,
so is it of covetousne^s, and of gluttony and drunkenness too. Look not thou
(says Solomon) upon the wine when it is red, and when it shows his color in
the cup; in the end thereof it will hurt like a Serpent, and bite like a
Cocatrice, Prove. 23. 31. So is it of pride; looking-glasses being nothing else
but the artificial eyes of pride, as our natural eye is a kind of living
looking-glass, by which so many stains and blemishes are not discovered in
the face, as imprinted in the soul: and lastly, so it is of Idolatry; the
Prophet Esaias in his twentieth chapter, stiling the Idols of Egypt the
abomination of the eyes, twice within the compass of two verses, ver. 7. 8.
Whence it is, in my judgment, that among all those idolatrous nations which
worshipped false gods, and went a-whoring after their own in ventions, the
greatest part have ever consented in worshipping the host of heaven, the Sun,
the Moon or the Stars, which among all creatures the eye most admireth and
delights in. Good reason then had our Savior, to say, If thine eye be
evil, all the body is dark, Mat. 6. 23: and Saint John, 1. Epist. 2. 16, to
make the lust of the eyes one of those three fountains from which all other
vices stream.

The sonn^s of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair: and then
follows that mischief which drew on the flood on the old world. The first
woman saw the fruit of the tree of knowledge, that it was pleasant to the eye:
and from thence issued that first sin, the mother of all the evil which we
both do and suffer. Whence it may be, in the Hebrew the same word signifies
as well an eye, as a fountain; to show that from it, as from a spring or
fountain, did flow both sin it self, the cause of sin, and misery, the
punishment of both. And if our first parents were thus bewitched by the eye,
and thereby received their bane in the state of innocence, when their appetite
was yet subordinate to reason, and their reason to God, what can we promise to
our selves, Qui animas etiam incarnavimut, who have made our very spirit a lump
of flesh, prone to entertain vice; but, weak God knows, to resist it? They
are in a manner composed of flax or tinder, apt to conceive fire, and to be
inflamed by the least spark admitted by this sense: except it be speedily
repelled or quenched by grace.

Great reason then had our Prophet to pray, and we with him, Turn away mine
eyes, O Lord, from beholding vanity: great reason had he to promise and we
with him, I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: the one, for the
imploring of Gods assistance, and the other for the quickening of our own
endeavors.

I hate the work of them that fall away, or turn aside: it shall not cleave
to me.
BEcause, such as set wicked things before their eyes, commonly turn aside
after their own inventions and desires; therefore our Prophet having in the
former part of this verse, promised not to set any wicked thing before his
eyes, here he professes to hate the work of them that turn aside or fall
away.

I hate] It is but Stoicisme and vanity, to think that all passions either may
be or should be utterly rooted out of the soul. They cannot, being as
natural to the souls sensitive power, as the will and unsterstanding are to
the reasonable: they should not, in that Saint Paul, censures it as a fault, to
be without natural affection, Romans 1. 30
in that being qualified and corrected by reason, they become useful for the
executing of that which reason directs (they are good servans being kept under,
but bad commanders, having gotten the mastery) and lastly, in that they are
found even in the glorified Saints, in the blessed Angels, in Man before his
fall, in Christ as Man, and are in holy Scriptures attributed to God himself.

It is a good conclusion of Thomas; Animae paessiones malae moraliter dicend^
non sunt, sed quae contra and praeter rationis iudicium sunt: The passions of
the mind are not to be termed morally evil, but in that they are either
against or beside the dictate of reason: And of Augustine before him, Interest
qualis sit volunt as hominis: qui^ siperversa est, perversos habebit hos motus;
si autem recta est, non soluminculpabiles, sed etiam laudabiles erunt. It
availes not a little, how the will of man stands affected: which if it be
perverse, these affections will likewise be irregular; but if it be straight,
they will not only be without fault, but deserve commendation.

The ^ost universal, the most operative, and the most durable passions of the
soul, are Love and Ha^red: they spread farthest, they pearce deepest, they
last longest. Now, as all the other passions flow from love as their fountain,
so does hatred too. It may seem a strange assertion, yet is it certainly a
true one, Cum nihil odi^ habeatur nisi quod adversatur bono convenienti and
quod amatur, omne odium ex amore nasci necesse est: since we hate nothing but
what is contrary to the good we love, it cannot be, but hatred must spring
out of love. Fear arises from some danger apprehended of losing the thing we
love; grief, from the sense of the loss of that we love; and hatred, from the
impatience of opposition against that we love: so that the more our love is,
the more is our fear to lose that we love, the more our grief if we lose it,
and the more our hatred to that which opposes against it.

Since then our Prophets affection was such toward God, that his soul
thirsted for him as a dry land where no water is; that his heart panted after
him, as the Heart brayeth after the waterbrooks, that his favor was better to
him than life it self, and his words sweeter than honey, more precious than
thousands of gold and silver; it cannot be, but his hatred should answer in
proportion to that which is opposite to Gods law, and derogatory to his glory.
No mervail then, that he not only mislikes, or dis-affects, or approoves not;
but detests, abhorres hates the work of them that fall away.

An hatred there is of malice, and an hatred of zeal; the one profane and
carnal, the other holy and divine: the one, as a stinking and poysonsome weed,
shoots up every where through the field of the world: the other, as a precious
herb or rare outlandish flower, comes up thin, and that but in a few men's
gardens, neither prospers it long without much tending and cherishing. The one
is sown in our hearts by that envious man, who hates the light, because his
deeds are evil; the other, planted by that good Spirit, who hates all the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5. 5. Of it speaks our Savior, The world hates me,
because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil: And our Psalmist,
the type of our Savior, They that hate me without a cause, are more in number
than the hairs of my head.

To hate those that hate us, is heathenish; to hate those that are harmless
and innocent, is brutish; but to hate those that love us, and seek our good by
telling us the truth, that is divelish. Am I therefore your enemy, because I
tell you the truth? says S. Paul to the Galathians: And Ahab to Eliah, Have
thou found me, O mine enemy? Yet this enemy of his it was, that brought him at
last to an outward and seeming repentance at least, and consequently to the
turning away of Gods wrath in his days. This kind of hatred is one of those
three bad daughters, born of three good mothers: Contempt being commonly the
birth of Familiarity; Idleness, of Peace; and Hatred, of Truth. But, this is
not of kin to the hatred our Prophet here speaks of* So far was he from hatred
of the truth, that (I think) he loved and honored the Propher Nathan the
better while he lived, for telling him the truth, when others flattered him.
Once I am sure, that afterward he gave him free access into his bedchamber,
and named him a Commissioner for the declaring of his Successor: 1 King. 1
but the hatred here spoken of, is of vice and superstition, arising from the
love of truth and virtue: without which, he that is hottest in matters of
religion, can be but lukewarm; and he that walks most upright, must needs
halt between two opinions. This hatred then as it is commended in private men;
so is it necessary in Magistrate; just anger being the whetstone of courage,
and this hatred, of justice: which, as one truly says, delights not so much to
see men severely punished, as justice duly executed; that is* hates the work,
but loves the person: therefore says our Propher, I hate the work of them
that turn aside; not the persons but the work, that is the object of his
hatred, and the second thing I am to speak of.

The work.] As we are not to love the vice for the man's sake, so neither are
we to hate the man for the vice. It is proper to God alone, who as Creator
has ius vitae and necis, an absolute dominion over all his creatures
(disposing of them at his pleasure) to affect or reject, to love or hate them,
as he will; his will being indeed the measure of right, and the rule of
justice. Unto Cain and his offering, he had no respect, Genesis 4. 5. First, he
had no respect to Caine, his person; and then to his work, his offering: and
yet he did him no wrong. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated: and the
Apostle adds, the children being yet unborne, neither having done any good,
or evil. What shall we say then, Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid. Has not the Pot^er power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? Shall the thing formed, say to him
that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Now, because we are to conform
our wills to Gods will, that is, his revealed will (in as much as we cannot
conform our selves to that we know not, and he reserves to himself) we may
therefore safely and justly hate those, whom God has namely and particularly
expressed that he hates; but, for others, we may and we ought to hate their
lying and their fal^e ways, as our Prophet speaks: but for the Liars
themselves, and those that walk in such ways, we have no warrant that I
know, to hate them.

There is a perfect hatred mentioned by our Prophet, Psalm. 139: which Saint
Augustine understands to be, when a man hates the manners, but loves the man;
when he hates the action, but loves the person. False witnesses did rise up
against me* they laid to my charge things that I knew not, says he, Psalm.
35; there is their action, that he hated: nevertheless when they were sick, I
put on sackcloth, and humbled my self with fasting; there is his love to their
persons. 2. Sam. 15. He prays against the wicked policy of Achitophel: O
Lord, I pray thee turn the counsel fo Achitophel into foolishnes; but against
Achitophel himself, we find not that he prayed: howbeit, David had advanced
him to honor, and he now sided with those Rebels that had taken up arms
against him. It is to this purpose good advice of Saint Augustine, Hominem Deus
fecit, praevaricatorem ipse se fecit; ama in illo quod Deus fecit, persequere
in illo quod ipse sibi fecit; God made man upright, but they have found out
many inventions to make themselves crooked: Love that in him which God made,
but hate that in him which himself made. And in another place, Nec propter
vitium oder is hominem, nec ames vitium propter homine^, sed oder is vitium,
ames hominem. Many think they may love God, and yet hate their brother: but
Saint John is bold to put the lie upon such, 1. John 4. 20; If any man say, I
love God, and hates his brother; he is a liar. If any man like not the phrase,
let him challenge him for it. Others think they may hate their brother, and yet
God love them well enough: but them he tells, Whosoever hates his brother is a
murderer; and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him:
and if not eternal life, then not the love of God, 1. Ioh. 3. 15. The object
then of our hatred, must be the work, not the man: we must learn Parcere
personis, dicere de vitijs.

It is the commendation of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2. 6.
This thou have, that thou hate the deeds of the Nicholaitans, which Ialso
hate: not the Nicholaitans, but their deeds; and for those imprecations we
read of in diverse Psalms, or elsewhere in holy Scripture, seeming to
infer or include hatred to the persons, of those against whom they be poured
out, they are all either Indefinite, or Conditional, or Prophetical.
Indefinite, without naming or aiming at any particular person: or if they be
definite, naming some partilar person, then are they Conditional; intending in
the first place, if God have so ordained it, Conversion; if not, in the second,
Confusion: or if they be both definite and absolute, then are they
Prophetical, non tam vota quam vaticinia, speeches of men inspired, not so
much wishing what they foretell, as certainly foreseeing and foretelling that
which of themselves they wish not, Vt in verbis quasi mal^ optantis
intelligamus praedicta prophetantis, says Saint Augustine: or if they with it,
it is either because they know by revelation it is the will of God, or tht it
makes for the glory of God. And thus Moses wished his own name to be razed
out of the book of life, and Saint Paul himself accursed from Christ, and both
rather then Gods glory should be blemished by the scandalous imputation of the
Gentiles in the rejection of the Jews, his chosen people, To whom pertained
the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the service of God, and the
promises. This was it likewise that troubled our Prophet: he was not so much
moved for his own sake, as for Gods cause: he does not so much hate the work
of them that forsake him self, as of those that forsake God: not so much of
those who turned aside, or fell away from his friendship, as from the course of
a vertouous and religious life, or from th service of the true and living God.

I hate the work of them that fall away. Whether in doctrine or in mariers,
whether in convesation or in opinion, whether by impure life or false worship.
His zeal in this case (an affection equally compounded of love and anger) was
such, that it consumed him, and (as his own phrase is) ate him up: which
though it were mystically spoken of Christ, yet is it literally to be
understood of David; and yet withal his excessive grief, such that his eyes
poured out rivers of waters, because men kept not Gods law. Thus zeal kindled
a fire within him, and his grief resolved him into tears; to teach us that in
our heat to Gods cause, we forget not to be tenderly affected toward men, but
to join pity with our earnestness, and with our fervency, compassion; and to
our compassion, must be added knowledge and discretion: otherwise, shall we be
no better than those reprobate Jews, who had zeal; but not according to
knowledge: and out of this perfect composition, fervency, compassion, and
discretion, arises that perfect hatred touched before; but here falling into
its proper place, Do I not hate them, O Lord, that hate thee, and am I not
grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a perfect
hatred, as if they were mine enemies, Psa. 139. 21. David would scarce have
accounted them good Subjects, who should not have showed themselves enemies to
them, who were enemies to him, and the State; but reason then, if himself
would be reputed a good Subject unto God, or his Vicegerent on earth, he
should proclaim them his enemies, who had proclaimed themselves enemies to God
and religion.

When Croesus was assaulted in the sight of his dumb son, Herodotus.
they write, the force of Nature wrought so powerfully in him, that it unloosed
the strings of his tongue, and he cried out, Homo ne perimas Croesum. The
truth of of the story I leave to be defended by the Authors of it: but this
am I sure of, that scarcely any outward action more cleares our inward grace of
adoption, arguing us to be indeed the sons of God, then when we are truly
sensible of dishonor offered to our fathers name, when we imbark our selves in
his quarrels, and (as our Psalmist speaks in another place) The reproaches of
them that reproach him, fall upon us. It argued a righteous soul in Lot, to be
vexed, or as the Original has it, to be tortured, or racked, not so much with
the opposite on, as the unclean conversation of the Sodomites: and it argues
in a Chrihian man the renewing of the image of God, stamped upon him in his
Creation, and in a Christian Magistrate the acknowledgement of his
Lieutenantship to be held from God, when he shows himself as forward to make
laws, and draw his sword for the punishing of sacrilege as theft, blasphemy as
murder, idolatry as treason, atheism as rebellion; finally, when by his actions
it appears, that he is as zealous and careful of the honor and service of
God, as of his own either gain or glory. How many have vainly spilt their
blood for the defense of their mistresses beauty, or their own imaginary
reputation! which had they done in defense of God and religion, against
atheism, idolatry, or blasphemy, they had undoubtedly purchased both the
renown and reward of Martyrdom.

Now, as our Prophet professes to hate the work of al those that set
themselves against God and godliness; so of those most specially, who turn
aside from the right path in which they have sometime trod, or fall away from
that truth which they have formerly professed. It is true, that where true
justifying and sanctifying grace is once thoroughly seated and settled in the
heart, it can never utterly be rooted out: the degrees and measure of it may be
impaired and abated, but the habit cannot be ex^inguisht: the sense and
feeling of it may be interrupted, but the essence and being cannot be abolisht:
the act and exercise of it may be for a time suspended, but the character
remains indeleble: which, being once imprinted upon the soul, can never
afterward be blotted out or wiped away; inasmuch as Christ whom he loves, he
loves to the end, John 13. 1. his gifts and calling being without repentance,
R^. 11. 29. So then, this we must hold for a sure ground, Stella cadens non est
stella, cometa fuit: A star that falls was never indeed a star, it was but a
blazing Meteor. There may be an outward profession of doctrine, and
participation of the sacraments; nay, more than so, in regard of the
understanding, an inward inlightning in some measure; and a taste of the powers
of the world to come, in regard of the affections, Heb. 6: yet all this but a
counterfeit blaze. No marvel, then, if such not only turn, but turn aside;
not only fall, but fall away: They go out from us, because, though for a time
they were among us; yet indeed and in truth, they were never of us, 1. John 2.
19: but, it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them, 2. Pet. 2. 21. And better had it been for
the Church, never to have brought forth or brought up such grace-lesse
children. These then it is, that David as a Prophet must hate, and as a Prince
must punish; as being most injurious to the truth, most scandalous to the
Church, most dangerous to the State, and most odious to God: but, above all, he
must take heed that they prove not infectious to himself.

Shall not cleave to me. No work of them that fall away; but chiefly, their
work of Aposta^ie and falling away, That shall not cleave to me. As likeness
is the cause of love; and That, of union: so dissimilitude is the cause of
hatred; and That again, of separation. That which we hate, we suffer not to
come, or at least not to abide near us: but either we remove it from us, or
our selves from it; nothing being more hateful in it self, and in the sight
of God and good men, than to entertain and embrace that in our selves, Which we
profess we hate in others. David then having professed, that he hates the
work of them that turn aside, he could do no less than promise, it should not
cleave to him. Were their arguments never so plausible, their power or number
never so great, their neernesse by friendship or kindred never so inward; though
Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend: though Saul turn aside and
fall away, yet that is no warrant for David; nay, rather let Saul's falling away
serve to warn David. The one fell away and lost his Kingdom by it: but the
other would not fall away, though it were to the gaining of a Kingdom, nay, all
the Kingdoms of the world and the glory of them: they being temporal; but the
sting, which follows upon this defection and final apostasy, eternal.
Witness that desperate voice of cursed Julian: who, sprinkling his blood in the
air, cried out; Vicisti Galilaee, vicisti; O Galilean, thou have overcom.

Now, the way to keep us that this damnable work of apostasy cleave not to
us, is, to keep us from cleaving to the Apostates themselves, or suffering
them to adhere or cleave to us; and withal, to cleave fast to God. This was
David's practice. For the first, Their drink offerings of blood will I not
offer, nor take up their names within my lips, Psalm 16. 4. So far was he
from cleaving to them, or suffering them to cleave to him. And for the second,
It is good for me to hold fast by God, Psalm. 73. 27. And again, I have stuck
to thy testimonies, O Lord, put me not to shame, Psalm. 119. 31. This his utter
disclaiming of the one, and sticking close to the other, was it that made him
so bold in another Psalm. Mine heart is fixed, O God, mine heart is fixed, 57.
7; and so confident here, It shall not cleave to me. I conclude with the
exhortation of the Apostle, Saint Paul, Take heed, brethren, lest at any time
there be in any of you an evil heart and unfaithful, to depart away from the
living God, Heb. 3. 12. And with the prayer of S. I^^de, verse 23. 24, Now unto
him that is able to keep you that ye fall not, and to present you faultlesse
before the presence of his glory with joy, that is, to God only wise, our
Savior, be glory and majesty, and d^minion, and power, both now and for ever.

Verse 4. The froward heart shall depart from me: I will know none evil; or, I
will not know a wicked person.
He had promised in the second verse to walk with a perfect heart: and here he
promises, A froward heart shall depart from him. Now, though that part of his
Vow be set before this in place, yet has this the precedence of that in
order: scales must first fall from S. Paul's eyes, before he can see clearly;
and Naaman must first be cleansed of his leprosy, before his flesh com again
as the flesh of a young child. We must first deny our selves, before we can
follow Christ; and the heart must first leave to be froward, before it begin
to be upright: as the distemper of the body must first be remooved, before
health can be restored; and darkness first chased away, before the light
break forth.

In the Verse immediately going before, he professed he hated the work of
those that fall away, or lepart from God. Now, the best way to provide, that
himself might not be found faulty in that which he hated in others, was, to
strive that a froward heart should depart from him. For, the more this
frowardnes decreaseth in us, the nearer we draw to God; and the closer it
sticks unto us, the farther we wander from God. True indeed it is, that it can
never utterly depart our souls, till our souls depart our bodies, and both
body and soul depart this vale of tears. While the heart lives its natural
life, it will also live in our hearts: and, as the heart is among the bodily
members the first that lives, and the last that dies; so is this amongst all
the corrupt affections of the heart: yet must we still labor to mortisie it,
that though it remain, yet it reign not in us; though it live, yet the
strength of it be broken, and the head of it crushed.

Again, in that he speaks of parting with a froward heart, he freely
acknowledges, that though he were by grace a man after Gods own heart; yet by
nature being without God as well as others, he could not be without this
froward heart; neither his Calling, nor his Crown could privilege him in that
Case: unless in becoming a King, he should leave to be a man; and being
advanced in dignity, he should shake-off nature: which being void of grace,
rather serves to deprave nature farther, than any way to correct it.

Once in this Psalm he promised a reformation of his eyes, twice of his
heart: therefore a double watch is to be set over the heart, in regard of any
other member. Solomon begins with it, Prove. 4. 23, Keep thy heart with all
diligence; or as the Original reads, abo^e all keeping, as a man would say
with double diligence: for out of it are the issues of life. And from the heart
he comes to the mouth, ver. 24. Put away from thee a froward mo^th; and from
the mouth to the eyes, ver. 25. Let thine eyes look right on; and from the
eyes to the feet, ver. 26. Ponder the path of thy feet; and from the feet to
the hand, ver. 27. Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left: thereby showing
us, that the heart is as the first wheel of the Clock: if this be either
righ^, or disordered, so are the rest. For, as out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks; so the eyes look, the feet walk, the hand moves.

As the heart is the shop of the vital spirits, and they again the food of
the natural life: so is it likewise the fountain of new birth, and That the
beginning of our spiritual life. Those sacrifices, in which no heart was
found, were by the Heathen counted ominous.

Their conceit therein might be superstitious; but I am sure it is true, that
those religious exercises in which the heart is wanting, cannot be acceptable
unto God. Hear, then, with thine ^^res, but with thy heart too; pray ^^th thy
lips, but with thy heart too; receive the^ Sacrament with thine hand, but with
thy heart too: otherwise, thy hearing, thy praying, thy receiving, being
heartless, will in the end prove f^uitless. Therefore does our ^rophe^ so
often beat upon this heart-string, A froward heart shall depart from me.

Frowardnes is sometimes universally extended to the whole corruption of the
heart: as, Psalm. 58. 3, The ungodly are froward, even from their mothers womb:
and so it includes both Ieremies deceitful heart, 17. 9, The heart is
deceitful above all things, who can know it? and Ezekiels stony heart, 11. 19.
I will take from them their stony heart, and give them a heart of flesh: and
Saint Stephens uncircumcised heart; Acts 7. 51. Ye stiffnecked and
uncircumcised in heart and ears: and Saint Paul's foolish heart, Romans 1. 21.
They became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of
darkness. And thus our froward heart is both stony, and uncircumcised, hard,
an^ impure, in regard of it self; deceitfu^^ full of windings and turnings, in
regard of men; and lastly, foolish, void of all true knowledge and
understanding, in regard of God. Now, to this hard we must oppose a tender
heart, compassionating the miseries of men, relentin^ at the threatenings of
God, and bleeding in the consideration of its own natural hardness. To this
impure we must oppose a clean heart, Create in me O God a clean heart;
clean, though not from all stain, yet from the foul blots of gross sins;
though not from all impuritie, yet from hypocrisy. To this deceitful we must
oppose a simple heart, sine plicis, without pleits and foldes, speaking as we
think, and doing as we speak: and lastly, to this foolish we must oppose a
wise heart; wise I mean in things appertaining to salvation, and the mysteries
of godliness.

More specially, frowardness against God, in holy Scripture, is contracted
either to stubbornness and rebellion, in not submitting our necks to the yoke
of his law; or to repining and murmuring, in not submitting our backs to the
rod of his chastisement. The first is perverseness and obstinacy, and it shows
it self either in preferring the traditions of men before, or equalling them
to the Oracles of holy Scripture, and the ordinances of Christ* or which is as
bad, if not worse, in preferring the devices and desires of our hearts before
the express injunction or inhibition of Gods commandments: fair pretenses may
be made for the former; but for the later no color, no excuse at all. I will
instance only in the two last precepts of the first table, because they
immediately concern the honor of God. Thou shall not take my name in vain,
says God: if then I speak of him jestingly or inconsiderately, or swear by
him rashly or falsely, knowing what he commands, and my self practice; Does not
this argue a froward heart?

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, says God. If then I spend it in
gaming or idleness, in gluttony and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness,
knowing what he commands and my self practice; Does not this argue a froward
heart? This froward heart it is, that our Prophet does here promise to put
away. And surely not without great cause; since he had learned (no doubt) out
of the 26. of Levit. ver. 24, If ye will not be reformed, but will walk
stubbornly against me, I will also walk stubbornly against you, I will punish
you yet seven times: that is, in the highest degree. Neither could he be
ignorant or forgetful of the message of Samuel to Saul, yet fresh in memory,
To obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams: but
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness as idolatry; Because
thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected thee from being
King, 1 Samuel 15. 22. 23. Nay, himself had told us in another Psalm, Psalm. 18.
26
speaking of God, With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the
froward thou will show thy self froward: or as the Original bears it, Thou will wrestle with the froward. Now, if God come to wrestle with man, though
with the stoutest of men, the commander of heaven and earth with dust and
ashes, it cannot but prove impar congressus, as the wrestling of a Giant with a
Dwarf; we shall make no match with him: He it is that loses the bond of
Kings, and powers contempt upon Princes, if they contemn him, Job 12. As
severe as they are toward their inferiors, if they carry themselves frowardly
toward them; so severe is he to them if they carry themselves frowardly
toward him. Let them always then remember, that Omne sub regno graviore regnum
est:

Every earthly kingdom must yield an account to a higher. And let them deal
with God, as they would have others to deal with them: the same obedience
which they expect from others, themselves must first perform to God. And the
more and greater blessings they have received from him, the stronger is their
obligation of obedience to him: specially considering that God demands it at
our hands, as a thing not any way beneficial to himself ( For, our goodness
extends not to him, Psalm 16. 1) but only as profitable to our selves.
Neither does he bind us to any blind obedience as the Padres do their
novices; nor exacts at our hands the sacrificing of our sons and daughters, and
the passing of them through the fire, as the Devils did of the Heathen: but
only ties us to his will revealed in his word. The execution whereof is no
less comfortable for this present life, then necessary for that which is to
come. The first thing then, and the chief, in abandoning this frowardness,
is, the submitting of our necks with all forwardness to the yoke of Gods
law; which though it seem at first to be burdensome to flesh and blood, yet
that being once mastered, His commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. Nay,
his yoke is easy, and his burden light, Mat. 11. 30.

The next is the submitting our backs to the rod of his chastisement; and as
the former required our obedience, so does this our patience. For, after we
have by our obedience done the will of God, yet even then we have need of
patience for the finishing of the race that is set before us, Heb. 10. 36. It
is a fair step to perfection and victory, when a man can say with the Church in
the 44. Psalm, Though all this become upon us, yet forget we not thee, nor
behave our selves frowardly in thy covenant. And with Mauritius the Emperor,
when he felt the utmost of misery, Iustus es Domine, and iusta sunt iudicia
tua, Righteous art thou O Lord, and upright are thy judgments: and with that
noble Lord of Plessis, when he had lost his eldest and his only son, and as I
take it, his only child, a Gentleman of marvelous great hope, Tacui and non
locutus sum, quia tu Domine fecisti: I held my peace and opened not my mouth,
because it was thy doing O Lord. I deny not but the best may at times, when
they feel the hand of God heavy upon them, grow pettish, and break out with
Job, Let the day perish wherein I was borne; or with Eliah, It is enough, now
O Lord take awaey my life; or with Jonah, I do well to be angry even unto
death: (though that were indeed an high degree of impatience) or with our
Prophet, Has the Lord forg^tten to be gracious, and will he shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure.

These motions may suddenly arise in their hearts, and they may speak
unadvisedly with their lips: yet they take care that frowardness do not
possess their hearts. And when they come to themselves, they are as ready to
say with one of them, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15.
And with another, Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear none evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they
comfort me, Psalm 23. 4. When a man is once grown to this assurance, that God
loves him; he takes every stroke at Gods hand as a several pledge of his
love, and kisses the very rod that strikes him; as knowing that the rod of
Aaron, and the pot of Manna must go together: but, when that assurance wants,
if God strike a man for his disobedience, it makes him fret with impatience,
till that provoke another stroke: and the more he is st^^cken, the more
impatient he grows; and again, the more impatient he grows, the more is
he st^^cken: till in the end, instead of confession and submission, he break
out into open defiance and rebellion against his striker, challenging his Maker
of injustice, and from that to indignation and gnashing of teeth; which is
nothing else, but a kind of frowardnes proper to Devils and damned spirits.
Now, the higher we are in place, the more impatient we commonly are of crosses,
supposing we should have God at our beck, as we have men, and being apt to say,
with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that he should thus cross me: but let such take
heed, lest while they imitate Pharaoh in his rebellion, they partake with him
in his confusion.

Now, as from the love of God flows the love of man: so from this frowardness
of obstinacy and impatience toward God, for the most part issues a frowardness
of ha^shnes and bitterness toward men, opposite to that meekness which
Christianity, and that sweetness of disposition which moral Phylosophie
teaches us. The symptoms of it are, a bended brow, a frowning eye, a sharp
tongue, a a hanging lip, a clowdy and lowering countenance; the ca^ses,
self-conceit, and sco^^e of others, an overvaluing o^ our selves, and a
dis^steeming o^ others; the eff^^ts, di^^iculty in acc^sse, and roughness in
^n^^^tainement, and in regard of others both ^eare and hatred, two inseparable
companions.

Absolo^s fair speech, and stretching forth of the hand, was it that stole the
hearts of the men of Israel: as on the other side Rehoboams crabbedness was it
that forced the people to say, What portion have we in David, neither have
we inheritance in the son of Iesse, to your tents O Israel. One gentle word,
one gracious look would then have won them for ever, whereas his dogged answer^
wrought him a deep and irrecoverable loss. Vt ameris, amabilis esto, the way
to be beloved, is to be lovely in carriage, and amiable in condition: and the
best guard of Commanders, is the love of inferiors.

Non sic excubiae, non circumstan^ia pil^,
Quam tutatur amor: --
All the poleaxes and halberds in the world, cannot so safely guard the person
of a Sovereign, as the love of his Subjects. Who can find in his heart to lift
up his hand against such a Prince, Qui neminem a se dimisit tri^tem, who never
dismis^^d any Petitioner with a tear in his eye, or a heavy heart; nay, he
counted that day as lost, in which he had not done some body some special
favor: which made him styled Deliciae generis humani, the darling of mankind
while he lived; and being dead, Sueton us, of Titus.
Senatus tantas mortus gratias egit, la^desque congessit, quantas ne viuo
quidem vnquam atque praesenti, The Senate gave him more thanks, and loaded him
with more praise being dead, then ever they did living and present. This virtue
then of affability and courtesy (a word derived as it seems, from the Court)
as it is commendable in private men; so in a Magistrate, such as David, is it
in a manner necessary: as the contrary vice of frowardness, which in private
men is uncomly and unchristian, in them is both dishonorable and dangerous.
Let churlish Laban then deal discurteously with Jacob; and Nabal (the same
name by inversion of letters) with David and his followers, insomuch as one of
his own family shall testify against him, He is such a son of Belia^ that
a man cannos speak to him, 1. Sam. 25. 17; yet shall he be held but a froward
fool for his labor, he shall be cursed and hated of all men, as a disastrous
Comet: when such as with David put away a froward heart, and crooked behavior
shall be honored as luckie planets.

It follows, I will know none evil.] or as both our vulgar English and last
Translation read it, [ I will not know a wicked person] the Original bears
both: and if we take it the first way, it is to be referred to things; if the
second, to men* Evil, in as much as it has no Entitie or Being it in self,
but in good, and nothing can be farther known then it has a Being,
consequently it cannot be known of us in it self, but only by the knowledge
of good; as darkness is by the knowledge of light, and sickness by the knowledge
of health. Rectu^ est index sui et obliqui, the evenness of a straight line, is
the best way to discover the unevenness of a crooked; and the knowledge of
true syllogisms, the deceit of fallacies. This knowledge of evil then arising
by reflection from good, is not in it self unlawful; in as much as God thus
knows the utmost extent and possibility of evil, though never acted, or to
be acted, and yet remains altogether untainted in himself, as the
Sunne-beames which glaunce upon sinks or dunghils. Yet this very knowledge,
though not unlawful in it self, in regard of our corrupt nature to us it is
dangerous; like a spark cast upon flax or tinder, which easily conceives fire.
Adams eating of the tree of Knowledge of good and evil, was it that brought
all that ensuing misery upon himself and his posterity, yet was he then in
the state of innocence. To know evil that we may run the farther from it, or
hate it the more, is good: but now, there is such a sympathy between us and
it, that for the most part the more we know it, whether it be by reading or
by relation, or experience, the more are we inamoured of it.

Ign^ti nulla cupid^.
We need not then go seek it in books, or far countries: it will comesoone
enough and fast enough of it self, it will come home to us, and find us out.
Let us resolve then with our Prophet, that we will not seek so much as the
knowledge of evil, farther than for the better practice of good.

But I rather fasten upon our vulgar and last translation, I will not know a
wicked person.] For a Magistrate to know wicked persons that he may punish
them, is a part of his duty. And for a private man to know them, that he may
shun their company, is a sign both of honesty and discretion. Take away the
dross from the silver, Pro. 25. 4. 5
and there shall come forth a vessel for the Finer: take away the wicked from
before the King, and his throne shall be established in righteousness; and this
does our Prophet promise in the last verse of this Psalm. But for a Magistrate
or private man to know the^, that is, to entertain them, to credit or
countenance them, to admit them into their friendship or service, to lodge them
in house with them, or place them in office under them; is that which our
Prophet, and with him all good men, specially all good Magistrates, utterly
disavow: considering the threefold hazard from thence manifestly incurred of
Suspicion, of Infection, of Malediction. Of suspicion from others, of infection
in themselves, of malediction and punishment from God.

The hazard of Suspicion from others, in as much as we commonly guess at a
man's inclination by the disposition of his servant or company, because (for the
most part) birds of a feather will together. 1. These. 5. 22, the Apostle wills
us to abstain from all appearance of evil: whereof this surely is one.

The second hazard is of Infection; such being both the corruption of our
nature, and the nature of our corruption, that, if the good and bad meet, the
good is rather soiled by the bad, than the bad any way bettered by the good. It
is written of Mezentius the tyrant, Corpora corporibus iungebat mortua vivis:

He bound the dead and the living together; but the dead did not revive by the
living: the living rather putrefied by reason of the dead. The fresh waters,
running into the Sea, do not sweeten it, but are made brackish by it. It is but
madness for a man to presume upon an Antidote in going to the Pesthouse, when
he may keep himself from it. It is indeed the property of oil, being poured
into other liquors, to swim on the top, and keep it self unmixed; and of the
Salamander, to ly in the fire and not be burnt: but, this quality is rare.
Even in Paradise, the woman, whom God himself gave to the man, being infected
by the Serpent, infects the man, and that at the first assault: and shall any
man, now being shut out of Pardiase, and stripped of those supernatural helps
and graces wherewith Adam was invested, think himself more able to resist,
than he? No, no: Evil words corrupt good manners; much more a continual
evil conversation. Reiterated importunity will at length make a breach upon
the soul, though in our judgment never so thoroughly fensed: as the long
playing of the Cannon batters the wall, and a continual dropping pearceth the
stone. Samson held out long against Dalilah; so did Solomon against his
outlandish wives: but, in the end, neither the wisdom of the one, nor the
strength of the other, could privilege or secure them; the grace of
Perseverance (as his Majesty well inferres thereupon) not being a Flower that
grows in our garden.

The third hazard is of Malediction from God. For, as the blessing of God falls
upon a whole society or family many times for one man's sake; as it did upon
all that sailed with Paul for his sake, and for Joseph's sake upon ^otiphar and
his house: so the plague and curse of God sometimes pursues a whole company for
one man's offense; as it did all that sailed with Jonas for his rebellion, and
the whole host of the Israelites for Achans theft. S. John would not abide
under the same roof with Ebion and Cerinthus, for fear it should fall down
about their ears. And, touching Babylon, he heard a voice; Go out of her, my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues, Revel. 18. 4: Like that of Moses to the Israelites, in the
sixteenth of Numbers, verse 26, Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these
wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye perish in all their sins.
Neither is it injustice in God, if we encourage or countenance sinners with
our presence or approbation (though we partake not with them in their sins)
to wrap us in the same vengeance.

Verse 5. Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off: him that
has an high look and a proud heart, will I not suffer.
Our Prophet having, in the la^er part of the verse going before, professed in
general, that he would not kn^we a wicked person, that is, entertain him in
his family and service, much less admit him unto his familiarity and
friendship; he comes in this verse, and in the seventh, to show in
particular, what wickedness it is he means, and specifies four kinds;
Slander, Pride, Deceit, Lies: Slander and Pride, in this verse; Deceit and
Lies, in the seventh. To these four several vices, he threatens four
several censures: to the first, cutting off; to the second, not suffering; to
the thi^d, not dwelling within his house; and to the fourth, not tarryi^g in
his sight. The first and worst vice is Slander, and with it is joined the
greatest punishment; destroying, or cutting off. First then, of the vice, which
is bad enough in it self; but is here aggravated by two circumstances, the
A^iunct and the Subject: the one as an Usher makes way for it; and the other as
an attendant, bears up the train. Slander is a Divelish Sin, but privy
slander makes it worse, and privy slander of a man's neighbor (that is, as I
take it, of a pretended friend) worst of all. And the more nearly it touches
him in his liberty or his life, in his goods or his good name: the greater the
person is to whom it is brought, and upon who^ it is cast: and the more
confidently it is affirmed; the more damnable it is. I will begin with the
naked vice it self, stripped out of the Circumstances.

Slander is a vice of the tongue, which is but a little member; yet is it (as
Aesop truly said) the best or worst meat that comes to the market: being well
or ill used, it becomes the instrument of great good or much mischief. Being
used to the glory of God, and the edification of our neighbor, it is the
crown and glory of a man; as our Prophet calls it, Psalm. 30. 12; To the end
my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent, that is, my tongue. But
on the other side, being abused to the dishonor of God, or the hurt of our
neighbor, it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of
Nature. This made our Prophet to pray, in one place, Set a vvatch O Lord,
before my mouth, keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 141. 3. And to promise in
another, I will keep my mouth with a bridle, or with a muzzell; I will take
heed to my ways* that I sin not with my tongue, Psalm. 39. 1. Which one
lesson Pambus a famous professor in the Primitive Church, plying hard nineteen
whole years together* (as himself witnesses in the fourth book and
eighteenth chapter of Socrates Ecclesiastical story) yet could he not learn
it so perfectly as to take forth a new: which the Author imputes not so much
to the dullness of the scholar, as to the difficulty of the lesson, in as much
as if there be any man that offends not in word, the same is a perfect man, and
able to bridle the whole body. For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of
serpents, and things in the Sea, i^ tamed* and has been tamed of mankind: but
the tongue can no man tame, It is an unruly evil full of deadly poison, Iam. 3.

The vices of this member are, Blaspheming, Swearing* Cursing, Dissembling,
Reviling, and those two named here in my Psalm, Slandering, and Lying: but of
the two, Slander named in my Text, is the worse, in as much as it includes a
Lie; it is a lie cum additamento* a lie and somewhat else. And again, a lie
though it be in it self always naught, yet does it not always tend to harm,
but slander does; it being as the School has rightly defined it, denigratio
alienae famae, the smutting of a man's good name. As flattery daubs white upon
black, so slander sprinkles black upon white; it is a false report (whether it
be by speaking, or by writing and libelling) wounding a man in his good name:
false, either by denying, disguising, lesning, concealing, misconstruing things
of good report; or else, in forging, increasing, aggravating, or uncharitable
spreading things of bad report; which though they be true, yet if I spread
them, not knowing them to be true, to me it is sin: nay, though I know them
to be true, and blase them abroad not for any love to the truth, nor for
respect to justice, nor for the bettering of the hearer, or the delinquent, but
only to disgrace the one and incense the other, I cannot avoid the imputation
of a slanderer.

Secondly, it is said to be a wounding instrument, and that justly; ^t being
compared by our Prophet sometimes to keen and cutting razors, sometime to
sharp and pearcing arrows, sometime to naked drawn swords, sometime to the
poison of Asps and Adde^s, sometime to spears and the teeth of wild beasts,
and sometimes again, to hot burning coals; and by Job, to a scourge, Thou
shall hide me from the scourge of the to^g^e, 5. 21. And yet none of these
commonly make such a wound, but a cunning Surgeon will cure them without any
great sign: whereas the rule of the Slaunderer is, Calumniare a^dacter, semper
aliquid h^ret, Lay on load boldly, somewhat will always stick by it: Many that
heard the slander, shall never hear the truth; all men by their ^aturall
corruption, being more apt both to believe, and to publish the one than the
other. The stroke of the rod makes marks in the flesh, Ecclus. 28. 17, but the
stroke of the tongue breaks the bones.

Besides, those other instruments wound commonly but one at one stroke, whereas
a slanderous tongue strikes and wounds no less than three at a blow. The
first and worst blow, he gives his own soul, infecting it with slander, and
making his conscience guilty of a lie. The second lights on the soul of him,
to whom he brings the false tales; for as we shall hereafter hear, the
plausible and willing hearer, is as far forth liable to censure, as the
^ale-bearer. The third and last stroke, lights on the reputation of the party
slandered: which though it be of the three the least; yet is it a very
grievo^s wound, and the third part of my definition, it is a false report,
wounding a man in his good name.

The Latins call it Detractio, because it is a kind of theft, in that it
steals from a man's good name; in in which sense our Savior may be thought
to have called them thieves, whom he whipped out of the Temple; because by
their buying and selling in it, they robbed God of his honor, profaning the
place consecrated to his worship. As then the Sl^nderer is a murderer, by
wounding a man in his reputation; so is he a thief in stealing from his good
name: nay, theft it is in the highest degree, and a degree beyond the highest
kind of theft, properly so called* and therein I affirm no more, than the
Prince of Schoolmen has done before me. Vitium detractionis quo proximi
l^ditur honor ex genere suo gravius est quam ^urtum: and his reason is; first,
because restitution may more easily be made of goods than of good name: which,
being once lost, for the most part is unrecoverable. Secondly, because a good
name is dearer to a man of understanding, than his goods; in as much as it has
a nearer affinity with our spiritual good: And a good name (says Solomon*
Prove. 22. 1.) is rather to be chosen than great riches, being better than
precious ointment, Eccles. 7. 2. Idest amplissimis and gra^^osissimis bonis
corporeis, says Iunius, Oyntme^ts are there named, because in those Eastern
parts they were laid up among the most precious things, even in the Kings
Treasury, as appears Esa. 39. 2, and were of all sorts highly este^med; not
only for civil use in anointing their faces and bodies, as well living as
dead; but for sacred use in anointing their Kings, Priests, and Prophets. And
this ointment is it, which in the 30. of Exodus is called the holy anointing
oil, compounded of oil olive, and Myrrh, and Cinnamon, and Calamus, and
Cassia, after the art of the Apothecary or the Perfumer: and whosoever
compounded any like to it, or put any of it upon a stranger, by Gods ordinance
he was to be cut off from his people. Even before this rare and costly
ointment, does Solomon prefer a good report; and not without cause, since the
one cannot keep the body from putrefying, as the other does the memory from
rotting. Well then, by how much more excellent and divine a good name is, by so
much more damnable and pestilent is this vice of detraction.

The Proverb is, Oculus and fama non patiuntur iocos, There is no good sporting
with the eye, or with a man's good name; the least aspersion cannot but be
offensive to either: and a wise man is as tender and sensible of the least
touch upon the one as the other. He was no fool, at least in moral matters,
who has told us, that Negligere quid de se quisque sentiat, non solum
arrogantis est sed and dissoluti, To be careless what men think or speak of
him, is the part not only of a proud but of a loose mind. And he was no
fool either in moral or spiritual, who exhorts us, Whatsoever things are of
goodreport, if there be any virtue, any praise, to think on those things,
Phil. 4. 8. Whereof Saint Augustine yields the reason, Propter ^os conscientia
nostra sufficit nobis, propter vos fama nostra non pollui, sed pollere debet in
vobis. In regard of a man's own self the keeping of a good conscience is
sufficient, if he be clear to Godward: but in regard of doing good to men,
specially in public places, a good reputation is no less necessary: which
he that by slander takes away, not only wrongs him from whom he takes it, but
others with whom he communicates in virtue, and to whom he might prove
beneficial; whereas standing in their opinion guilty of that whereof he is
accused, though wrongfully, neither his speeches nor his actions can be so
acceptable; and consequently, not so profitable unto them, as otherwise they
might be. To which purpose is that of Thomas, Auferre alicui famam valde grave
est, per cuius defectum impeditur homo a multis been agendis. And likewise,
that forenamed good Doctor and Pillar of the Christian Church, duly weighing
these dangerous effects, caused these two verses (as Possidius reports it in
his life) to be written in capital Letters over the Table where he took his
ordinary repast; Quisquis amat dictis absen^um rodere vitam,
Hanc mensam vetitam no verit esse sibi.


He that loves to detract from such as are absent, let him know, that his
presence at this table is not desired.

Another thing, which much aggravates this vice and the foulness of it, is,
that the Devil has his name from slandering, and a nature nothing dissenting
from his name: he slanders God to man, and man again to God, as his
instruments do man to man. God he accuses of envy to man, Genesis 3. 5, God
does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and
ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. And as he accuses God, to man,
of envy: so does he man, to God, of hypocrisy; Does Job serve God for naught?
have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that
he has on every side? thou have blessed the works of his hands, and his
substance is increased in the land: but, put ^orth thine hand now, and touch
all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face.

The Herbalists write of a certain Plant, which they call Divels-bit; so named
(as they say) because, being of sovereign use for mankind, the Devil is
thought (by simple people) of malice to bite off the root of it, which is found
very small, or none at all. Now, the root of the union betwixt God and man, is
the love of God to man, and the duty of man back again to God: and this root I
am sure we may truly call Divels-bit; not that he can ever bite it off, but
because he never leaves nibbling at it. This is he that stands before the
woman, Rev. 12, clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her
head a Crown of ^welve Stars, being now ready to be delivered of her child,
and he as ready to devo^re it being delivered. His endeavor is, either by
temptation to make a good purpose abortive, and to sti^le it in the womb or
birth, if he may: or if not that, by slander to devour it being brought into
the light. Let the slanderer then remember, as often as he opens his mouth to
that end, whether it be simply to disgrace another, or by his disgrace the
more to commend and justify himself; that, as it is a divine property, To
cover sin, where is hope of amendment, with the mantle of charity: so, To fain
a fault where it is not, or to amplify and extend it beyond truth where it is,
is a divelish condition: yet that which makes it worse, is, the doing of it in
secret, Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor.

This is the Adiunct that go^th before it, the Usher that makes way for it:
which notwithstanding is so inwardly essential unto the nature of it, that some
put it in the very definition, as a masterpeece; making open false accusation
(whether in judgment or otherwise) to be Calumny or Sycophancy; but secret,
Obloquie or Detraction: the ground of the former being commonly anger or
revenge, hope of reward or favor; but of the later, Emulation or Envy, which
is nothing else but an overgrown and inveterate anger.

And in regard of this quality of seeking corners, it may well be ranged among
the works of darkness; and the slanderer himself, among those creatures which
delight in darkness. With the Mole, he always works under ground; and, with
the Owl, he shuns the light: in which regard, in our Language is it called
backbiting, in as much as the Author of it loves not to stand to it, or to be
brought in question for the avouching of it; but, like a coward, not daring to
look a man in the face, nor to give him time to draw in his defense, he
assaults him behind at unawares, and thrusts him through: like a dog, he bites
a man by the shinnes, before he bark; and hurts, before his malice be espied:
as some kinds of lightning melt the blade in the scabberd, it remaining sound
and entire.

These secret whisperings (as the Apostle calls them, Romans 1. 29, and sets them
down as one of the marks of a reprobate mind) like the wind, which creeps-in
by the chinks and crevises in a wall, or the cracks in a window, prove commonly
more dangerous than a storm that meets a man in the face upon the Champain. And
the saying is, Avento percolato and inimico reconciliato libera nos, Domine;
from such kind of whisperers, good Lord, deliver us: which are so near of kin
to backbiters, that, in the place before alleged out of the Romans, they are
set immediately before them; and, in the 2. Cor. 12. 20, immediately after
them. Yet Calvin, therein following Thomas, puts this distinction between
them, that the Backbiter intends the impeachment of a man's good name, but the
whisperer breach of friendship, Obloquutor intendit infamiam, susurr^
discordiam: which is the worse of the two, in as much as friendship as far
exceeds reputation, as reputation does riches; reputation being referred to
friendship, as riches is to reputation.

There be six things (says Solomon, Pro. 6. 16.) which the Lord hates, yea
seven are an abomination unto him; among which the last and worst is, He that
sows discord. I will shut up this point with the exhortation of the Apostle
Romans 16. 17, Now I beseech you brethren mark them which cause divisions,
specially by these kinds of slanderous whisperings, contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them.

The second thing, which in my text aggravates this offense, is the person
offended, a man's neighbor: He that privily slandereth his Neighbor. In the
largest sense, Proximus tuus est qui tecum natus est ex Adams and Eva, says
Augustine, He is thy neighbor, who is borne of the same race with thee of
Adam and Eve. Thus is it taken in the ninth and tenth Commandments, Thou shall
not bear false witness against thy neighbor: Thou shall not coet thy
neighbors house. And by our Savior in the tenth of Saint Lukes Gospel. And I
deny not, but it may thus be understood, and be as generally extended here in
my text: Yet because our Prophet here chiefly intended the ordering of his
household, I think this word is here to be contracted to such as dwell together
under the same roof, and converse together in the same family: which is
favored by Montanus his Translation, Obloquentem socio suo, him that
slaundereth his fellow.

It is a bad bird, they say, that defiles his own neast: and surely it is a
sign of little grace, when a man slanders those that should be nearest and
dearest unto him; when Cham uncovers his fathers shame; when Siba by presents
and false suggestions obtaines his Masters inheritance, 2. Sam. 16; when the
Mistress of the house by slander and wrongful accusation shall cause her
servant, her faithful servant Joseph, to be cast into prison. It was the blow
of Bru^us that struck deepest into Caesar; and it is the slander of a pretended
friend that gives the most dangerous wound.

Such are excellently described by Bernard, in his 24. Sermon upon the
Cantitles, Detractores autem quodam simulatae verecundiae fuco, etc. The
Slanderers, under the color of feined modesty, labor to shadow that malice
which they cannot keep in: you shall see them send forth deep sighs; and with
a kind of gravitie and slaiedness, with a sad look and whining voice, to
pour forth their slander: which passes by so much the more plausibly, as it
is thought by those that hear it, to proceed not from any ^nvious, but a
condoling affection. I am very sorry (says he) for him, because I love him,
and have often admonished him thereof, but could never reclaim him: the thing
was known unto me before, but it should never have been published by me; yet
now that it is blown abroad by others, I cannot deny the truth, indeed it is
so. Hitherto Bernard. And who would think that a contemplative Abbot, living
within the cloisters of a Monastery, should be so perfect in the tricks of the
Court? And so I come from the vice to the Censure, from the slanderers cutting
and wounding of others, to the cutting of him off; Him that privily slandereth
his neigbour, him will I destroy, or cut off.

He promises of other offenses, he would not suffer them, they should not
dwell within his house, or tarry in his sight; but of this, like a rotten
incurable member when no other remedy will serve the turn, off they must. He
would not himself raise slanders upon innocents, that he might enter upon
their possessions, and then cut them off; as Iezabel dealt with Naboth: but he
would rather right the innocent, by cutting off the slanderer.

Now, a double kind of cutting off there is; either from favor, or friendship
or service, and that's for private persons: or from the participation of
religious exercises with the Church: and that's for the Magistrate
Ecclesiastical; or from liberty, by banishment; or lastly, if the case so
require, from life it self, by inflicting of death; and that's for the Civil
Magistrate: and this case in the Leviticall Law was only when the slander
reached to the life of him, upon who^ it was raised, Deuteronomy. 19. 19. He that
testifies falsely against his brother, ye shall do to him as he thougth to
have done to his brother: eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, life for
life. But for private men, all the cutting off they can use, is the shutting of
their doors, and the stopping of their cares against them; making
demonstration, by speech or countenance, of distasting their base practice;
according to that wholesome advice of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 11, Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reproove them.
And surely all honest men have reason to do it, not only in that they have
reason to conceive, that he who brings a slander upon another to them, will be
as ready upon occasion to carry a slander upon them to another; but withal
because Solomon tells us, that the wicked gives heed to false lips, and a
liar hearkeneth to a naughty tongue, Prove. 17. 4. It it a shrewd sign that a
man is that way disposed himself, when he gives way to others without any
check or control. And besides, it is a conclusion agreed upon by the best
Divines, Audiens detrahentem cui possit resistere, sed ei placet detractio,
eiusdem detractionis reus est: He that hears the slaunderer quietly when he
may resist him, so as the slander seems to please him, he is becomne guilty
of the same offense. Wherewith that of Bernard in his second book de
Consideratione ad Eugenium accords, Detrabere aut detrahentem audire quid horum
damnabilius sit non facile dixerim: To de^ract, or to listen to the detraction,
which of these two is the worse I cannot easily define: the one having, as he
adds, the Devil in his tongue; the other in his ear. And of Isidore, in his
third book de Summo bono, Non solum ille reus est, qui falsum de alio profert,
sed and is qui cito aurem criminibus praebet: He is not only guilty, that
raises a false report of another, but he also who readily listens thereunto.
The ground heerof is taken from the last verse of the first to the Romans, Not
only they which commit such things are worthy of death, but they also that
consent unto them that do them. Now consent is either indirect, when a man
resists it not being in his power; or direct, in advising or enticing to the
doing of it, or in abetting of it, or delighting in it being done.

It is the Receiver that makes the thief, and a smiling countenance and open
ear that makes and maintains a Slanderer: Whereas on the other side, As the
North wind drives away the rain; so does a frowning look the slanderous
tongue, Pro. 25. 23. It is like the casting of a dart, or the shooting of an
arrow against a flint, or piece of brass, it reflectenth back again upon the
face of the shooter. Et discit non libenter dicere, quod videt non libenter
audiri; He learnes not to speak that willingly, which he finds to be
unwillingly heard. Therefore it is that our Prophet ioynes both together, Psalm.
15. Who shall abide in thy tabernacle, or who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He
that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor receives a false report against his
neighbor: And so does the Poet: -- Absente^ qui rodit amicum,
Qui non defendi^ alio culpante.


They both are guilty of Denigratio alienae famae.
Hic niger est, hunc tu Romanc cavet^.


Thus far a Magistrate may and must go with private men: but he must not
stand here, he must proceed one step further, and that is to punishment. It
was none of the worst sayings of Domitian, though himself none of the best
Emperors, Princeps qui delatores non castigat, irritat: His meaning I take to
be, not so much of lawful informers, as wrongful accusers: For, righteous
lips are the delight of Kings, and they love him that speaks right. Prove. 16.
13. Though they be the chief of men, yet men they are: and having their
persons confined to places, they cannot see and hear all things themselves.
Many things they must of necessity see by other men's eyes, and hear by other
men's ears: Yet requisite it is, that such as they either employ, or permit to
be their eyes or ears, should be men of known trust and tried faithfulness;
and even then too, are they to keep one ear open for the defense of the party
accused.

Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aquus fuit.
As it is true, Si sufficiat negasse, nemo erit nocens, If a bare denial were
sufficient, no man would be guilty: So is it as true, Si sufficiat accusasse
nemo erit innocens, If a bare accusation were sufficient, no man should be
innocent. A naked information, or that which the Lawyers call Clamorosa
insinuatio, a common fame, is enough to give just occasion to a farther
inquiry: but not to a final Sentence.

Descendam and videbo, I will go down and see, says God himself, of Sodom
it self, whether they have done altogether according to the cry which is comn
unto me. The phrase of descending to see, is not so proper to God, whose eye
pearceth thorough the bowels of all things, as it is a kind of descending to
our capacities, and for our instruction, specially his deputies and vicegerents
on earth; who except sometimes they descend from their majesty and throne of
State, to a familiar search of truth, themselves will often be carried on the
wrong side, and wrong others.

I conclude what I have to say at this time, with the grave and wise
exhortation of the Apostle, Galat. 5. 15. If ye bite and devour one another,
take heed ye be not consumed one of another; I take him specially to be
understood of biting by a slanderous tongue; of which our Propher here, He
that privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off.

Him that has an high look and a proud heart, will I not suffer.
AFter Slander, our Prophet ranks Pride in the next place: and sure they are
so near of kin, that he could not well set them far asunder; Pride being
commonly both the mother and the nurse of Slander. For, when we have once a
good conceit of our selves, we are apt for the slandering of others, that
thereby either our vices may in some sort be justified, or our virtues shine
the clearer. I deny not, but Slander (as you have heard it proved in opening
the former part of this verse) sometimes arises out of malice, and seeking
revenge, or breach of friendship; sometimes out of covetousnes, in seeking to
gain by it; sometimes out of ambition, in seeking to rise by it; but, more
often out of pride, in seeking credit to our selves, either by forging false
reports, or by enlarging true, tending to the discredit of others. Hence is it,
that the Apostle, in 2. Cor. 12. 20, sets swellings next to whisperings; the
one being a branch of Pride, as the other is of Slander. And Solomon, in the
sixth of the Proverbs, ver. 17, couples together hauty eyes and a lying tongue;
they being the two first of those seven which the Lord hates, and his soul
abhors: nay, our Prophet himself joins them in one verse, Psa. 40. 5, Blessed
is the man that has set his hope in the Lord, and turned not to the proud, and
such as go about with lies: insinuating, it may be, that the slanderer, who
goes about with lies, as a peddler with his pack, is as the broker; and the
proud man, as the merchant or chapman to whom he vents his wares: for, as the
slanderer is as ready to receive lies, as to coin them; so is the proud man as
ready to receive sla^ders, as to raise them.

The way, then, to purge the tongue from Slander, is, to keep the heart from
Pride: and the best means to free a family from the one, is, to rid it of the
other. Therefore, our Prophet having promised, in the former part of this
verse, to cut off him that privily slandereth his neighbor; here he voweth,
not to suffer him that has an high look and proud heart; or, as some
Translations, have it, a proud look and a high heart. Elatumoculis and latum
pectore, says Musculus: vastum cord, or turgid^ cord, says Arias Montanus:
tumentem anime, says Iunius. The phrases are somewhat different, but they all
aim at the same mark, and are all sufficiently warrantable by the Original.
We are, then, in the first place to consider of the vice here censured; It is
Pride, both outward in the look, and inward in the heart. Secondly, of the
censure opposed unto it; It is* not suffering: so insufferable a vice it is.
Him that has an high look and proud heart, will I not suffer.

Had our Prophet said, I will not suffer a proud heart; the question might have
been, How we should come to know it: he therefore, to ^ase us of that doubt,
takes the right way to discover it by an high look; God having so both ordained
and ordered it, that our secret thoughts and hidden affections should be
manifested to the world by outward acts. What man knows the things of man,
save the spirit of man which is in him? says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2. 11. But,
there he speaks of a direct and immediate, of a primary and infallible
knowledge, which is proper to God, and God alone; in as much as he it is, and
he alone that searches the heart, and tries the reins, Ier. 17. 10. No man,
no devil, no Angel, no created substance, can possibly attain to that,
except it be by divine dispensation, by revelation supernatural. The ordinary
knowledge then which we have of the heart, is gathered by discourse of reason,
by observation of marks and effects; as the physician ghesseth of the disease,
by the Symptoms. We judge of the weather, by the face of the sky; of the
motions of the wheels of a clock or a watch, by the pointing of the Index: we
judge of the motion of the Sun, by the progress of the shadow in the dial:
we judge of the motion of the heart, by the beating of the pulse: we judge of
the fountain, by the stream which issues from it: and, lastly, we judge of
the depth of the foundation, by the height of the building which is raised upon
it: and as justly may we gather the pride of the heart from an high look.
Judge not, lest ye be judged, says our Savior, Mat. 7. 1. And his Apostle,
Judge nothing before the time until the Lord come, who will lighten things
that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest, 1. Cor.
4. 5. But they both speak of an uncharitable, unadvised peremptory and final
judgment; not so much touching the present disposition of men what they are,
as their future state what they shall be.

This then notwithstanding, as we lawfully may and usually do judge of the
passions of the mind (of fear, of hope, of grief, of joy, of hatred, of
love, of anger, of jealousy) by outward signs: so may we as lawfully judge
of the virtues or vices of the soul by outward effects; as it were of the
goodness of the tree by the fruits, or of the value of coin by the stamp set
upon it. And more safe it is to judge of vices than of virtues; in as much as
few are so desperately wicked, but they desire at least to appear good. Virtue
may be counterfeit, and that so cunningly, as the imitation shall seem to
exceed the copy; the counterfeit, the truth: but yet I think was never man so
mad as to counterfeit a vice; we labor rather by all means to conceal it:
yet we cannot do it so cunningly, but that it shows it self at times, as it
were in a glass, either in our speech, or in our apparel, or in our gait, or
in our countenance, or in our actions, or in all. And doubtless the wise
observation of these, is beyond all the rules that either judiciary Astrology
by casting nativities, or Physiognomy by inspection of faces, or Chyromancy by
behoulding the lines of the hand, can afford. Of these then it may be truly
said, Qui been conijciet, vates hic optimus esto.

But, amongst all vices, there is none (only drunkenness excepted) that
discovers it self sooner than pride. For the speech, we read of a bragging and
boasting mouth, a mouth of pride, Jude ve. 16: for the gait, we read of a foot
of pride, Psalm. 36. 11: for apparel, of a crown of pride, Esaias 28. 1; of a
chain of pride, Psalm. 73. 6. So that pride in the heart can no more hide it
self, than fire that lies in the bosom, or oil that is wrung in the fist.
Many that know not the man, yet point at him as he walks the streets, and
say, There goes a proud fellow: which, men usually pronounce of no vice beside,
but the drunkeard; because these two chiefly bewray themselves: and therefore
does the prophet Habbacuc join them both together, 2. verse 5.

When a man shall see a cloak imbrodered over with woods, and parks, and
Lordships, and lined within with obligations, and bands, and statutes; may we
not justly say, that such a man is so far from cloaking his pride, that he
proclaims it in his cloak? It was said of old, that soft raiment was the wear
in Kings Courts; whereas, now a-daies, it is so bedaubed with gold and silver,
so laden with pearl and precious stone, as it is hard to judge, whether it
more burden their bodies, or lighten their purses. The Poet could say of the
women of his time; Matrona incedit census induta nepotum.

And another: -- Pars minima est ipsa puella sui.

But, what would they say? or, rather, what would they not say, if they lived
in these our days, and saw that we see; when, for apparel, a man can see
little or no difference betwixt the Lord and the Tenant, the Master and the
Servant, the Prince and the Subject?

But, what a mavelous thing, yea what a madness is it, To see a man, created
according to the image of God, and Lord of all the visible works of his hands,
to grow proud upon the furs of beasts; upon silks, the excrements of worms;
upon gemmes, or gold, or silver, somewhat better concocted and finer part of
the earth; or, as the Prophet calls it, thick clay? Hab. 2. 6. Yea, to grow
proud of that which he carries about him, as a prisoner does his manacles or
fetters, in token of his offense; our raiment being both the effect and the
badge of the fall of our first parents, and of our fall in them. Had they stood
in their first integrity, and we in them, we should no more have been ashamed
of our nakedness in our age, than in our infancy: whereas now, being disrobed of
original justice, we are driven to seek these coverings, partly for defense,
and partly for hiding our shame.

If the clothing of Solomon in his royalty (who had the rarities of the known
world at his command) were inferior to that of the Lilly; why should we think
the better of our selves for a gay coat, or a quaint fashion, or a fringed
rose, or a fine feather? All that we can get by it, is this, that in covering
our bodies, we discover to the world the humor of our minds: by proud
apparel we disclose a proud heart, but yet more by a proud look; and
therefore says our Prophet, Him that an high look and proud heart.

As we find a man in what Inn he is lodged by the sign: so we know
whether pride have taken up her lodging in the heart, by the sign of the
look. As a wanton look is a sign of a lustful heart, and a sober look of a
chaste heart, and a sad look of a heavy heart, and a cheerful look of a
merry heart, and a modest look of an humble heart: so is an high look of a
proud heart. By this, as one truly says, a proud heart is traced unto, as a
Dear or Hare are traced to the place where they be, by their footing.

A difference I find in holy Scripture betwixt Oculus elevatus, and elatus
oculis: the one implies a look lifted up to God; the other, lifted up above
our brethren. The former our Prophet professes Psalm. 121. I will lift up mine
eyes unto the mountains, from whence mine help shall come: and our Savior
practiced it, John 11. 41. Jesus lift up his eyes and said, father I thank
thee, because thou have heard me: and so did Stephen, Acts 7. 55. Being full
of the holy Ghost, he looked steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God,
and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. Now, this kind of lifting up the
look, in as much as it serves or helps to lift up the soul, either in an holy
confidence, or heavenly, contemplation, or both; is not only lawful but
commendable, and it is a token of a lowly mind. But this high supercilious
look, this lifting up of the eyes here spoken of, is when a man beholds those
that are under him with a scorfull and disdaining countenance; like one that
looks down from an high Tower, to whom, men walking under, seem to be but
crows in comparison of himself: and this elatus oculis is that does manifest
la^um cord; and therefore does our Prophet join them both together: again,
Psalm. 131. 1. Lord I am not high minded. But how does that appear? I have no
proud looks; and so does Solomon, Pro. 21. 4. An hauty look and proud heart,
which is the light of the wicked, is sin. When a man by facing, and
strouting, and bearing his head aloft, would have all men that see him take
notice of his noble descent, of his honorable place, of his great estate, of
his comely personage, or some singular quality, or admirable excellency that is
in him, or he thinks to be in himself; his hauty look is an evident sign,
an argument infallible of his proud heart: and herein is the look more
offensive than the heart; in that, though the pride of the heart be more
odious to God, yet is the hautinesse of the look more scandalous to men. Nay,
in the 6. of Prove. It is one and the first of those six and seven things which
God hates, and his soul abhors; and therefore will he also with such
severity punish it, as he threatens by his Prophet, The high look of man shall
be humbled, and the loftiness of men shall be abased, and the Lord alone shall
be exalted in that day, Esa. 2. 11.

Thus much of outward pride, specially in the look, and the discovering of the
pride of the heart by it: we now come to the proud heart it self, the true
cause and fountain of all outward pride; and howsoever outward pride cannot be
without this, yet this may be, and sometimes is without it.

An high look and proud heart will I not suffer. By some it is rendered, Latum
cord, a large heart. Now, the heart may be enlarged, either by knowledge as
Salomons was: God gave him wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and
latitudem cordis, and a large heart, even as the sand upon the Sea shore. 1.
King. 4. 29. Or by sanctifying grace, whereof our Prophet, Psalm. 119. 32. I
will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall have enlarged my heart:
or by covetousness, whence some render it, Insatisbili cord; or by joy, for
as sadness contracts and draws it together, so joy dilates and enlarges it:
or lastly, by pride, not containing it self within its own bounds; but
swelling like the Sea, and being puffed up like the stomach that is filled with
wind. And as the swelling of the spleen is very dangerous for impairing the
health and strength of the body, and of the sails for the overbearing of a
little vessel: so this swelling of the heart is, of all spiritual diseases,
the most dangerous to the soul; whether it arise from the gift of temporal
blessings, of riches, of beauty, of birth, of power, of eloquence, of
knowledge; or from an opinion that we have those virtues in us, which indeed
we have not; or that we have them in a greater measure and perfection, than
indeed we have; or that we have them from our selves and our own industry, not
from God: or that we have obtained them from God, but by our own merit: or
lastly, that by reason of them we overvalue our selves, and despise others.

And herein lies the great danger of this vice, that it arises out of virtue it
self, though not of it self, but by reason of our corruption; and by that
means, the Devil both stains the work, and steals away the reward. It is
impossible to have good parts and not to know it: and a very difficult thing it
is for a man to know so much touching himself, and not thereupon to be the
better opinioned of himself: with the very increase of sanctification, if we
take not good heed this creeps-in; and which is strange, is noted to spring
even out of humility. A secret pride is sometimes occasioned by not being
proud: and then is it more deformed, than if it appeared in his own proper
colors. As Saint Hierome noted long since, Multo deformior est superbia quae
sub quibusda^ humilitatis signis latet: And as it occasionally springs out of
the life and flower of virtue: so does it out of the ashes of dead vices, the
carcases of mortified sins; as worms do of rotten timber.

Cum been pugnaris, cum cuncta subacta putaris,
Quae magis infestat vincenda superbia restat.
It is like the shirt, the first thing we put on when we come into the world,
and the last we put off when we go out of the world. It runs through all
estates: it infects the Artificer, the Soldier, the Lawyer, the Citizen, the
Scholar, the Courtier, the Counselor, and has Vniversalem quandam
influentia^ in omnia vitia, says the School-man, an universal kind of
influence into all vices; in as much as it is an aversion from God, which is
the first essential part of all vice. It infected the Angels in heaven, unto
whom that of the Babylonian King is applied by the Ancients, I will ascend into
heaven, and exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will ascent above the
height of the clouds, Esaias 14* 14. It infected our first parents in Paradise.
Primi hominis peccatum primum superbia fuit, qua quoddam spirituale bonum supra
mensuram suae conditionis appetivit. The first sin of the first man, was
pride, by which he longed for a certain spiritual good, above the reach and
capacity of his condition. It is the conclusion of Aquinas, and seems to answer
rightly to the Serpents suggestion, God does know that when ye shall eat
thereof, ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil.

Lastly, Pride, by Divines is ranged among the seven captain or capital
sins; so called, because from them the rest stream, as from their wel-heads.
Nay, by Gregory it is made the Queen and Mistress of the capital vices
themselves. Ipsa vitiorum Regina superbia, says he, cum devictum plene cor
ceperit, mox illud septem principalibus vitijs quasi quibusdam suis ducibus
devastandum tradit, ex quibus vitiorum multitudines oriuntur: Pride the Queen
of vices, having once taken full possession of the heart, delivers it over to
the seven principal sins, as it were to her chief Leaders, by them to be
laid waste, and from hence all the following troops of enormities ensue. And
so I come from the Vice to the Censure; Him that has an high look and proud
heart, I will not suffer: or as some Translations have it, more literally
therein agreeing with the Original, Ipsum non potero, I cannot suffer.

Now the reasons which chiefly moved him not to suffer this vice, touched him
partly as he was a reasonable man, endued with intellectual and moral
virtues; partly as he was a member of the Church, and the child of God,
inspired with the spirit of God; partly as he was an householder, the father of
children, the master of servants, the head and governor of a family: and
lastly, in part as he was a King the Sovereign of a populous and mighty
nation.

First, then as a reasonable man, he knew there was nothing in man, which
could in reason make him proud.

Vnde superbit homo? cuius co^ceptio turpis,
Nasci poena, labor vita, necesse mori.
Whence should a man grow proud? whose conception is shameful, his birth
painful, his life toylsome, his death necessary. The days of his pilgrimage
here on earth are few and evil: and yet even in those few, subject he is to
infinite infirmities in his body, partly by casualties from without, and
partly, by diseases from within; to infinite error and ignorance in his mind,
to infinite perverseness and distraction in his will: he comes whining into the
world, and departs groaning out of it; he shoots forth as a flower and is cut
down, he vanishes as a shadow, and continues not; his flesh is but as
grass, the wind blows over it, and it is withered, and the place thereof
shall know it no more; his breath goes forth, and he returns to his earth,
and then all his thoughts perish.

Secondly, as a member of the Church and child of God, he had reason to
oppose pride. As a member of the Church, in as much as schisms and heresies,
sects and separations, which rent and molest the Church, spring for the most
part out of a vain affectation of singularity: as a member of the Church, he
knew that man in his best estate was molded out of the dust of the earth; that
after the fall, his soul was spotted with the leprosy of sin; to which, by
the daily adding of infinite actual transgressions, if God should enter into
judgment with him, he were not able to answer one for a thousand.

Again, as Gods dear child, he had great reason to oppose against those,
who are of all the greatest Rebels against God. The Prodigal is an enemy
directly to himself, indirectly to God: the Covetous an enemy directly to
men, indirectly to God: but the Proud is a direct enemy to God himself. For
whereas other sins arise, some out of infirmity, some out of ignorance, some
out of a desire of profit, or pleasure, or honor, or ease, or revenge; the
proud man has no cause to be proud, but Pride it self, which says like
Pharaoh, I will not Obey. Superbia (says Aquinas) habet aversionem ^ Deo, ex
hoc ipso quod non vult Deo and eius regulae subijci: Pride has an aversion
from God, even for this very cause, because it will not be subject to God and
his law: and thereupon he quotes that of Boethius, Omnia alia vitia fugiunt a
Deo, sola superbia se Deo opponit; all other vices fly from God, pride alone
stands out, and makes head against him.

And as pride resists God in a special manner, so God in a special manner
resists it; as both Saint Peter tells us in his first Epistle, the fifth Chapter,
and fifth verse: and Saint James in his fourth chap. and sixth verse. Which he
manifests to the world in punishing this vice in a special manner, by
letting a man fall into other sins, for the correcting or curing of Pride.
He lets a man fall into in continency, into drunkenness, into murder, into
theft, that so he may learn to blush at his pride. The Philosophers of the
Gentiles when they knew God, and yet in the pride of their heart would not
glorify him as God, God gave them up to vile affections for their punishment:
but for the cure of his blessed Apostle, lest he should be puffed up with
abundance of revelations, he sent him the messenger of Satan to buffet him:
which was either a sin, or doubtless a strong solicitation to sin. When
the Israelites were to possess the Land of Canaan, the inhabitants were not
utterly driven out; lest the wild beasts should devour them: and God has left
the relics of Original sin in the best, while we are here in warfare upon
earth; lest it being utterly vanquished, we should be made a prey to self-love,
which is a branch of pride; it being either Amor illicitus propriae
excellentiae, or appetitus celsitudinis illicitae: An unlawful love of our
own worth, or a longing for an unlawful height.

That sin then must of necessity be very odious in the sight of God, which
he prevents, or scourges, or reformes with other grievous sins: and being so
odious to God, it cannot but be very displeasing to the sons of God. If God
denounce war against any man, all the creatures are ready to serve him in
their course: those then that he proclaims Rebels, the least that we can do
(if we would show our selves good and faithful Subjects) is, To profess that
we may not, we must not, we cannot suffer them; in as much as To lodge a
known traitor in our house, or to give him countenance, or to converse
familiarly with him, and then to give out that we carry as sound and loyal a
heart to our Sovereign as the best, is a matter that rather deserves laughter,
than belief.

Thirdly, our Prophet had reason thus to oppose Pride, as he was the head of a
family. Disobedience in children toward their parents, stubbornness in
servants toward their masters, envy in brothers one toward another; name
Pride, and you have named the mother and nurse of them all. The least thing
that is spoken to a man of this humor, to range him into order, is as burning
coals cast upon flax: it presently sets him on fire. He envies his
superiors, and scorns to be commanded by them: his equals he disdains, and
scorns to converse with them: and for his inferiors, if he could, he would
trample them under feet. He commonly sets-going, in pursuing his vanities and
pleasing his fancy, within less than a quarter, the allowance of a whole year:
then must he with unjust dealing, either at home or abroad, to the dishonor of
GOD, and the scandal of the house where he serves, make up that breach, and
repair those ruins which his own proud humor has caused. I will be bold
to say it (though it be not commonly held so) that, all things considered,
drunkenness or incontinency, or theft is more tolerable, and less troublesome
in a family, than Pride.

Fourthly and lastly, our Prophet had reason to oppose this vice, as he was a
King: not only, because the pride of great ones must be maintained and
born-out by exaction, extortion, and rapine from the lower Subject; but because
it never leaves pearching and pushing forward, till it set it self higher than
is meet: whence issue divelish and damnable practices, in ridding such out of
the way, as they think be likely to hinder them. If Mordecai will not bow to
Haman, a whole nation must be rooted out for it. Finally, Only by pride man
makes contention, Pro* 13. 10: wheresoever strife goes, there is pride, at
least in one of the parties contending, if not on both sides. Sometimes, it
stirs up men, and imbouldeneth them to offer wrongs: sometimes, it
imbittereth men, and makes them weyward against the right: sometimes, it
causes the one to be careless of dealing according to equity, and the other
to be impatient of bearing any injuries. The best use then for pride in a
Commonwealth, is, To make work for the jayler or hangman, or at least to keep
the Lawyer from idleness.

The last thing which I will speak of in the handling of these words, is, that
if David would not suffer pride in others, he would much less allow it in
himself. Many gifts indeed he had, which were able to puff up flesh and
blood; yet none of them all could moove him. For beauty, he was of a lovely
countenance, and comely visage; his strength such, as he was able to break a
boaw of steel; his bouldnes and courage such, that he had the heart of a Lion:
being but green in years, but a boy in a manner, he encountered and slew a
Bear, a Lion, a Giant of six cubits and an hand-breath of height. He was
taken from the sheepfolds, and from following the Ewes great with young, and
from thence advanced to feed Gods people in Jacob, and his inheritance in
Israel. He was so gracious before his coming to the Crown, that the soul of
Jonathan (Saul's eldest son) was knit to him: and the very women sang in their
courses, Saul has slain his thousand; and David, his ten thousand. He
happily escaped the stratagems and persecutions of Saul, and his Counselors,
and men of war: he found courteous entertainment even among the enemies of
God and his nation.

After he came to the Crown, he obtained victories upon the Iebusites, the
Moabites, the Edomites, the Aramites, the Ammonites, and upon the Philistines,
many a time and often. At home, he suddenly suppressed the rebellions of
Ishbosheth, of Sheba, of Absalom, of Adoniah. His Wisdom was such, that by Gods
assistance he drove Achitophel (who was held in those days, for his wisdom,
as the Oracle of God) to hang himself with his own hands: his favor with God
such, that he was acknowledged to be a man after Gods own heart: so skillful
was he in Music, that he was styled the sweet Singer of Israel; so expert in
Poetry, that his Psalms were even then during his life publicly sung in the
Congregation, as they are at this day; his prophetical spirit such, that he
clearly foresaw and foretold more particulars of the Person, the Office and
Kingdom of the Messiah (of whom he was a type, and from whom Christ was to
come) than any one of the Patriarchs or Prophets that went before him; his
Power such, that he had under his command many renowned and worthy Leaders,
and to the full number of thirteen hundred thousand strong men that drew
swords; his riches such, that he left his Son toward the building of the
Temple an hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of
silver, ^spans^
and of brass and iron passing weight; a matter, were it not for the testimony
of Scripture, beyond belief.

Besides all this, his Patience was such, that he waited Gods leisure many
years betwixt the time of his anointing, and his investing in the Throne; his
thorough and found Repentance such, that it is left as a pattern to all succeeding
ages; his Charity such, that he prayed for his enemies; he caused the
Amalechite to be put to death, that gave out he had slain Saul; and the
servants of Ishbosheth, who indeed slew their master Saul's son; and for the
death of Absolon he sorely lamented, though his own life and state were
endangered by his practices: his Loyalty such, that he spared Saul twice, when
he might have dispatched him and made a way to his own advancement. His
Piety such, that he desired rather to be a doore-keeper in the house of God,
than to live at ease in the Kings Palace. And lastly, a Promise was made him,
that his son Solomon should succeed him, and that his seed should be
established in the throne.

Were not these strong motives to puff up flesh and blood, to make himself
conceited and proud of his own worth? Yet hear what himself professes of
his humility, the groundworke of all his other virtues and abilities: Psalm
131, I am not high minded, I have no proud looks, I do not exercise my self
in great matters which are too high for me: but I refrain my soul and keep
it low, like as a child that is weaned from his mother, yea my soul is even
as a weaned child.

But, what was it that kept him so low, notwithstanding his greatness, and so
many rare excellencies and perfections wherewith he was endowed? The first no
doubt was the grace of God: for, as he gives his grace to the humble, so it is
his grace which makes them humble. The second, was those Crosses and
a^^lictions, both outward and inward, wherewith God^ fro time to time had
exercised him; From my youth upward, thy terrors have I suffered with a
troubled mind. The third, was the consideration both of his natural
corruption, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conctived me;
as also of his actual transgressions, They are more than the hairs of my head,
and mine heart has failed me. The fourth, was the acknowledgement of his own
frailty, He knows whereof we are made, he remembers that we are but dust.
The fifth, was the contemplation of Gods greatness; the greatest among the
sons of men, being less in comparison of him, than the silliest worm that
crawles on the face of the earth, in comparison of them. The sixth, was the
often exercising of himself with fasting, with prayer, with divine meditations
and holy soliloquies, with sackcloth and ashes, with making his tears his
drink, and minling his bread with weeping. The seventh, was his studying day
and night in Gods law (according to the commandment given to the king, Deuteronomy.
17. 20, that his heart might not be lifted up above his brethren) and
esteeming it above the honey and the honey comb, above gold an silver, yea much
fined gold, and precious stone. The eightth and last, was a full assurance and
free confession that God was privy to all his thoughts, that he would reward
him according to his works; that he was both the Author, Maintainer, and
Finisher of whatsoever good, either in his body, or in his soul, or in his
estate: according to that memorable speech of Saint Paul, l. Cor. 4. 7. What
have thou, which thou did not receive? and if thou did receive it, why
do thou glory, as if thou had not received it? Let our conclusion then
still be, in regard of all the good we either have or do, Non nobis Domine,
non nobis, sed nomini t^o da gloriam: Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy Name give the praise.

Verse 6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may
dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.
Our Prophet having, in the verse going before, made known in part, what they
were whom he would not receive into his family and service; He comes in this
verse to tell us of what condition they should be, whom he purposes to admit,
Mine eyes shall ^e to the faithful of the Land, etc.

It is not good that man should be alone, says God himself, Genesis 2. 18. And,
Woe be to him that is alone, says the wise Solomon, Eccles. 4. 10. And, Solus,
vel Deus, vel Demon, says Aristotle, He that desires to be alone, is either
of a more base, or divine metal, than men commonly are made of. Upon this
foundation of man's sociable nature, Kingdoms and Co^mon-wealths are built,
consisting of cities, and towns, and parishes; and they again of households
and families; and they again of husband and wife, parents and children,
Masters and Servants: of which last relation I am chiefly to speak at this
time.

Though the name and nature of a Servant were first brought into the world by
the ungratiousnesse of Cham, Genesis 9. 25: Yet is the impression of superiority
and subjection so universally stamped upon the face of Nature, that it reaches
up to heaven; there being a greater light to rule the day, and a lesser light
borrowed from and subordinate to the greater, to rule the night. If we ascend
higher to the Angels, there are among them principality and domination: nay,
more than so, it pearceth down to hell, where we read of Beelzebub a Prince
of Devils. And experience has farther observed, that even among unreasonable
creatures, this form is kept; The birds being by a natural instinct subject
to the Eagle, the beasts to the Lion, and the Bees marvailously obeying and
reverencing their Master. But, this truth shines yet more clearly in man him
himself, a little map or module as it were of the great world; his members
being subject to the head, his body to the soul, his appetite to reason. And
this principle is so deeply engraven upon the conscience of all, that the very
barbarous nations, who retain any spark of civility, willingly subscribe unto
it.

Whether then we look upward to heaven, or downward to hell, or outward to
the creatures, or inward to our selves, we shall every where find characters
imprinted of superiority and subjection, command and obedience, domination and
service. To take it then as granted, to be a thing not lawful only, but
commendable; nor commendable only, but as the case now stands, in a manner
necessary; I will proceed to the unfolding of the words themselves. And first,
of the former part of the verse, Mine eyes shall be to the faithful of the
Land, that they may dwell with me.

Faithfulness in holy Scripture is taken in diverse senses: Sometimes for
steadfastnes and assurance of belief; Put forth thine hand, and put it into my
side, and be not faithless, but faithful, John 20. 27: Sometimes for truth of
speech; Fidelis est hic sermo, This is a true and faithful saying, 1. Tim. 4.
9: Sometimes for the profession of Christian religion; If any faithful man or
faithful woman have widows, let them minister unto them, 1. Tim. 5. 16:
Sometimes for certainty and constancy in performing what a man promises; Let
us keep the profession of our hope without wavering, for he is faithful that
has promised, Heb. 10. 23: Sometimes for perseverance in the truth; Be thou
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life, Rev. 2. 10.
And, lastly, sometimes for a careful and conscionable discharge of ones duty
in that place whereto he is called: thus Christ is said to have been a
merciful and faithful high Priest, in things concerning God, Heb. 2. 17. And
Paul testifies of Tychicus, that he was a faithful minister in the Lord, Ephesians.
6. 21. And in this sense I take this word specially to be understood here in
my Text: Mine eyes shall be to the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
with me.

As the Art of navigation is most proper to a Mariner; courage, to a Soldier;
arithmetic, to a Merchant; utterance, to an Orator: so is fidelity, to a
Servant. We commend a ship, not so much for the fine shrowds and tackling, or
for the gilding or painting of it, as for the sailing; and a horse, not so much
for the rich bosses, the trappings and caparisons, as for the running; and a
sword, not so much for the handle or pummell hatched or inameld, or for a velvet
scabberd imbroidered with pearl, or set with precious stone; as for the temper
of the blade and cutting: so we commend a servant, not so much for his
strength, his nimblenesse, his comeliness, his parentage, his bravery in
clothes, or invention of fashions, his court-like behavior, or graceful
speech, his pleasant wit or merry disposition, his subtle and crafty fe^ches,
his knowledge of foraine States and languages; as for his fidelity: Any of the
rest, nay all the rest without it, serving only to make a servant more disposed
and more able too, as well for the plotting as the acting of villainy; whereas
fidelity, having joined with it but some few of the rest in a mediocrity, makes
him serviceable in a good degree.

This is the commendation of Moses, Heb. 3. 5. Moses verily was faithful in
all his house, as a servant. And it is required in Stewards, that a man be
found faithful, 1. Corinthians 4. 2. And our Savior demandes the question,
Mat. 24^ 45
Who then is a faithful servant and wi^e, whom his Master has made Ruler over
his house: They all thereby implying in my understanding, that faithfulness is
one of the Cardinal properties, if not the principal, required in a good
servant. Servus fidelis protectio fortis, munitum palatium, vivus thesaurus,
said Nazianzen; A faithful servant is a strong protection, a fenced palace, a
living treasure. And therefore the great Alexander, being enquired where his
treasure was, pointed with his finger to his domesticke servants.

Now, faithfulness presupposes knowledge and diligence, and shows it self
either in deeds or words, in actions or in speeches: In actions first, when a
servant does that which te^ds not so much to the satisfying of his Masters vain
humor and sensual appetite (which is sometimes wanton and lascivious, and
sometimes again malicious and bloody) as the advancement and furtherance of
his true and real good. And thus do I take Saint Paul to be understood, 1.
Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be not the servants of men. And
again, in the second of Titus, the 9. and 10. verses, Let Servants be subject
to their Masters, and please them in all things, not answering again* neither
pickers, but that they show all good faithfulness (all good faithfulness)
adorning the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. In both which places
(as it seems) he would put a difference betwixt Christian servants and the
bondslaves of the Heathen: their Masters having over them ius v^tae and necis,
absolute power of life and death; and they being instrumenta animata, living
Engines, not so much respecting the justness and equity of that which was
commanded, as the will and pleasure of the Commander; such as Tigillinus and
Petronius were to Ner^: But in these Cases better obey God than man. The
Masters turn is to be served vsquead aras, as far as honesty and piety will
give leave; and no further.

Again, fidelity shows it self in deeds, when the servant preferres his
Masters good before his own; his Masters gain, his ease, his liberty, his
safety before his own: but as Solomon asks the question, Pro. 20. 6, Many men
will boast everyone of his goodness, but who can find a faithful man? So may
we justly demand, Where shall a man find such a faithful servant? Surely he
is a precious jewel, and therefore hard to be found: yet such a servant was
our Prophet to his Master Saul, who sought him as a flea, or as one would hunt
a Partridge in the mountains: yet when Abishai would have nailed him whiles he
slept, with his spear to the earth, David would not suffer him; he spared his
Masters life, though it were to the indangering of his own, when he might
have secured his own by taking away his: and therefore, by Gods blessing,
himself afterward found the like affected to him; Thou shall not go forth,
for thou art now worth ten thousand of us, 2. Sam. 18. And again, Thou shall
go no more out with us to battle, lest thou quench the light of Israel, 21.
of the same book.

Fidelity in words shows it self, partly in concealing of secrets and
imperfections, and by laying the finger upon a man's mouth, and sealing up his
lips in such a case, whereof Solomon speaks, Prove. 11. 13. He that goes
about as a talebearer, discovers a secret: but he that is of a faithful
heart, concealeth a matter. And for this special quality it was, that Augustus
so highly esteemed and rewarded Mecanas; it being the property of a fool to be
full of leakes, Plenus rim^ru^ hac atque illac diffluens, No sooner is any
secret poured into his ear, but it drops out at his tongue; he is in pain
till he be delivered of it, as a woman that is great with child, or a stomach
that is full of wind. Yet two things have often drawn secrets even out of the
bosom of those who have been otherwise held wise men; the inticements of
women, and the strength of wine: Whereas on the other side it is found by
experience, that a sober and chaste heart is the surest Casket to commit the
jewel of a Secrecy unto.

Besides, fidelity shows (...) self in words (if occasion serve, and a man
be called unto it) in giving such counsel as he conceives to be not most
acceptable and passable, but most profitable and wholesome; Such hearty
counsel as Solomon speaks of, Prove. 27. 9. As ointment and perfume rejoice
the heart: so does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel: and in the
multitude of such Counselors there is health, 24. 6. And therefore one
special thing which the Primitive Christians ever mentioned when they prayed
for the Emperor (as Tertullian in his Apolog^ tells us) was this, that God would
send him Senatum sidelem, faithful Counselors. And it seems our Prophet
alluded heerunto; in as much as where our English reads it, To dwell with me;
Arias Montanus, rendering word for word, translates it, Ad sedendum mecum: and
Tremelius a Jew borne, Vt consideant mecum, That they may sit with me, as it
were at Counseltable: and Iunius has this note upon it, Bonos consiliarios,
mihi adhibebo, I will procure me faithful Counselors.

Now as counsel is the life of action and authority; so is discreet liberty
the life of counsel: which being once remooved, for mine own part, I find no
difference betwixt a friend and a flatterer, a parasite and a Counselor; such
as Ionadab, Amnons Counselor and friend, to whom he no sooner disclosed his
unnatural affection to his sister Tamar, but Ionadab presently finds out, and
shows him a trick how he might compass his desire, and satisfy his unlawful
lust, 2. Sam. 13. Whereas had he been a faithful Counselor indeed, he
would have labored by all means to have reclaimed him from his mischievous
purpose, and have stopped such a villainy, as afterward brought shame to Tamar,
grief to David, death to Amnon.

Somewhat better was Ioab: who though he wickedly gave way to David's cruelty,
in making away Vriah, according to the tenor of the letter sent unto him, 2.
Sam. 11; Yet afterward he did him the office of a faithful Counselor, when
David retired himself unseasonably upon the death of Absolon: I swear by the
Lord (says he) except thou come out, there will not tarry one man with thee
this night, 2. Sam. 19. 7. And again, in the 24. of the same book, when the
King in the pride of his heart would needs have his people to be numbered, The
Lord thy God, says Ioab, increase thy people an hundred fold more than they
be, and that the eyes of my Lord the King may see it; but why does my Lord the
King desire this thing? Which howbeit at that time David hearkened not unto,
yet I^ab therein did his part: and I make no doubt, but the King himself
afterward, when he felt the hand of God heavy upon him, wished he had
followed that advice.

The counsel of a grave and wise man, who speaks not out of passion or
private respects, but out of a zeal of the public good, and of the person of
him to whom he gives it, should be entertained and reverenced as the Oracle
of God. And though it be true, that books written in former ages (which are
justly called dead Counselors) be for the most part more faithful, in regard
that they speak without blushing or fear, to the present times: Yet as true
it is, that Counselors (which are or should be living books) if they be
faithful, are undoubtedly the more useful, in regard they best know the
disease, and should seek out the remedy of the times wherein they live.

It is not always easy and gentle physic which is the best; neither is it
always crossing counsel which is the worst: desperate is that man's case and
past all cure, whose ear judges all to be harsh that is wholesome; and
nothing profitable, but what is pleasing. Our Prophet was of another mind,
when he spoke, out of deliberation, Psalm. 141, Let the righteous smite me;
for that is a benefit: and let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious
oil that shall not break my head. And so was Solomon, Prove. 27. 6. Faithful
are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. And it
commonly proves true, that he who reproves not out of vain affectation of
singularity, but with discretion and out of an honest heart, shall commonly
find more favor, certainly more comfort at the last, than he who flattereth
with his lips.

But Counsel is best sought for at their hands, who either have no part at all
in the cause whereof they instruct; or else are so far engaged, that themselves
are to bear the greatest adventure in the success of their own counsels. Upon
that counsel which Rehoboams Counselors gave him, are set the two marks
whereby bad counsel is for ever best discerned; that it was green for the
persons, and violent for the matter.

Principis est virtus maxima, Nosse suos.
It is a great part of princely virtue, to observe the humors of his subjects
in general, but chiefly of his Counselors; the greatest trust between man and
man, being the trust of giving counsel. For, in other confidences, men commit
the parts of their life, their lands, their goods, their child, their credit,
some particular affair: but, to such as they make their Counselors, they
commit the Whole; by how much the more they are obliged to all faith and
integrity. Neither need the wisest Princes think it any diminution to their
greatness, or derogation to their sufficiency, to rely upon Counsel; since the
ancient times do set forth in figure both the incorporation and inseparable
conjunction of Counsel with Kings, in that they say, Jupiter did marry Metis,
which signifies Counsel: so as sovereignty or authority is married to
Counsel.

The second condition which our Prophet proposes, to be found in such as he
meant to entertain in his service, is, Walking in a perfect way, or walking
perfect in the way: it comes both to one; and the meaning of it is, The taking
of a godly and religious course, as has already been showed in opening the
sense of the former part of the second verse, I will do wisely in the perfect
way; so here, He that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. These two
then must go together, Faithfulness and Godliness, Piety and Fidelity, civil
Honesty and Religion: neither indeed can they be, as they should, either
thrifty for themselves, or trusty to their masters, who be not first religious
toward God. It was the memorable speech of Constantius, father to the great
Constantine, to such as forsook their religion, that they might please and
serve him.

Godliness, then, is requisite in the servant, first in regard of himself, and
then in regard of his Master: in regard of himself, because by that means he is
sure of a reward, either from his master, or from God, or from both. The
general promise they have, 1. Tim. 4. 8, Godliness is profitable unto all
things, having the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come.
But, a more special one they have directed to themselves in particular, in
Ephesians. 6. 8, Know ye, that is, ye servants (for, unto them he begins to
address his speech in the fifth verse) Know ye, that whatsoever good thing
any man does, the same he shall receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or
free. And yet more expressly in Colos. 3. 23. 24, Whatsoever ye do, do it
heartily as to the Lord, and not to men; knowing, that of the Lord ye shall
receive the reward of the inheritance: for, ye serve the Lord Christ.

And many times it falls out, that those, who being faithful and godly,
receive the least reward at their masters hands, receive the greater from God,
and that even in this world by his gracious blessing. This, Jacob found: he
was so religious toward God, that though his Master were an Idolater, he still
kept himself free from it; and yet so faithful was he to his Master, that,
for the space of twenty years, he was in his service consumed with heat in the
day, and frost in the night; and if any of the flocks were either stolen, or
torn by beasts, he made it good himself, he set it not on his Masters
account. Yet for all this, could not his Master afford him a good look, much
less a good word: he changed his wages ten times, sought to eat him up, and
to raven all he could get from him. This was the reward he had from his Master
for his faithful service. But now God so blessed him for his sincerity in
religion, that the very Presents he sent his brother Esau were able to make a
rich man, Genesis 32. And of himself he professes in the same chapter, verse 10,
With my staff came I over this Jordan, and now have I gotten two bands.

In regard of men, it fared worse with Joseph: though God prospered his Masters
house for his sake, neither would he hearken to the impudent and importunate
su^e of his mistress; yet his recompense was disgrace and imprisonment, they
put his feet in the stocks, and the iron entered into his soul. But God, in
stead of the stocks, set him in the seat of Justice; and, in stead of his
fetters, put a chain of gold about his neck. I will conclude this point with
the exhortation of St. Peter, Servants, be subject to your Masters with all
fear; not only to the good and courteous, but also to the froward: for, this
is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward GOD endure grief, suffering
wrongfully, 1. Pet. 2. 18.

Secondly, as godliness is requisite in a servant, in regard of himself; so is
it in regard of his Master. First, because, if he fear his Master and not
God, all that he does will be but eye-service; he will certainly intend his
Masters good no further, than he sees it may sort with his own: whereas if
God and the fear of him be before his eyes, he is the same man when his
Master is absent, as if he were present; he desires and endeavors his best
advantage, as much though he were a thousand mile off, as if he stood by and
looked on. If Gehezi had thought that his Master had been so far endued with a
prophetical spirit, that he could have told him what he did in so great a
distance from him, he would never have taken such pains to run after the
Syrian Captain for a bribe, to the disgrace of his Master, and the undooing of
himself. And if Judas had believed our Savior to have been God, and
consequently that he had known the thoughts of his heart, undoubtedly he
would never have hatched against him such a foul treason within his breast. It
was nothing that made Achitophel to side as a Rebel with Absolon, and to plot
against his Master David, and Ziba against Mephibosheth; but worldly respects,
and want of true religion.

Besides, as ungodliness in the servant cannot but put the Master in continual
fear, both of his estate and person: so it serves to infect as well the children
of the house, as his fellow servants; whereas on the other side, the godliness
of one, being countenanced and encouraged therein, serves to shame the lewder
sort, and to draw-on the well-disposed. Thus Daniel, being admitted into the
King of Babylons Court, was an instrument for the reforming and converting even
of the King Nebuchadnezar himself. And Joseph was admitted into the King of
Egypts Court, that he might inform his Princes, and teach his Senators
wisdom, Psalm. 125. 22. In the second of Kings and the fifth, we read of a
poor silly maid, but a Iewesse by Nation (the only people of God at that
time) who being taken captive by the Aramites, and serving Naamans wife, told
her Mistress, of the Prophet Elisha in Samaria; and by that means gave occasion
to her Lord of going thither, and cleansing himself from the leprosy both of
his body, and his soul.

Lastly, a godly and religious servant will ever be praying unto God, to send a
blessing on that work which he is set about; as Abraham's servant did, Genesis 24;
and so God prospered his journey, and the business he was entrusted with
accordingly. All which considered, great reason had our Prophet to say, and to
double it, to promise and to vow it, He that walks in a perfect way, he shall
serve me: He, he.

Now, because the word here used, to Serve, in the Original, signifies a free
and liberal kind of service; it may well be thought that our Prophet intended
not only the admitting of faithful and godly servants into his family, but the
advancing of such to the highest offices, and the placing of them in the
chiefest room of government under him. And surely this consideration and
promise was no less (nay, more) necessary then the former, in regard that the
good which from hence might arise is more public. They that be of high
calling (if they be good, and desire their goodness may spread abroad and
reach unto others) for this purpose may not un^ily be likened to great
Cisterns or ponds full of clear and wholesome water, that might be beneficial
to many, if there were sound and sweet pipes to convay it: whereas on the other
side, it yields no benefit at all, if the pipes be stopped; nay proves
hurtful, if they be poisoned and corrupted. Whereof it comes to pass, that
even when there be good Princes, yet things do still continue out of frame: as
we see in the days of Josiah, a most excellent and careful King, who feared
God betimes, and twice in his days reformed religion; his remembrance is as
the perfume made by the Art of the Apothecarie, and as music at a banquet of
wine; there was no King before him, either after him, that like Josiah turned
to God with all his heart, as he did: yet were there in his days, even in the
time of his reign, horrible abominations, atheism and contempt of God, pride
in apparel, oppression and cruelty, yea much damnable Idolatry,
notwithstanding the good King by his laws had taken as good order against these
as possibly he could. The cause of all was, that such as were under him in the
Commonwealth, and in the Church, did not that which he willed, and belonged
to their place; According to that complaint of Zophonie, That the Princes were
as roaring Lions, the Judges as Wolves in the Evening, which leave not the
bones till the morrow; the Prophets were light and wicked persons, and the
Priests such as polluted the Sanctuary, and had wrested the law of God to
serve their own turn: And so what marvel though in a rare Kings days
iniquity overflowed and abounded.

Esaias in like manner prophesied under good Kings, Vzziah and Iotham, and
Hezekiah: yet he justly and sorely complains, how far all things were even
then out of order, their silver was become dross, and their wine mixed with
water, Cap. 1. 22; and he adds the reason hereof in the verse following,
because their Princes, that is, their chief Officers under the the King, were
rebellious and companions of thieves, They loved gifts and followed after
rewards, they judged not the fatherless, neither did the widows cause come
before them. The people themselves do so sensibly see and feel this, that they
rejoice when the righteous be in authority, Prove. 29. 2; whereas clean
contrariwise, they sigh and mourn when the wicked are set up, and bear rule;
as it follows in the same place. Thus when Mordecai came out from the King in
royal apparel, of blew and white, and with a great Crown of gold, and with
a garment of fine linen and purple, the whole city of Susan rejoiced and was
glad, Ester 8. 15. The counsel therefore of Iethro (Exo. 18. 21.) was very
good, and not without just cause approoved of Moses, when he gave advice, that
not only his higher Officers, Rulers over thousands and hundreds, but the
inferiors too, over fifties and tennes, should be men of courage, fearing
God, dealing truly and hating cov^t^usnesse. Their fearing of God was a means
for them in good causes to put on courage; and their hating of couetousness to
deal truly, which in case they did not, the Commonwealth should not only
suffer, but Moses should be sure to hear of it. For though to private men it
be sufficient, if them-selves do no wrong; yet a Prince must provide that
none do it about him or under him; the neglect hereof being the chief
imputation that was laid to Galbaes charge, and tumbled him out of the Empire,
as being unworthy of government, Omnium consensu dignus imperio, nisi
imperasset.

Hitherto of the Conditions which our Prophet r^quires in those whom he
proposed to admit and entertain as Servants about him, as Counselors to him,
as Officers under him: Now for himself, he purposes his eyes should be upon
them; and that, as I take it, first, for Choice, and secondly for Use. There is
an eye of Search, and an eye of Favor: the one is for the seeking and finding
them out, that they may serve; the other for the countenancing of their
persons, and rewarding of their service. First then, for the eye of search and
choice; He would not take them up at haphazard, nor upon the bare report and
commendation of others, he would not presently entertain them who most
importunately sued or made the greatest friends, or largest offers; these being
for the most part sure signs of little desert, and less conscience in the
parties themselves, in discharging the duties of those places they sue for. He
that buyeth is thereby shrewdly provoked, nay, is after a sort openly dispensed
withal to sell again. If he have to do with the treasure, he will rob and
spoil; if with justice, he will take bribes; if with Church affairs, with
matter of war, or Civil government, it may be he will go farther: Such
will make small account to sell a State, or to deliver up a Kingdom. Now the
King, our Prophet speaks of, will for avoiding these mischiefs, rather
become a suter himself to sufficient and able men, for the accepting and
undergoing of such charges as he knew them fit for: neither would he advance
any to the highest rooms of dignity, but such as himself by experience had
found to be conscionable and faithful in lower places; and if he could not
find such near him, he would seek them farther off; his eyes should run
through the Land from the one end to the other, for the finding of them out.
Oculi mei ad ^ideles terrae, Mine eyes shall be to the faithful of the Land.

Now, as his eyes were to them for choice and entertainment: so were they upon
them for encouragement and reward. Lord, says he, who shall dwell in thy
tabernacle, or who shall rest upon thy holy hill? Among other properties this
is one, He that makes much of them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4. And
therefore in the very next Psalm verse. 3, he protests that all his delight
was upon the Saints that are on the earth, and upon such as excel in virtue.
And again, in the 119. 36, I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and
keep thy precepts: And in special of servants, of Kings and Princes, says
Solomon, in the 14. of Proverbs, at the last verse, The pleasure of a King is
in a wise servant, but his wrath shall be toward him that is lewd.

Neither is it sufficient to make much of them by looks and countenance, and
to feed with good words and fair promises: but to speak and do really for
them, as occasion shall serve and they deserve. Let thy soul love a good
servant, and defraud him not of his liberty, neither leave him a poor man,
Ecclus. 7. 21. And the reason is given in the 33. of the same book, verse. 29.
If thou have a faithful servant, entreat him as thy brother, for thou have
need of him as of thy self. Such a Master it seems Naaman was to his
servants: which made them call him father; Father, if the Prophet had commanded
thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? Such was that Centurion in
the Gospel, Compare Mat. 8, with Luke 7.
who when his servant was sick, entreated our Savior to come to him and heal
him, calling him by the same name which signifies a son; thereby showing that
good servants should be as sons to their Masters, in dutiful obedience; and
good Masters again, as kind fathers in loving affection to their servants, as
remembering that themselves have a father in heaven, to whom they must one day
render an account of all their actions, and with him there is no respect of
persons.

Verse 7. He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that
tells lies shall not tarry in my sight.
Our Prophet in the fifth verse had promised to banish Slander and Pride: here
he promises to take the like order with Deceit and Lying; two vices contrary
to those two virtues which before he had vowed to entertain; Deceit being
opposite to Faithfulness, and Lying to Godliness. These two vices are so common
and general, and yet withal so close and subtle, that he could not promise
utterly to abolish and extinguish them; but to deal with them as Physicians
do with pestilent diseases, to expel them from the vital parts: upon
discovery, they should not lodge in the Court, nor remain in the Presence. He
could not always prevent their entrance and abode there for a while;
deceitful men being as cunning to cover, as to work their deceit: yet would
he as narrowly as he could seek them out; and, when he had found them, cast
them out too.

Indeed the saying is, Turpius eijcitur, quam non admittitur: It is more
shameful to cast out a servant, than not to admit him: But it is as true,
Tutius eijcitur, like a raw morsel that sits ill in the stomach, he is more
safely cast out than retained: or, if he be a Retainer, non habitabit, he
shall not be in ordinary; or, if he be, he shall not be of such as ly
under my roof; or, if he do, non habitabit in interiori domus meae, says
Arias Montanus, he shall have no place in my privy-chamber, or bedchamber.

And for the Lier, he may chance to come into my sight, but non prosperabitur,
says Musculus, he shall not build his neast there: non firmabitur, says
Arias Montanus, he shall take no rooting there; non stabilietur, says Iunius,
he shall not set up his rest there.

It was great Wisdom in our Prophet that he would not have his house a
mingle-mangle, to consist pel-mel of diverse dispositions, as Hannibals army
did of several nations: he would not have his family like a motley cloth, or
a meddly color; some of his servants being of one Die, and some of another:
but he would have all to go in one Livery, uniforme and suitable; that so,
all agreeing and according together, they might all walk, and look, and draw
one way in the service of God and their Master. For, had he chosen some
religious, and others profane or idolatrous, some honest and sober, others
swaggerers and unthrifts, some civil and peaceable, others cutthroats and
rakehels; lastly, some faithful and godly, as in the verse next going before;
and some deceitful and lying, as in this verse; like fire and water, they
would never have given over striving to expel and chase away, or to supplant
and undermine one another: so that the Master, in stead of an orderly and
comfortable service, should have found nothing but controversy and complaint,
faction and brawl: for, What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousnes?
what communion has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Beliall?
what agreement has the temple of God with Idols? 2. Cor. 6. It was indeed
Machiavels rule, Si vis regnare, divide; If thou will rule in safety, sow
discord, and set division betwixt those that are under thee: but this is a
point of the devils policy, he never learned it in the school of Christ; and,
for the most part, the practice of it prooves most dangerous to the Authors of
it.

Hitherto in the general for so much as concerns both these vices taken
jointly together; now to the particulars, as they ly in order here in my text:
and first of working deceit, and then of telling lies. Deceit is commonly by
the Latins expressed by one of these three words; Astutia, Dolus, or Fraus:
between which, the Schoolmen put this difference, Prudentia direct opponitur
astutia, To true Wisdom craft or wiliness is directly opposed: executio
autem astutiae est proprie per dolum in verbis, perfraudem fraudem in factis:
but the execution of craft is properly by cosenage in words, and by guile in
deeds. Wec are afterward to speak of cosenage in words. The thing then here
intended, as I think, is guile in deeds: which howbeit it be now-adaies almost
generally esteemed the essential point of a Lawyer, the proper passion of a
Merchant, and the complement of an absolute Courtier; yet our Prophet held it
so odious, as in two several places he ioins it in the same verse with
bloodthirstinesse: The Lord will abhor the bloodthirsty and deceitful man,
Psalm. 5. 6. Upon which words, says Aquinas, Verbo abominand: denotatur odium
irreconciliabile; By the word, Abhor, is implied an irreconcilable and
implacable hatred: and indeed so it seems, in as much as our Prophet tells us
again, Psalm. 55. and the last verse, The bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall
not live out half their days.

Our Savior, when he would set out Herod in his colors, calls him a fox;
Goetell that fox, Luke 13. 32: and when he would commend Nathanael, he calls
him an Israelite, in whom was no guile, John 1. 47. The Devil is in holy
Scripture named a Serpent, not only because he took that shape upon him when
he deceived our first parents in Paradise, but because the Serpent was more
subtle than any beast of the field, Genesis 3. 1. As a Serpent, he is full of
windings and turnings, which are called his depths, Rev. 2. 24, Neither have
known the depths of satan, that is, his deep fetches: whereupon S. Paul, having
reproved Elymas the Sorcerer, that he was full of all subtilty and mischief;
he presently adds, Thou child of the devil, and enemy of all righteousness,
Acts 13. 10. Now, as the Devil appeared in the shape of a Serpent, which is of
all beasts the most subtle and crafty; so did the H. Ghost in the shape of a
Dove, which is of all birds the most simple and innocent: and John the Baptist
terms our Savior a Lamb, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins
of the world, John 1. 29. And again the next day, as he saw him walking by,
Behold the Lamb, or, as the Original and our last Translation reads it, that
Lamb of God: not only because he was so prefigured in the sacrifice of the
Paschal Lamb, and foretold by the Prophets, He was led as a sheep to the
slaughter, and as a lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth,
Esaias 53. 7; but also because he had the properties of a Lamb, and those
specially of a native innocence and godly simplicity; according to that of the
same Evangelicall Prophet, cited by S. Peter, 1. 2. 22, He did no sin, neither
was there any guile found in his mouth.

There is a blockish simplicity, or rather stupidity, arising out of a natural
defect; When a man deceives not another, because he wants wit to do it: and
this is no more praiseworthy, than continency in one that is an Eunuch by
nature, or sobriety in him that has no means to exceed. And there is a godly
simplicity, when a man has wit sufficient; yet so, as, being corrected and
qualified by grace, he restrains it from such mischievous and guilefull plots;
as his natural corruption would draw him unto. And this indeed is that
simplicity, and none but this, which is commended in Scripture, and accepted of
God. Posse and nolle, nobile.

And the vice contrary to this, is that which the Civilians call dolus malus,
by them opposed to bona fides, and defined to be Machinatio quaedam alterius
decipiendi causa, cum aliud agitur, and aliud simulatur, A device for the
deceiving of a man, where one thing is done, and another is dissembled.
Whereunto agrees that of Cicero, in the first book of his Offices, where he
approves the reply of Aquilius his familiar friend: who being demanded, Quid
esset dolus, what deceit was; he answers, Vbialiud est actum, and aliud
simulatum, where one thing is practiced, and another pretended: And of
Augustine in his seventh Tract upon John, expounding those words of Christ,
touching Nathanael, Behold an Israelite, in whom is no guile: Tum dolus est,
^aith he, cum aliud agitur, and aliud fingitur; when one thing appears in the
fact, and another thing is hid in the heart. Yet even this, if it be for the
good of some, and the hurt and hinderance of none, I dare not pronounce to be
simply unlawful. Such a deceit is that which Nurses use for the stilling of
their children; or Physicians, for the healing of their Patients. Such did our
Prophet himself use, when for the saving of his life he fained himself mad,
among the Philistines, 1. Sam. 21. 13. And hitherto are those words of S. Paul
by some referred, For as much as I was crafty, I took you by guile, 2. Cor. 12.
16.

Nay, though it tend to the outward hinderance and hurt of some, I cannot
always utterly condemn it. It was by a cunning slight, that the Israelites
robbed the Egyptians, that Ehud slew Eglon, and Iehu Baals priests: yet they
being warranted by Gods counsel, and excited by his Spirit, what therein they
did was in right justifiable. Nay, more than so: in a just and honorable war,
where it is lawful to kill, it is not unlawful by stratagems to deceive.

Dolus an virtus quis in host requirit!
It was the speech indeed of a Heathen, yet approoved by St. Hierome in his
Exposition upon Ezekiel. 17; but with this caution, that it be practiced without
the violating of an oath, the breach of promis, or the making of a lie.

Which notwithstanding, the world too well knows, and with grief feels it
to be both the doctrine and the practice of the Church of Rome, that Faith
plighted to Heretics is not to be held. Which position while she houlds, I
see not how those whom she accounts Heretics can either with safety and
security, or without just fear and manifest danger, any way rely upon the
contracts made with her or her adherents. Their moral or civil honesty may
chance ty them to the performance of such oaths: but (I am sure) their
religion, the strongest bond of conscience, does not. Nay, if it be for the
good of their Church, it dispenses with the breach, and (which is more)
commands them to break it. It is written by an Italian, no stranger to the
Court of Rome, that the Proverb is, Mercatorum est, non regum, stare
iuramentis, It is for Merchaunts, not Kings, to stand to their oaths: but from
such Merchants of men's souls, Libera nos Domine, Good Lord deliver us.

Now, the inconveniences and mischiefs which accompany this deceitfulness,
specially in a servant, are these: First, himself seldom or never thrives by
it; he enjoyes not the benefit of that which he gets by falshod, according to
that of Solomon, Proverb. 12. 27. The deceitful man rosteth not that which he
took in hun^ing: and of our Prophet, Psalm. 58. 9. Or ever their pots be made
hot with thorns, so shall indignation vex them as a thing that is raw. It
shall fare with them as with hunters, who many times when they take a prey, yet
themselves taste not of it; or as with meat, which, the thorns being consumed
under the pot, is left unsodden: and so all their plottes and enterprises
become as the untimely fruit of a woman, which never sees the sun. And if
they come not to public shame amongst men, which for the most part they do
(the vizard of their hypocrisy being plucked off) yet God in his due time will
not forget them. According to that of the Apostle, 1. These. 4. 6, Let no man
oppress or defraud his brother, for God is the avenger of all such things. If
a man be so mighty to oppress, that the Magistrate will not lay hold on him,
or so cunning to defraude that the law cannot take hold of him, then where
man and his law cease, there God and his law begin; though they dazzle the
eyes of men, yet the eye of God they cannot; and the less they feel at the
hands of men, the heavier shall they feel the hand of God, either in their
states, or in their bodies, or in their souls, or in their posterity, or in
all. Such a one may flourish for a while, like a green Bay tree; but, I went
by, and lo he was gone; I sought him, but his place could no where be
found. Keep innocence then and take heed to the thing that is right, for that
shall bring a man peace at the last, Psalm. 37. It is the surest, and fairest,
and likeliest way to bring him to riches and honor, in as much as all men
desire to deal with him whom they repute honest, though themselves be not
such: but the undoubted way it is to bring him Peace, peace with himself, and
peace with his God; without which, his riches and honor will do him little
good: Nay, they will in the end prove his bane and confusion.

Another mischief, that arises from the deceitfulness of a Servant, is to his
Master (specially if he be a great personage, and of eminent note) either by
bringing-in unjust accounts, or by betraying him to his enemies; who sometimes
prefer a servant, that they may thereby work villainy and get intelligence of
secrets; and so it may come to pass, that under a velvet or silk or scarlet
cloak, a Jesuit or Priest may be entertained: or lastly, in deceiving others,
by using his Masters name, though without his knowledge or consent, yet he
cannot but by that means breed in men's minds an ill conceit, and in their
tongues an il report of his Master. It very much then imports great men and
Princes, not only to observe narrowly such servants as they suspect, but for
examples sake to punish them severely being detected. Such were some of them
about the good Emperor Aurelian, who by Monopolies and impositions, by
projects and perquisites enenriched themselves, to the impoverishing of the
estate, and the dishonoring of their Master: Nay, of him they made a Monopoly
too; who, being let to know no more then what they pleased to inform him, was
of them by that means even bought and sold. But Alexander Severus took
another course with them: who understanding that Vercovius had greatly abused
his favor, taking much money of diverse to prefer their suits, and doing
nothing for them, he caused him to be hanged up in a chimney as some write,
or as others, to be tied in public to a stake, and there to be stifled with
smoke; an Herald proclaiming to the people, Fumum vendidit, and fumo pereat,
Smoke he sold, and with smoke let him perish. And, if it be observed, the
greatest Merchants of smoke have ever been found to be the greatest slaterers
of their Masters, Having men's persons in admiration because of advantage, Jude
16. I have dwelt somewhat the longer upon this point, because the Court is
generally held the Shop, the Forge, nay, the School and Theater of this vice:
not without good cause then does our Prophet vow, it shall not dwell with him.

As in the first place he excludes working of deceit; So does he in the
second, telling of lies: He that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight.

Servum nolle mentiri nova religio est,
Says one of the ancient Comikes;
And another, Is cliens frugi habetur, qui neque leges,
neque aequum bonum unquam colit.


But this is heathenish divinity: or as it may well be thought, they rather
spoke what men commonly did, then what they should do. Once, our Prophet I am
sure was of another mind: though he were an old servant, though never so
useful and profitable to him, though never so near and dear, as his right
hand, or his right eye; yet if he fell to lying, away he must; he would would
be so far from showing him any favor, that he should not so much as enjoy
the sight of his countenance.

A wonder it is to consider that the imputation of a lie should be so odious,
and yet the practice so frequent among men (specially those who stand most upon
their reputation) the name so hateful, and the use so common: that men should
be so tender, and sensible of the giving of the lie, as to think it presently
worthy the stabbe or the challenge; and yet to be so careless and
unconscionable in the making of it: a strange kind of vanity, I say it is, and
a marvailous repugnancy and contradiction in the nature of man, to be so hot
in the pursuit of the one, and so cold in the other. Wherefore either seem
to be as thou art, or be as thou would seem: either have a care and
conscience that thou make not a lie, or be content that a man call a Spade a
Spade, a Lier a Lier.

This vice of all other is so universally spread over the face of the world,
not only among servants, but all sorts of men, that what our Prophet spoke in
his haste, I said in mine haste, all men are Liers, Psalm 106. 10, that the
Apostle spoke advisedly, Romans 3. 4, Let God be true, and every man a liar. But
we must know it is one thing to lie, and another to make a trade or custom of
lying: one thing to slip into it unawares; another, deliberately to forge and
conceive it, and which is worse to defend it, and stand in it being done. The
one may proceed from the common frailty incident to mankind; yet not without
some striving against it, and repentance for it, in such as are sanctified by
Gods spirit: but the later is only proper to the unbeleeving and unregenerate.
Therefore says our Prophet, not Loquens mendacium, in the singular number; but
mendacia, in the plural.

Now in the handling of this point, we may first consider the nature, and
diverse kinds of a Lie. Secondly, the greatness of the offense, how slightly
soever we esteem of it. And lastly, the punishment always due unto it, and
many times inflicted upon it.

A Lie (to speak properly) is the speaking of an untruth with an intent to
deceive. For the clearer unfolding of which definition, we are to call to mind
a fourefolde truth mentioned in holy Scripture: of Judgment, of Affection, of
Action, of Speech. The truth of Judgment is opposed to Error, of Affection to
Hypocrisy, of Action to Dissimulation, and of Speech to Lies or Falsehood. If a
man speak that which is false without an intent to deceive, supposing it to be
a truth, it is a material lie. If he speak a truth with an intent to deceive,
supposing he spoke a falsehood, it is a formal lie: But if he speak a
falsehood, knowing it to be a falsehood, with an intent to deceive, this is a
full, a flat lie; it has the whole essence, the matter and the form, the
soul and the body of a lie.

The material lie is liable to the censure of men, but excusable before God,
at least a tanto, though not a toto; in as much as it proceeds out of
ignorance, the tongue agreeing with the understanding, but the understanding
disagreeing from the thing. The formal lie is punishable by God, though
acquitted by men; in as much as the understanding disagrees from the speech,
though the speech agree with the thing: but the full lie including both the
matter and the form, deserves punishment both from God and men; in as much as
in it both the understanding disagrees from the speech, and the speech from the
thing. Which ground being laid, I see not how the most cunning Sophisters in
the world can free their equivocations, and mental reservations, at leastwise
from the formality of a lie: which is indeed the life of it, if there may be
life in such a dead work. For, to grant that the thing which they speak is true,
yet they cannot deny but they speak it with an intent to deceive: and then
Linguam ream facit men's rea, It is a guilty mind that makes a guilty tongue;
according to that of Augustine, Ex animi sui sententia non ex rerum ipsarum
veritate aut falsitate mentiens aut non mentiens iudicandus est: A Liar is to
be judged not so much by the truth and falsehood of things, as by the purpose
and intent of his mind.

It matters not then, whether my lie be iocosum only for sport and merriment;
or officiosum, for the pretended good of some, without the hurt of any; or
malitiosum, out of a mischievous design: if it be an untruth uttred with an
intent to deceive, it comes all to one for the unlawfulness of it; howbeit,
the one be sinful in a higher degree, more divelish and damnable than the
other: and being once unlawful in it self, as being a direct breach of the
law, none other respect but only the dispensative power of the Lawgiver
himself can possibly make it lawful. When Thespis, the first stage player, was
asked if he were not ashamed to utter so many untruths in so worthy an
audience; he answered, that he did it in sport: but wise Solon replied, if
we approve and commend this sport, we shall find it in earnest, in our
contracts and affairs. And even so indeed by just judgment it befalles a man,
who, using to ly in sport, gets an habit of lying in earnest; and with his
jesting lies raises such a suspicion of him, that, be he in never so good
earnest, he cannot be believed. And for officious lies, since we cannot make
a lie for God cause, as Job testifies, 13. 9; much less may we ly for the
behoof of our selves or other men. Use not then to make any manner of lie: for,
the custom thereof is not good, Ecclus. 7. 13. No good and honest means are to
be neglected, which tend to the refreshing and cheering of their spirits who
bear the burden of the State: yet the Prophet Hosea 7. 3, reproves those that
make the king glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their lies:
neither is it any way warrantable to do evil, that good may come thereof,
Romans 3. 8. As righteousness then and peace, so truth and charity are inseparable
companions. And therefore the Apostle, 1. Cor. 13, puts down this among other
marks of charity, that it rejoices in the truth, verse 6.

And for those examples registered in holy Scripture of the Mid-wives to save
the male-infants of the Hebrews, of Rahab to save the spies, of Mich^l and
Jonathan to save David from Saul's fury, and the like of that kind, either
commended or not discommended; I answer, that we must distinguish betwixt the
deeds of the faithful, and their manner of doing them. Their facts in saving
David, the children, the spies, were commendable, and argued the fear of God
and love of his children: but the manner of putting them in execution is
neither approoved in holy Scripture, nor was in it self justifiable, nor is
to be imitated of us; it being no more lawful to save a man's life by a lie,
than by theft: both which, without repentance, in themselves deserve death
eternal. Et quomodo non perversissime dicitur (says S. Augustine) ut alter
corporaliter vivat, debere alterum spiritualiter mori? How can it be but a
perverse assertion, to say, That one should incur the death of the soul, to
free another from that of the body? And not far off in another place, Quanto
fortius, qua^to excellentius dices, Nec prodam, nec mentiar, ut Firmus
Episcopus Tagastensis? How much more courage and constancy does it show, for a
man to say, I will neither betray the truth, nor my friend; as did Firmus
Bishop of Tagastum, Firmus nomine, firmior autem re; Firm in name, but more
firm indeed.

The truth heerof will the better appear, if we consider the greatness of the
offense, the second thing which I proposed: in as much as it is first directly
against God himself; secondly, against the Scriptures, the Oracles of GOD;
thirdly, against nature, the workmanship of God; and fourthly, against civil
society, the ordinance of God. Against God it is both essentially and
personally taken. Against God the Father; This is eternal life, that they
know thee to be the only true God, John 17. 3: Against God the Son; I am
the way, the truth, and the life, John 14. 6: Against God the holy Ghost; When
he is comne, who is the Spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth, John
16. 13. And as God is the Father of truth; so is the Devil the father of Lies:
when he speaks a Lie, then he speaks of his own; for he is a lier, and
the father thereof, Ioh. 8. 44. No marvel then, that one of those seven things
which the Lord hates, and his soul abhorres, is a lying tongue, Pro. 6. 17.

Secondly, it is against the Scriptures, the Oracles of God. And therefore are
they truly called Verbum veritatis, the word of truth, Ephesians. 1. 13; not only
because they were indicted by the Author of all truth, or because they contain
so much supernatural truth as is requisite for our salvation, but withal
because they excite us to the embracing and practicing of truth. Cast off
lying, and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, Ephesians. 4. 25. Ly not one
to another, Col. 3. 9. Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, says our
Prophet? Even he that speaks the truth from his heart, Psalm. 15.

Thirdly, it is against nature, the workmanship of God. It is the privilege of
Mankind above all Creatures, that he is (...), a creature capable both of
reason and speech: and as reason was ordained to be the guide and directer of
our speech; so was our speech, to be the expounder and interpreter of reason.
And therefore the Grammarians make (...), which signifies speech, to be (...),
that which gives light to the notions of the understanding. If, then, we speak
one thing and think another, if we express one thing with our lips, and
conceive another thing in our hearts, it is against the end for which God
created speech.

Fourthly and lastly, it is against Civil society, the ordinance of God; a
maine part whereof consisting in Conference, in Consultation, in Contracts,
Fractavel leviter imminuta authoritate veritatis, omnia dubia remanebunt, says
Saint Augustine; The credit and soverainty of truth, being never so little
cracked, or the practice of lying never so little cou^tenanced, a man can build
upon nothing, but all things will be full of doubt and distrust. Rightly then
says the same good Father, Nunquam errare tutius existimo, quam cum in amore
nimio veritatis and reiectione nimia falsitatis erratur: A man cannot lightly
err more safely, then in too much love of truth, and hatred of lies. Truth is
a salt which serves for the seasoning of every action, and makes it favorie
both to God and man: and in the 6. to the Ephesians. it is compared to a girdle, or
a Soldiers belt, whereby they knit together and close unto their middle the
upper and lower pieces of their armor. And these belts, as they were strong,
so were they set with studs, being fair and large. There is then a double use
of them: one, to keep the several pieces of armor fast and close together,
and to hold the loins of a man firm and steady, that he may be able to stand
the surer, and hold out the longer; the other, to cover the joints of the
armor, that they might not be seen. The first use was for strength, the
second for ornament: and thus truth is both an ornament to a Christian
soldier, and also an excellent means for strength to uphold and assure him in
the day of trial. Therefore wisely does Solomon advise us, To buy the truth, but
in no case to sell it, Pro. 23. 23.

The last thing which I promised, is the punishment: and that surely cannot but
much aggravate the grievousnesse of the sin. It is both the punishment of
other sins, and other sins the punishment of it. When God would punish Ahab
for his wickedness, presently the Devil offers himself for the execution of
the service; I will go and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets,
1. King. 22. And those that would not believe and love the truth, he punishes
with strong delusions that they should believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2. And as it is
the punishment of other sins, so did he punish it with other sins in those
Philosophers of the Gentiles, who because they turned the truth of God into a
lie, therefore God gave them up unto vile affections, Romans 1. 25. And the rule
is general, The mouth that lies slays the soul, Wis. 1. 11. Thou shall
destroy them that speak lies, Psalm. 5. 6. And Revel. 22. 15, Without shall be
dogs* and enchanters, and whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolaters, and
whosoever loves or makes lies. And if God thus shut them out of his
presence; not without cause does our Prophet promise, They shall not tarry in
his sight. It is the prayer of Solomon, Prove. 30. Remove from me vanity and
lies; and his position in the 29. of the same book, ve^s. 12, Of a Prince that
hearkeneth to lies, all his servants are wicked. And if we are to shun the
practice of lies, much more the doctrine of lies, Teaching lies through
hypocrisy, 1. Tim. 4. 2. One effect whereof is the confident relation of their
lying miracles, and that Golden Legend compiled by a leaden brain, and
published by a brazen forehead. I will conclude with Saint Augustines
conclusion of his two Treatises de mendacio ad Consentium, Aut cavenda sunt
mendacia recte agendo, aut confitenda sunt poenitendo; non autem, cum abundent
infeliciter viuendo, augenda sunt and docendo. Lies are either to be shund by
speaking truth, or to be confessed and bewailed with sorrow; or if they abound by
ill living, they are not to be multiplied by teaching them as lawful.

Verse 8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off
all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.
Our Prophet, having in the former verses of this Psalm, vowed the reformation
of his own Person, of his household Servants, of his Counselors and inferior
Magistrates; Here in this last verse he vows in general the reformation both
of the Church and of the Common-weak, of the Civil and Ecclesiastical State.
In the handling of which words, I will follow the method proposed in the Text.
The first word is, In matutinis, as Arias Montanus; or Singulis matutinis, as
Tremelius renders it: In the mornings, or morning by morning* Every morning:
wherein he notably expresses his diligence and dispatch, in that it should be
his mornings work; and then his Constancy and perseverance, in that it should
be his work every morning, The second thing is, the work it sel^^* I will
destroy, I will cut off; his meaning is, when no other remedy will serve the
turn. The third is the Object, the persons upon whom this severe justice is to
be done; not petty offenders, much less the innocent, but notorious
malefactors: The wicked of the Land, wicked doers. The fourth is, the
unpartiality of his proceeding without respect of persons, All the wicked of
the Land, all wicked doers; twice repeated, that we might take notice of it. As
he would cut off none but notorious malefactors, so would he as near as he could
cut them all off: Neither his heart nor his eye should pity, nor his hand
spare any of them. The fifth and last is, the End he proposes to him self of
this work; the purging of the City of the Lord, by which is meant Jerusalem:
first, for Example to the whole Realm, it being the Metropolis and head City
of the kingdom; as also and principally, by reason the service of God and the
exercise of religion was in a special manner by divine ordinance tied unto it.
First then of the first, In matutinis: wherein his diligence in the careful
performing of this work comes first to be observed.

The saying is common, and in some cases no less just, Odi nimium diligen^es:
but where the business is weighty, and the failing dangerous, a man can hardly
be too, diligent. The life of man is precious, and the preservation of the
State and Church important; and diligence in such a case is not only
commendable, but necessary. The search of truth is hard, specially being
disguised by the colorable shifts of cunning heads: and in such a case, as it
is the glory of god to conceal a thing, so it is the Kings honor to search
out a matter, Prove. 25. 2. And no time so fit for this search as the morning,
when men's wits are freshest, and their minds after repose least distracted:
Therefore Iosuah rose early in the morning for the discovery of Achans theft,
7. 16. And besides, the drinking of wine often makes men after meals to forget
the law, and pervert the judgment, Pro. 31. 5. Therefore is there a woe
pronounced against that Land, whose Princes or chief Magistrates eat in the
morning, Eccles. 10. 16; that is, take up that time which is specially allotted
for matters of justice, with intemperate and unseasonable eating and drinking.
As then he is cursed that does the work of the Lord negligently: so is he
blessed that does it diligently and watchfully, In matutinis.

The second thing employed in this word, is speed and dispatch: therefore it
follows in the same place of the Prophet Jeremy, Cursed be he that keeps
back his sword from blood, 48. 10; that deferreth to do justice when occasion
and opportunity is offered, when reason and religion requires it. Delays in
other things are not good: but in this they are stark naught, because by delay
great offenses many times get either friends for protection, or means for
evasion; according to a saying of the Italians, Give me time, and give me
life. Again, by delay and connivence, small offenses grow great: a little
fire which at first might have been put out with a spoonful of water, being
let to burn, turns towns and cities into ashes, and cannot be quenched with
whole rivers. Punishments are as medicines, which if they be kept too long,
hazard the Patient, and lose their virtue; And Magistrates as Physicians, who
must not let a disease go too long, left by sufferance it prove incurable;
which might have been helped by timely ministering. Lastly, as by delay the
offender grows bolder, to the farther indangering and oppressing of the
innocent, the infecting of the good, the hartening and hardening of the wicked:
So he that should cut him off, many times by tract of time grows colder in
his zeal to justice.

If Ioab had received condign punishment according to his deserts at his
killing of Abner, he would never have grown so audaciously insole^t to murder
Amasa in such a treacherous manner. And had Absolon been taken short, when by
his command his brother Amnon was slain, there had bin no danger of his
ensuing rebellion against his Sovereign, his Father. It is good then to lance
an ulcer betimes, before it grow to a Gangrene; and to kill a Tetter before it
spread to a Ringworme. That which God commands Fathers of families, that if
they love their children, they correct them betimes, and chastise them whiles
there is hope, Prove. 13. 24, is also required of the fathers of the
Commonwealth: Whoseever will not do the law of God and the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, Esra, 7. 26. And the reason hereof is
yielded by Solomon, Eccles. 8. 11. Because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, the heart of the sons of men is fully set on mischief.

Yet is there not more haste to be made than good speed. The celestial
spheres, the higher they are in situation, the slower are they in their proper
motion: and the supreme Judge of the world uses much forbearance and long
suffering toward sinners, that so by the riches of his goodness he might draw
them to repentance; or because he foreseeth, that they will do some notable
good work to the advancement of his glory, and the good of his church: Much
like, says Plutarch in that golden Book of his, De sera Numinis vindicta, as
the laws ordain that a woman, condemned to death for some heinous offense, be
nevertheless reprived and spared, if she be with child, until she be
delivered: which being done, the Law is executed upon her. As then the supreme
Judge in heaven inflicts punishments on offenders without al passion, and with
all patience, in due manner, place and season: so should his Vicegerents on
earth, not so much out of desire of revenge, as zeal of justice; For, the wrath
of max works not the righteousness of God, James 1. 20.

And as he, which has no skill in Physic, cannot with reason control a
skillful Physician, because he draws blood from his Patient rather to morrow
than to day: so neither ought men to censure the proceedings of God, whose
judgeme^ts are many times secret, but always right; having feet of lead, but
hands of iron: and though he be long a-striking, yet he strikes home at last;
tarditatem gravitate compensat, he makes amends for his sloweness with the
waightiness of his blow. Nor, among men, ought inferiors too far to censure
the proceedings of their superiors; who many times stop the execution of
Justice, for causes just and reasonable in themselves, though unknown to us.
The Heaven for height, and the earth for depth* and the heart of the king, is
unsearchable, Pro. 25. 3.

The Law enacted by Theodosius, at the instance of S. Ambrose, cannot be
misliked: that because, being transported with choler, he had caused many
Innocents of Thessalonica to be put to the sword; from thenceforth thirty
days should pass betwixt the sentence of death and the execution thereof: in
as much as the guilty, though spared for a time, might notwithstanding
afterward be executed; but the guiltless, being once executed, could not
again be restored. Yet can it not be denied, but upon evident proof and a
fair trial, so way be not given to rash and unadvised anger, for many and
weighty reasons already touched, it were for the most part better, that
expedition in punishing great offenses, and cutting off notorious malefactors,
were rather used, than slacknes.

Some others there are, who, by this Betimes here mentioned in my Text,
understand our Prophet as vowing the execution of Justice at his first entrance
to the Crown, in the morning of his reign. Like a clean soul coming out of
the hands of the Creator, and placed in a Kingdom left by Saul, as in a body
altogether unclean, he promises, not to draw pollution from it, as the soul
does from the body; but rather to endeavor to cleanse it from those foul
impieties wherewith it swarmed: heerin resembling the Sun in the Heavens, which
as soon as it rises, or before it appear, chaseth the darkness before it, and
is clothed with glory, as with a robe.

Here, reason of State objecteth the danger of sudden innovation, fear of the
multitude; and I know not what a number of doubts and difficulties it
forecasts: but our Prophet, though doubtless not ignorant of these, yet in a
holy resolution casts them behind him; as well knowing, that the principles of
humane policy are as uncertain as the brain wherein they are forged; being
persuaded in conscience, and his heart telling him, The action it self was
good, the throng and thickness of difficulties should not discourage him, but
rather make him the more stoutly to pluck up his spirits, and to buckle
himself more roundly to the business. It was a sore task he had in hand, a
long journey he had to go; and therefore he had need to set forth betime, if
he meant to arrive at the end thereof before the night of death should
overtake him.

They were memorable pieces of justice which Solomon did, as soon as God had
put the scepter into his hand. Iehu, at his first entrance into the Kingdom,
roots out the house of Ahab, and the worship of Baal* Josiah, when he was now
but twelve years old, began to purge Judah and Jerusalem, 2. Chro. 34; that
men might know what they were to trust unto in the succeeding course of his
government.

Yet I take not our Prophets meaning to be, that the Prince at his first
entrance should unwisely and without advice destroy and cut off; for so,
perhaps, by seeking to make a way for godliness and virtue, and to banish
impiety and vice, he might chance to fall into a mischief more intolerable
tha^ the present condition: the remedy might prove worse than the disease.

In nature we see, that such a body there may be, in which all the blood
shall be so corrupted, that, before a man should find any good blood therein,
he might (if he would use phlebotomy draw out and take away both the life and
last drop together: in such a case, when the corruption is so gross and
infinite, a skillful Physician will use Epicrasis, as they call it, laboring
to bring the body to a better te^perature. He will draw from it at diverse
times and by diverse means; but yet he will take no more but what is needful
to unburthen nature: which, being discharged, gathers vigor to it self
again; and evacuateth, by sweating and other good means, the malignant
humors, and at length cleanses the blood it self: so may ^ Prince, in these
abundant and superfluous humors of the State, not presently open a vein, lest
so perhaps the spirits depart with the blood, and the life go away with the
strength, but by degrees; as he may displace corrupt Officers and Judges, and
substitute better in their rooms: and by this discretion, and Gods blessing
upon it, he shall see in a short time a conversion of the body of the
Commonwealth, without any subversion or trouble to it or in it; a new
Kingdom, and yet without any great novelty or change.

The ship of Delos, so renowned in antiquity for lasting many years and ages
without renewing, whence got it that fame? but because, as soon as a plank was
in danger or began to rot, they presently provided a new and sound one in the
room thereof: And the safest way to restore a decayed State, is, To proceed by
the same course; but then there needs constancy and perseverance, singalis
matutinis, morning after morning every morning.

It is not one mornings work: but, as Speed is required for such a work without
delay, and Diligence without remisnes; so is Constancy, without intermission.
It is a common saying, that A new besome sweepsclean; but it is a true one,
that The end crowns the work: for, to begin well and then to give over, or to
go on by starts, and not with a constant hand, is the next way to draw on a
relapse; which many times proves more dangerous than the original sickness.
Many, to win applause, or the better to settle themselves in their regal or
imperial Thrones, have begun with wholesome Laws, and strict execution of
them: but, within a while they have grown weary, either by despairing the
event would answer their purposes, or by giving themselves over to ease and
pleasure; and so have lost both their honor with men, and their reward with
God. But, as natural motions gather strength in moving: so a reformation begun
aright out of a conscience of duty, and a zeal of goodness, though it find some
rubs and oppositions at first; yet the farther it wades, the more easy it
finds the passage, and the means more ready for the compassing of what it
intends.

Had our King Henry, the last of that name, continued the same course at the
last as at first he began with, in the worthy execution of Empson and Dudley,
two caterpillars of the State; he had doubtless left more honor to his name,
and happily more treasure in his Coffers. Had Nero held-out the residue of his
government suitably to his first five years, he might well have marched in
equal rank with the best Emperors: but, beginning with an head of gold, and
ending in feet of iron and clay, he now stands registered amongst the monsters
of mankind. It was constancy which made Augustus truly to affirm of Rome at
his death, Lateritiam inveni, marmoream reliqui; I found it Brick, and left it
Marble. It was constancy that erected in every corner so many monuments of
honor to the memory of Traian, that the great Constantine, succeeding in the
Empire about two hundred years after, was wont to call him Herbam parietariam,
Pellitory of the wall. And lastly, constancy it was, and houlding on in an
upright course to the end, that made al Judah and Jerusalem sorely to mourn at
the funerals of the good King Josiah; and the singing men and women continually
in succeeding ages to remember his name in their lamentations; Whereas it is
recorded of some other of that race, who had fair and glorious beginnings, but
clowdy and durty endings, that they dyed without being desired of the people:
no man so much as shed a tear at their funerals, or wished them in being
again.

I come from our Prophets diligence, dispatch, and perseverance, to the work
it self; I will destroy, I will cut off: where a question offers it self,
Whether it be lawful, or no, to destroy; in what case it is lawful, and to
whom it belongs? For the commandment seems to be general, Thou shall not
kill: and so does the rule, grounded upon the law of Nature, and given before
the Moral law, Who-so sheddeth mans^blood, by man shall his blood be shed:
and the reason is added; For, in the image of God made he man, Genesis 9. 6. And
to the law Natural and Moral is added the Evangelicall, All that take the
sword shall perish with the sword, Mat. 26. 52: Which passages, notwithstanding
the peevishness of Anabaptisticall interpretations following the letter and not
the sense, the rind and and not the pith, are not to be expounded without many
limitations and distinctions. For the resolution then of the question, we are
to know, that in three cases, which by some are held unlawful, it is lawful
to destroy; and in three other cases, by othersome held lawful, is is
unlawful to destroy. It is lawful for a man to destroy another, either Se
defendenda, in defense of his own person, or in a just and lawful war, or by
the sword of the public Magistrate.

In defense of his own person, in as much as charity begins at home: and being
to love our neighbor but as our selves, the love of our selves is the rule of
the love of our neighbor, and consequently before it in nature; the rule by
which a thing is ruled and ordered, being ever in nature before that which is
ruled and ordered by it. If then my person be violently assaulted, and my life
wrongfully endangered, it is not only lawful but commendable, to endanger or
take away the assailants life, for the preservation of mine own: but, if I can
by any other means save mine own life without the taking away of his; though
it be in the worlds account reputed disgraceful, yet am I in Christian
charity to make choice of that; which as it teaches a man to prefer his own
life before another: so does it also to prefer another man's life before mine
own pretended or imaginary reputation.

Secondly, it is lawful to destroy in a just and lawful war: which is then
presumed so to be, when it is commanded by the supreme Magistrate, either for
the revenging of outrages committed, or for the repairing of injuries received,
or for the recovering of right detained, or for defending of our own country
or religion, by the enemy threatened. And though it were to be wished, that,
among those who jointly profess the glorious name of Jesus, none occasion were
offered of destroying one another and spilling of Christian blood, but that
they might all join their hearts and hands together in destroying the
professed enemies of that name: yet as long as covetousness and ambition are
admitted to Counsel, as long as right is measured by might, and private
respects are made public quarrels; as long as the Bishop of Rome the eldest
son of that Abaddon or Apollion, Revel* 9* which indeed signifies a
Destroyer, proudly challenges to himself those words of Jeremy, 1. 10. I have
this day set thee over the nations, and over kingdoms, to root out, to pull
down, and to destroy, as Pius Quintus expressly does in his declaratory Bull
against Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, and is therein not checked, but
applauded by Christian Princes; So long I say* such a wish may well pass for
an honest and religious desire, though in reason it be never likely to take
effect: nay, we are sure that the grand Destroyer himself is at last to be
destroyed, even by those Christian Princes whom he employed as instruments for
the destruction of others. The ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, are
they that shall hate the whore, and make her desolate, and naked, and shall
eat her flesh and burn her with fire, for God has put into their hearts to
fulfill his will, Revel. 17. 16. 17. We are then to follow peace with all men;
but none otherwise then as peace is joined with holiness: for what peace can
there be as long as the whoredoms and witchcrafts of that Iezabel remain yet
in such abundance? War then is to be preferred to such a Peace, where a Land
may justly complain, -- Longae pacis patimur mala: Saevior armis,
Luxuria incumbit --


The third sort of Lawful destroying is, by the sword of the public
Magistrate, in the execution of justice upon notorious malefactors; for he
bears it not in vain, but is the minister of God to take vengeance upon him
that does evil, Romans 13. 4. And of this it is that our Prophet (being then by
Gods ordinance designed to be his Vicegerent on earth) chiefly speaks in this
place, I will destroy, I will cut off. And with him agrees the wise Solomon,
Prove. 20. 26, A wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over
them. It is not only justice but wisdom, sometime to cut off and destroy:
First, that others may thereby be admonished to walk more warily. Thus the
disobedient son must be brought forth and stoned to death, That all Israel
might hear and fear, Deuteronomy. 21. As the thunderbolt falls with the danger of
few, but with the fear of all: So Poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes: the terror
of public executions reaches farther than the punishment; for the fear
extends to all, but the punishment to few: and howsoever it be true, that the
better sort be directed by love, yet the greater sort are corrected by fear. A
man that stands by, and sees one that is wounded, seared, or launced, is thereby
made more careful of his own health: and in like manner the beholding a
malefactor to be brought to deserved punishment, makes men more wary how they
run into the like courses. It was a true saying in the general of the
Proconsull to Cyprian at his martyrdom, though ill applied to him in
particular, In sanguine tuo caeteri descent disciplinam; In thy blood the rest
will learn discipline.

Secondly, the cutting off of the wicked causes the good to lead a more quiet
and peaceable life in godliness and honesty: who if they should be permitted to
live and enjoy their liberty, we should neither meet quietly in our
assemblies, nor dwell quietly in our houses, nor walk quietly in our streets,
nor travail quietly in our ways, nor labor quietly in our fields. In better
terms stands that State where nothing, then where all things are lawful: and
it is no less cruelty to spare all, than to spare none. For, he that spares
one bad, thereby injuries many good: which gave occasion to the Proverb,
Foolish pity marres the City; and to the saying of Domitius, that he had
rather seem cruel in punishing, than dissolute in sparing.

Many, says Saint Augustine, call that cruelty, when for love of discipline the
fault committed is revenged by the punishment of the offender; whereas the
Sentence of him that punishes satisfies the law, and redoundeth to the good
not only of them that are present, but even of them that are yet unborne. So
that severity used in this case, Vtilitate publica rependitur, is paid home
and recompensed with public benefit. Yea, but though he be a malefactor, say
some, yet is he a personable man, of an excellent wit, and good parentage; and
is it not pity to cast away such a man? To which may justy be replied, Is it
not more pity, that a proper man should undo a profitable man, that a witty
man should hurt an honest man, that he who has good parentage should spoil
him that has good virtues to serve the Commonwealth? To cut off such a wicked
person then by the stroke of justice, is not to castaway a man; but to
preserve mankind: and better it is, Vt unus pereat quam ut unitas; that one
single person should suffer, than a whole Society: -- Truncatur and artus,
Vt liceat reliquis securum viuere m^bris.


Thirdly, as by sparing wicked and wilful transgressors, the wrath of God is
provoked, and his judgments pulled down upon a Nation: So by cutting them
off, as by an acceptable sacrifice his wrath is appeased, and his favor
procured. If blood were shed in the Land, and the murderer not put to death,
the whole Land was thereby defiled, and made liable to Gods displeasure, Number.
35. 33. When Achan had stolen the consecrated thing, the wrath of the Lord was
so kindled against all the Host of Israel, that they could not stand, but were
discomfited before their enemies: but as soon as Achan with those that
belonged unto him were stoned to death, the Lord turned from his fierce wrath
against Israel; so that whereas, before, their enemies chased and smote them,
now they achieved many great and famous victories, Ios. 7. So long as the
murder committed by Saul upon the Gibeonites was unpunished, there was sent a
grievous famine upon the Land of Israel three years together: but as soon as
Saul's seven sons were hanged at the motion of the Gibeonites, God was
appeased with the Land.

Two notable examples to this purpose we have recorded by Plutarch: the one in
the life of Romulus, the other of Camillus. When Romulus K. of Rome, and Tatius
K. of the Sabines, after cruel war had made their composition to govern the
Romans and Sabines jointly, there fell a strange kind of plague and famine in
the Cities of Rome and Laurentum, for two murders committed by the Romans and
Laurentines: the one by the kinsmen of Tatius upon certain Ambassadors of
Laurentum; which murder Tatius neglected to punish: and the other by the
friends of the said Ambassadors upon Tatius in revenge of the injustice done
by his kinsmen, and suffered by him. Whereupon it being noted that the plague
and famine increased strongly in both Cities, and a common opinion conceived
that it was a punishment of God upon them for those murders committed and not
punished, they resolved to do justice upon the offenders: which being once
done, the plague ceased presently in both places.

The same Author likewise ascribes the Sack of Rome by the Gauls, to the just
judgment of God upon the Romans, for two injustices done by them: the first
was the unjust banishment of Camillus; the second, the refusal to punish
certain Ambassadors of their own, who being sent to treat peaceably with the
Gauls, on the behalf of the Clusians, committed acts of hostility against
them, contrary to the law of arms: And when the Gauls sent to Rome to demand
reparation of the injury, the Romans not only refused to give them
satisfaction; but also made made their Ambassadors, who had done the injury,
Generals of an Army to assist the Clusians against them, notwithstanding that
the Foeciales (officers ordained by Numa Pompilius to determine of the lawful
causes of Peace and War) made great instance to the Senate, that the
Ambassadors might be punished, lest the penalty of their fault might otherwise
fall upon the Commonwealth: as indeed it did. For the Gauls, giving battle
to the Ambassadors, overthrew them; and prosecuting their victory, spoiled and
sacked Rome it self, under the conduct and command of Brennus, their chief
Leader, and as some write a Britain.

Wherein I wish to be noted, how grievous a sin it is in the opinion of the
very Paynims themselves, and how dangerous to the Commonwealth, to neglect and
omit the punishment of notorious malefactors, whereby the offenses of
particular men are made the sins of the whole State, and draw the wrath and
punishment of God upon the same: And as upon the whole State, so chiefly upon
his person and posterity to whose place and office it belongs to see justice
done. It is a true saying, Iudex damnatur, cum nocens abs^luitur, the Judge is
condemned when the guilty is absolved; and Qui non vetat peccare cum potest,
iubet: He that does not restrain a man (when it is his duty, and it lies in his
power) does command him to sin. He that says to the wicked, thou art
righteous, him shall the people curse, Prove. 24. 24. And in another place, He
that justifies the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, 17. 15. So that
whereas they think by this means to win estimation with men, they make
themselves odious both to God and men. Saul was punished with the loss of his
kingdom, for not punishing Agag with death, 1. Sam. 15. And Ahab, for sparing
Benhadab, had a sharp greeting sent him, 1. King. 20. Because thou have let
go out of thine hand a man whom I appointed to die, thy life shall go for his
life, and thy people for his people. And many times we see by experience, that
a desperate wicked man, reserved from due punishment, proves a continual
vexation unto him that has spared him: As, the nations that inhabited the Land
of Canaan, being not cast out and destroyed by the Israelites as God had
commanded them, became by his just judgment a snare and destruction unto them*
a whip on their sides, and a thorn in their eyes, Ios. 23. 13. Judges 2. 3.

Verse 8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off
all wicked doers from the City of the Lord.
HItherto of the three kinds of lawful destroying, by some fantastical and
Anabaptisticall spirits held unlawful. Now, it remains, that I speak of
three other unlawful kinds of destroying, by some irreligious and profane
spirits held lawful; whereof, the first is self homicide, the destroying of a
man's self, the cutting off the thread of his own life with his own hands.
The second is, destroying of another by Duel, in single combat; whether he
send or accept the challenge, it matters not. The third, is the destroying of a
subject by the sword, and at the command of a civil Magistrate, only for
reason of State, or politic respects, without due order of law, or course of
justice.

First, then of the first; of the unlawfulness of a man's destroying himself,
whether it be for the shunning of shame, or grief, or misery, or sin. Our
Prophet himself was often brought into great distress, marvailous streights and
plunges, both bodily and ghostly, as may appear by his doleful complaints
through-out this book of Psalms: Yet would he not destroy himself thereby
to be rid of them. Saul, who would not destroy Agag, destroyed himself: but
David voweth to destroy the wicked; himself he would not destroy. Paul,
though he had fightings without, and terrors within, and desires to be
dissolved; yet dissolve himself, or hasten his dissolution he would not. Job,
though scourged with unmatchable chastisements, yet he would not moove from his
station without his Generals command, he would not change himself, but
patiently wait all the days of his appointed time, until his changing came,
14. 14.

It was a worthy speech which Josephus the Jew made to his Soldiers, being in
a cave, where they lay hid after they lost the City Iotapata, taken by
Vespasian; they, rather than they would bear the disgrace of being taken by the
enemy, would needs make an end of themselves: like Fannius, of whom the Poet,
Hicrog^, Non furor est ne m^riare m^ri?

Yet some might perhaps commend this resolution: but what says the good
Josephus, to persuade them to the contrary? The Almighty has given unto us our
life as a most precious jewel: he has shut it and sealed it up in this
earthen vessel, and given it us to be kept, till he himself (...) ask for it
again: we are neither to deny it when he shall require it, nor to cast it
forth till he command it. Among other reasons for which the Books of the
Maccabees are held Apocryphal, this is not the least, that they commend (...)
his destroying of himself, as a manfull and noble act; whereas indeed it is the
truest sign of a mind truly (...), like a Cube to stand upright in all
fortunes.

Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
The second kind of unlawful destroying, by too many held lawful, is the
killing of another in Duel: not such as our Prophet himself undertook with
Goliath the Philistine, by public authority from the State, and for the public
good of the State; but when men for private revenge, and righting their
conceived or pretended wrongs, either send or accept a challenge for single
combat, all the Soap and Niter in the world cannot wash away the guilt of
blood from this practice: whatsoever men pretend heerin, either for the trial
of manhood, or the putting-by the imputation of cowardice, or for the
maintenance of reputation, it cannot excuse in this case. And howsoever the
world applaud it many times with terms of worth, of gallantry, of brave
spiritednes, and the like; yet is it doubtless no better than murder in Gods
account; and disloyalty to the civil Magistrate, by wresting the sword out of
his hand, and taking his office from him. Sin then against God is more to be
feared, than shame amongst men; and true Christianity to be preferred before
the opinion of such foolhardy courage.

Think not, I read a Lecture of baseness: since true valor consists not in
quarrelling and brabbling for private injuries, or in stabbing for a word of
disgrace; but in maintenance of Gods honor, in preserving thy allegiance to
thy Prince, in safe-garding thy Country. He may well be reckoned among
Martyrs, who upon conscience and knowledge engages himself upon these
occasions.

Was Augustus Caesar a coward in the repute of the Heathen, when, receiving a
challenge from Anthony, he returned him this answer; that, if Anthony had a
disposition to die, or were weary of his life, there were ways enough else to
death besides that? The challenge was rejected, and yet his honor untainted.

I will shut up this point with an excellent speech of Bernards concerning
unjust fightings; and in that number I esteem these: If in thy fighting thou
have a mind to kill another man, and then art slain fighting, thou die a
murderer: if thou prevail, and kill the other, thou live a murderer.
Whether then thou live or die, be conquered or Conqueror, it is not good to
be a murderer. So that the conclusion is, that, which way soever it fall out,
murder it is before God. Miserable for a man to be slain, and so to go to
his reckoning while he is maliciously laboring to take away another life: as
miserable, if he kill, to be continually haunted with the guilt of blood. All
the fame and commendation of doing it upon fair terms, cannot countervail that
vexation.

I have the rather touched this point, for that it is one of the evils of our
times; many scarce accounting themselves men, till they have made a braul, and
(like the Youngsters of Helkethhazzurim) sheathed their swords in their
fellows bowels: whereby the Land is becomne a very Acheldama, a Field of
blood. The more are we to bless God, who has put it in the mind of our
David, not any way to countenance these Cutters, but to range them among those
wicked ones whom he has vowed to destroy and cut off.

The third kind of unlawful destroying, by some held lawful, is the cutting
off of a Subject by the sword, or at the command of the civil Magistrate, for
politic or private respects, without just cause and due desert. Almighty God,
who out of the earth molded man, and breathed into him the spirit of life,
might (as an absolute Lord of life and death) take that breath again from him,
and turn him into dust, or into nothing, at his pleasure: but his Vicegerents
on earth have no such transcendent power; their commission being confined to
the rules of justice and religion: the observation whereof is undoubtedly the
fairest and safest course they can take. Vriah was David's Subject: yet when the
King had cunningly caused him to be placed by Ioab in the forefront of the
battle, and upon a sudden retreit to fall by the sword of the Ammonite; in
sense of this unjust act he afterward cries out, Deliver me from
blo^d-guiltiness, O God. Naboth was Ahabs Subject: yet, because Letters were
written in the Kings Name, and his Seal was set to them for the putting of
Naboth to death, the Prophet Eliah is bid to charge him with the murder; Have
thou killed, and also taken possession? Neither does Ahab plead his power over
Naboth, or Naboths subjection unto him; but, by humbling of himself, seems to
acknowledge his guiltiness.

There is nothing that makes a man to be more accounted of amongst all men,
than, being accountable to no man for his actions, so to carry himself
(specially in the destroying and cutting off of men) as if he were ready to
yield account of his proceedings to all men. There is nothing that wins more
hearty affection, and inward both revere^ce and obedience, than when a man may
uncontrouleably and without check do what he list, to do no more than what
is lawful and justifiable.

Nee tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecisse decebit,
Occurrat, mentemq^e domet respectus honesti.
And as the Panegyrist speaks of The^d^sius, Idem es qui fuisti, and tantum
tibi per te licet quantum per leges antea licebat: ius summum facultate and
c^pia commodandi* non securitate peccandi, experiris. Whereunto the strongest
motive to induce a mind possessed with the sense of religion and the fear of
God, is, that no earthly throne is so high, but that it has a superior throne
in heaven, from which it was derived, to which it is subordinate, and by which
it must be judged: and the less it is liable to humane censure, the more
strict and severe either in this world, or in the next, or in both, must it in
reason expect the divine.

Si genus humanum and mortalia temnitis arma,
At sperate Deum memorem fandi at que nefandi.
Therefore our Prophet ads, I will destroy, I will cut off: but whom? the wicked
of the Land, the workers of iniquity: which is my third general part, the
Object upon who^ this severe justice is to be don.

It is as great abomination, says Solomon, Prove. 17. 15, In the sight of God
to condemn the just, as it is to justify the wicked: And the Prophet Esaias 5.
23, pronounces as great a woe against him that takes away the righteousness
of the righteous from him, as against him that justifies and absolveth the
wicked for a reward. As then special care must be had, that the innocent do
not suffer with the guilty, or as the guilty: So specially that their blood be
not spilt, and their life uniustly destroyed. Know for certain (says the
Prophet Jeremy) that if ye put me to death, ye shall bring innocent blood
upon your selves, and upon this City, and upon the inhabitants thereof, 26.
14. Thereby implying that God would avenge his blood, not only upon the
murderers themselves, but upon the people; the whole Land should be guilty of
it.

Manasses was a (...) murderer, he shed innocent blood exceeding much, till
he replenished Jerusalem from corner to corner, 2. King. 21. But mark how
fearfully God revenges this sin in his posterity. In the days of Iehoachim,
the Lord sent against him bands of the Chaldees, and bands of the Aramites, and
bands of the M^abites, and bands of the Ammonites, and he sent them against
Judah to destroy it; For the sins of Manasses, and for the inn^cent blood
that he had shed: as it is expressed in the 24. of the same book. Manasses was
dead and rotten long before this time, yet we see God had not forgotten that
sin; but the whole Land smarted in the third generation after him. So
likewise Ioash most unkindly caused Zachariah the son of good Iehoiada to be
stoned to death, because he reproved him for his Idolatry. But see what
followed. When the year was out, the Host of Aram came uppe against him, and
they came against Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes of the
people, and sent all the spoil of them to the King of Damascus: though the
army of Aram came with a small company of men, yet the Lord delivered a very
great army into their hands. After this, the King himself was smitten with
great diseases, and at last his own servants conspired against him, and slew
him in his bed. And the reason of all these fearful judgments is given there
by the holy Ghost, For the blood of the children of Iehoiada the Priest.

It is memorable, that which Procopius an Historian reports, touching
Theodorick King of the Goths; how that having slain Bo^thius and Symmachus,
two both noble and innocent persons, the guilt of that horrible fact cleaving
close to him, he had a strong imagination that the head of a certain fish
which was set upon his table, was the head of Symmachus, gaping and yawning
upon him: The very conceit whereof struck him into such a quaking fit, as was
the beginning of an extreme sickness, upon which he shortly died.

Now, as he vows to destroy the wicked, and none but them: so does he all
them; my fourth general part, His indifferent and unpartiall proceeding, I
will destroy all, I will cut off all. Not that he thought it possible to root
out all; but that he would do his best to leave none.

The magistrate herein is to imitate God, whose deputy he is, and whose person
he represents: And as he communicates with God in his name, so should he in his
nature; Who without respect of persons judges according to every man's work, 1.
Pet. 1. 17. Though Coniah were as the signet upon his finger, yet would he
pluck him thence, Jeremy 22. 24. And as his practice is, so is his precept: Ye
shall have one law, it shall be as well for the stranger, as the borne in the
country. The stranger if he deserve favor, must have it as much as if he
were borne in the country: and he that is borne in the country must be
punished as severely as if he were a stranger.

Tros Tyriusue mihi nullo discrimine aget^r.
If a son be stubborn and disobedient, the Parents themselves must bring him
forth to the Judges, that they may sentence him, and the people stone him,
Deuteronomy. ^1. If a brother, if a daughter, if a wife offend in some cases, they are
not to be spared, Deuteronomy. 13. And therefore Asa, King of Judah, is commended for
his uprightness in this respect, that when Maacha, his own mother, committed
Idolatry, he would not spare her, but deposed her from her Regency, 1. King.
15. And indeed it is truly said, Iustitia non novit patrem, non novit matrem,
veritatem novit: Justice neither knows father, nor mother, but only the
truth.

It is reported by a late Traveller, that in Zant over the place of judgment,
where all causes both Criminal and Civil are decided, there are these two
Latin verses written on the wall, in letters of gold: Hic locus odit, amat,
punit, conservat, h^norat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, i^ra, bonos.


This place hates wickedness, loves peace, punishes offenses, preserves the
laws, honors the good; implying that there should be no partiality used,
but every man should be proceeded withal according to his deserts.

To which purpose, was that memorable speech of our King Henry the fourth of
that name; who when his eldest son, the Prince, was by the L. chief Justice,
for some great misdemeanors, commanded and committed to prison, he thanked God
that he had both a son of that obedience, and a judge of such unpartiall and
undanted courage.

But Agesilaus was as much to blame, who when he commended a friend of his to
the Judge, he moved him that if his cause were good, he would absolve him
for justice sake; if not, at his motion: but howsoever the world went, absolved
he must be be; an ill example of dangerous consequence, in him who was to be
a pattern of indifferent justice to his inferior Judges: among whom we find
that too often true, which the heathen Orator complained of, in his times;
Omnium Sermon percrebuit, It is rife in every man's mouth, In his iudiciis quae
nunc sunt, pecuniosum hominem quamvis sit nocens, neminem posse damnari: That
in these judgments which are now-adayes, a monied man though he be guilty,
cannot be condemned. Nihil tam sanctum quod non violari, nihil tam munitum quod
non expugnari pecunia possit, There is nothing so holy that may not be
violated, nothing so well fenced, that may not be overthrown with money; the
laws being made like unto cobwebs, which catch and hold little ^lyes, but the
great ones break through them. Blasphemy, and perjury, and sacrilege, and
symonie, and extortion, and oppression, and usury, and exeessive bribery pass
current; when petty theeverie in case of extreme necessity is most severely
punished.

The fif^ and last point I proposed, is the End our Prophet proposes to him
self of this great work here vowed, It is the purging of the City of the
Lord: whereby is meant Jerusalem. First, for example to the whole Realm, it
being the Metropolis and head City of the Kingdom, as also and principally by
reason the service of God, and the exercise of religion, was in a special
mann^r by divine ordinance tied unto it: in which regard he calls it the City
of the Lord, as the Evangelist does the holy City, Mat. 4.

This City was so large, that it con^^^^ed of four quarters* every one of
them by walls divided from another. The first and highest was mount Sion: in
it was the City of David, called by ^osephus the superior City, exceeding
strong in regard of the natural situation thereof. The second was called the
Daughter of Sion, because it seemed to come out as it were of the bosom of the
other; and in this was mount Moriah, whereupon the Temple stood: This City was
compassed with a strong wal^, wherein stood threescore Towers. The third was
beautified with many ample streets, and fair buildings, compassed with a wall
wherein were fourteen Towers. The fourth was inhabited by all sorts of
Artificers, compassed with the third wall which was twenty five cubits high,
and had in it fourscore and ten strong Towers. So populous withal it was,
that during the siege of the Romans in the space of five months there were
slain and died, as Josephus there present reports it, to the number of eleven
hundred thousand. Now, albeit in our Prophets days this City was not yet
brought to this perfection, yet was it then very spacious and populous:
notwithstanding which greatness of the place and disordred multitude of the
inhabitants, yet by Gods help he undertakes the reformation.

It is a thing which we ought to bear away: for, it meets with the idle^ess
and litherness of many, who imagine that it is impossible to reform a great
City: yea, if it be but a little market town, it is impossible (say they) that
all should be well there. Yea, this excuse is pretended by such as have but
small families in comparison: and so, under a color of this impossibility to
reform all, they do almost just nothing; no, not so much as the laws put into
their hands, and command them to do. Yet these men have but as it were a
posterne gate in Jerusalem to keep: what think you would they do, if they had
the charge of so great and large a City? True it is, let Officers do their
best, there will be much disorder: what will it be then when they do little or
nothing, in respect of any care to weed out sin? but rather bolster it out,
take part with lewd companions, give them countenance, speak and write for
them, yea keep them company; men fit rather to be overseen and guided
continually by others, than to be in authority to see or guide any. But let
such as be in office do their duty, executing the good laws put into their
hands by higher authority, and then not doubt of the impossibility of reforming
abuses in their lesser charges; seeing David, trusting upon the help of God, is
so confident touching this great and populous City. Let them but put-to their
endeavors, and they shall find such success in the advancement of godliness
and suppressing of impiety, many times even beyond hope and expectation, as
they will see cause to rejoice in the performance of their duty, and to praise
God for his blessing upon it.

Again: David, vowing to reform this City, means not to stay there, but to
proceed to the cleansing and purging of the whole Land. This no doubt he might
think, that if Jerusalem were reformed, it would be a great light and direction
to the whole Kingdom: as we see how it falls out; lesser places look to
those that be^ greater, and the meaner sort look to those that be^ higher, from
whom also there is (...) force to draw inferiors either to good or evil.

Above maiori discit ar are minor.
A great town or a great house well ordered may fitly be compared to a great
garden full of sweet flowrs, which yields much good ^avour and prospect to the
neighbors: if they be ill ordered, they be like great dunghills, noisome and
contagious to such as dwell about. A great town or a great Personages house,
if they be good, do much good to the Country: but, if they be naught and
sinful, the poison of them is strong, and the infection dangerous.

It is then a work worthy a King, to begin the reformation of his State, with
purging the head-city of his Kingdom: where, by reason of the confluence of
foreign nations and all sorts of people, vice must needs abound; but specially,
because head-cities (for the most part) by Monopolies, and Companies, and
Corporations, and I know no^ that devices, labor to draw to themselves the
whole treasure of the Land: and if the blood should all be drawn from the
other members to the head, it would both diste^per the head, and starve the
members. The head-city then is so to be respected, that inferior cities and
towns be not neglected; but an indifferent hand to be extended to them al,
lest one in time swallow the other, as the greater fishes devour the lesser.

The last thing we are to observe, is, that he would begin his reformation in
the City of the Lord. Of the Lord. His meaning is, with matter of religion; it
being therefore called the City of the Lord, because, as he had chosen the
Land of Canaan out of all the world to be the portion of his people* so out of
all Canaan he chose Jerusalem, to place his Name and Tabernacle there (the
Temple being not yet built) and in the Tabernacle the Arc of the Covenant; a
special sacrament of his presence. This, our Prophet expresses yet more
clearly in another Psalm, 122. 9, Because of the house of the Lord our God, I
will seek to d^o thee good. Among other main and weighty matters then
pertaining to the Princes charge, the care of GOD's truth and Church must be
the chiefest. For, should the bodies, goods and credits of men be preserved;
and the honor and glory of GOD be neglected? Should earthly ease be so much
in request; and heavenly bliss so little in desire? Fear we the ruin of all
things, where injuries and violences by men are not repressed by the princes
sword; and doubt we no danger where idolatry, heresy, ath e^sm and blasphemy
against God, go unpunished? Is Gods hand shortened, that he cannot strike? or
his will altered, that he will honor those that dishonor him, and bless
them that hate him?

It is a Romish error, repugnant to the word of God, and to the examples of
the best Kings and Monarchs before and since Christ, to restrain Princes from
protecting and promoting the true worship of GOD within their Realms. Neither
has the man of sin more grossly betrayed his pride and rage in any thing, than
in abasing the honor, and abusing the power, and impugning this right of
Princes, by making them his Bailiffs and Sergeants to attend and accomplish his
will, and not meddle with supporting the truth, or reforming the Church farther
than he lists; that, whiles they command their subjects bodies, he might
command their souls, the better half: which, commanding the body, will quickly
upon occasion draw that after it; as reason shows, and experience teaches.

It is rightly observed, that, after the Bishop of Rome had once fully
engrossed the Imperial power, there was never since Emperor of strength, or
Pope of virtue: so they lost both by it. And indeed, as the blood, if it fall
any way out of the veins too much, there is some danger; but, if it fall into
the body extra vasa, there is more danger, for it will corrupt and putresie: so
was it with the supreme authority of Princes, when they suff^red it to fall
into the Clergy, as it were extra vasa: but their Scepters and Thrones, allowed
them by God, are sufficient proofs that they may and must make laws and
execute judgment, as well for godliness and honesty (which by the Apostles
rule are within the compass and charge of their Commission) as for peace and
tranquillity. God has given them two hands, to be Custodes utriusque tabulae;
Vpholders of both the tables: from observing this, no man may draw them; since
for neglecting this, no man shall excuse them.

They must not be careful in humane things, and carel^sse in divine: God ought
to be served and honored by them, that is, by their Princely power and care,
as much before men, as his truth and glory excels the peace and w^lfare of
men. It wants many degrees of a Christian government to look to the keeping
of things that must perish, and to leave the souls of men as an open prey to
impiety and irreligion. And if Princes provide not this for their Subjects,
peace, and traffic, and such like makes no better provision for them, then is
made for Oxen in good pasture; nay, not so good. For an Ox has therein all
he needs; but a man without this left altogether unprovided in his far
nobler and better part.

And as Princes without this Care provide not well for their people: so they
provide but ill for themselves, in as much as they can have no certain
assurance of the loyalty and allegiance of their subjects without it; since
nothing can cast a sure knot on the conscience for the firm binding of it, but
the true knowledge and fear of God. So that where Princes advance the good of
Gods house, they establish the good of their own all in one.

Lastly, it is to be observed, that in all the Kings of Israel and Judah, their
stories begin with this observation, as with a thing worthy to be chronicled
in the first place, how they dealt in matter of religion. Such a King, and such
a King: and what did he? He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord;
and such a King, he walked in the ways of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. I
spare to cite places: but it is the general observation of those books of
Kings and Chronicles; as they that read them know: yea farther, it may be
marked, that God has always humbled Princes, and even powered contempt upon
them, when they have contemned the messengers and forsaken or forgotten the
house of the Lord.

For the preventing whereof, it shall not be amiss for them to consult with
Churchmen, specially in Church affair^s; as the wise, the good King David in
all his weighty businesses, but specially in matters touching religion and the
service of God, still used the counsel and direction either of Gad or Nathan,
Prophets, or of Abiathar and Hiram, chief Priests. It went well with Ioash, as
long as Iehoiada his trusty Counselor lived: but when Iehoiadah died, the
Kings goodness dyed with him. Then came the Princes of Judah, and made
obeisance to the King, and the King hearkened unto them, and they left the
house of the Lord God of their Fathers, and served Groves and Idols, and wrath
came upon Judah and Jerusalem, because of this their trespass, 2. Chron. 24.
17. 18.

Give the King thy judgments O God, and thy righteousness unto the Kings Son.

FINIS.

