CASTARA
LONDON. Printed for Will: Cook, and are sold at his shop at Furnivals Inn
Gate, in Holborne. 1640.

W. M. sculpsit



CASTARA:

-- Carmina non prius Audita, Musarum sacerdos Virginibus. --

The third Edition. Corrected and augmented

LONDON Printed by T. Cotes, for Will. Cook: and are to be sold at his Shop
near Fernivals-Inne Gate in Holburne. 1640.

The Author.
THe Press has gathered into one, what fancy had scattered in many loose
papers. To write this, love stole some hours from busine^sse, and my more
serious study. For though Poetry may challenge if not priority, yet equality
with the best Sciences, both for antiquity and worth; I never set so high a
rate upon it, as to give my self entirely up to its devotion. It has too much
air, and (if without offense to our next transmarine neighbor,) wantons too
much according to the French garb. And when it is wholly employed in the soft
strains of love, his soul who entertaines it, loses much of that strength
which should confirm him man. The nerves of judgment are weakened most by its
dalliance, and when woman, (I mean only as she is externally fair) is the
supreme object of wit, we soon degenerate into effeminacy. For the religion of
fancy declines into a mad superstition, when it adores that Idol which is not
secure from age and sickness. Of such heathens, our times afford us a pittyed
multitude, who can give no nobler testimony of twenty years employment, then
some loose coppies of lust happily expressed. Yet these the common people of wit
blow up with their breath of praise, and honor with the Sacred name of Poets:
To which as I believe they can never have any just claim, so shall I not dare
by this essay to lay any title, since more sweat and oil he must spend, who
shall arrogate so excellent an attribute. Yet if the innocence of a chaste Muse
shall be more acceptable, and weigh heavier in the balance of esteem, than a
fame, begot in adultery of study; I doubt I shall leave them no hope of
competition. For how unhappie soever I may be in the elocution, I am sure the
Theme is worthy enough. In all those flames in which I burnt, I never felt a
wanton heat, nor was my invention ever sinister from the strait way of
chastity. And when love builds upon that rock, it may safely contemn the
battery of the waves, and threatenings of the wind. Since time, that makes a
mockery of the firmest structures shall it self be ^umated, before that be
demolisht. Thus was the foundation laid. And though my eye in its survey, was
satisfied, even to curiosity, yet did not my search rest there. The Alabaster,
Ivory, Porphir, Iet, that lent an admirable beauty to the outward building,
entertained me with but a half pleasure, since they stood there only to make
sport for ruin. But when my soul grew acquainted with the owner of that
mansion; I sound that Oratory was dombe when it began to speak her, and wonder
(which must necessarily seize the best at that time) a lethargy, that dulled
too much the faculties of the mind, only fit to busy themselves in
discoursing her perfections, Wisdom, I encountered there, that could not spend
it self since it affected silence, attentive only to instructions, as if all
her senses had been contracted into hearing: Innocence, so not vitiated by
conversation with the world, that the subtle witted of her sex, would have
termed it ignorance: Wit, which seated it self most in the apprehension, and
if not enforced by good manners, would scarce have gained the name of
affability. Modesty, so timorous, that it represented a besieged City,
standing watchfully upon her guard, strongest in the loyalty to her Prince. In
a word, all those virtues which should restore woman to her primitive state of
beauty, fully adorned her. But I shall be censured, in laboring to come nigh
the truth, guilty of an indiscreet Rhetoric. However such I fancied her, for
to say she is, or was such, were to play the Merchant, and boast too much the
value of a lewell I possess, but have no mind to part with. And though I
appear to strive against the stream of best wits, in erecti^g the self same
Altar both to chastity and love; I will for once adventure to do well, without
a president. Nor if my rigid friend question superciliously the setting forth
of these Poems, will I excuse my self (though justly perhaps I might) that
importunity prevailed, and clear judgments advised: This only ^ dare say,
that if they are not strangled with envy of the present, they may happily live
in the not dislike of future times. For then partiality cease, and virtue is
without the idolatry of her clients, esteemed worthy honor. Nothing new is
free from detraction, and when Princes alter customs even heavy to the
subject, best ordinances are interpreted innovations. Had I slept in the
silence of my acquaintance, and affected no study beyond that which the chase
or field allows, Poetry had then been no scandal upon me, and the love of
learning no suspicion of ill husbandry. But what malice, begot in the Country
upon ignorance, or in the City upon Criticisme, shall prepare against me, I am
armed to endure. For as the face of virtue looks fair without the adultery of
Art, so fame needs no aid from rumor to strengthen her self. If these lines
want that courtship, (I will not say flattery) which insinuates it self into
the favor of great men, best; they partake of my modesty: If Satyr to win
applause with the envious multitude; they express my content, which maliceth
none, the fruition of that, they esteem happy. And if not too indulgent to
what is my own; I think even these verses will have that proportion in the
worlds opinion, that heaven has allotted me in fortune; not so high, as to be
wondered at, nor so low as to be contemned.

To his best friend and Kinsman William Habington, Esquire.
NOt in the silence of content and store
Of private sweets ought thy Muse charm no more
Then thy Castara's ear. 'Twere wrong such gold
Should not like Mines, (poor named to th^^) behold
It self a public joy. Who her restrain,
Make a close prisoner of a Sovereign.
Enlarge her then to triumph. While we'see
Such worth in beauty, such desert in thee,
Such mutual flames between you both, as show
How chastity, though ye, like love can glow,
Yet stand a Virgin: How that full content
By virtue is to souls united, lent,
Which proves all wealth is poor all honors are
But empty tit^es, h^ghest power but care,
That quits not cost. Yet Heaven to Virtue kind,
Has given yo^ plenty to ^^ffice a mi^de
That knows but temper. For beyond your state
May be a pro^der, not a happier Fa^e.
I Write not this in hope to ^ncroach on fame,
O^ add a greater luster to your name.
Bright in it self enough. We two are kn^wne
To the World, as to our selves, to be but one
In blood as study: And my careful love
Did never action worth my name, approve,
Which served not thee. Nor did we ere cont^nd,
But who should be best patt^r^e of a friend.
Who read thee, praise thy fancy, and admire
Thee burning with so high and pure a fire,
As reaches heaven it self But I who know
Thy soul religious to her ends, where grow
No si^nes by art or custom, boldly can
Style thee more than good Poet, a good man.
Then let thy temples shake off vul^ar bays,
The have ^uilt an Altar which enshrines ^hy praise:
And to the faith of after time commends
Ye the best pair of lovers, us of friends.
GEORGE TAL^OT.

A Mistress
IS the fairest treasure, the avarice of Love can covet; and the only white,
at which he shootes his arrows, nor while his aim is noble, can he ever hit
upon repentance. She is chaste, for the devil enters the Idol and gives the
Oracle, when wantonness possesses beauty, and wit maintains it lawful. She
is as fair as Nature intended her, helped perhaps to a more pleasing grace by
the sweetness of education, not by the slight of Art. She is young, for a
woman past the delicacie of her spring, may well move by virtue to respect,
never by beauty to affection. She is innocent even from the knowledge of
si^ne, for vice is too strong to be wrastled with, and gives her frailty the
foil. She is not proud, though the amorous youth interpret her modesty to
that sense; but in her virtue wears so much Majesty, lust dares not rebel,
nor though masqued, under the pretense of love, capitulate with her. She
entertaines not every parley offered, although the Articles pretended to her
advantage: advice and her own fears restrain her, and woman never owed ruin
to too much caution. She glories not in the plurality of servants, a multitude
of adorers heaven can only challeng; and it is impiety in her weakness to
desire superstition from many. She is deaf to the whispers of love, and even
on the marriage hour can break off, without the least suspicion of scandal,
to the former liberty of her carriage. She avoydes a too near conversation
with man, and like the Parthian overcomes by flight. Her language is not
copious but apposit, and she had rather suffer the reproach of being dull
company, than have the title of Witty, with that of Bold and Wanton. In her
carriage she is sober, and thinks her youth expresses life enough, without
the giddy motion, fashion of late has taken up. She danceth to the best
applause but doates not on the vanity of it, nor licenceth an irregular meeting
to vaunt the levity of her skill. She sings, but not perpetually, for she
knows, silence in woman is the most persuading oratory. She never arrived to
so much familiarity with man as to know the demunitive of his name, and call
him by it; and she can show a competent favor: without yielding her hand to
his gripe. She never understood the language of a kiss, but at salutation,
nor dares the Courtier use so much of his practiced impudence as to offer the
rape of it from her; because chastity has write it unlawful, and her
behavior proclaims it unwelcome. She is never sad, and yet not jiggish; her
conscience is clear from guilt, and that secures her from sorrow. She is not
passionately in love with poetry, because it softens the heart too much to
love: but she likes the harmony in the Composition; and the brave examples of
virtue celebrated by it, she proposes to her imitation. She is not vain in
the history of her gay kindred ^r acquaintance; since virtue is often tenant ^o
a cottage, and familiarity with greatness (if worth be not transcendant above
the title) is but a glorious servitude, fools only are willing to suffer. She
is not ambitious to be praised, and yet vallues death beneath infamy. And I Will
conclude, (though the next sinod of Ladies condemn this character as an
heresy broacht by a Precision) that only she who has as great a share in
virtue as in beauty, deserves a noble love to serve her, and a free Poesy to
speak her.

To CASTARA, A Sacrifice.
LET the chaste Phoenix from the flowery East,
Bring the sweet treasure of her perfumed nest,
As incense to this Altar* where the name
Of my Castara's engraved by the hand of fame.
Let purer Virgins, to redeem the air
From loose infection, bring their zealous prayer,
T'assist at this great feast: where they shall see,
What rites Love offers up to Chastity.
Let all the amorous Youth, whose fair desire
Felt never warmth but from a noble fire,
Bring hither their bright flames: which here shall shine
As Tapers fixed about Custara's s^rine.
While I the Priest, my untamed heart, surprise,
And in this Temple mak't her sacrifice.
To CASTARA, Praying.
I Saw Castara pray, and from the sky,
A winged legion of bright Angel* fly
To catch his vows, for fear her Vrgin prayer,
Might chance to mingle with impurer air.
To vulgar eyes, the sacred truth I write,
May seem a fancy. But the Eagles sight
Of Saints, and P^ets, miracles often view,
Which to dull Heretics appear untrue.
Fair zeal begets such wonders. O divine
And purest beauty, let me thee enshrine
In my devoted soul, and from thy praise,
To Enrich my garland, pluck religious Bays.
Shine thou the star by which my thoughts shall move,
Best subject of my pen, Queen of my love.
To Roses in the bosom of CASTARA,
YE blushing Virgins happy are
In the chaste Nunn'ry of her breasts,
For he would profane so chaste a fair,
Who ere should call them Cupids nests.
Transplanted thus how bright ye grow,
How rich a perfume do ye yield?
In some close garden, Cowslips so
Are sweeter then in the open field.
In those white Cloisters live secure
From the rude blasts of wanton breath,
Each hour more innocent and pure,
Till you shall wither into death.
Then that which living gave you room,
Your glorious sepulcher shall be.
There wants no marble for a tomb,
Whose breast has marble been to me.
To CASTARA, A Uow.
BY those chaste lamps which yield a silent light,
so the cold Vrnes of Virgins; By that night,
Which guilty of no crime, does only hear
The Vows of recluse Nu^s and the Au'thrits prayer;
And by thy chaster self; My fervent zeal
Like mountain y^e, which the North winds congeale,
To purest Crystal, feels no wanton fire.
But as the humble Pilgrim, (whose desire
Blessed in Christ's cottage view, by Angels hands,
Transported from sad Bethlem,) wondering stands
At the great miracle So I at thee,
Whose beauty is the shrine of chastity.
Thus my bright Muse in a new orb shall move,
And even teach Religion how to love.
To CASTARA, Of his being in Love.
Where am I? not in Heaven: for oh I feel
The Stone of Sisiphus, Ixions wheel;
And all those tortures, Poets (by their wine
Made judges) laid on Tant ^lus, are mine.
Nor yet am I in hell; for still I stand,
Though giddy in my passion, on firm land.
And still behold the seasons of the year,
Springs in my hope, and Winters in my fear.
And sure I Am 'bove the earth, F^r the highest star
Shoots beams, but dim, to what Castara's are,
And in her sight and favor I even shine
In a bright orb beyond the Christalline.
If then Castara I in Heaven nor move,
Nor Earth, nor Hell; where am I but in Love?
To my honored Friend, Mr. E. P.
NOt still in the shine of Kings. Thou do retire
Sometime to the Holy shade, where the chaste quire
Of Muses does the stubborn Panther awe,
And give the wildenesse of ^is nature law.
The wind his chariot stops: The attentive rock
The rigor does of its creation mock,
And gently melts away: Argus to hear
The music, turns each eye into an ear.
To welcome thee, Endy^ion, glorious they
Triumph to force th^se creatures disobey
What nature has enacted. But no charm
The Muses have these monsters can disarme
Of their in nated rage: No spell can tame
The North-winds fury, but Castara's name.
Climb yonder forked hill, and see if there
In The bark of every Daphne, not appear
Castara written; And so marked by me,
How great a Prophet grows each Virgin tree?
Lie down, and listen what the sacred spring
In her harmonious murmures, strives to sing
To the neighboring bank, ere her loose waters err
Through common channels; sings she not of her?
Behold yond' violet, which such honor gains,
That growing but to emulate her veins,
It Is azur'd like the sky: when she does bow
T'invoke Castara, heaven perfumes her vow.
The trees the water, and the flowers adore
The Deity of her s^x, and through each pore
Breath forth her glories. But unquiet love
To make thy passions so uncourtly prove,
As if all ears should hear her praise alone.
Now listen thou; Edymion sings his own.
To CASTARA.
Do not their profane Orgies hear,
Who but to wealth no al^ars rear.
The soul's often poys'ned through the ear.
Castara rather seek to dwell
In The silence of a private cell.
Ri^h discontent's a glorious hell.
Yet Hi^dlip does not want extent
Of room (though not magnificent)
To give free welcome to content.
There shall thou see the early Spring,
That wealthy stock of nature bring,
Of which the Sybils books did sing.
From fruitless Palms shall honey flow,
An^ ba^ren Winter Harvest show,
While Lillies in his bosom grow,
No North wind shall the corn infest,
But the soft spirit of the East,
Our sent with perfumed banquets feast.
A S^tyre here and there shall trip,
In hope to purchase leave to sip
Sweet Nectar from a Fairies lip.
The Nimphs with quivers shall adorn
Then active sides and rouse the morn
With the shrill music of their horn.
Waken^d with which, and vievving thee,
Fair Daphne her fair self shall free,
From the chaste prison of a tree:
And with Nar^lssu^ (to thy face
Who humbly will ascribe all grace)
Shall once again pursue the chase.
So they whose wisdom did discuss
Of these as fictions: shall in us
Find, they were more then fabulous.
To CASTARA, Softly singing to her self.
SIng forth sweet Cherubin (for we have choice
Of reasons in thy beauty and thy voice,
To name thee so, and scarce appear profane)
Sing forth, that while the orbs celestial strain
To echo thy sweet note, our humane ears
May then receive the Music of the Spheres.
But yet take heed, lest if the Swans of Thames,
That add harmonious pleasure to the streams,
Oth' sudden hear thy well-divided breath,
Should listen, and in silence welcome death:
And ravished Nightingales, striving too high
To ^each thee, in the emulation dye.
And thus there will be left no bird to sing
Farewell to the Waters, welcome to the Spring.
To a Wanton.
IN vain fair sorcer^sse, thy eyes speak charms,
In ^aine thou make loose circles with thy arms.
I Am 'bove thy spells No magic him can move,
In whom Castara has inspired her love.
As she, keep thou strict cent'nell over thy ear,
Lest it the whispers of sof^ Courtiers hear;
Read not his raptures, whose invention must
Write journey work, both for his Patrons lust.
And his own plush: let no admirer feast
His eye oth' n^ked banquet of thy breast.
If this fair president, nor yet my w^nt
Of love, to answer thine, make thee recant
Thy sorc'ries; Pity shall to justice t^rne,
And judge thee* witch, in thy own flames to burn.
To the Honorable my much honored friend, R. B. Esquire.
WHile you dare trust the loudest* tongue of fame,
The zeal you bear your Mist^esse to proclaim*
To the talking world: I in the silenst grove,
Scarce to my self dare whisper that I love
Thee, titles Brud'nell, riches thee adorn,
And vigorous youth to vice not headlong borne
By the tide of custom: Which I value more
Th^n what blind superstitious fools adore,
Who greatn^ss^ in the chair of bliss^ enthrone,
Greatness we borrow, Ver^ue is o^r own.
In thy attempt be prosperou^, and when ere
Thou shall prefix the hour; May Hym^n wear
His b^ightest robe; where some famed Persian shall
Work by the wonder of her needle all
The nup^i^ll joys; which (if we Poets be
True Propheis) bounteous heaven designs for thee.
I envy not, but glory in thy fate,
While in the narrow limits of my state
I b^und my hopes Which if Castara daigne
Once to entitle he^s; the wealthiest grain
My earth, untild shall bear; my trees shall groan
Under their frui^full burden, and at one
And the same season* Nature forth shall bring
Riches of A^tumne, pleasures of the Spring.
But dig and thou shall find a purer Mine
Then the In^ians boast: Taste of this generous Vine,
And her blood sweeter will than Nectar prove,
Such miracles wait on a noble love.
B^t should she scorn my suite, I Will ^rend that path
Which none but some sad Fairy beaten has.
There force wronged Philomel, hearing my m^ne,
To ^igh my greater griefs, forget her own.
To CASTARA, Inquiring why I loved her.
WHy does the stubborn iron prove
So gentle to th* magnetique stone?
How know you that the orbs do move;
With music too? since heard of none?
And I will answer why I love.
It Is not thy virtues, each a star
Which in thy souls bright sphere do shine,
Shooting their beauties from a far,
To make each gazers heart like thine;
Our virtues often Meteo^s are.
It Is not thy face. I cannot spy,
When Poets weep some Virgins death,
That Cupid wantons in her eye,
Or perfumes vapor from her breath,
And amongst the dead thou once must lie.
Nor is it thy birth. For I was never
So vain as in that to delight:
Which balance it* no weight does bear,
Nor yet (...) obj^ct to the sigh^,
But only fills the vulgar ear.
Nor yet thy fortunes: Since I know
They in their motion like the Sea:
Ebb from the good, to the impious flow:
And so in flattery betray,
That raising they but overthrow.
And yet these attributes might prove
Fuel enough t'enflame desire;
But there was something from above,
Shot without reasons guide, this fire.
I know, yet know not, why I love.
To CASTARA, Looking upon him.
TRansfix me with that flaming dart,
I^h' eye, or breast or any part,
So thou, Ca^ta^a, spare my heart.
The cold Cym^rian by that bright
Warm^ wound* in the darkness of his night,
Might both recover heat, and light.
The rugged Scythian gently move,
In The whispering shadow of some gro^e,
That Is consecrate to sportive Love.
December see the Prim rose grow,
The Rivers in soft murmurs flow,
And from his head shake off h^s snow.
And crooked age might feel again
Those heates of which youth did complain,
While fresh blood swells each withered vein.
For the bright luster of thy eyes*
Which but ^o warm them would suffice,
May burn me to a s^crifice.
To the right honorable the Countess of Ar.
Winged with delight (yet such as still does bear
Chaste virtues stamp) those Children of the year
The days, have nimbly; and while as they fly,
Each of them with their predecessors vie,
Which yields most pleasure; you to them d^spence,
What Time lost with his cradle, innocence.
So ^ (if fancy not delude my fight,)
See often the pale monarch of tho night,
Diana, among her nimphs. For every quire
Of vulgar stars, who lend their weaker fire
To conquer the nights chillness, with their Queen,
In harmless revels tread the happy green.
But I who am proserib'd by tyrant love,
Seek out a silent exile in some grove,
Where naught except a solitary Spring,
Was ever heard, to which the Nimphs did sing
Narcissus obsequies: For only there
Is mufique apt to catch an amorous ear*
Castara! oh my heart! How great a flame
Did even shoot into me with her name?
Castara has betrayed me to a zeal
Which thus distracts my hopes. Flints may conceal
In their cold veins a fire. But I whose heart
By Love's dissolved, never practiced that cold art.
But truce thou warring passion, for I Will now*
Madam to you address this solemn vow.
By Virtue and your self (best friends) I find
In the interior province of your mind
Such government: That if great men obey*
The example of your order, they will sway*
Without reproof* for only you unite
Honor with sweetness, virtue with delight.
Upon CASTARA'S frown or smile.
LEarned shade of Tycho Brache, who to us,
The stars propheticke language did impart,
And even in life their mysteries discuss:
Castara has o'rethrowne thy strongest ar^.
When custom struggles from her beaten path,
Then accidents must needs uncertain be,
For if Castara smile; though winter has
Locked up the rivers: Summer's warm in me.
And Flora by the miracle revived,
Does ^ven at her own beauty wondering stand,
But should she frown, the Northern wind arrived,
In ^idst of Summer, leads his frozen band:
Which does to y^e my youthful blood congeale,
Yet in the midst of ye, still flames my zeal.
In CASTARA, All fortunes.
YE glorious wits, who find then Parian stone,
A nobler quarry to build trophies on,
Purchased against conquered time, go court loud fame,
He wins it, who but sings Castara's name?
Aspiring souls, who grow but in a Spring,
Forced by the warmth of some indulgent King:
Know if Castara smile: I dwell in it,
And vie for glory with the Favourit.
Ye sons of avarice, who but to sha^e
Uncertain treasure with a certain care.
Tempt death in the horrid Ocean: I, when ere
I but approach her, find the Indies there.
Heaven brightest Saint, kind to my vows made thee
Of all ambition courts, the Epitome.
Upon thought Castara may dye.
IF she should dye, (as well suspect we may,
A body so compact should never decay)
Her brighter soul would in the Moon inspire
More chastity, in dimmer stars more fire.
You twins of Laeda (as your parents are
In their wild lusts) may grow irregular
Now in your motion: for the mariner
Henceforth shall only stee^e his course by her.
And when the zeal of after time shall spy
Her uncorrup^ in the happy marble lie;
The roses in her checkes unwithered,
'Twill turn to love, and dote upon the dead.
For he who did to her in life dispense
A heaven, will banish all corruption thence.
Time to the moments, on sight of CASTARA.
YOu younger children of your father stay,
Swift flying moments (which divide the day
And with your number measure out the year
In various seasons) stay and wonder here.
For since my cradle, I so bright a grace
Never saw, as you s^e in Castara's face;
Whom nature to revenge some youthful crime
Would never frame, till age had weakened Time.
Else spite of fate, in some fair form of clay
My youth I de* bodied, thrown my sithe away,
And broke my glass. But since that cannot be,
I Will punish Nature for her injury.
On nimble moments in your journey fly,
Castara shall like me, grow old, and die.
To a friend inquiring her name, whom he loved.
FOnd Love himself hopes to disguise
From view, if he but covered lies,
In The veil of my transparent eyes.
Though in a smile himself he hide,
Or in a sigh, thou art so tried
In all his arts, he will be discride.
I must conf^sse (Dear friend) my flame,
Whose boasts Castara so does tame,
That not thy faith, shall ^now her n^me.
Twere profanation of my zeal,
If but abroad one whisper steal,
They love betray who him reveal.
In a dark cave which never eye
Could by his subtlest ra^ descry,
It does like a rich mineral lie.
Which if she with her fl^me refine,
I Would force it from that obscure Mine,
And then it like pure gold should shine.
A Dialogue between HOPE and FEAR.
FEAR, Check thy forward thoughts and know
Hymen only joins their hands;
Who with even paces go,
She in gold, he rich in lands.

HOPE. But Castara's purer fire,
When it meets a noble flame:
Shuns the smoke of such desire,
Ioynes with love, and burns the same.

FEAR. Yet obedience must prevail,
They who over her actions sway:
Would have her in the Ocean sail,
And contemn t^y narrow sea.

HOPE Parents laws must bear no weight
When they h^ppinesse pr^v^nt.
And our sea is not so straight,
But it room has for content.

FEAR. Thousand hearts as victims stand,
At the Altar of her eyes.
And will partial she command,
Only thine for sacrifice?

HOPE. Thousand victims must return;
She the purest will design:
Choose Castara which shall burn,
Choose the purest, that is, mine.

To CUPID, Upon a dimple in CASTARA'S cheek.
NImble boy in thy warm flight,
What cold tyrant dimmed thy sight?
Had thou eyes to see my fair,
Thou would sigh thy self to air:
Fearing to create this one,
Nature had herself undone.
But if you when this you hear
Fall down murdered through your ear,
Beg of Jove that you may have
In her cheek a dimpled grave.
Lilly, Rose, and Violet,
Shall the perfumed Hearse beset
While a beauteous sheet of Lawne,
Over the wanton corpse is drawn:
And all lovers use this breath;
"Here lies Cupid blessed in death.
Upon CVPID'S death and burial in CASTARA'S cheek.
CUpids dead. Who would not dye,
To be interred so near, her eye?
Who would fear the sword, to have
Such an Alabaster grave?
Over which two bright ^apers burn,
To give light to the beauteous Vine.
At the first Castara smiled,
Thinking Cupid her beguiled,
Only co^nterfeiting death*
But when she perceived his breath
Quite expired: the mournful Girl,
To ento^be the boy in Pearl,
Wept so long; till pittious Jove,
From the ashes of this Love,
Made ten thousand Cupids rise,
But confined them to her eyes:
Where they yet, to show they lack
No due sorrow, still we are black.
But the blacks so glorious are
Which they mou^ne in, that the fair
Quires of stars, look pale and ^^et,
Seeing themselves out shined by jet.
To Fame.
FLy on thy swiftest wing, ambitious Fame,
And speak to the cold North Castara's name:
Which very breath will, like the East wind, bring,
The temperate warmth, and music of the Spring.
Then from the Articke to the Antarticke Pole,
Haste nimbly and inspire a gentler soul,
By naming her, ^th' torrid South; that he
May mild as Zephor^^ cool whispers be.
Nor let the West where heaven already joins
The vastest Empire, and the wealthiest Mines,
Nor the East in pleasures wanton, her condemn,
For not distributing her gifts on them.
For she with want would have her bounty meet.
Loves noble charity is so discreet.
A Dialogue between ARAPHILL and CASTARA:
ARAPH. Do not thou Castara read
Amorous volumes in my eyes?
Does not every motion plead
What I Would show, and yet disguise?
Senses act each others part.
Eyes, as tongues, reveal the heart.

CAST. I saw love as lightning break
From thy eyes, and was content
Often to hear thy silence speak.
Silent love is eloquent.
So the sense of learning hears,
The dumb music of the Spheres.

ARAPH. Then there is mercy in your kind,
Listening to an unfain'd love.
Or strives he to tame the wind,
Who would your compassion move?
No you are pittious as y're fair.
Heaven relents, overcome by prayer.

CAST. But loose man too prodigal
Is in the expense of vows;
And thinks to him kingdoms fall
When the heart of woman bows:
Frailty to your arms may yield;
Who resists you wins the field.

ARAPH. Triumph not to see me bleed,
Let the Bore cha^ed from his den,
On the wounds of mankind feed,
Your soft sex should pity men.
Malice well may practice Art,
Love has a transparent heart.

CAST. Yet is love all one deceit,
A warm fr^st, a frozen fire.
She within her self is great,
Who is s^ave to no desire*
Let youth act, and age advise,
And then love may find his eyes.

ARAPH. Hymen's torch yields a dim light,
When ambition joins our hands,
A proud day, but mournful night,
She sustaines, who marries lands.
Wealth slaves man, but for their Ore,
The Indians had been free, though poor.

CAST. And yet wealth the fuel is
Which maintains the nuptiallfire,
And in honor there is a bliss,
The are immortal who aspire.
But truth says no joys are sweet,
But where hearts united meet.

ARAPH. Roses breath not such a sent,
To persume the neighboring groves;
As when you affirm content,
In no sphere of glory moves.
Glory narrow souls combines:
Noble hearts Love only joins.

To CASTARA, Intending a journey into the Country.
WHy haste you hence Castara? can the earth,
Aglorious mother, in her ^lowry birth,
Show Lillies like thy brow? Can she disclose
In emulation of thy cheek, a Rose,
Sweet as thy blush; upon thy self then set
Just value, and scorn it thy counterfeit.
The Spring's still with thee; But perhaps the field,
Not warmed with thy approach, wants force to yield
Her tribute to the Plough; O rather let
The ungrateful earth for ever be in debt
To the hope of sweating industry, than we
Should starve with cold, who have no heat but thee.
Nor fear the public good. Thy eyes can give
A life to all, who can deserve to live.
Upon CASTARA'S departure.
I Am engaged to sorrow, and my heart
Feels a distracted rage. Though you depart
And leave me to my fears; let love in spite
Of absence, our divided souls unite.
But you must go. The melancholy Doves
Draw Venus chariot hence: The sportive Loves
Which wont to wanton here hence with you fly,
And like false friends forsake me when I dye.
For but a walking tomb, what can he be;
Whose best of life is forced to part with thee?
To CASTARA, Upon a trembling kiss at departure.
THE Arabian wind, whose breathing gently blows
Purple to the Violet, blushes to the Rose,
Did never yield ^n odor rich as this.
Why are you then so thrifty of a kiss,
Authorized even by custom? Why does fear
So tremble on your lip, my lip being near?
Think you I parting with so sad a zeal,
Will act so black a mischief, as to steal
Thy Roses thence? And they, by this device,
Transplanted: somewhere else force Paradise?
Or else you fear, lest you, should my heart skip
Up to my mouth, t'incounter with your lip,
Might rob me of it: and be judged in this,
To Have Judas like betrayed me with a kiss.
In CASTARA, Looking back at her departing.
Look back Castara. From thy eye
Let yet more flaming arrows fly:
To live is thus to burn and dye.
For what might glorious hope desire,
But that thy self, as I expire,
Should bring both death and funeral fire?
Distracted Love, shall grieve to see
Such zeal in death: For fear lest he
Himself, should be consumed in me.
And gathering up my ashes, weep,
That in his tears he then may steep:
And thus embalmed, as relics, keep.
Thithe^ let lovers pilgrims turn,
And the loose flames in which they burn,
Give up a^ off^rings to my Vrne.
That them the virtue of my shrine,
By miracle so long refine;
Till they prove innocent as mine.
Upon CASTARA'S absence.
It Is madness to give Physic to the dead;
Then leave me friends: Yet happily you would here read
A lecture; but I Will not dissected be,
T'instruct your Art by my anatomy.
But still you trust your sense, swear you discry
No difference in me. All Is deceit oth' eye,
Some spirit has a body framed in the ay^e,
Like mine, which he does to delude you wear:
Else heaven by miracle makes me survive
My self, to keep in me poor Love alive.
But I am dead, yet let none question where
My best part rests, and with a sigh or tear,
Profane ^he Pomp, when they my corpse interre,
My soul impar^dis'd, for it is with her.
To CASTARA, Complaining her absence in the Country.
THe lesser people of the air conspire
To keep thee from me. Philomel with higher
And sweeter note^, wooes thee to weep her rape,
Which would appease the gods and change her shape.
The early Lark, preferring before soft rest
O^sequious duty* leaves his downy nest,
And does to thee harmoni^us tribute, pay;
Expecting from thy eyes the break of day.
From which the Owl is frighted, and does rove
(As never having felt the warmth of love.)
In uncouth vaults, and the chill shades of night,
Not biding the bright luster of thy ^ight.
With him my fate agree^. Not viewing thee
I Am lost in mists, at best, but meteors see.
To THAMES.
SWift in thy wa^ry chariot, courteous Thames,
Have by the happy error of thy streams,
To kiss the banks of Marlow, which does show
Fai^e Scymors, and beyond that never flow.
Then summon all thy Swans, that who did give
Music to death, may henceforth sing, and live,
For my Castara. She can life restore,
Or quicken them who had no life before.
How should the Poplar else the Pine provoke,
The stately Cedar challenge the rude Oak
To dance at sight of her? They have no sense
From nature given, but by her influence.
If Orpheus did those senseless creatures move,
He was a Prophet, and fore sang my love.
To the right honorable the Earl of Shrewes.
MY Muse (great Lord) when last you heard her sing
Did to your Uncles Vrne, her offerings bring:
And if to fame I may give faith, your ears
Delighted in the music of her tears.
That was her debt to virtue. And when e're
She her bright head among the clouds shall rear,
And add to the wondering heavens a new flame,
She Will celebrate the Genius of your name.
Wild with another ra^e, inspired by love,
She charms the Myrtles of the Idalian grove.
And while she gives the Cyprian storms a law,
Those wanton Doves which Cyther^ia draw.
Through the amorous air: Admire what power does sway
The Ocean, and arrest them in their way.
She sings Castara ^hen* OF she more bright,
Than is the Starry Senate of the night;
Who in their motion did like straglers err,
Cause they derived no influence from her,
Who Is constant as she is chaste. The Sun has been
Clad like a neighboring shepherd often seen
To hunt those Dales, in hope then Daphnes, there
To see a brighter face. The Astrologer
In the interim dyed, whose proud Art could not show
Whence that Eclipse did on the sudden grow.
A wanton Satyr eager in the chase
Of some fair Nymph, beheld Castara's face,
And left his loose pursuit; who while he eyed,
Vnchastely, such a beauty, glorified
With ^uch a virtue; by heavens great commands,
Turned marble, and there yet a Statue stands.
As Poet thus. But as a Christian now,
And by my zeal to you (my Lord) I vow,
She does a flame so pure and sacred move;
In me imp ety 'tw^re not to love.
To CUPID. Wishing a speedy passage to CASTARA.
THank*es Cupid, but the Coach of Venus moves
For me too slow, drawn but by lazy Doves.
I* lest my journey a delay should find,
Will leap into the chari^t of the wind.
Swift as the flight of lightning through the air,
He Will hurry me till I approach the fair,
B^t unkind Seymors. Thus he will proclaim,
What tribute winds owe to Castara's name.
Viewing this prodigy, astonished they,
Who first acc^sse denied me, will obey,
With fear what love comm^nds: Yet c^nsure me
As guilty of the blackest ^or^ery.
But after to my wishes m^^de^ prov^^
When they know this the miracl^ (...) l^ve*
To CAS^A^^. Of ^o^e.
HOw f(...)
^
And ore the obedient elements command.
He Is lame as he is blind, for here I stand
Fixed as the earth. Throw then this Idol down
Ye lovers who first made it; which can frown
Or smile but as you please. But I Am untame
In rage. Castara call thou on his name,
And though he will not bear up my vows to thee,
He Will triumph to bring down my Saint to me.
To the Spring, Upon the uncertainty of CASTARA'S abode.
Fair Mistress of the earth, with garlands crowned
Rise, by a lovers charm, from the p^rtcht ground,
And show thy flowery wealth: that she. where ere
Her stars shall guide her, meet thy beauties there.
Should she to the cold Northern climates go,
Force thy aff^ighted Lillies there to grow,
The Roses in those gelid field^ t'appeare,
She absent I have al^ their Winter here.
Or if to the ^orrid Zone ^er way she bend,
Her the cool breathing of Favonius lend,
Thither command the birds to bring their quires,
That Zone is temperate I have all his fires.
Attend her, courteous Spring, though we should here
Lose by it all the treasures of the yee^e.
To Reason, Upon CASTARA'S absence.
WIth your calm pre^epts go, and lay a storm
In some breast flegma^icke which would conform
Her life to your cold laws: In va^ne y'^ngage
Your self on me. I will obey my rage.
She Is gone, and I am ^ost. Some unknown grove
I Will find, whereby the miracle of Love
I Will turn t'a fountain, and divide the year,
By numbering every moment with a tear*
Where if Castara (to avoid the beams
Oth' n^igh'bring Sun) shall wandering meet my streams.
And tasting hope her t^irst alaid shall be,
She Will feel a sudden flame, and burn like me:
And thus distracted cry. Tell me thou clear,
But treacherous Fount, what lover's coffined here?
An answer to CASTARA'S question.
It Is I Castara, who when thou were gone,
Did freeze into this melancholy stone,
To weep the minutes of thy absence. Where
Can grief have freer scope to mourn than here?
The Lark here practices a sweeter strain,
Aurora's early blush to entertain,
And having too deep tasted of these streams,
He loves, and amorously courts her beams.
The courteous turtle with a wandering zeal,
Saw how to stone I did my self congeale,
And murmuring asked what power this change did move,
The language of my waters whispered, Love.
And thus transformed I Will stand, till I shall see,
That heart so stoned and frozen, thawed in thee.
To CASTARA, Upon the disguising his affection.
PRonounce me guilty of a Blacker crime,
Then e're in the Large volume writ by Time,
The sad Historian reads, if not my Art
Dissembles love, to veil an amorous heart,
For when the zealous anger of my friend
Checkes my unusual sadness: I pretend
To study virtue, which indeed I do,
He must court virtue who aspires to you.
Or that some friend is dead and then a tear,
A sigh or groan steals from me: for I fear
Lest death with love has struck my heart, and all
These sorrows usher but its funeral.
Which should revive, should there you a mourner* be,
And force a nuptial in an obsequie.
To the honorable my honored kinsman Mr. G. T.
THrice has the pale-faced Empress of the night,
^ent in her chaste increase her borrowed light,
To guide the vowing Mariner: since mute
Talbot thou have been, too slothful to salute
Thy exiled servant Labor not t'excuse
This dull neglect: Love never wants a Muse.
When thunder summons from eternal sleep
The imprisoned ghosts* and spreads oth' frighted deep
A veil of darkness; penitent to be
I may forget, yet still remember thee,
Next to my fair, under whose eyelids move,
In nimble measures beauty, wit, and love.
Nor think Castara (though the sex be frail,
And ever like uncertain vessels sail
On the ocean of their passions; while each wind,
Triumphs to see their more uncertain mind,)
Can be induc't to alter. Every star
May in its motion grow irregular;
The Sun forget to yield his welcome flame
To the teeming earth, yet she remain the same.
And in my arms (if Poets may divine)
I once that world of beauty shall intwine.
And on ^er lips print volumes of my love,
Without a froward check, and sweetly move
In The Labyrinth of delight. If not, I Will draw
Her picture on my heart, and gently thaw
With warmth of zeal, until I heaven entreat,
To give true life to the ayery counterfeit.
Echo to Narcissus. In praise of CASTARA'S discreet Love.
SC^rn'd in thy watery Vrne Na^cissus lie,
Thou shall not force more tribute from my eye
To Increase thy streams: or make me weep a shower,
To add fresh beauty to thee, now a flower.
But should relenting heaven restore thee sense,
To see such wisdom temper innocence,
In fair Castara's loves how she discreet,
Makes causion with a noble freedom meet,
At the same moment; thould'st confess fond boy,
Fools only think them virtuous, who are coy.
And wonder not that I, who have no choice
Of speech, have praising her so free a voice*
Heaven her severest sentence does repeal,
When to Castara I would speak my zeal.
To CASTARA, Being debarred her presence.
Banished from you, I charged the nimble wind,
My unseene Messenger, to speak my mind,
In amorous whispers to you. But my Muse
Lest the unruly spirit should abuse
The trust reposed in him, said it was due
To her alone, to sing my loves to you.
Hear her then speak. Bright Lady, from whose eye,
Shot lightning to his heart, who joys to dye
A martyr in your flames: O let your love
Be great and firm as his: Then naught shall move
Your settled faiths, that both may grow together:
Or if by Fate divided, both may wither.
Hark! 'twas a groan. Ah how sad absence rends
His troubled thoughts! See, he from Marlow sends
His eyes to Seymors. Then chides the envious trees,
And unkind distance. Yet his fancy sees
And courts your beauty, joys as he had cleav'd
Close to you, and then weeps because deceived.
Be constant as you are fair. For I foresee
A glorious triumph waits o'th victory
Your love will purchase, showing us to prize
A true content. There only Love has eyes.
To Seymors, The house in which CASTARA lived.
Blessed Temple, hail, where the Chaste Altar stands,
Which Nature built, but the exacter hands
Of Virtue polisht. Though sad Fate deny
My profane feet access, my vows shall fly,
May those Musicians, which divide the air
With their harmonious breath, their flight prepare,
For this glad place, and all their accents frame,
To teach the Echo my Castara's name.
The beauteous troops of graces led by love
In chaste attempts, possess the neighboring grove
Where may the Spring dwell still. May every tree
Turn to a Laurel, and propheticke be.
Which shall in its first Oracle divine,
That courteous Fate decrees Castara mine.
To the Dew, In hope to see CASTARA walking.
BRight Dew which do the field adorn
As the earth to welcome in the morn,
Would hang a jewel on each corn.
Did not the pittious night, whose ears
Have often been conscious of my fears,
Distill you from her eyes as tears?
Or that Castara for your zeal,
When she her beauties shall reveal,
Might you to Dyamonds congeale?
If not your pity, yet how ere
Your care I praise, against she appear,
To make the wealthy Indies here.
But see she comes. Bright lamp oth' sky,
Put out thy light: the world shall spy,
A fairer Sun in either eye.
And liquid Pearl, hang heavy now
On every grass that it may bow
In veneration of her brow.
Yet if the wind should curious be.
And were I here should question thee,
He Is full of whispers, speak not me.
But if the busy tell-tale day,
Our happy enterview betray;
Lest thou confess too, melt away.
To CASTARA.
STay under the kind shadow of this tree
Castara, and protect thy self and me
From the Suns rays. Which show the grace of Kings,
A dangerous warmth with too much favor brings.
How happy in this shade the humble Vine
Does 'bout some taller tree her self intvvine,
And so grows fruitful; teaching us her fate
Does bear more sweetes, though Cedars bear more state:
Behold Adonis in yand' purple flower,
It Was Venus love: That dew, the briny shower,
His coyness wept, while struggling yet alive:
Now he repents and gladly would revive,
By the virtue of your chaste and powerful charms,
To play the modest wanton in your arms.
To CASTARA, Ventring to walk too far in the neighboring wood.
DAre not too far Castara, for the shade
This courteous thicket yield; has man betrayed
A prey to wolves to the wild powers oth' wood,
Often travelers pay tribute with their blood.
If careless of thy self of me take care,
For like a ship where all the fortunes are
Of an adventurous merchant; I must be,
If thou should perish banquerout in thee.
My fears have mocked me. Tigers when they shall
Behold so bright a face, will humbly fall
In adoration of thee. Fierce they are
To the deformed, obsequious to the fair.
Yet venture not; it is nobler far to sway
The heart of man, than beasts, who man obey.
Upon CASTARA'S departure.
Vows are vain. No suppliant breath
Stays the speed of swift-h^el'd death.
Life with her is gone and I
Learn but a new way to dye.
See the flowers condole, and all
Wither in my funeral.
The bright Lilly, as if day,
Parted with her fades away.
Violets hang their heads, and lose
All their beauty. That the Rose
A sad part in sorrow bears,
Witness all those dewy tears,
Which as Pearl, or Dyamond like,
Swell upon her blushing check.
All things mourn, but oh behold
How the withered Marigold
Closes up now she is gone,
Judging her the setting Sun.
A Dialogue between NIGHT and ARAPHIL.
NIGHT. LEt silence close thy troubled eyes,
Thy fear in Lethe steep:
The stars bright cent'nels of the skies,
Watch to secure thy sleep.

ARAPH. The Norths unruly spirit lay
In the disordered Seas:
Make the rude Winter calm as May,
And give a lover ease.

NIGHT. Yet why should fear with her pale charms,
Bewitch thee so to grief?
Since it prevents n'insuing harms,
Nor yields the past relief.

ARAPH. And yet such horror I sustain
As the sad vessel, when
Rough tempests have incenst the Maine,
Her Harbor now in ken.

NIGHT. No conquest wears a glorious wreath,
Which dangers not obtain:
Let tempests against the shipwreck breathe,
Thou shall thy harbor gain.

ARAPH. Truths Delphos does not still foret^ll.
Though Sol the inspirer be.
How then should night as blind as hell,
Ensuing truths foresee?

NIGHT. The Sun yields man no constant flame*
One light those Priests inspires.
While I though black am still the same,
And have ten thousand fires.

ARAPH. But those, says my propheticke fear,
As funeral torches burn,
While thou thy self the blackes do wear,
TO attend me to my Vrne.

NIGHT. Thy fears abuse thee, for those light^
In Hymen's Church shall shine,
When he by the mystery of his rites,
Shall make Castara thine.

To the Right Honorable, the Lady, E. P.
YOur judgement's clear, not wrinckled with the Time,
On the humble fate; which censures it a crime,
To be by virtue ruined. For I know
Y' are not so various a^ to ebb and flow
In The stream of fortune, whom each faithless wind
Distracts, and they who made her, framed her blind.
Possession makes us poor. Should we obtain
All those bright jems, for which in the wealthy Maine,
The tanned slave dives; or in one boundless chest
Imprison all the treasures of the West,
We still should want. Our better part's immence,
Not like the inferior, limited by sense.
Rich with a little, mutual love can lift
Us to a greatness, whether chance nor thrift
E're raised her servants. For though all were spent,
That can create an Europe in content.
Thus (Madam) when Castara lends an ear
Soft to my hope, I Love Philosopher,
Win on her faith. For when I wondering stand
At the intermingled beauty of her hand,
(Higher I dare not gaze) to this bright vein
I not ascribe the blood of Charlemaine
Derived by you to her. Or say there are
In that and the other Marmion, Rosse, and Part
Fitzhugh, Saint Quintin, and the rest of them
That add such luster to great Pembrokes stem.
My love is envious. Would Castara were
The daughter of some mountain cottager
Who with his toil worn out, could dying leave
Her no more dowre, then what she did receive
From bounteous nature. Her would I then lead
To the Temple, rich in her own wealth; her head
Crowned with her hairs fair treasure; diamonds in
Her brighter eyes; soft Ermines in her skin;
Each Indie in each cheek. Then all who vaunt,
That fortune, them to enrich, made others want,
Should set themselves out glorious in her stealth,
And try if that, could parallel this wealth.
To CASTARA, Departing upon the approach of Night.
What should we fear Castara? The cool air,
That Is fallen in love, and wantons in thy hair,
Will not betray our whispers. Should I steal
A Nectar'd kiss, the wind dares not reveal
The pleasure I possess. The wind conspites
To our blessed interview, and in our fires
Bathe like a Salamander, and does sip,
Like Bacchu^ from the grape, life from thy lip.
Nor think of nights approach. The worlds great eye
Though breaking Natures law, will us supply
With his still flaming lamp: and to obey
Our chaste desires, fix here perpetual day.
But should he set, what rebel night dares rise,
To be sub du'dith' victory of the eyes?
An Apparition.
MOre welcome my Castara, then was light
To the disordered Chaos. O what bright
And nimble chariot brought thee through the air?
While the amazed stars to see so fair
And pure a beauty from the earth arise,
Changed all their glorious bodies into eyes.
O let my zealous lip print on thy hand
The story of my love, which there shall stand
A bright inscription to be read by none,
But who as I love thee, and love but one.
Why vanish you away? Or is my sense
Deluded by my hope? O sweet offense
Oferring nature* And would heaven this (...)
Been true; or that I thus were ever mad.
To the Honorable Mr. Wm. E*
He who is good is happy. Let the loud
Artillery of Heaven break through a cloud
And dart its thunder at him; he will remain
Vnmov'd, and nobler comfort entertain
In welcomming the approach of death, then vice
Ere found in her fictitious Paradise.
Time mocks our youth, and (while we number past
Delights, and raise our appitite to taste
Ensuing) brings us to unflatter'd age.
Where we are left to satisfy the rage
Of threatening Death: Pomp, beauty, wealth, and all
Our friendships, shrinking from the funeral.
The thought of this begets that brave disdain
With which thou view'st the world and makes those vain
Treasures of fancy, serious fools so court,
And sweat to purchase, thy contempt or sport.
What should we cov^^ here? Why interpose
A cloud ^wixt us and heaven? Kind Nature chose
M^ns soul th'Exchecquer where she would ^oord her wealth,
And lodge all her rich secrets; but by th'stealth
Of our own vanity, ware left so poor,
The creature merely sensual knows more.
The learned Halc^on by her wisdom finds
A gentle season, when the seas and winds
Are silenc't by a calm, and then brings forth
The happy miracle of her ^a^e birth,
Leaving with wonder all our arts possessed,
That view the architecture of her nest.
Pride raises us 'bove justice. We bestow
Increase of knowledge on old minds, which grow
By age to dotage: while the sensitive
Part of the World in it is first strength does live.
Folly? what do thou in thy power contain
Deserves our study? Merchants plough the maine
And bring home the Indies, yet aspire to more,
By ava^ice in the possession poor.
And yet that Idol wealth we all admit
Into the souls great temple, Busy wit
Invents new Orgies, fancy frames new rites
To show it is superstition, anxious nights
Are watched to win its favor: while the beast
Content with Natures courtesy does rest.
Let man then boast no more a soul, since he
Has lost that great prerogative. But thee
(Whom Fortune has exempted from the heard
Of vulgar men, whom virtue has preferred
Far higher than thy birth) I must commend,
Rich in the purchase of so sweet a friend.
And though my fate conducts me to the shade
Of humble quiet, my ambition paid
With safe content, while a pure Virgin fame
Does raise me trophies in Castara's name.
No thought of glory swelling me above
The hope of being famed for virtuous love.
Yet wish I thee, guided by the better stars
To purchase unsafe honor in the wars
Or envied smiles at court; for thy great race,
And merits, well may challenge the highest place.
Yet know, what busy path so ere you tread
To greatness, you must sleep among the dead.
To CASTARA, The vanity of Avarice.
Hark? how the traitor wind does cour^
The Saylors to the maine*
To make their avarice his sport *
A tempest checks the fond disdain!
They bear a safe though humble port.
We Will sit my Love upon the shore,
And while proud billows rise
To war against the sky, speak ore
Our Loves so sacred mysteries.
And charm the Sea to the calm it had before,
Where Is now my pridet' extend my same
Where ever statues are?
And purchase glory to my name
In the smooth court or rugged war?
My love has laid the Devil, I am tame.
I Would rather like the violes grow
Vnmarkt in the shaded vale,
Then on the hill those terrors know
Are breathed forth by an angry gal^,
There is more pomp above, more sweet below*
Love, thou divine Philosopher
(While covetous Landlords rent,
And Courtiers dignity prefer)
Instructs us to a sweet content,
Greatness is self, does in it self interr^,
Castara, what is there above
The treasures we possess?
We two are all and one, we move
Like stars in the orb of happiness.
All blessings are Epitomized in Love.
To my honored Friend and Kinsman, R. St. Esquire.
IT shall not grieve me (friend) though what I write
Be held no wit at Court. If I delight
So far my sullen Genius, as to raise
It pleasure; I have money, wine, and bays
Enough to crown me Poet. Let those wits,
Who teach their Must the art of Parasies
To win on easi^ greatness; or the yo^gue
Spruce Lawyer who is all impudence and tongue
Sweat to divulge their fames: thereby the one
Gets sees; the other hyre, l'em best unknown:
Sweet silence I embrace thee, and thee Fate
Which did my birth so wisely moderate;
That I by want am neither vilified,
Nor yet by riches flattered into pride.
Resolve me friend (for it must folly be
Or else revenge against niggard Destiny,
That makes some Poets rail?) Why are their times
So steept in gall? Why so obrayde the times?
As if no sin called down heavens vengeance more
Then cause the world leaves some few writers poor?
It Is true, that Chapmans reverend ashes must
Lie rudely mingled with the vulgar dust,
Cause careful heyers the wealthy only have;
To build a glorious trouble over the grave.
Yet do I not despair, some one may be
So seriously devout to Poesy
As to translate his relics, and find room
In the warm Church, to build him up a tomb.
Since Spencer has a Stone; and Draytons brows
Stand petrefied in the wall, with Laurel bows
Yet girt about; and nigh wise Henry's hearse,
Old Chaucer got a Marble for his verse.
So courteous is Death; Death Poets brings
So high a pomp, to lodge them with their Kings:
Yet still they mutiny. If this man please
His silly Patron with Hyperboles.
Or most mysterious nonsense, give ^is brain
But the strapado in some wanton strain;
He Will swear the State looks not on men of parts
And, if but mentioned, slight all other Arts.
Vain ostentation! Let us set so just
A rate on knowledge, that the world may trust
The Poets Sentence, and not still aver
Each Art is to it self a flatterer.
I write to you Sir on this theme, because
Your soul is clear, and you observe the laws,
Of Poesy so justly, that I choose
Yours only the example to my muse.
And till my brownes hair be mixed with gray
Without a blush, I Will tread the sportive way,
My Muse directs; A Poet youth may be,
But age does dote without Philosophy.
To the World. The Perfection of Love.
YOu who are earth, and cannot rise
Above your sense,
Boasting the envyed wealth which lies
Bright in your Mistress lips or eyes,
Betray a pittyed eloquence.
That which does join our souls, so light.
And quick does move.
That like the Eagle in his flight,
It does t^^nscend all humane sight,
Lost in the element of Love.
You Poets reach not this, who sing
The praise of dust
But kneaded* when by theft you bring
The rose and Lilly from the Spring
T'adorne the wrinckled face of lust.
When we speak Love, nor art, nor wi^
We gloss upon:
Our souls engender, and beget
Ideas, which you counterfeit
In your dull progagation.
While Time seven ages shall disperse*
We Will talk of Love,
And when our tongues hold no commerse*
Our thoughts shall mutually converse.
And yet the blood no rebel prove.
And though we be* of several kind
Fit for offense:
Yet are we so by Love refined,
From impure dross we are all mind.
Death could not more have conquered sense.
How suddenly those flames expire
Which scorch our clay?
Promet^eas-like when we steal fire
From heaven it is endlesle and entire
It may know age, but not decay.
To the Winter.
WHy do thou look so pale, decripit man?
Why do thy cheeks curle like the Ocean,
Into such furrows? Why do thou appear
So shaking like an ague to the year?
The Sunse is gone. But yet Castara stays,
And will add stature to thy Pigmy days,
Warm moisture to thy veins: her smile can bring
Thee the sweet youth, and beauty of the Spring.
Hence with thy P^lsie then, and on thy head
Wear flowrie chaplets as a bridegroom led
To the holy Fane. Banish thy aged ruth,
That Virgins may admire and court thy youth.
And the approaching Sun when she shall find
A Spring without him, fall, since useless, blind.
Upon a visit to CASTARA in the Night.
It Was Night: when Phoebe guided by thy rays,
Chaste as my zeal, with incence of her praise,
I humbly crept to my Castara's shrine.
But oh my fond mistake! for there did shine
A noone of beauty, with such luster crowned,
As showed mong the impious only night is found.
It was her eyes which like two Diamonds shined,
Brightest in the dark. Like which could the Indian find,
But one among his rocks, he would out vie
In brightness all the Diamonds of the Sky.
But when her lips did open the Phoenix nest
Breathed forth her odours; where might love once feast,
He Would loath his heavenly furfets: if we dare
Affirm, love has a heaven without my fair.
To CASTARA. Of the chastity of his Love.
WHy would you blush Castara, when the name
Of love you hear? who never felt his flame,
In The shade of melancholy night does stray,
A blind Cymmerian banished from the day.
Let Us chastely love Castara, and not soil
This Virgin lamp, by pouring in the oil
Of impure thoughts. O let us sympathize,
And only talk in the language of our eyes,
Like two stars inconjunction. But beware
Left the Angels who of love compacted are,
Viewing how chastely burns thy zealous fire,
Should soa^ch thee hence, to join thee to their quire.
Yet take thy flight: on earth for surely we
So joined, in heaven cannot divided be.
The Description Of CASTARA.
LIke the Violet which alone
Prospers in some happy shade:
My Castara lives unknown,
To no looser eye betrayed,
For she is to her self untrue,
Who delights in the public view,
Such is her beauty, as no arts
Have enricht with borrowed grace*
Her high birth no pride imparts,
For she blushes in her place.
Folly boasts a glorious blood,
She is noblest being good.
Cautious she knew never yet
What a wanton courtship meant:
Not speaks loud to boast her wit,
In her silence eloquent.
Of her self survey she takes,
But 'tweene men no difference makes.
She obeyes with speedy will
Her grave Parents wise commands.
And so innocent, that ill,
She nor acts, nor understands.
Women's, feet run still astray,
If once to ill they know the way.
She sails by that rock, the Court,
Where often honor splits her mast:
And retir'dnesse thinks the port,
Where her fame may anchor cast.
Virtue safely cannot sit,
Where vice is enthroned for wit.
She holds that days pleasure best,
Where sin waits not on delight,
Without mask, or ball, or feast,
Sweetly spends a winters night.
Over that darkness, whence is thrust,
Prayer and sleep often governs lust.
She her throne makes reason climb,
While wild passions captive lie.
And each article of time,
Her pure thoughts to heaven fly:
All her vows religious be,
And her love she vows to me.
FINIS.
CASTARA: The Second part.

Uatumque lascivos triumphos, Calcat Amor, pede conjugali.

LONDON Printed for WILLIAM COOK and are to be sold at his Shop, near
Furnivals-Inne Gate in Holborne. 1639.

A Wife.
IS the sweetest part in the harmony of our being. To the love of which, as the
charms of Nature inchant us, so the law of grace by special privilege
invites us. Without her, Man if piety not restrain him; is the creator of
sin; or, if an innated cold render him not only the business of the present
age; the murderer of posterity. She is so religious that every day crowns her
a martyr, and her zeal neither rebellious nor uncivil. She is so true a
friend, her Husband may to her communicate even his ambitions, and if success
Crown not expectation, remain nevertheless uncontemn'd, She is colleague
with him in the Empire of prosperity; and a safe retyring place when adversity
exiles him from the World. She is so chaste, she never understood the
language lust speaks in, nor with a smile applaudes it, although there appear
wit in the Metaphore. She is fair only to win on his affections, nor would
she be Mistress of the most eloquent beauty; if there were danger, that might
persuade the passionate auditory, to the least irregular thought. She is noble
by a long descent, but her memory is so evil a herald, She never boasts the
story of her Ancestors. She is so moderately rich, that the defect of portion
does neither bring penury to his estate, nor the superfluity license her to
Riot. She is liberal, and yet owes not ruin to vanity, but knows Charity,
to be the soul of goodness, and Virtue without reward often prone to be her
own destroyer. She is much at home, and when she visits it is for mutual
commerce, not for intelligence. She can go to Court, and return no
passionate doater on bravery; and when she has seen the gay things muster up
themselves there, she considers them as Cobwebs the Spider vanity has spunne.
She is so general in her acquaintance, that she is familiar with all whom
fame speaks virtuous; but thinks there can be no friendship but with one;
and therefore has neither she friend nor private servant. She so squares her
passion to her Husbands fortunes, that in the Country she lives without a
froward Melancholy, in the town without a fantastique pride. She is ^o
temperate, she never read the modern policy of glorious surfeits; since she
finds Nature is no Epicure if art provoke her not by curiosity. She is
inquisitive only of new ways to please him, and her wit sails by no other
compass then that of his direction. She looks upon him as Conjurers upon the
Circle, beyond which there is nothing but Death and Hell; and in him she
believes Paradise circumscribed. His virtues are her wonder and imitation; and
his errors, her credulity thinks no more frailty, then makes him descend to
the title of Man. In a word, she so lives that she may dye; and leave no
cloud upon her Memory, but have her character nobly mentioned: while the bad
Wife is flattered into infamy, and buys pleasure at too dear ^ rate, if she
only pays for it Repentance.

The Second Part.
To CASTARA, Now possessed of her in marriage.
THis day is ours. The marriage Angel now
Sees the Altar in the od^ur of our vow,
Yield a more precious breath, then that which moves
The whispring leaves in the Pa^chayan, groves.
View how ^is temples shine, on which he wea^e^
A wreath of pearl, made of those precious tears
Thou wepst a Virgin, when cross winds did blow,
Our hopes disturbing in their quiet flow.
But now Castara smile, No envious night
Dares enterpose it self, t'ecclipse the light
Of our clear joys. For even the laws divine
Permit our mutual love so to entwine.
That Kings, to balance true content, shall say;
Would they were great as we, we blessed as they.
To CASTARA, Upon the mutual love of their Majesty's.
DId you not see, Castara, when the King
Met his loved Queen; what sweetness she did bring
TO encounter his brave heat; how great a flame
From their breasts meeting, on the sudden came?
The Stoike, who all easy passion flies,
Could he but hear the language of their eyes,
As heresies would from his faith remove
The tenets of his sect, and practice love.
The barbarous nations which supply the earth
With a promiscuous and ignoble birth,
Would by this precedent correct their life,
Each wisely choose, and chastely love a wife.
Princes example is a law. Then we
If loyal subjects, must true lovers be.
To Zephirus.
WHose whispers soft as those which lovers breath
Castara and my self I here bequeath
To the calm wind. For heaven such joys afford
To her and me, that there can be no third.
And you kind stars, be thriftier of your light:
Her eyes supply your office with more bright
And constant luster. Angels gaurdians, like
The nimbler ship boys shall be joy'd to strike
Or ho^sh up sail; Nor shall our vessel move
By Card or Compass, but a heavenly love.
The couresie of this more prosperous gale
Shall swell our Canvas, and we will swiftly sail
To some blessed Port, where ship has never lane
At anchor, whose chaste soil no foot profane
Has ever trod; Where nature does dispense
Her infant wealth, a beauteous innocence.
Pomp (even a burden to it self) nor Pride,
(The Magistrate of sins) did e're abide
On that so sacred earth Ambition never,
Built for the sport of ruin, fabrickes there.
Thence age and death are exiled, all offense
And fear expelled, all noise and faction thence.
A silence there so melancholy sweet,
That none but whispring Turtles ever meet,
Thus Paradise did our first Parents Woo,
To harmless sweets, at first possessed by two.
And over this second, we will usurp the throne;
Castara we will obey and rule alone*
For the rich virtue of this soil I fear,
Would be depraved, should but a third be there.
To CASTARA In a Trance.
FOrsake me not so soon. Castara stay,
And as I break the prison of my Clay,
I Will fill the Canvas with m'expiring breath,
And with thee sail over the vast maine of death.
Some Cherubin thus as we pass shall play.
Go happy twins of love: The courteous Sea
Shall smooth her wrinkled brow: the winds shall sleep*
Or only whisper music to the deep.
Every ungentle rock shall melt away,
The Sirens sing to please, not to betray.
The indulgent sky shall smile: each starry quire
Contend, which shall afford the brighter fire.
While Love the Pilot, steeres his course so even,
Never to cast anchor till we reach at Heaven.
To DEATH, CASTARA being sick.
HEnce profane grim man, nor dare
To approach so near my fair.
Marble vaults, and gloomy caves,
Churchyards, Charnell houses, graves,
Where the living loath to be,
Heaven has designed to thee*
But if needs amongst us thou' it rage,
Let thy fury feed on age.
Wrinckled brows, and withered thighs.
May supply thy sacrifice.
Yet perhaps as thou flew'st by,
A flamed dar^ shot from her eye,
Singed thy wings with wanton fire,
Whence thou art forced to hover nigh her.
If Love so mistook his aim,
Gently welcome in the flame:
They who loathed thee, when they see
Where thou harbor'st will love thee.
Only I, such is my fate,
Must thee as a rival hate,
Court her gently, learn to prove.
Nimble in the thefts of love.
Gaze on the errors of her hair:
Touch her lip; but oh beware,
Lest too ravenous of thy bliss,
Thou should murder with a kiss.
To CASTARA Inviting her to sleep,
Sleep my Castara, silence does invite
Thy eyes to close up day; though envious night
Grieves Fate should her the sight of them debar,
For she is exiled, while they open are.
Rest in thy peace secure, With drowsy charms,
Kind sleep bewitcheth thee into her arms;
And finding where Loves chiefest treasure lies,
Is like a thief stole under thy bright eyes.
Thy innocence rich as the gaudy quil^
Wrought by the Persian hand, thy dreams from guil^:
Exempted, heaven with sweet repose does crown
Each virtue softer then the Swans famed down.
As exoroists wild spirits mildly lay*
May sleep thy fever calmely chase away.
Upon CASTARA'S recoverie.
SHe is restored to life. Unthrifty Death,
Thy mercy in permitting vital breath
Back to Castara, has enlarged us all,
Whom g^iefe had martyred in her funeral.
While others in the ocean of their tears,
Had sinking, wounded the beholders ears.
With exclamations: I without a groan,
Had suddenly congealed into a stone:
There stood a statue, till the general doom;
Had ruined time and memory with her tomb.
While in my heart, which marble, yet still bled,
Each Lover might this Epitaph have read.
Her earth lies here below; her soul's above,
This wonder speaks her virtue, and my love.
To a Friend, Inviting him to a meeting upon promise.
MAy you drink bear, or that adult'rate wine
Which makes the zeal of Amsterdam divine;
If you make breach of promise. I have now
So rich a Sack, that even your self will bow
^'adore my Ge^i^^. Of this wine should Pr^nne*
Drink but a plenteous glass, he would begin
A health to Shakespeares ghost, But you may bring*
Some excuse forth, and answer me the King
To day will give you audience, or that on
Affairs of state, you and some serious Don
Are to resolve; or else perhaps you will sin
So far^e, as to leave word you are not within:
The least of these, will make me only think
Him subtle, who can in his closet drink
Drunk even alone, and thus made wise create
As dangerous plots as the Low Country state,
Projecting for such baits, as shall draw ore
To Holland, all the herrings from our shore,
But you are too full of candor: and I know
Will sooner stones at Sali^bury casements throw,
Or buy up for the silenced Levi^s, all
The rich impropri^tion^, then let pall
So pure Canary, and break such an oath:
Since charity is sinned against in both.
Come therefore blessed even in the Lollards zeal,
Who can with conscience safe, '^ore hen and veale
Say grace in Latin; while I saintly sing
A Penitential verse in oil and Ling.
Come then, and bring with you prepared for fight,
Unmixed Canary, Heaven send both prove right*
This I am sure: My s^cke will disingage
All humane thoughts, inspire so high a rage,
That Hypocrene shall henceforth Poets lack,
Since more Enthusiasmes are in my sack.
Heightened with which, my raptures shall commend,
How good Castara is, how dear my friend.
To CASTARA, Where true happiness abides.
CAstara whisper in some dead man's ear,
This subtle quaere; and he will point out where,
By answers negative, true joys abide.
He Will say they flow not on the uncertain tide
Of greatness, they can no firm basis have,
Upon the tripidation of a wave.
Nor lurk they in the caverns of the earth,
Whence all the wealthy minerals draw their birth,
To covetous man so fatal. Nor in the grace
Love they to wanton of a brighter face,
For they are above Times battery; and the light
Of beauty, ages cloud will soon be night.
If among these Content, he thus does prove,
Has no abode; where dwells it but in Love*
To CASTARA.
FOrsake with me the earth, my fair,
And travel nimbly through the air,
Till we have reached th'admiring skies;
Then lend sight to those heavenly eyes
Which blind themselves, make creatures see.
And taking view of all, when we
Shall find a pure and glorious sphere;
We Will fix like stars for ever there.
Nor will we still each other view,
We Will ga^e on lesser stars then you;
See how by their weak influence they,
The strongest of men's actions sway.
In an inferior or be below,
We Will see Calisto loosely throw
Her hair abroad: a^ she did wear,
The selfsame beauty in a Bear,
As when she a cold Virgin stood,
And yet inflamed Jove's lustful blood.
Then look on Led, whose fair beams
By their reflection guild those streams,
Where first unhappy she began
To play the wanton with a Swan.
If each of these loose beauties are
Transformed to a more beauteous star
By the adult'rous lust of Jove;
Why should not we, by purer love?
To CASTARA, Upon the death of a Lady.
CAstara weep not, though her tomb appear,
Sometime thy grief to answer with a tear:
The marble will but wanton with thy woe.
Death is the Sea, and we like Rivers flow
To lose our selves in the insatiate Maine,
Whence Rivers may, she never return again.
Nor grieve this Crystal stream so soon did fall
Into the Ocean; since she perfumed all
The banks she past, so that each neighbor field
Did sweet flowers cherish by her watring, yield.
Which now adorn her Hearse. The violet there
On her pale cheek does the ^ad livery wear,
Which heavens compassion gave her; And since she.
Cause clothed in purple can no mourner be,
As incense to the tomb she gives her breath,
And fading on her Lady waits in death;
Such office the Egyptian handmaids did
Great Cleopatra, when she dying chid.
The Asps slow venom, trembling she should be
By Fate robbed even of that black victory
The flowers instruct our sorrows. Come then all
Ye beauties, to true beauties funeral,
And with ^er to increase deaths pomp, decay.
Since the supporting fabric of your clay
Is fallen, how can ye stand? How can the night
Show stars, when Fate puts out the days great light,
But among the fair, if there live any yet,
She Is but the fairer Digbies counterfeit.
Come you who speak your titles. Read in this
Pale book, how vaine^ bo^ast your greatness i^.
What Is honor but a hatchment? what is here
Of Percy left, and Stanly, names most dear
To virtue? but a crescent turned to th'wane,
An Eagle groaning over an infant ^^aine?
Or what availes her, that she once was led,
A glorious bride to valiant Digbies bed,
Since death has them divorced? If then alive
There are, who these s^d obsequies survive
And vaunt a proud descent* they only be
Loud h^ralds to set forth her pedigree.
Come all who glory in your wealth, and view
The emblem of your frailty. How untrue
(Though flattering like friends) your treasures are,
Her Fare has taught: who, when what ever rare
The either Indies boast, lay richly spread
For her to wear, lay on her pillow dead.
Come likewise my Castara and behold,
What blessings ancient prophecy foretold,
Bestowed on her in death. She past away
So sweetly from the world, as if her clay
Laid enely down to slumber. Then forbear
To let on her blessed ashes fall a tear.
But if thou art too much woman, softly weep,
Lest grief disturb the silence of her sleep.
To CASTARA, Being to take a journey.
What Is death more than departure; the dead go
Like traveling exiles, compelled to know
Those regions they heard mention of: It Is thou art
Of sorrows, says, who dye do but depart.
Then weep thy funeral tears: which heaven to adorn
The beauteous tresses of the weeping morn,
Will rob me of: and thus my tomb shall be
As naked* as it had no obsequie.
Know in these lines, sad music to thy ear,
My sad Castara, you the sermon here
Which I preach over my hearse: And dead, I tell
My own lives story, ring but my own knell.
But when I shall return, know it is thy breath
In sighs divided, rescues me from death.
To CASTARA, Weeping.
CAstara! O you are too prodigal
Oth' treasure of your tears; which thus let fall
Make no return: well placed calm peace might bring
To the loud wars, ^ach free a captived King.
So the unskilful Indian those bright jems,
Which might add add majesty to Diadems,
Among the waves scatters, as if he would store
The thanklesse Sea, to make our Empire poor:
When heaven darts thunder at the womb of Time,
Cause with each moment it brings forth a crime,
Or else despairing to root out abuse,
Would ruin vicious earth; be then profuse.
Light, chased rude chaos from the wo^ld before,
Thy tears, by hindering it is return work more.
To CASTARA, Upon a sigh.
I Heard a sigh, and something in my ear
Did whisper, what my soul before did fear.
That it was breathed by thee. May th'easie Spring
Enricht with odours, wanton on the wing
Of th'Easterne wind, may ne'r^ his beauty fade,
If he the treasure of this breath conveyed;
'Twas thine by the music which th'harmonious breath
Of Swans is like, propheticke in their death:
And th'odour, for as it the nard expires,
Perfuming Phoenix-like his funeral fires.
The winds of Paradise send such a gale,
To make the Lovers vessels calmely sail
To his loved Port. This shall, where it inspires,
Increase the chaste, extinguish unchaste fires.
To the Right Honorable the Lady F.
Madam.
YOu saw our loves, and praised the mutual flame:
In which as incense to your sacred name
Burns a religious zeal. May we be lost
To one another, and our fire be frost;
When we omit to pay the tribute due
To worth and virtue, and in them to you*
Who are the soul of women. Others be
But beauteous parts oth'female body; she
Who boasts how many nimble Cupids skip
Through her bright face, is but an eye or lip;
The other who in her soft breasts can show
Warm Violets growing in a bank of snow,
And vaunts the lovely wonder, is but skin:
Nor is she but a hand, who holds within
The crystal violl of her wealthy palm,
The precions sweating of the Eastern balm.
And all these if you them together take,
And join with art. ^ill but one body make,
To which the soul each vital motion gives;
You are infused into it, and it lives.
But should you up to your blessed mansion fly,
How loathed an object would the carcass lie?
You are all mind. Castara when she looks,
On you the Epitome of all* that ^ookes
Or e're tradition taught; who gives such praise
Unto your sex, that now even customs says
He has a female soul, who ere has writ
Volumes which learning comprehend, and w^it.
Castara cries to me; Searchou^ and find
The Mines of wisdom in her learned mind,
And trace her steps to honor; I aspire
Enough to worth, while I her worth admire.
To CASTARA. Against opinion.
Why should we build, Castara, in the air
Of frail opinion? Why admire as fair,
What the weak faith of man gives us for right?
The juggling world cheats but the weaker sight,
What is in greatness happy? As free mirth,
As ample pleasures of the indulgent earth
We joy who on the ground our mansion find,
As they, who sail like witches in the wind
Of Court applause. What can their powerful spell
Over enchanted man, more than compel
Him into various forms? Nor serves their charm
Themselves to good, but to work others harm.
Tyrant Opinion but depose. And we
Will absolute in the happiest Empire be.
To CASTARA. Upon Beauty.
CAstara, see that dust, the sportive vvind
So wantons with. It Is happ'ly all you will find
Left of some beauty: and how still it flies.
To trouble, as it did in life, our eyes.
O empty boast of flesh? Though our heirs gild
The far fetch Phrigian marble, which shall build
A burden to our a he^, yet will death
Betray them to the sport of every breath.
Do thou, poor relic of our frailty, still
Swell up with glory? Or is it thy skill,
To mock weak man, whom every wind of praise
Into the air, does 'bove his center raise.
If so, mock on, And tell him that his lust
To beauti's, madness. For it courts but dust.
To CASTARA, Melancholy.
WEre but that sigh a penitential breath
That thou art mine: It would blow with it death,
TO enclose me in ray marble Where I Would be
Slave to the tyrant worms, to set thee free.
What should we envy? Though with larger sail
Some dance upon the Ocean: yet more frail
And faithless is that wave, than where ^e glide,
Blessed in the saf^t^ of a private tide.
We still have land in ken. And 'cause our boat
Dares not affront the weather, we will never float
Far from the shore. To daring them each cloud
Is big with thunder, every wind speaks loud.
And though wild rocks about the shore appear
Yet virtue will find room to anchor there.
A Dialogue between ARAPHILL and CASTARA.
ARAPH. CAstara, you too fondly court
The silken peace with which we covered are,
Unquiet time may for his sport,
Up from its iron den rowse sleepy war.

CAST. Then in the language of the drum,
I will instruct my yet afrighted ^are,
All women shall in me be dumb;
If I but with my Araphill be there?

ARAPH, If Fate like an unfaithful gale,
Which having vowed to the ship a fair event,
Oth' sudden rends her hopeful sail;
Blow ruin; will Castara then repent?

CAST. Love shall in that tempestuous shower
Her brightest blossom like the black-thorne show:
VVeake friendship prospers by the power
Of fortunes Sun. I Will in her winter grow.

ARAPH. If on my skin the noisome skar
I should oth' leprosy, or canker wear;
Or if the sulfurous breath of war
Should blast my youth; Should I not be thy fear?

CAST. In flesh may sickness horror move,
But heavenly zeal will be by it refined,
For then we would like two Angels love,
Without a sense; embrace each others mind.

ARAPH. Were it not impious to repine;
Against rigid Fate I should direct my breath.
That two must be, whom heaven did join
In such a happy one, disjoined by death.

CAST. That Is no divource. Then shall we see
The rites in life, were tipes o'th marriage state,
Our souls on earth contracted be;
But they in heaven their nuptials consumate.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord M.
My Lord.
MY thoughts are not so rugged, nor does earth
So far predominate in me, that mirth
Looks not as lovely as when our delight
First fashioned wings to add a nimbler flight
To lazy time; who would, to have survai'd
Our varied pleasures, there have ever staid.
And they were harmless. For obedience
If frailty yields to the wild laws of sense;
We shall but with a sugared venom meet;
No pleasure, if not innocent as sweet.
And that is your choice: who add the title good
To that of noble. For although the blood
Of Marshall, Standley, and 'La Pole does flow
With happy Brandon's in your veins; you owe
Your virtue not to them. Man builds alone
Oth' ground of honor: For desert's our own.
Be that your aim. I Will with Castara si^
In The shade, from heat of business. While my wit
Is neither big with an ambitious aim,
To build tall Pyramids In The court of fame,
For after ages, or to win conceit
Oth' present, and grow in opinion great.
Rich in our selves, we envy not the East,
Her rocks of Diamonds, or her gold the West.
Arabia may be happy in the death
Of her reviving Phaenix, In the breath
Of cool Favonius, famous be the grove
Of Tempe; while we in each others love.
For that let us be famed. And when of all
That Nature made us two, the funeral
Leaves but a little dust; (which then as wed,
Even after death, shall sleep still in one bed.)
The Bride and Bridegroom on the solemn day,
Shall with warm zeal approach our Vrne, to pay,
Their vows, that heaven should bliss so far their rites.
To show them the fair paths to our delights.
To a Tomb.
TYrant over tyrants, thou who only do
Clip the lascivious beauty without lust;
What horror at thy sight sh^otes through each sense;
How powerful is thy silent eloquence,
Which never flatters? Thou instruct'st the proud,
That their swollen pomp is but an empty cloud,
Slave to each wind. The fair, those flowers they have
I'resh in their cheek, are strewed upon a grave.
Thou tell the rich, their I doll is but earth.
The vainly pleased, that Syren-like their mirth
Betrays to mischief, and that only he
Da^es welcome death, whose aims at virtue be.
Which yet more zeal does to Castara move.
What checks me, when the tomb persuades to love
To CASTARA. Upon thought of Age and Death.
THe breath of time shall blast the flowery Spring,
Which so perfumes thy cheek, and with it bring
So d^rke a mist, as shall eclipse the light
Of thy fair eyes, in an eternal night.
Some melancholy chamber of the earth,
(For that like Time devoures whom it gave breath),
Thy beauties shall entombe, while all who ere
Loved nobly, offer up their serrowes there.
But I whose grief no formal limits bound,
Beholding the dark caverne of that ground,
Will there immure my self. And thus I shall
Thy mourner be, and my own funeral.
Else by the weeping magic of my verse,
Thou had revived* to triumph over thy hearse.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord P.
My Lord.
THe reverend man by magic of his prayer
Has charmed so, that I and your daughter ar^
Contracted into one. The holy lights
Smiled with a cheerful luster on our rites,
And every thing presaged full happiness
To mutual love; if you will the omen bless.
Nor grieve, my Lord, it is perfected. Before
Afflicted Seas sought refuge on the shore
From the angry Northvvind. Ere the astonished Spring
Heard in the air the feathered people sing,
Ere time had motion, or the Sun obtained
His province over the day, this was ordained.
Nor think in her I courted wealth or blood,
Or more uncertain hopes: for bad I stood
On the highest ground of fortune, the world known
No greatness but what waited on my throne;
And she had only had that face and mind,
I, with my self, had the earth to her resigned.
In virtue there'^ an Empire, And so sweet
The rule is when it does with beauty meet,
As fellow Consul; that of heaven they
Nor earth partake; who would her disobey.
This captived me. And ere I questioned why
I ought to love Castara, through my eye,
This soft obedience stole into my heart.
Then found I love might lend to th'quick-ey'd art
Of Reason yet a purer sight: For he
Though blind, taught her these Indies first to see,
In whose possession I at length am blessed.
And with my self at quiet, here I rest,
As all things to my power subdued. To me
There Is naught beyond this. The whole wo^ld is she.
His Muse speaks to him.
THy vows are heard, and thy Castara's name
Is writ as fair in the Register of Fame,
As the ancient beauties which translated are
By Poets up to heaven; each there a star.
And though Imperial Tiber boast alone
Ovids Corinaa, and to Ar^ is known
But Petrarchs Laura; while our famous Thames
Does murmur Sydneyes Stella to her streams.
Yet have thou Sever^e left, and she can bring
As many quires of Swans, as they to sing
Thy glorious love: Which living shall by thee
The only Sov'ragine of those waters be.
Dead in loves firmament, no star shall shine
So nobly fair, so purely chaste as thine.
To Vain hope.
THou dream of madmen, ever changing gale,
Sw^ll with thy wanton breath the gaudy sail
Of glorious fools. Thou guid'st them who thee court
To rocks, to quicksands, or some faithless port.
Were I not mad, who when secure at ease,
I might in the Cabin pass the raging Seas,
Would like a frantic shipboy wildly haste,
To climb the giddy top of the unsafe mast?
Ambition never to her hopes did feign
A greatness, but I really obtain
In my Castara. Wer'^ not fondness then
To Embrace the shadows of true bliss? And when^^
My Paradise all flowers and fruits does breed:
To rob a barren garden for a weed?
To CASTARA, How happy, though in an obscure fortune.
WEre we by fate thrown down below our sear;
Could we be poor? Or question Natures care*
In our provision? She who does afford
A feathered garment fit for every bird,
And only voice enough to express delight.
She who apparels Lillies in their white.
As if in that she'de teach man's duller sense,
Wh'are highest, should be so in innocence.
She who in damask does attire the Rose,
(And man t'himselfe a mockery to propose,
Among whom the humblest Judges grow to sit)
She who in purple clothes the Violet.
If thus she cares for things even void of sense;
Shall we suspect in us her providence?
To CASTARA.
WHat can the freedom of our love enthrall?
Castara were we dispossessed of all
The gifts of fortune; richer yet than she
Can make her slaves, we would in each other be.
Love in himselfe's a world. If we should have
A mansion but in some forsaken cave;
We Would smooth misfortune: and our selves think then
Retired like Princes from the noise of men,
To breath a while unflatter'd. Each wild beast,
That should the silence of our cell infest,
With clamor, seeking prey; We Would fanci^ wear
Naught but an avaritious Courtier.
VVealth's but opinion. Who thinks others more
Of treasures have, then we, is only poor.
On the death of the Right Honorable, GEORGE Earl of S.
BRight Saint, thy pardon, if my sadder verse,
Appear in sighing over thy glorious hearse,
To envy heaven. For fame it self now wears
Griefs Livery, and only speak in tears.
And pardon you Castara if a wh^le
Your memory I banish from my style;
When I have paid his death the tribute due,
Of sorrow, I Will return to Love and you.
Is there a name like Talbot, which a shower
Can force from every eye? And has even power
To alter natures course? How else should all
Run wild with mourning, and distracted fall:
The illiterate vulgar in a well tuned breath,
Lament their loss, and learnedly chide death,
For its bold rape, while the sad Poets song
Is yet unheard, as if grief had no tongue*
Th'amaz'd mariner having lost his way
In the tempestuous desert of the Sea,
Looks up but finds no stars. They all conspire
To dark themselves, t'enlighten this new fire.
The learned Astronomer with daring eye,
Searching to tracke the Spheres through which you fly,
(Most beauteous soul) does in his journey fail,
And blushing, says, the subtlest art is frail,
And but truths counterfeit. Your flight does reach,
Fair Virtue has an Orb beyond his reach.
But I grow dull with sorrow. Unkind Fate
To play the tyrant and subvert the state
Of settled goodness. Who shall henceforth stand*
A pure example to inform the Land
Of her loose riot? Who shall counterchecke
The wanton pride of greatness; and direct
Straid honor in the true magnificke way?
Whose life shall show what triumph it is to obey
The hard commands of reason? And how sweet
The nup^ials are, when wealth and learning meet?
Who will with silent piety confute
Atheisticke Sophistry, and by the fruit
Approve Religions tree? who will teach his blood
A Virgin law and dare be great and good?
Who will despise his styles? And nobly weigh
In judgments balance, that his honored clay
Has no advantage by them? Who will live
So innocently pious, as to give
The world no scandal? who will himself deny,
And to warm passion a cold martyr dye?
My grief distracts me. If my zeal h^th said,
What checks the living; know I serve the dead.
The dead, who needs no monumentall vaults,
With his pale ashes to intombe his faults.
Whose sins beget no libels, whom the poor
For benefit, for worth, the rich adore.
Who lived a solitary Pnaenix, free
From the commerce with mischief, joy'd to be
Still gazing heavenward, where his thoughts did move^
Fed with the sacred fire of zealous love,
Alone he flourisht, till the fatal hour
Did summon him, when gathering f^^m each flower
Their virtuous odours, from his perfumed nest,
He took his slight to everlasting rest.
There shine great Lord, and with prepitious eyes,
Look down, and smile upon this sacrifice.
To my worthy Cousin Mr. E. C. In praise of the City Life, in the long Vacation.
I Like the green plush which your meadows wear,
I praise your pregnant fields, which duly bear
Their wealthy burden to the industrious Bore.
Nor do I disallow that who are poor
In mind and fortune, thither should retire:
But hate that he who is warm with holy fire
Of any knowledge, and among us may feast
On Nectar'd wit, should turn himself to a beast,
And graze in the Country, Why did nature wrong
So much her pains, as to give you a tongue
And fluent language; If converse you hold
With Oxen in the stall, and sheep in the fold?
But now it is long Vacation you will say
The town is empty, and who ever may
To th'pleasure of his Country home repair,
Flies from the infection of our London air.
In this your error. Now Is the time alone
To live here; when the City Dame is gone,
T'her house at Bra^dford; for beyond that she
Imagines there is no land, but Barbary,
Where lies her husbands Factor. When from hence
Rid is the Country Justice whose non-s^nce
Corrupted had the language of the Inn,
Where he and his horse litter'd: We begin
To live in silence, when the noise oth' Bench
Not deafens Westminster, nor corrupt French
Walks Fleet - street in her gown. Ruffes of the Bar,
By the Vacations power translated are,
To Cut-worke band^. And who were busy here,
Are gone to sow sedition in the shire.
The are by this is purged, and the Terms strife,
Thus fled the City: we the civil life
Lead happily. When in the gentle way,
Of noble mirth, I have the long lived day,
Contracted to a moment: I retire
To my Castara, and meet such a fire
Of mutual love: that if the City were
Infected, that would purify the air.
Loves Aniversarie To the Sun.
THou art returned (great Light) tothat blessed hour
In which I first by marriage sacred power,
Joined with Castara hearts: And as the same
Thy lusty is, as then so is our flame:
Which had increast, but that by loves decree,
'Twas such at first, it never could greater be.
But tell me (glorious Lamp) in thy survey,
Of things below thee, what did not decay
By age to weakness? I since that have seen
The Rose bud forth and fade, the tree grow green
And wither, and the beauty of the field
With Winter wrinkled. Even thy self do yield
Something to time, and to thy grave fall nigher.
But virtuous love is one sweet endless fire.
Against them who lay unchastity to the sex of Women.
THey meet but with unwholesome Springs,
And Summers which infectious are:
They hear but when the Meremaid sings,
And only see the falling star:
Who ever dare,
Affirm no woman chaste and fair.
Go cure your fevers: and you will say
The Dog-dayes scorch not all the year:
In Copper Mines no longer stay,
But travel to the West, and there
The right ones see:
And grant all gold's not Alchimie.
What mad man 'cause the glow-wormes flame
Is cold, swears there is no warmth in fire?
'Cause some make forfeit of their name,
And slave themselves to man's desire;
Shall the sex free
From guilt, damned to the bondage be?
Nor grieve Castara, though 'twere frail,
Thy Virtue then would brighter shine,
When thy example should prevail,
And every woman's faith be thine,
And were there none;
It Is Majesty to rule alone.
To the Right Honorable and excellently learned, WILLIAM Earl of St.
My Lord,
THe Laurel does your reverend temples wreath
As aptly now, as when your youth did breath
Those tragic raptures which your name shall save
From the black edict of a tyrant grave.
Nor shall your Day ere set, till the Sun shall
From the blind heavens like a cynder fall;
And all the elements intend their strife,
To ruin what they framed; Then your fames life,
When desperate Time lies gasping shall expire
Attended by the world in the general fire.
Fame lengthens thus her self. And I to tread
Your steps to glory, search among the dead,
Where Virtue lies obscured; that as I give
Life to her tomb, I spite of time may live.
Now I resolve in triumph of my verse,
To bring great Talbot from that foreign hearse,
Which yet does to her fright his dust enclose:
Then to sing Herbert who so glorious rose,
With the fourth Edward, that his faith does shine
Yet in the faith of noblest Pembrookes line.
Sometimes my swelling spirits I prepare
To speak the mighty Percy, nearest heir,
In merits as in blood, to CHARLES the great:
Then Darbies worth and greatness to repeat:
Or Morleyes honor, or Mounteagl^s fame,
Whose valor lives eternized in his name.
But while I think to sing those of my blood,
And my Castara's; Loves unruly flo^d
Breaks in, and bears away what ever stands,
Built by my b^sie fancy on the sands.
To CASTARA, Upon an embrace.
'BOut the Husband Oak, the Vine
Thus wreathes to kiss his leavy face:
Their streams thus Rivers join,
And lose themselves in the embrace.
But Trees want sense when they infold,
And Waters when they meet, are cold.
Thus Turtles bill, and groan
Their loves into each others ear:
Two flames thus burn in one,
When their curled heads to heaven they rear.
But Birds want soul though not desire:
And flames material soon expire.
If not profane; we'll say
When Angels colse, their joys are such*
For we no love obey
That Is bastard to a fleshly touch.
Let Us close Castara then since thus
We pattern Angels and they us.
To the Honorable, G. T.
LEt not thy groans force Echo from her cave,
Or interrupt her weeping over that wave,
Which last Narcissu^ kissed; let no dark grove
Be taught to whilper stories of thy love.
What though the wind be turned? Can thou not sail
By virtue of a clean contrary gale,
Into some other Port? Where thou will find,
It was thy better Genius changed the wind.
To ste^re thee to some Island in the West,
For wealth and pleasure, that transcends thy East.
Though Astrodora, like a sullen star
Eclipse her self; In The sky of beauty are
Ten thousand other fires, some bright as she.
And who with milder beams, may shine on thee.
Nor yet does this Eclipse bear a portent,
That should affright the world: The firmament
Enjoyes the light it did, a Sun as clear,
And the young Spring does like a Bride appear,
As fairly wed to the Thessalian grove
As e're it was, though she and you not love.
And we two, who like two bright stars have shined
In The heaven of friendship, are as firmly, joined
As blood and love first framed us. And to be
Loved, and thought worthy to be loved by thee,
I^ to be glorious. Since fame cannot lend
An honor, equals that of Talbots friend.
Nor envy me that my Castara's flame
Yields me a constant warmth: Though first I cam^
To marriage happy Islands: Seas to thee
Will yield as smooth away, and winds as free.
Which shall conduct thee (if hope may divine;)
To this delicious port: and make love thine.
To CASTARA. The reward of Innocent Love.
WE saw and wooed each others eyes,
My soul contracted then with thine,
And both burnt in one sacrifice.
By which our Marriage grew divine.
Let wilder youth, whose soul is sense,
Profane the Temple of delight.
And purchase endless penitence,
With the stolen pleasure of one night.
Time's ever ours, while we despise
The sensual idol of our clay.
For though the Sun do set and rise,
We joy one everlasting day.
Whose light no jealous clouds obscure,
While each of us shine innocent.
The troubled stream is still impure,
With virtue flies away content.
And though opinion often err,
We Will court the modest smile of fame.
For sins black danger circles her,
Who has infection in her name.
Thus when to one dark silent room,
Death shall our loving coffins thrust;
Fame will build columns on our tomb,
And add a perfume to our dust.
To my noblest Friend, Sir I. P. Knight.
Sir,
THough my dear Talbots Fate exact, a sad
And heavy brow; my verse shall not be clad
For him this hour in mourning: I will write
To you the glory of a pompous night,
Which none (except sobriety) who wit
Or clothes could boast, but freely did admit.
I (who still sin for company) was there
And tasted of the glorious supper, where
Meat was the least of wonder. Though the nest
Oth' Phaenix rifled seemd t'amaze the feast,
And the Ocean left so poor that it alone
Could since vant wretched herring and poor John.
Lucullus surfets, were but types of this,
And whatsoever riot mentioned is
In story, did but the dull Zanye play,
To this proud night; which rather we will term day.
For the artificall lights so thick were set,
That the bright Sun seemed this to connterfeit
But seven (whom whether we should Sages call
Or deadly sins, ^le not dispute) were all
Invited to this pomp. And yet I dare
Pawn my loved Muse* the Hungarian did prepare
Not half that quantity of victual, when
He laid his happy siege to No^ilinghen.
The mist of the perfumes was breathed so thick
That Liex himself though his sight famed so quick,
Had there scarce spyed one sober: For the wealth
Of the Canaries was exhaust, the health
Of his good Majestye to celebrate,
Who Will judge them loyal subjects without that:
Yet they, who some fond privilege to maintain,
Would have rebeld; their best freehold, their brain
Surrendered there; and five fifteenes did pay
To drink his happy life and reign. O day
It was thy piety to fly; the had been
Found accessory else to this fond sin.
But I forget to speak each stratagem
By which the dishes entered, and in them
Each luscious miracle, As if more books
Had written been oth' mystery of Cooks
Then the Philos'phers stone, here we did see
All wonders in the kitchen Alchimy.
But I Will not leave you there, before you part
You shall have something of another art.
A banquet raining down so fast, the good
Old Patriarch would have thought a general flood*
Heaven opened and from thence a mighty shower
Of Amber comfits it sweet self did power
Upon our heads, and Suckets from our eye
Like thickend clouds did steal away the sky,
That it was questioned whether heaven were
Blackfriars, and ^ach star a confectioner*
But I too long detain you at a feast
You hap'ly surfeit of; now every guest
Is reeld down to his coach; I license crave
Sir, but to kiss your hands, and take my leave:
To the Right Honorable Archibald Earl of Ar.
IF your example be obeyed
The serious few will live in the silent shade:
And not endanger by the wind
Or Sunshine, the complexion of their mind:
Whose beauty wears so clear a skin
That it decays with the least taint of sin.
Vice grows by custom, nor dare we
Reject it as a slave, where it breaths free.
And is no privilege denied;
Nor if advanced to higher place envyed.
Wherefore your Lordship in your self
(Not lancht fa^re in the maine, nor nigh the shelfe
Of humbler fortune) lives at ^ase,
Safe from the rocks oth'shore, and storms oth'Sea^.
Your soul's a well built City, where
There Is such munition, that no war breeds fear:
No rebels wild destractions move;
For you the heads have crushed; Rage, Envy, Love.
And therefore you defiance bid
To open enmity, or mischief hid
In fawning hate and supple pride,
Who are on every corner fortifide.
Your youth not rudely led by rage
Of blood, is now the story of your age
Which without boast you may aver
Before blackest danger, glory did prefer:
Glory not purchased by the breath
Of Sycophants, but by encountering death.
Yet wildness nor the fear of laws
Did make you fight, but justice of the cause.
For but mad prodigals they are
Of fortitude, who for it self love war.
When well made peace had closed the eyes
Of discord, sloth did not your youth surprise.
Your life as well as power, did awe
The bad, and to the good was the best law:
when most men virtue did pursue
In hope by it to grow in fame like you.
Nor when you did to court repair,
Did you your manners alter with the air.
You did your modesty retain
Your faithful dealing the same tongue and brain.
Nor did all the soft flattery there
Inchant you so, but still you truth could hear.
And though your roofes were richly guilt,
The basis was on no wards ruin built.
Nor were your vassals made a prey,
And for^'t to curse the Coronation day.
And though no bravery was known
To outshine yours, you only spent your own.
For 'twas the indulgence of fate,
To give y' a moderate mind, and bounteous state?
But I, my Lord, who have no friend
Of fortune, must begin where you do end.
It Is dangerous to approach the fire
Of action; nor is it safe, far to retire,
Yet better lost in the multitude
Of private men, then on the state to intrude,
And hazard for a doubtful smile,
My stock of fame, and inward peace to spoil.
I Will therefore nigh some murmuring brook
That wantons through my meddowes, with a book
With my Castara, or some friend,
My youth not guilty of ambition spend.
To my own shade (if fate permit)
I Will whisper some soft music of my wit.
And flatter so my self, I Will see
By that, strange motion steal into the tree.
But still my first and chiefest care
Shall be t'app^ase offended heaven with prayer:
And in such mold my thoughts to cast,
That each day shall be spent as 'twere my last.
How ere it is sweet lust to obey,
Virtue though rugged, is the safest way.
An Elegy upon The Honorable Henry Cambell, son to to the Earl of Ar.
ITs false Arithmaticke to say thy breath
Expired to soon, or irreligious death
Profaned thy holy youth. For if thy years
Be numbered by thy virtues or our tears,
Thou did the old Methusalem outlive.
Though Time, but twenty years account can give
Of thy abode on earth, yet every hour
Of thy brave youth by virtues wondrous po^^re
Was lengthened to a year. Each well-spent day
Keeps young the body, but the soul makes gray.
Such miracles works goodness: and behind
Thou Have left to us such stories of thy mind
Fit for example; that when them we read,
We envy earth the treasure of the dead.
Why do the sinful riot and survive
The fevers of their surfets? Why alive
Is yet disordered greatness, and all they
Who the loose laws of their wild blood obey?
Why lives the gamester, who does black the night
With cheats and imprecations? Why is light
Looked on by those whose breath may poison it:
Who sold the vigor of their strength and wit
To buy diseases: and thou, who fair truth
And virtue did adore, lost in thy youth?
But I Will not question fate. Heaven does conveigh
Those first from the dark prison of their clay
Who are most fit for heaven. Thou in war
Had taken degrees, those dangers felt, which are
The props on which peace safely does subsist
And through the Cannons blew and horrid mist
Had brought her light: And now were so complete
That naught but death did want to make thee great.
Thy death was timely then bright soul to thee.
And in thy fate thou suffer'dst not. 'Twas we
Who dyed robbed of thy life: in whose increase
Of real glory both in war and peace,
We all did share: and thou away we fear
Did with thee, the whole stock of honor bear,
Each then be his own mourner. We Will to thee
Write hymns, upon the world an Elegy.
To CASTARA,
WHy should we fear to melt away in death;
May we but dye together. When beneath
In a cool vault we sleep, the world will prove
Religious, and call it the shrine of Love.
There, when oth' wedding eve some beauteous maid,
Suspicious of the faith of man, has paid
The tribute of her vows; oth' sudden she
Two violets sprouting from the tomb will see:
And cry out, ye sweet emblems of their zeal
Who live below, sprang ye up to reveal
The story of our future joys, how we
The faithful patterns of their love shallbe*
If not; hang down yours heads oppressed with dew;
And I will weep and wither hence with you.
To CASTARA, Of what we were before our creation.
WHen Pelion wondering saw, that rain which fell
But now from angry Heaven, to Heaven ward swell:
When th'Indian Ocean did the wanton play,
Mingling its billows with the Balticke sea:
And the whole earth was water: O where then
Were we Castara? In the fate of men
Lost underneath the waves? Or to beguile
Heaven's justice, lurkt we in Noah's floating Isle?
We had no being then. This fleshly frame
Wed to a soul, long after, hither came
A stranger to it self. Those months that were
But the last age, no news of us did hear.
What pomp is then in us? Who the other day
Were nothing; and in triumph now, but clay.
To the Moment last past.
O Whither do thou fly? Cannot my vow
Entreat thee tarry? Thou were here but now,
And thou art gone: like ships which plough the Sea,
And leave no print for man to tracke their way.
O unseene wealth! who thee did husband, can
Outvie the jewels of the Ocean,
The mines of the earth! One sigh well spent in thee
Had been a purchase for eternity!
We will not loose thee then. Castara, where
Shall we find out his hidden sepulcher;
And we will revive him Not the cruel stealth
Of fate shall rob us, of so great a wealth*
Undone in thriftd while we be sought his stay,
Ten of his fellow moments fled away.
To CASTARA. Of the knowledge of Love.
WHere steepes the North-vvind when the South inspires
Life in the spring, and gathers into quires
The scattered Nightingales; whose subtle ears
Heard first th'harmonious language of the Spheres;
Whence has the stone Magneticke force t'allure
Th'enamourd iron; From a seed impure
Or natural did first the Mandrake grow;
What powreith' Ocean makes it ebb and flow;
What strange materials is the azure sky
Compacted of; of what its brightest eye
The ever flaming Sun; what people are
In the unknown world; what worlds in every star;
Let curious fancies at this secret rove;
Castara what we know, we will practice, Love.
To the Right Honorable the Countess of C.
Madam,
SHould the cold Muscovit, whose furre and stove
Can scarce prepare him heat enough for love,
But view the wonder of your presence, he
Would scorn his winters sharpest injury:
And trace the naked groves, till he found bayse
To write the beauteous triumphs of your praise,
As a dull Poet even he would say,
The unclouded Sun had never shown them day
Till that bright minute; that he now admires
No more why the coy Spring so soon retires
From their unhappy clyme; It does pursue
The Sun, and he derives his light from you.
He Would tell you how the fettered Baltic Sea
Is set at freedom, while the ye away*
Does melt at your approach; how by so fair
Harmonious beauty, their rude manners are
Reduced to order; how to them you bring
The wealthiest mines below, above the Spring.
Thus would his wonder speak For he would want
Religion to believe, there were a Saint
Within, and all he saw was but the shrine.
But I here pay my vows to the devine
Pure essence there enclosed, which if it were
Not hid in a fair cloud, but might appear
In its full luster, would make Nature live
In a state equal to her primitive.
But sweetly that's obscured. Yet though our eye
Cannot the splendour of your soul descry
In true perfection, by a glimmering light,
Your language yields us, we can guess how bright
The Sun within you shines, and curse th'unkind
Eclipse, or else our selves for being blind.
How hastily does Nature build up man
To leave him so imperfect? For he can
See naught beyond his sense; she does control
So far his fight he nere discerned a soul.
For had yours been the object of his eye;
It had turned wonder to Idolatry.
The harmony of Love.
AMphi^n, O thou holy shade!
Bring Orpheus up with thee:
That wonder may you both invade,
Hearing Loves harmony.
You who are soul, not rudely made
Up, with Material ears,
And fit to reach the music of these spheres.
Hark! when Castara's orbs do move
By my first moving eyes,
How great the Symphony of Love,
But it is the destinies
Will not so far my prayer approve,
To bring you hither, here
Lest you meet heaven, for Elysium there.
It Is no dull Sublunary flame
Burns in her heart and mine.
But something more, then has a name.
So subtle and divine,
We know not why, nor how it came.
Which shall shine bright, till she
And the whole world of love, expire with me.
To my honored friend Sir Ed. P. Knight.
You Would leave the silence in which safe we are,
To listen to the noise of war;
And walk those rugged paths* the factious tread,
Who by the number of the dead
Reckon their glories and think greatness stood
Unsafe, till it was built on blood.
Secure in the wall our Seas and ships provide
(Abhorring wars so barbarous pride.
And honor bought with slaughter) in content
Lets breath though humble, innocent.
Folly and madness! Since it is ods we nere
See the fresh youth of the next year.
Perhaps not the chaste morn, her self disclose
Again, to out-blush the aemulous rose,
Why does ambition so the mind distress.
To make us scorn what we possess?
And look so far before us? Since all we
Can hope, is varied misery?
Go find some whispering shade near A^ne or Poe,
And gently among their violets throw
Your wearyed limbs, and see if all those fair
Enchantments can charm grief or care?
Our sorrows still pursue us, and when you
The ruined Capitol shall view
And statues, a disordered heap; you can
Not cure yet the disease of man,
And banish your own thoughts. Go travail where
Another Sun and Stars appear,
And land not touched by any covetous fleet,
And yet even there your self you will meet.
Stay here then, and while curious exiles find
New toys for a fantastique mind;
Enjoy at home what is real: here the Spring
By her aeriall quires does sing
As sweetly to you as if you were laid
Under the learned Thessalian shade,
Direct your eyesight inward, and you will find
A thousand regions in your mind
Yet undiscovered. Travel them, and be
Expert in home Cosmographie.
This you may do safe both from rock and shelfe:
Man's a whole world within himself.
To CASTARA.
GIve me a heart where no impure
Disordered passions rage,
Which jealousy does not obscure,
Nor vanity t'expence engage,
Nor wooed to madness by queint oaths,
Or the fine Rhetoric of clothes,
Which not the softness of the age
To vice or folly does decline;
Give me that heart ( Castara) for it is thine.
Take thou a heart where no new look
Provokes new appetite:
With no fresh charm of beauty took,
Or wanton stratagem of wit;
Not Idly wandering here and there,
Led by an amorous eye or ea^e.
A^ming each beauteous ma^ke to hit;
Which virtue does to one confine:
Take thou that heart, Castara, for it is mine.
And now my heart is lodged with thee,
Observe but how it still
Does listen how thine does with me;
And guard it well, for else it will
Run hither back; not to be where
I am, but 'cause thy heart is here.
But without discipline, or skill.
Our hearts shall freely 'tweene us move;
Should thou or I want hearts, we would breath by love.
To CASTARA. Of true delight.
WHy does the ear so tempt the voice,
That cunningly divides the air?
Why does the palla^e buy the choice
Delights oth' sea, to enrich her fare?
As soon as I, my ear obey
The Eccho's lost even with the breath.
And when the sewer takes away
I Am left with no more taste, then death.
Be curious in pursuit of ey^s
To procreate new loves with thine;
Satiety makes sense despise
What superstition thought divine.
Quick fancy how it mockes delight?
As we conceive, things are not such,
The glow-worme is as warm as bright,
Till the decei^full flame we touch.
When I have sold my heart to Just
And bought rep^ntance with a kiss
I find the malice of my dust,
That told me hell contained a bliss.
The Rose yields her sweet blandishment
Lost in the fold of lovers wreathes,
The violet enchants the sent
When early in the Spring she breaths.
But winter comes and makes each flower
Shrink from the pillow where it grows,
Or an intruding cold has power
To scorn the perfume of the Rose.
Our senses like false glasses show
Smooth beauty where brows wrinkled are,
And makes the cosen'd fancy glow.
Chaste virtue's only true and fair.
To my noblest Friend, I. C. Esquire.
Sir,
I Have the Countries dirt and manners, yet
I love the silence; I embrace the wit
And courtship, flowing here in a full tide.
But loathe the expense the vanity and pride.
No place each way is happy. Here I hold
Commerce with some, who to my ear unfold*
(After a due oath ministered) the height
And greatness of each star shines in the state,
The brightness the eclypse, the influence.
With others I commune, who tell me whence
The torrent does of foreign discord flow:
Relate each skirmish, battle, overthrow,
Soon as they happen; and by rote can tell
Those Germane towns, even puzzle me to spell.
The cross or prosperous fate of Princes, they
Ascribe to rashnes^ee, cunning or delay:
And on each action comment, with more skill
Then upon Livy, did old Mat^havill.
O busy folly! Why do I my brain
Perplex with the dull policies of Spain,
Or quick designs of France? Why not repair
To the pure innocence oth' Country air:
And neighbor thee, dear friend? Who so do give
Thy thoughts to worth and virtue, that to live
Bl^st, is to trace thy ways. There might not we
Arm against passion with Philosophy;
And by the aid of leisure, so control,
What-ere is earth in us, to grow all soul?
Knowledge does ignorance engender when
We study mysteries of other men
And foreign plots. Do but in thy own shade
(^hy head upon some flowery pillow laid,
Kind Natures huswifery) contemplate all
His stratagems who laborus to inthrall.
The world to his great Master; and you will find
Ambition mocks it self, and grasps the wind
Not conquest makes us great. Blood is to dear
A price for glory: Honor does appear
To statesmen like a vision in the night,
And jugler-like works oth' deluded sight.
The unbusied only wise: For no respect
Indangers them to error; They affect
Truth in her naked beauty, and behold
Man with an equal eye, not bright in gold
Or tall in title; so much him they weigh
As Virtue raises him above his clay.
Thus let us value things: And since we find
Time bends us toward death, lets in our mind
Create new youth; and arm against the rude
Assaults of age; that no dull solitude
^th' country dead are thoughts, nor busy care
^th' town make us not think, where now we are
And whether we are bound. Time nere forgo^
His journey, though his steps we numbered not.
To CASTARA. What Lovers will say when she and he are dead.
I Wonder when we are dead, what men will say;
Will not poor Orphan Lovers weep,
The parents of their Loves decay;
And envy death the treasure of our sleep?
Will not each trembling Virgin bring her fears
To the holy silence of my Vrne?
And chide the Marble with her tears,
'Cause she so soon faith's obsequie must mourn.
For had Fate spared but Arap^ill (she will say)
He had the great example stood,
And fore't unconstant man obey
The law of Loves Religion, not of blood.
And youth by female perjury betrayed,
Will to Castara's shrine deplore
His injuries, and death obrayd,
That woman lives more guilty, then before.
For while thy breathing purified the air
Thy Sex (he will say) d^d only move
By the chaste influence of a fair,
Whose virtue shined in the bright orb of love.
Now woman* like a Meteor vapor'd forth
From dung hills, does amaze our eyes;
Not shining with a real worth,
But subtle her black errors to disguise*
Thus will they talk, Castara, while our dust
In one dark vault shall mingled be.
The world will fall a prey to lust,
When Love is dead, which has one fate with me.
To his Muse.
HEre Virgin fix thy pillars, and command
They sacred may to after ages stand
In witness of loves triumph. Yet will we
Castara, find new worlds in Poetry,
And conquer them. Not dully following those
Tame lovers, who dare cloth their thoughts in prose.
But we will henceforth more Religious prove,
Concealing the high mysteries of love
From the profane* Harmonious like the spheres,
Our souls shall move, not reached by humane ears.
That Music to the Angels, this to fame,
I here commit. That when their holy flame,
True lovers to pure beauties would rehearse,
They may invoke the Genius of my verse.
FINIS.
A Friend
IS a man. For the free and open discovery of thoughts to woman can not pass
without an over licentious familiarity, or a justly occasioned suspicion; and
friendship can neither stand with vice nor infamy. He is virtuous, for love
begot in sin is a misshapen monster, and seldom out-lives his birth. He is
noble, and inherits the virtues of all his progenitors; though happily
unskilful to blazon his paternall coat; So little should nobility serve for
story, but when it encourages to action. He is so valiant, fear could never
be listened to, when she whispered danger; and yet fights not, unless religion
confirms the quarrel lawful. He submits his actions to the government of
virtue, not to the wild decrees of popular opinion; and when his conscience is
fully satisfied, he cares not how mistake and ignorance interpret him. He has
so much fortitude he can forgive an injury; and when he has overthrown his
opposer, not insult upon his weakness. He is an absolute governor; no
destroyer of his passions, which he imployes to the noble increase of virtue.
He is wise, for who hopes to reap a harvest from the sands, may expect the
perfect offices of friendship from a fool. He has by a liberal education
been softened to civility; for that rugged honesty some rude men profess, is
an indigested Chaos; which may contain the seeds of goodness, but it wants
form and order.

He is no flutterer; but when he finds his friend any way imperfect, he freely
but gently informs him; nor yet shall some few errors cancel the bond of
friendship; because he remembers no endeavors can raise ^an above his
frailety. He is as slow to enter into that title, as he is to forsake it; a
monstrous vice must disobliege, because an extraordinary virtue did first
unite; and when he parts, he does it without a duel. He is neither effeminate,
nor a common courtier; the first is so passionate a doater upon himself, he
cannot spare love enough: to be justly named friendship: the latter has his
love so diffusive among the beauties, that man is not considerable. He is not
accustomed to any sordid way of gain, for who is any way mechanicke, will sell
his friend upon more profitable terms. He is bountiful, and thinks no
treasure of fortune equal to the preservation of him he loves; yet not so
lavish, as to buy friendship, and perhaps afterward find himself overseene in
the purchase. He is not exceptio^s, for jealousy proceeds from weakness,
and his virtues quit him from suspicions. He freely gives advice, but so little
peremptory is his opinion that he ingenuously submits it to an abler judgment.
He is open in expression of his thoughts and eases his melancholy by enlarging
it; and no Sanctuary preserves so safely, as he his friend afflicted. He makes
use of no engines of his friendship to extort a secret; but if committed to his
charge, his heart receives it, and that and it come both ^o light together. In
life he is the most amiable object to the soul, in death the most deplorable.

The Funerals of the Honorable, my best friend and Kinsman, GEORGE TALBOT,
Esquire.
Elegy, 1.
T Were malice to thy fame, to weep alone:
And not enforce an universal groan
From ruinous man, and make the World complain:
Yet I Will forbid my grief to be profane
In mention of thy praise; I Will speak but truth
Yet write more honor than ere shined in youth.
I can relate thy business here on earth,
Thy mystery of life, thy noblest birth
Out-shin'd by nobler virtue: but how far
The have taken thy journey 'bove the highest star,
I cannot speak, nor whether thou art in
Commission with a Throne, or Cherubin.
Pass on triumphant in thy glorious way,
Till thou have reached the place assigned: we may
Without disturbing the harmonious Spheres,
Bathe here below thy memory in our tears.
Ten days are past, since a dull wonder seized
My active soul: Loud storms of sighs are raised
By empty griefs; they who can utter it,
Do not vent forth their sorrow, but their wit,
I stood like Niobe without a groan,
Congealed into that monumentall stone
That does lie over thee: I had no room
For witty grie^e, fit only for thy tomb.
And friendships monument, thus had I stood;
But that the flame I bear thee, warmed my blood
With a new life. I Will like a funeral fire
But burn a while to thee, and then expire.
Elegy, 2.
TAlbot is dead. Like lightning which no part
Oth' body touches, but first strikes the heart,
This word has murdered me. There Is not in all
The stock of sorrow, any charm can call
Death sooner up. For musiqu's in the breath
Of thunder, and a sweetness even in the death
That brings with it, if you with this compare
All the loud noyses, which torment the air.
They cure (Physicians say) the element
Si^ke with dull vapors, and to banishment
Confine infections; but this fatal shreeke,
Without the least redress, is uttered like
The last days summons, when Earths trophies lie
A scattered heap, and time it self must dye.
What now has life to boast of? Can I have
A thought less dark than the horror of the grave
Now thou do dwell below? Were not a fault
Past pardon, to raise fancy 'bove thy vault?
Hayle Sacred house in which his relics sleep?
Blessed marble give me leave t'approach and weep,
These vows to thee! for since great Talb^t's gone
Down to thy silence, I commerce with none
But thy pale people: and in that confute
Mistaking man, that dead men are not mu^^.
Delicious beauty, lend thy flattered ear
Accustomed to warm whispers, and thou wilt hear
How their cold language tells thee, that thy skin
Is but a beauteous shrine, in which black sin
Is Idolized; thy eyes but Spheres where lust
Has its loose motion; and thy end is dust.
Great Atlas of the state, descend with me,
But hither, and this vault shall furnish thee
With more aviso's, then thy cos^ly spies,
And show how false are all those mysteries
Thy Sect receives, and though thy palace swell
With envied pride, it is here that thou must dwell.
It will instruct you, Courtier, that your Art
Of outward smoothness and a rugged heart
But cheates your self, and all those subtle ways
You tread to greatness, is a fatal maze
Where you your self shall loose, for though you breath
Upward to pride, your center is beneath.
And 'twill thy Rhetoric false flesh confound;
Which flatters my frail thoughts, no time can wound
This unarmed frame, Here is true eloquence
Will teach my soul to triumph over sense,
Which has its period in a grave, and there
Shows what are all our pompous surfets here.
Great Orator! dear Talbot! Still, to thee
May I an auditor attentive be*
And piously maintain the same commerce
We held in life! and if in my rude verse
^ to the world may thy sad precepts read;
I will on earth interpret for the dead.
Elegi^, 3.
LEt me contemplate thee (fair soul) and though
I cannot tracke the way, which thou did go
In thy celestial journey; and my heart
Expanssion wants, to think what now thou art
How bright and wide thy glories; yet I may
Remember thee, as thou were in thy clay.
Best object to my heart! what virtues be
Inherent even to the least thought of thee!
Death w^h toth' vigorous ^eate of* youth brings fe^^^
In its lean look; does like a Prince appear,
Now glorious to my eye, since it possessed
The wealthy empire of that happy chest
Which harbors thy rich dust; for how can he
Be thought a bank'rout that embraces thee?
Sad midnight whispers with a greedy ear
I catch from lonely graves, in hope to hear
N^wes from the dead, nor can pale visions frigh^
His ey^, who since thy death feels no delight
In man's acquaint^nce. Memory of thy fa^e
Does in me a sublimer soul create.
And now my sorrow follows thee, I tread
The milkie way, and see the snowie head
Of Atlas* far below, while all the high
S^olne buildings seem but atoms to my eye.
I Am heightened by my ruin; and while I
Weep or^ the vault where thy sad ashes lie,
My soul with thine does hold commerce above;
Where we discern the stratagems, which Love,
Hate, and ambition, use, to cozen man;
So frail that every blast of honor can
Swell him above himself, each adverse gust
Him and his glories shiver into dust.
How small seems greatness here! How not a span
His empire, who commands the Ocean.
Both that, which boasts so much it is mighty ore,
And the other, which with pearl, ^ath paved its shore
Nor can it greater seem, when this great All
For which men quarrel so, is but a ball
Cast down into the air to sport the stars.
And all our general ruins, mortal wars,
Depopulated states, caused by their sway;
And man's so reverend wisdom but their play.
From thee, dear Talbot, living I did learn
The Arts of life, and by thy light discern
The truth, which men dispute. But by thee dead
I Am taught, upon the worlds gay pride to tread:
And that way sooner master it, than he
To whom both the Indies tributary be.
Elegy, 4.
MY name, dear friend, even thy expiring breath
Did call upon: affirming that thy death
Would wound m^ poor sad heart Sad it must be
Indeed, lost to all thoughts of mi^th in thee.
My Lord, if I with license of your tears,
(Which your great brother's hearse as dyamonds wears
TO enrich deaths glory) may but speak my owne^
I Will pr^ve it, that no sorrow ere was known
Real as mine. All other mourners keep
In grief a method: without form I weep.
The son (rich in his fathers fate) has eyes
Wet just as long as are the obsequies.
The widow formerly a year does spend
In her so courtly blackes. But for a Friend
We weep an age, and more than the Anchorit, have
Our very thoughts confined within a Grave.
Chaste Love who had thy triumph in my flame
And thou Castara who had had a name,
But for this sorrow glorious: Now my verse
Is lost to you, and only on Talbots hearse
Sadly attends. And till times fatal hand
Ruins, what is left of Churches, there shall stand.
There to thy self, dear Talbot I Will repeat
Thy own brave story; tell thy self how great
Thou were in thy minds Empire, and how all
Who outlive thee, see but the Funeral
Of glory: and if yet some virtuous be,
They but weak apparitions are of thee.
So settled were thy thoughts, each action so
Discreetely ordered, that nor ebb nor flow
Was ere perceived in thee: each word mature
And every scene of life from sin so pure
That scarce in its whole history, we can
Find vice enough, to say thou went but man.
Horror to say thou were! Cursed that we must
Address our language to a little dust,
And seek for Talbot there. Injurious fate,
To lay my life's ambition desolate.
Yet thus much comfort have I, that I know,
Not how it can give such another blow.
Elegy, 5.
Chaste as the Nuns first vow, as fairly bright
As when by death her Soul shines in full light
Freed from the eclipse of Earth, each word that came
From thee (dear Talbot) did beget a flame
T'enkindle virtue: which so fair by thee
Became, man that blind mole her face did see.
But now to'our eye she is lost, and if she dwell
Yet on the earth; she is conffin'd in the cell
Of some cold Hermit; who so keeps her there,
As if of her the old man jealous were.
Nor ever shows her beauty, but to some
Carthusian, who even by his vow, is dumb!
So 'mid the ice of the far Northren sea,
A star about the Articke Circle, may
Then ours yield clearer light; yet that but shall
Serve at the froxen Pilots funeral.
Thou (brightest constellation) to this maine
Which all we sinners traffic on, did daigne
The bounty of thy fire, which with so clear
And constant beams did our frail vessels steer,
That safely we, what storm so ere bore sway,
Past ore the rugged Alps of the angry Sea.
But now we sail at random. Every rock
The folly does of our ambition mock
And splits our hopes: To every Sirens breath
We listen and even court the face of death,
If painted ore by pleasure: Every wave
Ift has delight w'embrace though it prove a grave.
So ruinous is the defect of thee,
To th'undone world in general. But to me
Who lived one life with thine, drew but one breath,
Possessed with the same mind and thoughts, 'twas death.
And now by fate: I but my self survive,
To keep his memory, and my griefs alive.
Where shall I then begin to weep? No grove*
Silent and dark, but is profaned by Love:
With his warm whispers, and faint idle fears,
His busy hopes, loud sighs, and caselesse tears
^ach ^are is so enchanted; that no breath
Is listened to, which mockes report of death.
I Will tu^ne my grief then inward and deplore
My ruin to my self, repeating ore
The story of his virtues; until I
Not write, but am my self his Elegy.
Elegy, 6.
Go stop the swift-wing'd moments in their flight
To their yet unknown coast, go hinder night
From its approach on day, and force day rise
From the fair East of some bright beauties eye^:
Else vaunt not the proud miracle of verse.
It has no power. For mine from his black hearse
Redeemes not Tal^ot, who could as the breath
Of winter, coffined lies; silent as death,
Stealing on the Anch'rit, who even wants an ear
To breath into his soft expiring prayer.
For had thy life been by thy virtues spun
Out to a length, thou had ou^-liv'd the Sun
And closed the worlds great eye: or were not all
Our wonders fiction, from thy funeral
Thou had received new life, and lived to be
The conqueror over death, inspired by me.
But all we Poets glory in, is vain
And empty triumph: Art cannot regaine
One poor hour lost, nor reskew a small fly
By a fools finger destinate to dye.
Live then in thy true life (great soul) for set
At liberty by death thou owe no debt
TO exacting Nature: Live, freed from the sport
Of time and fortune in yand' starry court
A glorious Potentate: while we below
But fashion ways to mitigate our woe.
We follow camps, and to our hopes propose
The insulting victor; not remembering those
Dismembered trunkes who gave him victory
By a loathed fa^e: We covetous Merchants be
And to our a^mes pretend treasure and sway,
Forgetful of the treasons of the Sea.
The shootings of a wounded conscience
We patiently sustain to serve our sense
With a short pleasure; So we empire gain
And rule the fate of business, the sad pain
Of action we contemn, and the affright
Which with pale visions still attends our night.
Our-joyes false apparitions, but our fears
Are certain prophecies. And till our ears
Reach that caelestiall music, which thine now
So cheerfully receive, we must allow
No comfort to our griefs: from which to be
Exempted, is in death to follow thee.
Elegy, 7.
THere is no peace in sin. Aeternall war
Does rage among vices. But all virtues are
Friends among themselves, and choicest accents be
Harsh Eccho's of their heavenly harmony.
While thou did live we did that union find
In the so fair republic of thy mind,
Where discord never swelled. And as we dare
Affirm those goodly structures, temples are
Where well-tuned quires strike zeal into the ear:
The music of thy soul made us say, there
God had his Altars; every breath a spice
And each religious act a sacrifice.
But death has that demolisht. All our eye
Of thee now sees does like a City lie
Razed by the cannon. Where is then that flame
That added warmth and beauty to thy frame?
Fled heavenward to repair, with its pure fire
The losses of some maimed Seraphick quire?
Or hovers it beneath, the world t'uphold
From general ruin, and expel that cold
Dull humor weakens it? If so it be;
My sorrow yet must praise fates charity.
But thy example (if kind heaven had daignd
Frailty that favor) had mankind regaind
To his first purity. For that the wit
Of vice, might not except against the Ancherit
As too to strickt; thou did uncloyster'd live:
Teaching the soul by what preservative,
She may from sins contagion live secure,
Though all the air she sucked in, were impure*
In this dark mist of error with a clear.
Unspotted light, thy virtue did appear.
TO obray'd corrupted man. How could the rage.
Of untamed lust have scorcht decrepit age;
Had it seen thy chaste youth? Who could the wealth
Of time have spent in riot, or his health
By surfeits forfeited; if he had seen
What temperance had in thy diet been?
What glorious fool had vaunted honors bought
By gold or practice, or by rapin brought
From his forefathers, had he understood
How Talbot valued not his own great blood!
Had Politiciana seen him scorning more
The unsafe pomp of greatness, then the poor
Thatcht roofes of shepherds, where the unruly wind
(A gentler storm than pride) uncheckt does find
Still free admittance: their pale labors had
Been to be good, not to be great and bad.
But he is lost in a blind vault, and we
Must not admire though sins now frequent be
And uncontrol'd: Since those fair tables where
The Law was writ by death now broken are,
By death extinguish it is that Star, whose light
Did shine so faithful: that each ship sailed right
Which steered by that. Nor marvel then if we,
(That failing) lost in this worlds tempest be.
But to What Orb so ere ^hou do retire,
Far from our ken: it is blessed, while by thy fire
Enlightened. And since thou must never here
Be seen again: may I ore-take thee there
Elegy, 8.
BOast not the reverend Vatican, nor all
The cunning Pomp of the Escuriall.
Though there both the Indies met in each small room
The are short in treasure of this precious tomb.
Here is the Epitome of wealth, this chest
Is Natures chief Exchequer, hence the East
When it is purified by the general fire
Shall see these now pale ashes sparkle higher
Then all the gems she vants: transcending far
In fragrant iustre the bright morning star.
It Is true, they now seem dark. But rather we
Have by a cataract lost sight, then he
Though dead his glory. So to us black night
Brings darkness, when the Sun retains his light.
Thou eclipsed dust! Expecting break of day
From the thick mists about thy Tomb, I Will pay
Like the just Lark, the tribute of my verse
I will invite thee, from thy envious hearse
To rise, and 'bout the World thy beams to spread,
That we may see, there is brightness in the dead,
My zeal deludes me not. What perfumes come
From the happy vault? In her sweet martyrdom
The nard breathes never so, nor so the rose
When the enamored Spring by kissing blows
Soft blushes on her cheek, nor the early East
Vying with Paradise, in the Phoenix nest.
These gentle perfumes usher in the day
Which from the night of his discolored clay
Breaks on the sudden: for a Soul so bright
Of force must to her earth contribute light.
But if w' are so far blind, we cannot see
The wonder of this truth; yet let us be
Not infidels: nor like dull Atheists give
Our selves so long to lust, till we believe
(TO allay the grief of sin) that we shall fall
To a loathed nothing in our Funeral.
The bad man's death is horror. But the just
Keeps something of his glory in his dust.
FINIS.
CASTARA: THE THIRD PART.

LONDON Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Will. Cook. 1640.

A Holy Man
IS only* Happy. For infelicity and sin were borne twins; Or rather like
some prodigy with two bodies, both draw and expire the same breath. Catholic
faith is the foundation on which he erects Religion; knowing it a ruinous
madness to build in the air of a private spirit, or on the sands of any new
schism. His impiety is not so b^ld to bring divinity down to the mistake of
reason, or to deny those mysteries his apprehension reaches not. His obedience
moves still by direction of the Magistrate: And should conscience inform him
that the command is unjust; he judges it nevertheless high treason by
rebellion to make good his t^^ets; o^ it were the basest cowardice, by
dissimulation of religion, to preserve temporal respects. He knows humane
policy but a crooked rule of action: and therefore by a distrust of his own
knowledge attaines it: Confounding with supernatural illumination, the
opinionated judgment of the wise. In prosperity he gratefully admires the
bounty of the Almighty giver, and uses, not abuses plenty: But in adversity
he remains unshaken, and like some eminent mountain has his head above the
clouds. For his happiness is not meteor-like exhaled from the vapors of this
world; but shines a fixed star, which when by misfortune it appears to fall,
only casts away the slimie matter. Poverty he neither fears nor covets, but
cheerfully entertaines; imagining it the fire which tries virtue: Nor how
tyrannically soever it usurp on him, does he pay to it a sigh or wrinckle: for
he who suffers want without reluctancie, may be poor not miserable. He sees
the covetous prosper by usury, yet waxes not lean with envy: and when the
posterity of the impious flourish, he questiones not the divine justice; for
temporal rewards distinguish not ever the merits of men: and who has been of
council with the Aeternall? Fame he weighes not, but esteems a smoke, yet
such as carries with it the sweetest odor, and rises usually from the
Sacrifice of our best actions. Pride he disdaines, when he finds it swelling
in himself; but easily forgiveth it in another: Nor can any man's error in
life, make him sin in censure, since seldom the folly we condemn is so
culpable as the severity of our judgment. He does not malice the
over-spreading growth of his aequ^lls: but pitties, not despises the fall of
any man: Esteeming yet no storm of fortune dangerous, but what is raised
through our own demerit. When he looks on others vices, he values not
himself virtuous by comparison, but examines his own defects, and finds
matter enough at home for reprehension: In conversation his carriage is neither
plausible to flattery, nor reserved to rigor: but so demeanes himself as
created for society. In solitude he remembers his better part is Angelical;
and therefore his mind practices the best discourse without assistance of
inferior Organs. Lust i^ the Basiliske he flies, a Serpent of the most
destroying venom: for it blasts al plants with the breath, and carries the
most murdering Artillery in the eye: He is ever merry but still modest. Not
dissolved into undecent laughter, or tickled with wit scurrilous or injurious.
He cunningly searches into the virtues of others, and liberally commends them:
but buries the vices of the imperfect in a charitable silence, whose manners he
reformes not by invectives but example: In prayer he is frequent not apparent:
yet as he labors not the opinion, so he foares not the scandal of being
thought good. He every day travailes his meditations up to heaven, and never
finds himself wearied with the journey: but when the necessities of nature
return him down to earth, he esteems it a place, he is condemned to.
Devotion is his Mistress en which he is passionately enamord: for that he has
found the most Sovereign antidote aganst sin, and the only balsome
powerful to cure those wounds he has received through frailety. To live he
knows a benefit, and the contempt of it ingratitude, and therefore loves, but
not doates on life. Death how deformed soever an aspect it wears, he is not
frighted with: since it not annihilates, but uncloudes the soul. He therefore
stands every moment prepared to dye^ and though he freely yields up himself,
when age or sickness sommon him; yet he with more alacrity puts off his
earth, when the profession of faith crowns him a martyr.

Domine labia mea aperies DAVID.
NOe monument of me remain, My mem orie rust
In the same marble with my dust:
Ere I the spreadingst Laurel gain,
By writing wanton or profane.
Ye glorious wonders of the skies, Shine still bright stars,
The Almighties mystic Characters!
I Will not your beauteous lights surprise
TO illuminate a woman's eyes*
Nor to perfume her veins, will I In each one set
The purple of the violet.
The untoucht flower may grow and dye
Safe from my fancie^ injury.
Open my lips, great God! and then I Will soar above
The humble flight of carnal love.
Upward to thee I Will force my pen,
And trace no path of vulgar men.
For what can our unbounded souls Worthy to be
Their object find, excepting thee?
Where can I fix? since time controuses
Our pride, whose motion all things roules.
Should I my self ingratiate T^ a Princes smile;
How soon may death my hopes beguile?
And should I farm the proudest state,
I Am Tennant to uncertain fate.
If I court gold; will it not rust?
And if my love
Toward a female beauty move;
How will that surfeit of our lust
Distaste us, when resolved to dust?
But thou Aeternall banquet! where For ever we
May feed without satietie!
Who harmony art to the ear,
Who art, while all things else appear!
While up to thee I shoot my flame Thou do dispense
A holy death, that murders sense,
And makes me scorn all pompes, that aim
At other triumphs than thy name.
It crowns me with a victory So heavenly, all
That Is earth from me away does fall.
And I, from my corruption free,
Grow in my vows even part of thee*
Versa est in luctum cythara mea. JOB.
LOve! I no orgies sing
Whereby thy mercies to invoke:
Nor from the East rich perfumes bring
To cloud thy Altars with the precious smoke.
Nor while I did frequent
Those fanes by lovers raised to thee:
Did I loose heathenish rites invent,
To force a blush from injured Chastity.
Religious was the charm
I used affection to entice:
And thought none burnt more bright or warm,
Ye^ chaste as winter was the Sacrifice.
But now I thee bequeath
To the soft silken youths at Court:
Who may their witty passions breath,
To raise their Mistress smile, or make her sport.
They Will smooth thee into rhyme,
Such as shall catch the wanton ear:
And win opinion with the time,
To make them a high sail of honor bear.
And may a powerful smile
Cherish their flatteries of wit!
While I my life of fame beg^ile
And under my own vine uncourted sit.
For I have scene the Pine
Famed for its travels ore the Sea:
Broken with storms and age decline,
And in some creek unpittied rot away.
I have seen Caedars fall,
And in their room a Mushrome grow:
I have seen Comets, threatening all,
Vanish themselves: I have seen Princes so.
Vain trivial dust! weak man!
Where is that virtue of thy breath,
That others save or ruin can,
When thou thy self art called to account by death?
When I consider thee
The scorn of Time, and sport of fate:
How can I turn to jollitie
My ill-strung Harp, and court the delicate?
How can I but disdain
The empty fallacies of mirth;
And in my midnight thoughts retain,
How high so ere I spread, my root's in earth?
Fond youth! too long I played
The wanton with a false delight.
Which when I touched, I found a shade
That only wrought on the error of my ^ight.
Then since pride does betray
The soul to flattered ignorance:
I from the World will steal away
And by humility my thoughts advance.
Perdam Sapientiam Sapientum
To the Right Honorable the Lord Windsor.
My Lord
FOrgive my envy to the World; while I
Commend those sober thoughts persuade you fly
The glorious troubles of the Court. For though
The vale lies open to each overflow,
And in the humble sh^de we gather ill
And aguish airs: yet lightnings oftener kill
Oth' naked heights of mountains, whereon we
May have more prospect, not security.
For when with loss of breath, we have overcome
Some steep ascent of power, and forced a room
On the so envied hill; how do our hearts
Pant with the labor, and how many arts
More subtle must we practice, to defend
Our pride from sliding, then we did to ascend?
How does success delude the mysteries
And all the involved designements of the wise?
How does that Power, our Pollitickes call chance,
Rack them till they confess the ignorance
Of humane wit? Which, when it is fortified
So strong with reason that it does deride
All adverse force oth' sudden finds its head
In^angled in a spiders slender thread.
Celestial Providence! How thou do mock
The boast of earthly wisdom? On some rock
When man has a structure, with such art,
It does disdain to tremble at the dart
Of thunder, or to shrink opposed by all
The angry winds, it of it self does fall,
Even in a calm so gentle that no air
Breaths loud enough to stir a Virgins hai^e!
But misery of judgment! Though past time
Instruct us by the ill fortune of their crimes,
And show us how we may secure our state
From pitied ruin, by another fate;
Yet we contemning all such sad advice,
Pursue to build thougth on a precipice.
But you (my Lord) prevented by foresight
To engage your self to such an unsafe height,
And in your self both great and rich enough
Resused t'expose your vessel to the rough
Uncertain sea of business: whence even they
Who make the best return, are forced to say:
The wealth we by our worldly traffic gain,
Weighes light if balanced with the fear or pain.
Paucitatem dierum meorum nuncia mihi. DAVID.
TEll me O great All knowing God *
What period
Have thou unto my days assigned?
Like some old leafelesse tree, shall I
Wither away: or violently
Fall by the axe, by lightning, or the Wind?
Here, where I first drew vital breath
Shall I meet death?
And find in the same vault a room
Where my ^ore-fathers ashes s^eepe?
Or shall I dye, where none shall weep
My timelesse fate, and my cold earth intombe?
Shall I'gainst the swift Parthians fight
And in their flight
Receive my death? Or shall I see
That envied peace, in which we are,
Triumphant yet, disturbed by war;
And perish by the invading enemy?
Astrologers, who calculate
Uncertain fate
Affirm my scheme does not presage
Any abridgement of my days:
And the Physician gravely says,
I may enjoy a reverent length of age.
But they are jugglers, and by slight
Of art the sight
Of faith delude: and in their school
They only practice how to make
A mystery of each mistake,
And teach strange words credulity to fool.
For thou who first did motion give,
Whereby things live
And Time has being! to conceal
Future events did^t think it fit
To check the ambition of our wit,
And keep in awe the curious search of zeal.
Therefore so I prepared still be,
My God for thee:
Oth' sudden on my spirits may
Some killing Apoplexy se^ze,
Or let me by a dull disease
Or weakened by a feeble age decay.
And so I in thy favor dye,
No memory
For me a well-wrought tomb prepare,
For if my soul be among the blessed
Though my poor ashes want a ch^st,
I shall forgive the trespass of my heir.
Non nobis Domine DAVID.
NO marble statue, nor high
Aspiring Piramid be raised
To lose its head within the sky!
What claim have I to memory?
God be thou only praised!
Thou in a moment can defeat
The mighty conquests of the proud,
And blast the laurels of the great.
Thou can make brightest glory set
Oth' sudden in a cloud.
How can the feeble works of Art
Hold our against the assault of storms?
Or how can brass to him impart
Sense of surviving fame, whose heart
Is now resolved to worms?
Blind folly of triumphing pride!
Aeternitie why build^t thou here?
Do thou not see the highest tide
Its humbled stream in the Ocean hide,
And n^^^^he same appear?
That tide which did its banckes ore-flow,
As sent abroad by the angry sea
To level vastest buildings low,
And all our Trophes overthrow;
Ebbes like a thief away.
And thou who to preserve thy name
Leave statues in some conquered land!
How will posterity scorn fame,
When the Idol shall receive a maime,
And loose a foot or hand?
How will thou hate thy wars, when he
Who only for his Fire did raise
The counterfeit in stone; with thee
Shall stand Competitor, and be
Perhapes thought worthier praise?
No Laurel wreath about my brow!
To thee, my God, all praise, whose law
The conquered does and conqueror bow!
For both dissolve to air, if thou
Thy influence but withdraw.
Solum mihi superest s^pulchruu^. JOB.
WElcome thou safe retreat!
Where the injured man may fortify
Against the invasions of the great:
Where the lean slave, who the Oar does plye,
Soft as his Admiral may lie.
Great Statist! it is your doom
Though your defignes swell high, and wide:
To be contracted in a tomb!
And all your happy cares provide
But for your heir authorized pride.
Nor shall your shade delight
In The pomp of your proud obsequies.
And should the present flattery write:
A glorious Epitaph, the wise
Will say, The Poets w^^ here lies.
How reconciled to fate
Will grow the aged Villager,
When he shall see your funeral state?
Since death will him as warm inter
As you in your gay sepulcher.
The great decree of God
Makes every path of mortals lead
To this dark common period.
For what by ways so ere we tread,
We end our journey among the dead.
Even I, while humble zeal
Makes fancy a sad truth indite,
Insensible a way do steal:
And when I Am lost in deaths cold night,
Who will remember, now I write?
Et fugit velut umbra. JOB.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Kintyre.
My Lord
THat shadow your fair body made
So full of sport it still the mimick playde
Even as you moved and looked but yesterday
So huge in stature; Night has stolen away.
And this is the emblem of our life: To please
And flatter which, we sail ore broken seas
Unfaithful in their rocks and tides; we dare
All the sick humors of a foreign air.
And mine so deep in earth, as we would try
To unlocke hell, should gold there hoarded lie.
But when we have built up an aedefice
T'outwrastle Time, we have but built on ice:
For firm lowever all our structures be,
Polisht with smoothest Indian Ivory,
Raised high on marble, our unthankful heir
Will scarce retain in memory, that we were*
Tracke through the air the footesteps of the wind,
And search the print of ships sailed by; then find
Where all the glories of those Monarchs be
Who bore such sway in the worlds infancy.
Time has devoured them all: and scarce can fame
Give an account, that ere they had a name.
How can he then who does the world control
And strikes a terror now in either Pole,
The insulting Turk secure himself that he
Shall not be lost to dull Posterity?
And though the Superstition of those Times
Which de^fied Kings to warrant their own crimes
Translated Caesar to a star; yet they,
Who every Region of the sky Survay;
In their Celestial travail, that bright coast
Could nere discover which contains his ghost.
And after death to make that awe survive
Which subjects owe their Princes yet alive,
Though they build palaces of bralle and jet
And keep them living in a counterfeit;
The curious looker on soon passes by
And finds the tomb a sickness to his eye.
Neither when once the soul is gone does all
The solemn triumph of the funeral
Add to her glory or her pain release:
Then all the pride of war, and wealth of peace
For which we toild, from us abstracted be
And only serve to swell the history.
These are sad thoughts (my Lord) and such as fright
The easy soul made tender with delight,
Who thinks that he has forfetted that hour
Which adds not to his pleasure or his power.
But by the friendship which your Lordship daignes
Your Servant, I have found your judgment reigns
Above all passion in you: and that sense
Could never yet demolish that strong fence
Which Virtue guards you with: By which you are
Triumphant in the best, the inward war.
Nox nocti indicat Scientiam DAVID.
WHen I survay the bright
Celestial sphere:
So rich with jewels ^ung* that night
Does like an Aethiop bride appear.
My soul her wings does spread
And heavenward flies,
The Almighty's Mysteries to read
In the large volumes of the skies.
For the bright firmament
Shootes forth no flame
So silent, but is eloquent
In speaking the Creators name.
No unregarded star
Contracts its light
Into so small a Charactar,
Removed far from our humane sight:
But if we steadfast look,
We shall discern
In it as in some holy book,
How man may heavenly knowledge learn.
It tells the Conqueror,
That farre-stretcht power
Which his proud dangers traffic for,
Is but the triumph of an hour.
That from the farthest North;
Some Nation may
Yet undiscovered issue forth,
And ore his new got conquest sway.
Some Nation yet shut in
With hills of ice
May be let out to scourge his sin
'Till they shall equal him in vice.
And then they likewise shall
Their ruin have,
For as your selves your Empires fall,
And every Kingdom has a grave.
Thus those Celestial fires,
Though seeming mute
The fallacy of our desires
And all the pride of life confute.
For they have watched since first
The World had birth:
And found sin in it self accursed,
And nothing permanent on earth.
Et alta a long cognoscit. DAVID.
TO the cold humble hermitage
(Not tenanted but by discolored age,
Or youth enfeebled by long prayer
And tame with fasts) the Almighty does repair*
But from the lofty gilded roof
Stained with some Pagan fiction, keeps a loofe.
Nor the gay Landlord daignes to know
Whose buildings are like Monsters but for show.
Ambition! whither wilt thee climb,
Knowing thy art, the mooker^ of time?
Which by examples tells the high
Rich structures, they must as their owners dye:
And while they stand, their tennants are
Detraction, flattery, wantonness, and care,
Pride, envy, arrogance, and doubt,
Surfeit, and ease still tortured by the gout.
O rather may I patient dwell
In the injuries of an ill-cover'd cell!
Against whose too weak defense the hail,
The angry winds, and frequent showers prevail.
Where the swift measures of the day,
Shall be distinguished only as I pray:
And some stars solitary light
Be the sole taper to the tedious night*
The neighbo'ring fountain (not accursed
Like wine with madness) shall allay my thirst:
And the wild fruits of Nature give
Diet enough, to let me feel I feel, I live*
You wantons! who improverish Seas,
And the air dispeople, your proud taste to please!
A greedy tyrant you obey*
Who varies still its tribu^e with the day.
What interest does all the vain
Cunning of surfeit to your senses gain?
Since it obscure the Spirit must
And bow the flesh to sleep disease or lust.
While who forgetting rest and fare;
Watches the fall and rising of each star,
Ponders how bright the orbs do move,
And thence how much more bright the heavens abov^
Where on the heads of Cherubins
The Almighty sits dis^aining our bold sins:
Who while on the earth we gr^veling lie
Dare in our pride of building tempt the sky.
Universum statum ejus versasti in infirmitate ejus. DAVID.
MY Soul! When thou and I
Shall on our frighted deathbed lie;
Each moment watching when pale death
Shall snatch away our latest breath,
And 'tweene two long joined Lovers force
An endless sad divorce:
How will thou then? that art
My rational and nobler part,
Distort thy thoughts? How will thou try
To draw from weak Philosophy
Some strength: and flatter thy poor state,
'Cause it is the common fate?
How will thy spirits pant
And tremble when they feel the want
Of the usual organs; and that all
The vital powers begin to fall?
When it is decreed, that thou must go,
Yet whether; who can know?
How fond and idle then
Will seem the mysteries of men?
How like some dull ill-acted part
The subtlest of proud humane art?
How shallow even the deepest sea,
When thus we ebb away?
But how shall I (that is
My fainting earth) look pale at this?
Disjointed on the rack of pain.
How shall I murmur, how complain;
And craving all the aid of skill,
Find none, but what must kill?
Which way so ere my grief
Does throw my fight to court relief,
I shall but meet despair; for all
Will prophecy my funeral:
The very silence of the room
Will represent a tomb.
And while my Childrens tears,
My Wives vain hopes, but certain fears,
And counsels of Divines adv^nce
Death in each doleful circumstance:
I shall even a sad mourner be
At my own obsequie.
For by examples I
Must know that others sorrows dye
Soon as our selves, and none survive
To keep our memories alive.
Even our falls tombs, as loath to say
We once had life, decay.
Laudate Dominum de caelis DAVID.
YOu Spirits! who have thrown away
That enveous weight of clay
Which your caelestiall flight denied:
Who by your glorious troops supply
The winged Hierarchy,
So broken in the Angels pride!
O you! whom your Creators sight
Inebriates with delight!
Sing forth the triumphs of his name
All you enamord souls! agree
In a loud symphonie:
To give expressions to your flame!
To him, his own great works relate,
Who daign'd to elevate
You 'bove the frailty of your birth:
Where you stand safe from that rude war,
With which we troubled are
By the rebellion of our earth
While a corrupted air beneath
Here in this World we breath
Each hour some passion us assailes:
Now lust casts wildfire in the blood,
Or that it may seem good,
It self in wit or beauty vailes.
Then envy circles us with hate,
And lays a siege so straight,
No heavenly succor enters in:
But if Revenge admittance find,
For ever has the mind
Made forseit of it self to sin.
Assaul^ed thus, how dare we raise
Our minds to think his praise,
Who is Aeternall and immens?
How dare we force our feeble wit
To speak him infinite,
So far above the search of sense? *
O you! who are immaculate
His name may celebrate
In your souls bright expansion.
You whom your virtues did unite
To his perpetual light,
That even with him you now shine one.
W^ile we who to earth contract our hearts,
And only study Arts
To shorten the sad length of Time:
In place of joys bring humble fears:
For hymns, repentant tears
And a new sigh for every crime.
Qui quasi flos egreditur.
To the Right Honorable, the Lady Cat. T.
Fair Madam! You
May see what is man in yo^d' bright rose*
Though it the wealth of Nature owes,
It is oppressed, and bends with dew.
Which shows, though fate
May promise still to warm our lips,
And keep our eyes from an ecclips;
It will our pride with tears abate.
P^ore ^illy flower!
Though in thy beauty thou presume,
And breath which does the spring presume*
Thou may'^t be cropped this very hour.
And though it may
Then thy good fortune be, to rest
Oth' pillow of some Ladies breast;
Thou Wilt wither, and be thrown away.
For it is thy doom
However, that there shall appear
No memory that thou grew'st here,
Ere the tempestuous winter come.
But flesh is lo^th
By meditation to fore see
How loathed a nothing it must be:
Proud in the triumphs of its growth.
And tamely can
Behold this mighty world decay
And wear by the age of time away:
Yet not discourse the fall of man.
But Madam these
Are thoughts to cure sick humane pride*
And medicines are in vain applied,
To bodies far 'bove all disease.
For you so live
As the Angels in one perfect state;
Safe from the ruins of our fate,
By virtues great preservative.
And though we see
Beauty enough to warm each heart;
Yet you by a chaste Chimicke Art,
Calcine frail love to piety.
Quid gloriaris in malicia? DAVID.
SWell no more proud man, so high*
For enthroned where ere you sit
Raised by fortune, sin and wit:
In a vault thou dust must lie.
He who is lifted up by vice
Has a neighb' ring precipice*
Dazeling his distorted eye.
Shallow is that unsafe sea
Over which you spread your sail:
And the Bark you trust to, frail
As the Winds it must obey
Mischief, while it prospers, brings*
Favor from the smile of Kings
Vselesse soon is thrown away,
Profit, though sin it extort,
Princes even accounted good,
Courting greatness nere withstood,
Since it Empire does support.
But when death makes them repent
They condemn the instrument,
And are thought Religious for it.
Pitched down from that height you bear,
How distracted will you lie;
When your flattering Clients fly
As your fate infectious were?
When of all the obsequious throng
That moved by your eye and tongue
N^ne shall in the storm appear?
When that abject insolence
(Which submits to the more great,
And disdaines the weaker state,
As misfortune were offense)
Shall at Court be judged a crime
Though in practice, and the Time
Purchase wit at your expense.
Each small tempest shakes the proud;
Whose large branches vainly sprout
'Bove the measure of the root.
But let storms speak nere so loud,
And the astonished day benight;
Yet the just shines in a light
Fair as noone without a cloud.
Deus Deus Meus. DAVID.
WHere is that fool Philosophy,
That bed^am Reason, and that beast dull sense;
Great God! when I consider thee,
Omnipotent, Aeternall, and imens?
Vnmov'd thou did behold the pride
Of the Angels, when they to defection fell?
And without passion did provide
To punish treason, rackes and death in hell.
Thy Word created this great All,
In The lower part whereof we wage such wars:
The upper bright and sphaericall
By purer bodies tenanted, the stars.
And though six days it thee did please
To build this frame, the seventh for rest to assign*
Yet was it not thy pain or ease,
But to teach man the quantities of Time.
This world so mighty and so fair,
So'bove the reach of all dimension:
If to thee God we should compare,
Is not the slenderst at^me to the Sun.
What then am I poor nothing man!
That elevate my voice and speak of thee?
Since no imagination can
Distinguish part of thy immensitie?
What am I who dare call thee God!
And raise my fancy to discourse thy power?
To whom dust is the period,
Who am not sure to farm this very hour?
For how know I the latest sand
In my frail glass of life, does not now f^ll?
And while I thus astonished stand
I but prepare for my own funeral?
Death does with man no order keep:
It reckons not by the expense of years.
But makes the Queen and beggar weep,
And nere distinguishes between their tears.
He who the victory does gain
Falls as he him pursues, who from him flies,
And is by too good fortune slain.
The Lover in his amorous courtship dies.
The statesman suddenly expires
While he for others ruin does prepare:
And the gay Lady while sh' admires
Her pride, and curles in wanton nets her hair.
No state of man is fortified
Against the assault of the universal doom:
But who the Almighty fear, deride
Pale death, and meet with triumph in the tomb.
Quoniam ego in flagella paratus sum. DAVID.
FIX me on some bleake precipice,
Where I ten thousand years may stand:
Made now a statue of ice,
Then by the summer scorcht and tan'd*
Place me alone in some frail boa^e
'Mid the horrors of an angry Sea:
Where I while time shall move, may floate
Despairing either land or day!
Or under earth my youth confine
To the night and silence of a cell:
Where Scorpions may my limbs entwine.
O God! So thou forgive me hell.
Aeternitie! when I think thee,
(Which never any end must have,
Nor knew'st beginning) and foresee
Hell is designed for sin a grave.
My frighted flesh trembles to dust,
My blood ebbes fearfully away:
Both guilty that they did to lust
And vanity, my youth be^ray.
My eyes, which from each beauteous sight
Drew Spider-like black venom in:
Close like the marigold at night
Oppressed with dew to bath my sin.
My ears shut up that easy door
Which did proud fallacies admit:
And vow to hear no follies more;
De^fe to the charms of sin and wit.
My hands (which when they touched some f^ire*
Imagined such an excellence,
As the Ermines skin ungentle were)
Contract themselves, and loose all sense.
But you bold sinners! still pursue
Your valiant wickedness, and brave
The Almighty Justice: he will subdue
And make you cowards in the grave.
Then when he as your judge appears,
In vain you will tremble and lament.
And hope to soften him with tears,
To no advantage penitent.
Then will you scorn those treasures, which
So fiercely now you doat upon:
Then curse those pleasures did bewitch
You to this sad illusion.
The neighboring mountains which you shall
Woo to oppress you with their weight:
Disdainefull will deny to fall*
By a sad death to ease your fate.
In vain some midnight storm at sea
To swallow you, you will desire:
In vain upon the wheel you will pray
Broken with torments to expire.
Death, at the fight of which you start,
In a mad fury then you will Court:
Yet hate the expressions of your heart,
Which only shall be sighed for sport.
No sorrow then shall enter in
With pity the great judges ears.
This moment's ours. Once dead, his sin
Man cannot expia^e with tears.
Militia est vita hominis.
To Sir Hen Per.
Sir
WEre it your appetite of glory, (which
In noblest times, did bravest souls bewitch
To fall in love with danger,) that now draws
You to the fate of war; it claims applause:
And every worthy hand would pluck a bough
From the best spreading bay, to shade your brow.
Since you unforced part from your Ladies bed
Warm with the purest love, to lay your head
Perhaps on some rude turfe, and sadly feel
The nights cold dampes wrapped in a shee^e of steel.
You leave your well grown woods; and medows which
Our Severne does with fruitful streams enrich.
Your woods where we see such large herds of Dear
Your meades whereon such goodly flocks appear.
You leave your Castle, safe both for defense
And sweetly wanton with magnificence
With all the cost and cunning beautified
That adds to state, where nothing wants but pride.
These charms might have bin powerful to have staid
Great minds resolved for action, and betrayed
You to a glorious ease: since to the war
Men by desire of prey invited are,
Whom either sin or want makes desperate
Or else disdain of their own narrow fate,
But you nor hope of fame or a release
Of the most sober government in peace,
Did to the hazar'd of the army bring:
Only a pure devotion to the King
In whose just cause whoever fights, must be
Triumphant: since even death is victory.
And what is life, that we to wither it
To a weak wrinckled age, should torture wit
To find out Natures secrets; what does length
Of time deserve, if we want heat and strength?
When a brave quarrel does to arm^s proyoke
Why should we fear to venture this thin smoke
This empty shadow, life? t^is which the wise
As the fools Idol, soberly despise?
Why should we not throw willingly away
A game we cannot save, now that we may
Gain honor by the gift? since happily when
We only shall be statue of men
And our own monuments, Peace will deny
Our wretched age so brave a 'cause to dye.
But these are t^oughts! And action it is does give
A soul to courage, and make virtue live:
Which does not dwell upon the valiant tongue
Of bold Philosophy, but in the strong
Undaunted spirit, which encounters those
Sad dangers, we to fancy scarce propose
Yet it is the true and highest fortitude
To keep our inward enemies subdued:
Not to permit our passions over sway
Our actions, nor our wanton flesh betray
The souls chaste Empire: for however we
To the outward show may gain a victory
And proudly triumph: if to conquour sin
We combat not, we are at war within.
Vias tuas Domine demonstr a mihi.
WHere have I wandered? In what way Horrid as night
Increast by storms did I delight?
Though my sad soul did often say
It Was death and madness so to stray.
On tha^ false ground I joy'd to tread Which seemed most fair,
Though every path had a new snare,
And every turning still did lead,
To the dark Region of the dead.
But with the surfeit of delight I am so tired
That now I loath what I admired,
And my distasted appetite
So 'bhors the meat, it hates the sight.
For should we naked sin discry Not beautified
By the aid of wantonness and pride
Like some misshapen birth 'twould lie
A torment to the affrighted eye.
But clothed in beauty and respect Even ore the wise,
How powerful does it tyrannize!
Whose monstrous form should they detract
They famine sooner would affect.
And since those shadows which oppress My sight begin
To clear, and show the shape of sin,
A Scorpion sooner be my guest,
And warm his venom in my breast.
May I before I grow so vile By sin again,
Be thrown off as a scorn to men!
May the angry world decree, to excile
Me to some yet unpeopled Isle.
Where while I straggle, and in vain Labor to find
Some creature that shall have a mind,
What justice have I to complain
If I thy inward grace retain?
My God if thou shall not exclude Thy comfort thence:
What place can seem to troubled sense
So melancholy dark and rude,
To be esteemed a solitude.
Cast me upon some naked shore Where I may tracke
Only the print of some sad wrack;
If thou be there, though the seas roar,
I shall no gentler calm implore.
Should the Cymmerians, whom no ray Does ere enlight
But gain thy grace, the have lost their night:
Not sinners at high noone, but they
Among their blind clouds have found the day.
Et Exaltavit Humiles.
HOw cheerfully the unpartiall Sun
Gilds with his beams
The narrow streams
Oth' Brook which silently does run
Without a name?
And yet disdaines to lend his flame
To the wide channel of the Thames?
The largest mountains barren lie
And lightning fear,
Though they appear
To bid defiance to the sky;
Which in one hour
We Have seen the opening earth devour
When in their height they proudest were.
But the humble man heaves up his head
Like some rich vale
Whose fruits nere fail
With flowers, with corn, and vines ore-spread.
Nor does complain
Oreflowed by an ill seasoned rain
Or battered by a storm of hail.
Like a tall Bark with treasure fraught
He the seas clear
Does quiet steer:
But when they are to a tempest wrought;
More gallantly
He spreads his sail, and does more high
By swelling of the waves, appear.
For the Almighty joys to force
The glorious tide
Of humane pride
To the lowest ebb; that ore his course
(Which rudely bore
Down what opposed it heretofore)
His feeblest enemy may stride.
But from his ill-thatcht roof he brings
The Cottager
And does prefer
Him to the adored state of Kings:
He bids that hand
Which labor has made rough and ^and
The all commanding Scepter bear.
Let then the mighty cease to boast
Their boundless sway:
Since in their Sea*
Few sail, but by some storm are lost.
Let them themselves
Beware for they are their own shelves
Man still himself has cast away.
Dominus Dominantium.
SVpreame Divinity! Who yet
Could ever find
By the bold scrutinie of wit,
The treasury where thou lock'st up the wind?
What Majesty of Princes can
A tempest awe;
When the distracted Ocean
Swells to Sedition, and obeyes no Law?
How wretched does the Tyrant stand
Without a boast?
When his rich flee^e even touching land
He by some storm in his own Port sees lost?
Vain pomp of life! what narrow bound
Ambition
Is circled with? How false a ground
Has humane pride to build its triumphs on?
And Nature how do thou delude
Our search to know?
When the same winds which here intrude
On us with frosts and only winter blow:
Breath temprate on the adjoining earth;
And gently bring
To the glad field a fruitful birth
With all the treasures of a wanton Spring.
How diversely death does assail;
How sporting kill?
While one is scorcht up in the vale
The other is congeald oth' neighboring hill.
While he with heates does dying glow
Above he sees
The other hedged in with his snow
And envies him his ice although he freeze.
Proud folly of pretending Art,
Be ever dumb.
And humble thy aspiring heart,
When thou find glorious Reason overcome.
And you A strologers, whose eye
Survayes the stars!
And off^r thence to prophecy
Success in peace, and the event of wars.
Throw down your eyes upon that dust
You proudly tread!
And know to that resolve you must!
That is the scheme where all their fate may read.
Cogitabo pro peccato meo.
IN what dark silent grove
Profaned by no unholy love.
Where witty melancholy nere
Did carve the trees or wound the air,
Shall I religious leisure win
To weep away my sin?
How fondly have I spent
My youths unvalued treasure, lent
To traffic for Celestial joys?
My unripe years pursuing toys;
Judging things best that were most gay*
Fled unobserved away.
Grown elder I admired
Our Poets as from heaven inspired
What Obeliskes decreed I fit
For spencers Art, and Sydnyes wit?
But waxing sober soon I found*
Fame but an Idle sound.
Then I my blood obeyed
And each bright face an Idol made:
Verse in an humble Sacrifice,
I offered to my Mistress eyes.
But I no sooner grace did win
But met the devil within.
But grown more polliticke
I took account of each state trick:
Observed each motion, judged him wise,
Who had a conscience fit to rise.
Whom soon I found but form and rule
And the more serious fool.
But now my soul prepare
To ponder what and where we are
How frail is life, how vain a breath*
Opinion, how uncertain death:
How only a poor stone shall bear
Witness that once we were.
How a shrill. Trumpet shall
Us to the bar as traitors call.
Then shall we see too late that pride
Has hope with flattery belied
And that the mighty in command
Pale Cowards there must stand.
Recogitabo tibi omnes annos meos. ISAY.
TIme! where did thou those years inter
Which I have seen decease?
My souls at war and truth bids her*
Find out their hidden Sepulcher,
To give her troubles peace.
Pregnant with flowers does not the Spring
Like a late bride appear?
Whose fether'd Music only bring
Caresses, and no Requiem sing
On the departed year?
The Earth, like some rich wanton heir,
Whose Parents coffined lie,
Forgets it once looked pale and bare
And does for vanities prepare,
As the Spring nere should dye.
The present hour, flattered by all
Reflects not on the last;
But I, like a sad factor shall
TO account my life each moment call,
And only weep the past.
My memory trackes each several way
Since Reason did begin
Over my actions her first sway:
And teaches me that each new day
Did only vary sin.
Poor banckrout Conscience! where are those
Rich hours but farmed to thee?
How careless^ly I some did lose,
And other to my lust dispose
As no rent day should be?
I have infected with impure
Disorders my past years.
But I Will to penitence inure
Those that succeed. There is no cure
Nor Antidote but tears.
Cupio dissolvi. Paul.
THe soul which does with God unite,
Those gayities how does she slight
Which ore opinion sway?
Like sacred Virgin wax, which shines
On Altars or on Martyrs shrines
How does she burn away?
How violent are her throws till she
From envious earth delivered be,
Which does her flight restrain?
How does she doat on whips and rackes,
On fires and the so dreaded Axe,
And every murdering pain?
How soon she leaves the pride of wealth,
The flatteries of youth and health
And fames more precious breath.
And every gaudy circumstance
That does the pomp of life advance
At the approach of death?
The cunning of Astrologers
Observes each motion of the stars
Placing all knowledge there:
And Lovers in their Mistress eyes
Contract those wonders of the ^kies.
And seek no higher sphere.
The wandering Pilot sweates to find
The causes that produce the wind
Still gazing on the Pole.
The Politician scorns all Art
But what does pride and power impart.
And swells the ambitious soul.
But he whom heavenly fire does warm,
And against these powerful follies arm,
Does soberly disdain
All these fond humane mysteries
As the deceitful and unwise
Distempers of our brain.
He as a burden bears his clay,
Yet vainly throws it not away
On every idle cause:
But with the same untroubled eye
Can or resolve to live or dye,
Regardlesse of the applause.
My God! If it is thy great decree
That this must the last moment be
Wherein I breath this air;
My heart obeyes joy'd to retreat
From the false favors of the great
And treachery of the fair.
When thou shall please this soulet' enthrowne,
Above impure corruption;
What should I grieve or fear.
To think this breathless body must
Become a loathsome heap of dust
And nere again appear.
For in the fire when Ore is tried;
And by that torment purified:
Do we deplore the loss?
And when thou shall my soul refine,
That it thereby may purer shine
Shall I grieve for the dross?
FINIS.

