A doleful Discourse and ruthful Report of the great Spoil and lamentable
loss, by fire, in the Town of East Dearham, in the County of NORFOLK: Upon
Tuesday the.18. of Iulie, this present year.1581.

HOSEA. 5. Verse. 14.15. I will be unto IPHRAYM as a LION, and as a Lions whelp
unto the house of IVDA: I, even I, will spoil and go away, I will take away and
none shall rescue it: I will go and return to my place til they acknowledge
their fault and seek me. 2. CRO. 36. Verse. 16. They mocked the Messengers of
God, and despised his word: and misvsed his Prophets, until the wrath of the
Lord aroase against his people, and till there was no remedy. AT LONDON.

Printed by Richard Bradocke, for Richard Hollens: And are to be sold at his
Shop oueragainst the Sign of the Bell within Algate. 1581.

TO MY DEAR FRIEND AND CHRIstian Brother, Richard Atlee, Inhabitant of the
desolat Town of Eastdearham, and to his virtuous wife, Alice Atlee: ARTHVR
GVRNEY wissheth prosperity, and all good things, in CHRIST IESV.
About a fortnight since, it was my hap to understand of a Ballet (as I take
it) then newly come from the Press, containing a brief and doleful Discourse
of the late burning of East DERHAM. And (as for mine own part) I both was and
am a witness of the wonderful events thereof: and therwithall (what for my
continual travel of body and mind, the ruins of my friends and allies and
mine own small losses) a fellow feeler of the heavy burden imposed upon the
towns estate: even so, with so much the more good will I enterteyned the
news, expecting some better sequel, and rested not, til mine eyes were
testimonies of the truth. But when I perused the same, and approved the
penning as sufficient in that or such like cases, I was (nevertheless) well
advised of sundry untruths, which the Author (no doubt) not so much upon
pretenced deprauation, as for want of necessary instruction had inserted. And
allbeit, no important thing has therein escaped, which (for mine own part) I
would not tolerate, of very good will in that respect: yet sith her Majesty,
her honorable counsel, many noble, worshipful, and common personages, be
otherwise infourmed of the matter: as also, the duty of a christian,
requiring by all means to intercept the course of an untruth: and last of
all, in diversities of wandering reports to establish some certainty, I have
undertaken in the discourse of the matter, to set down such an assurance of
his particular errors, and instead thereof, interposed such truth, as the
diligent observation of mine own experience and the trial of many sound
judgments can confirm and testify.

One poinct (therefore) wherein he failed, is touching the number of Tenementes,
Messuages, or mansion houses subverted and spoiled.

The.2. concerning the dissolution of our houses necessary for diverse
domestical uses.

The.3. his insinuation of a total loss and detriment sustained.

In these three (specially) has he left the matter destitute of true report:
for, as I have expressed in the sequel of my treatise: the number of
tenementes is. LII. which he calls. LX. The houses of office, 350. or there
aboutes: which he reducethe into the number of.80. The value of all
together.8000. li. or very little less, which he reports to be.14000. The two
first (without al controversy) are mistaken, and publisshed falselie: But as
for the last, I must confess, that (at a blush) it seems to carry great
appearance of truth: and I my self was therein greatly ouerseene and deceived,
until with certain other (of good experience) I had made an estimate of
every particular loss, and brought them to a general and gross sum.

Nevertheless, if we may reckon the charge, which the town (if ever she be
repaired) will exact, to make return of her former estate, I mean in number
and quantity of houses, and (therewith) not pretermit her manifold losses,
namely, of coin, corn, implements of Household stuff, victuales, wood,
Timber, chattell, fruict, wels, pumps, hay, straw, time and trades, whereby ever
since they have declined and gone backward, which with the rest are and ought
to be brought into the rekning: It is certain true, that of, 14000.li. a small
remnant will remain, if any deal be left at all.

But this is an other case: for an account is rather to be raised according to
the rate of so much money as every man's house and stuff would yeald in sale,
if now it wear in STATV QVO PRIVS. For albeit the buildinges were such as
might have served many years and ages, if it had pleased the Lord to permit
them to posteryties: yet of a new house, in quantity of proportionable
resemblance with an old, and of an old, is not one and the self same reason:
because by how mvch it excedeth in goodness, by so much ought it to be preferred
in price and estimation.

So then the whole loss which town has sustained is 8000.li. or there
abouts, and the reedifiyng or restauratio^ of the same in necessary manner with
such other reconings adhearent as I have already cast over, will amount to
little less then 14000. and so it seems not vainly said.

He that buyeth a house ready wrought,
Gets many a nail fot naught.
Thus much Sir, touching the cause that moved me to intermedle and busy my
self about the affairs of this process.

Now whereas the Lord of his own especial grace from amongst the rest of
that part of the town destroyed, has gleaned out your house, as one ear out
of a shocke of corn, and preserved it alone amids the multitude of so
monsterous flames, though I am in no case to exhort you whom I prefer before
my self, or at the least do make no inferior, either in the due acceptance
of such a benefit at his Highness hand, or in recounting the causes why he
has been more merciful to you then the rest of all that town, and what
purposes he seems to have pointed and aimed at therein: yet since I daily
hear men more reddye to attribute occasion unto the means which the Lord
used in that action of mercy, and to detract from him that honor and
privilege that in all good things is due to him only: then to way and
consider what it is to neglect the merit of his grace herein: I am to crave
your pardon if this my Epistle shall seem any thing tedious and not facioned
with that DECORVM that best might become so short a discourse as is the treatis
it self.

You know I am sure that albeit the case of the town in that dismal day
wherein it was afflicted, was no less myraculous in the eyes of good men, then
fearful to the ^ad whose tongues at the same instant could implore the aid of
God and attend upon his ordinance, yet has it pleased some since that time to
make so diverse constructions thereof as does agree and join with all
untruth: and to take so slender taste of true knowledge as if their senses had
either of late forsaken them, or as if they were new drunk and lulled a
sleep in their oblivion, as in truth they seem in all goodness.

These be the me^ that turn al things be they never so grave and weighty unto
wantonness, that are always musling with beasts in the mire of worldly matters,
and never vouchsafe to lend so much as half an eye to look upon the sunshine
of Salvation, ne will be procured to put forth one poor nuger to take
acquaintance of the power and providence of God: but readily proffer their hand
and the service of all the instrume^tal parts of their body to welcome and
enterteine Ma^mon that monster their Master.

But it is no matter, they show eue^ the same modesty toward God when he
shows himself unto the^, that in the common course of their life they have
don toward those that are present with the^, namely the professers of the
Gospel, and in the end, shall find their fault I doubt not, and thoroughly
understand it either unto perpetual pain, or repentance: In the mean season,
since in their darkness we perceive fair daylight and the glory of God in their
just co^de^nation, if that be the reward of their ingratitude let the^
accumelate their sins, seeing they will needs be filthy, till they have
ascend, the throne of judgment, and we shall see and they feel the greatness of
their own grievous fall.

Let us I say, be sure, that God reuealeth himself to no infidel, preordeined
to perdition, and therefore confirm our selves so much the more in our hope,
by how much the less they make reconing of the truth and their own headines
and wretched co^ditio^. For in truth, nothing can commend the good estate of a
Christian to his own soul and conscience with more undoubted arguments, the^
when he sees himself co^tine^t in the wicked actions and demeanor of
worldlings, and has faith in all the changes and chau^ces of this unconstant
life to pull true obedience upon him for his protection: The rest roll every
way and tumble up and down like restless waves of water, always relatinge
the mercies and miracles of the Lord as accidents to profane beginninges.

And as they are seldom possessed with the spirit of humility, even so they
tosle and turmoyle them selves in affliction til they are windlesse, and then
breathe and to it again, with infinite curssinges and quarreles till tract of
time has worn away the sorrow of their case, or made them feel the prick
that posteth their danger, of sickness death, or desperation.

These poor souls never learned of David, Job and the rest, how to behave
themselves under the Cross and hand of God, they account him a God no longer
then he pynneth prosperity upon their sleeves, or wayghteth upon them with
abundance of wealth and pleasures if they account him a God at all.

But if their eyes were not seeled that they might fly right up till they are
weary and then fall straight down and break their necks, they might gather a
heap of miracles together passed in the ruins of this our town, and by the
same learn to know the providence of God.

As the wall covered with dry and parched straw, which although it be platted
where the fire had free access and stood like a stake in the midest of
ouerwhelming floudes, yet does it stand whole and sound, yea and, which is
more, with one of the corner posts burnt a good depth just in the midst of the
top, with strawes stroughtinge over it unperished. What? has fortune care of
strawes? or could these (little wretches) lay hold on her heary side, and a
whole streat of houses so many furlongs long not miss the bald. Oh fine
strawes, if your dexterity have saved you, thank your selves. If Fortune, fie
on her harlot, that would be so freendly unto you, who never did her good, and
so froward to the rest, that never wished her harm.

Likewise the wind which always changed in defense of those houses that now
stand, and then were in danger, may show how far the Lord did purpose to
reach his rod, It cannot be denied with any colloure of truth, that when the
fire had gotten the market stead, the wind from the sowthwest chanced full
west, whereby that side was preserved, and when it had got, by your house and
beyond it, so that had the fire taken the next row, the remnant, except God
being able to do what he will, had showed a wonderful miracle: must of
necessity have gone with the fore end of the piece, then I say he brought the
wind from the west to the northwest, which kept off both the blaze and sparcks
and turned them almost back again, or at the least, that way wherein lay no
danger. If any deny this, not only my self who duly observed these alterations
as I labored, but other credible witnesses also can testify with me, and in
the end when the fire was suppressed and beaten down, then lo, it returned
into the same stead wherein it stood at the first.

Moreover, why cannot our fortune men gather nothing out of the preservation of
your house, knowing that another was burnt to the earth whichin the on end,
namli on the stree^ side was joined to it and came somewhat within it, (...) on
the back side between the fou^dations of the cross buildings was at the most
but four foot distance, so that by all likelihod of imagination the eues of each
other must concur within less then three quarters of a yard? if they say your
mansion house (whereof the question is) is a tiled house and that you had the
assistance of the pit and great help of man's hand, I grant. But I pray you who
put that boldness and courage in one only man, whom we never before knew
desperate in rash attempts when your house was al ready fired, for want of ladders
to break out between two spars, there to endure that great peril and danger that
not only his parents and friends cried out on, but all the standers by also for
dread of his present death? who I say in this notable distres made him the
instrument of your good and an incorage me^t to the rest? was it God or
fortune? now, all this say our Epicures was fortune forsooth: it was but good and
evil luck, it was but habardepas, it was but this or that, and which for a
penny. Alas if I should go about to persuade the^ that before the pit was made,
or er the house was raised, or er you were born, God held the purpose of your
defense, I think they would judge me mad, and yet is it greater madness by odds
to deny it.

Finally in a world of such witnesses and arguments of the providence of god
to make short with the^ and conclude in a word: so sone as the fire was ceased,
who sent that notable shoure of rain? was it fortune to show her self in her
po^tificalibus, or the lord to declare to us and prove what he cold have don in
time for our safty, if it pleased him? they which ascribe these things to
fortune, let them set her on the top of the pinnacle, rest in her co^templation
and service and seek non other gods, for she is even good enough to show them
experience of eternal shame.

It repented godly Augustine that ever he dishonored the name of God by talking
of fortune with his tongue, but these men are not afraid to rob God of his glory,
and honor her with their hearts* But if they happen to be hunted (like hogs
that are led by the ears) from this fortres of theirs, so as they must either
confess God or else be pointed out for blaspheming Atheysts, then straight way
theie say that indeed he suffered it, but neither willed it, nor did it: wherein
also they shape them out a God according to their own shadow, who by this reso^
must suffer that which he would not or be a careless and idle ouerseer of
worldly matters. well I leave the^ to their grosnes til the lord shall please to
vouch safe their better knowledge or bring upon them the just effects of
wilful ignorance.

Now for as much as amidds so great desolatio^ he has left you this notable
trial of his love, and tumbled the rest together before the owners faces as
though he would have you to know and confess, and the rest to bear witness of
his favor toward you: For the love of god (for your parts) a^swere him again
with your due obedience in that caling wherein he has placed you, even of a
ready and willing mind to bring glory to his name, profit to his church and
comfort to your own consciences. And as you have hitherto ben countenau^cers of
the poor professors of Jesus christ in this your town, and loving friends to al
other: so herafter, be not wanting (as I trust you will not) in reforming and
bridling those, whose religion and manners, you daily see too too far out of
square and order, haling the iugdeme^ts of god upon them and others, who but
for them would be more teachable, and in short space better taught. And the Lord
(who in althings can see the secrets of your intents) shall bless your labors
and reward you with the open liberality of his glorious kingdom: which I
beseech him grant unto you both. Amen,

Yours, in the Lord, A R. GVRNEY.

A LAMENTABLE DISCOVRSE of the Spoil of East DEARHAM.
WHo marks the steps of this unstayed state, Least they be reserved for as
great or greater Judgment.

And sees the seas which sink us in our sin,
And wiseli weies our wicked wa^dring gate,
And floudes of filth that we lie frozen in,
May mourn with me, our cases are akinne.
I tied my trust to trifling trash and pelf,
He by my harm may seek to save himself.
A Town I was though blessed, not brave, God wott, A Town of mean report

Ne of renoune, my name was always small,
My treasures thin, yet trades which I had got,
Did hold me high upon an happy stall:
An aid was I, but in no case a thrall
To neighbor Towns dispersed hear and there,
My state was sound and stood for stately chere.
My fields full fair, my pastures pight for good,
My waters clear, my fruict sufficient:
My bounds both broad and well bestad with wood,
My Commons large and comely to content: Co^modyties.

But oh, my sin deserved to be shent,
And loud did call the vengeance of my God,
Who heard at last, and lasht me with his Rod.
For lo, where late I was a Town at needs,
Where Judgments and where laws were often discust,
Am now become a Nettle bush of weeds,
Defaste with fire and half returned to dust: Eastdearham.

My name to ken, who so has any lust,
Dearham I am, situate next the East,
In Norffolk soil, full well for man and beast.
Meaning all other towns and warnyng them.
Come forth, therefore, both friend and foe I mean,
I counsel all, and none would ouerpasse:
Come learn of me, that whylome sound did dream
Of happy state, but saw not what it was,
A world of sins has caused my disgrace:
Yea, common faults, and in no calm degree,
Therefore, I say, now see your selves by me.
When as I stood in peace and pleasant rest,
Guarded with these and pleasures many more:
My pleasant paths so promised me the best,
That (void of dread) I doubted no such bloe:
For why? the tempest that has wrought my woe,
Was out of sight and couerd with a cloud,
which causd me pranck, oh wretch and pattern proud.
Why should I count, the courses of my crime?
Sith true it is, I plunged was most deep
In each offense that does reproach the time,
And in these days, so rock the world asleep?
My sins, my sins, have caused me to weep,
Whom God has made a Myrrour to them all,
That see my sore, or ever search it shall.
A Drunkard (friends) was I with deep delight,
Drunckennes goes not alone.
And pamperd up my paunche with belly cheer:
I left not so, but still came on foorthright,
To thousands more, then I have cited here:
I cared not to cogge, to lie and swear,
To boast and brawle, I thought no simple sport,
Ne yet the good, with spite to misreport.
Thus, by degrees, I practiced my part,
For (whirlyng now) came Whordome on withal,
Self will, Hatred, and swellyng Pride of heart,
The lack of Love, did thoroughly make me thrall:
I serud my self, and poasted next the wall
My neighbor, friend or foe, what ere he was,
As though I raued, to ride on Mydas Ass.
Lo friends you see the cause of all my wrecks, Cause.

Even sin it was that stroocke this fearful stroke,
Now shall you hear the form of such effects,
As do pursue them which the Lord provoke, Effects.

Their glory fades and falls away like smoke,
Expert am I and witness in the case,
Whose fumeing faults have thus besmeard my face.
Attend therefore the sequel of my tale,
And I shall show the shape of my myshapp.
Believe me well I will not pass my pale,
But truly touch the truth in every gapp,
For why? to lull or luske in liars lapp,
Ought duly of all men to be abhorde,
Now list I say, and do the truth record.
When Jove my judge the mighty Lord on high,
Had looked long and could not see me come,
And when I card not for his call and cry, Without recovery.

Ne would be s^i^de to stoop unto his doom,
And when I showde my self both deaf and dum,
Then up he starts and straight had pight the plott
Which staind my state, and laid me to my lot.
For at the least, more then a monthe right out, Drought.

Before he blew the brand that burnt me thus,
He sent a season of sunneshyne and drowghte,
No day came down to dew my utter crust,
But parcht me like the perfect tunder dust,
So that the steel no sooner gave the stroke,
But flames flew out and I began to smoke.
The time of year, was trusty to the touch, This spoken. tantum secundum
quid.

For Iulie did her dry days begin:
Who to the Match. the Candle well could couche,
And light the mist of my misfortune in:
Now woes began weaue the web which I did spinne,
And since the Lord has just set down my time, Man's help vain.

I iumpt in vain to save me by a shrine.
IVLY.
The eighteenth day of that same mournful moon,
Within the year of thincarnation
A comparion borrowed of the Moon ^^tring into the line of (...)
Of Christ our Lord Gods well-beloved son,
One thousand five hundredth eighty and one.
Before eleven a clock in the forenoone,
I took my course into Ecliptica,
And leaft my lamp in lewd Saturnica.
For why, the Lord did hide him now behind,
The Center of his whole consuming ire,
He alludeth still unto an eclipps.
And now my sin the torture so unkind,
Opposde me just whereof aroase the fire,
For look how much my flames increased hier,
So much they dimd and daunted my estate,
And causd me crouch unto a crabbed fate.
My streets were longest twixt the South and North,
The cituation of the town.
And therein peard such beauty as I bare,
My breadth from East to West did pass right forth,
And as in towns cross streets full common are,
Right so in me they went and planted were.
Whereby four ways the fire soon was spread,
All which at one must needs annoye my head.
The wind (God wot) did wait at the southwest,
The wind.
To blow the blaze into the market plot,
All things were armde and ready to arrest,
My careless corpse, that all mishaps forgot,
Wherefore I served am, full like a sot,
For lo, even in the midst of the high streate,
The cuilles were met which did me thus entreat.
As for the man with whom it did begin,
Where the fire began.
The heavens behold I would not hyde his crime,
Yet I suppose he has committed sin
Which lately gald him in a retchlesse rhyme,
For if I wear, his faults for to define,
I could not charge him with infamous acts,
Ne tread the trace of his so filthy factes.
He is (no doubt) a sinner with the rest,
And bears the Badge of Adames beastly part,
And broodes the bale, that breeds within his breast,
And hoordes the harms that hanges on each man's heart,
I know what I could say of his desert:
But let that pass, I am not here to tell
Of praise, but how with me it late befell.
Betwixt the wife and maid of that same man,
Right true it is, my bane at first brake out,
To whom (likewise) no harm adiudge I can,
In this their fact, for why? what man can doubt,
But that they rued the ruin of this route?
Besides (my friends) in all these flames and smoke
We may be sure, the Lord did strike his stroke.
This being thus, why should I chalk his chance?
With marks of malice and of foul despite,
Full well I see, he did but lead the Dance:
For many more were pesterd in that plight,
Yet all (I deem, with very dull delight:
And since I know, God eft with his begins, 1. Pet. 4.17.

Why do I poinct at this man and his sins?
Admit the Lord would wrest from him my woe,
And first of all, put him in for his part,
Shall I anon, my ways and wantes let go,
As though my self had near deserved to smarte,
None can so count, but being fond in heart,
Let me (therefore) still as I ought believe,
That he has taken, which first to me did geeue.
But now again, I turn me to my tale,
My Belles were ronge, and I straight ways aroase,
My neighbors heard them both from Hill and dale, No help can intercept the
work of God.

Which way so ere the rumor spreads and goes,
But all was one, were they my friends or foes,
They could not stint ne stay the strong decree,
Which God had pitched and plotted out for me.
Yet since I say, I could not understand,
Means ^^d.
Ne search the secrets of his holy head
Nor see how far he would stretch forth his hand,
Nor what for me he had before decreed:
I left no let that might me stand in stead,
But used those my Masteries in chief,
That promised most, yet least did ease my grief.
Some water drew, some did the same transporte,
Some Ladders reard and ran to houses tops,
Some spread wet clothes, and some in woeful sort,
Came headlongs down from Eues where water drops
Some counsel gave, and called other fops,
Some cride allowde, do rear before the fire,
And some bad rend, but where I would repaier
Some sought to save some lynnen cloth and ware,
And some again my coin began fast convay,
Some came with Carts, and with whole loades of care
Some Gooddes did lead into the fields and way,
Some for their deeds and Evidences pray,
Some that were stoarde of vittailes and of grain,
Did see it burn unto their loss and pain.
Some from the field returned soon and fast,
But were shut out, and could no where get in.
Some to escape out, with baggage ran in haste,
And could perceive no sawte where to begin,
Thus some and some great weariness did win,
Until the some was very scant and small,
That idle stood, and in no stead at all.
And what for this? where is the gain I got?
My means did fade, and fall flat to the ground,
And all my helps and hands were staid (God wot)
Which sought to save me in that state and stownde:
Because the Lord would needs me now confownde,
And make me taste some trial of mishap,
Thus was I caught in trifling with the trap.
For lo, the Ladders that were soon set up,
The fire did force to fall right down as fast: Ladders burnt

My strength was staid, that I might sup the Cup,
And ken my self a captive at the last,
The wind did wax, as though it made great haste,
To fling the flames of foul fate about,
And could rejoice my weal to scorn and flowt
And where my aid in water chiefly lay,
As in a mean for such distress preparde, The ^^nifite of w^^^ lost.

And where I made my most recourse that way,
My footing fayld till all my Mart was mard,
Full suddenly thereof was I debard:
For why? the brandes, they whirld so fast about.
They burnt my Pumps, and won my wells right out
And where my wares was poasted too and fro,
And leaft at large, for every man to see, pylf^^^s.

Few bought (God knows (but many borrowed so,
That I have cause to curse their knauerie:
And shall no less (I doubt me) while I die:
For though evil winds do blow some men to good
Yet aro they lewd, that lives by others food.
Nay, lowdly lewd, and most accursed wighres,
Be they who see the Thunderboultes of God, The ^^^ckednes (...).

About their cares, and still dare use the sleightes,
And in their thest and villainy thus plod,
Where shall they have their lasting place and boade,
In heaven? no, here I pawn and pledge my soul,
Except they turn, and tame such fancies foul.
Can any beast that feeds on carren vile?
Or can the Dog spew out such filth as this?
Or can the Devil more damnably beguile?
Those whom he trains to turn from lasting bliss,
If all the Furies were agreed (...)
They could scarce coin (...)
Then these have found, by (...)
If Pallas had set over all her skill,
Or were my tongues more then were Argus eyes,
Or had I got the trade of Tullies Quill:
These often told, could me not half suffice,
To paint and portray out in worthy wise,
The sore, the sin, the shameful parts of man:
Whose mind and mood no mean but madness can
For though the Lord imprints in cloud and sky,
Right strange Edictes, to call us home from sin,
Natu^ ^uses
And so by signs of Judgments daily try,
The canckred case that we lie tumbling in,
Yet nothing will our wandering senses win,
We straight, in nature, can discern the cause,
And so ascribe each thing unto her laws.
We diuersie can descant of the Earth,
And dull us in ou^ deep devices so,
And show the cause of plenty and of dearth,
And what does shake the ground, and many more,
We are so far betwitcht and gone in woe,
That when the Lord does plead our plagues by word
We shift it off, as though he did but bourd.
Doubtless I deem, or (rather see right well,
That if from Heaven, we heard his voice and cry:
Or if he sent the seely souls from Hell:
Diue^ Lazaru^
To warn us by t^eir woeful misery,
We would account all this but fablerie,
So that (alas) I can not judge ne think,
What may us save, that have such minds to sincke
If fearful Comete glide over our head,
Or blasing Stars shine in our shameless eyes,
If Sickness have our sore both brought and bred,
Or else the loss of lands caused our cries,
Of these (I say) we dasell and devise,
(...) Nature, as our God,
(...) and daily nod.
Few prooffes herein may seem sufficient,
For (out alas) how many way the truth,
Mine eyes, mine eyes, want no experiment,
That may me drive to dole and double ruthe, Note this well

For of my heavy harmefull hap ensuthe,
Naught else with most, but discord and disdain:
And of my loss, have many made their gain.
But if they fear the judgments of the Lord,
Or knew from whence this passing plague did spring,
Or would not wrongly still my case record,
Ne shroud my shame under their fortunes winge,
They would be careful of this cruel thing,
And rather learn to leave for fear of pain,
Then love so long to live by trayters train.
But all in vain I seem thus to inuey,
Their frozen hearts I fear not soon can thowe, The prechers after the fire
in fearful manner, charged to restore all the stolen stuf.

They have been taught and truly told the way,
How they might gain, and in Gods favor grow,
But they are deaf, they love to hear of snow,
Therefore I leave them that will filthy be,
And so again unto my tale do flee.
When as I saw I was so sore beset,
On cry side that now no hope I had,
And that my means did fall into the net,
And all was fish that came, both good and bad,
Right hastily and all, in care yclad,
I muckehild up, my mooueables and stuff,
And shortly saved myckle mangled shruffe.
Alas the while, what sight was this to see,
I got a bed, the fire gainde a house,
I chopped a chip, it took away the tree?
It caught the head and I reached back a louse
For every plume, I parted with a geese,
And yet alas, it rag'de and ran so fast,
That lo, this luck it suffered not to last
For after it had once begone to fume,
No mercy in fire
Against the wind, and with the wind it went,
It leaft no side, bue eftsoons did assume,
All that it toutcht, and no way would be pent,
Till my long streets, on both sides it had brent,
And made them low and leauell with the ground,
And of my coin, had molten many a pownde.
The Houses Mansion, which it brought down,
Were fifty two, even there aboutes I guess,
The sum of houses.
And all the rest, that burnt were in the Town,
Three hundred and fifty, not many more ne less.
So that the total number I confess,
Is four hundred and twain, which I clearly lost.
And now do lack, to my great grief and cost.
The Fish and flesh, that I forehande preparde,
Havoc.
The Drink, the drugges, the bread, butter and cheese,
The Hay, the straw, the wood for which I card,
All at a clappe, I must forgo dnd leese:
The Catchpole caught them as his lawful fees,
Which laid me supperlesse upon my Bed,
When I scarce fownde a Cowch to calm my head.
The Fruict that late I looued to pare and prune,
Hunger is good ^^use
I now could reach well roasted from the trees,
Hunger with care, had harpt so sweet a tune,
That Biscuit Boxes, Carawayes and these,
I leaft at large, for dainty waspes and Bees,
And now could leap alofte to catch a crust,
And snap it up with Appetite and lust.
The moan of infants and women with children.
And doubtless, who had heard the Infantes moan,
For lack of lodging and accustomed fare,
Or of the brusde and burnt, the grievous groan,
Or seen the shift, that poor estate and bare,
Of women, that full big with children wear,
Would near forget the Pageants nor the plight,
So long as he could know a woeful wight.
(...)
