A SERMON PREACHED AT St MARY'S (...) OXFORD UPON TVESDAY IN EASTER WEEK,
1617.

CONCERNING THE ABUSES of obscure and difficult places of holy Scripture, and
remedies against them.

By JOHN HALES, FELLOW OF ETON COLLEGE, and Regius Professor of the Greek
tongue in the University of Oxford.



AT OXFORD Printed by John Lichfield, and William Wrench, Printers to the
famous University. 1617.

2. PETER. 3. 16. Which the unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do the other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction.
THE love and favor which it pleased God to bear our Fathers before the law,
so far prevailed with him, as that without any books and writings, by
familiar and friendly conversing with the^, and communicating himself unto
them, he made them receive and understand his laws: their inward conceits and
intellectualls being after a wonderful manner as it were Figured, In Psalm. 28.
and Characterd, (as St Basil expresses it) by his spirit, so that they could
not but see, and consent unto, and confess the truth of them. Which way of
manifesting his will, unto many other gracious privileges which it had, above
that which in after ages came in place of it, had this added, that it brought
with it unto the man, to whom it was made, a preservati on against all doubt
and hesitancy, a full assurance both who the author was, and how far his
intent and meaning reached. We (...) their of^^ng ought, Hom. 1. in Mat.
as St Chrysostom tells us, fo to have demeand our selves, that it might have
been with us as it was with them, that (...) might have had no need of writing,
no other (...) but the spirit, no other books but our hearts, no other means to
have been taught the things of God Nisi inspirationis divinae internam (...),
ubi sine sonis sermonum and sine elementis literarum, eo dulcius quo secretius
veritas loquitur; as says Fulgentius. (...), L. 3. Epist. 106.
says Isidorus Pel^siota: for it is a great argument of our shame and
imperfection that the holy things are written in books. For as God in anger
tells the Jews, that he himself would not go before them as hitherto he had
done, to conduct them into the promised land, but would leave his Angel with
them as his deputy: so has he dealt with us, the unhappy posterity
degenerated from the ancient purity of our forefathers. When himself refused
to speak unto our hearts because of the hardness of them, he then began to
put his laws in writing. Which thing for a long time amongst his own people
seems not to have brought with it any sensible inconvenience. For amongst all
those acts of the Jews, which God in his book has registered for our
instruction, there is not one concerning any pretended ambiguitie or obscurity
of the Text and Letter of their Law, which might draw them into faction and
schism; the Devil be like having other sufficie^ advantages on which he
wrought. But ever since the Gospel was committed to w^^ting, what age, what
monument of the Churches acts is not full of debate and strife, concerning the
force and meaning^ (...) those writings, which the holy Ghost has left us to
be the law and rule of faith? St Paul, one of the first penmen of the holy
Ghost, who in P^^^dise (...) words which it was not lawful for man to utter,
has left us words in writing, which it is not safe for any man to be too busy
to interpret. No sooner had he laid down his pen, almost ere the ink was
dry, were there found Syllabarum aucupes, such as St Ambrose spoke of, qui
nescire aliquid erubescunt, and per occasionem obscuritatis tendunt laqueos
deceptionis, who thought there could be no greater disparagement unto them,
then to seem to be ignorant of any thing and under pretense of interpreting
obscure places laid gins to entrap the vncautelous: who taking advantage of the
obscurity of St Paul's text, made the letter of the Gospel of life and peace,
the most forcible instrument of mortal quarrel and contention. The growth of
which, the Holy Ghost by the Ministry of St Peter, has indeavored to cut up
in the bud, and to strangle in the womb, in this short admonition which but
now has founded in your ears. Which the learned etc. In which words, for
our more orderly proceeding, we will consider, First, the sin it self that
is hear reprehe^ded, wresting of Scripture: where we will briefly consider
what it is and what cau^^^ and motioners it finds in our corrupt
understandings, Secondly the persons guilty of this offense, discipher'd unto
us in two Epithets, unlearned, unstable. Last of all the danger in the last
words, unto their own damnation. And first of the sin it self, together
with some of the especial causes of it.

(...). They wrest. They deal with Scripture as Chimickes deal with natural
bodies, torturing them to extract that out of them which God and nature never
put in them. Scripture is a rule which will not fit it self to the obliquitie
of our conceits, but our perverse and crooked discourse, must fit it self to
the straightness of that rule. A learned writer in the age of our fathers,
Fab^r.
commenting upon Scripture spoke most truly when he said, that his Comments
gave no light unto the text, the text gave light unto his Comments. Other
expositions may give rules and directions for understanding their authors, but
Scripture gives rules to exposition it self, and interprets the interpreter.
Wherefore when we wade in Scripture, non pro sententia divinarum Scripturarum,
as St Austine speaks, sed pro nostra ita dimicantes vt tam velimus
Scripturarum esse quae nostra est: When we strive to give unto it, and not to
receive from it the sense: when we factiously contend to fasten our conceits
upon God: and like the Harlot in the book of Kings, take our dead and
putrified fancies, and lay them in the bosom of Scripture as of a mother, then
are we guilty of this great sin of wresting of Scripture. The nature of
which will the better appear, if we consider a little, some of those
motioners which drive us upon it. One very potent and strong mean is the
exceeding affection and love unto our own opinions and conceits. For grown
we are unto extremities on both hands: we cannot with patience either admit of
other men's opinions, or endure that our own should be withstood. Scholiast. in
Thucyd.
As it was in the Lacedaemonian army, almost all were Captains: so in these
disputes all will be leaders: and we take our selves to be much
discountenanced, if others think not as we do. So that the complaint which
one makes, concerning the dissension of Physicians about the diseases of our
bodies, is true likewise in these disputes which concern the cure of our
souls, Pliny.
hinc illae circa agros miserae sententiarum concertationes, nullo idem
censente, ne videatur accessio alterius. From hence have sprung those miserable
contentions about the distemper of our souls, singularity alone, and that we
will not seem to stand as cyphars to make up the sum of other men's opinions,
being cause enough to make us disagree. A fault anciently amongst the
Christians so apparent, that it needed not an Apostolical spirit to discover
it, the very heathen themselves to our shame and confusion, have justly,
judiciously, and sharply taxt us for it. Ammianus Marcellinus passing his
censure upon Constanti^^ (...) Emperor: Christianam religionem absolutam and
simplice^ (says he: and they are words very well worth your marking)
Christianam religionem absolut^^ and simplice^ anili superstitione confudit. In
(...) scrutanda perplexius quam componenda grauius, excitauit dissidia plurima,
quae progressa fusius alu^t concertati^ne verborum, dum ritum omnem adsu^^^
trahere conatur arbitrium. The Christian religion, a religion of great
simplicity and perfection, he troubled with dotage and superstition. For
going about rather perplexedly to search the controversies, then gravely to
compose them, he raised great stirs, and by disputing spread them far and
wide, whilst he went about to make himself sole Lord and commander of the
whole profession. Now (that it may appear wherefore I have noted this) it is no
hard thing for a man that has wit, and is strongly possessed of an opinion, and
resolute to maintain it, to find some places of Scripture, which by good
handling will be woed to cast a favorable countenance upon it. Pythagoras
Scholars having been bred up in the doctrine of numbers, when afterward they
diverted upon the studies of nature, fancied unto themselves somewhat in
natural bodies like unto numbers, and thereupon fell into a conceit that
numbers were the principles of them. So fares it with him that to the reading
of Scripture comes forepossest with some opinion. As Antipheron Ori^tes in
Aristotle thought that every where he saw his own shape and picture going
before him: so indivers parts of Scripture where these men walk, they will
easily persuade themselves that they see the image of their own conceits. It
was, and is to this day, a fashion in the hotter countries, at noone, when the
sun is in his strength, to retire themselves to their Closets or beds, if
they were at home, to cool and shadie places if they were abroad, to avoid the
inconvenience of the heat of it. To this the Spouse in the Canticles alluding,
calls after her beloved, as after a shepherd: Show me, O thou whom my soul
loves, where thou feedest thy flock, where thou do rest at noone. The
Donatists conceiting unto themselves that the Church was shut up in them alone;
being urged by the fathers to show how the Church being universal, came on a
sudden thus to be co^finde to Afric: they had presently their Scripture
for it: for so they found it written in the Canticles: Indica, quem diligit
anima mea, vbi pascas, vbi cubes in meridie. In which text, meridies doubtless
as they thought, was their Southern country of Afric, where the shepherd
of Israel was, and no where else, to feed his flocks. I may not trouble you
with instances in this kind: little observation is able to furnish the man of
slendrest reading with abundance. The texts of Scripture which are especially
subject to this abuse, are those that are of ambiguous and doubtful meaning.
For as Thucydides observes of the fat and fertile places of Greece, that they
were evermore the occasions of stirs and seditions; the neighboring nations
every one striving to make it self Lord of them: so is it with these places
that are so fertile, as it were, of interpretation, and yield a multiplicity of
sense: they are the Palastra for good wits to prove masteries in, where every
one desires to be Lord and absolute.

A second thing occasioning us to transgress against Scripture, and the
discreet and sober handling of it, is our too quick and speedy entrance upon
the practice of interpreting it, in our young and green years, before that
time and experience have ripened us and settled our conceits. For that which in
all other business, and here likewise does most especially commend us, is our
cautelous and wary handling it. But this is a flower seldom seen in youths
garden. Aristotle differencing age and youth, makes it a property of youth,
(...), to suppose they know all things and to be bold in affirming: and the
heathen Rhetorician could tell us, that by this so speedy entering upon action,
and so timely venting our crude and unconcocted studies, quod est vbique
perniciosissimu^, praevenit vires fiducia, a thing which in all cases is most
pernicious, presumption is greater then strength, after the manner of those,
who are lately recoverd out of some great sickness, in whom appetite is
stronger then digestion. These are they who take the greatest mysteryes of
Christian religion to be the fittest arguments to spend themselves upon. So
Eckius in his Chrysopassus, a work of his so termed, wherein he discusses the
question of predestination, in the very entrance of his work tells us, that
he therefore enterpris'd to handle this argument, because forsooth he thought
it to be the fittest question in which he might luveniles calores exercere.
The ancient Masters of sense amongst the Romans were wont to set up a post, and
cause their young Scholars to practice upon it, and to foine and fight with
it, as with an adversary. Instead of a post, this young fencer has set
himself up one of the deepest mysteries of our profession to practice his
freshmanship upon. Which quality when once it finds Scripture for his object,
how great inconvenience it brings with it, needs no large discourse to prove.
St Jerome, a man not too easily brought on to acknowledge the errors of his
writings, amongst those few things which he does retract, censures nothing so
sharply as the mistake of his youth in this kind. In adolescentia provocatus
ardore and studio Scripturarum, allegorice interpretatus sum Abdiam Prophetam,
cuius historiam nesciebam. He thought it one of the greatest sins of his
youth, that being carried away through an inconsiderate heat in his studies of
Scripture, he adve^tured to interpret Abdias the Prophet allegorically, when as
yet he knew not the historical meaning. Old men, says our best natural
master, by reason of the experience of their often mistakes, are hardly brought
constantly to affirm any thing, (...), they will always cautelously interline
their speeches, with it may bees, and peradventures, and other such particles
of warines and circumspection. This old men's modesty of all other things best
fits us in pervsing those hard and obscure texts of holy Scripture. Out of
which conceit it is that we see St Austine in his books de Genesi adlitteram,
to have written only by way of questions and interrogations, after the manner
of Aristotle in his Problemes, that he might not, (for so he gives his reason
by being over positive prejudice others, and peradventure truer
interpretations: that every one might choose according to his likeing, and vbi
quid intelligere non potest, Scripturae Dei det honorem, sibi timorem: and
where his understanding cannot attain unto the sense of it, let him give that
honor and reverence which is due unto the Scripture, and carry himself with
that aw and respect which befits him. Wherefore not without especial providence
it is, that the holy Ghost by St Paul giving precepts to Timothy, concerning
the quality of those who were to be admitted to the distributing of Gods holy
word, expressly prescribes against a young Scholar, least, says he, he be puffed
up. For as it has been noted of men, who are lately grown rich, that they
differ from other rich men only in this, Arist. Rbet. 2.
(...) that commonly they have all the faults, that rich men have and many
more: so is it as true in those who have lately attaind to some degree and
mediocritie of knowledge. Look what infirmities learned men have, the same
have they in greater degree, and many more besides. Wherefore if Hippocrates in
his Physician required these two things, (...), great industry and long
experience, the one as tillage to sow the seed, the other as time and season of
the year to bring it to maturitie: then certainly by so much the more are
these two required in the spiritual Physician, by how much he is the
Physician to a more excellent part.

I will add yet one third motioner to this abuse of Scriptures, and that is the
too great presumption upon the strength and subteltie of our own wits. That
which the Roman Priest sometimes told an overpleasant and wirtie vestall
Virgin, Coli Deos sancte magis quam site, has in this great work of
exposition of Scripture an especial place. The holy things of God must be
handled sancte, magis quam site, with fear and reverence, not with wit and
daliance. The dangerous effects of this have appeared, not in the green tree
only, in young heads, but in men of constant age, and great place in the
Church. For this was that which undid Origin, a man of as great learning and
industry, as ever the Church had any; whilst in sublimitie of his wit, in his
Comments on Scripture, conceaving Meteors and aerie speculations, he brought
forth those dangerous errors, which drew upon his person the Churches heaviest
ce^sure; and upon posterity the loss of his works. Subtle witted men in
nothing so much miscarrie as in the too much pleasing themselves in the
goodness of their own conceits; where the like sometimes befalls them which
befell Xe^xis the painter, who having to the life pictured an old woman, so
pleased himself with the conceit of his work that he died with laughing at
it. Heliodor Bishop of Tricca in Thessaly, Nicepho^^^.
the author of the Aethiopick story, a polite and elegant I confess, but a
loose and wanton work, being summoned by a provincial Synod, was told, that
which was true, that his work did rather endanger the manners then profit the
wits of his reader, as nourishing loose and wanton conceits in the heads of
youth: and having his choice given him either to abolish his work, or to leave
his Bishopric; not willing to loose the reputation of wit, chose rather to
refigne his place in the Church, and, as I verily think, his part in heaven.
And not in private persons alone, but even in whole nations, shall we find
remarkable examples of miscarriage in this kind. The Grecians, till barbarism
began to steal in upon them, were men of wondrous subtletie of wit, and
naturally over indulgent unto themselves in this quality. Those deep and
subtle heresies concerning the Trinity, the divinity of Christ and of the
holy Ghost, the union and division of the divine substance and persons, were
all of them begotten in the heat of their wits: yea by the strength of them
were they co^ceaved, and borne and brought to that growth, that if it had been
possible for the gates of Hell to prevail against the Church, they would have
prevailed this way. Wherefore as God dealt with his own land, which being
sometimes the mirror of the world for fertility and abundance of all things,
now lies subject to many curses, and especially to that of barrenness: so at
this day is it with Greece. Where sometimes was the flow and luxury of wit,
now is there nothing but extreme barbarism and stupidity. It is in this
respect so degenerated, that it scarsly for some hundredth of years has brought
forth a child that carries any show of his fathers countenance. God as it were
purposely plaguing their miserable posterity with extreme want of that, the
abundance of which their fathers did so wantonly abuse. The reason of all, that
hitherto J have in this point delivered, is this. Sharpness of wit has
commonly with it two ill companions, pride, and levitie. By the first it comes
to pass that men know not how to yield to another man's reasonable positions;
by the second, they know not how to keep themselves constant to their own.
It was an excellent observation of the wise Grecian, Th^^yd.
(...) etc. Sad and dull spirited men usually manage matters of state better
then quick and nimble wits. For such for the most part have not learnt that
lesson, the meaning of that voice that came to the Pythagorean, that was
desirous to remove the ^shes of his dead friend out of his grave, (...) things
lawfully settled and composed must not be mo^ed. (...) says Julian. Men over
busy are by nature unfit to govern. For they move all things, and leave
nothing without question and innovation, (...) as Nazianzen speaks, out of
desire to amend what is already well. And therefore we see that for the most
part such, if they be in place of authority, by unseasonable and unnecessary
tampering put all things into tumult and combustion. Not the Commonwealth
alone, but the Church likewise has received the like blow from these kind of
men. Nazianzene in his six and twentieth Oration, discoursing concerning the
disorders committed in the handling of Controversies; speaks it plainly:
(...) etc. Great wits, hot and fiery dispositions have raised these tumults.
From these it is (says he) that Christians are so divided. We are no longer a
tribe and a tribe, Israel and Judah, two parts of a small nation: but we are
divided kindred against kindred, family against family, yea a man against
himself. But I must hasten to my second general part, the persons here
accounted guilty of abuse of Scripture.

The persons are noted unto us in two Epithe^s, unlearned, unstable. First,
unlearned. It was St (...) complaint, that practitioners of other arts could
contain themselves within the bounds of their own profession, Sola
Scripturarum ars est, quam sibi omnes passim vendica^t. Hanc garrula anu^, hanc
delirus, senex hanc sophista verbosus, hanc vniversi praesumu^t, lacerant,
docent antequam discant: every one presumes much upon his skill, and therefore
to be a reacher of Scripture: (...) (so Nazianzen speaks) as if this great
mystery of Christianity were but some one of the common, base, inferior, and
contemptible trades. I speak not this as if I envied that all even the meanest
of the Lords people should prophecy: but only that all kind of men may know
their bounds, that no unlearned beast touch the hill, least he be thrust
through with a dart. It is true which we have heard, surgunt indocti and
rapiunt regnum coelorum: they arise indeed, but it is as St Paul speaks of the
resurrection, every man in his own order. Scripture is given to all, to
learn: but to teach and to interpret, only to a few. This bold intrusion
therefore of the unlearned into the chair of the teacher, is that which here
with our blessed Apostle I am to reprehend. Learning in general is nothing
else but the competent skill of any man in whatsoever he professes. Vsual^^^^^
call by this name only our polite and Aca^^ micall studies: but indeed it is
common to every one, that is well skild, well practiced in his own mystery.
The unlearned therefore, whom here our Apostle rebukes, is not he that has
not read multiplicitie of Authors: or that is not as Moses was, skillful in
all the learning of the Egyptians: but he that taking upon him to divide the
word of God, is yet but raw and unexperienced; or if he have had experience,
wants judgment to make use of it. Scripture is never so unhappy, as when it
falls into these men's fingers. That which old Cato said of the Grecian
Physicians, quandocunque ista gens literas suas debit, omnia corrumpet, is most
true of these men. whenever they shall begin to tamper with Scripture, and
vent in writing their raw conceits, they will corrupt and defile all they
touch. Quid enim molestiae tristitiaeque temerarij isti praesumptores, De
Genesi ad literam.
etc as S. Austine complains: for what trouble and anguish theserash
praesumers (says he) bring unto the diereeter sort of the brethron, cannot
sufficiently be expressed: when being convinced of their rotten and ungrounded
opinions; for the maintaining of that which with great levitie and open
falsehood they have averd, they pretend the authority of these sacred books,
and repeat much of them even by heart, as bearing witness to what they hold:
whereas indeed they do but pronounce the words, but understand not either what
they speak, or of what things they do affirm. Belike as he that bought
Orphem Harp, thought it would of it self make admirable melody, how
unskillfully soever he touched it: so these men suppose (...) Scripture will
sound wonderful musically, if they do but strike it, with how great
infelicitie or inco^gruity soever it be. The reason of these men's offense
against Scripture, is the same with the cause of their miscarriage in civil
actions. (...) says Th^cydides, (...) Rude men, men of little experience, are
commonly most peremptory: but men experienced, and such as have waded in
business, are slow of determination. Quintilian making a question, why
unlearned men seem many times to he more copious then the learned (for
commonly such men never want matter of discourse) answers that it is because
whatsoever conceit comes into their heads, without care or choice they broach
it, cum doctis sit electio and modus: whereas learned men are choice in their
invention, and lay by much of that which offers it self, Wise hearted men, in
whom the Lord has put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all
manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, like Bezaleel and Aholiab
refuse much of the stuff which is presented them. But this kind of men whom
here our Apostle notes, are naturally men of bold and daring spirits, quicquid
dixerint, hoc legem Deiputant, as Saint Jerome speaks, whatsoever conceit is
begotten in their heads, the spirit of God is presently the father of it: nec
scire dignantur quid Prophetae, quid Apostoli senserint, sed ad suum sensum
incongrua aptant (...). But to leave these men, and to speak a little more
home unto mine own auditorie: Let us a little consider, not the weakness of
these men but the greatness of the business, the manage of which they
undertake. So great a thing as the skill of exposition of the word and Gospel
is, so fra^ght with multiplicitie of authors, so full of variety of opinion,
must needs be confessed to be a matter of great learning, and that it cannot,
especially in our days, in short time with a mediocritie of industry be
attaind. For if in the Apostles times, when as yet much of Scripture was
fearsly written, when God wrought with men miraculously to inform their
understanding, and supplied by revelatio^ what man's industry could not yield;
if I say in these times St Paul required diligent reading, and expressly forbad
greenness of schollarship: much more the^ are these conditions required in our
times, wherein God does not supply by miracle our natural defects, and yet the
burden of our profession is infinitely increast. All that was necessary in the
Apostles times is now necessary and much more. For if we add unto the growth of
Christian learning, as it was in the Apostles times, but this one circumstance
(to say nothing of all the rest) which naturally befalls our times, and could
not be required at the hands of those who guided the first ages of the Church:
that is, the knowledge of the state and succession of doctrine in the Church
from time to time; a thing very necessary for the determining the controversies
of these our days: how great a portion of our labor and industry would this
alone require? Wherefore if Quintilian thought it necessary to admonish young
me^ that they should not presume themselves satis instructos, si qaem ex ijs,
qui breves circumfernutur, (...) libell^^^ edidicerint, and velut dicretis
technicorum tutor put^nt: if he thought fit thus to do in an a^^ of so
inferior and narrow a sphere; much more is it behoofefull that young students
in so high, so spacious, so large a profession, be advised nor to think
themselves sufficiently provided upon their acquaintance with some Notitia, or
systeme of some technicall divine. Look upon those sons of Anak, those Giant
like voluminous writers of Rome; in regard of whom our little tractats and
pocket volumes in this kind, what are they but as Grasshoppers? I speak not
this like some seditious or factious spy, to bring weakness of hands, or
melting of heart upon any of Gods people: but (...), to stir up and kindle in
you the spirit of industry, to enlarge your conceit, and not to suffer your
labors to be copst and ^^ed up within the poverty of some pretended method. I
will speak as Joshua did to his people, Let us not fear the people of that
land, they are as m^^t unto us, the^^ shadow is departed from them the Lord is
with us, fear them not. Iivie.
Only let us not think, (...) and ^ot is d^bellari posse, that the conquest
will be gotten by sitting still and wishing al were well or that the walls of
those strong (...), will f^ll down if we only walk about them, and blow
rams horns, But as the voice of Gods people sometime was, by the s^^rd of
God and of Gedeon, so that which here gives the victory must be the grace of
God and our industry. For by this circumcised, narrow and penurious form of
study, we shall be no more able to keep pace with them, then a child ca^
with Hercules. But I forbear and pass away unto the second epithe^, by which
these rackers of Scriptures, are by St Peter stiled^ Unstable.

In the learning which the world teaches, it were almost a miracle to find a
man constant to his own tenants. For not to doubt in things in which we are
conversant, is either by reason of excellency and serenitie of understanding
thoroughly apprehending the maine principles on which all things are grounded,
together with the deserying of the several passages from them unto particular
conclusions, and the diverticles and blind bypath which Sophist^ie and deceit
are wont to tread: and such a man cann^t ^e never yield: or else it is through
a senseless stupiditie, like unto that in the common sort of men, who
co^versing among the creatures, and beholding the course of heaven, and the
heavenly host, yet never attend them, neither ever s^^kes into their heads to
marvel, or question these things so full of doubt and difficulty. Even such^
(...), that learnes Theology in the school of (...) to participate of a^y
(...) composedness of conscience. Either it never comes into his head to doubt
of any of those things; with which the world has in^^ (...) if it does, it is
(...) great purpose, he may smother and strangle, he can never resolve his
doubt. The reason of which is this. It lies not in the worlds power to give in
this case a text of sufficient authority to compose and fix the thoughts of a
soul, that is disposed to doubt. But this great inconvenience which held the
world in uncertainty, by the providence of God is prevented in the Church. For
unto it is left a certain, undoubted; and sufficient authority, able to exalt
every valley, and lay low every hill, to smooth all rubs, and make our way so
open and passable, that little inquiry serves. So that as it were a wonder in
the school of nature to find one settled and resolved: so might it seem a
marvel that in the Church any man is unstable, unresolved. Yet
notwithstanding even here is the unstable man found too, and to his charge the
Apostle lays this sin of wresting of Scripture. For since that it is confessed
at all hands, that the sense and meaning of Scripture is the rule and ground of
our Christian tenants, whenever we alter them, we must needs give a new
sense unto the word of God. So that the man that is unstable in his religion
can never be free from violating of Scripture. The especial cause of this
levitie and flitting disposition in the common and ordinary sort of men, is
their disabilitie to discern of the strength of such reasons, as may be framed
against them. For which cause they usually start, and many times fall away,
upon every objection that is made. In which too sudden entertainment of
objections, they resemble the state of (...), who are (...) recou^ed out of
some long sickness* (...). Seneca.
Who never more wrong themselves then by suspecting every alteration of their
tempe^, and being affrighted at every little passion of heat, as if it were an
ague fit. To bring these men therefore unto an (...), and to purchase them a
setlednes of mind; that temper that St Austine does require in him that reads
his book, tales meotum Scriptorum velim iudices, qui responsionem non semper
desiderent, q^^m (...) quae leg^ntur audier int ali quid contradict: the same
temper must be found in every reader of Scripture, he must not be a^ a stand
and require an answer to every objection that is made against them. For as the
Philosopher tells us that mad and fantastical men, are very apprehensiue of all
outward accidents, because their soul is inwardly empty and unfurnished of
any thing of worth which might hold the inward attention of their minds: so
when we are so easily dord and amated with every Sophisme, it is a certain
argument of great defect of inward furniture and worth, which should as it were
ballace the mind and keep it upright against all outward occurrents
whatsoever. And be it that many times the means to open such doubts be not at
hand, yet as St Austine sometime spoke unto his scholar (...) concerning such
advise and counsel as he had given him: Nolo te causas rationesque rim^ri,
quae etiamsi reddi possint fides tamen, quae mihi credis non eas debeo: so much
more must we thus resolve of those lessons which God teaches us: the reasons
and grounds of them, though they might be given, yet it fits not that credit
and trust which we owe him, once to search into, or call in question. And so I
come to the third general part, the danger of wresting of Scripture, in the
last words, unto their own damnation.

The reward of every sin is death. As the worm eats out the heart of the
plant that bred it: so whatsoever is done amiss naturally works no other end,
but the destruction of him that does it. As this is true in general, so is it
as true, that when the Scripture does precisely note out unto us some sin,
and threatens death unto it, it is commonly an argument, that there is more
then ordinary, that there is some especial sin, which shall draw with it
some especial punishment. This sin of wresting of Scripture in the eye of some
of the ancients seemed so ougly, that they have ranged it in the same rank
with the sin against the holy Ghost. And therefore have they pronounced it a
sin (...), Isidorus Pelusiota.
greater then can be pardoned. For the most part of other sins, are sins of
infirmity or simplicity, but this is a sin of wit and strength. The man
that does it, does it with a high hand; he knows, and sees, and resolves upon
it. Again, Scripture is the voice of God: and it is confessed by all that the
sense is Scripture, rather the^ the words. It cannot therefore be avoided, but
he that wilfully strives to faesten some sense of his own upon it, other then
the very nature of the place will bear, must needs take upon him the person of
God, and become a new indi^e^ of Scripture: and all that applaud and give
con^en^ unto any such, in effect cry the same that the people did to He^od, the
voice of God, and not of man. If he then that abases the Princes come deserves
to die, what is his desert that instead of the tried silver of Gods word stamps
the name and character of God upon Ne^ushtan, upon base brafen stuff of his
own? Thirdly, 2. Pet. 1. 20.
No Scripture is of private interpretation, says the Apostle. There can
therefore be but two certain and infallible interpreters of Scripture: either
it self; or the holy Ghost the author of it. It self does then expound it
self, when the words and circumstances do sound unto us the prime, and
natural, and principal sense. But when the place is obscure, involu'd and
intricate, or when there is contained some secret and hidden mystery, beyond
the prime sense; infallibly to show us this, there can be no interpreter but
the holy Ghost that gave it. Besides these two, all other interpretation is
private. Wherefore as the Lords of the Philistines sometimes said of the kine
that drew the arc unto Bethshemesh: If they go of themselves, then is this
from God, but if they go another way, then is it not from God, it is some
chance that has happened unto us: so may it be said of all pretended sense of
Scripture. If Scripture come unto it of it self, then is it of God but if it
go another way, or if it be violently urged and goaded on, then is it but a
matter of chance, of man's wit and invention. As for those marvailous discourses
of some, framed upon presumption of the spirits help in private, in judging or
interpreting of difficult places of Scripture, I must needs confess I have
often wondered at the boldness of them. The spirit is a thing of dark and
secret operation, the manner of it none can descrie. As underminers are never
seen till they have wrought their purpose; so the spirit is never perceaved
but by its effects. The effects of the spirit (as far as they concern
knowledge and instruction) are not particular information for resolution in any
doubtful case (for this were plainly revelation) but as the Angel, which was
sent unto Cornelius informs him not, but sends him to Peter to school: so the
spirit teaches not, but stirs up in us a desire to learn: Desire to learn
makes us thirst after the means: and pious sedulitie and carfulness makes us
watchful in the choice, and diligent in the use of our means. The promise to
the Apostles of the spirit which should lead them into all truth, was made good
unto them by private and secret informing their understandings, with the
knowledge of high and heavenly mysteries, which as yet had never entered into
the conceit of any man. The same promise is made to us, but fulfilled after
another manner. For what was written by revelation in their hearts, for our
instruction have they written in their books. To us for information, otherwise
then out of these books, the spirit speaks not. When the spirit regenerats a
man, it infuses no knowledge of any point of faith, but sends him to the Church
and to the Scriptures. When it stirs him up to newness of life, it exhibits
not unto him an inventory of his sins, as hitherto unknown; but either
supposes the^ known in the law of nature, of which no man can be ignorant; or
sends him to learn them from the mouth of his teachers. More then this in the
ordinary proceeding of the holy spirit, in matter of instruction. I yet could
never deserie. So that to speak of the help of the spirit in private, either
in dijudicating, or in interpreting of Scripture, is to speak they know not
what. Which I do the rather note, first, because by experience we have learnt,
how apt-men are to call their private conceits, the spirit: And again, because
it is the especial error, with which S. Austine long ago charged this kind
of men: tanto sunt ad seditionem faciliores, quanto sibi videntur spirit^
excellere: by so much the more prone are they to kindle schism and contention
in the Church, by how much they seem to themselves to be endued with a more
eminent measure of spirit then their brethren; whilst (...), (as St Basils
speaks) under pretense of interpretation they violently broach their own
conceits. Great then is the danger in which they wade, which take upon them
this business of interpretation temeritas asserend^ incertae dubiaeque
opinionis, says St Austine, difficile sacrilegij crimen evitat: the rashness
of those that aver uncertain and doubtful interpretations for Catholic and
absolute, can hardly escape the sin of sacrilege.

But whereas our Apostle says, their own destruction, is the destruction
only their own? this were well if it stretched no farther. The ancients much
complain of this offense, as an hinderer of the salvation of others. There
were in the days of Isidorus Pelusiota some that gave out that all in the old
Testament was spoken of Christi belike out of extreme oppositio^ to the
Manichees, who on the otherside taught, that no text in the old Testament did
foretell of Christ. That Father therefore dealing with some of that opinion,
tells them how great the danger of their tenent is. (...) for if, says he, we
strive with violence to draw and apply those texts to Christ, which apparently
pertain not to him, we shall gain nothing but this, to make all the places
that are spoken of him suspected; and so discredit the strength of other
testimonies, which the Church usually vrges for the refutation of the Jews.
For in these cases a wrosted proof is like unto a suborned witness. It never
does help so much whilst it is presumed to be strong, as it does (...) when
it is discovered to be weak. St Austine in his books de Genesi ad litteram
sharply ^^proues some Christians, who out of some places of Scripture
misunderstood, framed unto themselves a kind of knowledge in Astronomy and
Physiologie, quite contrary vntosome parts of heathen learning in this kind,
which were true and evident unto sense. A man would think that this were but a
small error, and yet he doubts not to call it (...), and pernicios^^ and
maxi^^ cavendum. His reason warrants the roundnesse of his reproof. For he
charges such to have been a scandal unto the word, and hinderers of the
conversion of some heathen men that were scholars. For how, says he, shall
they believe our books of Scripture persuading the resurrection of the dead,
the kingdom of heaven, and the rest of the mysteries of our profession, if
they find them faulty in these things, of which themselves have undeniable
demonstration? yea though the cause we maintain be never so good, yet the
issue of diseased and crazie proofs brought to maintain it, must needs be
the same. For unto all causes, be they never so good, weakness of proof,
when it is discovered, brings great prejudice, but unto the cause of religion
most of all. St Austine observed that there were some qui (...) de aliquibus,
qui ^^^anctum nomen profitentur aliquid (...), velveri putuerit, (...) vt de
omnibus hoc cred^tur^ (...) with religion it self, the^ it does with the
professors of it. Diverse malignants there are, who lie in wait to epsy where
our reasons on which we build are weak, and having deprehended it in some,
will earnestly solicit the world to believe that all are so, if means were
made to bring it to light: (...), as Nazianzen speaks: using for advantage
against us no strength of their own, but the vice and imbecillitie of our
defense. The book of the Revelation is a book full of wonder and mystery: the
ancients seem to have made a religion to meddle with it, and thought it much
better to admire it with silence, then to adventure to expound it: and
therefore amongst their labors in exposition of Scripture, scarsly is there
any one found that has touch^ it. But our age has taken better heart, and
scarsly any one is there who has entertained a good conceit of his own
abilities, but he has taken that book as a fit argument to spend his pains
on. That the Church of Rome has great cause to suspect her self, to fear
least she have a great part in the prophecies of that book, I think the most
partial will not deny. Yet unto the expositors of it, I will give this advise,
that they look that that befall not them, which Thueydides observes to befall
the common sort of men: who though they have good means to acquit themselves
like men, yet when they think their best hopes fail them, and begin to
despair of their strength, comfort themselves with interp^^^ati (...) of (...)
and abscure prophecies. Many plain (...) of Scripture are very pregnant, and
of sufficient strength to overthrowe the points maintained by that Church
against us. If we leave these, and ground our selves upon our private
expositions of this book; we shall instly see^e in the poverty of better
proofs, to rest our selves upon those prophecies; which, though in themselves
they are most certain, yet our expositions of them must, (...) except God give
yet further light unto his Church) necessarily be mixed with much uncertainty,
as being at the best but improbable conjectures of our own. Scarsly can there
be found a thing more harmefull to religion, then to ven^ thus our own
conceits, and obtrude them upon the world for necessary and absolute. The
Physicians skill as I conceive of it; stands as much ^n opinion, as any that I
know, whatsoever. Yet their greatest master Hippocrates tells them directly
(...), etc. then the Physicians praesumption upon opinion, there is not one
thing that bringes either more blame to himself or danger to his patient. If
it be thus in an art which opinion taken away, must needs fall; how little
room then must opinion have in that knowledge, where nothing can have place
but what is of eternal truth? where if once we admit of opinion all is
overthrown? But I conclude this point, adding only this general admonition,
that we be not too peremprorie in our positions, where express text of
Scripture faile^ us: that we lay not our own collections and conclusions with
too much praecipitancie. For experience has showed us, that the error and
weakness of them being afterward discovered brings great disadvantage to
Christianity, and trouble to the Church. The Eastern Church before St Basils
time, had entertained generally a conceit, that those greek particles (...)
and the rest, were so divided among the Trinity, that each of the persons had
his particle which was no way appliable to the rest. St Basil having discovered
this to be but a niceness and needless curiosity, beginning to teach so,
raised in the Church such a tumult, that he brought upon himself a great
labor of writing many tracts in apology for himself, with much ado, ear
matters could again be settled. The fault of this was not in Basil, who
religiously fearing what by way of consequence might ensue upon an error,
taught a truth; but in the Church, who formerly had with too much facility
admitted a conclusion so justly subject to exception. And let this suffice for
our third part.

Now because it is apparent that the end of this our Apostles admonition is to
give the Church a caveat how she behave her self in handling of Scripture,
give me leave a little, instead of the use of such doctrines as I have formerly
laid down, to show you, as far as my conceit can stretch, what course any
man may take to save himself from off^ing violence unto Scripture, and
reasonably settle himself, any pretended obscurity of the text whatsoever
notwithstanding. For which purpose the diligent observing of two rules shall
be thoroughly availeable. First, The litter all plain, and vncontroversable
meaning of Scripture without any addition or supply by way of interpretation,
is that alone which for ground of faith we are necessarily bound to accept,
except it be there where the holy Ghost himself treads us out another way. I
take not this to be any peculiar conceit of mine, but that unto which our
Church stands necessarily bound. When we receded from the Church of Rome, one
motive was, because she added unto Scripture her glosses as Canonical, to
supply what the plain text of Scripture could not yield. If in place of hers,
we set up our own glosses, thus to do, were nothing else but to pull down
Baal, and set up an Ephod; to run round, and meet the Church of Rome again
in the same point, in which at first we left her. But the plain, evident and
demonstratiue ground of this rule, is this. That authority which does warrant
our faith unto us, must every way be free from all possibility of error. For
let us but once admit of this, that there is any possibility that any one point
of faith should not be true; if it be once granted that I may be deceived in
what I have believed; how can I be assured that in the end I shall not be
deceived? If the author of faith may alter: or if the evidence and assurance
that he has left us be not pregnant, and impossible to be defeated, there is
necessarily opened an inlet to doubtfulnesse and wavering, which the nature of
faith excludes. That says therefore may stand unshaken, two things are of
necessity to concur. First, that the author of it be such a one, as can by
no means be deceived, and this can be none but God. Secondly that the words
and text of this author upon whom we ground, must admit of no ambiguitie, no
uncertainty of interpretation. If the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who
shall provide himself to battle. If the words admit a double sense, and I
follow one, who can assure me that that which I follow is the truth? For
infallibility either in judgment, or interpretation, or whatsoever, is annexed
neither to the sea of any Bishop, nor to the Fathers, nor to the Counsels, nor
to the Church, nor to any created power whatsoever. This doctrine of the
litterall sense was never grievous or prejudicial to any, but only to those
who were inwardly conscious, that their positions were not sufficiently
grounded. When Cardinal Caietan in the days of our grandfathers had forsaken
that vain of postilling and allegorising on Scripture, which for a long time
had prevailed in the Church, and betaken himself unto the literal sense: it
was a thing so distasteful unto the Church of Rome, that he was forced to
find out many shifts, and make many apologies for himself. The truth is (as
it will appear to him that reads his writings) this sticking close to the
litteral sense was that alone, which made him to shake many of those tenants,
upon which the Church of Rome and the reformed Churches differ. But when the
importunity of the reformers, and the great credit of Calvin's writings in that
kind, had forced the divines of Rome to level their interpretations by the
same line: when they saw that no pains, no subtletie of wit was strong enough
to defeat the literal evidence of Scripture: it drove them on those desperate
shelfes, on which at this day they stick, to call in question, as far as
they durst, the credit of the Hebrew text, and countenance against it a corrupt
translation; to add traditions unto Scripture; and to make the Churches
interpretation, so pretended, to be above exception. As for that restriction
which is usually added to this rule, that the literal sense is to be taken, if
no absurdity follow, though I acknowledge it to be sound and good, yet my
advise is that we entertain it warily. St Basil thought the precept of Christ
to the rich man in the Gospel, Go sell all thou have and give unto the poor;
to be spoken as a command universally and eternally binding all Christians
without exception. And making this objection, how possibly such a life could
be amongst Christians, since where all are sellars, none could be buyers:
(...) (says he) (...), etc. Ask not me the sense of my Lords commands. He
that gave the law, can provide to give it possibility of being kept without
any absurdity at all. Which speech, howsoever we may suppose the occasion of
it to be mistaken; yet is it of excellent use, to repress our boldness,
whereby many times, under pretense of some inconvenience, we hinder Scripture
from that latitude of sense, of which it is naturally capable. You know the
story of the Roman captain in Gellius, and what he told the shipwright, that
chose rather to interpret, then to execute his Lords command: Corrumpi atque
dissolvi omne imperantis officium, si quis ad id quod facere iussus est non
obsequio debito, sed consilio non desiderato respondeat. It will certainly in
the end prove safer for us to entertain Gods Commandments obsequio debito,
then to interpret them acumine non desiderato. Those other ways of
interpretation, whether it be by allegorizing, or allusion or whatsoever, the
best that can be said of them is that which Basil has pronounced: (...). We
account of them as of trim, elegant, and witty speeches, but we refuse to
accept of them, as of undoubted truths. And though of some part of these that
may be said which one said of his own work, quod ad vsum lusi, Ausonius in
monosyl.
quod ad molestiam laboravi, in respect of any profit comes by them, they are
but sport, but in respect of the pains taken in making of them they are labor
and travail: yet much of them is of excellent use in private, either to raise
our affections, or to spend our meditations, or (so it be with modesty) to
practice our gifts of wit to the honor of him that gave them. For if we
absolutely condemn these interpretations, then must we condemn a great part
of antiquity, who are very much conversant in this kind of interpreting. For
the most partial for antiquity cannot choose but see and confess thus much,
that for the litterall sense the Interpreters of our own times, because of
their skill in the original languages, their care of pressing the
circumstances and coherence of the text, of comparing like places of Scripture
with like, have generally surpast the best of the ancients. Which I speak not
to discountenance antiquity, but that all ages, all persons may have their
due. And let this suffice for our first rule.

The Jewish Rabbines in their Comments on Scripture so often as they met with
hard and intricate texts, out of which they could not wrest themselves, were
wont to shut up their discourse with this, Elias cum venerit, solvet dubia:
Elias shall answer this doubt when he comes. Not the Jews only, but the
learned Christians of all ages have found many things in Scripture which yet
expect Elias. For besides those texts of Scriptures, which by reason of the
hidden treasures of wisdom, and depth of sense and mystery laid up in them,
are not yet conceau'd, there are in Scripture of things that are (...),
seemingly confused, (...), carrying semblance of contrariety, anachronismes,
metachronismes, and the like, which bring infinite obscurity to the text:
there are I say in Scripture more of them, then in any writing that I know
secular or divine. If we mean not to settle our selves till all these things
are answered, let us take heed least the like be said to us, which St Austine
said to some of the Gentiles, who refused to believe till all objections were
satisfied: sunt enim innumerabiles quae non sunt finiendae ante fidem, ne vita
finiatur sine fide. The Areopagites in Athens, when they were troubled in a
doubtful case in which they durst not proceed to sentence, were wont causam in
diem longissimam differ, to put it off till a day of hearing for some
hundredth years after, avoiding by this means the further being importuned
with the suit. To quiet our selves in these doubts it will be our best way in
diem longissimam differ, to put them to some day of hearing a far off, even
till that great day, till Christ our true Elias shall come, who at his coming
shall answer all our doubts, and settle all our waverings. Mean while till our
Elias come, let us make use of this second rule. In places of ambiguous and
doubtful, or dark and intricate meaning, it is sufficient if we religiously
admire and acknowledge and confess: using that moderation of Austine: Neutram
partem affirmantes sieve destruentes, sed tantummodo ab audaci affirmandi
praesumptione revocantes. Qui credit, says one, satis est illi quod Christus
intelligat. To understand belongs to Christ the author of our faith to us is
sufficient the glory of believing. Wherefore we are to advise, not so much how
to attain unto the understanding of the mysteries of Scripture; as how it best
fits us to carry our selves when either the difficulty of the text, or
variety of opinions shall distract us. In the sixth general Council Honorius
Bishop of Rome is condemned for a Monothelite. Two Epistles there are of his
which are produced to give evidence against him. For the first I have nothing
to say. For the second) I speak with submission to better judgment)
notwithstanding the sharp proceeding of the Council against him, I vrerily
suppose that he gives unto the Church the best counsel, that ever yet was
given for the settling of doubts, and final decision of controversy. For that
which he teaches in that Epistle, at least in those parts of it, which there
are brought, sounds to no other purpose but this: That whereas there was lately
raised in the Church a controversy concerning the dualitie or unity of wills
in Christ; since that hitherto nothing in the Church concerning either part
has been expressly taught, his counsel was that men would rather cease to
doubt, then to be curious to search for any solution of their doubtings; and so
abstain from teaching doctrinally either part, and content themselves with
that express measure of faith, with which the Church has hitherto rest
satisfied. This to my conceit is the drift of his Epistle. How this advise of
the Bishops was appliable or how it fitted the question then in controversy;
or what reason moved the Council to think that it was absolutely necessary
for them, to give an express decision, and determine for the one part, belongs
not to me to discuss. But I verily persuade my self, that if it had pleased
those, who in all ages have been set to govern the Church of God; betimes to
have made use of this advise, to have taught men rather not to have doubted,
then to have expected still solution of their doubtings: to have stopped and
damm'd up the originals and springs of controversies, rather then by
determining for the one part, to give them as it were a pipe and conduit to
convaie them to posterity, I persuade my self the Church had not suffered that
inundation of opinions, with which at this day it is overrunne. Is it not St
Paul's own practice, when having brought in a question concerning Gods justice
in predestination, he gives no other answer but this, O man, who art thou
that disputest with God? Is it not his plain purpose to advise the disputer
rather not to make the question, then to require a determination of it at his
hands? How many of the questions even of our own times, even of those that are
at home amongst us, might by this way long since have been determind? I have,
I confess, the same disease that my first parents in Paradise had, a desire to
know more then I need. But I always thought it a very judicious commendation,
which is given to I. Agri^ola, that he knew how to bridle his desire in
pursui^ of knowledge, (...), qu^d est difficillimum, ex scientia m^^um. Mallem
quidem (as St Austine says) eorum qua a me quaestni^^i habere scientiam, quam
ignorantiam; sed qui^ id nondum po^ ^i, magis eligocantam ignorantiam
confiteri, quam falsam scientiam profiteri. It shall well befit our Christian
modesty to participate somewhat of the Sceptike, and to use their (...), till
the (...) and remainder of our knowledge be supplied by Christ: In quem sic
credimus, vt si alique nobis non apa^i^t et^^m puls^ntibus, nullo modo advers^s
eum mu^murare debeamus. To conclude. St Austine in his eightieth Epistle
discoursing of the speedy or slow coming of our Savior to judgment, to show
that it is the safest way to teach neither, but to suspend our belief, and
confess our ignorance, ranging himself with men of this te^per, obsecrote
(says he to Hes^chtus, to who^ he writes that Epistle) obsecrote vt me talem
non spernas. So give me leave to co^mence the same suit to you: obs^cro vos vt
me talem no^ spernatis. Let me request you bear with me, if I be such a one,
as I have St Austine for example. For it is not depth of knowledge, nor
knowledge of antiquity, or sharpness of wit, nor authority of Councils, nor
the name of the church can settle the restless conceits, that possess the
minds of many doubtful Christians: only to ground for faith on the plain
vncontroversable text of Scripture, and for the rest to expect and pray for the
coming of our Elias, this shall compose our waverings, and give final rest
unto our souls.

Thus instead of a discourse which was due unto this time, concerning the
glorious resurrection of our blessed Savior, and the benefits that come unto
us by it, I have diverted my self upon another theme, more necessary as I
thought for this auditorie, though less agreeable with this solemnity. Those
who have gone before me in that argument have made so copious a harvest, that
the issue of my gatherings must needs have been but small, except I had with
Ruth gleand out of their sheaues, or straind my industry which is but small,
and my wits which are none, to have held your attentiveness with new and
quaint conceits. In the mean time, whether it be I or they, or whatsoever has
been delivered out of this place, God grant that it may be for his honor,
and for the Churches good, to whom both it and we are dedicate. To God the
Father, etc.

FINIS.

