THIS Worlds Folly. OR A Warning-Peece discharged upon the Wickedness thereof.

Hor. Sat. 3. Lib. I. Et qui nocturnus divum sacra legerit; adsit
Regula, peccatis qua poenas irroget aquas.
By I. H.

HEB DDIM HEB DDIEV



London Printed by William Iaggard for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at
his shop at the South entry of the Royal Exchange. 1615.

To the more judicious Reader.
NOt to affront a little structure with too large a Portall; briefly, let me
thus far insinuate my self into thy favorable acceptance: That without
squint-eye, thou will suprauise this my hasty, and artlesse homespun web, (the
rapted Corrolarie of my more busy hours) and silently suspend thy Cryticke
censure; seeing it was (from the Exordium to the Exodium) warpt and wouen in
some few sad minutes, softly stolen from the humide bosom of the silent Night,
and suddenly endured the pitiful pain of Pressing, without my knowledge or
perusal: and the rather I woo thee hereunto, for that the intercedency of
more weighty occurrences (from whence my shallow rivulets of life draw head and
issue) thwarts and repelles the deeper current of my more studious disseignes.
What errors therefore are obuious, either of commission or omission, rather
attribute them to the Times breuity, then the Authors fatuity; albeit, the
subsequent matter in part, be out of my garb and element; who is (being most
unworthy) neither approved nor profes'd Divine.

Praecedentis Contractio.
AN quispiam (quaeso) est, qui si iusta lance illarii regionum vitia and noeuos
trutinet, in quibus Euangelij professio floret ac viget, non ad ipsum pene
peccat: apicem ascendisse illas and cuectas esse dicat. Si vnd^que
circumspiciat, si nobiles, infimos, opulentos, egenos, eruditos, imperatos ob
oculos ponat, singulos deforme: and prodig osos suae libidinis foetus parere
and parturire, non animo fingens concipiet, sed reipsa id probans experietur.
Si aulicae vitae primo te speculatorem constituas, anlicorum luxum and del
cias, sat scio, criminaberis: omnes ibi splendido vestitu and peregr no amictu
volitant, nitide compti, concinne et molliter composit^ ambulant, in Gallos,
Italos, tanquam noua induta forma transmutati incedunt, qui mollitiem plusquam
muliebrem nimium effoeminata imitatione exprimunt: Isto fere nomine a Propheta
ol^m taxati Israeliti sunt, Amos. 6.6.
Accumbunt (inquit) in lectis eburneis, b^bunt in crateribus vini, and
praestantissimo vnguento vngunt se, neque afficiuntur aegritudine propter
confractionem Iosephi: Si ad rusticam vitam contemplandam descendas ibi sordida
omnia and agrestia occurrent: inter rusticos fraudem, dolum, auaritiam
dominari, atque aratrum ipsum comitari conspicies: Istos Propheta sic increpat:
Dicunt, Amos 8.4.
quando transiuerit hoc nouilunium vel Sabbatum, vt vendamus comeatum, and
apperiamus frumenti horrea, minuendo Epsa, and maius facie^do pondus ac
pervertendo lancibus dolosis. Si ad diuites te conuertas, illis foenerandi, and
quacunque iniuria opes congerendi and cumulandi cupidinem amicam admodum and
familiarem esse tibi compertum erit: In quos sic denunciat Esaias: Vae
coniungentibus domum domui, Isa. 5 8.9.
agrum agro adhibentibus, etc. domus vestrae desolationicrunt (iurauit Deus)
magnae and p^aestantes. Si panperum tecta intrare digneris, and cor^ns moribus
te assuefeceris, nihil praeter querelas, turgia, vociserationes andias fu^t ^
etiam rapinas, inimicitias deprehendes: de qu^hus vere prae^^xit vates: Ne
creditore amico, ab ^a, quae cubat in sinu tuo, obserua fores oris tui. Micah.
7.5
Nam filius turpitudine afficit patre^, filia insurgit in matre^ suam, ^urus in
socrum suam, i^inuci cuiusque sunt domestici ipsius. Si doctorum and
literatorum classem speculari cupias, legisperitos nummorum plus, quam turis
studiosos, auaritiae magis quam iustitiae min strosdices: neque hic silet idem
Propheta, ita in Iudices innectus: Vtmalefaciant ambae manus strenue, Princeps
poscit et Iudex pro retributione, Micah 7.3.
etc. Theologos praeterea osc^tanter victitantes, multos gregem non pascentes
quippe quod pluribus praeficiantur, vel ineptiad docendum sint, sed in decimis
tamen suis colligendis mire astutos and prouidos reperies: De quibus Zachariam
sic loquentem audiamus: Oues erraticas non visitant, Zach. 11
aetate teneras non requirunt, et fractas non curant, sed carnem pinguioris
comedunt, et vngulas earum perrumpunt. Si postremo imperitam and rudem
plebeculam adeas, monstritibi and prod gi^ loco erit, si resciueris, quam rudis
ea sacrarum literarum sit quam diuini cultus ignara, quam porro versata and
petulans, quam ad iniurias proclouis, ad rixas parata, ad p^etatis edendos
fructus indocilis and infrugifera: vt olim Ieremias de populo conquestus est: A
minimo little vsque ad maximum, quisquis est, de ditus est quaesturi, Ierem. 13.
etiam a Propheta vsque ad Sacerdotem, quisquis est, agit falso: Quis ergo est,
qui isto modo per corruptos temporum nostroru^ mores animo discurrens, poenam
illam grauem and acerbam praesag^re non possit, quam nobis minatur Ichouah,
nist diuinae vindictae cursus nostra pietate sistatur?

FINIS.
This worlds a Fool. OR A warning-peece discharged upon the wickedness
thereof.
WHen I but seriously consider this besotted World, how (like a turbulent
torrent) it is inundate with all sorts of execrable sins, a trembling horror
unties my bodies Ligatures, my very knees beat together; and I could
unfeignedly wish my sinewie Structure to be transformed into a lump of Snow,
that the ardor of my souls vexation might dissolve it into penitential
tears. Do not men act sin with an auaritious appetite? Are not all varieties
of abominations lifted to their verticke point? Is not Satan, that subtle
Impostor, put to his Nil vltra in coining them, so fast, as men would willingly
put them in practice? Did Pride ever so strut it upon the Tiptoes as now it
does? Does not Sir Iaques-Scabdhams (sole heir to some driueling and gowty
Usurer, who to gain one single deniere to the number of multiplication, would
suck Figs out of an Asses fundament) bestow more on a pair of spangled
Shoo-tyers, then some of our ancient Kings have done of a whole garment? But
Olim haec meminisse, nocebit. Can the devil out of his shop of Fashions, lay
open more anticklike Forms then are forged on the Anvile of man's fantastic
Invention? In Court, the Nobility are hardly distinguished from their followers:
in City, the Merchant is not known from his Factor: in Country, the Gentry
cannot be descried or described from the Bacon-eating, brawny-handed Rustic:
and in general, the Body-publicke is so ore-spredde with the leprosy of that
garish Strumpet, PRIDE, as there is scarce any difference betwixt Countess and
Curtezan, Lady and Chambermaid, Mistress and greasy Kitchin-wench, Gentleman
and Mechanicke; as for Knight and Tailor, there goes but a pair of Sheares
betwixt them. How many mispend and profusely lavish their forenoones hours in
the curious pranking of their sinne-polluted bodies, but how few rescrue one
poor brace of minutes wherein to provide spiritual induments to house their
naked sinful souls? Never was that Apoththegme of old Bias the Philosopher
more verified (Omnia mea mecum porto) then in these our frantic Times: most
men carry their wealth about with them, (not as Bias did, in Learning and
Virtue) but upon their backs in gorgeous apparel: women do so commonly
sophisticate their beauties, that one (though Linceus-sighted) can hardly judge
whether they possess their own faces or no: and which is more then most
lamentabl, every snowy-headed Matron, every toothlesse An abuse much complaind
of by the Company of Painters.
Mumpsimus, that one may see the sun go to bed through the furrows of her
forehead, must have her box of odoriferous pomatum, and glittering Stybium
wherewithal to parget, white-lime, and complexionate her rumpled cheeks, till
she look as smug as an handsome painted close-stoole or rotten post. But as
for those that lap up their bodies in the pleasant mists of aromaticke
perfumes, let them withal swallow the Poets pill: Neuole, nonbene olet, qui
been semper olet. Martial.

Within a sweet and Ciuet-lurking body, often is imprisoned a loathsome
stinking soul.
Murder is accounted but Manly revenge, and the desperate stabber cares no
more to kill a man then to crack a Flea. Usury and Extortion are held Laudable
vocations; Covetousness is styled Thrift; Luxury and Whoredom are reputed
but youthful tricks. And as for Drunkenness, why that is a tolerable
recreation: do not men pursue it with such inordinat affection, that they often
neglect their functions, bid farewell to that domesticke care they ought to
entertain, dislodge that humane providence which should be shut up in the
cabinet of their reasonable part, and soly prostitute themselves to quotidian
carowsing, till their breathes smell no sweeter then a Brewers Aperne? whilst
their families are wrung and grip't in the clutches of Poverty, locked up and
imprisoned from those necessary supplements, which should keep both breath
and body together at union. This is a worthy S. Gregory.
Fathers opinion, That a manpossessed with a devil may be thought to be in a
more hopeful state then a Drunkard: for albeit he be possessed, yet is it
compulsiuely, and against his will; but the Drunkard wholly adopts and
dedicates himself with all the powerful faculties of his soul, voluntarily
to the service of Satan. S. Augustine likewise descries three fearful
properties in a Drunkard: S. Augustine.
It confoundes Nature, (says he) loses Grace, and consequently incurres Gods
wrathful indignation to be powered out upon the embracer thereof.

Swearing and blaspheming Gods great and glorious name, is reckoned for a Moral
virtue, the grace of Birth and Honor, the cognizance of an high-bred spirit.
What Christian can refrain (that has any spark of divine intellect in him) to
vnsluce the floodgates of his eyes, and let his melting heart gush through in
tears, when in the streets he shall hear little children scarce able to go, or
speak to be understood, volley forth most fearful oaths, and with such
procliuity, as if they had bin tutored in their mothers womb? whilst their
parents standing by, offer not to check them with so much as a sovvre
reproof, but seeming rather rather to solace themselves in their childrens
sins, and delight in their own damnations, like those who die of a Sardinian
laughter. If the penal Law of Ludouicus were put in practice, (who hearing one
swear, seared up his lips with an hot iron) scarce ten in as many parishes,
but would be glad to be in league with the Apothecaries Lip-salue. How many
miraculous judgments has God shot out against the blasphemers of his sacred
Name? (whose instances would be too prolixious:) what sin can be more damnable,
and yet what more practiced? none can sooner plu^ge the soul into the
implacable gulf of perdition, and yet no sin (by intentive endeavor) so easy
to be cropped off, and weeded up; for that it is no incidentall issue of natural
corruption, but an accidental Monster engendered of corrupted custom. A
learned August.
Father confesses, That at every other word, he once used to swear, but at
length endeavoring to lock up the door of his lips, to set watch before his
tongue, imploring divine assistance therein, and entreating moreover his friends
to smite him with the rod of reprehension; in forty days, he utterly lost the
abusiue use thereof: so that now (says he) Nihil mihi facilius, quam non
iurare, Nothing is more easy unto me then not to swear at all. French
Inuentory.
It is recorded, that Lewis the 7. King of France divulged an Edict, that
whosoever was known to war against heaven with oaths, should be branded in
the forehead as a Capital offender: should not then every Christian labor to
set a watch before his mouth and keep the door of his lips, that no
rebellious words salley forth against his Creator? if not for the fear of
temporal Justice, yet lest the God of Justice should brand his soul with the
dreadful stigme of eternal damnation, which no salve can heal, Haliacmons
flood wash out, nor length of time wear off.

O lamentable! when the Turks and Ethnicks outstrip us in their cloudy and
ignorant zeal: they will dispute in the heart of their highest streets about
their Alcoran and Mahometish Religion, with holy intended devotion: But what
voice is heard in our streets? Naught but the squeaking out of those Lasciui
contus quibus Satyri gaudent. Achan var. ^^st. genesis
(...), obscaene and light ligges, stuffed with loathsome and unheard of
Ribauldry, sucked from the poisonous dugs of Sinne-sweld Theaters; controuersall
conferences about richest Beer, neatest Wine, or strongest Tobacco, wherein to
drown their souls, and draw meager diseases upon their distempered bodies.
Therefore let them be patient, if I rippe up their impostumd'd ulcers (as
Erasm. Apophthegm.
Diogenes did the luxurious scape-thrifts) with the Poets Lancier: -- Homer.
(...).
Fond youth, thy vital Twist will soon be cracked.


And tell them moreover, that by their nocturnall superfluities, and insatiable
quaffings, they set but feathers in Times wings, and (as a worthy homebred
Author says) spur but the gallopping horse, hasten on their speedy deaths, and
dig their own untimely graves. More have: recourse to Playing houses, then to
Praying houses, where they set open their cares and eyes to suck up variety of
abominations, bewitching their minds with extrauagant thoughts, and benumbing
their souls with insensibilitie, where by fin is become so customarie to them,
as, That to sin, with them is deemed no sin at all; consonant to that
Theological Maxim, Consuetude peceandi, tollit peccati sensum; and semblable
to Pythager as his conceit of the sphaericall Harmony: Because (says he) we
ever hear it, we never hear it. I will not particularize those Of (...) an
vnsaucuty hea^ be, in English called Beets. Erasm. Apophthegm.
Blite a dramata (as Laberius terms another sort) those Fortune-fatted fools,
and Times I deots, whose garb is the Toothache of wit, the Plague Sore of
Judgment, the Common-sewer of Obscaenities, and the very Traine-powder that
discharges the roaring Meg (not Mol) of all scurrile villainies upon the Cities
face; who are feign to produce blind Garlic.
Impudence, to personate himself upon their stage, behung with chains of
Garlic, as an Antidote against their own infectious breaths, lest it should
kill their Oyster-crying Audience. Or, Tu quoque.
Vos quoque, and you also, who with Scylla-barking, Stentor-throated
bellowings, flashchoaking squibbes of absurd vanities into the nosthrils of
your spectators; barbarously diuerting Nature, and defacing Gods own image, by
metamorphising humane Greenes Baboone.
shape into bestiall form.

Those also stand within the stroke of my pen, who were wont to Curtain over
their defects with knauish conueyances, and scum off the froth of all wanton
vanity, to qualify the eager appetite of their slapping Favorites. In fine,
these are the Masters of those Mint-houses, wherein are coined all kinds of
Atheistical prophanations: these are they, who by their wantonizing
Stage-gestures, can ingle and seduce men to heave up their hearts and
affections, as a voluntary sacrifice to that exulcerated Fiend The spirit of
Lechery.
Asmodeus, and all other abominable Idoll-sinnes, obstinately alienating and
tearing their selves and souls from the spirit of Grace; and by how much more
exact these are in their mimicke venerean action, by so much more highly are
they seated in the Monster-headed Multitudes estimation: notwithstanding one
might thus gleeke them, (as Diagenes did the fellow that exercised the Play
called A foolish game used by lovers, Erasin. Apophthegm.
(...)) The better they do, the more it is. He therefore, who (by the
assidual drinking up the loathsome Lectures) with auaritious delectation
whiffes down the muddy lees of their damnable doctrine, falls par into the paws
of the Poets tart invectiue: Ridiculus tot as simul absorbere placentas, Horat.
lib. 1. Sat. 8.

-- In lieu of delicies,
The wit-blinde gull will swallow gilded Flies.
These are they, whose exemplary lascinious subiectmatter, leave behind it
(like the snaile) a slimy trackt, in which many of their Sectaries insensibly
post on so fast, till they plunge themselves praecipitate into the Charybdis of
incuitable destruction, and contemned beggary. O then let the honest heart lay
fast hold of the Poets counsel, who being hoode-winkt with the condensate and
cloudy night of ignorance, could by natural instinct discern this light,
(...). Theognis.

Keep and converse with honest company,
For still from them, thou may gleane honesty.
Could not the impetuous storms be quieted, the foaming billows calmed, nor
the ship preserved, till Jonas was hurled ouer-board? Then surely neither can
Gods wrath be qualified, nor his pestilential arrows, which fly amongst us by
day, and lethally wound us by night, be quiuer'd up, till these Menstruous
Bawdy Players.
Rags be torn off (by the hand of Authority) from the Cities skirts, which
so besoyle and coinquinate her whole vesture. The Primum mobile which gives
motion to these vnder-turning wheels of wickedness, are (those mercenary
Squitter-wits mis-called Poets, whose illiterate and picke-pocket Inventions,
can Emungere plebes argento, slily nip the bunges of the baser troops, and cut
the reputations throat of the more eminent rank of Citizens with corroding
scandals: these are they, who by dipping their Goose quils in the puddle of
mischief, with wild and vncollected spirits make them desperately drunk, to
strike at the head of Nobility, Authority, and high- seated Greatness. And all
this they do, but only to purchase the Fee-simple of a Long-lane Suite, to
entaile a Punke in some new-stript Peticoate, and to cancel the Tauern-bill
for two Bacchanall Suppers: albeit, for the whole next-ensuing quarter, they
be feign to live by the denariall lines drawn from the Center of an Essex
Cheese; and be glad sneakingly to suck up the bottomes of gamesters leauings,
or young Prodigals superfluities, (to whom they stick as fast as a kibe to a
Boys heel) as Flies do in summer the drunkards spillings. Oh! how their
teeth will stand wet-shodde at the presence of a brace of black Puddings? and
think themselves as brave men as a new chosen Scauenger, if they be but
preferred to the caruing up of a two-penny Custard. With reucrence
notwithstanding, must my petulant Muse stoop low to those wit-wonders of our
age, whose Inventions sphaere moves in a mystic orb beyond the common
Intellect. But without farther evasion, I will return into the path of my
intended purpose. Many set fair outside colors upon their profession of
Religious honesty, but being strictly looked into by the penetrating eye of
Practice and Performance, prove seldom did in grain. Some glitter like Gold
in their conversation, but put once to the touch, are found but counterfeit
Alcamy: Others will needs seem (...), a substantial body, in integrity of
life; but shaken and fisted with the hand of Trial, become but (...), an
Anatomy of bones. To give Alms is thought but a fantastic Ceremony, and to
refresh the comfortless Lazarus, is deemed but the maintenance of idle and
exorbitant vagabonds. O where is Charity fled? Is she not whipped and foysted
out of great men's Kitchins, glad to keep sanctuary in straw-cloathd Cottages?
Are not larger beneuolences often distributed at the door of one Russetclad
Farmer, then at ten mighty men's gates? The Magnifico's of this world rear up
sumptuous buildings only for show and ostentation; whiffing more smoke out of
their Noses then their Chimneyes:and it begets more wonder to see them shake
down their bounty into the poor man's lap, then to see a Court Lady unpainted,
or to find an open-fisted Lawyer, that without a Vulgarly ter med bribe.
New-yeares gift will faithfully prosecute his Clients cause. Notwithstanding
all this, so parcimonious are they in their domesticke provision, that not a Rat
of any good education, but scorns to keep house with them. In those Golden
Times of yore, Charity was the rich man's Idol: for they did emulate each
other, in supplying the widows wants, in comforting the orphans miseries, and
in refreshing the travelers wearines; and it was their earthly Sammum bonam to
be open hearted and handed to each hungry stranger; this Inscription commonly
engraued upon the front of their gates: Porta patens esto, nulli clauderis
honesto,
O gate, stand open to all, be shut against none:
But in these our modern days, they can cunningly transpose the point, and
thus pervert the sense: Porta patens esto nulli, clauderis honesto,
Stand open (Gate) to none, be shut against all.
Do not these Heauen-tempting Nimrods depopulate and level with the ground
whole Towns, crowd and iustle many honest and ancient Farmers out of their
demesnes, deuastate their possessions, and expose them, with their wives,
children, and families, to be Camerades with pale-fac't beggary? only to lay
the Basis of their Babell-out-brauing Palaces, abillimented with Punkish
outsides, to cheat the speedy-approaching traveler of his hungry hopes, as
Zeuxis did the silly Birds with his liuely-limbed Grapes: and if they be
in-lined with quaint garnishings, shings, and costly furniture, and beautified
with curious-pencild pieces, whereon thy eye may glut it self by gazing, yet
perhaps may thou be Chapfalne for want of victuals. These glittering
objects are the Medusa's that inchant, the violent instigations that spur on
young luxurious heirs, to hurl out their angle to catch their Fathers lives,
and languishingly to long, till they see their mossie bearded Sires topple up
their heels. Never could the Poets tristall song be better adapted, then to
these our degenerate times: Ovid.
Filius ante diem patries inquirit in anuos. And when their Fathers surrender
up their breathes to him from whom it was first diffused, then do they mourn
(forsooth) though ceremonially, not for that they are dead, but because they
dyed no sooner.

The premises preconsidered, what can be expected then but an imminent
desolation, or conclusiue dissolution of this foolish doting world, since
universally it is but an indigested Chaos of outrageous enormities? Religion is
made the Canopy to shroud the putrefaction of Hypocrisy; and its grown the
highest Maxim in mundane policies, to seem (not be) religions: equall-handed
Justice is rusht aside by stubborn Authority, and all moral Virtues, embraced
in their Contraries.

How long then (most mild, and more merciful God) will thou forget to be
just? Oh, how long will thou shut up the vessels of thy wrath, and protract
revenge? Art thou not the powerful God of Justice? how can thou then be any
thing but thy self? what infiniteness of sins are shot up to heaven against
thee? yet still, and still, thou wooest us with the humble and heavenly breath
of thy holy Gospel, uncovering those inexpressible wounds thou receiuedst for
our redemption, from sin and Satan, that we might with pitiful
commiseration behold them: and incessantly crying out unto us, How often (O my
dear childeren, whom I have bought with the price of my most precious blood)
would I have gathered you together, even as an Hen does her Chickins, and
yet, nor yet, will you be collected? How often has he thundered and knocked at the
doors of our hearts with the power of his spirit, to wake us from the profound
Ecstasin of Soule-killing sins, yet still lie we snorting on the bed of
Security, and cannot be rowzed? How often, O how often, has he outstretched
his all-sauing hand, to heave and help us out of the slimy mud of our
impieties, yet still lie we groueling and orewhelm'd in the insensible
Lethargy of abominable transgressions? How many warning-peeces has he
discharged upon us? how often has he displayed his Milke-white Ensign of Peace
unto us? what devouring Plagues, what Fires, what Inundations, what
unseasonable Seasons, what prodigious Births, what unnatural Meteors, what
maleuolent Conjunctions, what ominous Apparitions, what bloody assassinations
of mighty Kings, what Rapes, what Murders, what fraudulencies betwixt Brother
and Brother? what horrible Conspiracies by Sons against Fathers; all these
sent as Heralds to denounce Gods just Judgments against us, yet will we not
come in and be reconciled.

These prodigious precursions, or precursiue prodigies, should deter each
humane creature from spurning against his Creator; these premonitions should
instruct us, that Gods dreadful vengeance waits at our doors, and like a
starved Tygar gapes for our destruction; and notwithstanding he do for a while
fore-slow to let fall his flaming rod of fiery indignation upon us, yet is the
axe already laid to the root of the tree, and God must and will assuredly come
to judgment, seeing that now, not any of those ancient predictions,
mystically poynted out unto us in the Soule-sauing WRIT, by the holy Prophets,
remain unfinished, but only the final destruction of that Romish seven headed
Monster, together with the recollection of the vagabundiall jews into the
sheepe-fold of Jesus Christ.

Does not an uncouth terror seize upon a man, when in the depth or noone of
night this sudden and vnthought-of outcry of Fire, Fire, shall fill his
affrighted ears, and chase him out of his soft and quiet slumbers; whereat,
skipping from his easefull bed, and distractedly gazing through the casement,
shall behold his own house ore-spred with a bright-butning flame, and
himself, together with his wife, children, servants, goods, and all, most
liable to the devouring rapacity of imminent danger? O consider then thou
wicked man, how thy soul will be beleaguered with anguish and horror, when in
that last and terrible Day, thou shall behold with thy mortal eyes the
Cataracts of Heaven vnsluc'd, and hushing showers of sulphurious fires disperse
themselves through all the corners of the earth and air, the whole Universe
ore-canoped with a remorcelesse flame: when thou shall see the worlds great
and glorious Judge appear triumphantly in the skies, whilst mighty winged
clouds of devouring flames fly before him, as vshers to his powerful and
terrible Majesty; attended with countlesse multitudes of beauteous Angels,
golden-winged Cherubims and Seraphims sounding their Trumpets, whose clamorous
toungs shall affright the empty air, and call and awake the drowsy dead from
their dark and dusky Cabines: when thou shall see the dissipated bones of all
Mortals since the Creation (concatenate and knit in their proper and peculiar
form) amazedly start up, and in numberless troops flock together, all
turning up their wondering eyes to gaze upon their high and mighty Creator.
Then, o then will thy Conscience recommemorate afresh thy past-committed
sins, and with the corroding sting of guilt will stab through thy perplexed
soul; then, o then will it be too late to wish the mountains to fall upon
thee; for they themselves for fear would shrink into their center: alas, it
cannot then be available to woo the waters to swallow thee; for they would
be glad to disclaim their liquid substance and be reduced to a nullity: what
will it boot thee then, to entreat the earth to entombe thee in her dankish
womb, when she her self will struggle to remove from her local residence,
and to fly from the presence of the great Judge: the air cannot muffle thee
in her foggy vastiry, for that will be clearly refined with celestial
flames, before contaminated with humane pollution. In fine, how will thy soul
tremblingly howl out, and break forth into bitter exclamations, when thou
shall hear that definitive, or rather infinitive sentence denounced against
thee, Non noui, diseede, ito in Gehennam, I know thee not, depart, and go into
everlasting torment; whilst Legions of devils with horride vociferations
muster about thee, like croking Ravens about some dead carcass, waiting to
carry thee. O then thou Usurer, and thou that grindest the Faces of the pore,
thy gold cannot ransom thee: then, thou mighty man that wrackest the widow,
and circumuents the orphan of his successiue right, thy honor cannot
privilege thee: then thou murderer, adulterer, and blasphemer, thy colorable
excuses will not purge thee: then, o thou uncharitable churl who never
knew, that Nil dives habet de diuitijs, nisi quod ab illo postulat pauper, A
rich man treafures up no more of his riches, then that he contributes in
alms: thou, that never imbracedst the counsel of that reverend Ambrose.
Father, who cries, Pasce fame morientem: quisquis pascendo seruare poteris: si
non paucris, fame occidisti: Feed him that dies for hunger, whosoever thou art
that can preserve and wilt not, thou stand guilty of famishing: then I
say, in that day shall thou pine in perdition: then, o thou luxurious Epicure,
that through the five senses, which are the Cinque Ports, or rather sinneports
of thy soul, gulpest down delightful sin, like water, they will be to thee
like the Angels book, sweet in thy mouth, but bitter in thy bowels: then, o
thou (gorbellied Mammonist) that piles up and congesteth huge masses of
refulgent earth, purchased by all unconscionable courses, yet cariest nothing
with thee, Nisiparna quod vrna capit, but a Coffin and a Winding Sheet; thy
fair pretenses will be like characters drawn upon the sands, or arrows shot
up to heauen-ward, they cannot release thee from Satan's inexpiable servitude:
Then, o thou Cankerworme of Commonwealths, thou monster of man, thou that
put out the eye of Justice with bribes, or so closely shuts it, that the
clamorous cry of the poor man's case cannot open it; thou that make the Law
a nose of wax to turn and fashion it to thine own private end, to the utter
disgrace of conscionable Justice, and to the lamentable subversion of many an
honest and upright cause, thy quirkes, dilatorie demurres, conueyances and
conniuences cannot acquit thee: but thou shall be removed with the Writ
Corpus cum causa, into the lowest and darkest dungcon of damnation. No, no, the
Lord of heaven and earth (who is good in infiniteness, and infinite in
goodness) will winnow, garble, and sanne his corn, the choice wheat he will
treasure up in the garners of eternal felicity, but the chafe and darnell
must be burnt with unquenchable fire: There must you languish in torments
vnrelaxable: there must you fry and fieeze in one selfe-furnace: there must
you live in implacable and tenebrous fire which (as August. de ciu. t^dei.
Austin defines) shall give no light to comfort you. Then will you wish (though
then too late) that you had been created loathsome Toades, or abhorred
Serpents, that your miseries might have closed up with your lives: but you must
be dying perpetually, yet never dye; and (which enuirons me with a trembling
terror) when you have languisht in inexpressible agonies, tortures, gnashings,
and horrid howlings ten thousand millions of years, yet shall you be as far
from the end of your torments, as you were at the beginning. A confused model
and misty figure of hell have we conglomerate in our fancy, drowsily dreaming
that it is a place under earth, vncessa^tly (Aetna-like) vomiting sulphurious
flames, but we never pursue the meditation thereof so close as to consider what
a thing it is to live there eternally: for this adiunct Eternal intimates such
infiniteness, as neither thought can attract or supposition apprehend:and
further to amplify it with the words of a worthy writer: Though all the men
that ever have or shall be created, were ( Briareus like) hundred-handed, and
should all at once take pens in their hundred hands, and should do nothing
else in ten hundred thousand millions of years but sum up in figures as many
hundred thousand millions as they could, yet never could they reduce to a
total, or confine within number, this tri-sillabled word Eternal.

Can any Christian then (upon due consideration hereof) forbear to prostrate
himself with flexible humility before the glorious throne of grace, and there
with floods of unfeigned tears, repentantly abjure and disclaim the
allurements of carnal corruption, the painted pleasures of the world, and the
bitter-sweetnesse of sin, which is the deaths-wound of his soul: for
Peccatum in animo, quasi vulnus in corpore, a weapon wounds the body, and sin
the soul: for what profits it a man to win the whole world, and loose his
own soul: The soundest method therefore to prevent our exclusion from the
throne of Gods mercy is to imagine we still see him in his Justice present,
whatsoever or whenever we intend or attempt any black deseigne; let us but
adumbragiously fancy (as one has it) the firmament to be his face, the
all-seeing Sun his right eye, the Moon his left, the winds the breath of his
Nostrels, the Lightning and Tempests, the troubled action of his ire, the Frost
and Snow his frowns, that the heaven is his Throne, the earth his Footstool;
that he is all in all things, that his omnipresence filles all the vacuities of
heaven, earth, and sea: that by his power he can vngirdle and let loose the
seas impetuous waves, to ore-whelme and bury this lower Universe in their vast
wombes in a moment: that he can let drop the blew Canopy (which has nothing
above it whereto it is perpendicularly knit) or hurl thunderbolts through the
tumerous clouds, to pash us praecipitate through the center into the lowest
dungeon of hell. These allusiue cogitations of Gods omnipotent majesty will curb
in and snafflle us from rushing into damnable actions, if we vnremouably seat
them in our memories.

Make then a covenant with thine eyes and heart o man, least they doat on
earthly dross, surfeit on the sugared pills of poisonous vanities, and so
insensibly hurl down thy better part into the gulf of irreuocable damnation:
if not for thy self sake, yet iniure not thy Creator, who has drawn thee by
his own (...), or Pattern, molded thee in his own form, and to make thee
eternally happy, has infused his own essence into thee. For thy Soul (by the
Aristotle.
Philosophers confession) is (...), an Infusion Celestial, no Natural
traduction: and in that respect, Philo.
another calls it Coeli apopasma, an arrachment, or cantell pulled from the
Celestial substance, which cannot terminate it self within a lump of flesh;
even as the beams of the Sun, though they touch the earth, and give life to
these inferior creatures, yet still reside in the body of the Sun, whence they
are darted: so thy Soul, though it be seated either within the filme of the
brain, or confined in the center of the heart, and conuerseth with the Senses:
yet, Haeret origini suae, (says Seneca.
one) It will still there have being, whence it has its beginning.

Remember then thy Creator in the days of thy youth; call upon him, while it
is called to day, oportunely: for as the Poet no less sweetly, then discreetly
sung: Quis scit, Horat. lib. ^. Ode. 7.
an adijciant hodiernae crastina summae
Tempora di superi?


Who knows ore-night, that he next morn shall breath?

Then take David's Mane, early in the morn, not the devils Mane, stay till to
morrow: for thou know he will bring thee to judgment, yet thou know not
when, nor in what year, nor in what month of the year, nor in what week of
the month, nor in what day of the week, nor in what hour of the day, nor in
what minute of the hour, nor in what moment of that minute: for he will come
Sicut fur in nocte, like a thief in the night, suddenly, before with a wink
thou can lock up thine eye, or in thy brain create the nimblest thought.
Can thou then hope to stand justified in thy Makers presence, when thou have
crammed the devil with thy sap of strength, and full-gorg'd him with the purest
acorne-mast of thy sinowey virility, if at last thou come limping on Times
tottering crouches, to present unto him the offall, husks, and morosity of thy
doting decrepite age? What thank it is to pardon our enemies when we cannot
hurt them? to give away our goods when we can enjoy them no longer? to abandon
our pleasures, when we cannot use them? to forsake sin, when it bids farewell
to us? and at last only to surcease to offend, when ability of offending is
taken from us? No, no, he will then parallel thee with the sluggard, that never
would acquire food till he was first starved, and rank thee with the sottish
Idiot, that could not learn to know a fish, till he was already stung with a
Scorpion: thy palsey-shaken prayers will be like Cains oblation, unacceptable to
the Lord and noisome to his nosthrils. Think thou to expiate Gods Justice
when thou have prodigally sweal'd out the blazing lamp of thy brightest days
in the devils Chapel, if at last thou come creeping (when thy breath lies
twinkling in the socket of thy nosthrilles) to set it up in Gods Sanctuary,
hoping then and there to hane it replenisht with his all-sauing Grace and
Mercy? O mock not thy soul with these deluding Phantasma's: for as Plut. in.
vit. Alex.
Alexander seeing one of his soldiers whetting his dart, when others his
fellows went forth to fight, cashierd him, saying, Inutilis act, qui pararet
arma tune cum ^s vtendum, he is unfit to bear arms that has them to make
ready when he should skirmish: so will God send thee packing (as he did the
foolish virgins) with this retorsion; Thou comst disfurnisht with no oil in
thy lamp, and thou desern'st no mercy, that never desirdst it till now in
misery.

Gather thy self betimes then, within the weapons of Faith, Hope, Charity,
Repentance, and Perseverance, and let Prayer stand perpetual Sentinel: for if
the devil once get footing within thee, he will hardly be eiected, so wily is
he in peruenting thee, that thou can not be too wary in preventing him. For
as Plutark.
Iphicrates answered his General (who asked him, why he surrounded his
soldiers with a wall, when there was no fear of foe-mens approach) Abundans
cautela non nocet, A man cannot be too provident in preventing obuious and
occurrent dangers: so can thou not be too cautelous in repelling the
perilous stratagems of the devils assaults; therefore may I close up the
precedencie, with that worthy saving of a more worthy Owen. Epigr.
Epigrammatist, Nemo cauenda timet, qui metuenda canet.
No man needs fear, that fears before he needs.


O cleanse and purify thy heart then by earnest prayer and powerful
eiaculations, which is made the loathsome cage of sin, the silent receptacle
of all diabolical cogitations, and the dismal dungeon of malignant motions;
that the Spirit of grace may there find harbor, and take delight to be thy
Inmate. Remember, o thou mighty man, that swelling titles of Honor are but
folia vanitatis, the leaves of vanity, a Gnathonicall puff, and a blast of the
chaps: Remember, o thou rich man, that terrene and transitory pleasures are
like the Be, though they yield honey, yet carry they a sting, and are but Lilia
terrae, more delectable in show, then durable incontinuance: Remember, o thou
Extortioner, thou cruel man, thou murderer, thou adulterer, thou deceitful
man, thou that unconscionably detainest the hirelings wages, and thou that
actest inexorable villainies secretly in the darlie, imprisoned from the worlds
dull eye; that if the Eagle can discern, Sub frutice Leporem, sub fluctibus
piscem (as Augustm.
one has it) the Hare under the busho, and the Fish under the waves; much more
can God, who is the Creator of creatures, penetrate the closet of thy heart with
his all-seeing eye, and discern thy clandestine sinful practices, before,
and in their very conception, and for them he will bring thee to judgment.
Remember, o thou that swayst the sword of Justice, to strike or save, as thou
art suggested by thine own ends, profits, or affections, that though thy
covert proiects be not envulgar'd to the worlds general eye, yet a day of
Revelation will come, that Nihil occultum quod non reuelabitur, when all thy
partial and private practices shall be stripped, euiscerate and laid as
apparently open, as the Sheep upon the gambrell. But now with reverence, and
Doue-like humility, to you (which are Iehouahs Ambassadors, the Light of the
world, and Salt of the earth,) do I address my speech, mustred up in the
meanest and mildest rank of words: O I could wish, that all of you stood
without the list of that reprehension of vices, which once an ancient and
honest Guil. Malm. de Pont ficibus.
Historian twitted the Monks of Canterbury with: Monachi Cantuartenses (says
he) secularibus haud absimiles erant, canum cursibus auocari: aui^m praedam
raptu aliorumque valucrum per mane sequi: spumantis equi tergum premere: tesser
as quatere, etc. Some rise early in the morning to see their hounds pursue the
prey, but not to pray: some delight to catch fowls, but not souls: some take
pleasure to cast a Dye well, but not cast to die well. Does the wild Ass bray,
says Job, when he has grass, or loweth the Ox when he has fodder? but I
dare not say, no more do some of you preach when you have once got a Benefice.
If there be any that entertain Religion with their Lord, preach the praise of
their Patrons; Preachers in the Pulpits, chatters in their chambers, suiting
their linsey-woolsey professions with their several ends; O let those remember
how God met with a mischief that notorious Cassiodorus, lib 12. cap. 4.
Nicephoru^. lib. 14. cap. 31.
Nestorius, who, for his temporizing inconstancy set worms a work to eat out
his tongue: O let them look into the story of one Hecebolus a Socrat.
Tripartit. l^b. cap. 38.
Sophister, who accommodating his profession to the fashions of the Emperors,
fained himself in the days of Constantius, to be a most fervent Christian;
But when Julian the Apostata was ruler, presently he turned Paynime, and in
his orations proclaimed Julian a God; and when Julian was dead, in Iouinians
time, he would have turned back to Christianity; whereupon, for his
mutability and lightness in his Religion, his horrid conscience drove him to the
Church gates, and there hurling himself flat, cried and bellowed with a loud
voice, Conculcate me sal infatuatum; trample me under your feet, unsavory
salt that I am, entirely wishing out of his souls agony, that he had never
seen the light, or^t his Conception his tongue had been riuetted to the roof
of his mouth.

Lastly, and indefinitly to all, remember so to live, as you still may be
prepared for the stab of death: then will you desire to sing your Requiem, and
Quousque Demine? longing to be dissolved and to sleep in peace, reclusiuely
from the turbulent sea of earthy careful miseries; discerning clearly by the
spiritual eye of understanding, that man's life is a wayfare, and a warfare; a
wayfare, because it is short, and a warrefare, for that it is sharp; and that
worldly delights are deceitefull, and of no durability; like the waterserpent
d Ephemeron, simu^ oritur, moritur, no sooner bred, but dead: collecting
likewise out of humane experience, that the best life, is but a weary and
tedious pilgrimage, and feels no touch of true solace, till at the evening of
his days, he lodge at the Inn of death; for Death is the path to Life, a
Gaole-deliuery of the Soul, a perfect health, the haven of heaven, the final
victory of terrestrial troubles, an eternal sleep, a dissolution of the
body, a terror to the rich, a desire of the poor, a pilgrimage uncertain, a
thief of men, a shadow of life, a rest from travel, an epilogue to vain
delight, a consumption of idle desires, a scourge for evil, a guerdon for
good; it disburdens us of all care, vnmannicles and frees us from vexation,
solicitude, and sorrow. Of all those numberless numbers that are dead, never
any one returned to complain of Death, but of those few that live, most
complain of Life: on earth Nemo sua sort conte^tus, every man grumbles at his
best estate. The very Elements whereby our Ens (as the secondarie cause) is
preserved, conspire against us: the fire burns us, the water drowns us, the
earth annoyes us, and the air infects us: our days are laborious, our nights
comfortless: the heat scorcheth us, the cold benumbs us: health swells us with
Pride, sickness empaleth our beauties; friends turn Swallows, they will sing
with us in the Summer of prosperity, out in the Winter of trial, they will take
wing and be gone: Enemies brand our reputations with deprauing imputations;
and the envious man hurleth abroad his grins to ensnare our lives: who would
then desire to live where there is nothing that begets content? For this world
is a Theater of vanities, a Chaos of confusions, an Ambassador of mischief, a
tyrant to virtue, a breaker of peace, a favorite of war, a sweet of vices, a
coyner of lies, an anuile of Novelties, a table of Epicurisme, a furnace of
lust, a pit fall to the rich, a burden to the poor, a Cell of Pilgrims, a
den of Thieves, a calumniator of the good, a renowner of the wicked, a
cunning impostor, and a deceiuer of all.

How is the progress of poore-proud-mans life violently agitated (like the
river Eurypus) with contrarious motions? The pleasure of the wily world thus
inueagles him, Veni ad me, ego reficiam, Come unto me and I will drown thee in
delight: the corruption of the luxurious flesh thus ingles him, Veni ad me, ego
inficiam, Come unto me, and I will infect thee, the devil he whispers this
in his ear, veni ad me, ego decipiam, Come unto me, and I will cheat and
deceive thee: but our sweet and sacred Savior Jesus Christ, with perswasiue
inducements, thus intreates him, Veni (...) ad me, ego retipiam, Come unto me
(I pray thee) that are heavy laden, and I will receive, and exonerate thee, and
with the mighty arm of my mercy and compassion, lift off that insupportable
load, which crusheth down to hell thy groaning soul.

Study then to live, as dead to the world, that thoumaist live with God: for
the just man is said, nunquam, sed post mortem viuere, never to live till
after death. Indeauor thy self to march fair through this worlds labyrinth:
not to squander and look asquint upon the Cyrcean allurements thereof: but
without turning either to the right or left hand, run straight on in that
Eclipiticke line, which will conduct thee to that Celestial Jerusalem, where
(with that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus) thou shall enjoy, pleasure without
pain, wealth without want, rest without labor, joy without grief, and
immensiue felicity without end. Therefore I will bind up the premises with this
conclusiue exhortation of the Apostles, Repent, and amend your lines, Math.
4.17.
for the Kingdom of God is at hand.

Proh dolor! hinc Lachrymae.
Fair Honor footes it: squallid Glo-wormes ride,
And dart false splendors from vnpaid-for Pride:
Ith best Religion true, none truly knows;
In such deformed conformity she goes.
Lust's a tired Jade, and waits for whom will mounther
The Lord with his Landresse, Countess, with Page encounter.
Hymen, tread out thy torch; Plate's concession,
Omnia communia, is the C profession.
Full beams of Grace beguild th'obsequious Groom,
VVho'l kiss the ground with his knee: But there is no room
For high-borne Merit: he ith shadow stands,
Far out o'th Margent of great-base Commands:
Sleeke Flatteries cups replenish't to the brim:
But swollen Promotion looks asquint on him,
Who hoards more treasures in's volumnious brain,
Then all those earth-bred stars, Prides gaudy train.
Peace, moyst-ey'd Muse, thy best Inventions poor,
Thy Toung's portcullist, but thy thoughts speak more.
The Authors Character.
IN hope of guerdonile Epistle none: with
O my thrice honored Lord, your worth alone, etc.
Nor blow the bellows to Ambitions fire:
With Eaglet-ayres make Butterflies mount higher
Then their own Natural pitch:nor with filled phrase,
Base-temperd Birth, will burnish, scowre, or glaze:
No Popiniey shall wear worths liuerie,
Emblaz'd with word-embroderie by me.
Let Enuies womb be my eternal grave,
If I turn Sycophant, or vnseason'd slave:
To furnish spangled-Fooles with what they want:
Make the Ass believe he carries the Elephant,
Craule int'a Great-mans bosom by some icast,
Like a starved Lowse upon a Tailors breast;
Or cloth the fatal strumpet Helena,
With th'attributes of chaste Andromeda:
Nor squint I after praise, or plausiue grace:
Man's honest plainness needs fear no man's face.
Insta, non magna vole.

