A Commemoration of the most prosperous and peaceable Reign of our gracious
and dear Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God of England, France and
Irelande, Queen etc. Now newly set forth this.xvii. day of November, being
the first day of the.xviii. year of her Majesty's said Reign.

By Edw. Hake. Gent.

Imprinted at London, by William How, for Richard Iohnes, dwelling without
Newgate, over against S. Sepulchers Church.

To the worshipful, his very loving Cowsen M. Edward Eliotte Esquier, the
Queens Majesty's Surueyour of all her Honors Manours, Lands and possessions
within her highness County of Essex.
Being entered (worshipful and my beeloued Cowsen) into the meditacion of ye
rare government of our renowned Queen Elizabeth, so high and so aboundaunte
matter of admyration offered it self to the view of mine understanding, that I
felt my thoughts in such sort surprised with the consideration thereof, that
(for the solace of my mind) I yielded my self a joyful man to set down in
writing some superfitiall discourse upon the same: such, as (at the least
within mine own soul) might stir up and procure the praises of God, and
draw forwards a dew thankfulness unto his majesty for the wonderful benefits
that largely (thereby) have accrewed to the whole body and to every particular
member of this our English Nation. And lo, no sooner had I accomplished this
mocion of my mind (in such sort as you may see it here set down in printe)
but another Cogitacion began with importunity to assail me a fresh: for
beholdinge (with the feruencye of my heart) the truth of that matter which I
had already compyled, and seeing yet (farther) so glorious and so plentiful a
treasourie remaining to be discovered, and that, In perpetuam rei memoriam: I
could not choose but so far mislike with the sclendernes of that which I had
already done, as I wished (and not slightly) that it would please almighty
God (to the eternal praises of his holy name) to stir up the zeal of some
learned and well approved member to give abroad for an universal view, to all
Countreies and Nations of Christendom, in ye heroyicall garnishment of
learning and truth, an exact historye and declaration of the same. And in this
cogitacio^, repairing unto your house for the comfort of your friendlye
conference, it was the good will of God that I should disclose mine affections
(that way) unto you, as also yt I should offer unto you the hearing of this
matter, as it was at that time, thus unlearnedly penned: where findyng by the
like good favor of god, your learned and friendly neighbor, it was recokned
for Gods divine providence, that I should require him also to be a hearer of ye
same. Which learned man (as you know) upon the hearing thereof, so largely
dispensed with all those wantes that by learning might (peradventure) have binne
supplied in this book, as that by favoring and chiefly regarding the undoubted
truth of the matter, he persuaded that it would grow no blemysh at all unto my
credit, neither in respect of the brevity of the work, nor yet for the
playnesse and rudenes of the style, if I should agree to the publishing of the
same in prynt: whereunto on the one part, the admyrable works of God so
exceedingly, above humane reason, shininge forth unto the world in the royal
person and regiment of our most loving and gracious Queen, and on the other
part, ye silence of ye learned sort (silence I may term it in respect of that
vehemence which ye woorthines of ye cause requires) and the more then stoical
and cold consideracio^ of al our english people, who are for ye greatest part
so far from thanking, yt they have no thinking of the same: these motions I
say, together with ye favorable ce^sure and encourageme^ts of your said learned
neighbor at one instant concurringe, I was zealously bold to cast abroad into
the view of ye world, this my small treatise, as it were to provoke the pen of
some renowned Homer, and to prepare the hearts of al her highness subjects to a
further and deper consideration of Gods exceeding and superaboundaunt mercies,
yt in the thankfulness and sincerity of their hearts, they might (not for one
day supersticiously, but for ever) keep holy unto ye Lord, ye co^memoratio^ of
ye most prosperous and peaceable reign of ye same our gracious and dear
sovereign lady queen Elizabeth. And now (my worshipful cowsen) because ye
forces of these my private motions have in this sort effected, ye needs they
must break forth (I trust to ye honor of the highest) and the same not meanly
by occasion of the encourageme^ts which I received in your house: I cannot
resist, but (coactedly as it were by love) I must confer ye dedication thereof
(digested into this little book as you see) upon you, before and above ye rest
of my beloved friends: assuring you yt (in ye great joy of my heart) I have
found you so equal unto mine affections in the favoring of this cause, and
in the comfort that you take by beholding the blisful days of our sanctified
DEBORA, as also so Ialous for the Regestryng of her highness praises (or
rather ye praises of our God) unto posterity, yt if I knew by what other
mean, more acceptably, then thus by the first view of these my trauayles
(employed to ye glory of god) I might manifest unto you the sincerity of mine
affection, undoubtedly you should find me so forward to accomplish the same,
that ye deed it self, to ye utmost limit of my poor degree, should be enough
to make known what unfeigned love I do bear you. And whereas the dedication of
all other books (for the most part) do seem to crave countinaunce and
defense at ye hands of ye patron, this my small book (assure your self) for
the dignity of the personage of whom it treats, as also for the truth of ye
matter yt it contains, shall be able enough (besides the defense of it self)
to give both countinaunce and commendation to your person, being indeed, the
very man (amongst men of your place and calling) whose loyal heart and
religious mind (besides the consideracion of private duties of love) may
challenge from me such affection as best of al becomes a christian lover to
his friend so well approved. And though the book be but little, yet ye personage
of who^ it treats is great: and so great, as that ye Book may sooner be
countenaunced with the royalty of her highness name, than be able (by ye
thowsande part) to show forth ye number of her princely virtues, much less,
of the large benefits that infinitely arise unto our common wealth of England
and to every member of the same, by the goodness of her rarest government:
Some particular parts whereof are (as before is declared) in these Quaires,
though brieflye, yet truly discoursed.

But now, that you may some way answer the name of a Patron of this my Book:
although the matter of the same has defense sufficient in it self, and in the
truth thereof, is able enough to stand against the faces of al ye enemies of
truth: Yet because there is a sort of people, which I fear me, more of envy,
then of any true zeal or care of my well doing (as having an awstere regard
unto my vocation, which in deed, rests in the Study, or rather in a mean
place of practice of ye common laws of this Realm) will reckon it a matter
more then ordinary that I should after this sort so transcende the limits of
my said vocation, as spendyng my time, or at the least, some part of the same,
in things by semblaunce, so far discrepaunte from my profession: let my defense
be so made, I beseech you, that it may in equal sort be considered, or at the
least wise by you enforced, not only how much and how largely ^^ue and zeal
are hable to work and bring to pass in men otherwhyles conuersaunt in the
consideration of things high and precious, but also how seemly a thing it is
and how well agreeable with every vocation to advance and set forth the high
praises of virtue and virtuous personages, as also to batter and beat down
the enforcementes of vice and vicious monsters.

And for my self, I have boldly to affirm unto all such discontented minds
(especially unto those that have the common laws for their profession) yt the
matter of this my littel book is not so void of excuse, but that by view of
the substance and full scope thereof, it may yield forth a strong and
ryghtfull defense against these nice and over curious reprouers: for, as it
concerns the special praise of God in the Commemoration of the Queens
Majesty's most prosperous and peaceable government: So, it is not unknown that
touching the Regiment of Princes, the nature of Laws, the office of
Counsaylers, and the authorytie of Judges, the volumes of our Laws are not so
barrein, but that they may and do minister matter aboundantlye to the
professors and students of the same, whereby to discern and to deem
indifferently of them all: for whether we would consider the good and godly
government of a Prince by often pardoning of offenses in mercy, or by sharply
punishing of offenders in justice, by planting of good and wholesome laws, or
by repealyng of evil and unnecessary Statutes: Not only Bracton, but also the
worthy and worshipful Knight master Forescue in sundry places of his little
Commentary, very copiously give forth matter for the furtherynge of studious
wits in the consideracion thereof. And no less may be gathered touching a
difference and sownd censure of honorable Counsayllers: but especially of
Judges and of laws. Whereupon I trust I may infer, yt to praise and extolle
the admirable government of our renowned Sovereign, or to commend the
sowndnes of her laws, or to advance and set forth the wonderful virtues of
her highness counsayllers, or to acknowledge the rare learning and holiness of
her reverend Judges: so far forth as they be matters (though but
superfitially) to be discerned and descyphred by the Books of our Laws, so
far, they are not to be thought discrepaunt or impertinent for a student of
the laws to treat or to write of.

But wherefore should I thus carefully seek to defend that, which I suppose,
needs no reprehension? why should I not rather challenge that liberty that is
granted to every vocation of learning, yea to the lawyer himself? namely, to
intermingle with painful trauayles of the mind, ye pleasures of some exercise
more plausible and mild, especially, where the same may be practiced to the
glory of god and to the profit of our brethren, as I trust, this is, or at the
leastwyse was intended. Well, if all this notwithstanding, these curious
carpers will never be satisfied, let them at their pleasures blow abroad what
they list, and hold on in their myslikings, until in the vanytie of their
purposes, and the rage of their envy, they shall at the length be glutted with
the fullness of rancoure and uncivil reproaches. You (finally) I doubt not, will
take this gift as I mean it, and deem of it as a thing not unnecessarily
sent abroad at this instant. God grant unto it such effect in the hearts of all
those unto whom it specially appertains, that they, or rather every English
soul may say in ye feruency of a sownde faith: Domine, quid ego retribuam tibi
pro omnibus quae tribuisti mihi? What reward shall I give unto thee (O Lord)
for all the benefittes that thou have done unto me? Psalm. 116.
In which prayer I think it convenient here to make an end At Barnards Inn
this joyful Eve of our 17. day of November. 1575. with his hand whose heart
loves this instaunt day and you.

Edward Hake.

The Authors mind upon the matter of this his little Book.
A Publicque peace our high Iehoue has wrought:
A private war, with hate tweene man and man
Does Satan breed. Good state, but life right naught:
Alas alas, what wretches are we than?
A Vineyard fenst, well fenced from decay,
A State preserved, but people froward ay.
Ah most unkind that never will obey.
Prou. 8. b. Deuteronomy. 17. a Through me do Kings reign: through me,
Counsaylours make just laws: through me do Princes bear rule, and all the
Judges of the earth execute judgment.

Prou. 28. a. Leuit. 26. c. Because of sin the land does often change her
Prince. But through men of understanding and wisdom a Realm endures long.

Prou. 28. c. Where the Prince is without understanding, there is great
oppression and wrong. But if he be such a one as hates covetousness, he shall
long reign.

A Commemoration of the most prosperous and peaceable Reign of our gracious
and dear Soueraygne Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England, France
and Ireland Queen etc.
IEhoua, with our joined hands,
and hearts replete with joy,
We praise thee for our noble Queen,
the shield of our annoye.
Not we, not we (oh great Iehoue)
not we, but thy right hand
Has wrought this calm and quiet state*
in this our English land.
Great Bulls of Basan roar abroad,
great curse from Balac commes,
Each Foreyn ear is filled with fight
and sownde of fearful droommes.
Woe, woe, waymenting woes and fear
through foreign Soil does raunge:
No Coast so clear where face of war
ne makes the cruel change.
Blood, blood is shed in monstrous wise:
each foreign State does jar,
And open Murders wanting Law,
in foreign Countreies are.
Foul fraud and faithless fawning words
in foreign Coasts do dwell:
High Seats of sway in foreign Soyles
of fraud and falshod smell.
Men, Beasts, and fields, laws, love and truth
there fall from former states:
Each thing, each Sex uncertain stands
and honest order hates.
No course kept right, no seasons known,
naught there, in sauety lies.
Each good growth ill, each ill growth worse
each worse to worste does rise.
There, Soyles lie sacked, there, Mountains quake
there lofty Hills down sway:
There, pleasant plots yield filthy weed,
where Fragrant odoures lay.
The plowed Fields, are there laid waste
there, fertile grounds lie baard
Each Meadow there, lies clean defaste,
no plotte of pleasure spaard:
No lofty Palace stands upright,
no place where virtue dwelt,
Standth there so sownd which of the dinte
of Battle has not felt.
No Seat in sauety, nothing helps:
no dew Regard preuailes:
No right of cause there frees from force:
no Sex of sorrow fayles.
Each noble face ly'th there forlorn,
each mighty head brought low:
Each valeaunt visage sprente with blood
there, through the Streates they throw.
No law relieues: no justice helps,
no truth from danger frees:
None there, that lives in godly fear,
true hope of sauetie sees.
The aged man there drowpth in woe,
the young and lusty Rowte
Are there sent forth to lead their life
in pyllage round about.
The armed Knights with treasons trapt,
the Sages of the land,
In suspense lodge to live or die:
thus each ones case does stand.
There, wronged wights with silence smart
and there, the oppressed want aid
There, Laws whereby the just should live,
do make the just afraid.
There dwelles no sound of sacred songs
that sweetly send forth health:
But there, both dowle and double plaints
waymenting sorrows telth.
No Fountain there stands free from filth:
no crystal Spring runs clear:
In steed of streaming Floods of life,
deep dampes of Death are there.
And whilst these woes do wander thus,
as foreign coasts have tried,
Thine english People, Lord, dwell safe:
with them does peace abide.
With them does live a loving Queen
who like a Mother reigns,
And like a chosen sacred Impe
immortal glory gains.
Her hands she holds not forth to war,
her heart does rest in peace:
She Joys to see her peoples wealth
and wayles their harms increase.
Thy gospelles sownde she sendes abroad:
she stoppes no wholesome Spring:
But popish Puddles dammes she up
which noisome humors bring.
A Prince of price, most worthy praise
for thee and in thy name
Of all that ever Scepter bare,
of all that ever came
From English loins to royal Seat:
I say, none worthy more
Amongst the race of English kings
that ever Scepter bore.
I would contain my fervent Muse,
Ah Iemme, thy name denies.
My praise nor all the Poets pens
thy merit can suffice.
And highest king that Welkin weeldst
if hence thy glory come,
That of a virgin Queen whom thou
have set in sacred Room,
Thy peoples peace should be sustainde,
thy Gospel should be spread,
Why should my burning Muse lie still?
why should my pen lie dead?
Is hand of flesh her firmest force?
is frowning face her swaye?
Does subtle drifts draw forth her peace,
or vaunting glory? Nay:
Of Flesh, the feeblest Sex by kind:
of face not Iunoes feere:
But mylde Susanna in her looks
and Hester in her cheer.
The work is thine, it is thine Iehoue:
no jot begone by man:
Thou fram'dst her only for thy praise:
by thee her days began:
All only thou Iehoua, thou
have wrought her for thy praise:
All only thou have made her deeds
a wonder to our days.
From thee therefore, what so she has,
from thee her virtues came,
And her we praise as gift (...) thine
and glory to thy name.
So planted is her sovereign Seat,
so fixed is her Throne,
That thick and threefold wronged wights
there lay abroad their moan.
Truth, mercy, peace, and love possess
her Chair of royal State:
No Subject Soul complaining grief,
goes helpless from her gate.
And what she Rules, by love she Rules.
No Force, where love may win.
First friendly warnings-sendes she forth
Ear smarting Laws begin.
Her Subjects blood she seeks to save
as Apple of her eye:
They live and shall, save such as law
and Justice bids to dye.
They live and Joy, her Foes and all,
full many kept from Death:
No ease to her, but grief of mind,
is loss of Subjects breath.
Her Subjects goods she never seeks:
none lives whom she has spoyld
Her very Foes are free from force:
no Foe with force is foyld.
Yea foes and all, they sow and reap:
they plant and eat the fruit,
They build and buy, no loss they take
unless by lawful suite.
Each wight within her royal Realm
possesses as his own,
Such substance as by lotte he has
and unto him is grown.
With quiet course in equal sort,
each man in his degree,
Draw'th forth his days and spend'th his time
full orderly to see.
Wrong rests no man's right by might
where Princes aid is crau'de:
The poor with ritche contend a like:
by Law their Rights be sau'de.
No Law locked up, no Justice stopped,
no one through her takes wrong.
O noble Prince, and have thou liu'de
a virtuous Queen so long?
And has thy name Elyzabeth,
so many years sustainde
The cause of Truth, and run that race
that virtue has ordeinde?
Now, blessed be those days of thine:
Thrice blessed be our God,
By whom our Queen Elyzabeth
those virtuous steps has trod.
Not force of Flesh has held her up,
not sharp devise of man,
Not craft, not skill, not worldly shifte
her blessed state began.
Before her reign, bereaft of peace,
bereaft of outward Joy:
Pursude to death by Romish beasts
still seeking her annoy:
Whose foamy frothye murthrous Jaws,
with stomachs stuffed with guile
Each day deuisde her graces death
and sacred state to foil.
Whom high Iehoue preserved has
in spite of Satan's rage,
To live a Queen in blessed peace:
to live an happy age.
Oh, grant her God, an heart to praise
and magnify thy name:
And as thou have preseru'de her life,
so still preserve the same.
Let dew remembrance never slip
from forth her royal breast,
But let her always bear in mind
how thou have wrought her rest. 17. Nouemb. an. 18. Elizabeth R.

Full seauenteene years this day her grace
has raign'de with us a Queen:
No Treasons force has yet preuaild,
that ever could be seen.
No drift, devise, no devils deed,
no falshod fetchte from hell
Has yet taken place: in sauetie yet
her noble grace does dwell.
Thine hand Iehoue has found them out,
thine own right hand has brought
Each dark devise to open view
and treasons guile to naught.
Thine hand has held her kingdom fast:
thine own right hand has stayde
The running rage of rancour bent,
and made her foes afraid.
Of wisdom have thou lent her stoare
to guide thy folcke aright:
Who never yet emprised ought
wherein they took the foil.
By thee we still enjoy her grace:
by thee this Counsel so:
By thee the same do plant good laws
all vice to overthrow.
And for those laws such Judges set
as Justice well maintain,
Such Judges, some, as doubtless yet
no former times could gain:
Not moody sort of wandering heads
not hearts corrupt with guyle,
Not wrangling wits, not bribinge hands
our Judgments Seats defile.
But seemly sorts of sacred heads
but Sages sownde and grave,
But goodly view of learned wits
our Judgment places have.
Where, look what Law and Justice will,
that Judges do pronounce:
Where, look what law and Justice nill,
that, Judges do renounce.
Where, he (my Lord) amongs the rest;
whose hands regard no meede,
Whose heart Dies no deceyte at all,
with honor does proceed
(As others eke) in soundest sort
to Join together aye,
With Mercy, Truth: with Justice, Peace:
in firm and perfect stay.
Ah hawtie Hall with honors decked,
ah Roofes of royal view,
Ah Seats possessed with Justice self,
with peace and Judgments true.
Since laud, since thanks, since endless praise
be dew unto thy name:
Sweet lord, sweet Christ, for these thy gifts
we magnify the same.
Lord, bless therefore these benefittes,
Lord, give them large increase,
Lord, let thy mercies still endure,
Lord, let them never cease.
Lord, bless our Queen, Lord prosper her,
Lord, lead her with thine hand:
Lord teach her aye thy will to know
and word to understand.
Lord, grant that she in heart may love
thy law and thy decree:
That she may know how all these gifts
proceed good Lord from thee.
And for thy works of wonder done,
let her extol thy praise:
Let her in truth and holy life
continewe all her days.
Let (Lord) her graces eyes so pearce
into thy Churches state,
That she with Judgment sound and pure
remove from thence debate.
And let her (Lord) so love to hear
thy godly Preachers voice,
That she reiecte not what they teach,
but take the best in choice.
Let pompous state be unto her
no stop of dew regard,
Ne let the faults of faythlesse mates,
at any time be sparde.
Let all her royal howsholde so
reformed be from sin,
That they to all the world may show
what virtue is therein.
That she may bring a lasting praise
and glory to thy name:
That life and doctrine fownde alike,
her foes may suffer shame.
Lord give her Judgment to discern,
and that with Counsel grave
She may find out what sownde redress
our common wealth should have.
To cut of craft from wholesome laws:
and (chiefly) to supplant
From place of Rule and Justice, such
as sownde profession want.
Whose hands how hurtful they shall be
in times of troublous state
Our sundry sorts of troublous heads
expressed have of late.
Lord, grant therefore that Laws be had
to bind each place to choose
To office, such as love thy word,
and others to refuse.
That whenever foreign driftes
or home devise shall rise,
Such men of trust prepared so,
may treasons guile surprise.
Lord, finally, with humbled minds,
and Sowles we thee desire
Unite both Prince and Peoples hearts
with love and zeal entire.
That the one with upright course may rule.
the other so obaye,
As Prince may be her peoples Joy,
and people Princes stay.
Lord grant that none within this Land
no one that bears breath.
Refuse in heart to cry God save
Our Queen Elizabeth. Amen.
The Author most humbly to all the Queens highness most honorable
Counsaylers.
THough Poets pens in these our later days
In works of wait gain credit near a deal,
Because that some seduced many ways,
Their fond affectes and fancies do reveal
In rymyng frames, wherein they do conceal
No want of wit, nor learning dew regard,
As in their Books full many have declarde:
Yet hope I must that truth may take no harm
Where she is cloathd with cloak of simple Ryme
Deuoyd of dark devise and Poets charm:
Which learned wits full rifelye in our time
Have set to view as sootest herbs in Prime,
Although the blunt and bitter biting brain,
Each rymed truth does blot with black disdain.
You noble wights that win immortal fame
By gyding well our english common wealth,
To you I write* as one that loves the same
And joys in heart to see your Honors health:
Reject him not that riming fancies telth:
But bear him out where he deserves no blame,
And here such terms as he in truth shall name.
Your godly, grave, and provident foresightes
Th^se passed times and blisfull days forespent
Have so preferred in peace unto your mightes,
That calmer days of yoare were never lent.
Your God therefore that so your hearts has bent,
Extolle with praise, and watch to work his will:
Seek tresons soil and love your country still.
Beware of foreign fraud and false pretensed love*
Accept goodwill, but secreat woorks prevent:
So joy in league, that close compacts you prove:
So live in peace, as you to war were bent.
Yield trust, but try, for fear ye do repent.
Give heed to peace, but live not vnpreparde.
The strongest state the longest time is sparde.
And as you watch, each one in your degree,
T'establish peace, and plant right wholesome laws,
So, noble wights, (as you true noble be)
Keep men oppressed from rage of ramping paws.
Pluck, pluck ye spoil from forth devouring jaws
And let not Crewes of cruel wasting wightes
Thus prank in pride with spoil of pore men's rights.
To tax the Trades that wickedness finds out,
To touch the lives that lewdness has begone,
To blase the pride yt runs the Realm throughout
To preach ye Spoils ye private gain has won,
To show the shifts that poor men have undone,
O noble wights, and honorable all,
No pen of mine has force or ever shall.
Men crave, you grant: men pray, you pardon still:
Men swear, you trust: men crouche, you think them mylde:
Ah, out alas herein is error still:
Herein your godly meanings are begilde.
Herein the wastful Crewes and lusty heads wax wyld
Herein the trades that wickedness does breed
On Commonwealth with private pawnche do feed.
Herein the pomp of Pride withouten end,
Has put it self in prease, and vaunting spreddes
With daringe face, where none should dare offend:
No Caesar's look nor Princes eye it dreddes:
In frank outrage alas it trampling treddes.
Herein, the rowtes of cutting roysters grow,
And banks of peace with braules do over flow.
Herein, the bloody papists do conspire,
And begging broodes of bankrowts (in their kind)
Do take the course to set our peace on fire,
By fawnyng force a flithy fetch to find,
A few to raise with riches ill assygnd,
Though thousands thence do reap their endless need
Whence, hate for love in consequence does breed.
Herein, (to f^^e) the fewest sorts do right:
Herein, the laws that godlynes have fixed,
Herein, the peace appearing in our sight,
By pryuate heads with wickedness are mixed,
And this our peace has dangers drawn betwixt.
Herein, therefore to find redress with speed
Shall make your names true noble still indeed,
In most humble wife* Edward Hake.

Gentle Reader, having this prayer following imparted unto me by a learned and
worshipful gentleman, very behooufull to be used in this the end of our
reioysinge, I have according to the duty of godlynes, here published the same
as the fittest and seemeliest conclusion to be had in this my little Book.

A Meditation wherein the godly English gives thanks to God for the Queens
Majesty's prosperous government hitherto, and prays for the continuance
thereof to Gods glory.
AMongst other thy benefits great and innumerable (heavenly father our most
merciful Lord and God) by thee of thy exceeding goodness bestowed upon the
children of men, the servant of thy household, dispersed upon the face of the
earth, it has pleased thee yt we thy people of England living in these days
should in abundance beyond the measure of the graces of our brethren, and the
prosperous course of our fathers, behold and perceive thine inestimable
goodwill in the amiablenesse of thy countinaunce shininge upon us, to whom thou
have given thy chosen Handmayden Elizabeth for sovereign Lady and governor.
For what so ever is the glory of thy house (O Lord) for us, wc the issue of
the slime of the earth, to stand and look up to Heaven, made into vessels
after thine image that were not: to be redeemed and borne a new after the
second Adam that perishes not, in the sprinkling of the blood of Christ and
sanctificacion of the spirit, that were utterly lost, to stand fast in thy
hands, sealed according to thine eternal love, and written in the Book of
life, that daily run headlong to our own destruction: As the sense thereof
reioiseth the hearts of all those whom thou have knit into this fellowship of
the saints, and called into the blessed hope of the eternal kingdom, so
again how ungrateful should we be to whom thou have dealt these benefits from
thy divine majesty by the person reised up for thine instrument thereof toward
us, if we should not in special sort show us thankful unto thee therefore? And
if not to live tearing and eating one, the other, like the Giantes in the old
world, and every man to do what seems him best in his own eyes, as when
there was no Judge in Israel, if, that Princes reign and governors give
judgment, it is thy gift: and then in the worst disposition of their thoughts
for the sins of the people, they are redowbted, thou O Lord have appointed
them, they are sacred, thou O Lord have anointed them, they are feared, thou
chaungest their hearts like the streams of waters, they are honored, thine
own image and lickenes in guiding Angels and all creatures is pregnaunt and
cannot deuayle in them, bearinge rule in earth over the children of men: what
praise is due unto thee, from those, unto whom thou leauest not an Anarchy and
headless dissolution, as to the Ca^nibals, a monstrous and misshapen
government and flaminge with fire, and streaminge with blood, and smoking with
mist and darkness of error and ignorance, as to ye Antichrists greased in the
browe with the mark of the Image of ye great Beast, and whoor of Babylon: not
a waste and barbarous perpetual heathen co^tricion as unto the Tartarian
hoords of cursed Cham, unto the Rusty and wasted with misery the inhabitants of
Meschech, or to ye Turbulent and ravenous swarms and hosts of Tubal-Gog, or
such like as those: but contrariwise whom thou leadest like a flock of sheep
by ye hands of Moses and Aaron, and have chosen David thy servant whom thou
have loved, to feed as the people of thine own Inheritance, giving unto the^
for war, peace: for inciuilytie, socyetie: for ignorance, knowledge: for
supersticion, religion: for error, truth: for hunger, plenty: for
vnproudiency, polycie, for dissonancye, harmony: for myserie, felicyty: and
making them to dwell in safety as under the wings of thy defense, and shadow
of thy protection. Now, such has been thy mercy toward us, yt no tongue is
able to express in geuinge us in thy gracious pleasure and thine vnrecountable
largess and liberality, thy select Servant Elizabeth Queen and supreme
gouernesse to us of the liege Nations and peoples of her obeysaunce and
regiment: that as by a star the light and influence over things beneth from
thee, the first cause and fowntaine of brightness not to be attained unto, and
as by a clear river and plentiful brook the course of the waters from thee,
y^ everlasting head spring: even so the shininge beams, and flowing streams
of all those thy mercies, and good gifts has been and are sithence the days of
her happy and gracious government, from thee conuaied and devolued unto us.
And we that before were no people, not so much in regard of ye state in which
we haled, when we were sauadge, as wood men, cruel as Mendeuourers, terrible
as spirits, brutishe as beasts in the old age at the first calling home of
our grand Ancestors to human ciuilitye, but in these days in few years
degenerate from the true knowledge of thee and thy son Jesus Christ unto the
consuminge nakedness of idolatry and playinge inordinat, before ye golden
Calfe of our own making and our priests: now the eightenth sun most happily
enuironeth in the firmament, sithence by the means of a poor vessel of the
weaker ser, and a selly maiden, thou perfourming the glorious delyuerance of
thy people out of the thraldom and slauerye of Pharao and Egypt, dyddest
annoint the Kings daughter with an holy oil setting a crown of pure gold upon
her head, and inuesting her with the purple and Scepter and regal Diadem of
this Realm. Sithence which time, O Father, we owe, to thee and to her, our God
and our Moses, the sight of this light, the use of this air, the ease of our
hearts, the peace of our consciences, and the whole work of our welfare. By
her inspired by thee, spreding her beams at her appearing, the bloody lawnces
and claunching Murreans, and redoublinge shieldes, have been shattered asunder
in shiuers, and bated and foiled into mattokes and spades, the flames of our
furies quenched and put out, and the cool of grace flowed over ye realm, the
Lion reconciled with the Lamb, the wild Ass set to be pastured with the
seely Kyd, the abhomynation of desolation removed from the holy temple, and the
sun of man exalted and lift up on high in his own kingdom, for all that were
s^onge by the fiery serpent to look upon and be saved. In admyrable lenytie,
Babylon has put on Syon, Egypt is become our own, Rahab the harlot denizoned
in Jerusalem: we become of the wild olyues the true garden plants: of Ismael,
Israel: of miscreant, christian: of paynim, protesting and professing: of
Antichristian Romanest heathen idolaters, faithful euangelycall sincerely
believing worshipers of thee in spirit and verytie, according to thy holy
word. Neither has cost ben spared, nor occasion foreslowd, nor time over
passed, nor travel intermitted, to raise that was fallen, to win that was
witholden: to call that was strayed, to heal that was wurryed: to find that
was lost, to restore that was ruined, to repair that was decayed, to make good
and enhable that was abandoned. Preachers have been sent forth plenteously,
Laws have been executed mercyfully, Orders have been set down polytickly,
dangers have been declyned discretly, tumultes have been apeased victoryously:
the whole spacious dominyons of both Isles and the adjacent Lands governed
triumphantly. So as it is hard to find the man that more orderly has
manedged the charge of any one household: then the Daughter of thy house with
her virginal hands has welded the weightye scepter of sundry and mighty
populous nations. In her time has been seen the golden years of the reign of
her Father David, and the peaceful kingdom of Solomon to have been advanced.
The earth not to have denied her fruitfulnes, the sea her encrese, the clouds
their drops, the heavens their fayrenesse, the sun his warmth, the year her
goodness. But the valleys stand thick with corn, the wilderness crowned
with gladness, the furrous watered, the mountains laugh and sing, the folds
full of sheep, our sons and daughters grow up like to ye polished corners of
ye Temple, our yongmen see visions, and our old men prophecy: Jerusalem her
light shining unto her, and the glory of the Lord risen unto her. The Queen
bringing her honor unto the city of David, and the nations walkinge in the
light thereof. Great is the honor yt thou have heaped upon us, and honorable
in foreign regions is the work yt thou have wrought by thy chosen. Yea and so
much the more has the brightness of this bewty ben powered abroad, y^ whiles
Egypt round about has been darkened (even the whole world in a manner besides
us, whom thou have gathered into pastures of this Gosen) and the thick mistes
of error has blinded the eyes of the earth: the cloudy pillar has not
departed from us, by the day, nor ye fiery flame by night. Whiles other lands
round about have warred to the destruction of one another, our Moses has
guided us in peace: whiles other nations like Egypt round about has been
plaged by the destroyer from the first borne, syttinge upon the princes trone,
unto the slave grindyng at the handmyll, our Moses has not deminished of her
flock: whiles the firm lands have been overwhelmed by ye rage of the seas
and waters: our Island having dwelt in peace, in peace has sent her ships into
Opher for gold, and prepared her nauye against the danger of the enemy.
Whiles Athalia has murdered her own blood, our Ioas has learned the law of
the Lord of I^ho^ada. Whiles Achaz consecrateth his own son in the fire, and
Samaria eats her own children on the walls, our Eliza directs the children
of the prophets in their offices. Whiles Iezabel sets up Baal, and embreweth
Achab with the blood of the Prophets and of Naboth: our Elias gathers the
people of God t^ mount Carmell, to behold the wonder of the fire of God
lighting from Heaven upon the sacrifices, and replenishing the hearts with joy,
and toungs, with gifts of languages. This is then so worthy an instrument of
thy goodness and express Image of thy Majesty, and the ample matter of this
days celebritie. And now what does thy people desire at thine hands, but that
first O Lord thou give us thankful hearts, and make us all the days of our
lives mindful of this thy fatherly and gracious bountifulnes. Then, as
presently ye Queens highness has gloriously achieved the trauayll of full
seventeen years, and now the annuell celebritie of our voluntary sacrifice of
praise and thanksgeuing therefore, returns: so it may by thy benefit full
often return, and not once or twice, but year by year, and year heaped upon
year, we and our offspring may behold this felycity, until we and she
satisfied in abundance, the time draw alonge which thou have appointed for the
veling of her Crown at the feet of thy sun Jesus: and the course of this
earthly pilgrimage ouerrunne, we and she, at our determined seasons be taken to
reign in the everlasting kingdom of thy glory. Again, where much is the
mischief of man, great and enormous the rage of Satan, subtle the practices of
Antichrist, evil our deserts, lamentable the state of things, whiles open
coloring hides privy conspiring, poisoned lips give sugered words: the
breath of Cocatrices, the embrasings of Scorpions, the roringe of Bulls, the
raging of Rabsake, the sword of Herod, the destruction of Abbadon has been
seen in our streets, has been hard on our walls, has multiplied before the
gates of our cities: that thou destroy us not in the midest of thy works of
thy mercy, to leave us headless and make us a scorn and proverb to the
enemy: but rather to behold the number of the faithful subjects, in the
dread of their souls, and just ielosye of thyr common interest, bowinge the
knees of their hearts, for the long safety of Queen Elizabeth's sacred Princely
person: rather then in thy just fury for auenging of our sins, to suffer ye
devil with the wicked to prevail in the unjust zelousnesse of their
preposterous vows gracelesly swearing the death of thy Saints and thine
anointed. Lastly that what remains of the happy building of thy Church by
the hands of thy dear daughter: thou plentyfully power of thy principal
spirit upon her, and rauishe her heart with the flame of the love of thee and
thy house, with Moses to lead, and with Iosue to bring in to ye land of
promise, with Debora to fight thy battle, and with Iahel to knock Sisera of
Rome in the temples of his usurped headship: to his utter destruction, with
David, to bring home the Ark, and with Solomon to finish and consecrate to
eternity thy Temple, amongst thy people: on the earth for the time to geeue
largelye her foster milk to Jerusalem, in Heaven at the time in the pureness
of her virginity to be presented to the Lamb, and sing the song of her
weddinge day with thy Angels and thy Saints, to the praise of thy glorious
Majesty, the father, the son and the holy Ghost, in one eternal Deity for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

