A COMPARISON BETVVEENE THE DAYS OF PVRIM and that of the Powder treason for
the better Continuance of the memory of it, and the stirring up of men's
affections to a more Zealous observati. on there of.

Written by G. H. D. D.

OXFORD

Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and WILLIAM TVRNER Printers to the Famous University

Ann. Dom. 1626.

I said, I would scatter them into Corners, I would make the remembrance of
them to cease from among men, were it not that I feared the wrath of the
enemy, least their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and least
they should say, our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all this. For
they are a nation void of Counsel, neither is there any understanding in them.

Deuteronomy. 32. 26. 27. 28. A COMPARISON BETWEEN THE DAYS OF PVRIM AND THAT OF THE
POWDER TREASON etc.
THese days of Purim or of Lots mentioned in the ninth chapter of the book of
Ester were the fourteenth and the fifteenth days of the month Adar answering
in part to our February enjoined to be kept Festival of the Jews, first by
Mordecayes letter, and then by Queen Esters decree in remembrance of there
wonderful deliverance from Hamans bloody design for their utter extirpatio^
at that time.

These days (the like being scarcely to be found again in holy Scripture) I
purpose to compare with our day of the Powder plott, together with the
Authority, the Causes and Reasons of the institution of both, that from thence
it may appear that the mercy of God was more clearly manifested in our
Deliverance then in theirs, and that consequently we have greater cause
religiously and with thankful acknowledgement to observe our day then they
theires. In the opening whereof I will compare plott with plott, persons with
persons, motive with motive, assurance With assurance, prevention with
prevention, issue with issue, month with month, day with day.

First then for Hamans plot upon the Jews, it Plot.
was undoubtedly a very cruel one, thinking it too little, too small a
satisfaction to hishonor and revenge, to lay hands upon Mordecai, he purposed
in one day to have put them all to the sword (as the Sicilians did the French
in one night) young and old, women and children, without distinction of age or
sex, throughout all the large dominions of Ahafhuerosh, reaching from India to
Ethiopia, and comprising an hundred and 7 and twenty Provinces; yet putting to
the sword is not so cruel as blowing up with powder, in as much as in the
former some hope is left by tears or prayers, or gifts to stay the
executioners hand; but in the latter none at all. For as men are presumed to
have more mercy then beasts, and beasts then insensible Creatures, Which are
altogether inexorable: so among them all, the two elements of fire and water
have the least mercy, and of the two, fire (specially if it be enraged with
store of powder) least of all.

Again Hamans project upon the Jews was not so suddenly to be acted but that
they had leisure given them to appease the fury of their Adversary, or to
procure the Kings favor, as afterward they did; they had opportunity to stand
for their lives, or to save themselves by flight, or if it came to the worst,
they had respite to cast up their accounts and make all things level between
God and their own Consciences: But this project of our conspiratours should
have been acted in a moment, in the turn of an hand, in the twinkling of an
eye, the parties aimed at should neither have had time to fly nor to fight, to
entreat nor to threaten, to let fall a tear or castvp a sigh for their sins,
or so much as to say or to think in manus tuas Domine. The cruelty of Haman
then extended only to men's bodies, but this of our Conspiratours to their
souls, they held the maine body of that assembly to be heretical, and that
for an heretic so departing this life there is no possibility of salvation,
and consequently they could not but make account to send all so affected quick
to hell. And for the bodies of the Jews though after the shedding of their
blood and the loosing of their lives they could not have promised to themselves
any decent kind of burial, yet was their case better then to be torn in a
thousand pieces, and to have the shiuers of their bones, the sprinkling of
their blood, and gobbets of their flesh (if any such remained) to be cast into
far distant places, and exposed as a prey to dogs and ravens. Besides, the
cruelty of Haman extended not to insensible creatures, as this did, to the
utter demolishing of that famous Senate house, in which the Ancestors of the
Conspiratours themselves had often met to consult about the making of wholesome
laws for the suppressing of vice and the advancing of the honor of the
English name. We count it but madness in a dog to snarle at a stone, and can
we count it less in men to fight with stones and timber? Surely if we should
have held our peace, these very beams and stones would have cried for
vengeance, and the rather being to have bin stained with the blood of so many
right noble and worthy personages, which is the second point of Comparison.

The Jews though at that time the Church Persons
of God was in a manner impaled within their nation, yet lived they but as
strangers; nay as vassals and Captives among the Persians, as at this day for
the greatest part they do, as well among the Turks as the Christians. It was
true, though by Haman maliciously urged, that their laws were diverse from all
people, neither did they observe the Kings laws. Haman himself the chief
plotter against them was not only an Infidel, but an Amalakite a mortal enemy
to their religion, and moreover being of great place and command, he had gotten
both the King and the whole state to countenance his design against them. But
in this of our Conspiratours the case was contrary; There, Pagans and
Infidels, Persians and Amalakites conspired against the Israelites: here
native English and professed Christians, (though in truth most unworthy the
name of either) conspired against their own Countrymen baptized, and
rejoicing in the glorious name of Jesus Christ, nay I make no doubt but that
some of their own near kinsmen, and of their own romish profession at
leastvvise in heart and affection should for company have perished by that
blow: There, superiors and those of Eminent note and rank conspired against
their inferiors and those of the lowest and meanest degree in that state:
Here inferiors against their superiors, subjects against their liege Lord and
lawful Sovereign, servants against their masters, for so was one of them at
least, and that in honorable place, and as if it had been too little to lay
hands upon the King alone, they all conspired against that venerable Court, the
highest in the Land, consisting of their lawful and competent Judges, the
murdering of the least of which in that place being legally called thither by
his Majesty's writ, iudicially there to sit, had been treason, which is the
highest offense the law takes notice of: What then could we have called that
act, by which they should have been all murdered and mangled at one clap?
Surely as we want an example to parallel it, so do we a name to express it.
Touch not mine anointed says God: but these intended to have blown up at one
blast the King and Queen, both anointed with sacred oil, together with their
eldest son the Prince then living, and with them the great Officers of the
kingdom, the prudent Counselors of Estate, the Honorable Peers of the
Realm, the Reverend Bishops, the Grave Judges and Sages of the law, the choice
Knights and Burgesses being indeed the very flower of the land, all the
Clerks of the Crown, Counsel, Signet, and Seals, the greatest part of the
learned Lawyers, together With a number of the Kings and Queens and Princes
nearest and dearest servants. I will do a thing in Israel says God, that
whosoever shall hear, it shall make both his ears to tingle: but surely the
very relation of this, had it taken effect, had been enough not only to make a
man's hair stand an end, and his ears to tingle, but his very heart to quake
and tremble: and I am persuaded as no Historian ever wrote, or Poet faind, or
Painter counterfeited, or Tragedian acted the like: so if all the damned
Spirits of hell, and the damned Crew on the earth should join in council, and
set the utmost of their wits aworke, they could never find out the like cursed
divice again. It was the utmost point of all villainy, beyond which is Terra
incognita, no man can divise what should be between hell and it, and look by
how much the more devilish was the invention, by so much more divine, was the
Preservation. It were then worth the inquiring what should move these men to so
brutish and barbarous a plott which is my third point of Comparison. The
Motives.

That which Haman pretended against the Motives.
Jews was that they were not subject to the Kings Laws, neither was it for
the Kings honor or profit to suffer them in his dominions: but intruth that
which stuck in his stomach was Mordecaies stiffenes, he would not creep and
crooch unto him as others did, and as the King had commanded, they should, he
would not prostrate himself before that Idol of Court, and give him divine
adoration, the thing as it seems which Haman in the pride of his heart
expected, and Mordecai denied, for I cannot believe that he denied civil
reverence; and was not this the motive of our Conspiratours that we would not
bow to their Idols, their triple crowned Idol of Rome and their breadden
Idol in the consecrated host, pretending that it was not for the profitt nor
the honor of the Catholic Church any longer to suffer us: but was this the
means by which Christ founded and his Apostles reared up, and their
successors enlarged and repaired his Church? no, no, they founded and built,
and enlarged and repaired it with the pouring out of their own blood not with
the shedding of others.

Tantaene animis caelestibus irae?

What is it possible that Catholics the best Christians nay the only
Christians should conceive such a savage enterprise? Tantum religio potuit
suadere malorum? Is it credible that matter of religion should induce men to so
damnable an attempt? It was the speech of Lucretius the Epicure touching
Agamemnon enduring and assisting at his daughters sacrifice* but what if he had
known the Massacre of France, or the powder plott of England? Surely it would
have made him tentymes more Epicure and Atheist then he was: There is not such
a sin against the person of the Holy Ghost, to take it literally, as instead
of the likeness of a dove, to bring him down in the shape of a raven or a
vultur nor such a scandal against their Church as out of the bark of S Peter
to set forth a flagg of Pirates and Assasines: even those of Calicutt who adore
the Devil, never held it lawful for quarrel of religion to enter into such
mischievous consultations; and although particular men of all professions have
been some thieves, some murderers, some traitors, yet ever when they come to
their end and just punishment, they confessed their fault to be in their own
corrupt nature, and not in their profession, these Romish Catholics only
excepted. But if this be religion then let hell be heaven, and let the depth of
villainy be the height of piety, if this be holiness let Nero who set Rome on
fire to see how Troy burnt, and Caligula who wished all the men i^it had had
but one neck that so he might strike it off at one blow, let them I say be
set in the Callander of Saints, let murderers be registered for martyrs,
Co^spirators for confessors, and treason march in the rank of Christian
virtues, and be counted the fairest and shortest cut to a crown of
immortality. Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage for it
was cruel: and the more fierce no doubt because it took not hold of fancy but
of conscience: the former being like a fire in straw which though it cause a
great blaze at the first kindling, yet is it quickly spent, and only the smoke
remains, but the latter like fire in steel quod tarde acquisiuit, diu
retinet, though it be long before it conceive fire, yet having once conceived
it, it retains it long, and the marks of it are lasting monuments, specially
if to conscience in religion be added confidence in execution which is my next
point of Comparison, Assurance with assurance,

Hamans assurance was great, he relied Assurance.
much upon the strength of his own wit and his wealth, two powerful means
for the effectuating of great attempts. His wit he used in setting a fair
pretense upon the business before the King* his wealth in offering to pay to the
Kings coffers ten thousand tallents of silver, he was so deeply rooted in the
Kings favor, that his offer was returned, and yet his request passed, his
wisards were consulted with, the Lot by them was cast before him, and by it a
luckie day found out for the acting of the Tragedy. Letters were written in
the Kings name and sealed with the Kings ring, which kind of mandates were held
as irreuocable as laws, by the Medes and Persians. They were delivered to the
Posts or Curriers, and by them to the governors of the several Province, and
after this Haman was so familiar with the King, as they two were seen drinking
hand to hand. Here were all things now so fast, so sure, as a man would have
thought there had been no means possible left to undo them, there seemed to
want nothing but the very execution of the plott. The like assurance, if not
greater, was there in our Powder plotters, they relied too upon their wit, and
upon the wealth and strength of their faction both at home and abroad. Some of
them offering horses and armor, others to contribute money, to the sum of
two thousand or three thousand pound a piece. Near about the time when the
deadly blow should have been given, were their prayers and processions made
throw Christendom by these of that profession for the prospering of some great
enterprise then a foot, for the good of the Catholic cause. Their side here
at home was at the same time very daring and insolent, as looking out for the
near approach, of some sudden and great change in the state, and I can never
believe that they entered upon such a business without the benediction of the
Balaam of Rome. Once we are sure they had consulted with their Wisards the
Jesuits, well practiced in figure flinging too, if they be not belied. These
by their skill had allotted out a day for the fortunate delivery of that
monsterous birth, by these were the actors born in hand, that the fact was not
only lawful but religious and meritorious: And as Haman got the Kings letters
for the destruction of the Jews* so had one of them gotten his holiness
Briefes, though at last, supposing they would come to an ill market, he made no
use of them, but sacrificed them to Vulcan. Besides these our Conspiratours had
bound themselves with a strict and solemn oath by the sacred Trinity and the
Sacrament (to the^ the strongest obligation) not to disclose the project by
word or Circumstance, directly or indirectly, nor to desist from the
prosecution of it till they had effected it, or leave were granted them from
their Confederates. Lastly, they had Wrought the Mine, and when that would not
serve the turn they had hired a sellar, the powder was laid in to the quantity
of thirty six barrells, great bars of iron and massy stones, and billets
being laid on the topp of the barrells, thereby to make the noise more hideous,
and the breachthe more dangerous, the day of execution was now come, the hour
approached, the match was ready, so that nothing was wanting but the presence of
that Venerable assembly, and the setting of fire to the powder. But then, even
then, that great God of heaven and earth, who commands all things therein and
they obey, who setts bounds and bars to the raging waves of the Sea, and says
unto them; hitherto shall ye go and no farther stopped the course of these
bloody proiectors, and stayed their hands, as he did the hand of Ahraham, when
it was now lifted up for the sacrificing of his son; Which that it was his
doing, and his alone, will manifestly appear in the discovery and prevention
of the plott, which is my next point of Comparison.

For Hamans plott, there needed no discovery, Prevention.
it was not carried so close, but that Mordecay had gotten a copy of the Kings
letters, and sent them to Ester, which in truth was no hard matter to do,
considering the decree was publicly made known by proclamation through the
Provinces: but in the prevention of it, and the working of their peace by
turning the Kings heart toward them and against Haman, therein the finger of
God clearly appeared. For howbeit in the effecting thereof much was to be
ascribed to the watchfullnes and wisdom of Mordecai, and no less to the care
and industry of Ester, yet if we deuly observe the admirable concurrence of
Causes ordained and falling in together for the composing of it we shall find,
that undoubtedly God was therein the principal agent. As first in Vashtaies
remouall, and Esters succeeding in her room, when she poor wench of obscure
parentage and a Jewish by nation had small reason to dream of a Crown: Then
in Mordecaies discovery of a foul conspiracy against the person of the King:
Then in the Kings calling for the Chronicles when he wanted sleep and in
falling upon that place wherein Mordecaies discovery was recorded, and lastly
in making Haman, who was then coming in to beg Mordecaies life, a chief
instrument in his reward and advancement for that service; and by this means
were the Kings letters reuersed and contrary written, The same hand which had
signed a decree in the opinion both of them that granted, and of them that
procured it irrevocable, became the buckler of their preservation, that no one
hair of their heads might be touched. All which considered, might they not
justly cry out with Pharaohs magicicians, digitus Dei est hic, the finger of
God is here; yet surely was Gods special providence more apparently manifested
in the discovery and prevention of our powder plott.

Curse not the King, says Solomon, no not in thy thought, for that which has
wings shall declare the matter. It was a quill, a piece of a wing that revealed
it, till when not a feather sprang to give any suspicion A quill set a work
no doubt by one of those that had bound themselves to secrecy by the oath
before mentioned, one, who had he presumed it would have taken that effect,
would rather have bitten off those fingers that used it: but he was persuaded
(no doubt) that either the letter should never come to light, or if it did, it
was so darkly penned that the reader should gather nothing but confused
generalities from it. And herein was the construction thereof made by his
Majesty not a little strange, as himself to the honor of God openly
confessed, that holding suspicion to be the sickness of a tyrant, and being
for the most so bent upon the other extreme, as he rather contemned all other
advertisements and apprehentions of practices then any way entertained them, he
at this time was so far contrary to himself, as upon the first view of the
letter he did presently interpret some obscure phrases therein, contrary to the
ordinary Grammar construction of them, to be meant of that horrible form of
blowing up that sacred assembly with powder; whereas had he construed those
ambiguous words to any other danger, no earthly provision could have prevented
their utter destruction. Now lay all these together, and then tell me, whether
we have not as great reason as those Jews, to confess and profess, digitus
Dei est hic, the finger of God is here: And yet is there one very remarkable
Circumstance behind, to note out Gods miraculous preuentio^ of the mischief,
and deliverance of us from the danger which hung over our heads above and
beyond that of the Jews. God untwisted as it were the thread of mischief
spunne against them when they were humbled by captivity, and had also cast
themselves down by fasting and prayer, and sackcloth and ashes, as the
Ninevites did at the preaching of Jonas: Queen Ester herself even in the
Kings palace with her waiting ladies fasted and prayed three whole days for
the turning of the Kings heart unto them, and the turning away of that imminent
peril (which was threatened) from them. Their humiliation and tears God beheld
and accepted, their prayers and supplications he heard and granted: and yet
herein it must be acknowledged that mercy was showed them. But alas that mercy
toward us far exceeded this, For the Lord wrought our deliverance when we
were so far from sackcloth and ashes, as we dreamed not of any danger
approaching; but were rather puffed in pride and wantonness, promising to our
selves by the entrance of his majesty and his royal issue a settled continuance
of peace, plenty, and prosperity: Even then when we were lulled a sleep in
the depth of security, and yet our enormious sins were crying alowd in his
ears for vengeance, and urging his Justice to pour down the full viols of
his wrath upon us, even then did the eye of his special providence and mercy
watch over us, and for us, and delivered us from the very brinke of the grave,
from the jaws of death, which had opened her mouth wide to have swallowed us
up quick. Herein God sets out his love toward us, that while we were yet
sinners Christ died for us, says the Apostle; and surely herein if ever God
showed the riches of his mercy toward us, that when we were in the hight of
our sins he so wonderously delivered us when we had no will to desire, much
less means to deserve it: And for our enemies, their own tongues, as the
Psalmist speaks, or rather their own penns made them fall: insomuch as who so
considers ^t shall laugh them to scorn, and all men that see it shall say,
this has God done; for they shall (...) that it is his work: But yet much
more if we consider the issue which is the next point of Comparison; the issue
I mean as well in regard of the end of the Conspiratours, as the consequences
of the Conspiracyes, had they taken effect.

Touching the end of the Conspiratours, End of the conspiratours.
for Haman himself we know he (...) on the same gibbet that he provided for
Mordecai, as Catesby the first inuenter of the powder treason was scortcht and
(...) and likely to have been slain by (...), (...) about the time that they
intended the acting of their plott* Hamans sons went the same way that their
Father did before the^, and Garnet the ghostly Father of these powder men went
the same way his sons had gone before him: The end of them all being a like.
Upon the same day that the innocent blood of the Jews should have been poured
out by their Enemies and the friends of Haman, the Jews slew of them thorowout
Assuerus his dominions, and in Susan the Imperial City seventy six thousand;
And I have often wondered that the people of this land upon the first discovery
of this damnable Conspiracy, being known to be undertaken wholly by Romish
Catholics, and for the advancement of the Catholic cause, had not violently
run upon the known professors of that religion. But that God restrained both
their hearts and their hands that our mercy might remain as an argument of the
goodness of our religion, as their Cruelty shall to the Worlds end of the
badnesse of theirs. It was a short but a sufficient answer returned by a
Professor of ours to one of theires, demanding what reason he had not to be
of their religion, why, quoth he, because you eat your God and kill your King,
And as their cruelty is a sufficient reason to keep us from them: so me
thinks, it should work somewhat, specially this most bloody and barbarous
conspiracy, to bring them to us. We read in the last verse of the eight
chapter of this book of Ester, that when the people of the land saw the
unexpected downfall of Haman and his adherents, and the wonderful deliverance
of the Jews, many of them became Jews, that is, made themselves Proselites,
conforming themselves to the Jewish religion. And I have many times not a
little marueiled that the manifest detection and knowledge of this foul
Conspiracy had not turned the hearts of many Romish Catholics to our
profession: But again when I call to mind that 2 These. 2. 10 11.
of our Apostle: Because they received not the love of the truth that they
might be saved, God shall send them strong delusions that they should believe
lies: I cannot but therein acknowledge the just judgment of God in their
Wilful obstinacy.

Now for the consequences of these conspiracies, had that of Haman taken
effect, it would doubtless have been very grieuious to behold, but worse to
feel; the children should have been slain in their Parents sight, and the
poor infants have been drawn from their mothers breasts and dashed against the
stones. It must needs have given a great blow and a deep wound to the Church
of God; yet not so deep, but the body of the Jewish nation and the life of
their religion, and the state of their government would still have been
preserved: there being at that time a great number of that people living in
their own country of Judea. But if this of ours had taken effect, Lord, what
a marvelous confusion must needs have suddenly followed through out the
whole kingdom, both in religion and civil government, as well in Church as
state affairs, what bitter outcries and lamentation, what sheeding of tears
and wringing of hands in every quarter of the land? sons and daughters
mourning for their slaughtered fathers; fathers and mothers for their sons,
brothers and sisters for their brothers, wives for their husbands, and servants
for their masters: and that such masters, such husbands, such brothers, such
sons, such fathers as were both for nobility in blood, ability in estate, and
sufficiency in wisdom the pict choice men of the land, of whom they could
neither take their leaves alive, nor interr their bodies being dead. It is
precisely noted in the ^^ve. of the eighteenth and ninteenth chapters of the
book of Judges, that in those days there was no King in Israel, and
thereupon follow those abominable outrages there after recorded. What then was
our case like to have been when we should have had neither King, nor Queen,
neither Prince (for this present King they intended presently upon the blow to
have made away) nor great officer of the Kingdom, nor Counselor of state, nor
Bishop nor Judge, what public exercise of religion, what administration of
Justice could any where have taken place? what cutting of throats what rifling,
what rauishing should we have seen in every corner by rogues and ruffians
without any check or control? We should neither have lain quietly in our
beds, nor have sat quietly at our tables, nor have walked quietly in our
streets, nor have traveled quietly in our ways, much less have met quietly
in our temples but every place would have been full of fear and danger and
horror and blood; and surely I am persuaded that in such a general confusion
of all things, the Co^spirators themselves could not have promised security to
their own goods and houses, to their own sons and daughters, to their own
wives and persons, and if this should have been our case in the country, what
would have been the face of the Court and City whereas the blow should have
been given? How would they have looked, what could they have said or done but
stood amazed and at their wits ends. By the hideous thunder and roaring of the
blow, by the trembling of the air and earth, by the flashing of the fire and
the thick clouds and smoke, by the fall of those ancient goodly buildings, by
the sight of the dismembered, and the woeful cry of the bruised and wounded, who
by the casting of beams and iron and stones afarr of, must needs have been
many: besides those infinite* troops who waiting there about the return of
that assembly would have been either torn or crushed in pieces: nay all the
courts of Justice the Church used for the Coronation of our Kings, the
monuments of former Princes, the Crown and scepter and other marks of
Royalty, all the records as well of Parliament as of particular men's right with
a great number of charters and such like should have been snatched away in that
stormy tempest that furious diluge of fire so as not only we but the memory of
us and ours should have been thus extinguished in an instant, worse then if we
had been invaded or vanquished by the Turk or Scithian. I remember that the
heathen Emperor when he beheld the temple of Jerusalem on fire, he could not
hold but let fall tears at the sight thereof: and truly I am of opinion that
the Conspiratours themselves had they beheld this monstrous birth of their most
unnatural devise, if they were men and not incarnate Devils or savage beasts
in the shape of men, they would have sent forth many a sigh and let fall many
a tear at that woeful* spectacle, and for mine own part I think that no true
English heart can seriously think, or tongue speak, or hand write of it
without some kind of horror and astonishment, and least my thoughts should be
swallowed up in this dreadful meditation I hasten to the last comparison, of
the month and the day.

Their month was Adar, answering in The month
part to our February and in part to March; It was a month famous among them
for the finishing of the second temple and the disco^fiting Ezra. 6.
of Nicanor: but above all for this their admirable deliverance from the
Conspiracy of Haman: And is not this month of November 2 Macc. 15
crowned with as many and great blessings in it brought unto us. In this month
it was `that that renowned Lady, that heroical Ester of incomparable virtue
made her entranceto the Crown and wore it as long with as much honor as ever
Prince did. She brought with her the sunn shine of peace and prosperity, and
above all of the Gospel after almost five years continual showers of tears
and blood during her sisters reign. In this month his sacred majesty now
living and by Gods grace long to live, the joy of our hearts, the staff of our
hopes, made his entrance into the world, borne I hope in a happy hour for the
good of Christendom, and from my heart I pray it may so prove. And lastly, in
this month God Allmighty wrought for us this wonderful deliverance from the
most damnable conspiracy that ever the sun saw, which I may the more boldly
auerre for that it being a work of darkness was wrought so near hell as the
eye of the sun could not pierce through to discern it. yet as S. Paul had
the messenger of of Satan sent to buffet him, least he should be puffed up with
abundance of revelations: so is the sixth of this month as an yearly messenger
sent us to put us in mind of that heavy loss which upon that day for our
sins we received, least we should be puffed up with abundance of blessings.
The day.


But from the month if we descend a little lower to the comparison of the
day, we shall find that we have better reason to observe ours the^ they
theirs though doubtless they observed theirs much more solemly the^ we do
ours. We shall hardly find in holy scripture the like to these days of Purim
instituted by humane authority either Ecclesiastical or civil, except it were
that of the dedication enjoined in their month Caslew (answering to our
November) by Judas Macchabeus in memory of the restoring of the public
exercise of their religion, after the freeing of the temple from the tyranny
and pollution of Antiochus his garrison; to which our Savior himself was not
unwilling to afford some credit and countenance by his personal appearing in
the temple at that feast. That it is then both lawful and commendable in some
cases to set such a day a part for public thanksgiving and commemoration
either of some great benefit or deliverance wrought, I intend not to prove,
because I suppose no sober minded man makes a doubt of it The saying is Cura
omnium, cura nullius, that office which is given in charge to all, no man takes
charge of, and it is as true, that such as neglect the observation of this day
under a pretense of being thankful at all times, are for the most part
thankful at no time. Besides it is most kindly and seasonable to publish opus
diei in Die suo, the work of the day upon the day it self: then a man's words
if ever work a deeper impression in the hearts of the hearers, then if ever
are they like apples of gold with pictures of silver, like nails fastened by
the masters of the assembly, the very robes and face of the day makes our
children not capable of our prayers and preaching to enquire into the reason of
our meeting; and good reason have we to deliver over the keeping of this day
to our posterity, since in it the sons of Beliall thought to have feathered
us such an arrow as should have stricken through the heart of the child yet
unborn. When your children ask you, what service is this you keep, you shall
say it is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, says Moses Exodus 12. And when
your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, what mean these
stones, you shall show your chil. dren and say Israel came over this Jordan on
dry land says Iosuah chapter 4 In like manner when our children enquire what
means the observation of this day it will be a fit occasion to inform them
in the reason thereof, Areason never to be forgotten, but deeply to be
engraven in the heart of all succeeding ages as it were in a pillar of Marble
or brass with a pen of iron or the point of a diamond.

But I return to the Comparison of our Powder day with those of Purim kept by
the Jews. Theirs had the name of Pu^, which in the Persian language signifies
a Lot, as in Greek it signifies fire, a name not unfit for our day too,
Theirs was appointed by the authority of Mordecai and Ester, the decree for and
hence wasit called* Mordocheus day.
the perpetual keeping of it as well in the country as in the city was
registered in their book of ordinances, as ours is in our book 2 Match. 15. 36
of statutes, made and ratified by our Sovereign then being and the body of
the three Estates assembled in Parliament; whereas though Mordecai were a
great man in the Persia^ state, and Ester were Queen, yet had neither of the^
for ought we find Sovereign authority over the Jews which notwithstanding
they duly and cheerfully observed two whole days as festival, there being
but one part of a day, nor past two hours in a manner enjoined us. They were
to observe theirs in a country where they could not but provoke their enemies
more powerful then themselves by putting them in mind of the slaughter
committed by the Jews upon their Countriemen and kindred upon that day:
whereas we may (God be thanked) observe ours not only without fear and
danger, but With much comfort and commendation: yea it is written by those who
report the present estate of the Jews, that this day is observed among them
wheresoever they live: so that by computation they have kept it above two
thousand years, whereas we have not observed ours above twenty, and yet I
know not how it comes to pass, the keeping of it is already grown out of
fashon, wearisome and teadious unto us, I know that the disciples of Rome
howsoever they would have highly applauded the plott, had it taken effect, yet
now, it being of the nature of those designs, quae non laudantur nisi per
acta, which are never commended till they are ended, in their hearts they wish
of this day, as Job did of his birth day, that it might not be joined to the
days of the year, nor come in to the account of the months: But the rather
must we and truly may we say of it as was said of the night in which the
Isralites went out of Egypt. It is a day to be kept holy to the Lord, it is
that day of the Lord which all the children of England must keep throw out
their generations, as an eternal presedent of Gods watchful eye in the
preservation of our Church and state, and an everliving testimony of the never
dying cruelty of Iesuited Romish Catholics.

This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people that shall be
created shall praise the Lord. Psalm. 102. 18.
FINIS

