Another godly Letter, lately written to the same H H by his own Sister out of
the Country, about eighty miles from London.
GOod brother: I bless God that yet I see your hand writing: by which his
mercy appears, in sparing you and yours, among Thowsands that fall on your
right hand and on your left, in this heavy visitation of Gods displeasure:
which goodness of his in yet sparing you; my hope is you esteem according to
the worth thereof, and make that holy use of the same which God expects, and
his Ministers every where with earnestness call upon us all for: namely, to
search and try our hearts and ways, and to turn from all our sins of heart
and life, and to renew our vows of better obedience for time to come. The
further meditations of these most necessary things, I commend to your most
serious thoughts, as things most precious and requisite for these times: in
which most weighty business, I as your unfeigned loving sister shall, as I am
able, continually pray God to assist you, and in the performance of that which
may in this kind be acceptable in his sight, in Jesus Christ: As also that he
would, as it may stand with his Glory, spare you in this common Visitation:
However, to sanctify it, both in the fear of it, or inflicting of it: so as
every way his favor may be discerned, to the peace and comfort of your soul:
To which end, the All-sufficient protection of the Almighty in mercy and
goodness be ever vouchsafed unto you and all yours: And let my sister, your
wife, know in particular that in all good wishes I remember her equal with
your self; and must to you both rest a great debtor for much love.

For us here (in the Country, where I now am) I praise God we are all in bodily
health: my self and company that parted from you, came hither safe on Saturday
at three of the clock in the morning; having ridden all night, in regard that
we could not be lodged at D. where we thought to have lain: of which you may
hear more hereafter: But besides our selves we had very good company, which
made our nights travel very pleasant to us. Brother, my brothers and sisters
here do all wish you well, and pray for you and yours; especially our dear
mother, who wishes it could be any ways convenient that you and yours, I
mean your wife, were here: though indeed my fathers house is already very
full; howeuer, you want not our aged Parents prayers and blessing, which they
send you, and their love to your wife; and our good mother beseeches you both
with tears to love and cherish each other in the Lord, that whatsoever hand of
his may befall you: yet it may be sweetened by your mutual undergoing it with
patience and comfort: and so once more I beseech the Lord to stablish your
hearts in his fear: And with you to be good to your afflicted City, and
purge it by this Visitation: and prepare us here in C. for the like: for it is
to be feared we may not long escape: We had here on Wednesday last the Fast
kept publicly as in London: and before, I did partake with M. F. in what he
did privately for preparation to the public Exercises. Good brother, commend
me to all your neighbors and friends that I know, which you think will
accept the same from me: by name M. D. and his wife, M. L. and his, etc. Thus
have I seamblingly imparted unto you, in have, my mind, and how things are with
us here: Accept all in good will, and whiles we live let us love; that come
life or death we may be so linked that death may not separate us: And whiles
God spares you, let me I pray see your hand to my self; which be assured I
will take kindly: commend me to little S. for whose mothers death, and that
further Visitation I am not insensible, in regard of my sister your wife: but
she is discreet; whom with your self once again I commit to Gods mercy. July
22. 1625.

Resting Your true loving Sister, A. H.


