Gutta Podagrica: A TREATISE OF THE GOVT. The several sorts thereof. What
Diet is good for such as are troubled therewith. And some approved Medicines
and Remedies for the same. Perused by P. H. Dr. in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER. 1633.

TO ALL HONORABLE, Reverend, and Worshipful Lords, Spiritual or Temporal,
Ladies, Knights, Scholars, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, of any degree, that are
unwillingly acquainted with this frequent disease, especially of the Podagrick
Gout: The Publisher hereof sends greeting.
BFloved, the disease commonly called and usually felt and known, Podagra, or
as a learned Writer says, Gutta Podagrica, is (as I may say) a sly, subtle,
and theevish Serpent. Which I prove; first, a sly and subtle Serpent, in as
much as it creeps not only into the Courts and secret Closets of the greatest
Potentates and Princes of Christendom, but of the whole world, and their
subordinate Magistrates, in Church and Commonwealth; and so consequently to the
meanest subject: some say the Rich rather than the Poor. And some this Serpent
biteth by the heel, and some by the foot, some by the great, and othersome by
the lesser toes, and otherwhiles by the anckles. Secondly, it is theevish, for
that it comes always unawares, before it is thought on, or expected: yea, it
commonly comes as a thief in the night. Now what it is by definition, our
learned Author says sufficiently in the Discourse following: And certes, if I
my self were a professed Physician, I should not be of Paracelsus his mind,
who says, that this Podagra is a gravel gathered between the joints, whereby
the Gout is called And however it be, it is a disease subject to such as are of
sedentary and studious lives: i. e. that sit much: as Councillors of Estate,
Senators of Cities, Bishops, Judges and Scholars, (that study much) do: Nay,
may we not sometimes see that even men of active lives and dispositions are
surprised with this theevish serpenticall disease. For the benefit therefore of
the Commonwealth, this Treatise not unlearnedly written, I hope is not
unprofitably published: Especially considering, the like, to my knowledge, is
not extant, either in English or Latin. I had it not many months past, from
the hands of one near and dear unto me, who is since dissolved, and I hope in
Heaven: And sithence it has been perused by one more near and dear unto me,
an ancient Professor of this Apollonian Art. Vouchsafe therefore ye Lords,
Ladies, or of what degree soever, unto whose hands and sight this, though a
Pamphlet, shall happen to come, to accept heartily, what is courteously, and
not without some cost, published for you benefit.

And so I betake you all to the supreme Physician of body and soul: and of you
take my leave.

Vale and fruere. H. H.

A TREATISE OF THE Disease of the GOVT. The several sorts thereof, etc.
THE word (GOVT) has two significations. The first distinction of the word
Gout.
The one general; the other particular. Generally, all such aches as are
incident to any joint, we call the Gout; whereas in nature and deed they
differ not; but only in respect of the part affected: and in respect thereof,
they are distinguished in name. As the ach in the fingers is called Chiragra;
the ach in the knees is called Gonagra; the ach in the hip is called S^^a^ica;
in the ankles (some term) Talia I^alaria; and the ach in all the joints is
called Arthritis, i. morbus articularis; which is the general name to all
aches and greifes of the joints. Particularly the word Gout is taken for the
pain and grief only of the feet, and from thence it assumeth a name distinct
from the rest, Podagra, quasi pedum captura vel aegritu^o, the disease of the
feet, (...), sive (...) It has also two other significations, The second.
the one proper, the other common. Properly the Gout is taken for a grievous
pain in the joints of the feet, preceding either of some distemperature in
the part affected, or of some humor bred in the part by the weakness or ill
disposition thereof, or by the deflux of some humor descending from some other
upper place unto that part. In the common signification all other aches
proceeding of what cause soever may be called the Gout: such as come by
contusion or brusing, or by dislocation of a joint: and so the French disease
having an untolerable ach in the limbs, like a false fellow, being ashamed of
his own Morbus Gallicus, i. Lues venerea.
name, terms it self sometimes by the name of Ach or Gout. In this slender
Discourse of the Gout, I will entreat of that which is particularly appropriate
unto the feet, and properly is called the Gout. In the explication The general
proposition.
whereof, I will first declare what the Gout is: Next what are the causes
thereof. Thirdly, by what The general division.
signs each cause is to be known. Fourthly, whether it may be cured or no.
Fifthly, what kind of cure belongs unto it. And lastly, how a man may be
preserved from it.

Concerning the first. The Gout is a grief of the feet, occasioned by some
distemperature, or irregular The definition of the Gout.
humor, which either is bred in the joints of the feet, and toes, by some
weakness thereof, or by deflux has descended from some upper part thereunto.
That the nature of the Gout may the better appear, I will verbatim expound
this definition. First it is a grief or pain. A grief (as concerning this
purpose) is occasioned after four sorts: Either by way of oppressing a part,
when as a gross humor weighing down a part Four sorts of griefs.
ponderously, causes it to greeve in bearing the burden thereof: such kind of
grief proceeds of a phlegmatic, and melancholic humor, because they are
heavy and weighty. Another kind of grief comes by way of distention, when
as the veins, and sinews, and arteries of some one part are fuller than they
should be, then is that part greeved by distention. This kind of grief
comes sometimes of wind, and sometimes of fullness of blood, and of humors.
Another kind of grief proceeds of a distemperature of a part, as when it is
colder or hotter than it should be, because each part does rejoice in its
natural state, and an unnatural is greevous unto it: such kind of grief
comes of inflammations. The fourth kind of grief is by way of erosion, when
as the part affected does feel a greevous gnawing and fretting; which kind of
grief comes either of a choleric humor, or else of a corruption and
depravation of other humors. Now to apply: The Gout is a grief in some by The
application of this fourefold distinction.
way of oppressing the part; when as it comes of a cold humor, and this kind
is incident most to old men, who abound in cold humors, by reason of the decay
of natural heat. Also the Gout is a grief in some by way of distention,
whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger
parts put down their offending fullness unto the lower, which descending, the
veins, and sinews, and arteries procure this pain of distention. This kind
of grief is incident to men of middle age, and such as are of a sanguine
complexion, and do use a full diet, with little exercise and much rest Thirdly,
the Gout is a grief in some by way of distemperature, and this does fall out
as occasion is offered, as some by standing long in cold water, may have the
Gout by reason of a cold distemperature, which is wrought into the part by the
cold water. And some by much travel on foot in hot weather, may have the Gout
by reason of a hot distemperature procured unto the feet by overmuch travel
and heat. Lastly, in some the Gout is a grief by way of corrosion, not that it
eats the flesh, but in that it gnaweth and fretteth, that the patient
sometimes thinks that dogs do gnaw his bones. This kind befalls choleric
persons, and such as use an ill diet, breeding in them store of ill humors. So
is it evident that the Gout is a grief, and what kind of grief, which is
profitable to him that will give help thereunto, for by the manner of the
grief we come unto the cause thereof, and so accordingly apply the remedy. It
follows that it is a grief of the feet. There are four reasons why the feet
are more afflicted Four reasons wherefore the feet are subject to the Gout.
with these greifes than other parts are. First in respect of their place, for
that they are the lowest parts in the body, the upper put down their
superfluities to them, where they remaining, procure in some one manner or
other (as is before specified) a pain. The second cause is, for that the feet
are not of so compact or solid substance as some other parts are of, but have a
thin composition, with many void and empty receptacles, and therefore in more
abundant sort do receive and retain the superfluities of other parts. The
third cause is, for that the feet are more in motion than other parts, and the
nature of motion is, to make attraction of humors unto the moved part, and
consequently a pain. The fourth is a debility naturally incident more to the
feet than unto other parts; for that they are situate farthest from the
fountain of heat, which is the heart. They also consist of such substance as
is of a cold complexion; so that both for lack of the comfort they should have
from the heat of the heart, as also in respect of their own composition, the
feet are weaker than the other parts, and the weaker goes still to the wall:
for they receive the annoyances of the stronger, because they are not of
strenght to resist: and therefore must of necessity yield to their pain. Now
why in the Gout the feet should feel such greevous pain, Wherefore in the
Gout the feet should suffer pain.
this is the reason; for that they consist of many joints, and have for their
motion and sense many nerves, which are the instruments of motion and sense;
whatsoever part is most neruous, is also most sensible: and therefore the feet
upon any little offense, are pained or greeved the more. Another reason is
this, that about every joint is wrapped a skin, and when as a humor has
insinuated it self between that and the joint, in distending of that, until
it be resolved, it works an intolerable grief; and it is so hard to resolve
it, as that sometimes it does indurate or grow into an hard substance, which is
called nodosa Podagra, the knotted Gout. And these two causes of the dolorous
state of the feet, are accidentally growing from the part it self affected. In
respect of other causes I have given other reasons before in the fourefold
distinction of greifes. Now it does follow that this grief in the feet is
occasioned by some distemperature. There are eight sorts of distemperatures;
four simple, and four compound. There are eight sorts of distemperatures.
The four simple are, too hot, too cold, too moist, too dry. The four
compound, too hot and dry withal; too moist and cold withal; too hot and
moist; too dry and cold with all. And these inequalities come by The causes
thereof.
reason of some unequal mixture of the four elements in us, and the dominion
of some one or other above the rest. The four elements whereof we are
compounded are, the fire, the air, the water, the earth: The four elements.
the element of fire is hot and dry, the air hot and moist, the water cold and
moist, the earth cold and dry. Of these four mixed together come the four
temperaments or complexions. The choleric hot The four complexions, and
whereof they proceed.
and dry, where the fire has the dominion: the sanguine hot and moist, wherein
wherein the air has the dominion: the phlegmatic cold and moist, wherein the
water has the dominion: the melancholic, wherein the element of earth is
predominant; and of these four temperaments come the four humors, to The
four humors, and whence they proceed.
wit, choler, hot and dry; blood, hot and moist; phlegm, cold and moist;
melancholy, cold and dry. Of these four humors are framed and maintained all
the parts of man's body, so that if they offend either in the first composition
in any inequality, or after, by disorder of How a distemperature may befall any
part.
diet be made unequal, then do they breed either in the whole, or in some
part, the like inequality. And hence it comes that we have hot and dry
diseases, as Fevers: and we have cold and moist diseases, as the Palsy,
Apoplexy, the falling sickness, and diverse more: also we have diseases of the
blood, as inflammations: and likewise of melancholy. Which all diseases, as
some in some one part, and some in some other, may come of the distemperature
of the same part, so the Gout may also come of a distemperature in the feet,
either bred therein originally, or by some disorder procured unto them, as
hereafter in the causes which procure the Gout shall appear. It follows,
that it is occasioned either by some distemperature, or irregular humor: The
humors of the body are either good and Three sorts of humors.
natural, and then nature rejoices in them, for that they nourish the body,
and maintain it in good health and long life. Or else they are naught and
contrary to nature, for that they procure diseases and destruction unto it, as
when they are possessed with putrefaction. Or else they are neither good
altogether, neither bad, but semimali, half naught, and this state of the
humors I call irregular, because they are not altogether overruled by nature,
and that in three respects: A humor may offend in three respects. 1 Quantity. 2
Quality. 3 Substance. Three sorts of bodies considered in Physic.
for either they offend in quantity, in being in greater abundance than the
nature of the body requires: or they offend in quality, being too hot, or too
cold, or too sharp, and rodent: or else they offend in substance, when as they
are declining some what from a good and natural state unto an unnatural.
There are three sorts of bodies considered in physic, the body healthful, the
body diseased, and thirdly the body neither perfectly whole, neither diseased,
but in a neutrality between both: which is after two sorts, either when a sick
body recovereth and grows toward health; then it is neither whole nor sick:
or when a whole body is declining from a healthful state and grows to be
sick. By the i. e. good.
first sort of humors, the first kind of bodies is maintained: and by the i.
e. naught.
second the second kind of bodies is corrupted: and by the i. e. neither good
nor bad. The application of the former distinction of humors.
third kind the third sort of bodies are molested. Now for the Gout, it cannot
come of good humors, for that they bring no pain to the body, but comfort. And
of the second sort it cannot proceed, for then there should always a bad fever
go with the Gout, for that such humors have always in them a putrefaction.
Wherefore it remains, it come of the third sort, either through their
overgrea^ quantity, or ill disposed quality, or some depravation of substance:
and these are the humors which I call irregular, for that they are not obedient
to nature, and yet not altogether repugnant to nature, but by some slender
means may be corrected and reclaimed unto a good and natural state. It
follows that these humors are either bred in the feet, or by a deflux descend
thereinto from some upper part. When ill humors breed in a part, it is through
an imbecility and weakness of that part. The strength of all parts consists
in a natural heat, grounded and settled The good estate of all parts in the
body consists in the natural heat.
naturally in that part, by virtue whereof there is drawn to the part a
competent food to maintain it, and by it that food is concocted and converted
into a profitable nutriture for the same part, retaining that which is good,
and expelling that which is excrementitious and naught. Now when this natural
heat by any sinister means is infirmed and weakened, then do the functions of
that part fail in their duty; for neither can there be good concoction in the
part as should be, neither sufficient expulsion of the superfluities left of
that concoction in the part, as should be. Wherefore three inconveniences
follow through this infirmity of natural heat. First, good and profitable
Three inconveniences through the infirmity of natural heat.
matter is not bred in the part so affected. And the bad is not expulsed. And
thirdly, the part is made a sink to receive the dross of other parts. Now if
by some means an imbecility happen to the feet, that neither The application.
they breed for themselves a profitable nutriture, and yet cannot expel that
which is unprofitable, it must needs follow, that in keeping thereof, they
cannot be well, but ill affected. This is to show, that the matter of the Gout
may be bred in the feet through the weak state and condition of natural heat,
appertaining unto them, whereupon does grow humorum decubitus, (as we term it)
that is, when for lack of good concoction in any part, ill humors by little and
little are laid up in that part, which after some season, either by their
overgreat quantity, or ill affected quality, and by some depravation of their
substance, prove offensive and hurtful unto that part. It follows now, how
the The Gout proceeding from a deflux may be in two respects.
Gout may come by a deflux of some humor descending from some upper part into
the feet: which is in two respects. For either it may proceed from the brain,
or from other parts in the podagricall body. The deflux of an humor from the
brain is called a rheum, which is the mother of many diseases. For sometimes
The rheum is the mother of many diseases.
it takes course to the eyes, and thereof comes a dropping and inflammation
of the eyes, and a dimnesse and loss of sight; sometimes it takes course by
the nose, and is called the pose; sometimes to the mouth, and causes great
expuition, and spitting, and the falling of the uvula, and toothach; sometimes
to the windpipe, and thereof comes raucedo, the hoarsnes; sometimes to the
lungs, and causes exulceration or putrefaction thereof, or some great
obstruction, which brings a difficulty of breathing and strangulation;
sometimes it takes course to the stomach, and causes lack of appetite and ill
digestion; and if to the guts, then falls out the flux of the belly called a
lask; sometime it setleth in the brain, and grows into a gross and thick
substance, either in the fore part, as in the nerves optic, which are the
conducts whereby the power of seeing does come unto the eyes, and causes
either dimnesse, or loss of sight; or in the conducts that convey the power of
hearing unto the ears, and there causes a dullness of hearing or deafness;
or in the conducts that convey the power of smelling to the nose, and cause
either a lack or loss of swelling; or in the conducts that come to the tongue,
and there does occasion the like imperfection in tasting: Also if it settle in
the fore part, obstructing the cells or ventricles of the brains, three ill
diseases do grow thereupon, called three of the dead sleeps, car^s, and coma,
and apoplexia. Also in the fore part it causes a hurt to imagination. The
middle part of the head is the seat of understanding and reason, where if this
gross^ rheumatick matter do settle, it causes stultitia, foolishness. In the
hinder part it causes the lethargy, another of the dead sleeps, and the
palsy, and the falling sickness, and the convulsion, and oblivion or loss of
memory. And if it come down backward into the neck, it causes a kind of
convulsion called tetanos, when as the neck cannot turn to nor fro, but it
stands stiff and stark without motion. If it flow down to the back, it
causes another kind of convulsion called ^pisthotonos, wherein the head and
the heels are made to meet backward. If it flow forward into the muscles of
the breast, another convulsion is caused called emprosthotonos, wherein the
head and the feet are drawn together forward. Now if it go to the joints, it is
morbus articularis; if to the hands and fingers, it is chiragra; if to the
knees, it is gonagra; if to the feet and toes, it is podagra, The reason why
the rheum from the brain does cause many diseases
the Gout. And the reason why the rheum should occasion all these diseases is
this. The brain is the fountain of nerves, principium nervorum, and in the
brain are made animal spirits, which do give the power of moving and feeling,
and are conveyed by those nerves into every part of the body; so that when the
brain is affected in rheumatick sort, partly by them, and partly by other
meatus, as it were passages, the inferior parts shall feel the effects of
this ill disposition of the brain. And between the head and the feet there is
a great consent, by reason of many and great nerves and veins extended
directly from the one to the other, so that many shall be ill affected in
their head by taking cold in their feet. This deflux also which is in cause of
the Gout, may proceed from other Four points to be considered in every deflux.
places, as the liver, and therefore in every deflux there are four points to
be considered. The first is the mandant from whence it proceeds. The second,
the matter that flows. The third, the passages whereby the matter descends.
The fourth is the part recipient, wherein this matter setleth it self. Now
when we are to deal with a disease that depends upon a The application
thereof.
deflux, we must find out from whence it proceeds, what it is, and by what
ways it descends, so we shall the better find a relief to the part
whereunto it descends. And so to conclude this point, the Gout is a pain of
the feet, depending upon some distemperature The conclusion of the first
general point
of the part, or of some irregular humor, either bred in the part by imbecility
thereof, or derived from some other part, and that principally the brain;
which definition how it is to be understood, I have for better declaration
sake, verbatim expounded, so that this may suffice for the first point, to wit,
what the Gout is.

The second point contains the causes. The causes The second general point,
which contains the causes of the Gout.
of the Gout are partly external, and partly internal. The external are 1
Reason.
first too moist a state of the air, for that does engender great store of
rheum. 2 Reason.
Also the use of many sorts of meats; and too great ingurgitation thereof, for
that does heap up great store of humors, which one way or other must have a
vent. 3 Reason.
Also ill digestion, for that does engender ill humors. 4 Reason.
Also the often use of strong wines, especially fasting, because they do send
up many vapors unto the brain, and fill it full of rheumatick matter, and do
withal procure a weakness to the nerves and sinews, whereupon must needs
follow, that nothing can be worse for the Gout, than to be often drunken. The
immoderate use of Venery is wonderful ill, for that it spends the spirits, 5
Reason.
and decays natural heat, and so procures a weakness to all parts of the
body. Also the Gout may come of overmuch sleep, especially in the afternoon,
and 6 Reason.
that immediately after meat; for that does fill the brain full of rheumatick
matter. Also overmuch watching, and fasting, and study, and labor, and sorrow,
and 7 Reason.
care, because they spend the body, and cause a weakness in the parts thereof,
may occasion the Gout. It may come also of too much rest and ease, for that
such 8 Reason.
superfluities are retained in the body as should be discussed by exercise.
Also much walking and travel on foot, because it draws a deflux to the feet,
may procure 9 Reason.
the Gout. Also the use of cold and moist meats, 10 Reason.
as Cucumbers, Gourds, Lettuce, Endive, and such like. Also it may come when
any usual evacuation 11 Reason.
is stopped, for then the matter wanting an usual vent, will flow into other
parts of the body. And because exercise does evacuate by sweat, much
superfluous and 12 Reason.
excrementitious matter, the omission or long intermission of any accustomed
exercise may be an occasion of the Gout. Also too much cold in the feet,
because it 13 Reason.
dulleth the natural heat of the part. And too hot keeping of the feet,
because it resolves forth the natural 14 Reason.
heat of the part, and so weakneth the feet, may procure the Gout. Sometimes
the Gout comes by inheritance. 15 Reason. How diseases may come by our
parents.
The reason whereof is this. The seed whereof conception is made, is taken
principally from the principal parts. For the liver gives the blood whereof
it is made, the heart gives the vital spirit, whereby it receives life, the
brain gives the animal spirit, whereby it receives motion and sense; and
secondarily it is taken from all parts of the body, so that if any imperfection
be in any one part of the parents, the inconvenience thereof often befalls
the child. These and such like may be the causes of the Gout external, and
they are to be found out by the inquisition of the Physician, and relation of
the patient. All which do not one way procure the Gout, but some by breeding
the matter thereof, some by procuring the deflux of the matter, some by
weakening the joints, making them subject to the deflux. Now to come to the
internal The internal causes of the Gout, which are four.
causes, they are either blood, or choler, or phlegm, or melancholy, and that
simply some one, or more mixed together. Blood is of all humors the best. First,
for that it is the matter or substance whereof the spirits are made, wherein
do consist all actions and functions either vital, or animal, or natural.
Next, for that it is that that does nourish the body; for it is the treasure
The first, to wit, blood.
of nature, and the upholder and maintainer of life, and therefore Moses said,
that anima omnis carnis est in sanguine, the life of all flesh is in the blood.
This blood How blood is made.
is made after this sort: The food which we receive into our stomach is there
converted into a white substance called chylus, which being put over into the
guts, is from thence sucked out by certain veins called venae mesaraicae,
which are dispersed all over the upper guts and bottom of the stomach, and by
them is conveyed into a vein entering into the liver, called vena p^rta; and by
that it goes to the liver, wherein it is converted to blood by a peculiar
property and faculty naturally given unto the liver. Wherefore blood The
definition of blood.
is a humor hot and moist, made ex chylo, that is, a substance of food
concocted in the stomach, being from thence and the guts, by certain veins
conveyed into the liver. It is after two sorts, either good or bad: The Two
sorts of blood.
good is known first by his substance, it is not too thick, nor too thin,
but of an indifferent substance. The signs to know good blood.
Next by the color, it is very red. Thirdly by the taste, it is sweet. Lastly
by the smell, for it is of no ill savor or sent. The bad is, when it declineth
from these conditions, and that either in respect of it self, or of other Ill
blood is caused after sundry sorts.
humors mixed therewith. In respect of it self, it is sometimes not good,
either for that the substance thereof is thicker, or thinner than is convenient,
or because it is adust or burnt blood, the thicker part whereof goes into
melancholy, and thinner into choler. By admistion with other humors it may be
made naught after sundry sorts, in respect of great variety of many other
humors as may be mixed therewith. As being mixed with melancholy, it is made
thick, and gross, and black: being mixed with phlegm, it is made cold and
whitish: with choler it is made thin and pale, or yellowish, and hot, and
fretting, and bitter. And being mixed with putrified humors, it is wholly
corrupted in substance, in color, in taste, and is of an ill savor. This
blood amongst the rest is one internal The application how blood may be a
cause of the Gout.
cause of the Gout, when as it is good, but in too great quantity, whereof I
have given a reason before: but most of all when it is bad, either in it self,
or by admistion with other humors: for being once made in the liver, it is put
over into a great master vein, out of the which a great multitude of other
veins, some big, some less, do ramifie, whereby this blood is conveyed into
all parts of the body, and such as it is, good or bad, so does it affect the
parts of the body, either in good sort, or in bad. The second internal cause
of the Gout is the humor phlegmatic, which is next unto blood, for The second
internal cause of the Gout.
that it is indeed a crude or inconcocted blood, and in time of hunger and hard
fare it is by better concoction converted into a profitable blood for the
maintenance of the body. And therefore next unto blood it is of all humors in
greatest abundance in the body, and has no proper place allotted unto it, but
does converse This humor has no proper place, but does converse with the blood
for three causes.
with the blood in the veins, and that for three causes. The first is to make
the blood more current in the veins, which of it self otherwise would be too
thick. The second is, for that with the blood it should pass to such
phlegmatic parts as are to be nourished therewith. The third, that it should
go into the joints for the suppling and moistning thereof, for they are
compounded of dry substances, which without that kind of suppling, would be
unapt to any ready motion: wherefore this humor may be defined after this
sort. That it is an humor in quality cold and moist, in substance The
definition of the humor phlegmatic.
crude and inconcocted, in color inclining to white, or either of no taste, or
somewhat sweet, which being bred in the stomach, is from thence conveyed to the
liver, and from thence by the veins with the blood, is distributed into all
parts of the body. This humor is either natural or unnatural: to the natural
Two sorts of phlegm in general.
belongs that which is before. The unnatural is made either in respect of it
self, or by admistion of other humors. Of it self sometimes it is too thick,
sometimes The particulars of the first.
too thin, sometimes roping like birdlime, sometimes like to molten glass
called vitrea pituita. There is also a phlegm which is sour, which likewise is
very crude; another of no taste, which is not so crude; and another is salt,
and that in respect of it self. Now by admistion of other humors the like
depravation arises, The particulars of the second.
being mixed with choler it is salt, or being mixed with some putrified humor,
it has the like taste; and being mixed with melancholy, it is of a sour
taste. But in all these sorts of phlegm we must speak after two A
distinction.
sorts: either properly, or improperly. Properly that is to be understood for
the humor phlegmatic, which with the blood goes into the veins. Improperly
all the cold and gross matter that comes out of the brain, and out of the
lungs, and stomach, is called phlegm. Now for the Gout, it may come either of
the humor it self, or being mixed with other humors. How the Gout may come of
phlegm.
If it come of it self, then must it not be thick or gross, for that is not
apt for a deflux, but it must be a thin phlegm, which may be fluent, and
this does happen to old men and such as are of a cold constitution, which
through weakness of natural heat do breed it, and therefore in such we shall
often see toward night their legs to swell; for the humor being not good, the
heart and stronger parts put it down to the lower, where it does settle and
swell. But in younger persons we shall seldom see the Gout to come of this
humor alone, but being mixed with choler, which makes it more fluent, and more
to afflict the patient Wherefore The third cause internal of the Gout.
now I will entreat of the third cause internal of the Gout, which is the
humor choleric. It it is to be understood, that the food whereon we feed, is
not of one simple condition, and nature, and therefore is not in us converted
into one only humor, but more. And as in the liver this food is turned into
blood, so in the same part is there a purification of the blood by separation
of other humors, and by taking of them to their proper places, wherefore with
blood there are made in the liver both choler and melancholy, for the thinner
part and hotter is turned into choler, and the thicker and grosser into
melancholy. The choler is drawn from the blood by the gall, and the melancholy
by the spleen, which two places are the receptacles of these two humors. This
choleric humor as the The choleric humor is of two sorts.
former is either natural or unnatural: the natural is an humor in quality
hot and dry, but not actually dry, for that in touching it is felt to be moist,
but potentially, for that it has the power of drying, and in substance thin,
in color yellow, and in taste bitter. This The definition.
being bred in the liver, is divided into two parts; the unprofitable part is
passed over unto the gall, and the profitable goes with the blood into the
veins, which is for two causes, the one that it may go to nourish such parts
as in whose composition and complexion this humor has ought to do, the other
that by the sharpness and thinness thereof the blood may pass the better
through the small veins. That which is in the gall, is evacuated by a conduct
into a gut called jejunum, the empty or hungry gut, for that the choler coming
into it does cleanse and scour it, and so keep it empty. And it is evacuated
into the guts for two causes; the one to cleanse and scour them from slimy and
gross phlegm, the other to excitate and stimulate them to expel the
excrementall dross of the guts. The unnatural humor of choler is made of it
self by adustion The unnatural choler is of two sorts.
or by admistion of other humors, as with thin phlegm, and it is thin choler,
and of the color of the pill of pome citron, called cholera citrina; or with
Mo sorts of choler.
thick phlegm, and then it is thicker, called cholera vitellina, because it is
like the yolks of eggs, which as they are some of a paler, some of an higher
color, so is this kind of choler: this choler by the action of greater heat
does become green, and is called cholera porraria, because it is green like to
leek blades, and by greater heat it does become black like unto rust, and
therefore is called oeruginosa cholera. Of all these sorts of choler the
fittest to breed the Gout is that which What kind of choler is in cause of the
Gout.
with the blood does pass into the veins; for together with the blood it
goes into all parts, and according to the disposition thereof affects such
parts as are offended therewith: the signs whereof shall be declared
hereafter. The last cause internal of the Gout is the humor melancholy, which
humor is in quality Melancholy the fourth internal cause of the Gout. The
definition
cold and dry, in substance thick, and somewhat slimy, in color black, in taste
sour. The original whereof is in the liver, and the thinner part goes with
the blood into the veins for the nourishing of such parts as are by
constitution melancholic: and the grosser Two sorts of natural melancholy.
part is drawn from the liver by the spleen, which is the proper seat of
melancholy, and from thence is put over into the stomach, and that because it
should in the mouth of the stomach procure the sense of hunger. For hunger is a
want of food, the feeling or sense whereof is in the mouth of the stomach, and
that sense is made of the sowernesse of this humor, whereby the orifice or
mouth of the stomach is shriveled and wrinckled, and drawn together, whereof is
made a desire of food. And these two sorts of melancholy are natural. There
are also some unnatural, as when by excess of heat the natural melancholy
receives adustion, then is it unnatural, and called adust, which if withal
it has any putrefaction, it breeds bad melancholy fevers. There is another
melancholy humor The unnatural melancholy.
unnatural, which comes by the adustion of choler, which is a most evil
humor, whereof comes dementia ferina, a belluine madness, when one is as mad
as a wild beast. Another unnaturrall humor melancholic, does proceed of the
adustion of other humors, as of blood and of salt phlegm. The fourth is when
in the unskilful cure of tumors there is left an hard substance, for this if
it should come to exulceration, would prove a cancer, a kind of ulcer which is
hardly cured, or not at all. Now the Gout does indeed seldom proceed of the
melancholic humor: first for that there is no great store thereof in man's
body: secondly, for that this humor is not apt for a deflux, because it is
gross. Notwithstanding sometimes it fall leth out, being mixed with some other
humor it may communicate with it in the procuring of the Gout. And thus far
forth concerning the causes external and internal of the Gout.

It follows now that I deliver the signs whereby The third general point
containing the signs of each cause of the Gout.
each cause is to be known. And first for the causes external, they are to
be found out by the inquisition of the Physician, and relation of the party,
for the Physician must ask the patient of each one, and the patient must
answer particularly, so shall it appear by what external means he has
gotten his Gout. Wherefore ^ereof I surcease to speak, because it stands in
the private conference of the Physician and patient. But concerning the causes
internal, they do only stand in the skill of the Physician to judge of, and to
diserne by the signs. Wherefore first of the first internal The sign^s of the
Gout proceeding o^ blood.
cause of the Gout, which is blood. Whereof when it proceeds, it is to be
known by these signs, first of the manner of the tumor, for when the Gout
proceeds of blood, then does there concur a tumor or swelling, and that
very big. Next of the color, for the tumor will be very red. Thirdly, of the
heat of the part, for it will be but of a tolerable heat. Fourthly, of the
manner of the grief, for it will not be extreme, and that by distention, for
that the fullness of blood in the part, does by dissevering such parts as are
united, cause in the part affected a distending grief. Hereunto must be added
the complexion of the patient, which if it be sanguine, it confirms with the
former evidence, that the Gout proceeds of blood. Also the age is to be
considered, whether the patient be young; and his manner of diet, whether he
does use to eat liberally, and that of the best and most nourishing meats and
drinks. Also his custom of life, whether he live at ease and much rest,
enjoying many delights, which if they concur to the former, it is the greater
confirmation of blood. And if any usual evacuation of bleeding by the nose or
otherwise be suppressed, after that the Gout befall to the person, it is an
argument that it is of blood. If the Gout proceed of choler, then is it The
signs of the Gout proceeding of choler.
known by these signs, first the tumor is not so big: The color thereof is
pale. The heat that follows this humor is most vehement. The pain it
procures is untolerable. It is greatly releeved by application of cooling
things. Hereunto must be added the complexion of the patient, whether it be
choleric. Also his age, whether he be in the middle age, which is from five
and thirty to five and forty, the hot and dry time of man's age. And whether his
diet has been of choleric meats, and hot and dry wines. And whether he has
led his life in sorrow and care, or watching, or study, or fasting, or has
used great labor and travel: which all, or some, if they concur; because
they are the breeders of the choleric humor, they signify unto us the cause
of that Gout to be the said humor. But when the Gout proceeds of a
phlegmatic The signs of the Gout proceeding of the humor phlegmatic.
humor, then the tumor thereof will be very big and soft? The color thereof
white. The pain not great, except so great quantity of the humor possess the
part as that by distention the pain is augmented. The heat it procures is
little, and it is releeved by application of hot things. The complexion of the
party is phlegmatic, or having used meats of a cold and moist constitution,
and lived in much rest, without competent exercise, giving himself to much
sleeping, or bathing, and that immediately after meat. Also the old age is a
sign of this humor, and the cold time of the year, as winter, a cold and
moist-habitation, which are both causes and signs of a phlegmatic humor. Now
if the Gout proceed of a salt phlegm, then together with the other signs,
there will be in the part affected a great itching, which is caused through
the saltness of the humor. The Gout does seldom come of a melancholy humor,
but when it The signs of the Gout proceeding of melancholy.
befalls, it is known by the tumor, for it is little and hard, and in color
black. The pains will be as if the part were bored with a percer. There will
appear little heat, but rather a cold. The person is in the declining age, as
from forty five to fifty five. His complexion is melancholic, and has used to
eat of melancholic meats, and to give himself to much labor and travel,
even to overgreat defatigation, his habitation is in a cold and dry place, and
commonly it haunteth him in autumn. Thus far of the signs of such
particular causes internal as occasion the Gout: which causes being sometimes
confounded, as blood and choler, or blood with phlegm, or melancholy; or
melancholy with blood, choler, or phlegm, the signs are more hard to be
seen, and therefore the cause more hard to be known, and the cure very hard to
be performed; for in a confusion it is hard for a man to determine upon a
certainty, and that which may be good for one, is hurtful to another, whereas
things of contrary natures and dispositions are confounded together; wherefore
herein does chiefly consist the skill of a good Physician, as by the signs to
judge whereof the confusion is made, and to discern the one from the other,
and so to moderate his medicine, that in doing good to some one which
principally has the dominion, it may not work any inconvenience to the rest.
This because it is a curious piece of work, and stands upon many terms of
our Art, it will be but obscure and tedious, if I entreat thereof, wherefore
here an end of this point, which contains the signs of such causes as
procure the Gout:

Now to the next point, whether the Gout may be cured or not? I would I could
warrant the cure, for I The fourth general point that is, whether the Gout can
be cured or no?
might be the richest Physician in England. Many make many vain brags to win
them a name, but if a man will show himself honest, and good, and to profess
a troth without collusion or dissimulation, he must needs confess that he
cannot radically cure the Gout, with warrant that it shall never return.
First, The reasons why the Gout is hard to be cured.
for that Gout which is by inheritance, it is altogether impossible to remove
it, for that imperfection which comes by kind may be releeved, but not
removed by Art. And that Gout that comes by surfeiting and banqueting, it is
most hard for such persons to keep a good diet, wherein indeed the whole
preservation consists. And when the joints are once weakened, it is an hard
matter to reclaim them to a natural state, because they are far from the
heart, the fountain of heat, which should be their comforter. Likewise such
parts as by their depravation do breed the matter of the Gout, will hardly be
reformed; for both the part that breeds, and the parts that receive the
matter, are so far distant from the stomach, whereinto the helping medicines
are to be received, that before they can approach either part, they suffer so
great alteration, as that they lose their proper effect, and cannot work to
that purpose upon those parts as they should. I add hereunto, that when a
water takes a course, it is hardly restrained, so when a deflux has once
took a course, it is hardly restrained, for the stronger parts will evermore
disburden themselves by the same course. In ancient time the Why in ancient
time the Gout was not so common
matter was not so hard, for that people were of a more temperate and orderly
diet. Then was it true that Hippocrates says, that eunuchs were not subject
to the Gout, for that they used no venery; which because it weakneth the joints
and other principal parts, if it be used too often, does procure the Gout.
And that women, except their natural terms were suppressed, were not subject
to the Gout; for by that evacuation their bodies were cleansed and preserved
from superfluous matter. And that no young man before he had betook himself
to venery, could be possessed with the^ Gout. But now because of excessive and
disordered diet, or some other disorder whereinto this age is inc^dent (I know
not who can be exempted from the Gout, except he can overrule his affections,
and direct himself by great moderation) and having once got it, it will be
hard for him to remove it. Paulus Aegineta says, that the Gout by reason of so
manifold causes whereof it may come, and are hard to be known, does bring with
it a very heavy conceit, to wit, that it can no way be cured by the Art of
Physic. And Tralli^nus says, that when a humor is once confirmed in a joint,
there is no hope that the part can be reclaimed to a natural state. And Galen
is of the same opinion, which is to be understood of the perfect and radical
cure of the Gout. As for the fit, no doubt there are many good means to
releeve and remove it. Wherefore thereof I will entreat, coming now to that
point which contains the cure of the Gout.

The cure of the Gout must be referred to the causes thereof; for except the
cause be removed, the effect The fifth general point, that is, the cure of the
Gout. The cure in respect of the causes external.
will still continue. I have said before, that the causes of the Gout are
either internal or external. Now for the cure of the causes external, as
they are to be understood by the patient, so he being warned of the Physician
to forsake and avoid the same, shall find a good relief to his Gout. If he
live in such an air as may procure it, the counsel of the Physician is to
change. If by overmuch feeding and ingurgitation of meats of sundry sorts, then
he must use a more temperate diet. If it come by excessive use of drinking,
that must be avoided. If it come by ill digestion, then the patient must be
careful of better. If it come by overmuch venery, that is to be used in more
moderation. If it come by too much labor, or fasting, or watching, or sorrow,
or care, then the ground of the cure is to abandon the cause. If it come of too
much ease, then let the patient use more exercise. If of too much walking and
travel on foot, then let him avoid it. If any usual evacuation be stopped,
let the Physician procure it again, or derive it by some other course. And so
if the patient can tell from whence his Gout either begins, at the first; or
afterward does come to a fit, let him avoid that cause, and it shall be a
great help unto him: for except the patient be obedient herein, no good cure
can be done. The cure of the Gout in respect of the causes internal, have two
principal scopes, the one is Two principal scopesin the cure of the Gout to
be observed.
an order of diet, the other consists in administration of medicines; and
neither of these can be general, but particularly must be appropriated unto
the cause. Wherefore first I will begin the cure of the Gout proceeding from
blood.

And first for the diet of the patient, which in all The cure of the Gout
proceeding of blood. What diet must be observed.
diseases is a principal point, the air must be somewhat disposed to coldness
and dryness; sleeping and watching must be used moderately. If the belly be
costive, it must be made soluble with gentle clysters, when as the flux does
begin, the patient must rest and hold up his leg on a stool, for the motion
would draw down the greater deflux, and laying up does resist the deflux, but
when it is in declination, a little motion is good, for that it does evacuate
that which remains. All sorrows and cares, and great perturbations of the
mind must be avoided. Little meat must be used. especially if it nourish
much, and breed store of blood, because that increases the cause. Wherefore in
the fit of this kind of Gout the patient should altogether abstain from
flesh, or if that cannot be by reason of his weakness, then let him eat of
birds, especially such as live in the hills, as Feldefares, Thrushes, Black
birds. And wine in this cause must altogether be avoided, for that it is an
increaser of blood, and through the heat and thinness, and peercing property,
it searches each part of the body, and both breeds and stirs defluxes.
Wherefore many by abstaining from wine have had more speedy recovery, and
longer intermission of the Gout. Here also the use of Venus must be omitted,
or seldom and moderately used; for there is nothing worse to procure the Gout,
especially if it be used daily, and out of season, as when the stomach is
full, for then it destroys concoction, or when the body is too empty, for
then it spends and weakneth the body. And here because eating and drinking
too much, breeds great store of raw humors, the patient must give himself to
a moderate and sober diet, for as Hippocrates says, the principal point. of
maintaining good health, is not to stuff the stomach too full, and to be
ready to put the body to exercise. This order being observed in respect of the
air, and eating, and drinking, and sleeping, and watching, and resting, and
stirring, and such like, we are to descend to the cure. The Gout when it
comes of blood, requires The administration of medicines.
some things inwardly to be given, and some things to be done outwardly. The
order of both is after this sort. First we must give a lenitive medicine,
either by clyster or potion, or in a solid substance, which ^nternall.
must be such as stir not the humors too much, for that will increase the
deflux: as by the mouth may be given Cassia, and Manna, and the syrup of roses
solutive, or such compounds as consist of these and the pulp of damask prunes,
and tamarinds, and such like. Next it is good to let blood, especially at the
first beginning of the Gout, for that does evacuate the matter thereof, and the
blood must be let on the same side whereon the Gout is; as if it be in the
right foot, we must let blood in the right arm in the liver vein, which by
way of revulsion and plucking back the blood that is descending, does good: And
here Galen reports that by letting of blood in the spring in such as have
been often taken with the Gout, he has preserved them from it a long time. And
Aetius is of the same opinion, counselling not at the spring only, but more
often to let blood. But Paulus Aegineta thinks that such as are often
troubled with the Gout, shall receive more harm than good by letting of blood,
especially if the body be but of a weak constitution, and inclining to a colder
state. And Alexander Trallianus is of the same opinion, wherefore it must rest
in the wisdom of the Physician, to consider of the state of the body, and age
of the person, and times of the year, and such like circumstances, which may
give him warrant for his action. Next we may use some purgation if need be, so
it be gentle. And we must apply to the foot somewhat to strengthen the part,
and to put back the deflux, and to mitigate the pain. To this purpose at the
beginning External or local medicines. To repel the descending humor.
of the fit, we do use old wine-vineger mixed with oil of roses, especially
if the pain be settled any thing deep in the joints; for the vinegar does
penetrate, and having an astringent property, does strengthen the part, and
because it is cold in operation, it does repel the deflux: and the oil of
roses does both comfort the part, and mitigate the pain. If the pain be not
grounded so deep, and the inflammation not great, then we must use oil of
roses, and a little white wine in summer not warmed, in winter made a little
warm. Partly to repel, and a little to resolve.
And a stronger than this is, to take of the pill of the Pomgranate, and
Sumach, and Sengreen, boil them in water and vinegar, and add thereunto the
flower of barley or beans, and some oil of roses, and apply it unto the part.
Also a Pomgranate if it be boiled and brayed in a mortar, is of it self good
to be applied. Also it is good to take of Goats milk, and Ewes milk, and boil
therein some flower of barley or beans, and To ease the pain, and to resolve,
and a little to repel.
some of the flower of Fenygreek seed, or crummes of white bread, and mix
therewith the yolks of eggs, and the oil of roses, and a little saffron, and
vinegar, which must be applied and often changed. Also take Quinces well
boiled, and bray them in a mortar, with the crummes of white bread, and oil of
roses, and apply it: When the part must be washed, we must not take water
only, but water and vinegar warmed, or An observation.
the decoction of some astringent thing. Now when by these means the deflux is
wholly restrained, and the pain somewhat ceased, then we may apply things to
resolve out that which is descended into the part affected. Such are the oils
of white Lillies, of Camomill, Medicines to resolve.
of Dill, either applied so, or with a little virginwax made in form of an
ointment: or the decoction of them with Mallows and Hollyhock leaves, and
roots, and the seeds of Fenygreek, and Linseed, with which decoction it shall
be good to bathe the part, and the residence of the decoction being beaten in
a mortar into a pulp, with a little oil of Roses, and Camomill, and Dill mixed
together, will be good to be applied unto the part. Much more might be added
unto this cure, but it would be too tedious, and I must express many things in
Latin terms, which would The cure of the Gout pro ceeding of choler.
be obscure. Wherefore I pass over unto the cure of the Gout proceeding of
choler: And first for the diet, the air must be inclining to moisture and
cold: rest The order of diet.
and sleep are to be used, for watching and labor are naught, for that they
increase the heat and choleric quality of the humor, in which sense abstinence
is alike naught: Wherefore it shall be good for the patient to take his meat,
as a Ptisan, or the pulp of a Ptisan, or a Chicken boiled with Lettuce, and
Endive, and Succory, or other cold herbs. Boiled meats are better than roasted.
Albeit, Capon, Hen, Pullet, Fesant, Partridge, Blackbird roasted, are allowable.
In a choleric state Fish is not disallowed, so it be such as do feed in sandy
and gravelly water. Some fruits are not forbidden, as Pomgranate, and Pears,
and Cherries, and such as have some little astriction. The drink must be
small, wherefore wine in this case is most hurtful. In meats and drinks that
moderation must be used, as that the stomach be not overcharged. As in the
former it was tolerable to use but little Venery, so here it is altogether
forbidden. It is also most hurtful to be angry and testy, for it inflameth
the humor, and stirs it more: wherefore all means must be used for music,
or pleasant conceits to delight the patient. These for the diet. The
administration of medicine has this kind of method. First it shall be good
if The order of administration of medicines.
the belly be too costive, to use an emollitive clyster, or some of those
gentle things prescribed before, as Cassia, Manna, syrup of Roses, or Violets
solutive, or sugar of Violets, or the pulp of Tamarinds, or such like, which
work upon choler in gentle wise, neither stirring nor heating the humor. Then
it shall be good to use a vomit, as with warm water and vinegar; or syrup of
Acetose or Oxymell, mixed together, and drunk: for that by revulsion may do
good by plucking back the humor descending. Next some for the same cause do let
blood, but that must be done with circumspection, for that the blood is a
bridle to choler, repressing by the moystnesse thereof, the dryness, and heat,
and acrimony of choler. Wherefore therein the Physician is to use good
discretion, whether in the person affected, it shall be so expedient or no.
After this, the choleric humor which causes this Gout must be repressed
somewhat, that is, his acrimony, heat, and fury must be abated by cooling
potions, as of Endive, and Succory, and Lettuce, and Violet leaves, and
Strawbery leaves, or such like, either decocted or made in syrup, and taken
with barley water: or the boiling of a Chicken, or some other convenient liquor.
This being done, the humor is to be purged with Rheubarb, yellow Mirabolans,
and some of the former contrived into a potion. As take of the decoction of
cold herbs, or of the distilled water of Endive four ounces, infuse therein
all night two drammes of Rheubarb, and of the yellow Mirabolans one dram, in
the morning strain it, and express it some what, then add thereunto of Cassia
one ounce and an half, of the syrup of Roses solutive two ounces mixed
altogether; and drink it in the morning fasting, abstaining to eat by four
hours after; then take some of the broth of a Chicken, if the deflux continue,
then the purpation must be taken again, until the cause be somewhat stayed.
Next hereunto must be used local medicines to strengthen the part affected,
Local medicines.
and to cool it, and to appease the grief that the part abides. Take oil of
roses, the yolks of two eggs, and a little vinegar, it shall both cool, and
comfort, To repel and mitigate pain.
and mitigate the pain. Or take the juice or decoction of cooling and
astringent herbs, as of Plantaine, Polygonum, To cool and repel.
Sorrel, Purslaine, Nightshade, Singreen, or such like, which being grreene
and stamped in a mortar, may be applied to the part for the cooling thereof,
and repelling of the humor. If hereunto be added some oil of roses, and some
barley flower, it shall be better. Also the seeds of Psyllium being boiled in
To cool and mitigate pain.
water, and brayed in a mortar until it come to a pulp, with the flower of
barley, and so applied to the part, does in excellent sort both cool and
mitigate the pain. Aetius reports of one, that being in most intolerable An
experiment.
pain of the Gout, put his feet into cold water, and received singular relief.
The pulp of Cassia with the powder of Camomill flowers is well commended to be
applied To mitigate pain, and to resolve.
to the part. Now if the pain be so outrageous that nothing can asswageit,
then we do use some things to dull the sense of the part, which are to be used
with great circumspection. Such are Henbane, and Poppy, Stupefactives
and Hemlock, and juice of black Poppy called opium. This must be used in
little quantity, and must not lie A caution to be observed.
long to the part. And when the part is amended, then some warm things must
be applied to recover the cold disposition which by these extreme cooling
things is got into the part. Now to come to the cure of the Gout proceeding of
a phlegmatic humor. And first The cure of the Gout proceeding of the humor
phlegmatic.
for the diet: The air must be hot and dry, whereunto if the time of the year
do not serve, then it must be procured by art. Much sleep is not good, but
some watching is better, because it does dry. And for the same cause fasting is
good in this kind of Gout: moist The order of diet.
meats are hurtful, as Veale, Lamb, Pig: Conies, and such birds as are
rehearsed before are better: Fish is not good, but if it be taken, it must be
boiled with The method of cure.
Hysop, and Thyme, and winter Savory, and some such hot and dry herbs, to
correct the moistnes thereof. Wine is forbidden, but yet it may be best
tolerated in this kind of Gout. All fruits and cold herbs must be avoided. The
manner of cure is to procure a vomit, if the patient be apt thereunto, and do
it with some facility. Next the humor must be prepared with such things as do
extenuate and rarifie the humor, as honey made with roses, and honey made with
vinegar, called oxymell; or with the syrup or decoction of staechas and betony,
and such like. Then must the humor be purged with such purgatives as do
respect phlegm: as with Agarick, and the seeds of Cartamus, and the great
Mirabolans, and Diaphenicon, and Electuarium Indum, and such like infused and
mixed in a convenient liquor. After purgation, if the person do much abound in
cold humors, it shall be good to give him* Treacle or Mithridate: The order to
be used in applying medicines.
After this we may come to the local medicines, which in the beginning must
be somewhat discussive, and more astrictive; in the increase of it they must
be less astrictive, and more discussive; and in the very rigor thereof they
must be such as ease the pain, and discuss: and in the declination they must
A caution to be observed.
be wholly discussive to resolve out that matter which by deflux is descended
into the part. But therein this observation must be used, that things of too
hot operation be not applied; for the thinner part of the humor will be
resolved, and the grosser will grow into a hard substance, whereof comes that
incurable Gout called nodosa, the knotted Gout. Wherefore in the beginning it
may be good to take Thyme, and Penyrioll, and winter Savory, with Mallows,
and Hollyhocks, the roots of white Lettuce, and Fenygreek, and This is to
dis^^sse and repel.
Linseed, boil them in sharp vinegar, and being thoroughly boiled, take of the
decoction, pour it upon the part, and also bathe it therewithal. In the
increase Neats dung, or Goats dung, with barley meal This is more discussive.
and Barrowes grease, all mixed together over the fire, with a little vinegar,
being applied to the part, will do it good. In the vigor this may be used;
take the oil This is more discussive.
of white Lettuce, and the oil of Roses, and oil of Camomill, and Dill, and
some May-butter, and of Deare-suet, and of Ammoniacum and Galbanum, dissolved
in vinegar, and with wax make thereof a plaster, and lay it upon the part. If
there be no great heat in the part, it may be made stronger. In all sorts of
Gouts some do use a defensive of bole armoniack and whites A defensive.
of eggs, binding it hard below the knee to straighten the passages whereby
the deflux descends, and so to prohibit any further deflux: as in the
toothach by a rheum, we use a plaster to the temple to prohibit the falling
down of the rheum. To this kind of Gout the Bath is most good, especially
when it declineth, for otherwise it may be too hot, and so procure a greater
deflux, and augmentation of heat. Also Snailes being bruised in a mortar, and
laid to the part, is excellent good. Take of Castory, and Frankincense, of the
marrow of a Heart, and of Goose grease, of the oil of Dill, and Nard, oil of
Baellium and Galbanum, dissolved in vinegar, and of the meal of Linseed, and
Fenygreek, and so much Vigin-wax as will serve to This is good in the
declination of the fit. The cure of the Gout proceeding of the humor
melancholic.
make a stiff plaster: This does resolve very well, as many mo which I omit to
set down^ because it would be too long. When the Gout consists on a
melancholy humor, (which chances seldom) then the diet must be accordingly
prescribed. As the air must incline to moisture and heat, sleeping and
watching must be in moderate sort. The meat must be of the best, as Partridge,
Fesant, Capon, Chicken, and such like. All wild foul is naught, as also
Venison, Hares flesh, and Beef, and all salt and burnt meats. Such fish as
does live in gravelly, sandy, and stony waters, being boiled The diet.
with some of the hot herbs and Burrage, and Buglosse, is not amiss. Vinegar
and all sour sauces and drinks are not good, for that they turn to
melancholy. It is most hurtful herein to be sad and careful. Concerning the
cure: Neither this humor, neither the former The method of the cure by
medicines.
of themselves require any emission of blood, for that the state of those
bodies which they possess, is already too cold, but if it chance to be mixed
with blood, then at the very beginning it shall be convenient to let blood,
premising some solutive clyster, or lenitive medicine. Next the humor and body
must be prepared with such syrups or decoctions as do respect melancholy, as
with Burrage, and Buglosse, and Fumitory, and tops of Hops, and Cetrach, and
such like. Then the humor must be purged with such purgative medicines as
respect the humor, as with Sena, Polipody, the black Mirabolans, Epithymum,
with Catholicon, and if need be, Diasen^a, and confectio Hamech. When as the
humor is somewhat stayed by purging, then must we come to local medicines,
which first must be to repel; next to resolve. Such as repel must be
moderately hot, because the humor is cold of it self, as the The local
medicines.
leaves of the Terebinth tree, and of the Cipres tree, and the roots of Cyprus
boiled in vinegar, wherewith the part is to be bathed. To resolve this or such
like may do well: Take of the tender Bay leaves, and of Camomill, Dill,
Penyrioll, of Basil, and the roots of the Flower-de-luce, boil all together,
and with the water bathe the part, and stamp the herbs into a pulp, whereunto
add the flower of Barley, and Fenygreek, and Linseed, with some Capons grease,
or oesipus, or Goose grease, and May-butter, and apply it warm to the place,
and so change it often. And if one thing cannot do good, we must devise some
other; for it falls out oftentimes that some one thing may do good at some
times, and sometimes it can do no good; An observation.
and being applied a little while, it does good; and being longer to the part,
it does harm.

Now if the Gout come not of any several humor, The method of cure when the
Gout pro ceedeth upon a mixture of humors.
but by the mixture of mo, then is there a great discretion to be used of the
Physician, either to judge of the predominant humor, or of the manner of their
mixture, and accordingly to apply his remedy. As if choler, or blood, or
phlegm, or melancholy be predominant, then the medicines or cure must chiefly
be appropriated to that, somewhat respecting the rest; or if there be an equal
mixture of all (which does seldom befall) then there must be such a mixture of
things for the cure as shall respect all, not doing harm to any, but good unto
all. And this makes the Gout so hard to be cured; for if in a deflux one only
humor would descend, we should easily know it, and sooner amend it; but it
falls out for the most part, that one brings down another, and mo do
concur, and such as are of a contrary nature, as choler and phlegm, then
grows it out to be hard both to judge of the cause, and determine of the
medicine, for that that does good to the one, may do harm to another. Thus in
rude manner A conclusion of the five general points antecedent.
I have gone over the Gout, first showing the nature, and essence thereof. Next
in giving the causes thereof. Thirdly in delivering the signs whereby each
cause is to be known. Then in discussing whether it may be cured or no. And
lastly what method or kind of cure is convenient for the Gout in respect of
such causes whereof it proceeds.

Now because he that has once had the Gout, and The last point which is a
preservation from the Gout.
he that fears lest he shall have it, would gladly have some means how to
avoid it: It remains that I set down an order of preservation, which albeit I
cannot do so absolutely, for that it must chiefly be referred to the person
affected, so that one only rule cannot serve all, because we are not all alike
in constitution, in diet, and such like; yet I will endevor a general order,
which shall be good for all such to observe, as would be willing to avoid the
Gout. And first in these diseases that are reciditive and chronicall, long
lasting diseases, the The order of diet to be used of such as will be preserved
from the Gout which does consist upon three general points.
the chiefest and principal point is to observe a good diet. This diet must
concern certain points; first, that it be such as does not breed
distillations and rheumes. Next, that it be such as does not frait the body
too full of humors. Thirdly, that it be such as does not breed any weakness in
any principal part or in the joints. To these purposes, first we must take
choice of the air, avoiding a moist and cold situation, as by some river, and
standing poole, or marrish ground, or moted habitation. Cloudy or rainy and The
air.
misty weather is naught: wherein we must keep within, and keep a good fire.
Hippocrates says that the Southern winds do fill the brain full of
rheumatick matter, because from the meridionall point they blow cross over the
seas, and by the vapors thereof are made moist, so that being hot of
themselves, and moist by the sea, they become unwholesome; disposing things to
putrefaction, and filling them with too great store of moisture: wherefore they
in this case must be avoided. A clear air wherein the Sun shines, the
wind standing somewhat Eastward or Northward is best. In meats and drinks we
must observe certain Of meat and things to be considered therein. Substance.
Quantity. Quality. Time. Order. Concerning the substance. Mutton, veal, Capon,
Chickken, Partridge Fesant, Pullet, Rabbet. Uenison. Wilde-fowle. Beef* Salt
meats. Fish.
points, as the substance, the quantity, the quality, the time of taking them,
and the order how they are to be taken. First for the substance, the meat
should be of a good substance, breeding good humors, and of no hard digestion,
as Mutton, Veale, Capon, Chicken, Partridge, Feasant, Pullet, Rabbet. Wild
foul is held but of a gross substance, but Woodcock, Snight, Mallard, Teale,
Whinder, Heathcock, and generally such as have the whiter flesh, may be taken,
but Goose, Duck, and such as are of a black flesh are reproved. Beef is of a
hard, gross substance, Heart, Hind, Buck and Do are the like. And because
they are prepared with much pepper and salt, and thereupon we pour in great
store of wine, they procure much inconvenience. Salt meats breed no good juice,
nor humor. Fish is a moist meat, but being such as we call petrosas or
saxatiles, that live by rocks, or upon gravelly waters, being boiled with some
of the hot herbs, Whiting-gurnat, Haddock, are good; Sammon if it be boiled in
water and vinegar with rosemary, may be eaten, Pike is not amiss, especially
if it be taken in a scowre, or put into a stew to be cleansed; So Bream and
Carp should be used: and generally such fish as live in muddy or in gross
water, either is to be rejected, or to be corrected in the keeping or
dressing. Herbs breed no good substance, especially in Herbs.
our Climate, for that the heat of the Sun is not sufficient to concoct their
watery moisture, and to bring them to a perfection, wherefore we use them for
sauces, and not for food: Some roots may be good, as Roots.
Carrot, Skirwirt, and the Parsnep if he were not so windy: the Radish breeds
an ill humor; Cucumers, Melons, Pepons, do soon putrify in the stomach.
Lettuce, Purslain, and other cold herbs do thicken the spirits too much, and
causes dullness of eyesight, Capres and Olives may be eaten as sauces. Apples
are naught as we use them, that is, after meat, for they Fruits.
trouble the stomach, and do put up moist rheumatick matter unto the brain:
they should rather be used before meats, for then they make the belly soluble.
Pears, Quince, Orange, Limon, Citron, Peach, and all such fruits as are tart,
or have some astringent property, are to be used after meat, but not in any
great quantity, for they are of no good juice, but are only taken to close up
the mouth of the stomach, and to prohibit thereby the ascension of vapors to
the brain. Milk, and all things made of milk are hurtful for the Milk and all
things made of milk are to be avoided.
Gout. Only this, take old and hard cheese that is not strong of the rennet,
and dissolve it in oil of Roses, white Lillies, and Camomill, being laid to
the hard knob bred in the joints by the Gout, it is said to be very effectual
in resolving of the same. Otherwise cheese, butter, cream, custard, and other
compounds hereof are condemned; for in some stomachs they quickly corrupt, in
some they turn into choler, in some stomachs they are sour, and in all they
sum plenteously into the brain. Now for the quantity of The quantity, that is
to wit, how much we are to eat.
of our meat this is a general rule, that we use that in moderate sort,
shutting up the bag before it be full. Our moderation herein we shall know by
our concoction, for if the stomach be not oppressed, but have in it competent
food, then it agrees well with it, and against the next meal it will have a
good desire to meat, and will like very well of that it takes, and has no
heaviness nor ill disposition in it. The quantity also may be set down in
respect of the meats, for of meats of light digestion we may eat more, and of
such as are of hard digestion we must eat less. Also in respect of the
person, for a strong man and a choleric stomach must take more. Also in
respect of the age, for young men must be allowed more than old men. And in
respect of the time of the year, for in winter we may eat more than in summer.
Also in respect of our labor and rest, for a man given to motion may eat more
than another given to rest. And so by these and such like observations a man
may determine what a quantity of meat is most convenient for him. And when we
trespass herein it is to be known by an oppression that How we shall know when
we have eaten too much.
the stomach shall feel, and by a dislike of that we have eaten. There is
nothing more hurtful than such repletion. Wherefore all surfeiting is to be
avoided. Notwithstanding this is my counsel, that a man rather It is better to
eat a little too much than much too little.
offend in eating a little too much, than much too little; for natural heat is
as a fire, it must have a subject to work on, or else it will work upon the
good humors, and spending the body, will also it self decay, then it will be
too late to yield more store of food, because then it can neither receive it,
neither digest it; whereas by using a little too much, we may amend that fault
by fasting some time, or purging. Touching the quality of meats, in this case
I have said before, The quality of meats.
that too moist meats are hurtful, and such as do easily putrify. Summer
fruits therefore are naught, as Cherries, and Plums; summer apples and such
like; it is a most hurtful thing to feed too much on them. For the time of
taking our meat, it should be a seasonable The time of taking our meat.
time, and usual to us, intermitting so much between our meals, as that the
former may be well digested before the other be received, neither drinking nor
eatting between, nor too late except necessity urge. The order to be observed
in eating our meats is, first to feed on the meats of hard digestion, and the
lightest at The order therein.
the last, albeit it is not good to feed upon many dishes, for they trouble the
stomach in digesting them, being To eat of many sorts of meats is not good.
of sundry natures, some hard, some easy to digest; for natural heat cannot
work a like effect upon both. And here I utterly mislike of banqueting dishes
served Banqueting dishes are hurtful after meat. Curious Cooks mar good
meat. Concerning our drink.
in after meat, for they corrupt the rest that was received before, and the
curious cookery is not so good, for good meat is best when it is in his kind,
with some convenient sauce, without so many ingredients as if it were a
confection out of the Apothecaries shop. Now concerning our drink, I could wish
it should not be too new, for that it is inflative; neither too stale, for
that it is too peercing and fretting. And here I utterly dislike of small
drink, for it does nothing comfort Small drink is not good.
natural heat, and being of a thin and weak substance, it does evaporate unto
the brain, and bringing no comfort thereunto, it falls down, and voideth by
spitting, or some other rheumatick sort, whereas a good indifferent drink does
help concoction in fortifying natural heat, and comforting the stomach, and
the vapors thereof that ascend to the brain, because they be warm, do comfort
and recreate the brain, being cold, and cause it to work the better
concoction, and retention, and expulsion, and they do convert into a
profitable nutriture; for the brain which being a part moist of it self,
requires great store of moist matter, for the maintenance and sustenance
thereof. As for wine it is altogether forbidden to them that fear Wine. Some
allow of white wine in preservation from the Gout.
the Gout. Yet some Physicians allow of white wine, saying, that because it it
a peercing and scouring wine, it deriveth the course of Podagricall matter by
urine, and so does greatly avail in the way of preservation from the Gout. Of
this opinion is Montanus, a learned Physician: but I mislike it, for in my
opinion there is nothing more hurtful to the Gout than the use of white But
nothing can be worse. The reason^.
wine and Rhennish: For first whatsoever is hurtful to the nerves and sinews,
is most hurtful to the Gout, but these wines are such; for they have two
properties that hurt the nerves and sinews: a peercing property, and a cooling
and moistning property; for albeit generally all wines are hot, yet white wine
is but cold, for it comes of a raw and incocted grape. Also what does evaporate
much to the brain is not good for the Gout, but white wine does so, for it is
of so thin a substance that so soon as it is in the stomach, it is either in
the brain, or in the bladder. I add hereunto that if white wine were good in
this case, then it were to be taken either fasting, or at dinner, or supper.
But fasting no wine is good, when the stomach is empty, for it runs to the
head, and going into the veins, heateth the blood; but white wine is most
hurtful fasting, for it fretteth the stomach, and offends the brain in
peercing and moistning the nerves and sinews. And with meat that drink must be
taken that will not hasten the meat out of the stomac^ before it be digested,
but white wine will do so, for it is a drink not of concoction, but of
distribution. Lastly, at supper and at night if it be to be taken, it will
replenish the brain full of vapors and rheum; for as of it self it is too
apt to ascend, so by sleep it will be drawn up in more plentiful wise.
Between meals it is naught, for it carries the remains of the former
concoction into the reins and kidneis to breed matter for the ague, and for
the stone, wherefore I do not like of white wine, but in the way of medicine,
being taken in some little quantity with some other things, for some purpose.
Claret wine may be taken in moderate sort, being neither too Claret wine.
old, because it peirceth too much, neither too new, but of a middle age, being
sweetened with sugar, for then it peirceth not so much. The sweet wines as
Muscadell, Malmsey, Bastard, are condemned. They do fume too Of sweet wines.
much to the brain. If a good stomach can digest of it self, it needs no
Sack, but if occasion be to use it, it should be taken at supper before meat,
and at dinner Sack, and how it is to be used.
in midst of our dinner; for to drink it after our meat it is most hurtful,
for that directly it fumes up to the brain, and causes indeed more speedy
distribution than should be. Now for the quantity of our drink, it What
quantity of drink is convenient with meat.
must not be so much as to make the meat swim in the stomach, for that
corrupts the meat, and carries it out of the stomach before it be concocted;
and if it be too little, then will the meat burn in the stomach for lack of
moisture, so there must be a moderation used herein, wherefore these great
tiplers offend much, and breed their own woe: albeit I will not deny to
outlash now and then is not amiss, especially if good evacuation by vomit or
stool do ensue. As for the quality The quality of our drinks.
of our drink I have partly set down before, it must not be too stale, neither
too new, but of a middle age, well brewed, and clear, with no sour taste:
drinks of too hot a quality, are not good, as bragget, which is made of ginger,
galingale, and grains, and cloves, Bragget.
hung in a bag in the drink when it is new. Alacras Alacras.
which is ale compounded with nutmegs, and ginger, and cinnamon, and sugar, may
be permitttd sometime. Ipocras is too hot a fellow. I have before condemned
Hipocras.
small drink. Some think that ale is better than beer, because that beer
does fume more, by reason of the Ale is better than Beer.
hop. And indeed we find by experience, that ale is less rheumatick than
beer, and it is a more mild and temperate drink, whereas the hop does cause
the beer to be hotter, and because it has a power to open the liver and
spleen, and to digest cold matter in them, and the brain, and other places, it
becomes a greater searcher and stirrer of humors than ale. The time when The
time to drink.
we should drink is cheifest with meat, and the order to be observed therein
is first to eat, and then to drink, and eating again, to drink again,
observing an indifferent proportion between both. As for drinking at
unseasonable hours, it is not commended in Physic, especially for such as
fear a deflux. I have wrote of two points to be rightly observed in this
preservation, the air and food. The next is how we should order our selves in
sleeping and waking. We are not to sleep at all in the day time, especially
soon after meat, except Of sleep. To sleep in the day is not good. What rules
are to be observed if we sleep in the day time.
in the night we have taken no good rest. And if we do sleep, we must observe
these rules, first that we sleep not immediately after meat, but use some
intermission. The second, that we do not lie down, nor hang down our head, but
sit upright in a chair. The third, that we take but a nap. The fourth, that
we be not of a sudden awaked. Also we must put off our girdle and undo the
fore point, and unbutton our dublet below all the belly. And one gives
counsel to put off the shoes, because that from the feet a reflex of vapors
will strike up to the brain, and hurt the eyesight and memory. Our natural
sleep must be in the night about Our night sleep is most natural, and
requires some observations.
two hours after meat, first using some paces up and down our chamber, and
lying down first on the right side, and then turning to sleep on the left,
with our head lying somewhat high, and covered with some nightcap, having the
windows shut, and other defenses against the cold and moist air of the night.
To sleep upon the back is hurtful unto the kidneies and the ridge of the
back. And to sleep grovelling upon the belly is naught for the eyes. How long
we shall sleep must be measured by our concoction, for if we How long we are
to sleep.
awake after five or six hours and find our stomach lightsome and empty, then
have we slept sufficiently. One Author gives this rule, that to sleep less
than five hours is too little, and to sleep seven hours is well, but to sleep
nine hours is too much; so commonly An observation.
seven hours may be sufficient. In the night when we awake we must use to make
water, for that will be a good preservation from the stone in the bladder. To
watch much is hurtful, for it hinders concoction, Of watching and how
hurtful it is to watch too much.
it spends the spirits, it decays natural heat, and it dries the body, it
engenders rheumes, it weakneth the brain, it hurts the eyesight, and is an
enemy to all natural, animal, and vital operations and functions. Now
commethin, another point in this preservation; to wit, what we must do
concerning the moving or resting of the body; and generally it is to be
observed, Of our exercise, and of the commodities thereof.
that exercise is good for all sorts of persons. It reviveth and stirs up
the natural heat, and it strengthens the joints, and causes expulsion of
superfluities; It makes the body lusty and lightsome: It is to be used for two
purposes, either to make the body fat or lean: if to fat it, then it must be
done ad ruborem, The ends of exercise.
until the color wax red: if to make it lean, then it must be done ad
sudorem, until the body sweat: this is for fat folks, the other for lean. The
place should be clean and sweet, the air pure and good, for that The place
wherein we are to exercise.
in exercise our pores are open, and we breathe faster and thicker, so that
store of air does enter into us, which being not good, may do us much harm.
For the time when we should exercise, it is to be noted, that The time when.
upon meat we should rest, for exercise does bring out the natural heat from
the stomach, and so does hinder concoction, and procure raw humors; wherefore
the morning is best, or in the afternoon when concoction is done. There are
sundry sorts of exercises, which I will not speak of in this place, for it
would be too long. But for such as are subject to the Gout, it What kind of
exercise is best for such as fear the Gout.
shall be best, most to exercise with the upper parts, to pluck back such
humors as are ready to take their course downward. As by listing of weights, or
by tossing a ball at a wall, or by shooting, or having a pully with a cord put
into it, and a little stick tied at each end, and so holding each stick in each
hand, to reach up and down, and to swing up and down: In this case I take this
to be a most excellent exercise. But to exercise the feet overmuch, or the
legs, will but draw humors unto them. Now for rest and ease, and too much
sitting Of rest and ease and the discommodities thereof.
still, it heapeth up great store of superfluous matter fit for the Gout, and
dulleth natural heat, and makes the body heavy and unweildy; wherefore it
must not be used too much in this case. Another point in The fifth point of this
preservative diet.
this preservative diet concerns all such things as should be retained in the
body, and such as should be put forth. For the first, any great bleeding is
hurtful, for that it decays natural heat, and weakneth the Bleeding too
much is hurtful. So is Sweating too much.
body too much. And often sweating is not good, for sweat being but an excrement,
must be avoided in a competent quantity, and time convenient; for otherwise it
spends the good humors of the body, and dries and weakneth the body too
much. Hereupon often and immoderate Venery is disco^mended, for being So is
often use of Uenery.
used as it should be, it lightneth the body, and cheereth the senses, and
edgeth the stomach; and gladdeth The commodities of seasonable and moderate
Venery.
the mind, and this is when it is used upon a fullness of seed, then nature
being disburdened thereof as of an unprofitable matter, it is greatly releeved
and lightened. But to do it more often, it does occasion a great decay unto the
principal parts, and to the rest, for that from them that matter is taken
whereof the seed is made, as I have declared before. To have a continual lask
is in this case hurtful also, and any such A continual lask is hurtful, or
any other immoderate evacuation.
evacuation as wastes the good humors, and spends the spirits, and
enfeebleth natural heat, or weakneth the body, or any part thereof. As those
things should be kept in the body, so some things there are which should be
put forth, as emission of urine, and an orderly going to stool, and a
competent sweating, and such like, which being under the name of excrements,
they Competent evacuation of superfluities is requisite.
are unprofitable to nature, and therefore nature should use thereupon the
power of expulsion, which if of it self it do not, then it must be releeved
by art. And here it is very hurtful to have the belly costive, for it
Costivenesse is hurtful.
does force up to the brain great store of vapors, and fills the body otherwise
full of bad humors; wherefore such a one must now and then be dealing with
some gentle mollitive clyster, or other medicine: it must be gentle, and not
too often, lest we make nature too slothful, and then it will look for a
stronger, and that more often? Now remains the last point of this
preservative diet, which contains the passions and Of the passions of the
mind.
the perturbations of the mind, wherein we shall do well enough, if we give
our selves to be merry, avoiding pensiveness, sorrow, and care; not giving our
minds to great meditation, and matters of study, but using our time of
recreation, solace, and pastime. Which counsel Benedictus Victorius does give
to all sick men and whole men, Laetetur (says he) praesertim cum medico crebro
offerendo illi pecunias, citius quoniam sanabitur. Thus far forth I have
discoursed of the preservation from the Gout by order of diet. Somewhat
Concerning medicinal matters what is to be done in this preservation.
remains to be set down in respect of medicinal matters, for twice in a
year we are to use some evacuation, to disburden the body of such superfluous
matter as may occasion the Gout; for few men do live so temperately, but that
they heap up sufficient matter for many diseases, if by good means it may not
be prevented. And this evacuation is chiefly to be used at the Spring, and at
the fall. At the Spring because Why at the Spring and at the Fall we are to
purge in this preservation.
the Sun rising to some elevation, has more power upon these inferior
bodies, so that the blood and humors are stirred, and begin to flow, and to be
dispersed, so that they search every place, and if they find any one weaker
than another, there they settle themselves, causing either inflammations, or
Gouts, or some one imperfection or other. Now the Autumn is a bad time of the
year, which of it self by the ill disposition of the air and autumnall
fruits, does engender many bad humors, which humors are also then apt for
defluxes by reason the passages are dilated and opened too much by the former
heat of the Summer: wherefore at this time of the year prevention must be
used in taking away this defluxible matter. And this is to be done by
purgation, wherein the Physician is to consider the humor like to offend, the
age of the person, What is to be respected in this evacuation.
and his complexion, and his manner of diet, and custom of life, and strength
of his body, and accordingly to determine what is to be purged, and by what
things, and by what ways, and how much or little. If blood be like to offend,
then that is to be let out. If choler, then that is to be purged: so likewise
if phlegm, or melancholy; or if mo humors are like to be mixed, and to
concur, then in our purgation we must lay for them, and using such
purgatives as do respect them, and convey them out of the body. And these
purgative medicines must not be too strong, for A caution.
that such do stir the humor too much, and cause an attraction or deflux
thereof unto some part which is weakened, by that strong and violent evacuation.
Montanus does always avoid them, giving this reason, quia destruunt munera
virtutum, that is, they destroy the very foundation or groundworke of natural
operations and functions. But here we may use a distinction of purgative
medicines: some are called lenitives only, A distinction of purgative medicines.
as Cassia, Manna, small raysins, damask prunes, great raysins, tamarinds,
syrup of roses and violets solutive, and such like, which are most gentle in
working, and if they work not, are not unwholesome, for that they turn into no
ill humor. Some are called benedicta medicamenta, which are stronger in
operation than the former, and yet are but mild and gentle, because they cause
no great disturbance in working, and if they work not, they turn into that
humor which they should have purged, such are Rheubarb, Agarick, Sena, the five
sorts of Mirabolans, and such like. The third kind is called vehementer
purgantia, such as purge vehemently, as Turbith and Hermodactill, etc. The
fourth are called deleteria medicamenta, because they have a venenosity, and do
purge most extremely, as Scamony, Coloquintida, Heleborus, Elaterium, Stibium,
etc. which require to be most exactly corrected, for the great danger they
bring: and therefore of themselves they are seldom given, but being compounded
and mixed with others, and that in no great quantity, of which compositions the
Apothecaries shop wants no store. Now the best writers would have a man not
pass benedicta, or using the other it should be in some The application
thereof.
of the gentlest confections, wherein they were in no great quantity, and
perfectly corrected. After this it shall be good to use some lotion or bath
for the feet, wherein are boiled some things of an astringent property, to
roborate the joints, that they may be more able to resist the deflux of any
humor. And throughout all the year it shall be good to keep the body in
soluble state, and rather by meats that have that property, than by medicines.
Or if by medicines, then by the gentlest, as such as may be given with meat,
or a little before or after. But if nature it self do work sufficient
expulsion, then we may abstain from any farther attempt.

FINIS.

