THE GREAT AND FAMOVS BATTLE OF LVTZEN, Fought between the renowned King of
Sweden, and Walstein;

Wherein were left dead upon the place between 5 and 6000. of the Swedish
party, and between 10 and 12000. of the Imperialists, where the King himself
was unfortunately slain, whose death counterpoyz'd all the other. Pappenheim,
Merode, Isolani, and diverse other great Commanders were offered up like so many
Sacrifices on the Swedish Altar, to the memory of their King.

Here is also Inserted an Abridgment of the Kings life, and a Relation of the
King of Bohemia's Death.

Faithfully translated out of the French Coppie.

Imprinted 1633.

To the Reader.
WE see that in the greater Maps things are expressed more plainly then they
can be in the smaller, though they be drawn all by one skill: So Virtue in
Princes is more perspicuous, then in Plebeians; in the sormer she is drawn at
length with all her dimensions; in the latter she is limn'd in little, being
invisible, unless you approach very near her. And, indeed, this is consonant
to Natures own Wisdom, who suffers the vitali spirits in the body to go to
the least member, yea to the very fingers end; yet does she most plentifully
bestow them where she has the greatest employment for them: so on the vulgar
she conferres gifts suitable to so low a Calling: But in Princes and Monarchs,
she centuples and irradiates her ornaments, because by them she speaks, and
gives Laws to Humanity. Yet is not this Rule so general, that it often
suffers not an exception: for as Nature distinguishes between the Subject and
the Prince by Soveraigntie, so does she between Prince and Prince by Virtue,
and Ability. That this is true, this our dear Tragical subject will serve
for a lively and clear demonstration, whom neither this Age, nor any of the
former could parallel in the management both of the Scepter, and the Sword. In
his whole Reign, his Prudencie at home has not deserved more admiration then
his Prowess abroad: For indeed, from his Youth upwards, Mars has been the
Sphere wherein he has moved, into which violated Justice first hall'd him,
and out of which nothing but she appeased, or Death could remove him. He was
a General ere a Man, and with a yet vnreaped Chin mowed down his Enemies
before him. With many Kingdoms at once he waged war, from all which he
forced conditions advantageous to him and his. This was not without the
amazement of all men, to see a Point oppose and conquer so vaste a
circumference. In his wars I will only observe three things, His Way to
Victory, his behavior in it, his Carriage after it. For the first, he did
animate his Soldiers rather by Fighting, then Exhorting; nor did he challenge
to himself any advantage above the meanest of them, but Honor and Command.
He knew that it is in Empire, as in the Body, where the most dangerous
diseases flow from the Head: Wherefore he worked on their manners by his
own, the only firm Ciment of a General and his Army. He well understood
that Faith and Loyalty are not to be expected where we impose thraldom and
servitude, and therefore at times he would be familiar as well with the Common
Soldier as the Commander. His Invention, and execution of all Military
stratagems were ever twins: for in all his Conquests he owed as much to his
Celeritie, as Valor. When his foes were in their Tents securely discoursing of
him, as a far off, he like the Wolf, broke into their fable, to their
irrecoverable astonishment. They could not withstand the force of his Fame,
much less that of his Arms. One feather more I must add, without which his
Victories had not been fully plumed, nor could have soared so high, and that
was this: He never persuaded any man to an Enterprise, in which he would not
himself make one. He taught them as well by Hand, as Tongue. I may add, that
neither Antiquity can, nor Posterity ever shall produce a Prince so patient
of all Military wants, as of meat, drink, warmth, sleep, etc. all which are
necessary to the maintenance of life. In diverse sufferings of his he recalls
to my mind the most accomplished of the Romans, Cato, who leading his Troops
through the contagious and poisonous Deserts, was ever the last of his Army
that drank, save once, when he began to them all in water taken from a spring
suspected to be envenomed.

Thus much of his way to Victory, now let us come to his Deportment in it.
After all his Conquests, such a calm immediately ensued, that the passed
storm was soon forgotten, and the Enemy appeared rather like one suddenly
wakened, then frighted. There was not any of his Victories that washed not her
hands of all cold and innocent blood. He was so severe a Iusticer, that he ofen
reve^ged the violating of his merciful Decrees even upon the place, and
sometime on men of quality, whom he affected. The Laws of Retaliation he
knew so well, that he gave to all men punctual satisfaction for all offenses
received from his party, according to the nature of the wrong done. For this
cause his Tribunal (like the Roman) stood ever open. All his great
Atchieuements were ever attended by Devotion within, and Circumspection
without. He first praised God, and then provided for man, at once having an eye
on his enemies next designs, and his soldiers present necessities. The
greatest of his glories purchased with blood and sweat, could neither change
the estate of his mind, or copy of his countenance. The true greatness of his
spirit was such, that in all his actions he placed Ostentation behind, and
Conscience before him, and sought not the reward of a good deed from Fame, but
from the deed it self. I conclude this point with this assertion, That
Honesty had as strict, and great a command over him, as Necessity over
mankind. He was a Prince of so great and clear a fame, that Envy her self
blushed to oppose it, and therefore was forced to assume the mask of Religion,
under which she might securely display her invectiues. Religion, Religion, it
is thou that should unite, but do estrange hearts, and make us seek to
take away even those lives that gave us ours. Let a man have in eminency all
the Cardinal and Theological virtues, he of a contrary sect looks on all
these through a mist raised by his malice, which makes him either not see them
at all, or not as they are. O Jesus, Jesus, in thy best blessed time gather thy
straied flock into one fold, and let Truth and Peace kiss each other. This
testimony the perfections of this Prince drew from me, who was abstemious and
continent in every thing, save in the search of Glory and Virtue.

It now remains that I say something of the ensuing Treatise, in which is
contained the last and greatest Battle of this King, his deplored Death, and
other weighty Circumstances. The Original is French, written by one of the
ablest Pens of that Nation. He begins at the Kings coming down into
Germany, and extends his Story to his death. Of all the Modern Histories, I
dare make it the Chorus; for it is written in a style so Attick, and so
judicial, that it may well be called, The French Tacitus. What has been
before delivered in other Discourses concerning this Subject, is to this naught
else but a Fail. The full and perfect Translation of this rare piece, I here
promise the Courteous Reader; and in the mean time, entreat him to wear as a
favor, this Branch, by which he may judge the whole body,

Dix^.

The great and famous Battle of Lutzen, fought between the renowned King of
Sweden, and Walstein, wherein were left dead upon the place between 5. and
6000 of the Swedish party, and between 10. and 12000. of the Imperialists,
where the King himself was unfortunately slain, whose death counterpoyz'd all
the other. Pappenheim, Merode, Islonain, and diverse other great Commanders were
offered up like so many sacrifices on the Swedish Altar, to the memory of their
King.
Here is also Inserted an Abridgment of the Kings life, and a Relation of the
King of Bohemia's Death.
THE King having mustred his Troops, and those of Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar
about Erffurt, the Army received command to advance toward Naumburg.

The King came thither in person on Saint Martins day, and cut in pieces two
Regiments of Merode, that opposed him by the way. He was no sooner arrived at
Naumbourg, but he received Intelligence that the Enemies forces lay encamped
at Leipzig, and Noerspurg, and stretched thence in length as far as
Weissenfels, and that they were entrenched in a place advantageous. Which
proceeding of theirs obliged the King to do the like at Naumbourg, and to
seek the means to join his Army with the Electorall, which then lay about
Torgau, consisting of fifteen thousand men, and reenforced with two thousand
Horse, belonging to the Duke of Lunebourg. He sent diverse Posts to inform
them of his coming, and of the courses were to be taken for their uniting.
Walstein, and Pappenheim being lodged between them, had an eye on them both,
and made it their only study to hinder their conjunction. On the fourteenth
of November, the Scours of the King brought him word, the Enemy had sacked,
and abandoned the City, and Castle of Weissenfells, laid plain his Trenches,
and retired himself toward Lutzen, two German miles from Leipzig. The King
hearing this news, resolved no longer to delay the Fight, his courage not
permitting him to temporize any further, nor to attend the return of his Posts
sent to the Electour.

That which confirmed him in this his Resolution, was the assurance of certain
prisoners brought him by Relinguen, that Pappenheim was gone to Hall with six
Regiments Wherefore his Army had order to march toward the enemy, the
fifteenth, three hours before day, and to dare him to a Battle. The
diligence of the Van was such, that it reached the enemy by the second hour
after Noone, and began the Assault. The Imperialists failed not to make head,
and a strong resistance. Many charges were given with advantage, and loss
equal, the victory enclining now to this side, then to that, till at length
the Swedes gave fire to their small Fieldpieces, which pierced, and broke
sundry Imperial Companies, and forced them to a Retreat. The Swedes became
Masters of the Field, and brought to the King a Standard taken from the Enemy,
with this Devise, La Fortune, and l'Aigle Romain, Fortune, and the Roman Eagle.
Hence some drew this Prognosticke, that the enemy should ere long part with
the one and the other. A thick miste, and the night coming upon them, the
Swedes were hindered in the pursuit of the enemy, and the victory.

The King remained in the Field, and stood in order of Battle all night,
having no other shelter then his Caroach, resolved to follow close his Design,
and engage the enemy to a general Combat. He communicated his Intention to
the Dukes of Saxon-Weymar, and other remarkable Commanders, who passed away
that night near his Caroach, having nothing over their heads, but the Heavenly
Arch, nor any thing under them, but trusses of straw laid upon the earth.
Their field furniture they left behind, believing they should return to lodge
in Naumbourg. But the patience of their General made them with ease pass over
these inconveniences. Some of the principal Officers endeavored to diswade
the King from giving Battle, alleging that the Forces of the Enemy were
great, his Seats advantageous, their own Army feeble, and wearied with
continual Marches; and that it was far safer to wayt for the arrival of the
Saxon, and make so strong an union, as may promise success in the equality of
their Armies. Their reasons were not received, but crossed by the King, with
many more solid, derived from the Experience of the times past, and the present
astonishment of the enemy, from the courage of his Soldiers, and his
advantages obtained, from the Justice of his Arms, from the Benediction from
above, from the absence of Pappenheim, and the discommodities he should be
subject to in that season now waxing bitter, in case he should suffer the
enemy to perfect his Trenches, which he had already begun in many places. To
which he added his Reputation, and how important it was to hasten the Combat,
saying alowd, That he could not suffer Walstein to beard him, without calling
him to an account, and letting him see by proof he was not to be faulted, that
ere this he had not seen him with his sword in his hand: that he desired to
make trial of his ability in the Field, and ferret him out of his burrowes.

The Commanders perceiving by the language, and tone of the King, that his
decree to fight was inevitable, and their opposition fruitless, conformed
their wills by an humble obedience to his, not without reiterated protestations
to subscribe themselves his, in their own blood, and seal it with the loss
of their lives: Whereat the King rejoiced extremely, nor could he contain his
joy from appearing in his face, but by his cheerful looks expressed his
inward content, and forthwith called for a new suit of Chammois, which he
presently put on. Then they presented to him his Arms, and the Duke Bernard of
Saxon Weymar, and sundry other Princes, and Officers conjured him by all things
dear and holy to wear his Helmet and Cuirasse: but they could not win him
to it, he objecting the encumbrance, and laying his hand on the Musket bullet
still remaining in his shoulder, which to him made the least weight
unsupportable.

The Kings design was to begin the combat by the peep of day; but so
thick and dark a mist arose, that it confined the eye to a small distance,
and rendered any enterprise not only difficult, but dangerous: Wherefore the
King was constrained to expect till the Sun had chased it away, which till
then had deprived him of all sight of the Enemy. The interim (according to his
custom) he employed in his devotions, and in making the Round of his Army, to
mark the disposition and countenance of his soldiers, and encourage them to
fight manfully. Coming to the Quarter of the Swedes and Finlanders, he put
them in Battle Ray, and with a voice and countenance alike chee efull he thus
bespake them: Camerades is in English Chamber-fellowes.
My friends, and Camerades, this is the day that invites you to demonstrate
what you are; show your selves men of valor, keep your ranks, and fight
couragiausly for your selves and your King: If this day the bravery of your
spirits shine forth, you shall find the heavenly Benediction perched on the
points of your swords, Honor, and a recompense of your valor; On the
contrary, if you turn back, and basely and foolishly commit the armed hand to
the protection of the unarmed foot, you shall find Infamy, my disgrace, and
your own ruin, and I protest to you on the word of a King, that not the least
piece of you, or of your bones, shall return again into Swedeland.

This Exhortation, delivered in a high and piercing tone, won from the Swedes
and Finlanders only these general acclamations: That they would approve
themselves men of Honor; that they had lives only for him, which they were
ambitious to preserve in the obteining of victory, and his good graces.

The Swedes being placed in Rank and File, the King embattailes the Alman
Regiments, and thus in few words exhorts them: My friends, Officers, and
Soldiers, I conjure you, by your love to heaven and me, this day to manisest
whose you are; You shall fight not only under me, but with me, my blood and
life shall mark you out the way to Honor; Break not your ranks, but second
me with courage: If you perform this, Victory is ours with all her glories,
you, and your posterity shall enjoy it; if you give back, your lives and
liberties have one period.

This Speech was answered with an universal shout, and vows reciprocal; That
they would make it appear they knew the way to Victory, or to death; that the
King should receive all satisfaction in their service, and the Enemy should
acknowledge he had to do with men of Honor.

Walstein, and his principal Officers discovered quickly by his Scouts the
resolution of the King, and the countenance of his, and thereupon grounded this
resolution, that they must needs come to blows. Walstein was infinitely
desirous to avoid the Combat; but he was wisely admonished by some about him,
that every step his men made in a retreat would take from their courage, and
give it to the Enemy, and bring upon his Army a Panicke fear, and an utter
confusion. He spent that whole night in digging and intrenching, in
embattailing his Army, and planting his Artillery in diverse places
advantageous, the better to sustain the shocke of the Enemy. Pappenheim was
sent for back in post have, who was gone to Hall, being very desirous to
invest it, not believing that the King would give or accept of battle, before
the Forces of Saxon were arrived. In the mean time the utmost endeavors of
Walstein were not wanting to hearten his men, and laid before them Honor,
Reward, their advantages, their Forces, the justice of their cause, which God,
the Catholic Church, the Emperor, and the whole Empire justified against the
violence and usurpation of a stranger, and all this and more he uttered in his
Litter, which his Gowt would not permit him to forsake.

This was subject to diverse interpretations; Some believing that indeed he
felt some symptoms of that sickness very familiar to him; others maintained,
this posture to have no good grace on a day of Battle, and judged that
Walstein was very willing to preserve himself safe and sound, that he might
hereafter serve his Master, and his party: others averred, he was much indebted
to his Gowt, which did warrant his retreat without his reproach, necessity
commanding the stoutest courage to yield to such an Enemy.

On the other side, the King being ready at all points, and his Army
embattail'd, he would take no refection, because he would be an example to his
men, and lose no time. Being placed in the head of Steinbocks Regiment, he
thus spoke with avoyce audible: Now, now is the time Camerades, we must go on
undaunted; let us charge, let us charge in the name of God: Jesus, Jesus, Jesus
aid me in fighting this day, and favor my right.

These words were no sooner pronounced, but he gave spurs to his horse, and
with his head inclined, gave a charge to a Battalion of four and twenty
Companies of Cuirassiers, which were esteemd the flower of the Imperial Army.
Two Swedish Regiments had order to second him. The Artillery of the King was
advanced, and five Cannon shot discharged upon the Enemy, who answered them
with two hundred, which went off with a horrid noise, and lightning, but with
small loss to the Swedes, the Cannoniers of Walstein not having well taken
their aim. But the first shocke was fatal to the King, and all the Army: For
though the Squadrons led by so brave a Chief, with an unheard of resolution,
gave on like Thunder on the Enemy, and made him recoyle; yet one shot from a
Pistol gave him new courage, which pierced the Kings arm, and broke the bone.
When those next the King saw him bleed, they were amazed, and cried out, The
King is wounded. Which words the King heard with much distaste and repining,
fearing it would abate the valor of his men: wherefore dissembling his grief
with a joyful and undaunted look, he sought to quallify the fear of his
Soldiers with these masculine words: The hurt is slight Camerades, take
courage, let us make use of our odds, and return to the Charge. The
Commanders that were about him, with hands lifted up, earnestly besought him to
retire: but the apprehension of frighting his men, and his ambition to overcome
prevailed.

The Assault being rebegunne with vigor, and fervor, and the King fighting
again in the head of his Troops, once more to break those Ranks that were
again made up, the loss of blood, and the grief which he felt in the
agitation of his body, enfeebled much his spirits and voice, which caused him
to whisper these words in the ear of the Duke of Saxon of Lavenburg; Convey
me hence, for I am dangerously wounded. He had scarcely ended his speech, and
turned head to retire, when a Cuirassier marking this retreat, advanced upon
the gallop from the Battalion of the Enemy, and discharged his Carabin full in
the shoulder of the King, with this insulting speech: And art thou there then?
long it is that I have sought thee. Some imagined that it was Pappenheim that
gave the blow, by reason he had often vaunted, that an ancient prediction was
found amongst the Records of his Family, That a Stranger King should dye by the
hand of a Pappenheim, with diverse scarres in his body, and mounted on a white
Horse. And for this cause (having many scarres in his face, and diverse other
parts of his body stitcht up) he reflected on himself, and believed the
Prophecy should be accomplished by his hand. But this needs no other
confutation then the absence of Pappenheim, and the time when the King received
his hurt, which was in the very beginning of the Assault, before Pappenheim
could make one of the adverse party. I may add, that the discretion of this
worthy Count would not have sufferd him to run into an error so uncivil, as
to speak so undecently to a Prince of that eminency.

When the King had received this mortal wound, which pierced him through and
through, he fell from his Horse, and gave up the Ghost, with nothing but (my
God) in his mouth. He that made this accursed shot was beaten down with a
storm of Harquebusados, and sacrifised to the indignation of the Swedes. But
while the Groom of the Kings Chamber, and diverse others lighted to raise the
body, the charge began again more furiously then ever; the Enemy having
taken notice of this blow, and concluding that all was now finished, and that
he should have Swedes good cheap. This hindered the Kings servants from
bearing of his body, and summond every man to regaine the stirrupe, and
withstand the foe: so that the King could not be defended from receiving
another pistol shot in the head, and being twice run through with a sword:
The Imperiallists fearing him even after death, and cowardly suspecting his
speedy resurrection. The poor Groom of his Chamber never forsook him, but
breathed his last upon his Masters carcass, after the receipt of an infinity
of wounds.

But neither the Kings death, nor the great odds that the enemy had, being
strongly entrenched in diverse places, could let the Swedes (madded with their
inestimable loss) from assaulting the Imperiallists with an unspeakable fury,
insomuch that they compelled the Battalion of Cuirassiers (which made the left
Wing) to retire into their Trenches, whom they dislodged about noone, and
gained seven of their Cannon, together with many Colors and Cornets.

Lieutenant Coronell Relinguen received command to advaunce, and with three
hundred Horse, to charge four Regiments of Crabbats commanded by Isolani,
which made the right wing of the Enemy, which he performed with so much
braverie and courage, that he twice pearc'd through them, and brought back
three Standards, leaving behind one of his own. All his Officers were
wounded, and he himself in the second onset had his arm shot through with a
Pistol bullet, which forced him to retire. Isolani General of the Crabbats
lost his life, with a great number of his men. Eighteen of his Companies
charged some Germane Regiments that guarded the Baggage, but they were stoutly
opposed, the Combat fierce, the Assaults reiterated, the earth dyed crimson,
and burdened with carcasses, the Crabbats driven back, though not without some
disorder of the Germane Horse, recoyled amongst the Carts: but this
disadvantage the Enemy could not epsy, by reason of a thick cloud which then
arose, and gave the Germans opportunity to rank themselves.

The Imperial Commanders, Galas, Merode, and Holok, longing to recover their
Seat, and Cannon lo^^, took selected Bands, fired the four Corners of Lurzen,
to blind the Swedes, and keep them from piercing that side, to the succor of
their friends. This Essay was followed by success, the Trench force by the
Imperiallists, the seven pieces of Cannon lost, regained, and some Swedish
Regiments disordered.

The Duke Bernard of Saxon Weymar seeing the confesion of his men, and being
advertised by Kinphausen of the Kings death, was extremely incensed, and
protesting he had not so base a wish as to surviue him, he ran (with his
head couched) on the enemy, seconded by the Regiments of the Prince of Auhalt,
and Count Lowenslein. Then the fight became obstinate on both sides, the
Charges redoubled, the Carkases piled up, the Pikes broken, and the difference
come to be decided by dint of Sword. The eye of man, nor that greater of the
World ever beheld a Ioust more furious. The Imperialistes strove to hold their
advantage recovered, and the Swedes to dispossess them of it. The Duke Bernard
did wonders that day. Thrice like Lightning shot he through the Forces of the
Enemy, nor could a wound received on the left Arm cause him to leave the
field, before he had constrained the Enemy to abandon the Cannon, and his
Post.

The winning of this opened him the way to the conquest of another: For this
valiant Prince pressed the Imperialist so hard, that he again disrank'd them,
and compelled them to quit another Post, guarded with thirteen Cannon. His
dexterity in the drilling of his men, in the opening and shutting of his
ranks was such, that they received little or no hurt from the Enemies Cannon.
The Duke undaunted, pierced through the clouds of smoke, displaced the enemy,
and made himself Master likewise of this place, and of the Cannon, and drove
the enemy to a confused Retreat. The slaughter was great, and the Swedes well
blouded, made good life of their advantage, and the disorder of their foes,
passing over their bellies, killing all that came in their way, and stopping
their ears against all motives for quarter.

The Duke possessed of this place, and Master of the Field, between two and
three in the afternoon, thinking there was but one Post to force, seared by a
Windmill, and guarded by three Imperial Regiments, endeavored to remove
them, sending in the mean time sundry Squadrons to chase the fugitives. But
then the fight grew more cruel then ever: For Pappenheim was returned from
Hall, and came upon the gallop with certain fresh Regiments. His Reputation,
and his concouragement gave new spirits to the Runawayes, and called them to
the combat. The Duke having notice of this, quits this place, new ranks and
encourages his men, and gives Pappenheim a meeting in the midway. All the
Charges past were nothing in respect of these latter. Pappenheim employed his
utmost cunning and diligence, and showed himself in all places in the Head of
his Troops, to embolden them. On the other side, the Duke Bernard fixed a
resolution either to die, or overcome; and the Swedes and Finlanders enraged
for the death of their King, fought like Lions, and desperately ran upon the
enemy. The Artillery advanced, and began to thunder, and to enter diverse
Battalions, and to make legs and Arms to fly from one place to another. The
smaller shot was also se violent, that the Squadrons encountered in the palpable
darkness caused by the smoke without knowledge of their parties. This furious
shocke continned two hours, with equal loss to both, Victory opening her
arms to embrace now one side, then another. Galas, Merode, and Holok were
wounded to death, and a Cannon shot cut off Pappenheim by the middle.

His death, and the loss of diverse other Commanders, staggered the
Imperialistes, as much as that of the kings incensed the Swedes. Then the enemy
(upon the receite of a new salute from four and twenty Cannon, which pierced
their thickest Troops) began to fly, and the Swedes pressed and pursude them
far within night, which favored the retreat of the fugitives, and hindered the
Swedes from ranging further in the chase. Indeed they were so tired, that they
had neither breath, nor force furtherto follow them. The Imperiallists (giving
fire to their camp, and part of their baggage,) took some the way of Leipzig,
others that of Leutmeritz, toward the Frontiers of Bohemia, whither it was
thought Walstein was gone, (having heard of the loss of the Battle) to find a
safe place of retreat, and to gather together his dispersed Troops.

The Swedes remained in possession of the Enemies camp, and most of his
Baggage, of one and twenty exquifite Cannon, besides inseriour ones, and a
multitude of Standards and Corners. Upon the mustering of their Army, they
found wanting, (over and above the incomparable, and irreparable loss of their
King) the Major General Isslet, and other Coronells, and Officers. A Prince of
Anhalt, a Count of Nilis, the Coronels Brandestein, Wildenstein, Relinguen, and
Winchell received that day deep and honorable wounds. The Duke Bernhard of
Weymar also was hurt, to whose valor and conduct the Swedian party (after
God) owes the glory of that day, more bloody by far, then that which was
sought the year past in the neighboring fields of Leipzig. The Duke Ernest of
Weymar also infinuated himself into the hearts of all men by his courage, and
leading that day. The Regiments of these two Princes, and those of the Prince
of Anhalt, of the Count of Lewestein, of Coronell Brandestein, and the two
Swedish Coronells, surnamed, The Blew, and the Yellow, bore the brunt of that
day. The Swedes lost between five and six thousand men, and the enemy
between ten and twelve thousand remaining on the place, and two thirds of
their Army ruined, and dispersed, besides the death or mortal wounds of
diverse of their remarkable Commanders, as Calas, Merode, Holok, Piccolomini'
Isolani, and diverse others. Pappenheim above all the rest was bewailed by his
party, and not without just cause; his courage, his Conduct, his Vigilancie,
and Experience having conspired to rank him in the Soldiers esteem amongst
the bravest Generals of these times.

But this glorious Victory of the Swedian Army suffered an Eclipse by the
death of that truly great King, who was the soul of his Friends, and the
terror and scourge of his Enemies. His body could not be found till the next
day, when after a curious search it was discovered amidst the dead heaps
rifled, and half naked, and so disfigured with blood, and dirt, that he could
hardly be known. This at once so doleful and glorious a spectacle of the end
of so great a Monarch, worked so strongly, and effectually on the hearts of his
Soldiers, that with tears and lamentations for a loss so irreparable, they
made an unanimous Vow, upon the place to revenge his death, and make him reviue
in the rigorous pursuit of his Designs, which he had so often conjured them
to continue, especially a little before this Battle, when he seemed to
presage his end, touching which he discoursed often and seriously with many
of his familiars. Amongst other passages, the King marking the multitude of
people that flocked about him at his entry into Naumbourg, three days before
the Battle, and hearing their shouts of Joy, and this general acclamation,
Long live the King, as if now they had nothing to fear, since he was present,
he made to the standers by this short but memorable speech: Our Affairs
answer our desires, but I doubt God will punish me for the folly of the
people who attribute too much to me, and esteem me as it were their God, and
therefore he will make them shortly see I am but a man. He be my witness it
is a thing distasteful to me. What ever befall me, I shall receive it as
proceeding from his divine will: In this only I rest fully satisfied, that he
will not leave this great Enterprise of mine imperfect.

The seventeenth of November immediately following the day of Battle, and the
Kings death Duke Bernard of Weymar retired to Weissenfels to take a general
review of his Army, and to give rest, and breath to his over wearyed Troops.
By the review of his Regiments, it appeared that his Army was be tweene
fifteen and sixteen thousand strong. The Duke imparted his present estate,
and all other necessary particulars to the Court of Saxon, and urged the
Electour to an uniting of their Forces, to the end they might follow close
their design, and pursue Walstein to the remotest parts of Austria. After
this, all the Army, as well Swedish as Germane, agreed in the election of Duke
Bernard for their General, and took a new Oath faithfully to serve him, who
had deserved so well of the Swedian party by so many benefits, by his
vigilance, his conduct, and the greatness of his same in War: but above all,
by his resolution, and incomparable valor, of which he made so oportune and
clear a demonstration on that bloody day of Battle. The Chancellor
Oxesterne (who lay when about Frankfort) was sent for in all have to manage the
affairs of the Chancery Royal removed to Erfurt; but chiefly, to serve and
counsel the desolate and disconsolate Queen, environed wih griefs and crosses
inexprimable, yet but equal to the greatness of her loss. The said
Chancellor, and the Chevalier Rache served happily to rectify sundry
disorders, and to raise the spirits of such as were dejected; but principally,
to stop the flood of tears flowing from the eyes of this most virtuous
Princess, and to replant in her mind generous and masculine resolutions.

De la Gorde was sent for in post have, who was embarked in Swedeland with
certain Regiments of Swedes, and Finlanders, to bring a supply to the Camp
Royal, and reinforce it, the dead King being anchored in this maxim, to make
continual levies, (notwithstanding the number of his Armies) that so he might
have men at will to fill up those empty Companies, which the Sword, mortallity,
and many other military miseries might unhappily depopulate.

But notwithstanding the death of this mighty Prince, the astonishment and
fright of the Enemy was such, that he basely forsook diverse strong and
impregnable places in the Electorate of Saxony. Amongst others the City of
Leipzig was forsaken, and the Castle rased to the ground, Chemnits was taken,
Zwickaw invested and forced, the Duke Bernard following close his good fortune,
and making good use of the Enemies amazement. To this he was animated the
more, by the fixed decree of the consederate Princes, to make all fast, and more
and more to knit a firm Union with the Swedes, that so jointly, that so both
of them jointly might execute, and fulfill the intentions and exhortations of
the deceased King.

Walstein having notice betimes of his men's infortunity, and the advantage of
the Swedes, recovered Leipsig that night, and before day took the way of
Leutmeritz, where he recollected is disbanded men, and added to them six
fresh Regiments that had not been engaged in the Battle. After the often
sending of his Posts to all parts, at length Altringer had order from the Duke
of Bavaria to join half his Army to that of Walstein.

Notwithstanding the somiserable defeat of the Imperialists, bonefires were
made in diverse parts of Bavaria, for the death of the King, and Te Deum
chanted aloude through all the streets of Ingolstatt, and Ratisbone. But these
vain fires, and triumphs served for so many Trumpets, to sound forth the
praise and glory of the departed King, since in the Enemies own judgment his
death was thought sufficient to counterpoize the dissipation and slaughter of
so puissant an Army: And indeed, except this accursed blow, there was no one
circumstance, that did not oblige the Imperial party to a funeral Equipage.
Nothing was more to be admired then the moderation of the Court of Vienna,
which expressed no joy in triumph, or exultation. They contented themselves
with the discharging of a few Ordnance, to make the silly people believe they
had the better of the day. Some judged this modest behavior to proceed from
sensible losses, suffered in the Battle, from the consideration of the
Swedish Forces, and the difficulty to set on foot again an Army of that
vastness. Others deemed it to proceed from the dispersed rumor of the
Emperors death, which they thought countervail'd that of the King, and cast
the Imperial Court into an irrecoverable dejection

The failing of the Saxon to appear in the Field on the day of Battle, (when
his aid concerned his own honor and the Kings good) was attributed to the
like sad accident, a rumor being divulged, not only of the Dukes death, but
the manner of it, to wit, sudden Apoplexy: But these false bruits, both of
the one and the other, were contradicted by assuted news that both the Princes
were living.

That the Saxon was not dead, he gave good proofs, resolving to take occasion
by the lock to revenge the ruin of his Cities, and depopulation of his
Country, and to hinder the Imperialifts from sending into his Dominions any
more Incendiaries.

The continuance of the Emperors life was favorable to his party; the very
name and splendor of Majesty being of virtue to animate, and retain diverse
spirits in devotion, and obedience to the Austrian Line, which else perhaps
might have followed the Chariot of the victorious Triumpher.

But will'st the foolish people spread abroad, or by design, or credulity, the
death of these two Princes, there came too assured news from Nayence of the
King of Bohemia's death. When this unfortunate Prince was ready to take a new
possession of his Country, and the conditions drawn up between him, the King
of Sweden, and the Governor of Frankendale, he was surprised in Nayence with
a contagious disease, presently after his return from Deux-ponts, where he
had visited a Prince of his alliance. The care and sufficiency of the Physician
was so great, that he quickly expelled the pestilent quality, and set him in
all appearnace free from danger; but the great calamities through which he had
passed, had much estranged his Constitution from its first purity, and quite
altered his color, and complexion. When he thought to quit his tedious bed, and
take possession of Frankendale, it unfortunately happened that the King of
Swedens death came to his ear, which wrought so on his mind, and body, that
his disease was aggravated, and his death ensued on the 29. of November. His
death was much deplored by those of his blood, by his servants and subjects,
yet did their grief receive an allay by his devotion, and his last words full
of faith and piety.

The life of this Prince was a mere Medley, and like a Picture with many
faces. His entry into the Electorate was glorious, his beginning happy, his
Virtues eminent, and courted he was by the whole Empire. His Alliance, and
friends within and without Germany, the consideration of his House, of his
Dominions, and the great Body that depended on his direction, were the cause
of his election to the Crown of Bohemia, which was fatal to him, and all
Germany, which felt the sad accidents that attended this Comet, and was
forthwith invaded by an universal War in her heart, and all her quarters,
which has never since forsook her, having engaged all the Imperial States
and Provinces, every one whereof to this day carries her marks. And though
this Prince has sought all means of reconciliation, hoping that way to quench
this Wildfire; yet has he from time to time found such fatal oppositions,
and such an ingrasted malice in the incensed party, that all the motives,
propositions, and intercessions of great Kings have hitherto been
unprofitable; and this good Prince has been constrained to live an exile from
his Country. At length when a most pleasing prospect laid at once open to his
view the frontiers of his Country, and the end of his afflictions, a sudden
death deprived him of his sight, and the fruition of so delightful an object.

The calamity of this Prince has given occasion to many licentious tongues,
and pens to declaime against him, and unjustly to judge of his cause by the sad
event. Those that were of his more inward acquaintance, avow that he was
unfortunate beyond defect, and that the most magnanimous, and Heroicke soul
could bear afflictions with no greater moderation and patience, then he did.
If many of his virtues have been clouded and obscured by his infelicity, yet
are there more which his darker fortune could not hinder from shining forth,
and striking envy blind. His great Family, his Extraction, his Allies and
Confederates, and his Princely virtues, me thinks should have contained within
the bounds of Honor, and truth, certain Mercenary, Satyricke Spirits, who
have common places of praises, and Invectiues, which they draw forth to exalt,
or depresse whom they please, and mainetaine their looser vain at the cost of
Princes, and play upon their persons, qualities, and estates, whom the
greatness of their births should privilege from such contumelies. We owe
honor, and respect to Princes of what party soever; whether they be Friends,
Enemies, or Neuters: And I thought this short Apology due to my so much
deplored Subject, whom his miseries rendered to some contemptible, though by
others he was truly honored in the midst of his disgraces, and afflictions.
The King of Sweden gave many brave testimonies of him, being forced oftentimes
to give him a stop in the carreere of honor, lest courage should engage him
too sarre, exhorting him to preserve his life, the good of his Country, and
the public cause.

All the comfort of his Subjects is contained in that generous unparalleled
Princess, and in her fair line, and numerous issue which promises them one
day an entire liberty, and the reestablishment, and subsistence of a house so
many ways considerable, as being one of the first, and most ancient of Europe.

The Reader, I doubt not, will pardon this digression of the Soldier, who held
himself obliged to speak for a Prince, who had been a long time the common
But of all afflictions, and infultations. That which has made him the more
bold, and earnest in his defense, is the near alliance of this Prince to
mighty Monarchs. I shut up all concerning this point in this Assertion, that
all Princes have a common interest in the honor of their equals, and should
all join to place their Crowns, and purple above the reach of Envy.

The death of these two Kings was sufficient to make the Germans approve of the
calculation, and prognostics of their great Astrologer Herlicius, who had
noted this Month of November, as fatal to great Princes and Commanders, and
foretold by the Aspects, and fiery constellations, the tragical encounters of
these two great Armies, and the death of such eminent persons, as may well
compose the greatest part of the History of our time.

The Swedes were even wedded to sorrow for the death of their King, vowing they
would more willingly have suffered the loss of many battles then that of
him, if it had lain in their power to dispose of the Arrests of Heaven, and the
satall laws of the eternal Providence, which with a Diamantine point marks
all things, and gives them a Character, which never can be changed, or defaced.

Indeed all the days of this Month of November, were at strife for
Superiority in evil, but the sixteenth overcame, to which all stories shall
give a brand, in that it gave so strange an alteration to the face of
Christendom. The battle sought on that day is enobled by many memorable
accidents, which exalts it above those of former Ages. Amongst others are
remarkable the small number of the victors, and the multitude of the vanquist,
the violent and surious charges, the durance of the fight, the doubtful event
of the combat, when victory (as if the had been the daughter of Ianus) had two
faces, and looked two ways; the piles of the dead, the loss of eminent
Commanders, and the different effect which one and the same cause wrought in
both parties, the Kings death kindling indignation and desire of revenge in the
bosom of the Swede, and the death of Pappenheins, and other great Commanders,
begetting an astonishment in the hearts, and looks of the Imperialists. And
we may well affirm, that amongst all the Accidents of that saddest of days,
this particular has bin most remarkable; that the Swedes having lost their
King in the first shocke, this unparaleld mischance, served rather to confirm,
then shake their courage, and was one of the most apparent causes of the
victory.

This also raised as high as Heaven the Kings renown, that in his fall he
crushed in pieces so vast a body, and the hearts of his men were so inflamed
with this his disaster, that after his death they made the palm and the
Laurel to spring out of his blood. Nor was the life of this Prince less
famous then his death.

His youth was exercised in great affairs, which hardened his body to endure
travel, and armed his mind against all finister accidents, and infused into
him a courage which might easily be provoked, never subdued. The entry of his
Reign (which was the Eleventh of this age, and the Seventeenth of his) was
thorny, and sallebrous. At one, and the same time he was confronted by the
Danes, the Polonians, and the Muscovites, who on all sides assaulted him: And
though their motives to war were diverse, yet all their intentions, like so
many lines met in this Center, to ruin the Swede. Sometimes he showed
himself on the Frontiers of Denmark, sometimes on those of Muscovia, sometimes
again on those of Livonia, and all with that promptness and celerity, that
his Enemies believed his body to be ubiquitary. And his troubles were
increased by corruption of many of his Subjects to a base revolt. But his
valor, his dexterity, and the continual travail of his body and mind were
such, that he passed through these, and greater impediments without stop, or
diminution of his Fame. His composition with the Danes, and Muscovites was
honorable, and to his advantage. The quarrel between him and the Polonian
was not about any small petty Territory; but the Crown and Scepter it self,
and therefore hardly to be decided.

The Prowess and agility of this King were such, that the Polonians saw him in
all parts, like another Hanniball, before their gates; and after many great
losses received in Livonia, and Prussia, they took counsel of the Pillow, and
(to preserve the remainder of those Countries unviolated) concluded to come to
a treatry, on which attended a Truce, which from their souls they wished had
been a Peace, whereby their repose might be eternized. Our youthful Mars had
not a soul so narrow, as to be contented to wear only the Laurel of the
North. More wreathes were prepared for him, and a Theater more spacious, and
glorious. Posterity will hardly believe that what this Prince has done was by
a man fesible. That the conquest of so many vast Provinces, and the ruin of so
many Armies was the work only of two years, and a few months. That a
puissant Empire, formidable in her greatness, in her supports, in her
extension, in her Armies, in her conquests, and success, fortifyed with so
many Garrisons, who has for her bounds the Ocean, and the Alps, should in so
short a time be forced to put on the yoke. A man would think infinite Forces
were required to manage well an Enterprise of this nature, and greatness.

The personal qualities of this Prince were admirable. His external bravery
consisted in a sweet yet majesticall aspect, in a comely stature, in a piercing
eye, in a commanding voice, in an agility, and universal application to all
such as might hinder or further him. But the great guests that lodged within
were far more illustrious, a quick spirit, a sollid judgment, an
incomparable wisdom, an inexprimable courage, an indefatigable nature, and an
admirable conduct, which were the happy instruments of all his victories, and
the embellishment of this rare piece. I may justly add his Encampments, his
Discipline, his foresight, his direction, and unequalled Industry. Nor was his
readiness less in the disposition of his affairs, in the government of his
men, and his complying with their several humors, which made him as well Lord
of hearts, as Provinces and Cities. But above all the rest, his devotion was
conspicuous, and his frequent pious exercises, which received no interruption
by his most serious employments. And (which draws near to a miracle) he
himself projected and executed all things. It suffised not him to be only a
General, but he would also be a Captain, and Engenier, a Sergeant, a
Cannonier, a common Soldier, or of any Military calling. The most dangerous
occurrences dazzled not his judgment, but then was he most venturous when his
valor was most required. He never formed a military project, in the execution
whereof he would not himself make one. And (which bred in all an amazement)
he was never weary, though ever busied, as if action had been his nourishment.
I will close up the Pannegyricke of this Worthy with this affirmation, that in
him all imaginable brave parts conspired to make him the greatest, and most
able Captain of Christendom.

There was nothing in him the least way blameable but his choler, to which the
least provocation gave fire: an humor familiar to fiery spirits chafed with
continual business, which often falls out cross. But he had a corrective
ever ready, which was an overflowing courtesy, and sweetness to him natural,
which stopped and repaired the breach his Anger had made. For any hasty speech
he would give satisfaction, not only to men of eminency, who might justly be
offended, but to those also of the meanest condition, borne to suffer. In
acknowledgement of his nature so apt to take fire at the least distaste, he
would often say; That he was willing oftentimes to bear with others
infirmities, as the phlegm of some, and the wine of others, and that therefore
reciprocally his choler deserved some support. And, to say truth; this passion
may challenge, and win connivence from him who shall duly consider his
working spirit, never weakened, though ever bended; as also his extraordinary
virtues, and his gentleness, which, upon occasion, made him familiar with the
meanest of his soldiers, so far was he from being pufft up with prosperity,
or raising his mind with his fortune.

Some note another oversight in this Prince, that he did not better distinguish
between the duties of a Carabin, and a General, but exposed himself to all
dangers, and was too prodigal of a blood so precious. To confess the truth,
it is not so much to be wondered at, that he lost his life in this famous
Battle, as that he parted not with it long before in so many Encounters, where
his life ran the same hazard with the basest of his soldiers. And in his
defense this may worthily be annexed, that the valor of his men depended on
his example, and all his victories had for their original his presence, and
forwardness in all Battles, which like a heavenly aspect sent down
influences, and irradiations into the spirits of his soldiers, and terror and
amazement into those of his Enemies.

The Soldier has attempted to draw this Prince to the life, and assures
himself, that they who have had the honor to see, and serve him in his wars,
will confess that the portraict has some air of his face, if not drawn to
the life. And he believes withal, that they who have felt the puissance of
his Arms will be the first to extol and magnify his worth, that thereby they
may lessen their own losses, justify their disgraces, and show to the world
that so powerful an Organ was required to operate on them with such success.

Amongst other circumstances, this is the most agreeable, and worthy of
observation, that this Prince has left his affairs in an estate so
prosperous, and advantageous. The Swedian party is possessed of two thirds of
Germany, of the best Cities, of most of the Rivers from the Vistule to the
Danube, and Rheine. It has also ten Armies dispersed through the higher and
lower Saxonies, Silesia, Moravia, Bavaria, Franconia, Suabe, Alsatia, and the
Circle of the Rhein. This party is also backed, and countenanced within by the
principal Forces of the Empire, and without by great Kings and States, who
think themselves interested in the support of it, and prefer sure friends
before doubtful and wavering, who will eternally remember the least loss, or
affront received, and, opportunity serving, be ready to revenge it. To this
may be adjoined the experience of the times past, which demonstrates unto us
how well in the Mantuan war they requited the benefits received from that
house at a dead lift, which serves for an infallible argument of their dealings.

It now remains that the Princes, and States united continue to make good the
advantages bequeathed them, by banishing all jealousies, suppressing of
factions, extirpating of Schisms, and partiallities, deciding of all disputes
arising from their Genealogies, by conferring offices on men, not of great
descent, but ability, by making use of the times present and past, by quickly
seconding their consultation with action, and by a straight conjunction of
their Counsels, and Forces to seek their own preservation in that of the
Empire. In any of which being wanting, neither the care and pains of the
deceased King, nor their own Armies, or advantages can secure them from being
a miserable prey to their Enemies, and wretched spectacle to their friends.

The truth is, hitherto the Princes and Generals united have much abated the
pride of the Enemy, by deceiving his hopes, and apprehensions, and making it
evident by their proceedings that they were not in vain so long trained up in
the Kings school, but were still mindful of his instructions and discipline,
and that his death did but concenterre, and redouble their vigor. The Dukes of
Weymar tread on Walsteins heels, whom some report to be wounded, others dead
in the Forest which lies between Fravestein and Klostergrappe. If he be
deceased, he serves as another sacrifice due to the Kings tomb. Tubal keeps
the greatest part of Silesia, and Moravia in obedience. The Prince of
Birkenfield shuts up all passages to the Bavarians, within the circle of
Ingolstat and Ratisbone. Horn is Master of Alsatia, and has joined to it the
Conquest of Schletstatt. Colman and Kentzingen have Senfeld, nothing remaining
in those parts unconquered, but Frebourg which they batter, and Brissack which
they play with. Baudisin marches through the Archbishopricke of Cullen without
resistance, and traverseth his Galleries (maugre the Count of Gransfield) from
the river of Wesper even to the gates of Cullen. The Troops of Wirtenberg
advance toward the Lake of Constance, and are resolved to make good proof of
their courage. To be brief, the Swedes show that they have no great desire to
repasse the Sea, no more then have the Germans to refall into their wonted
slavery.

But though the King of Sweden has left his party in an Estate prosperous,
yet we must needs confess, that the enemy deriues from his death great
Advantages, and that the expense of a little Lead has profited him as much as
the gaining of many millions, in that the several Heads of the Swedish Armies
are subject and prone to jealousies and misconceptions, which gives him means
and opportunity to preserve what he yet holds, to calm seditions, to recall
long-banisht peace, and once more to replant her in the Empire.

If he make good use of his losses and imfortunities, we shall see him
forthwith to abandon all counsels tending to blood, or violence, to have a
care, left by the oppression of Princes he make them desperate, to recall his
strayed Subjects by a general Pardon of all their offenses, and seek to
reign by Love, not Fear. He will then no more violate Peace, and the
public Faith, under the pretext of Conscience, which ought to be persuaded,
not forced, as depending on another Tribunal then that of men. This way to
rest and quiet, he is invited also to take and persist in, because he may now
peaceably enjoy all his due rights and Titles, the death of the King having
cured him of the deadly Fear he was in, lest this magnanimous Prince should
yet fore higher, and aspire to new Diadems, and make good his Anagram, by
changing the name of Gustavus into Augustus.

FINIS.

