A SERMON PRINCIPALLY ENTREATING OF THE CROSS IN BAPTISM: WHEREIN ALSO IT IS
proved, against the unadvised reprouers, that it is no Popish error, to say;
that Austine sent from Gregory the Great, was the conuerter of the English in
this Jland: AND FVRTHER THAT the Britains did not receive their first faith
from the Church of Rome. By R. H. D.

AT LONDON Imprinted by F. K. for Cuthbert Burbie dwelling in Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the (...) 1606.

THE EPISTLE TO the Reader.
IT has bin (Christian Reader) in the chief of my desires, to seek the peace
of this church and kingdom in which we live: to that end, being called to
speak at a visitation unto my brethren. I chose to entreat of those words in
the Psalm: O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: let them prosper that love her.
In the unfolding of which, according to that measure of grace, that God had
given me; I sought with all mildnes, to persuade those of my brethren (whose
labors has bin most fruitful in the Lord) that for a Cross and a Surplesse,
they would not forsake the work of their God, nor defraud the people of their
charge, of that blessed comfort which by their preaching they once received. At
this I aimed, and their untimely silence (which after followed) I then greatly
feared. Thus my love to them, and the house of our God, imboldned me to speak,
that which Cartwright, Beza, and other of reverend memory, before had
delivered: that it was better to undergo those disliked ceremonies, then for
them to forsake their calling, to despise the flock of Christ Jesus, over
which the holy Ghost had made them overseers. For the question then was not (as
some conceived) what in those ceremonies was convenient; that was by our rulers
before ouerruled: but what in this case, was for us, and Gods Church most
expedient: whether with them to continue, the work of our ministry, or by our
refusing to yield co^formity to them, to betray the people of our charge, and
to neglect that holy function, unto which God had called us. This was the
question; to this, not only for the better satisfying of men, but of our God;
we were to answer. And although thou seem to the world for thy excuse, to
lay the cause and blame of this thy silence upon thy rulers; because they will
not permit to thee the exercise of thy ministry, except thou submit thy self
unto those their imposed ceremonies: yet because thou art to answer, not so
much for thy rulers and their doings, as for thy self and thy doings unto thy
God; enter into the chamber of thy conscience, there seriously consider,
whether (the Magistrate comma^ding these) it be better for thee, to forsake
these together with thy ministry; or with these, (although with thy distaste
and some dislike) to continue thy blessed labors in the cross of God. This is
that, on which we should especially look, what upon their command is best
beseeming us to do. O let Gods glory and the good of his Church, so far as
it may be, ever weigh with us. I doubt not but that thou will say, so it shall
ever be with thee: but yet thou reply, thou may not do evil that good
may come thereof; that God will have his glory sought by such means which he
approves: this that is imposed is not that which God approves, nay it is
evil. This thing is in question, and many (thou know) have labored to prove
that they are not evil, that they are not such which God has disallowed. I am
not now to reason this matter, I refer thee unto that which has bin written.
Only now summo^ thy self unto the justice seat of thine own conscience (and
all prejudice and affection set apart, all regard of men, and respect of thy
former speeches and doings laid aside) I pray thee, in that light that God has
given thee, answer to thine own soul, whether these rites seem to her to be
simply evil; or whether she does not repute them in a sort indifferent. If
upon this summons, thy conscience tells thee that they are evil; Romans 14.1
I do not persuade thee to sin against thy conscience; to thee that reputest
them to be evil, they are evil. Yet let not thy conscience prejudice the
liberty of thy Christian brother, neither do thou condemn the persons of other
as evil and corrupt; which in their obedience to these, are not of the same
mind and conscience with thy self: for thou may be deceived, and God may
show his truth to them. Howsoever true must be that oracle of truth, 1. Cor. 1^
and worthy of all men to be received: Love suffers long, love enuieth not,
love does not boast itself, is not puffed up, disdaineth not, seeks not her
own, is not provoked to anger, thinks no evil. By our cognizance of love,
let it be known to whom we appertain: let us not forget of what spirit we
are, but according to the rule of the Apostle, If it be possible, ^. 12.18.
as much as in us lies, let us seek to have peace with all men. For when we
seek to deprave the writings and speeches one of another, and to enforce
another meaning in these then was intended, or the letter bears: when our
mouths are full of raylings, and bitter speakings, and our persons are become
vile one to another: when we make it our studies by misreports and false
suggested slanders, to make one the other odious to the world, and leave in our
writings reme^brances of our shame: where is that true love, the very grace of
Christians, which with grief remembers her brothers falls, and seeks to
hide and cover his shame? Where is that spirit of Christ? of meekenes, patience
and humility? by which, and not by fiery and reproachful speakings, the world
was first converted to the faith. Where is that true zeal of Gods glory? that
tender care of the weak brethren? that desire to stop the mouths of the
slaundering Papists, and scoffing Atheists? Alas these unseemly, galfull, and
malice-shewing speeches, as dark clouds obscure the truth of Christ's Gospel;
these as thorns in their eyes wound the consciences of the weak, making them
to think and say that such bitter waters cannot flow from the professors of
Gods truth; these make Gath and Askalon of the uncircumcised to rejoice, and
give great advantage to their close-followed cause. These stir up our
unseasoned affections, that whilst we seek with contumely to return that
was ill spoken, we give new occasions to hear worse. These are not the
weapons of our spiritual warfare, with which our David's men beloved of God,
should fight the battails of their Lord. Wherefore, o my brethren, although we
cannot accord in one tune, and with that same mind acknowledge these imposed
ceremonies: yet let us not forget the spirit, peace, and love of Christians;
let us not give way to our hasty affections: but rather let us endeavor, to
seek the truth by such means, and in such a manner, as the word of truth
prescribes: so will God give a blessing to our endeavors, and we shall find
after our long and many disagreeings, Gods blessed peace and comfort in our
souls. The which God give us in these our days to see, to the good of his
Church, and glory of his great name. Amen.

A SERMON PRINCIpally entreating of the Cross in Baptism.
Psalm. 122. verse. 6. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: let them prosper that
love thee.
AS the Apostle requires of every Christian, that he should be ready to give
a reason of his faith: so is it expected that we of the ministry should of our
doings, especially since of us many are hardly censured by some of our
brethren, and not well reported of many of the people, for yielding our
obedience unto those, long since imposed, but late exacted ceremonies. In
regard whereof, as in my former Sermon, I spoke unto you of the lawful use of
the white linen garment, used by the ancient Fathers in the time of Divine
service in the Church: so am I at this time according to my promise, to
entreat of the lawful use of the Cross, which on the baptized is imposed. In
the ha^dling of the which, that I may the more distinctly proceed; first I will
show unto you, that since the Cross is no part of the substance of Baptism,
that therefore they that are baptized with it, or without it, are in respect of
the substance of Baptism, perfectly baptized. Secondly, that the ancient
Fathers in their times, used to sign with the Cross them that were baptized.
Thirdly, we will consider of the reasons, that moved the Fathers so to do.
Fourthly, we will show, that since there are two kinds of Crosses (as the
Schoolmen speak) the one manent, the other transient; the one material, the
other acreall, that somewhat in the Fathers times, but much more since they
both have been sinfully abused, the one to Idolatry, the other to
superstition. Fifthly, that therefore they of our Fathers, and other reformed
Churches did not ill, which have wholly taken away the use of the Cross, which
in former ages was so sinfully abused. Sixthly, that yet we of the ministry
well may, since by the governors of our Church it is imposed, sign our
baptized with the sign of the Cross, as the Fathers did, so it be freed from
superstition, the opinion of merit, and necessity. Lastly, I will seek to free
my self from that untrue imputation, with which the compiler of the abridgment
of the Apology of the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese, The abridgement of the
Apology of the Ministers of Lincoln Dioces. page 25.
to the Kings Majesty; amongst many other reverend in their place, does brand
me, either for a dangerous corrupter of the purity of doctrine, or a broacher
of a Popish errors in that in my former Sermon upon this text I said, that
Austine, to whom Gregory the great did write, was the conuerter of our English
nation. Of these briefly, and first of the first. That the Cross is not of
the substance of Baptism; therefore not absolutely nece^rie.


In the holy Sacrament of Baptism, some things are of the essence, substance,
and being of Baptism (which if in Baptism they be wanting, then it is not,
nor may well be called the Baptism of Christ) as to be baptized with water,
and to be baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and of the holy Ghost:
these Christ ordained to be of the matter and form of his Baptism, without
which Christ's Baptism can no more be said to be, then an house without his
form and matter, or a man without a soul and body. This Basil acknowledged
when to the question whether it were a sufficient Baptism to baptize in the
name of the holy Ghost only, ^asil de Spiritu ^ncto cap. 12.
he answers no: For (says he) the tradition given in the living grace must
continue immovable, for he which has freed our life from corruption, has
given unto us his regenerating power, which power has a cause which cannot be
expressed, hidden in this Sacrament; yet bringing health unto our souls:
wherefore to add or to detract from it, is even a fall from eternal life.
Where mark to baptize in the name of the holy Ghost only, is not a sufficient
Baptism: secondly the tradition must continue immovable: thirdly to add or
detract from it, is to fall away from eternal life. Zanchius tra^ in 5. cap.
ad Ephesians. cap. 2.
The same witnesses Zanchius, of our modern writers most judicious. If any be
baptized in the name of the Father, leaving out and omitting the name of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost; the same is not signed with the Baptism of
Christ: and then, as the said Zanchius in another place speaks, Idem lib. 1.
d^ cultu Dei externo.
He that is baptized with a Baptism not ordained of God, as he has not the
true outward sign of the Covenant, no more shall he enjoy the thing it self,
or the benefits of the Covenant; there is but one Baptism. Ephesians. 4.5.
That therefore is of the essence and substance of Baptism, which Christ
ordained, unto which nothing may be added as part of the substance; nor from
which nothing that is of the substance may be detracted: for then it leaves
to be the Baptism of Christ, and it becomes the Baptism of man, whose
stamp it bears.

Other rites there are used in Baptism, which are not of the substance of
Baptism, neither may they be so reputed. Whereof some may be used in the
Church of God, others may not. Of the first sort are, whether the baptized is
to be dipped under the water, or to have water powered or sprinkled on; whether
to be thrice dipped or once; whether to be signed with the sign of the
Cross, or not to be signed, and such like of these rites, although some are
rather to be used then other, and are in their nature to be preferred before
the other, as sundry Ierom. in E^es. cap. 4. ^mbros. de Sa^am. lib. 2. ^p. 7.
Chrysostom. Joan. hom. 4. Basil. de spi^t. sanct. c. 27. ^rgor. Nyss. ^ap. Sozom.
the Fathers do so sentence, commending the dipping under the water before the
sprinckling on, as more agreeing to the primary institution, and practice of
the Church; and more lively expressing our burial in Baptism, and rising up
unto newness of life. Yet other, whose judgment we are not to conte^ne, b
^st. Eccl lib. 6. ^p. 26. ^ncil. Tol^t. 4. ^p. 5.
advise us to follow the custom and practice of the Church in which we live, c
Thom. in 4. ^nt. did. 3.
showing that in the unity of the faith, these diverse customs of the Church do
not hurt: nay d Gregor. Epist. ^. 1. Epist. 41. ^andro.
that they are all well and truly baptized, although with the same rites, they
are not all baptized: for as Linwood herein well speaks, e ^yprian. epist. ^
4. Epist. 7. ^inwood de ^is.
thou must not understand that it is of the necessity of Baptism, that the
baptized be dipped; for Baptism may well be performed, either by the manner
of pouring or sprinckling on water, especially when the custom of the Church
approves it, or there be some necessity in it, either for want of water, or
weakness of the baptized, or feeblenes in the Minister, not well able for to
dippe the child. The truth of which may the better appear, if we attentively
consider, Act. 2.4.
how those three thousand in the story of the Acts were baptized, surely in
probability of reason not by dipping under the water, but rather by pouring or
sprinckling on of water.

Other rites also there are, which although they be not of the Papists, reputed
to be of the substance of Baptism, but rather de solemnitate (for his better
grace and credit, Joan. Pech^ apud Linwo^ de baptism*
that so the people might conceive better, and more reuere^tly of it) as
exorcising and blowing on the baptized, the giving to him salt, the touching
his nose and ears with spittle, the anointing of his breast and shoulders, the
oyling of the crown of his head, the often crossing, the giving to him a white
garment, a burning taper, and such like. Yet because these much have corrupted
the simple, pure, and naked institution of Christ, and made the people to have
in greater reverence these devised ceremonies, then Christ's blessed Sacrament;
such superstitious fancies of men, were worthily abandoned out of the Church,
and in the ministering of this Sacrament, not thought fit to be continued. And
yet since many of the fauorits of Rome, have not reputed these rites, to be of
the substance or necessity of Baptism, but that only which our Savior in his
Gospel instituted; declaring in many their writings, that there was a time
when in Baptism these were not used, and diverse times when these diverse rites
were brought into the church; for they were not all borne and hatched in one
day: it has been the judgment of the Church of God, that they which have been
baptized in the Church of Rome (notwithstanding those her many superstitions in
this Sacrament used) have in respect of the substance of Baptism, been truly
baptized, and ought not again to be baptized of us: Zanch. explicat. ni 5.
cap. a^ Ephesians. cap. 7. obseruat. 49.
so Zanchius, They do impiously and unskillfully which either in the Church of
Rome, or in our Churches (he means the reformed) do cause them that are
rightly baptized, again for to be baptized. Thus then you see that the Cross
in Baptism, is not of the substance of Baptism, for Christ remembers it not
in the institution of Baptism, neither is it mentioned in the story of the
Acts, where yet many are said to be baptized: but added after as a convenient
rite. This therefore if any wanted, yet were they fully baptized, and if any
had it; yet then had they nothing more of the substance of Baptism, then the
other: and therefore they both were rightly and fully reputed to be baptized.

Now are we in the second place to show unto you, That the ancient Father
signed the baptized with the sign of the Cross:
that the ancient Fathers in their times, used to sign with the sign of the
Cross, them that were baptized. For the proof of this, you shall have not two
or three witnesses, but a full Jury; not forced to speak that which they never
meant, but freely delivering their own meanings; nor speaking at random of
the Cross in general, but properly in particular of the Cross in Baptism;
of whom the first is Basil surnamed the Great, who seeking to prove that some
rites were to be received from the tradition of the Apostles, which are not
expressly set down in the letter of the word, and yet then were in use in the
Church of God; ^sil. de spirit. ^ct. cap. 27.
amongst other names this first: In Baptism to sign with the sign of the
Cross, those which have their hope in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. In
which mark first that he says, that to sign with the sign of the Cross,
was from the tradition of the Apostles: secondly that it was then in use in the
Church of God. ^in. Martyr Orthodox. ^ons. Quaest. ^3.
The second is Justin Martyr, who, to the question why Christians, when they
prayed turned to the East, gave for answer, because that (in the opinion of
men the Sun there rising) was the more worthy part, as (says he) with the
right hand in the name of Christ we consigne those that need this sign,
because it is more honorable then the left. Where mark 1. That the Minister
did sign the baptized. 2. With the right hand. 3. That he reputed this sign
somewhat needful. The third is Tertullian (whom Cyprian honored as his Master)
he speaking of Baptism and the Lords Supper says, The flesh is washed, that
the soul may be cleansed; Tertul. de ^surrect. car^
the flesh is anointed, that the soul may be consecrated; the flesh is signed
that the soul may be sensed; the flesh is shadowed by the imposition of hands,
that the soul may be illightned by the spirit; the flesh is fed with the
body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be satisfied with God. In which
you may observe that the party that was baptized with water, was also signed
with the sign of the Cross. The next is Origin, who in an exhortation he
makes to his hearers to live a godly life, says, Origin, in 38. homil. 2^
Let not Satan say this man was called a Christian, and was signed with the
sign of the Cross in his forehead: but he does my will, and he has my seal
in his heart: behold, he which renounced me and my works in Baptism, has
again made himself a servant in my works, and again obeys my laws. Where
most plainly Origin shows that the baptized in his time were signed with the
sign of the Cross in their foreheads. About the same time Arnobius, reverend
amongst the Christians, and of renown among the Gentiles, says, Since Christ
is risen from the dead, ^ob. com^t. in Psalm.
and ascended up to heaven; we his Apostles and Disciples with all that
believe, have the sign of the Cross in good; so that our visible and
invisible enemies may see in our foreheads his sign, and be ashamed. In which
we may observe that all that believed were signed in their foreheads with the
sign of the Cross: secondly that the Apostles, Disciples, and all the
faithful reputed it as good: lastly that by it the enemies of Christianity
since Christ was risen and ascended, were done to shame. The like witnesses
zealous Cyprian, who shows that they which were baptized in the Church, were
offered to the Church by their governors, ^. ad Inba^ de hae^ ^aptiza^d.
and by prayer and imposition of hands enjoyed the holy Ghost, and were
consummated by the Lords sign. Where note he calls the sign in Baptism
the Lords sign. Secondly, that in the end or after the Sacrament of Baptism
it was administered. To the same purpose Athanasius, whom Basil calls the
Physician of the Church diseases: Basil. Epist. ^
who has persuaded the barbarous nations in their savage countries, Athanasius
^ humanitat. (...) verbi and ei^ corpor. adue^^
to lay aside their cruelty, and to think of peace; but the faith of Christ
and the sign of the Cross? Where note that by their Baptism, the barbarous
nations were converted from their savage cruelty unto peace. In like manner
Ambrose: Ambros. cen^ment. in Epi^ ad Romans cap^
He cannot be holden of the second death which, is signed with the sign (or
mystery) of the Cross. For the preaching of the Cross of Christ's, is an
argument that death is conquered. A little after: He cannot therefore be holden
of death, because he has the sign that death is conquered for him. Where he
shows that the baptized cannot be holden of the second death (except they
make themselves unworthy Christ's merit; because they have the Cross in
Baptism, a sign that death is conquered for them. So Chrysostom having
before spoken of the rites, use, fruits, and effects of Baptism, which it
should work in the regenerate of God, ^rysostom. in ^an. homil. 24.
says, Not only that Baptism is called the Cross, but the Cross is called
Baptism. With the former accords learned Hierome, who in his Commentaries
upon Ezechiel, says, ^eron. com^nt. in E^h. cap. 9.
In the ancient letters of the Hebrews, the which the Samaritans do use unto
this day, the last letter called Tau, has the likeness of the Cross, which is
made on the forheads of Christians, and with which Christians often sign
themselves. In which we may observe, first that this Cross is made by other,
the Minister that baptiseth: secondly that it was made in the foreheads of
Christians. Next unto Hierome, and which lived with him in those days, is
Austin, who speaking to those which were to be baptized, ^ust. de Ca^zand. ru^
cap. 20.
says, with the sign of whose Passion and Cross, thou art now to be signed,
yea and all Christians are signed. And in his tract that he makes upon John,
he further says. Idem tract. in Joan. 118.
The which sign of the Cross, except it be made either upon the foreheads of
them that believe, or upon the water, in which they are regenerated: nothing is
orderly done. Where note that they that came to be baptized, were signed with
the sign of the cross: secondly on their foreheads: thirdly that Austine did
think that if this sign were wholly omitted, that all was not well done. The
last of the twelve, and latest in years is Gregory the Great, who briefly
thus: Gregor. mag^ Euang. him. 22.
In the upper dorepost of the house, we sprinckle the blood of the Lamb;
because we carry the Cross of his Passion in our foreheads. Thus then by the
verdict of these twelve most reverend and renowned Fathers, you have it found;
that in their times and before, they that were baptized, were also at the same
time signed in their foreheads with the sign of the Cross: this was then the
practice of the Church, Upon wha^ reasons the Fathers sig^ the baptize with the
si^ of the Cro^
and this without the known contradiction and gainsaying of any, was then
used. Now let us in the third place consider, by what reasons these Fathers
were moved, to sign with the sign of the Cross, them that came to be
baptized. Was it because the Fathers thought, that the Apostles either by their
ensample showed, or word of mouth delivered, that the baptized were so to be
crossed? Surely Basil said Basil. de spi^t. sanct. ca. 27. Cyprian. ad ^bianum.
that it came from the tradition of the Apostles; August. de ^erbis Apost. ^r.
8. Idem ^ctat. in Job.
Cyprian, that it was the Lords sign; ^gust. Ianua^ Epist. 118.
Augustine, that it was Christ's Cross, which he would have set in our
foreheads; and those reverend Fathers by their verdict before given, show, that
in their several Churches, and therefore by some probability of reason,
generally in the whole Church of God (for it is unlikely, that that which was
used by them, was disused by other) that the baptized were signed with the sign
of the cross. Now those rites which are not expressly remembered in Scripture,
and yet are in all the world observed, either were by the Apostles themselves
commended to the Church, or in some general Council concluded. But yet I dare
not deliver for a word of truth, that this was the moving reason, which carried
the Fathers to sign their baptized with the sign of the Cross. What then?
was it because that in the Apostles times first, and after in the days of
these Fathers, many both of the Jews and Gentiles (for amongst many such the
small number of Christians were enforced to live) reproachfully vpbrayding,
that they put their trust in him, which was hanged on the Cross; that the
Fathers to show to those scorners, that that which they reproached as their
shame, they reputed their glory, they signed their baptized with the sign of
the Cross? So Austine speaking to those reproachers of the faith of
Christians: August. de v^ bis Apost. ^ 8.
We have an heart, but not such as yours is, neither are we ashamed of him that
was crucified, but in the part where the sign of shame is, there we have his
sign of the Cross. And the same Austine in another place, Idem com^ in Psalm.
56.
the Jews disdained that that title, he was King of the Jews, was written
over his head; they were ashamed to have him their King, whom they could
crucify; for they did not yet see, that that Cross on which they should
fasten him, should be in the foreheads of Kings. And in another place the same
Austine showing unto Christians, how they should behave themselves toward such
reproachers of their crucified Christ: ^ugust. comment. in Psalm. ^.
Frontosus esto, be not ashamed, when thou hear thy Christ reproached:
prorsus esto frontosus, be of a bold and vnshamed forehead; why do thou fear
thy forehead, which is armed with the Cross of Crist? And again speaking of
himself, ^em in Psalm. ^1.
he says, So far am I, from being ashamed of the Cross of Christ, that I
have Christ's Cross, not in an hidden place, but I carry it in my forehead. And
generally, in another place, speaking of that which is done of all Christians:
^m tractat. ^an. 3.
We do carry his sign in our foreheads, of which we need not be ashamed, if
we carry it also in our hearts. His sign is the lowest step of his humility.
The wise men knew him by a Star, yet he would not have the Star, but his
Cross, to be his sign in the foreheads of the faithful. Thus then you see,
the reason why principally the Fathers were moved, to sign their baptized with
the sign of the Cross, and that in their foreheads, the very seat of shame:
that the Jew, Gentile, the unfaithful might understand, that Christians were
not ashamed of their Christ that was crucified; but rather reputed his Cross,
the very top and crown of all their glory. Another reason there is, that
whereas these Fathers saw, how hard a matter it was to make the mean of the
people, to understand this mystery of their salvation, and how prone the nature
of man is, not only to ascribe to other, that which is only due to Christ; but
even also not to know, or knowing to forget, that which Christ had suffered for
them; the Fathers signed their baptized with the sign of the Cross, that by
this sign, they might be remembered, to ascribe the whole and sum of their
salvation; not to the water in which they were baptized, nor unto any other
thing that they should do, or is done to them, but unto the only merit and
worth of Christ's death and passion. This may appear by Austin, who says,
August. in P^ 4^.
not without cause, we carry the sign of Christ^ Cross in our foreheads,
eue^ that by it we might remember that Christ was crucified for us. This by
Ambrose who speaking of the question ministered to the baptized, ^mbros. de
Sa^ament. lib. 2. ^p. 7.
and there answers, says, Thou wast asked do thou believe in God the
Father almighty, thou said I believe; and thou wast dipped under the water,
that is, thou wast buried. Again thou wast asked do thou believe in our Lord
Jesus Christ, and in his Cross; thou said I believe, and thou wast dipped
under the water etc. Thus the baptized at his Baptism, was not only asked
whether he did believe in Christ, but (that he might the better know, from
whence the good came he received by Christ) whether he did believe in his
Cross. For as in another place he says, the fountain Marah it is bitter, ^m
de his qui ^terijs ini^tur cap. 3.
but it became sweet when Moses cast in the wood of Christ. It is the
preaching of the Cross of Christ, that makes al our bitter waters sweet.
^ysostom. in ^th. hom. 55.
So Chrysostom: The Passion of our Lord is the beginning and head of all our
bliss, by which we live, by which we are: let us therefore with a joyful
mind, carry with us the Cross of Christ, as the crown and cause of all which
makes for our good. Thus then you see the reasons, which moved those ancient
Fathers, to sign their baptized with the Cross; either because they somewhat
thought that the Apostles, either by their ensample, or word showed, that the
baptized were to be signed with the Cross: or that they might show to the
Jews and Gentiles, that they were not ashamed of their Christ that was
crucified: or that they might the better teach their hearers, to ascribe the
whole of their salvation, to the only merit and worth of Christ's bitter death
endured on the Cross. These were the thoughts, and this the practice of that
godly antiquity, whose piety and wisdom as we cannot but reverence; so let us
follow them in all peace and patience, well weighing the reasons, that should
move us to abhor their paths.

Now notwithstanding all that has been showed, That the Cross has been
sinfully abused to I^latry and superstition.
out of those Fathers for the Cross in Baptism, we will show, which is the
fourth thing we proposed to prove: that whereas there are two kinds of crosses,
the one mane^t, the other transient, the one material, the other aereall; that
somewhat in those Fathers times, but much more since, both those kinds of
crosses, have bin sinfully more or less abused, the one to Idolatry, the other
to superstition. I must here confess unto you that many strange things are
recorded by the ancient of the Cross material. As that in the time of Cyril,
^zomen. hist. ^cle. lib. 4. c. 4.
Bishop of Jerusalem there should appear in the air a sign of the Cross, of
that brightness and greatness, that by the sight thereof, many unbelieving Jews
and Gentiles were converted to the faith: as that to Constantine should appear
in heaven, ^seb. de vita ^stant. lib. 1. (...) 22. ^omen. lib. 1. ^. 3.
the sign of the Cross, and that from thence he should hear that in that
sign he should overcome: the which when according to the voice and vision
followed, ^^seb. d^ vita ^^^stant. lib. 3. ^. 48. ^om. lib. 1. ^ 4.
he caused a Cross to be made of gold, and beautified it with many precious
stones, and set it over the entrance to his Palace; nay he further caused the
Cross, to be richly embrodered in his chief standard, which in battle was
carried before him; yea and on the armor of his soldiers, Idem lib. 1. cap. ^.
which warred under him. And when aereall crosses appeared, on the garments of
Arcadius and such which were with him, Prosp. de promiss. and praedict. Dei:
part 3. cap. 34.
going to war against the Persians, for the wrongs they had done the
Christians of Armenia: after his return with conquest from the battle, he
caused his money to be coined with a Cross. Thus the Cross made his entrance
into the Palace, standards, armor, and coin of Princes; and after into the
cities, high ways, yea and holied places; and for Christ's sake, but to the
dishonor of Christ, Jerome. Epist. 27. cap. 3. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 4.
and hurt of men's souls, got that reverend estimation amongst men; that in
fine it they adored (as Sozomen says they did the sta^dard of Constantine in
which the Cross was pictured) to it they fell down, and kneeling kissed it,
making their prayers to it, as to Christ. Thus lea^ing Christ, they committed
spiritual wh^oredome with his Cross, and contrary to the express command of
God, nade themselves a graven image for to worship it. The which all may
appear, if we consider what Darandus reports, to be the practice of their
devotion on Easter day; ^rand. ratio^. lib. 6. ^. 77.
for when their golden and gemmified Cross (which with them had stood covered
from the time of Christ's Passion, until the time supposed that he rose) was
once uncovered, then in their blind and deceived devotion, the people
barefoot, came creeping to it, saluting it, adoring it, offering to it, and
humbly kissing the basest parts of it, reputing this their Idolatry, the
greatest worship they could do to Christ.

Now as this material and manent Cross, was thus sinfully abused to Idolatry:
so was also the Cross aereall and transient foully abused to superstition. For
when some of the Fathers, had somewhat largely spoken of the power of the
Cross, as ^ng. Quaest. ^st. 114.
that by it the devils were terrified, and driven away, the oracles of the
Pagans for fear of it durst give no answer: ^thanas. de ^n. verbi.
that by it all enchantme^ts lost their force and witcheries their effects:
then at every turn, and at every work, whersoeuer they were, or whatsoever
they took in hand, were it belonging to God, or man, or brute beasts, or other
senseless creatures; they crossed themselves: reputing nothing well begun which
was not first begun with a Cross, nor nothing well ended, which was not ended
with a Cross. Neither was this the error only of some of the people, but of
the Fathers, some, (otherwise devout and pious) did not only give way to these
superstitions of the people, but were in part the exhorters and furtherers of
many, unto this blind, needless, and superstitious devotion. So Chrysostom. in
Matthew hom.
Chrysostom having spoken before of the Cross, infers: Wherefore in our
parlers, and on our walls, and on our windows, yea and on our foreheads, and
souls, with great care and study let us set the Cross. Idem ad P^ Antioch.
ho^ 21. Jdem t^ 5. quod Chr^stus deus. I^ in Psalm. 109^
To the same he persuades his hearers in diverse other places. In like manner
Hierom in an Epistle he writes to Demetriades; Hieron. D^ metriad. E^ 8. cap.
6.
Do thou afte^ arm thy forehead with the sign of the Cross, lest the
destroyer of Egypt find place in thee. And the same to Eust^chium, Idem ad
Eu^och. Epist. 22. ^ap. 16.
whatsoever thou do, wheresoever thou go, let thy hand make a cross. Now
with the times, did this superstitious devotion increase amongst the people and
clergy. In so much that in these later years, no Church was consecrated but
with a multitude of crosses, no prayers said, no Sacraments administered, but
they were begun, continued, ended with many crosses. Yea their breaden God, as
Durandus writes, whilst that Sacrament was ministered, was signed with the
Cross twenty five times. Unto which sign was attributed that virtue, that
Durandus affirms, ^urandus ra^onal. lib. 14. ^ap. 45. ^dem lib. 4. ^p. 42.
by virtue of the Cross made, and words said, the bread in that Sacrament was
transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ. Thus whereas at the first
it was but once or seldom made, after it was often; whereas they signed to put
the baptized in mind, that they should not be ashamed to confess Christ
crucified, but should in the merit of his Passion place the cause of all their
bliss: after they ascribed the virtue and holiness to the outward sign, that
without it, they thought nothing was sanctified, nothing consecrated, nothing
sufficiently fenced, from the power and malice of the devil. So great
superstition and will worship fansied by man, but not approved by God, did
after follow and accompany the Cross. Thus have you heard that both these
kinds of crosses have bin sinfully abused, and by whom; and that although the
aereall Cross was rightly used by the Fathers at the first: yet that now they
have multiplied one into many, filling every place, and every act, full of
needless and superstitious crosses.

Now it follows that we show unto you, That the use of the Cross may be
disused.
that since the Cross has been so foulie abused, that therefore they of our
Fathers and other reformed churchers, did not ill which have wholly abandoned
the Cross, that in former ages has been so sinfully abused. 2. Reg. 18.
For if Ezechiah be commended for commanding the brazen Serpent to be broken,
which yet God had appointed to be made, after it was continued seven hundred
years: why may not with their praise, upon the same reason of Idolatry,
Christian Magistrates remove out of the Church and houses of God, those crosses
and crucifixes which were devised and fansied by man? Surely not so commanded
of God, as was the brazen Serpent. ^om. Aquin. ^nauentur.
If here they shall insist, for their excuse, that they do not worship the
Cross or Crucifixe, but Christ which in the Crucifix is remembered; what do
they in this allege for themselves, but that which the Jews might for their
calfe, and the Gentiles did for their Idols? For under the form of the calfe
the Jews thought to worship that God which brought them out of the land of
Egypt; therefore to the calfe they sange, These are thy Gods which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt: and Austin speaking of the Gentiles: ^ugust.
com^ent. in Psalm. ^3.
The Heathen say that they do not worship that which is visible, but the
Godhead which there inuisibly dwells. In this therefore the Papist, Jew, and
Gentile agree. But to the^ all, not I but ^asil replieth. ^sil. in Psa^ ^ vers^
How ridiculous a thing is this to believe, that the heavenly godhead is
fastened to an image, and there under an Image to worship it? When it was
objected by the heathen that Christians did worship crosses, Arnobius replieth,
Arnob. co^gent. lib. 8.
We do not worship crosses, neither do we advise you so to do. In like manner
Cyril to Julian: Cyril. cont^ Julian. lib*
we deny that the sign of the Cross is worshipped and adored of Christians.
The reason of their answer appears, because as Gregory Nyssen speaks,
Gregor. N^orat. fun^ Placillo.
he which adoreth a creature, although he do it in the name of Christ, yet he
is a worshipper of images; having given the name of Christ, unto an image. By
the same reason Basil proves Arius to be an Idolater, because he worshipped
Christ, and yet reputed him to be but a creature: he that shall call the only
Son of God, Basil. con^ Sabellium Arrium.
the work of God and a creature, and shall after worship him; in that they
worship a creature and not a Creator, graecismum inducunt, they bring in the
Idolatry of the Gentiles. Thus then by the judgment of these Fathers, none may
in the name of Christ, or for Christ's sake worship a Crucifix, worship a
Cross: for it is but a creature, neither is the divine Godhead fastened to an
Image, as the Jew and Gentile thought, neither can it be showed, that Christ
would have himself in a Cross or Image to be worshipped. Wherefore our Rulers
did well, by taking away the causes of the peoples error, to reduce them to the
worship of the true and only God: and by defacing the Crosses, with which the
blinded world committed spiritual whoredom, to take away ye reproach of our
faith, for which both Jew, Turk, and well affected Christians were offended
with us. This, in this very case Athanasius approves, ^as. Anti^ Princip. ^t.
16.
saying, lest any of the unfaithful Iexes do reprove that in us, that we
worship the Cross, we may (the two pieces of the wood being severed, and the
form of the Cross unformed,) cast them away from us, as unprofitable wood. In
like sort, as the world may see, in our liturgy and Sacraments, and in the
common use and practice of the people, the aereall Cross in a manner is
abandoned. (...) in E^ p. 5.
The reason of this Zanchius alleges, propter introduct as superstitiones,
and opinionem necessitatis, because they were superstitiously abused, and
thought so necessary, that without the^, many thought nothing well done. When
the Hemerobaptists did every day wash the^, to wash away their sins, Epiphanius
laughed at their folly, Epiphan. lib. ^ cap. 18. contra haeref.
and showed, that al ye water in the springs, rivers and sea, was not able to
do away their sin: the reason of his speech he there gives, because it was
not done according to reason, nor by the command of God: even so we say to
them, which are so devoted to their many crosses, these shall not be able to
drive away the devil, or do away your sin: because they are not done according
to reason, nor by the command of God. Lest therefore they should bear the
blame of the deceived people, and hear from the Lord, for their often
crossing, What evil has this people done, that you should suffer, nay bring
so great a sin upon them? in an holy obedience to God, they caused them to
leave this superstitious practice, of the deceived world. Thus the^ as diverse
ancient rites sometime used in baptism, were put out of use, and that by the
Fathers which lived in the first six hundred years, as the tasting of milk,
honey, wine, mentioned in Tertullian: so may also this of the Cross, Che^nisius
ex^en. Cencil. ^rident. can. ^ 3. de ritibus (...) administ. ^acrament.
as well as they by Che^nisius judgment be disused; if either by reason of
circumstances it be not found so profitable as it was, or that the reason
cease for which it was ordained, or ye contrary to ye purpose for which it
was ordained, ^sil de spirit. ^act. cap. 27.
it be abused to superstition. Yea, although it were a granted truth, yt it
came not from man, but from ye tradition of the Apostles: for as other rites
either instituted, or put in practice by the Apostles themselves, ^ug. epist.
118.
as the feasts of love, the receiving ye Sacrament after supper, the greeting
one another with a kiss, have long discontinued and left to be used in ye
Church: eue^ so may this of the Cross, although it were used of the Apostles
themselves: but of this too much, because it is a doctrine received of all.

^et the Mi^^^^ers may (...) the baptized with the sign of the Cross.
Now let us come to that which in the sixth place we proposed, that we of the
ministry, since it is so enjoined by the Governors of our Church, well may,
as did the Fathers, notwithstanding the contrary usage of other Churches, sign
our baptized with the sign of the Cross. For since the Fathers in their
times, signed their baptized with the sign of the Cross, and that upon good
and approved causes; why may not that which was lawful for them, be lawful
for us? keeping our selves within the same bounds and limits? Surely that,
which the first and renowned Fathers, in all their several Churches put in
practice, as though it came from the Apostles themselves, we cannot reject as
superstitious; or disauow as unlawful and naught. Nay rather herein we suspect
our contrarying thoughts, and suppose yt we may be deceived, and that they may
(being nearer the times of Christ and his Apostles) in things of this nature
better see the truth. Nay since the Cross is a rite merely in the general
indifferent, since it may serve to decency and order, and as a badge of our
profession: how may I or other of the like mind and conscience with my self,
in this refuse the order of our Church, upon our private spleen and fancies?
let not him that uses it not, condemn him that uses it. If not to thee, yet
to me, except I would give the lie unto my conscience, it is indifferent.
Surely Chemnisius writing of the rites which in the Sacraments are used, for
order and decency sake, and of those outward things indifferent, ^mnisius ex^en
Council. ^dent. in ^ 13.
says, It must not be permitted to every man, without the judgment and
consent of the Church, of his own wa^tonnes and will, to leave out, or alter any
rite or ceremony that is used in the Church. For although other Churches do
not use to baptize with the Cross, yet are we in things of this nature, to
follow the rites and orders of the Church in which we live, and not the orders
of those to whom we are not subject, except we will become troublers of the
peace of our Church, an offense unto other, and cause other to be offended with
us. The several Churches of God without blemish or derogation to other, may in
these rites use their liberty according to the rule of Paul, as Chemnisius in
the same place speaks. And as Linwood inferred when in some Churches the
baptized was dipped under the water, in some had water sprinkled or powered on:
Linwood de baptism.
that it was not of the necessity of Baptism that the child should be dipped:
so may thou, (in that some Churches do sign the baptized with the sign of
the Cross, others do not) hereby understand that the Church of God, does not
repute the Cross, to be of the necessity of Baptism. Yet does the Church in
which we live, for order sake, command the use of the Cross unto us. Should we
for this, forsake the people of our charge? and leave the ministry unto which
God has called us? by what warrant? this was not the counsel of Beza,
Cartwright, and other impugners of this and the like ceremonies; but rather to
walk in our calling, and in patience to bear the burden of these dislikes. If
this had bin absolutely evil, this they might not, nor would not have
persuaded. And if they thought it lawful, but not expedient nor convenient;
our Governors in their great experience should better know, what is fitting
the state of our Church than they. If they do not, as thou supposest, yet how
may thou leave thy lawful and needful duty, which God has enjoined and
requires of thee, in that thou will not undergo with the good of many that
which thou think is not expedient? If thou farther say, that the Cross
has bin most superstitiously abused, we say the same yet being freed from
superstition and the opinion of merit, holiness and necessity; why may it not be
continued with us, especially since that which is used of us, is far unlike
that which is used of the Papists? For they make the Cross in Baptism a
needful ceremony; we a convenient: they sign the baptized and the water
often; we once: they put some religion and holiness in the sign; we put none:
they cross the baptized before he receives his Christendom; we after, and
after he is received as a member in the Church: they to drive out the devil,
and by that sign to fear him from returning; we that it might be an
honorable badge, to remember us with all boldness to confess Christ
crucified, and to repute the cause of all our happiness, the merit of Christ's
Passion endured on the Cross. Well may therefore the Cross be used of us,
which has been most superstitiously abused by them. And so much the rather,
because that by this sign thus remaining with us, (since all other use of the
cross is in no use with us) we may stop the mouths of the slaundering
Papists, which say that we are enemies to Christ, and to his Cross: because
our Rulers have broken down his Crucifixes and Crosses, and because the people
do not (as their Fathers did) sign themselves with the sign of the Cross. For
this sign thus used in Baptism, shows that we are not enemies to Christ
nor to his Cross, but to their Idolatry and superstition. And although we do
not live among the Jews and Pagans, which seek to shame us because we put our
trust in him, that was hanged on a tree: by this Cross to show them, that that
which they reproach we repute our glory: yet since this is a doctrine needful
for all sorts to learn, that not in the minister or water, but in the blood of
Jesus, they attain the washing away and remission of their sins; since of
this many of the people are very ignorant, not only by the word and Sacraments,
the blessed means of God, but by this sign also the people may be remembered
as thought the ancient Fathers, that Christ died for them on the Cross.
^hrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 55 ^mbros. de Sa^a. lib. 2. cap. 7
Neither lacks this cause the approbation of many reverend of our modern
writers. For although Beza to Grendal did there reject the Cross, ^eza Epist.
8. ^indallo.
because it opened a gap to that great superstition and Idolatry, which among
the Papists ensued, and would have it therefore with the brazen Serpent utterly
abolished: yet the fame Beza in his after thoughts writing unto Francis
Ba^dwin, I know that some having taken away the adoration of the Cross, have
yet retained some use of the sign of the Cross. Let them use as it is fit
their liberty: and to the same in an^ place, there was a time in which there
was some use of the sign of the Cross, against the contemners of Christ
crucified, and let it be long and willingly used of Christians for an outward
sign of their religion. Where mark he says that it is meet that they should
use their liberty in the use of the Cross. 2. That it was of good use against
the contemners of Christ crucified. 3. that he would willingly have it long
continued, as an outward profession of true religion. Likewise Bucer speaking
of the Cross, Bucer.
this sign not only because it has been of ancient use in the Church of God,
but because it is a very plain sign, presently remembering the Cross of
Christ; I judge it not indecent, or unprofitable, if it be purely understood,
and religiously taken; without any superstition, or servitude of the element,
or of common custom. To the same purpose Chemnisius; such rites we do not
without cause love and retain, in the action of Baptism, Chemnisius ex^ amen
Council. Trident. de ^genere traditionum. Idem de Sacrament. nu^
which do signify and illustrate the doctrine delivered in Scripture
concerning Baptism. In another place; we ought to oppose our selves against
those rites which fight with the word of God. Or when the opinion of holiness,
merit, and necessity is attributed to them. Likewise Zanchius speaking of the
rites in general used by the Fathers in Baptism, ^ch. ex^at. in 5. ad ^es.
cap. 7.
these I dare not reprove in those Fathers, first because the scope of the
Fathers in those rites was very good, to imprint in the minds of the faithful
the remembrance of Baptism. Secondly, because in them was no superstition or
opinion of necessity; and thirdly because they were not ridiculous and foolish.
Thus then you have heard by the testimony of Beza, Bucer, Chemnisius, Zanchius,
of whom some have not the use of the Cross in their Baptism, that yet, it is
lawful for us, to sign our baptized with the Cross, so that it be done
purely without superstition, and so that in it we do not place any holiness,
merit, or necessity. Wherefore if there be any that scornfully rejects the
judgment of these ancient and modern writers to them not I but Austin
speaks: ^gust. in Psa. ^ 1.
Thou worshippest God that was crucified; he that does not understand
reprehendeth the Cross of Christ; there is nothing more proud, the^ the sick
which derides his medicine.

Thus have you heard that which we proposed about the Cross in Baptism, That
Austi^ was the co^uerter of o^ English, but not British nation.
briefly and therefore somewhat obscurely handled. It remains now, that we
make answer to that untrue imputatio^, with which either the compiler, or the
vnconformed Ministers of Lincoln diocese, in that abridgment of their
Apologle to the Kings Majesty, Page 25.
do brand me (with many other well deserving of the Church of God) either for
a dangerous corrupter of the purity of doctrine, or a broacher of a popish
error: in that in my former Sermon upon this text, I named Austin to whom
Gregory the Great did write, the co^uerter of our English nation. The words I
acknowledge to be mine; but by these I deny, that the purity of doctrine is
corrupted (and I suppose, you think it needless thereon to insist) or that
any popish error is broached. The truth of which, that you may the better
understand, I must take as granted from you, which is a known truth; that this
part of the Island, was not always called Anglia, ^ydor. ^linshed. ^aston. ^w.
^da. ^das. ^ian. ^llinshed lib. ^ap. 2. and 5. ^lliam Mal^bury.
nor the nation English; but that in the times before, it was called Britannia,
and the people Britains. The which may appear by the testimony of all our
country stories. For whereas about the year of Christ 447. Vortiger a
Christened King of the Britains, had called for his succor against the Scots
and Picts; the Angles, a people in Germany, which then were Pagans and
strangers to the faith; they shortly after having seized by treachery on the
person of the King, and killed at a parle four hundred of his Nobles, extorted
from him Kent, Sussex, Northfolke, Suffolk, for the^ and their people to
inhabit; who after drawing new colonies from their country, by force so far
prevailed against the Britains, that they enforced them into Wales and
Cornwale, terming them Welshmen, that is, strangers, and calling these parts of
this Island which they conquered after the name of the country from which they
came, Anglia, and themselves An^i. Thus with the Britains then was banished
the faith of the Britains, the Gospel of Christ; and then was established in
the parts conquered by the^, Gentilisme and Paganism, Hollenshed 5. cap. 19.
the idolatry of their country; which so there continued the space of one
hundred forty seven years, till Gregory the Great sent this Austine with other
to convert this English nation to the faith. To this all our Stories give
witness, John Fox and Monuments lib. ^
as well modern as ancient, as reverend Fox, Polydor, Hollenshed, Grafton,
Pabian, Stow, Beda, Galfrid; Polydor. li^ Holinshed (...) 5. cap. 14. Beda
bist. (...) lib. 1. cap. 12 Galfrid. bi^ cap. 4. Testi^ v^rit, temp^ de vita
Di^ Functius C^ nolog. William M^^mesbury.
and to this not only our country stories, but that which is recorded by
strangers, Testis veritatis temporum, Functius, Blondus, Carrion, Diaconus de
vita Gregory, with many other. Since therefore there are so many that give
witness, that the English nation from Paganism to the profession of Christ, was
converted by this Austin sent from Gregory, this is no popish error (as it is
untruly suggested) but an English truth. Nay I boldly speak that the reprouer
of this speech, cannot prove by the testimony of any author either domestical
or foreign, that the English in this Island had publikly received the faith,
before this Austins coming to Ethelbert, Fox lib. 2. ^s Acts Monu^ts. ^enshed
lib. ^p. 2.
the first Christened King of the English nation. What then moved this compiler
in such have to term so known a truth by the name of a popish error? It may
be he thought, that I and the Papists had taught, that Christianity was not
professed in this Ila^d before this time. But where I pray you do the Papists
avouch this? their errors in matters of faith and story I confess are many,
but that they have in this thus erred, I did never read, ^na de vita ^ibery An.
nay I have to induce me to the contrary. For Platina reports that Lucius
King of the Britains, ^ist. lib. 1.^.
with many of his people in the year of Christ 156. was baptized by Fugatius,
and Damianus, which Eleutherius Bishop of Rome hither sent. Not long after, ^a
de vita ^lini primi. ^ bist. lib. 1.
as the said Platina witnesses, when Pelagius a Britain borne (against who^
Jerome and Austin have learnedly written) had corrupted this Island and diverse
other places, with the Pelagian heresy; Celestinus the first sent Germanus a
learned Bishop hither, to reduce and confirm the people in the faith. Yea
Caesar Baronius writes, Caesar. Baron annalium 2. Anno 303. Beda hist. A^ lib.
1. cap. 7.
that the persecution, moved by Diocletian against the Christians, invaded this
Island, in which amongst other, Alban, after canonised for a Saint, was
martyred: Caesar Baron^ annalium 3. Anno 359.
and that all the British Bishops by the command of Constantius the Emperor,
gathered in a general Council at Ariminum, (except three whose poverty was
great) refused the maintenance which the Emperor allowed, and did choose rather
to live at their own charge: Parsons of the three conue^sions of England part.
1.
yea Parsons that has written of the three conuersions of this Island,
reme^breth two former, makes this of Austins the last. By which it may
appear, that although this Austine was the first that converted the English,
yet by ye witness of the Papists themselves, Christianity was professed
publicly in this Island, four hundred years and better, before that Gregory
the Great was: but yet not then by the English, for they had not then set foot
in this Island, but by the Britains, the ancient inhabitants of this land. The
which may more evidently appear, in that this Austin, ^a hist. Angl. ^e. lib.
2.^.2. ^fridus suo ^tan. li. 8. c. 4 ^is veritatis ^p. de vita ^noth ab.
^llinshed lib. ^ap. 21.
as Beda and others reports, desiring conference with the British Bishops,
who seven in number together with an Archbishop presenting themselves unto him,
and of him proudly contemned, or not regardfully respected; they retired
themselves and never would after, have further speech or communication with
him. Thus then before this Austins time, there were in this Island not only
Christians, but Christian Bishops (which did not fetch their Palles from Rome)
but yet then among the Britains, not English. For as then the name of Angli
was not heard of in the Church of God. This is that Tertullian says, ^tul.
aduers. ^daeos.
the places of the Britains unto which the Roman forces never came, they are
subject unto Christ. This is that Origin reports, ^igen. in E^ch. homil. 4.
that Britain has received Christian Religion. This is that which Chrysostom
witnesses, ^rysost. Ser. de ^ntecost.
before in Britain they did eat man's flesh, but now there with fasting they
do feed their souls. And in another place, Idem tom. 5. quod Christus sit
Deus.
the British Island which is placed not in this sea, but in the very Ocean,
has felt the power of Gods word, there are Churches founded, there are Altars
erected. This is that which Arnobius confesses, Arnobius in Psalm. 138.
that Gods word runs so swiftly, that when so many thousand of years, God
was only known in Judah; now within a few years, he is not unknown unto the
Indians on the East; nor yet to the Britains on the West. Athanas. Apo^logia
2. cont^ Arrian.
This is that Athanasius acknowledges, that in the great Counsel at Sardica,
by the command of the most religious Princes Constantius and Constance, more
then three hundred Bishops by their verdicts acquitted him: amongst which were
the Bishops of Spain, France, and Britany. This is that, Idem Epist. Jouinian.
that he writes to Iouinian; that he taught the same faith, which the Fathers
assembled at Nicon did acknowledge, and unto which all Churches, in all places
gave witness; whether in Spain, Britany, France or Italy. To these I might
add sundry other, the authorities of the ancient Fathers Greek and Latin;
but by these you may understand, that long before the time of Gregory the
Great, the faith of the Britains, but not English (for of them in those former
times no mention is made) was famous amongst all the Churches of God. Wherefore
I would advise those my brethren, which are so ready to find fault with others,
more advisedly to consider of this and other their positions, before with so
black a cole, they note their brethren for setters abroach of Popish errors.
Now here that you may the better know in this cause, the difference betwixt the
Papists and our writers; you must briefly understand, that this is not
questioned betwixt us, whether Austin was the first that taught the English
Christianity in this Island: all do acknowledge that Ethelbert was the first of
the Saxon Kings, that here was Christened: neither was the Church of the
English known to be a member of Gods Church, before those days. Neither is
it questioned betwixt us, whether this Austin was the first that preached
Christianity in this Island: for among the Britains Christianity was many
hundred years before. Their, and our records, and the mouth of antiquity,
commending the faith of the Britains does witness the same. But this is in
question betwixt us and them, as reverend Fox in his second book of Acts and
Monuments shows, whether the Britains and Christians in this Island, first
received the faith from Rome, or else where. The which although I will not take
upon me at this time to decide, yet upon these reasons (judge you what I say)
I think that the Britains first received Christianity, not from Rome, but
from some other place. For although all antiquity does acknowledge, which we
cannot gainsay, that of the Britains, Lucius was the first Christened King:
yet as Christ's religion was long before in Rome, before the Emperors embraced
it, and were baptized: so might Christianity be long before in this Island,
before the Prince received it, and by his public authority gave countenance to
it. Joan. Fox A^ Monum. lib. ^
For we find recorded in our stories, that in the time of Tiberius, Camden
William Malm^bury. Stow his abridgement.
this Island received the faith, by the preaching of Joseph of Arimathea, who
with others was sent out of France by Philip the Apostle, to preach the
Gospel, who continued and was buried in the place after called Glassenbury, as
Henry the second in his Charter, after the recital of many former and ancient
Charters does acknowledge: if then the Gospel was received by the preaching of
Joseph, then not from Rome. The which may seem herein the more probable, in
that the British Bishops with whom the remembered Austin desired further
conference; ^eda hist. eccle. ^ngl. lib. 2. c. 2. ^estis verit. ^empor. de
Di^th. abbat. ^ollinshed lib. (...) cap. 21.
would have no fellowship with him, which came commended from Gregory then
Bishop of Rome: neither could be persuaded to leave many their positions,
rites, and customs, which agreed with the East Churches, but were different
from those then in use in the Church of Rome. ^da. ^trus Cluna^sis Epit.
Ber^d^. ^inshed lib. ^ap. 21.
Surely in the keeping of the feast of Easter, as the fast on Saturday, they
follow not the guise and custom of the Church of Rome, but rather the East
Churches; which feasted on Saturday, and in those times kept their Easter,
Socrat. hist. eccl. lib. 5. c. 21.
not on the same day, as Victor of Rome urged, but on the day, usually kept and
observed of the Jews: which all the Churches of God at first so kept; and
which in all probability was first commended to them by Joseph, or by Simon
Zelotes, Nicephor. hist. lib. 2. cap. 40.
the second Bishop of Jerusalem, the first founders of Christian religion in
this land. Thus then you see, in that Joseph of Arimathea was the first that
first preached Christianity in this Island; in that the British Bishops would
have no fellowship with Austin, that came commended from the Sea of Rome; in
that, in many rites and customs, the Christians in this Island, were different
from the rites, customs, and vsages of the Church of Rome; and agreed in the^
with the East Churches, and with that, which the Apostles and Joseph of
Arimathea did therein, whilst they lived: it may probably be presumed, (since
there is nothing of moment that makes to the contrary) that not from Rome, but
from the East Churches, the Britains in this Island, first received the faith.
Now what remains, but that you fairly take, that which has been spoken;
that we all, in all our censures, would suffer out zeal to be guided with
knowledge, knowledge to be moderated with love; that in our prayers, desires,
and best endeavors, with a good conscience we would seek for the peace of our
Jerusalem, the Church and kingdom in which we live: so shall we prosper,
and it shall always, whatsoever betide us, go well with us, Amen.

Sit Deo Gloria.

