AN ANSWER TO A TREATISE WRITTEN BY Dr. CARIER, By way of Letter to his
MAJESTY: WHEREIN HE LAYS DOWN SUNDRY POLITIC CONSIDERATIONS; By which he
pretends himself was moved, And endeavors to move others to be reconciled
to the Church of ROME, and embrace that Religion, which he calls CATHOLIC.

By GEORGE HAKEWIL, Doctor of Divinity, And Chapleine to the PRINCE his
Highness.

B. C. I cannot but marvel that M. Doctor in inueighing so much against that
which he calls the new religion should in quoting thereof forsake the old
translation.
Mine heart will utter forth a good matter, I will entreat in my works of the
King.

G. H. Give thy judgments to the King, (O God,) and thy righteousness to the
Kings son.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON by JOHN BILL. 1616. Cum Priuilegio.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
DREAD SOVEREIGN,
HAD this Letter of Dr. Carier been imparted, or the drift of it only reached
to your Majesty, it would have deserved none other answer then your Majesty's
private censure; and might well have been buried in silence with the Author of
it: But now that it not only aims in particular at all the members of the
body Politic, First the Nobles, then the Commons, and lastly the Clergy; but
withal is published to the view of the World, and spread through all the
quarters of your Land, for the better effecting of that it aims unto; and is
not a little magnified by the Romish faction: It must needs argue in us, either
want of wisdom in preventing a mischief, or of power in providing for our
own safety, or of zeal and sincerity in our love to the Truth, if it
should pass without some discovery, as well of the malicious scope to which it
tends, as the weakness of the arguments by which it endeavors to persuade.

The maine end which it drives at, is either a total reconcilement to the
Church of Rome; or if that cannot be, a partial toleration of the Romish
Religion.

The general means by which it strives to compass this end, are first by
working a destraction even amongst those your Subjects, who every way conform
themselves as well to the doctrine, as the discipline of the Church of England,
established by public allowance, in making some Puritanes, and some
Protestants, who in his language Cap. 2. Sect. 41.
can endure the state of the Church of England as it is, but could be content
it were as it was: (implying thereby the rest to be Puritanes) some Caluinists
and some temperate men, Cap. 2. Sect. 45.
who cannot but in judgment approve the truth of that Religion which he calls
Catholic, (thereby implying the rest to be Caluinists) the one he terms the
greatest enemies of the Clergy, the other his honest and loving brethren,
whereof he professes he knew many, and himself to be one: whereas in truth if
any such there be, the difference should rather have been made betwixt
Protestants and Papists, English and Romish Catholics, since they who could be
content the Church of England were as it was before the Reformation, can in my
judgment be none other then Papists; and those that in their judgment
approve the doctrine of the pretended Catholic Religion, can (as far as I
apprehend it) been none other then Romish Catholics. Thus those whom we call
Papists, he calls Temperate Protestants, and those whom we call Protestants,
he calls State Puritanes.

The second general means for the compassing of his desired end, is an
endeavor to work an utter separation betwixt our Church and other reformed
Churches, specially those of France, and the Netherlands; whom therefore in
contempt he calls Hugonots, and Geux, and their doctrine Caluinisme; intending
thereby, (as I conceive) either to weaken our strength, by leaving us to stand
single, or, which is worse, to enforce us at length to relapse upon Rome: And
to this purpose is he bold to affirm, that their doctrine makes as much
against the Religion of England, as that of Rome; whereas the writings of the
most learned men, as well on their, as on our side, our harmonies of
Confessions, the testimony of our adversaries, nay, the Impia mysteria and
instituta ad Caluini praescriptum a se suscepta and obseruata, etiam a subditis
seruari mandauit, circa med. bull.
Pope himself in his Bull against Queen ELIZABETH, your Majesty's La charity
que nous portons aux sieurs estats nos voisins and confederezfaisants
profession de la mesme religion auecques nous.

Declaration to^chant le faict de Conradus Vorstius, page 6.

Messieurs les estats doncques estants non seulement nos alliez mais le
principallion de nostre conjunction estant nostre vniformite en la vraye
religion. page 40. Mais la religion don't moy and eux faisons profession n^a
este iugee ^n aucun concile ou nous ayons este ouys: speaking of those of the
reformed religion in France, desense du droit des Rois, page 82.

Ce qu'^l dit que les heretics de France, font leur profit de ceste division
est fondee sur ceste proposition que ceux de la religion Christienne reformee
cest a dire repurgee du papisme sont heretics ce qui se prouuera quand un
aura fait un autre euangile ou forge un au^re bible* ib. p. 109


Books, and practice in the matching of that Noble Lady, your daughter, and
in permitting those Churches the free exercise of their Religion within your
dominions, so plainly euince the contrary, that I wonder, having let fall so
foul a blot from his pen, he durst present it to your Majesty's view: and yet
I need not wonder, considering he was not ashamed to tell your Majesty, that
for any thing you have written in your Apology, or Premonition, you may when
you please, admit the Popes Supremacy in spirituals: which must needs
argue, either that he was merely ignorant what your Majesty had written, or
cared not at all what himself wrote; regarding rather the evenness of his
Style, and the cadencie of his sentences, then the truth of his assertions;
like false windows, bearing proportion with the rest of the building, but
without light.

By the truth of these assertions, your Majesty may make an estimate of the
whole piece; in which, if I can judge any thing, I have not met within the
narrow compass of so short a treatise, so formally pend, and carrying so fair
an outside; so many weak arguments, so many gross mistakes, so many notorious
falsehoods, so many irreconciliable contradictions, so many sandy and
disioynted consequences: howsoever were his proofs never so strong, so sure,
so true, so consonant, so coherent; yet was he a man most unfit to intermeddle
in a business of union, and pacification; who was so far engaged to one
party, as by his own acknowledgement he was persuaded, Cap. 1. Sect. 20.
that all the Religion at this day prescribed, and practiced by the Church of
Rome, is the true Catholic Religion; and promises particularly to justify it
from point to point, when time and opportunity should serve: and your
Majesty, together with us of the same profession, he rangeth Cap. 1. Sect. 13.
among Jews, and Infidels, and heretics, for refusing to join with them in
the worship of Christ in the Sacrament.

But God blessed not his vain project, Mr. Henry Constable dying within
fortnight after he came from Paris, by Cardinal Perrons appointment, to
Leidge, to confer with him; and himself a while after in Paris, within a
month of his coming thither to confer with the Cardinal; yet as the
Apostle speaks of Abel, being dead, he yet speaks, though in a different
manner, and the speech of dead men commonly proves more effectual, more
profitable, or more dangerous then that of the living.

For your Majesty, there is (God be thanked) no fear at all; the obligations
by which you have tied your self to the Religion established amongst us, being
so many and so strong, and withal his motives for inducement to the contrary,
so weak; dealing with your Majesty as the devil did with our Savior, who
being beaten from Scripture, fell to the promising of the glory of kingdoms,
which notwithstanding was not in his power to perform; only for their sakes,
some Reply seemed not unnecessary, of whom it may truly be said, which he
falsely affirms of your Majesty, that Cap. 2. Sect. 6.
they embrace shadows instead of substances, which as a matter of high
commendation, he solemnly protests, he gladly wrote, and so gave it out with
all the honor he could of your Majesty: But such kind of commendation, as
your Majesty truly tells Cardinal Perron, is none other, then if a man
should commend a soldier for his fair hair, and call him coward to his face.

Now because the Letter, (though not without some mark of presumption) is by
the Author, not only dedicated, but throughout directed to your Majesty, ( as
if he meant to fight, neither with small nor great, save only against the
King) I was imboldned humbly to submit this my defense of truth to the Royal
arbitrament of the same sacred, and impartial vmpire, hoping to find the
censure somewhat more favorable, in as much, as I have made bold to borrow the
greatest part of my weapons, both offensive and defensive, from the rich
armourie of your Majesty's writings, wherein already, though severed, as in the
tower of DAVID, built for defense, hang a thousand shields and all the targets
of the strong men: but being ranged into one volume as united forces, they
would doubtless have more strength, as well to assault as to resist, both the
tongues and pens of men, and the teeth of time* Having lighted my candle then
at your Majesty's torch, I thought my self in duty bound to offer it upon the
same altar again.

He was your Majesty's servant, and so am I, both unworthy, though in a
different respect; he sworn to serve your Majesty, which how he performed at
last, this Letter can best speak, and your Majesty best judge; my self
sworn to your Majesty, for the service of your most Noble Son the Prince,
my most sweet and gracious Master, whose quickenesse of Spirit, love of
Virtue, and sense of true Religion, though I have now by a good space observed
sensibly to grow faster then his years, yet being but tender in age, and
consequently not fully ripened in judgment; I tho^ght I might herein do him
some service for his better information, to mark out unto him such passages in
your Majesty's writings, as serve for a satisfaction to such passages of the
letter as may concern him; hoping thereby he may somewhat the rather be
moved to go on as he has happily begun, till he arrive to that perfection
which Pliny commends to Traian, Facere scribenda, scribere legenda. I conclude
with that repetition of the prayer of David for you both: Give thy judgments
to the King (O God) and thy righteousness to the Kings son; that your days
may be upon earth as the days of heaven, both for glory and lasting* and for
your Majesty, with that acclamation of the Romans to their Emperors,

De nostris annis tibi Jupiter augeat annos. Your MAJESTY'S most humbly devoted
subject and servant, GEORGE HAKEVVIL.

THE AVTHOR to the Reader.
WHAT Dr. Carier was for his rank, the degrees and places of charge he held
and passed through (expressed at large in the Printers Epistle, prefixed to his
Letter) will speak sufficiently, though I were silent; what for his learning,
this Letter will partly testify; and for his other qualities such informations
as were offered me, though by men of credit, and I could have gathered out of
diverse of his Letters and Papers, which I have in mine hands, I chose rather to
suppress in silence then to publish: His immoderate Ambition alone, (which
himself so freely acknowledges in diverse places) was doubtless sufficient to
corrupt a stronger judgment then his, in matter of Religion; specially being
crossed in his designs: That was it, which cast the Angels out of heaven, and
Adam out of Paradise, and still casts most Apostates out of the Church.

Ambition says one (whom Master Doctor in his Letter deservedly commends
for a worthy Gentleman) is like choler, which is an humor that makes men,
active, earnest, full of alacrity and stirring, if it be not stopped: but if
it be stopped and can not have his way it becomes adust, and thereby malign
and venomous: so ambitious men if they find the way open for their rising, and
still get forward, they are busy rather then dangerous; but if they be checked
in their desires they become secretly discontent and look upon men and matters
with an evil eye; and if they rise not with their service, they will take
order to make their service fall with them.

Now, what opinion was held of him abroad by Romish Catholics, after his
departure from us and our Church, let Pelitier and Fitz-Simon testify, the one
in French, the other in Latin. Discourse de la mort du Sieur Carter, etc.
La memoire de cest homme de bien ( says Pelitier) estant grandement
recommendable pour l' innocence and probite de ses maeures; qu' ausi pour le
graund zeal qu'il a eu de chercher son salut; Car estant personage de
singuliere erudition et fort verse en la lecture des Saints Peers, il
recogneut en fin dans leurs escrits Comme dans vne glace luisante, la viue
image de l' Eglise Catholic tant aux points essentielles de la Religion qu'
en la police, et government d'icelle. Hitherto Pelitier; but Fitz-Simon goes
further. Britannom. minist. lib. 3. cap. 5. part. 8.
Inter quos ( says he) nouum sidus Catholicorum omnium gaudio refulgens, vt
laudum suarum insistant vestigijs, vtque mentem ac linguam sceleri seruent This
can ill be applied to D. Car^^r, who often took the oath of Supremacy, and
more often Recognized it in his prayer before his Sermons.
iniuratam, praelucet; Cum igiur Ibernis, alijsque omnibus facem praeferat,
Reformatorumque (a quibus salutari palinodia defecit) causam gregemque sua fuga
condemnet: Caeteris obiter a me Page 220. Where among such famous Doctors as
were converted lately to the Romish Religion he reckons Dr. Bull for one.
superius recensitis accedat, optimoqueiure praecedat Illustrissimus inter
Theologos Doctores Cantabrigienses, Beniaminus Carerius, Concionator, ac
sacellanus regius, Qui talis Abdemelech seu Regis seruus esse voluit, vt simul
esset Abdenago seru^s Dei, Verus Beniaminus, vtpote mane praua educatione Lupus
rapax Christi praedam comedens, vespere vero haeresis eiuratae spolia detrahens
diuidensque, and salutari ^alinodia dextrae filium se constituens; Verus
Barsabas vera ad fidem conuersione eiusque causa demittens multa, quia dilexit
multum; Verum animal quartum simile aquilae volanti, sigillo quarto aperto
singulis reformatorum clamitans, Veni and vide, faelix omnino conuersio Tarda
and sera nimis, sed fama and laud perenni. So that it seemed needful some
answer should be made to his treatise, if for none other reason, yet in
regard of so great an opinion conceived of his worth and sufficiency: But sure
I am of opinion, that had he been a man of that moderation in matter of
Religion, (as through this Treatise he would bear his Majesty and the world
in hand) he had neither died among the Jesuits, as Pelitier testifies in the
conclusion of his pamphlet, nor received such a testimony from Fitz-Simon by
nation an Irishman, and a Jesuit by profession: Howsoever, sure I am that
talking of Unity and Peace ( the pretended scope of Mr. Drs letter) as terms
now stand between us, savors not of a Jesuits spirit. We for our parts freely
profess, as Mr Casaubon does in his Majesty's name. [Let them in whose power
it is to perform it, offer us such a peace, of which it may be said, Peace
and truth have kissed each other, and the controversy is at an end:] Let them
sever humane ordinances from divine, superstitious from godly, new from
ancient, needless from necessary, I say again ( says he) and with as loud a
cry and much earnestness as may be, I proclaim it, that all men may hear
me, for as much as concerns his Majesty, and the Church of England, the
controversy is at an end. His Majesty's intent and full resolution is, that
they in vain talk or think of Peace, who sunder that heavenly yoke of unity
and verity; but ( says he in conclusion, speaking to the Romanists;) their
purpose is constantly to maintain all they hold, not to reconcile the minds of
well disposed persons, by the reformation of that which is amiss; in which
purpose as long as they shall persist, his Majesty professes once for all,
that he will entertain no society, no Communion at all with the Church of
Rome: And in this case we stick not to profess with Nazianzene, that there is
a kind of holy war, in which who so dies, shall undoubtedly obtain of the
chief Bishop of our souls, a Plenary Indulgence for his sins, and ^ith
Hillary, Amiable is the name of peace, and lovely the opinion of unity, but who
doubts that to be the only Peace of the Church, which is the Peace of Christ?
and lastly with Cyprian, [He is not reconciled to the Church, who is separated
from the Gospel.] Now because M. Doctor would persuade the ^orld, and his
Majesty himself, that at his first entrance into this kingdom, he was more
inclineable to reconcilement, and labors by promising honor and riches and
security to reduce him again to the same pretended inclination, it shall not
be amiss (beside that which I have spoken to this point in diverse parts of
mine answer) to acquaint the Reader with his Majesty's protestation (even
while matters were yet in a mammering) made to Watson, as himself confessed to
the late Earl of Northampton, See the late B. of Lincolnes answer to a
namelesse Catholic, p. 115.
That all the Crowns and kingdoms in this world should not induce him to
change any jot of his profession which was the pasture of his soul, and
earnest of his eternal inheritance; and as he thus protested at his first
entrance, so in the conclusion of one of his last speeches to the Parliament,
he shows himself in this point ever like himself. [ May 21. 1610
I am now out of conscience and for security ( says he) not to forget
religion; I spoke to you last as a Prophet, that it was likely the Papists had
some new plot in hand, now you see it is come to pass, and I will let you know
this much, their aim was not at His Majesty there speaks of the French King
Henry the IV.
him alone, but at other Princes to, whereof I assure you I was one; look that
these weeds do not ouergrow the corn that Papi^try be not increased by one
thing too much used among them: They send out their kinsemen, children and
servants to Doway, and such like places, these after they have been there
nourished, come daily over, and with their poison infect others: This one day
will make you smart, if it be not prevented.] And I pray God his Majesty do
not prove as true a Prophet in this latter, as the success showed him in the
former; how soever, it suffices to show his Majesty's auersenes from all manner
of reconcilement, things standing in the terms they do: Nay, M. Doctor
himself in his Epistle to Casaubon, written since his going over, professes,
that N^s^ itaque idexp^ct^^ur a seren^ssimo Reg^, v^ palam ^or am vniue^ so
mundo profiteatur s^met^^ ad sidem cog^, non v^deo, quo modo a^imus Regius in
t^m iusta 17a, and tanto per^^^lo suo and suorum, p^ssit ad little par^es
propius a^^edere.
except it were expected from his Majesty, that he should (in a manner)
proclaim to the world, that he was forced to that religion, he saw not how (in
so great danger, and just anger) he could possibly draw nearer to them, who
well deser^ed the anger, by procuring the danger. M. Doctor then might well
have spared his pains of writing to his Majesty to that purpose, considering
withal he had by his own acknowledgement received full answer from M*
Casuabon, that his Maiesti^s settled determination was (as he had before
signified to Cardinal Perron) not at all to shake hands with Rome, whiles her
whordomes and withcrafts yet remain in such abundance.

My wish and hearty prayer to God is, and I think not mine alone, but of all
good men, neither would I account my life dear to be spent in the furtherance
of it, that the miserable rent, and wide wounds, which at this day we see in
the Christian world, in matter of Religion, might by some good means be closed
up, for the sparing of the effusion of so much Christian blood, the securing of
the Crowns of Christian Princes, the settling of so great distraction in
Christian minds, the wiping away of the scandal of division, from the
Christian profession, and lastly resisting with united forces, the common
enemy of the blessed and glorious name of Jesus Christ: But as long as the Sea
the relation of the state of religion in these Western parts which it were
much to be wished, the Author himself would perfect and publish.
Bishop of Rome shall hang the faith of his followers on this Principle [ I and
my Church cannot possibly erre] and with the same stop the mouths of all his
opposites, be the force and evidence of their arguments never so clear and
strong; I cannot conceive otherwise of such a wish then of an honest desire,
but without any apparent hope of success. For if divine authority do
concur with them in all their ordinances, if Gods Spirit infallibly assist
them in all their decisions, what remains there, but only that they teach, we
believe, they command, and the world obey? Indeed in humane governments where
reason is shut out, there tyranny is thrust in; but where God commands, to
ask a reason, is presumption, to disobey, rebellion: to this miserable
necessity have their assertions tied them which they have laid for their
eternal foundation; miserable to themselves, and miserable to the whole world;
nay, in so many conferences as have been held in this age for pacification, it
has been truly observed, that ere they parted, they plainly discovered,
they came not with any such intent, as to yield any thing for Peace, much less
for Trueths sake, but only to assay either by persuasion to reduce, or
otherwise by cunning to entrap and disgrace their adversaries; and if some one
of them have showed himself more moderate at any time, it has been his utter
disgrace with his own party for ever after. Now for the manner of mine
answering, I have set down his text at large in his own words, without
altering or adding so much as a syllable (except it were to make sense where I
found none) imputing the error thereof to the Printer, rather then the Author,
I have followed the Method of his own division, for the most part, both in
the Chapters and Sect. The maine scope of every Sect. I have answered in the
body of my Reply, stretching the force of his Arguments, sometimes beyond the
extent of the Letter; and such extrauagant matters, as he draws in upon the
bye, I thought it sufficient to reply unto, in my marginall notes, so that in
one of the two, nothing I think worth the answering has escaped unanswered;
and I shall crave that courtesy of the Reader, if he receive not satisfaction
in the one, to have recourse to the other; and this I take to be fair and
just dealing without exception; once I am sure I have dealt with him as my
self in like case should desire to be dealt withal, which I take to be the
safest rule of just dealing. Surely a matter it is of little labor and
credit; but less honesty, to deal as Fitz-Simon has done with Mr. Mason,
whose learned and painful book of the lawful Britta^nom. (...) page 324.
Consecration of our Bishops, he pretends he read over and confuted in 15.
days; but his chief confutation (as may ea^ily appear to the Reader) stands
in denying acts vouched out of the public Register; or as Eudaemon (the common
packehorse of Rome) has lately dealt with my Lord of Salisburie, answering his
Antilogie, a book of about 60. sheets, full of variety of learning, and
^uident proof, with a Libel of some three or four sheets at most, which he
has also rather stained, with railing at persons, and catching at words, then
made offer to answer so much as one material point; and to speak a truth, I
have good reason to think, he rather wrote it that the title might be seen^ in
the common Catalogue, then that the Book it self might commonly be read; in
regard that the work is so slender, and the copies so few, that as it is
scarce to be had, so is it scarce worth the reading being had: himself
professes that he wrote it [ Ne magni aliquid latere in ^o libro putarent,
que^ nemo confutasset: Lest men should think some great matter lay hidden in
that book, which no man had confuted:] but he that shall compare both, may
well say, notwithstanding his answer, that no man has yet confuted it.

Somewhat more wisely and warily has he dealt with Casaubons Exercitations,
answering only the fourth chapter of his first Exercitation, and promising a
whole volume to follow after against the rest, in imitation belike of Richard
Stanihurst, who has published his flourish to a future combat with his Nephew
Mr. Dr. Usher; but I think we shall see the full encounters both of the one
and the other, by leisure. Pollicitis dives quilibet esse potest; but
Tarda solet magnis rebus inesse fides.
An easy matter it is to promise great matters, but not so easy to perform
them being promised: For mine own part, I must confess, I have made a larger
answer then either the treatise answered deserved, or the state of my body,
and my leisure (being to make so often returns from a remote part of the
Kingdom to mine attendance in Court) could well permit, or indeed my self at
first proiected; but I have now found it true in mine own experience, which I
have often heard observed by others, to fall out many times in writing, as it
does in building: many alterations and additions present themselves, besides,
and beyond the first design. It was written of Fame, but it may as truly be
said of this kind of writing, Vires acquirit ^undo. It gathers strength in
going, as in eating a man sometimes gets a stomach: which was the reason
(together with an expectation, that either some more able pen would have
undertaken this encounter, or some matter of greater importance promised by the
Author himself, and Pelitier, would ere this have been published to the
world) that mine answer has been differred till now: but if it be well
enough, it is soon enough, how well it is, let the reader judge, whom
notwithstanding, I shall desire to suspend his judgment* till he have heard
both parties speak, which request me thinks is but reasonable, considering I
have dealt so favorably with the adverse party, as to set down all at full,
that he could say for himself: With whom, if I deal in mine answering as if
he were still alive, it is to be ascribed to himself, who in the conclusion
of his Letter, professes he sent his soul therein; neither is that I have
done herein without example of those, by whose greatness if need were, small
faults might be countenanced; it is (I hope) sufficient that I neither intend
thereby to wrong the dead, or deceive the living:

Neither let it be thought blameable, that being by profession a divine, I
have meddled so much in matters of state; it was rather out of the necessity of
the arguments to be replied unto, then any desire or disposition of mine own,
farther then to make it appear to the world, that the Religion by us
professed, is more suitable to the preservation of the civil power, and in
special the form of policy established among us, then that religion which
dares accuse ours of the contrary; of which I may truly say that (in the
terms it now stands) it does not so much uphold temporal policy, as it is
vpheld by it, and yet like the iuie which rises by clasping the oak, has it
at length ouertopt the oak of Soueraigneti^ it self: whereas on the other
side ours has hitherto had none other supports, but the mere evidence of
truth and divine assistance, and so according to that received principle of
nature, being still nourished by the same means as it was first bredde, it
makes us confident that it will both grow the better and last the longer. Thus
commending thee to Gods grace, the work to thy charitable censure, and my
self to thy Christian prayers, I rest.

Thine in our Common SAVIOVR, George Hakewil.

The Publishers Preface to the Reader before Dr. CARIERS Book.
Having exactly perused (good Reader) this Treatise here presented to thy view,
and finding it both in stuff and style to be learnedly and eloquently
contrived; I took my self in some sort obliged in Christian duty, to divulge
it in print to the world: I can show it in the Authors own Letters, that he
had a purpose of publishing it.
unwittingly I confess to the Author: howbeit, encroaching upon his charitable
consent, who I am well assured is most forward to defray his talent in ought
wherein the Catholic Roman religion may be advanced: Of this firm and full
resolution he has made effectiue proof, not only in words but also in
works. The Author, as it is notoriously known, has gained He has now gotten
more name and fame by running away from us, then by any act that ever he did
among us.
name and fame among the Protestants, having been a Teacher in their
Colleges, a Preacher in their Pulpits, a Doctor in their Schools, a Canon in
their Churches, Chaplain to the King his most excellent Majesty, flowing in
wealth, supported with the The Credit he had in Court, was won by his
hypocrisy.
credit of the Court, most likely in short time to He was like enough to aspire
to higher preferment: but while he remained like himself, not like to attain
it.
aspire to higher Ecclesiastical preferments, had he persisted in the course
of his former profession: Yet notwithstanding all these worldly allurements,
which are in good sooth What inti^ing baits could these be unto him, who by his
own acknowledgement, felt the state of his body such, that he could not long
enjoy them.
wondrous enticing baits to hook and to hold an unstayed soul; Mr. Doctor
Carier having from his greener years wallowed himself in the choicest
writings of the most learned Protestants, and confronting in his mature age
their The wavering was in his brain not in their opinions.
wavering opinions with the uniform and settled consent of the ^ncient Fathers,
found the He professes indeed that he found a large opposition, between the
new French, (as he calls it,) and the old English: but between the English
and the R^mish, none at all, or ^o small as it might easily be reconciled.
Chap. 2. S^ct. 29.
new so opposite to the old, that at length receiving Or rather a counterfeit
light from him, who is transformed into an Angel of Light.
gracious light from the Father of lights, did tear His own relation shows,
how slowly he proceeded in this business, as being in hope of higher
preferment, and yet in despair of longer life.
at a trice all these forementioned earthly s^ares, resolving not to wander any
longer like a lost sheep, but to come to the fold of the Catholic Roman
Church; and consequently, choosing like a zealous Moses, to be afflicted with
the people of God, then to have the pleasure of temporal sin: These and the
like pregnant points are sufficiently debated in this Treatise, which I wish
thee (gentle Reader) to peruse with heedfull attention, whereby the Author his
pains may turn to thy profit, if happily thou be alienated from the
Catholic Roman, I take to be as much as Kent and Christ^ndome.
Catholic Roman religion, always presenting thy prayers to our Lord Sweet
Jesus, that he would vouch safe to illuminate thy mind in the passage of thy
eternal salvation, that thou may prefer light before darkness, truth
before falsehood, Catholic Religion before particular opinions, Had Mr. Dr.
done so, he had rested where he was.
as Mr. Doctor Carier has done upon such sound and grounded reasons, as he
has opened in this Treatise: And this wishing that good to thy soul, which I
wish to mine own, I betake thee good Reader to the direction and protetection
of the author, and giver of grace and glory.

G. H.
IT seems you had not so exactly perused this ensuing Treatise, as in the
front you pretend, in as much as you tell us, that the Author thereof from his
greener years wallowed himself in the choicest writings of the most learned
Protestants; whereas himself in his first chapter and fifth Section,
professes, that when he first took himself to the study of Divinity,
setting aside all respect of men then alive, and of Writers that had moved or
maintained Controversies, farther then to understand the question that was
betwixt them, he fell to the reading of the Church History and ancient
Fathers, which had no interest on either side: Indeed he tells us before
this, he read over our English Chronicles, and except this Were his wallowing
in the choicest writings of the most learned Protestants, I understand not out
of his own relation what was: Once I am sure he affirms mere untruths
touching Caluins doctrine (which I take it he understands by Caluinisme)
faining him to teach, that the Sacraments of the Church be nothing but signs
and badges of that grace, which a man has before, by the carnal covenant of
his Parents faith, and that Priesthood can do nothing but preach the word,
which lay men may do also if they will: positions so directly opposite not only
to Caluins words, but his grounds and reasons, that it makes me suspect he
never read him nor so much as his Majesty's either Apology or Premonition; in
both which he plainly and largely impugneth the Bishop of Romes usurped power
in spirituals, which the Dr. notwithstanding denies, Cap. 2. S^^t. 36.
and that in his letter to his Majesty himself.

But you found the treatise, you say, both in stuff and style, to be learnedly
and eloquently contrived: It may be said of eloquence without learning, as of
the Nightingale, that it is vox and praeterea nihil, A sounding brass^ or
tinkling Cymball: Neither do I see how that can well be called a learned piece
of work, which treating of Christian religion, alleges not so much as one
passage of Scripture throughout, nor alludeth to any by way of proof; and
quoteth of the Ancients only, S. Augustine twice, but not against us, and S.
Ambrose once, but against his meaning, as shall appear in his proper place:
and among latter Writers Sir Francis Bacons Essays, where no such thing as he
quotes is to be found, and Caluins life written by Beza, which rather makes
much against himself, then in any sort for him; besides this, he borrows a
sentence or two out of Aristotle's Politikes, which he fathereth upon the
Fathers, and this is the learned stuff you so much brag of.

From the work you pass to the Author, who gained fame (you say) amongst the
Protestants, having been a Teacher in their Colleges, a Preacher in their
P^lpits, a Doctor in their Schools, etc. So was Nicholas amongst the Deacons,
and Judas among the Apostles, and Reuben among the Patriarchs, and Saul among
the Prophets, and Julian among the Christian Emperors, and Nestorius among the
Bishops, and Sergius among the Monks, and Lucifer among the Angels, and Satan
among the children of God; He went out from us because he was not of us, for
if he had been of us, he would ^aue continued with us. Stella cadens non est
stella, cometa fuit. His falling away proves him to have been a blazing but
never a fixed star: Which that I have good reason to think, his own words
written with his own hand, and taken out of his common place book, shall
testify, where he proposes the question.

IAN. 5. 1611. An quis possit esse in statu gratiae, quiest
extra externam obedientiam Ecclesiae.
Which he thus resolves: Catholicus extra externam obedientiam Ecclesiae, vel
in Scismate natus, velper loci interdictum eiectus, potest tamen esse in vn^one
Catholica. Ergo potest esse in statu gratiae.

Potest habere animam perfect vnitam. Ergo potest esse in union Catholica.

Potest habere intellect^m vnitum, scilicet per veram fidem, and voluntatem
vnitam, scilicet per veram charitatem. Ergo potest habere animam perfect
vnitam. Ergo sinon potest habere corpus vnitum, est tamen in statu gratiae,
modo nihil prius cupiat, quam vt sit etiam in externa obedientia, and abstineat
propter commune bonum Ecclesiae, non propter bonum priuatum.

From whence in my judgment it cannot well be collected otherwise, but that
while his body was with us, his soul was united to Rome, and that even before
his leaving us, he left no stone unmoved for the public good of that Church.

Lastly, for that uniform and settled consent of the ancient Fathers, and those
pregnant points and sound and grounded reasons of the Author which the Prefacer
pretends; it will easily appear at first view, that the former appears not in
this Treatise: and for the latter, they may appear to the unlearned and
unstable, who like children are carried about with every blast of vain
doctrine; but to such as are sound in the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, and grounded in the principles of Christian religion, I am sure his
reasons can neither appear sound nor grounded.

Those four quotations of Scripture which are set by the Prefacer in his
margin (being more by four then are to be found in the Treatise it self) the
thickness of my marginall notes enforced me to omit; and yet if I had figured
them as I find them there, the Reader in searching would have missed them, the
11. and 19. of James being put for the 1. and the 17. the 15. to the Heb. for
the 11. and Psalm. 83. 12. for 84. 11. But herein it may be he followed the
division of the vulgar edition, and the rest I am content to impute to the
Printer.

Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim. Dr. CARIERS PREFACE TO HIS LETTER.
Most Excellent and Renowned Sovereign,
IT is not unknown to all those that know me in England, that for these many
years I had my health very ill, and therefore having from time to time used
all the means and medicines that England could afford; Last of all, by the
advice of my Physicians, I made mine humble suite unto your Majesty, that I
might travel unto the Spaw for the use of those waters, purposing with my
self that if I could be well, I would go from thence to Heydelberge, and
spend this winter there. But when I was gone from the Spaw to Aquisgrane, and
so to Colin, I found my self, rather worse then better then I was before, and
therefore I resolved with my self that it was high time for me to settle my
thoughts upon another world: And seeing I was out of hope to enjoy the health
of my body, at the least to look to the health of my soul, from whence both
You might have named Scripture as well as art, but it seems you purposely
forbore it, lest you should seem a Caluinist.
art and experience teaches me that all my bodily infirmities have their
beginning, for if I could by any study have proved Catholic Religion to be
false, or by any means have professed it to be In your 2. chap. and 21. Sect.
you affirm the doctrine of the Church of Eng. to be that which is contained in
the common prayer book, and Church Catechism, very nere agreeing with, or at
least not contradicting the Church of Rome.
true in England, I doubt not, but the contentment of my soul would have much
helped the health of my body: But the more I studied the Had you brought any
proof from the Scriptures and ancient Fathers for the truth of that Religion,
which you call Cathol. you would have thereby given us some reason to think
^ou had indeed studied them.
Scriptures, and most ancient Fathers to confute it, the more I was compelled
to see the truth thereof, and the more I labored to Your reconc^liation of
relig^o^ was nothing else but a renouncing of the truth.
reconcile the religion of England thereunto, the more I was disliked,
suspected, and condemned as a common enemy: And if I would have been either
ignorant, or silent, I might perhaps with the pleasures and commodities of my
preferments, have in time cast off the care of Religion: But seeing my study
forced me to It is marvel you had not imparted; knowledge by writing
know, and my place Your place compelled you not to preach points of R^mish
doctrine.
compelled me to preach, I had no way to avoid my grief, nor means to endure
it: I have therefore apprehended the opportunity of my License to tra^ell, that
I may withdraw my self for a while from the sight and offense of those in
England, which Catholic Religion is not hated in England, but the religion of
pretended Catholics is justly restrained.
hate Catholic Religion, and You might as fully and ^reely have enjoyed ye
pre^ence of our blessed Savior in the vnit^e of ye English Church, as the
R^mish.
freely and fully enjoy the presence of our blessed Savior, in the unity of
his Catholic Church, wherein I will never forget, at the How can there be a
daily oblation of that which himself offered once for all. Heb. 7. 27. and 9.
28. and 10. 10
daily oblation of his most blessed body and blood, to lift up my heart unto
him and to pray for the When his Mai^sties reasons are answered why he should
not be already esteemed in the unity of the Catholic Church, prayer for his
admission into it, will be admitted.
admission of your Majesty thereinto: And in the mean time I have thought it
my Your due^ie would better have appeared in writing somewhat in defense of his
Majesty's writings.
duty to write this short treatise with mine own hand, wherein before I Your
auowed presence at the daily oblation (as you call it) was a sufficient
declaration of your revolt.
publish my self unto the world, I desire to show to your Majesty these two
things: 1 How sufficiently either of these two be showed, I leave it to the
indifferent Reader to judge.
The means of my conversion unto Cath. Religion: 2 The hopes I have to do
your Majesty no ill s^ruice therein.


I humbly crave your Majesty's I wonder that any having affiance in his
Holiness^ pardons, should desire his Ma^esties.
pardon, and will rest ever Your Mai^sties He is indeed likely to be a
faithful servant to his Majesty, who flies to the tents, and pleads the cause
of his sworn enemies.
faithful and truly devoted servant, B. Carier.

GEORGE HAKEVVIL.
IT is likewise known to all them that knew you, that for these many years,
you have been more sick in mind, then in body, which has appeared not only
publicly in your Sermons and writings; but privately in your Conferences and
Letters: where of my self am in part a witness; but they with whom you were
longer and more familiarly conversant, can more fully testify it, and though
you used many medicines, yet one was wanting, to wit, 1. P^t. 3. 4.
a meek and quiet spirit, a thing before God much set by; it being as David's
music, which stilled Saul's rage; and this I am persuaded would have done you
more good, as well in regard of the diseases of your body as your mind, then
any of your other medicines, or all of them put together: among which your last
was the Spaw waters, which I grant, you might use by advice of Physicians; but
I have withal reason to think the voyage out of his Majesty's dominions into
those parts, was by you intended rather for the fuller and safer discovering of
the sickness of your mind, then the recovering of that of your body: which your
self in this very Preface confess upon the matter, in as much as being (you
say) suspected and condemned as a common enemy, and having no way to avoid your
grief, nor means to endure it, you desired to withdraw your self from the
sight and offense of those who hated Catholic Religion: whereby I presume you
mean such as opposed your turbulent courses, laboring under pretense of
Catholic Religion, and old English divinity, to bring in, and set up, the
new Romish; and considering you stood so affected, it seems to me strange you
should purpose a journey to Heydelberge, and the spending of a winter there,
being so profested an enemy to all Caluinists, except you hoped to convert
Abraham Scultet, Or David Parrey: My self passed one whole winter amongst
them, and unless their opinions be since altered, or you had altered yours
before your coming thither, or at least concealed them at your being there,
you would doubtless before the winter had passed, grown more weary of them
then of us: But being (you say) upon the way at Colin, you found your self
worse, and thereupon resolved it was high time to settle your thoughts upon
another world, and being out of hope to enjoy the health of your body, at
least to look to the health of your soul; So that by your own confession,
you made a virtue of necessity, then resolving to settle your self, when you
expected not long after the dissolution of your body; then to fix your
thoughts upon God, when you perceived you could not long remain in the world;
which as it is less acceptable to God, then for a man to consecrate the flower
and strength of his age to him, so is it in the doctrine of the Church of Rome
less meritorious in it self, and in reason not so exemplar to draw others:
Had you determined to forsake a falshod, and embrace a truth for the mere
love of truth without worldly respects, men would rather have inclined to
think that true which you had embraced; had you hoped to rise higher, and live
longer, and yet not held your life or hope of honor dear; in regard of that
future life and glory which you hoped for by the change of your Religion, you
might sooner have induced others to follow your steps: but for a man so
ambitious as your self, by your own acknowledgement, who by striving against
the stream, had put himself not only out of hope of rising higher; but
almost out of breath to, and all hope of living much longer, to seek that name
and fame in dying abroad, which he saw could not be gotten by living at home;
it may perhaps work somewhat with those who judge of matters only by events,
as Geometricians measure the height of towers by their shadows, and are ready
to turn every accident to an argument for their own purposes; but such as
judge of events by looking into their causes (which not many love much to busy
their brains about, nor are indeed capable of) and frame not arguments to
their opinions; but contrariwise submit their opinions to the soundness and
force of argument; such I ^ay, I am sure it cannot much move.

AN ANSWER TO D. CARIERS LETTER TO THE Kings Majesty.
CHAP. I. The means of my conversion to Catholic Religion.
BENJAMIN CARIER.
1.
I Must confess to Gods honor, and my own shame, A that if it had been in my
power to choose, I would never have been a Catholic. I was borne and brought
up in It was such a schism as the Apostle practiced, when certain were
hardened and disobeyed, speaking evil of the way of God, he departed from
them, and separated the discsples, Acts 19. 9. and g^ue the like commandment
to others, if any teach otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome words of
the Lord Jesus, and from such separate thy self, 1. Tim. 6. 3, 4, 5.
schism, and was taught to B abhor a Papist, as much as any Puritan in
England does. I had ever a great desire to justify the religion of the state,
and had great C hope to advance my self thereby: neither was my hope ever so
great, as by your Majesty's favor it was D at the very instant of my
resolution for Catholic Religion: and the preferment I had, together with the
honor of your Majesty's service, was greater by much, then without your
Majesty's favor, I look for in this world. But although I was a^ This
ambition of yours was it which being some what crossed* or not fully satisfied,
caused your apost^sie, as it did Arrius his heresy*
ambitious of your Majesty's favor, and as desirous of the honors and
pleasures of my Country, as any man that is therein: yet seeing that I was not
like, any long while, to enjoy them, and if I should for my private commodity
speak, or write, or do any thing against the honor of Christ his Church, and
against the evidence of mine own conscience, I must shortly appear before the
presence of the same Christ, in the presence of the same his Church, to give an
account thereof. Therefore I neither durst any further to pursue my own desire
of honor, nor to hazard my soul any farther in the iustifications of that
religion, which I saw wasE impossible to be Yet himself afterward iustifies
it, chap. 2. s^ct. 21.
justified by any such reason as at the day of judgment would go for payment;
and that it may appear that I have not respected any thing so much in this
world, as my Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? and can
either duty or love be expected from such subjects and friends? better is the
h^tred of an open enemy, then the love of such a friend.
duty to your Majesty, and my love to my friends and Country, I humbly
beseech you give me leave (as briefly as I can) to recount unto you the whole
course of my studies and endeavors in this kind, even Ab ouo vsqu^ ad malu^^.
from the beginning of my life until this present.

GEORGE HAKEWIL.
1.
A In saying you would never have been a Catholic, He repeats the same phrase
in diverse other places.
if it had been in your power to choose, you seem to fall upon that opinion
which is wrongfully thrust upon Calvin, that we are converted, as it were, by
constraint, whether we will or no, and consequently you overthrow both the
freedom of will, and the merit of work.

B It seems then your father, who brought you up, did much abhor a Papist,
and yet you confess in the next Section that he was a learned and devout man,
and that he seasoned you with the principles of piety and devotion.

C Your great hopes were indeed always beyond your just de^^rts: yet his
Majesty might be drawn to favor you the rather, for that hypocritical
sermon which you made last before him in his ^happell at White Hall.

D So it seems you resolved for the pretended Catholic religion before your
parting from hence: howbeit before, you bear us in hand, that you got license
to travel to the Spaw, only for your health, and afterward you tell us, that
you went hence, hoping to find some greater offense in the service of the
Church of Rome, then you had done in their books, that so you might return
better contented, to persecute and abhor the Catholics at your pleasure:
Thus, for your advantage, you turn your tale, as Mariners do their sails.

E No reason at the day of Judgment, in all likel^hood* shall better go for
payment, then that which the Judge, as a rule to be judged by himself has
left us, and of which we may say, if we be deceived, thou Peter, thou Paul, or
thou Christ have deceived us. But whether on the other side, your humane
inventions, or as the Apostle calls them, Col^ss. 2. 23.
voluntary religion and will worship, will then pass for current pay, a iuster
doubt may be made: of which he might justly say, as he does to his people by
his Esai. 1. 12.
Prophet, Who has required these things at your hands?

B. C.
2.
I was borne in the year, 1566. being the son of Anthony Carier, a learned
and devout man: who although he were a Protestant and a Preacher, yet did so
season me with the principles of piety and devotion, as I could not choose but
ever since be very F zealous in matters of Great zeal and neutralitie in
Religion seldom stand together, as neither do great ze^le and vehement
ambition.
religion. Of him I learned that allG false religions in the world were but
policies invented for the temporal service of Princes and States: and
therefore that they were diverse and always changeable, according to the diverse
reasons and occasions of State. H But true Chr^^^ian Religion was a truth
revealed of God for the eternal salvation of souls: and therefore was like to
God always, one and the same. So that all Princes and States in the world
never have been, nor shall be able to We grant as much, that the gates of hell
shall never utterly pr^uaile against it.
overthrow that Religion. This to me seemed an excellent ground for the finding
out of that Religion, wherein a man might find rest unto his soul, which
cannot be satisfied with any thing but eternal truth.

G. H.
2.
F A zealous man indeed, your self confessing in your Preface that you then
began to look to the health of your soul, when you were out of hope to enjoy
the health of your body: And in the very Section going before, Non been
c^n(...) vna sede morantur ambitio and zelus.
that you were as ambitious of his Majesty's favor, and as desirous of the
honors and pleasures of your Country, as any man that is therein: But it
seems you dwelt by bad neighbors, who are thus enforced to commend your own
Zeal, or else they hold it of none other kind, then that of which the James 3.
16.
Apostle speaks [ having strife for her companion and sedition for her
daughter,] and if we should grant that you had Zeal though [ Romans 10. 2*
not according to knowledge,] I rest well assured that this Epistle, in the
judgment of the wisest, would not euince the contrary.

G Your father being (as you say) a Protestant and a Preacher in all
likelihood, by False Religion, understood the Romish, being indeed the deepest
policy invented by men for their own purposes that ever was in the world, [
L^ke 16. 8.
the children of darkness being in their generation wiser then the children
of light,] and is in that regard rightly termed by Saint Paul 2. These. 2. 7.
[ the mystery of iniquity which began to worke] in his days, but since has
fully weaued those threeds, which were then begun to be spunne; the
Cockatrice is now hatched, which was then only in the egg. And surely I
think, not without great reason, the Bishop of Rome has, or at least wise,
formerly had the word Mystery engraven on his diadem, since in the
seventeenth of the Revel. at the fifth verse it is foretold, it should be [
written on the forehead of the ^reat Whore.] For to pass by other [ depthes of
Satan] as they be called Revel. 2. verse 24. I would know what Religion was
ener in the world which invented a policy like to the Popes dispensations in
general, but specially in Marriages, it being hitherto the best stake in his
hedge, and without exception the strongest sinew for the tying of Christian
Princes unto him, as to their head, they being made many of them by it
legitimate, and illegitimate without it: So they stand in a manner bound to
defend his authority with the same sword, that they do their own Crowns. And I
am verily persuaded, were it not that they lie obnoxious to him in this regard,
some of them would not stick so close to him as they do, especially since the
publishing of his Majesty's learned and godly premonition unto them. Farther,
what use they make of Confessions for the discovery of all secrets, as well of
nature as of States, Indulgences, Canonizations, Consecrations, Of their
bloody Inquisition, which like a sharp Northern wind nippes the spring of
Religion in the bud, Of forging false Authors, and corrupting the true, Of
suppressing the books of our Writers, and correcting their own, Of spreading
false rumors, and razing all antiquity that makes against them, the world has
long since discovered. Besides all this, they have a bait for every fish, a
motive to draw every several humor: for an ambitious disposition they have a
triple Crown, or a Cardinals cap; for a Contemplative, a Monks cloister, or a
Friars coule; for a working practical head, employment in State affairs, for a
Scholasticke, preaching and writing, and in writing, some they set to
meditations, some to politic discourses, some to cases of conscience, some to
commentaries, some to controversies, according to the several point and temper
of their wits. Nay he that shall but consider the politic form of government
observed in the only order of the Jesuits, their rules, their intelligence,
their corespondence, their infinite cunning devises how to win some whom they
desire for respects to be of their society, or to make their friends, and to
disgrace or remove others whom they suspect to stand in theirway, may justly
pronounce of them that they have perfectly learned the former part of our
Saviors lesson, [ Matthew. 10. 1^.
Be wise as serpents,] but not the latter, [ be ye innocent as doves:] whereas
nothing argues the inocency of our cause more, then that it hitherto has bin,
and still is supported merely by the goodness of God, and the evidence of
truth.

H Surely, if true religion be unchangeable, then the Romish cannot be the
true, it having suffered so many changes both in doctrine and practice, that
we may now justly question it whether it be the same or no, as the Scholars
of Athens did Theseus his ship, after many reparations, we may seek Rome in
Rome it self, and not find it. I will instance only in the Mass, which like
a beggars cloakehath received so many additions and patche^, that if S. Peter
should now live to see a Priest saying Mass, he would without doubt conceive
it to be any thing rather then the commemoration of Christ's death* or the
administration of his Supper: and to speak a truth* as long as the traditions
of Men are held of equal authority with the lively Oracles and eternal
truth of God, it cannot be, but that religion, which is grounded on them,
should be as subject to variation, as are the conceptions of men's minds. So
that your ground for the finding out of that religion wherein a man might find
rest unto his soul is excellent good, but your application erroneous, since
there is indeed no rest, but upon eternal truth; and no truth eternal, but
that which is divine.

B. C.
3.
My next care then was after I came to years of discretion by all the best
means I could to inform my self, whether the religion of England were indeed
the very same, which being prefigured and prophesied in the old Testament, was
perfected by our blessed Savior, and He indeed deliueredit to his Apostles
and disciples to continue, but sure we are, it continued not by that
succession, and in that Church which you call visible and perpetual, or at
least not as he delivered it: the enui^us man came in the night and sowed tares
amongst it.
delivered to his Apostles and disciples to continue by perpetual succession
in his visible Church, until his coming again: or whether it were a new one
for private purposes of Statesmen invented, and by humane laws established. Of
this I could not choose but make some doubt* because I heard men talk much in
those days of the change of religion, which was then lately made in the
beginning of Queen ELIZABETH'S reign.

G. H.
3.
I would demand, by M. Doctors leave, whethermen might not talk as much of
the change of religion made in the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, as Queen
Elizabeth's? But you will say Queen Mary's was a restitution to the ancient:
and we reply, that Queen Elizabeth's was a restitution to a more ancient: and
most true it is, the most ancient is the most true. So that in this regard we
may justly say, [ Nos non sumus nouatores, sed vos estis veteratores,] and with
our Savior, Matthew. 19. 8.
From the beginning it was not so.

B. C.
4.
I was sorry to hear of a change and of a new religion, seeing me thought in
reason, if true religion were eternal, the new religion could not be the true.
But yet I hoped that the religion of England was not a change, or a new
religion, but a restitution of the old, and that the change was in the Church
of Rome, which in process of time might perhaps grow to be Superstitious and
Idolatrous, and that therefore England had done well to leave the Church of
Rome, and to reform it self: and for this purpose I did at my leisure and
best opportunity, as I came to more judgment, read over the Chronicles of
England, and observed all the a^terations of religion that I could find
therein: but when I found there, that the present religion of England was a
plain change, and change upon change, and that there was no cause of the
change at all at the first, but only that ^ King Henry the VIII. was desirous
to change his old bedfellow, that he might leave some heirs males behind him
(for belike he feared the females would not be able to withstand the title of
Scotland) and that the change was continued and increased by the posterity of
his latter wives, I could not choose but suspect some thing: But yet the Observe
here the great zeal of this man, which himself boasts of in the 2. S^ction
going before.
love of the world, and hope of preferment would not suffer me to believe but
that all was well, and as it ought to be.

G. H.
4.
You told us before, that your care was, as soon as you came to years of
discretion, by all means you could to inform your self, whether the religion
of England were indeed the very same which being prefigured and prophesied in
the old Testament, was perfected by our blessed Savior, and delivered to his
Apostles and disciples: and here you tell us, that when you came to more
judgment, for the better informing your self herein, you read over the
Chronicles of England: a proper course indeed, as if a man should read over
the Chronicles of England to search, whether the practice of our Architects in
building agree with Vitruuius his precepts, or of our husbandmen in manuring
their grounds with Columellaes rules. For mine own part, I should rather have
thought, that the readiest way to inform your self aright, had been to
compare the religion of England with the doctrine of the Gospels, Epistles,
Acts of the Apostles, and Church history, the end of a Chronicle being not to
show every alteration in religion, specially where it is made peecemeale,
insensibly, and by degrees, of which a man may say that he sees it is changed,
though he saw not the changing, as he sees the grass has grown though he
saw it nor growing, and the shadow in a dial to have moved, though not
moving, [ Matthew. 13. 5. 25
The envious man sowed his tares in the night, so that men discovered it then
when they sprang up in the morning.] but the sowing of them they could not
observe, because it was done cunningly in the night when all men slept, and for
a time, they lay hid under the earth. And yet are not our Chronicles so silent,
but that they every where lay open the just comp aint of our Kings, and groaning
of our Clergy and people under the yoke of the Bishop of Rome, as shall more
clearly appear, when we come to show what benefit every estate may expect
from the restitution of Romish religion* But you say* you found the religion of
England a plain change, and change upon change: But our constant answer is,
(that which you profess you hoped to find) that the change was in the Church
of Rome, our change being nothing else but the scowring off of that rust, or
the repairing of those ruins which we found had insensibly grown upon it. For
to suppose that tract of time cannot draw a corruption upon religion, as well
as upon civil affairs, is as if a man should imagine that Castles indeed are
subject to reparations, but not Churches: and for your pretended change upon
change, we may boldly say, that our Common prayer book has not received so
many changes as your Breuiaries, your Portesses, your Legends, your
Martyrologies, your Pontificals, your Ceremonials, and specially your Missals
have done, and that since our reformation; nay, since the framing and
publishing of our Common prayer books in the beginning of the reign of Edward
the VI. we find no change in any material point at all, save that in their
Letanie they prayed to be delivered by name from the tyranny and malice of the
Pope, which for any thing I know, might as justly, and upon as good reason have
been retained by us, as it was by them put in.

H Now why Henry the VIII. should cause the first change in religion out of a
desire to change his bedfellow, I see not, except you esteem a restraining of
the Popes unlimited power in dispensations to be a change in religion, and
indeed it may well be, since now the world is come to that pass, that the
Popes authority, and religion are in a manner as reciprocal, as the definition
and the thing defined. And for the change of his bedfellow, it is well known
to those that have read over our Chronicles with observation (as your self
pretend you have) that he being married to her at the age of 10. years or
thereabout, protested against it when he came to 14. in the presence of Richard
Fox Bishop of Winchester, and John Read a public Notary, as appears by a
deed under his own hand, being then Prince of Wales, besides the Counsel both
of Spain and of France, treating a marriage for the Lady Mary, the one wi^h
Charles the Emperor, the other with Henry Duke of Orleans, they both made a
doubt whether the marriage of her mother, having been wife to the Kings own
brother could be dispensed with, or the children begot in this second bed
legitimate, and by Law allowed to succeed to the crown: nay which is more, D.
Longland then Bishop of Lincoln the kings Confessor, after it had long slept,
revived this Scruple in the kings conscience, the Cardinal being Archbishop of
York, and Legate to the Pope, together with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
all the rest of the Bishops ( Rochester only excepted, who was then lately
made Cardinal, but lost his head before his hat came over) subscribed and
sealed to the justness of the divorce, both our It is to be noted that some of
these Universities profess in their published instruments, that they took an
oath to deliver and to study upon the foresaid questions, as should be to the
pleasure of God, and according to conscience, the copy whereof is to be seen
in our English Chronicles.
Universities, yea, many beyond the Seas to the number of 10. or 12. some of
them in Italy it self, and under the Popes peculiar jurisdiction confirmed it
under their common seals, diverse of our After the determinations of these
Universities were read in open Parliament, there were shown above a 100. books
drawn by Doctors of strange regions, which all agreed the Kings mar^age to be
unlawful.
Doctors, being purposely sent to Rome about it, offered dispute before the
Pope to prove it, Cranmer in a private conference at Vienna with Cornelius
Agrippa (then following the Emperor, and every where admired for his learning)
so fully satisfied him that he held the proposition most true, if it could be
proved that the Lady Katherine was carnally known of Prince Arthur, whereof
the presumptions were great. The one was, that Prince Henry was deferred from
his creation, and title of Prince of Wales, by the space of six months after
Arthurs decease, upon a supposition that the Lady Katherine might be by him
conceived with child: Another was that for this cause the said Lady procured a
second Bull from the Pope with this addition [ Velforsan cognitam] and
peradventure carnally known, which Bull was only purchased to dispense with
this marriage. A third presumption was from the report of Prince Arthurs
Chamberlain upon certain words spoken by the Prince the first morning that he
rose from his bed. A fourth was the relation of the Ambassadors of Ferdinando
her father king of Spain, being sent hither purposely to see the marriage
consummated, who returned their knowledge of their mutual conjunction by the
marks, and that nothing was left unperformed of any nuptial right: And surely
they being both of years able enough to accomplish the act, he above 15. and
she above 17. laid both in one bed almost five months together, do assure us
the certainety of that which in this business is made the greatest scruple.
These were the reasons which in appearance moved Henry the VIII. to the
removing of his bedfellow, not those which you as fondly imagine, as you
suggest maliciously. I do not take upon me the clearing of this king from all
the blame that is cast upon him: yet I may truly say that strangers have been
more favorable unto him, then our own contrymen, he being deeply and
bitterly taxed not only by Saunders (from whom nothing but such slanders could
be expected) but by a later writer, professing himself of our own Church, to
the great content of the Romish faction, whose obligation notwithstanding to
the daughter in the censure of wise men might deservedly have purchased some
more respective terms of the Father: whereas Thuanus the most impartial and
judicious Historiographer of our age gives this testimony of him, that [ he
was a Prince of singular natural indowments, and such a one in whom (had he
not too much loosed the reins to this pleasure) you could hardly find wanting
any perfection. Nay after his divorce from his Queen, and from the Church of
Rome, the Bishops which he named (says he) were honest men and good
Scholars, being ever himself a great Patron of learning] which testimony I
the rather allege, because the Spanish expurgatorie index has rased it, as
also diverse other very memorable passages in this Author.

B. C.
5.
Thus I satisfied my self at School, and studied the Arts and Philosophy,
and other humane learning, until being Master of Arts, and fellow of Corpus
Christi College in Cambridge, I was at last by the Statutes of that house,
called to the study of Divinity, and bound to take upon me the Order of
Priesthood, then I thought it my duty for the better satisfaction of mine
own soul, and the saving of othermens, to look as far into the matter as
possible I could, that I might find out the Truth, and having the opportunity
of a very good Library in that College: I resolved with my self to study
hard, and setting aside all respect of men then alive, or of Writers that had
moved or maintained Controversies (farther then to How learnedly you
understood the state of the question betwixt us, appears afterward in setting
down the opinion of the Church of Rome touching Images.
understand the question which was betwixt them) I fell to my prayers, and
betook my self wholly to the reading of the No mention at all of reading the
Scriptures, that was too base a work for so great a Clerk.
Church History, and of the ancient Fathers, which had no interest on either
side, and specially ^ made choice of S. Augustine, because I hoped to find most
comfort in him for the confirming of our Religion, and the confuting of the
Church of Rome.

G. H.
5.
After your perusing the Chronicles of England, you betake your self to the
reading of the Church History, and ancient Fathers, and in special make
choice of S. Augustine in whom you find the doctrine of Rome every where
confirmed, and ours confuted: But I would feign know whether one maine point of
the doctrine of the Church of Rome be not the Supremacy of that Sea, and
whether a chief feather in that wing be not Appeals from foreign parts. Now
whether S. Augustine approved them, I appeal to his practice, being one of
those Bishops in the Council of Carthage, who discovered and disclaimed the
impudency and forgerie of the Church of Rome, in challenging that as right,
which some of constraint had performed, and others of courtesy had granted,
for which himself with his Fellow-Bishops were excommunicated by the Bishop of
Rome, and (for any thing I can find in the Church History) so died. Some of
his works I have read, specially those of Christian doctrine, and of them I
will be bold to say that they confirm no one point of Romish doctrine
controuersed at this day: and surely there, if any where, had been the proper
place to declare the Bishop of Rome Supreme judge in all controversies.

B. C.
6.
In this sort I spent my time continually for many years, and noted down
whatsoever I could gather, or rather snatch either from the Scriptures, or the
Fathers to serve my turn: But when after all my pains and desire to serve my
self of Antiquity, I found the doctrine of the Church of Rome to be every
where confirmed, and by most profound demonstrations out of How comes it to
pass then, that the profou^d Doctors for proo^e of many doctrines of that
Church, forsake the Scriptures, and fly to traditions?
holy Scripture made most agreeable to the truth of Christ's As if in your
learning, the Gospel were not Scripture.
Gospel, and most conformable to all Belike then we in these cold Northern
Climats have no Christian souls.
Christian souls, and saw the When those Preachers shall be named, and their
current opinions specified, and the passages quoted, by which they are
con^uted, I doubt not but the unanswerable consequents will find a sufficient
answer, in the mean time you must give us leave to suspect that Dolu^ latet
in vniuersalibus, falsehood insists upon generals.
current opinions of our great Preachers every where confuted, either in plain
terms, or by most unanswerable consequence, although mine understanding was
thereby greatly edified (for which I had great reason to render immortal
thanks to our blessed Savior, who by these means had vouchsafed to show
himself unto me) yet my heart was much We have good reason to think you
were not so much grieved for crossing those great preachers you speak of, as
that thereby your prefe^ment was crossed.
grieved, that I must be feign either not to preach at all, or to cross and
var^e from the doctrine which I saw was commonly received.

G. H.
6.
I have perused your Commonplace book, written for the most part with your
own hand, and indeed it thereby appears that your noting might more
deservedly be termed a snatching, then a gathering, though by your will you
solemnly bequeath it as a rich legacy to C.C.C. in Camb. whereof you were a
Fellow: but you found the doctrine of the Church of Rome, (you say,) every
where confirmed by most profound demonstrations from holy Scripture; in truth
I must confess they are so deep, that throughout this treatise they are
invisible; but I much desire to know by what profound demonstration from holy
Scripture, you would prove the adoration of images, the administration of the
Sacrament under one kind, the exercise of public prayer in a language not
understood of the people, or lastly the Bishop of Romes usurpation over the
temporals of Princes, unless you bring Bellarmines profound demonstration to
that purpose [Pasce oues meas,] or Baronius [Surge occide and manduca] or the
Canonists [fecit Deus duo magna luminaria] much like a profound demonstration I
have heard of for proof of the Salique law [ the lillies neither labor nor
spinne] therefore the Crown of France [ne tomb point sur laquenouille] falls
not to the distaffe: or like that of a Friar, who would needs prove that ten
worlds were made in the first Creation, and that out of our Saviors words in
the Gospel [ annon december factisunt mundi] but he was well answered by his
brother in the words following, [ Sed vbisunt nouem?] and did he not deserve
the title of D. profundus trow you, for so profound a demonstration? Such a
profound demonsration is that of Bellarmine out of Petrus Damianus, to show the
reason why in the Popes old Seals S. Paul was on the right hand of S. Peter,
because forsooth Paul was of the tribe of Benjamin, and Benjamin signifies the
son of the right hand, and for this he quotes Genesis 35. and 42.
By such like profound demonstrations, you find the doctrine of the Church of
Rome made most agreeable to the truth of Christ's Gospel, which for the
Sacrament is, Matthew. 26. 27.
drink ye all of this,] and for the power of his ministers, John 18. 36.
[ my kingdom is not of this world,] words delivered as it seems out of a
prophetical spirit, as foreseeing what errors should in after ages spring up
in his Church, but you do well to say that those doctrines were made agreeable
to this truth: they may be made so, or at leastwise made to seem so, by
forging and hammering upon the anuill of men's conceits, howbeit in themselves
they are not so, as the belles seem to the child to ring that tune which
runs in his head.

B. C.
7.
Being thus perplexed with my self what course I were best to take, I
reflected back again upon the Church of England; and because the most of
those Preachers which drew the people after them in those days were Puritans,
and had grounded their divinity upon Caluins institutions, I thought
peradventure that they having gotten the multitude on their side, might wrong
the Church of England in her doctrine, as well as they desired to do in her
discipline, which indeed upon due search, I found to be most true: for I found
the Common prayer book, and the Catechism therein contained, to hold no point
of doctrine expressly contrary to Antiquity, but only that it was very
defective, and contained not enough: and for the doctrine of I Predestination,
Sacraments, Grace, Freewill, Sin, the new Catechism and Sermons of those
Preachers did run wholly against the Common prayer book, and Catechism
therein, and did make as little account of the doctrine established by law, as
they did of the discipline: but in the one they found opposition by those that
had private interest, in the other they said what they list, because no man
thought himself K hurt.

G. H.
7
If our Common prayer Book and Catechism therein contained, hold no point of
Doctrine contrary to Antiquity (as you affirm.) Surely the Church of Rome
must needs be contrary to Antiquity, in as much as it holds diverse points
contrary to it: If we should begin with the Preface, which is confirmed by
equal authority of State, as the body of the book, it tells us in the very
entrance, [ there was never any thing by the wit of man so well devised, or so
sure established, which in continuance of time has not been corrupted, as
among other things it may plainly appear by the Common prayers in the Church,
commonly called Divine Service (the reason is added a little after,) in as much
as the godly and decent orders of the Fathers were altered and neglected, by
planting in uncertain Stories, Legends, Responds, Verses, vain repetitions,
Commemorations, Synodals, that commonly when any Book of the Bible was
begun, before three or four Chapters were read out, all the rest were
unread.] Another reason is there annexed* [ that whereas S. Paul would have
none other language spoken to the people in the Church, then they understand,
and have profit by hearing of the same, the Service in this Church of England
these many years has been read in Latin to the people, which they
understand not; so that they have heard with their ^ares only, but their mind
has no^ been edified thereby.

Now for the body of the Common prayer Book, I will first begin with the
division of the Commandments* The Church o^ Rome joins the two first in one,
the better thereby to cloak their Idolatry in the worship of Images: But the
Common prayer Book of the Church of England divides them into two, therein
following (two of the Fathers at most excepted) all Antiquity. The Church of
Rome in the doctrine of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, teaches that we eat
and drink the Body and Blood of Christ carnally: The Common prayer of the
Church of England in the form of administering that Sacrament, that we do
both Spiritually and by Faith feed on him in our hearts, eating and drinking in
remembrance that C H R I S T dyed and shed his Blood for us. The Church of Rome
holds, that the Oblation of the Body of C H R I S T is to be iterated: The
Common prayer Book of the Church of England, that being by himself once
offered, he is a full perfect and sufficient Sacrifice for the ^innes of the
whole world, which also meets with the Romish satisfaction for Venial
sins, as they call them, and temporal punishment dew to Mortal. The Church
of Rome teaches, that the outward Sacrament of Water suffices to save
Infants: The Common prayer Book of the Church of England in the administration
of public Baptism, that the working of the holy Ghost is to be joined
thereunto. The Church of Rome teaches, that Laijks and Women may in some cases
lawfully Baptize: The Common prayer Book of the Church of England in the
administration of private Baptism, that none may do it lawfully but the
lawful Minister. The Church of Rome teaches, that children may be confirmed
before they come to years of discretion, and are able to yield an account of
their Faith: The Common prayer Book of the Church of England in the order set
down for Confirmation, teaches and commands the contrary. More might be
said to this point, but this shall suffice to show that if the Common prayer
Book of the Church of England be in no point of doctrine contrary to
Antiquity (as M^. Doctor affirms) then must Antiquity needs be contrary
to the doctrine of the Church of Rome, in as much as the doctrine thereof, and
our Common prayer Book are contrary each to other.

But you further add that though it contain no point contrary to Antiquity,
yet is it very defective, and contains not enough. Indeed we confess y^ we
go not so far as the Church of Rome; but so far as we have warrant. We pray to
God in the Name of CHRIST, they to God and to Saints. We pray for the living,
they for the living and the dead. We acknowledge 2. Sacraments, they to those
two add five more. We make the Communion of the Eucharist properly a
Sacrament, they a Sacrament and a sacrifice, and that propitiatory. We hope to
be saved by the merits of Christ, they by his merits and their own: the
principal ground of all these additions is, that we make Scripture the only
rule of faith, they both Scripture and traditions: and by mingling the water of
their own inventions with the wine of the Gospel, they have made the Law of
Christ of none effect. And surely if defect may justly be imputed to us,
excess may much rather to them, who in their Pontifical spend seven leaves in
the largest fol. only about the benediction of bells (which is indeed little
different from Baptism) and many hundreds about such ^opperies and trifles, as
wise men among themselves cannot but laugh at, and yet dare not speak against,
and good men pity, though they cannot remedy.

I I marvel what doctrine of predestination, grace, free will, or sin you
find in the Common Prayer book, or Catechism therein; the end of the one
being not to set down doctrinall positions, but the exercise of religious
acts, and of the other, as briefly as may be, to instruct children in the
principles of Christian religion, not men of riper age in the controversies.

K It is to me strange, that you dare write thus to his Majesty, who made it
known to the world by his pen (when other Christian Princes and Churches were
silent) that he thought himself hurt by the pestilent subtilties of Vorstius,
howbeit he were not under his dominions, and by Legate his own subject, who was
burnt at London for Arianisme some few years since. But surely I am clearly
of opinion that his Holiness would take it much more to heart, and think
himself more hurt, if a Friar should preach against his power in deposing
Kings, and disposing of kingdoms, then if he denied the eternal generation of
the second person in Trinity from the first, or the procession of the third
from the other two.

B. C.
8.
This truly was an increase of my grief: for knowing diverse of those
Preachers to be very It seems then your Puritan (for you tell us before,
those preachers were such) may be a very honest man, yet afterward you tell us
their principles are such as overthrow all honesty.
honest men, and such as I did love with all my heart, I was very loath to
dissent from them in private, much more loath to As loath as you were to oppose
them in public, yet you did as far as you durst, as your self afterward
confess.
oppose them in public: and yet seeing I must needs preach, I was lothest of
all to oppugn mine own conscience, together with the faith wherein I was The
faith in which you were baptized, is the ^ame which now is professed in the
Church of England, and that I am sure no man expected, you should oppugn.
baptized, and the souls of those to whom I preached, nevertheless having
gotten this ground to work upon, I began to comfort my self with hope to
prove that the religion established in England was the same, at the least in
part, L which now was, and ever had been held in the Catholic Church, the
defects whereof might be supplied, whenever it should please God to move your
Majesty thereunto, without abrogating that which was alr^ady by Law
established: which I still pray for, and am not altogether out of M hope to
see, and therefore I thought it my duty, as far as I durst, rather by N
charitable constructions to reconcile things that seemed different, that so our
souls might be for ever sa^ed in unity, then by malicious calumniations to
maintain quarrels, that so men's turns might for a time be served in
dissension.

G. H.
8.
L How then can we be esteemed heretics, who broach their own fantasies,
since holding as the Church of England does, we hold the same that the
Catholic Church has ever held?

M Truly you had little reason to hope to live to see thos^ unwarrantable
Supplies (you speak of,) by his Majesty's command, as well in regard of your
own infirmities of body, as his MAJESTY'S strong resolution of mind to the
contrary: but it may be your intelligence deceived you: sure we are your
hope failed you.

N Touching your opinion of Reconciliation, whether it may be thought to
proceed of charity, or arrogancy, as also whether it be probable, or in a
manner possible, as the case now stands, I shall have fitter opportunity to
discuss hereafter, then in this place. Yet give me leave by the way to tell
you, that in my judgment you call that Unity, which is indeed distraction, it
tending to nothing else but a rent and a drawing of us further from other
reformed Churches, and ne^rer to the Church of Rome: for if this were not your
meaning, the same charitable constructions would have served to reco^cile
things that to you (looking through the false spectacles of prejudice and
passion) seemed very different betwixt us and other reformed Churches abroad,
much better, and easier then for the reconciling of those maine and broad
differences, which are indeed betwixt us and the Church of Rome. Of which I
fear I may too truly say, as Abraham does to the rich glutton in hell, Luke 16.
26.
between you and us there is a great gulf set; so that they which would go
from hence to you can not, neither can they come from thence to us.] I speak
in regard of Reconciliation in differences of Religion; for otherwise but too
many are suffered to go from hence thither, and having sucked their poison,
to return again at their pleasures, for the vomitting of it out amongst us,
notwithstanding the sharp penalties and great gulf set between us.

B. C.
9.
In this course although I did never proceed any farther then law would give me
leave, yet I found the I had thought before that a Puritan and a Caluenist,
and a creature of Schism in your language had been all one.
Puritans and Caluinists, and all the creatures of Schism to be my utter
enemies, who were also like the sons of Zeruiah too strong for Daui^ If David
himself be a Schismatike, as you make him, how were the creatures of Schism
to strong for him?
himself, 2. Sam 3. 39. but I well perceived that all Those whom you call
temperate men, we may suspect to be neutrals, made of lincie whoolsie, neither
hot nor cold, but halting between two opinions, 1. Kings 18. 21.
temperate and understanding men, who had no interest in the Schism, were glad
to hear the truth That which you call honest preaching of the Truth, we
take to be the nearest approaching that may be to Rom^ gates.
honestly, and plainly preached unto them: and my hope was by patience and
continuance, I should in the end unmask Herein you failed not, in that at
last you unmasked your own hypocriosie.
hypocrisy, and gain credit to the comfortable doctrine of Antiquity, even
amongst those also, who out of misinformation and prejudice did as yet most
mislike it. And considering with my self that your right to the Crown came
only by O Catholics, and was ancienter then the Schism, which would very
feign have utterly extinguished it, and that both your P disposition by nature,
your amity with Catholic Princes, your speeches, and your proclamations did
at the beginning, all tend to peace and unity, I hoped that this endeavor of
mine to enforce Catholic Religion, at the least as far as the Common prayer
Book and Catechism would give leave, should be well accepted of your
MAJESTY, and be as an introduction unto farther peace and unity with the
Church of Rome.

G. H.
9.
O His MAJESTY'S right to the Crown is double* the one from his mother
lineally descending of the first match of the Lady Margaret daughter to Henry
the VII. and sister to Henry the VIII. Kings of England, with James the fourth
King of Scotland, his MAJESTY'S great Grandfather, who though she embraced that
Religion in which she was brought up, being never acquainted with any other,
yet as his Majesty observes in his Monitorie Preface to the Christian Princes,
[shee disliked some of the superstious Ceremonies, and abhorred those new
opinions, which the Jesuits call Catholic.] His second right above any other
pre^endor was from his father* descended of the second match of the said Lady
Margaret with Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angush, being brought up in Q.
Elizabeth's Court, whose father the Duke of Lenox professing the reformed
religion, as well appeared by his practice in his life, in receiving the
Sacrament after the manner of the reformed Churches, and by the confession of
his faith in the hearing of many ministers at his death, in all likelihood his
Majesty's father himself should be that way affected, though Cardinal
Bellarmine upon the relation of I know not whom, would feign have it otherwise.
And whereas you say that schism would feign have extinguished his Majesty's
right, it is well known, that those whom you call schismatikes, were the
chief instruments under God to preserve his Majesty's not only right, but
life; against the fury of some, whom you call Catholics, both before his
mothers death, and since.

P From his Majesty's progenitors, you come to his own disposition by nature*
his amity with Catholic Princes, his speeches, his Proclamations, which all
tended at the beginning (you say) to peace and unity: True indeed it is that
his Majesty by nature is disposed to mercy, his amity with Christian Princes
argues his charity, and heroical ingenuitie, void of jealousy and suspicion,
even where occasion may seem to be given, his speeches and Proclamations were
not bloody; yet all this could not serve your turn, as a sufficient warrant to
endeavor a peace with the Church of Rome in matters of religion: no more then a
league with the great Turk for traffike should give occasion of joining with
him in Mahometisme: but had you withal with the other eye reflected a little
back upon his Majesty's education from his very Cradle, the choice of his
aliance in marriage, his counsel to his son touching the matter of religion in
the first book of his Basilicon Doron, his exposition published upon the 7. 8.
9. and 10. verses of the 20. chapter of the Revel. or lastly his subscription
to the confession of his faith, in the year 1581, as soon as he came to years
of discretion: you would have had little reason to have presumed so far upon
him for hearkening to any peace with the Church of Rome, 2. King. 9. ^. ^^.
as long as her whoredoms and witchcrafts r^maine,] yet in such abundance, and
being offered cure, (that we might know she is Babylon) she has, and still
does wilfully Ierem. 51. 9.
refuse to be cured.

But the sandy ground of the vain presumption will yet more lively appear,
if the form of that subscription be well considered: in which having
rehearsed and renounced the chief points of Popery, as namely, the Popes
usurped authority over the Scriptures, over the Church, over the civil
Magistrate, and the consciences of men, his deuilish mass, his blasphemous
Priesthood, his profane sacrifice for the quick and the dead, and, in a word,
the erroneous and bloody decrees of the Council of Trent, he promises and
swears by the great name to the Lord God, to persevere in that faith, and to
defend it all the days of his life, to the utmost of his power, under pain of
all the Curses contained in the Law, and the danger both of body and soul, in
the fearful day of judgment: and further straightly charge and commands
all his officers and ministers, to make the same subscription themselves, and
to take it of others under their charge, and lest we should think that
arriving to riper age he altered his judgment, in his instructions to his
son, he gives us this assurance, As for the particular points of religion
(says he) I need not to dilate them, I am no hypocrite; follow my
footesteps, and your own present education therein.

B. C.
10.
But when after my long hope I at the last did plainly perceive that God for
our sins, had suffered the devil, the athour of dissension, so far to
prevail, as partly by the furious practice of some desperate Catholics, and
partly by the You might more properly have applied fiery to your desperate
Cath. for such was their practice.
fiery suggestions of all There needed no great violence to aggrauate the
haynousnesse of that plot.
violent Puritans, he had How comes it then to pass that notwithstanding all
this in the next chap. you so earnestly labor the conversion of his Majesty,
and the whole Realm.*
quite diuerted that peaceable and temperate course which was hoped for, and
that I must now either alter my judgment, which was impossible, or preach
against my conscience, which was intolerable; Lord, what anxietie and
distraction of soul did I suffer day and night! what strife betwixt my
judgment, which was wholly for the Q peace and unity of the Church, and my
affection which was wholly to enjoy the R favor of your Majesty, and the love
of my friends, and Country: this grief of soul now growing desperate, did
still more and more increase the infirmities of my body: and yet I was so loath
to become a professed Catholic, with the displeasure of your Majesty, and of
all my honorable and loving friends, as I rather desired to silence my
judgment with the profits and pleasures of the world, which was before me,
then to satisfy it with reconciling my self unto the Catholic Church. But
it was Gods will, that ever, as I was about to forget the care of religion, and
to settle my self to the world among my neighbors, I met with such humors,
as I saw by their violence against Catholics and Catholic religion, were like
rather to waken my soul by torture, then bring it asleep by temper: and
therefore I was driven to S recoile to God and to his Church, that I might find
rest unto my soul.

G. H.
10.
Q Certainly for their sins it was, that God suffered them to plot so
barbarous a design, but, for our good, we hope, if in nothing else, yet in
working in us a stronger hatred of that religion, which produces such effects,
and in awakening us to beware of the like mischievous plot again, if it be
possible the like may be plotted: we excuse not our selves, but in this
business we have rather tasted of Gods mercy, which we deserved not, then of
his judgments which we must acknowledge we deserved.

R Quis tulerit Gracchos deseditione querentes? what patient ear can endure
him talking of nothing but peace and unity, who did ever blow the coals of
dissension, both in Court and Country, as well in the College: where he lived
a fellow, as in the Church where he was a Canon.

S So it may well be gathered out of your own words, Ex ore^tu^ condemnaberis,
serve nequam, Luke 1^. 22.
that the chief ground of your grief was, that you saw your ambitious humor
was now crossed, in as much as you could not keep the old wont, and withal
rise to place of honor.

T Your apostasy, and forsaking the faith, and Church, in which you were
baptized, you call a recoiling to God and to his Church; neither will I much
stand upon it, since we know that Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God,
bearing himself as God.

B. C.
11.
And yet because I had heard often, that the practice of the Church of Rome was
contrary to her doctrine, I thought good to make one trial more, before I
resolved, and therefore having the advice of diverse learned Physicians, to go
to the Spaw for the health of my body, I thought good to make a virtue of
necessity, and to get leave to go the rather for the satisfaction of my
soul, v hoping to find some greater offense in the service of the Church of
Rome, then I had done in her books, that so I might return better contented,
and persecute and abhor the Catholics at home, after I should find them so
wicked and idolatrous abroad, as they were in every pulpit in England affirmed
to be. For this purpose before I would frequent their Churches, I talked with
such learned men as I could meet withal, and did of purpose dispute against
them, and with all the What needed any great wit or learning for the
justification of that doctrine which by your own confession holds no point
expressly contrary to antiquity.
wit and learning I had, both justify the doctrine of England established by
Law, and object their superstition and idolatry, which I thought they might
commit either with the images in the Church, or with the Sacrament of the Altar.

G. H.
11.
That is a truth, to avouch the practice of the Church of Rome to be more
gross then her doctrine, (howbeit we must confess her doctrine, in many
points, to be very gross) appears by this, that the better and wiser sort
among themselves, both in their judgments and writings, condemn many
fopperies usually practiced by the people, and winked at by their guides: as
their hallowing of grains, and medalls, and beads, by touching some supposed
Relic, with opinion of merit, Their praying to fained Saints, and believing
forged legends and miracles, Their permitting of public Stews, and a Priest
to keep his concubine under a yearly rent, which Espencaeus wishes were
falsely thrust in among the grieuances of Germany, Their setting of certain
rates upon the most grievous sins before they be committed, as appears in
their Taxa Camera, Their allowing of Sanctuaries for wilful murder, Their
ordinary buying and selling of souls in Purgatory, as a man would buy an horse
in Smithfield, Lastly the making of ghosts to walk and talk at their
pleasure, of images to move, to weep, to sweat, to speak when they list, are
matters which the modester sort dare not defend, and yet the most impudent
cannot well deny; and surely for mine own part I must confess, that nothing
so much moved me to a loathing of their religion, as the beholding of their
practice, their whole worship wherein we differ, either consisting in apish
ridiculous gestures, or in a mere outward formality, or directed wholly to the
greatness and gain of the Clergy. And I have heard some English gentlemen
affirm, that being induced by subtilty of argument to the entertaining of some
doctrine of the Church of Rome, the sight of her whorish countenance, and the
licentious lives of her chief Prelates, even in Rome it self, has wrought
them to a distaste of it, as supposing that a face so artificially painted and
composed, could not stand with simplicity of truth, nor such lewdness in
living with soundness in doctrine, which Adrian the VI. by nation a
Netherlander, one of the best Popes of latter days, acknowledged to be the
chief cause of so much scandal in the world, and so general and eager a
desire of reformation, as appears in his instructions to his Nuntio to be
delivered to the States of Germany assembled in Diet, and recorded by
Espencaeus in his Commentary on the first of Titus, and therefore promises
that he would begin with the reformation of his own Court, as our Savior did
with the Temple: but his disposition being discovered, and his intent known,
order was taken that he should not proceed in that business, being shortly after
cut off by untimely death. So that if you had so pleased, you might have found
the practice of the Church of Rome much more gross then her doctrine, as well
for exercise of their religion, as for the lives of their Clergy and religious
men: neither needed you to have undertaken a voyage to the Spaw for that
purpose, in as much as you had made, or at least, might have made trial
thereof, at your being in France with an honorable person employed thither by
his Majesty.

In the last words of your Section going before this, you tell us that you were
driven to recoile to God, and his Church, that you might find rest to your
soul, and here within 10. lines you tell us* that you got leave to travel
beyond the Seas, hoping to find some greater offense in the service of that
Church, then you had done in her books, in her practice, then in her doctrine:
and yet both your instances in the Section following, and conference with
learned men argue their doctrine, rather then their practice.

B. C.
12.
Their common answer was, that which by experience I now find to be true,
viz. that they do abhor all idolatry and superstition, and do diligently To
allow the people images for religious use, and then to admonish them that they
take heed of idolatry, is as if a man should put an hungry horse into a goodly
pasture, and then command him not to eat, or a child upon the top of a l^dder,
and then bid him take heed of a fall.
admonish the people to take heed thereof, and they use images for none other
purpose, but only for a Why do they cover them in Lent then?
devout memory and representation of the Church triumphant, which is most fit
to be made in the time and place of prayer, where after a more special manner
we should with all reverence have We should indeed have our conversation
amongst the Saints in heaven, but not amongst their images on earth.
our conversation amongst the Saints in heaven.

G. H.
12.
It appears by resting satisfied with this answer, that either your wit and
learning were very slender to object, having, as it seems, scarce looked into
later writers, so much as to understand the state of questions controuersed
between us (which notwithstanding you pretend before in your fifth Section) or
else your will forestalled by prejudice, was very apt to receive satisfaction
with any answer. For what nouice is there so meanly studied in Controversies,
who knows not that the Church of Rome has hitherto practiced, and still does
profess, that the use of Images in their Churches, is not only for memory
and representation, as you affirm, but for worship and adoration: and withal
commands her Pastors in that Catechism which they call the Roman, to teach
the people so. Nay, which is more, they both give, and maintain to be due,
the same adoration to the sign of the Cross, and neither less nor more, M.
Hooker in his 5. book of Ecclesiastical policy, Sect. 65.
then is due unto Christ himself, which opinion (as a moderate and judicious
writer has well observed) howsoeeuer they endeavor to varnish and qualify
with distinctions, which the Schools in speculation have boulted out,
pretending that the Cross, which to outward sense presents visibly it self
alone, is not by them apprehended alone, but has in their secret surmise or
conceit, a reference to the person of our Lord Jesus Christ; so that the
honor, which they jointly do to both, respects principally his person, and
the Cross but only for his persons sake: yet the people not accustomed to
trouble their brains with so nice and subtle differences in the exercise of
religion, are apparently no less ensnared by adoring the Cross, then the
Jews by burning incense to the Brazen serpent, and in actions of this kind,
we are more to respect what the greatest part of men are commonly prone to
conceive, then what some few men's invention can devise in construction of
their own particular meanings.

His Majesty's own words to this purpose are excellent and worthy
observation. [ But for worshipping either of them says he, speaking of
Relics or Images,) I must account it damnable Idolatry, I am no Iconomachus,
I quarrel not the making of images, either for public decoration, or men's
private uses: but* that they should be worshipped and prayed unto, or any
holiness attributed unto them, was never known of the ancients: and the
Scriptures are so directly, vehemently, and punctually against it, as I wonder
what brain of man, or suggestion of Satan, durst offer it to Christians: and
all must be salued with nice Philosophical distinctions: as, Idolum nihil est,
and they worship forsooth the Images of things in being, and the Image of the
true God, but the Scripture forbids to worship the image of any thing that
God created: It was not a nihil then that God forbade only should be
worshipped, neither was the Brazen serpent, nor the body of Moses a nihil, and
yet the one was destroyed, and the other hidden, for eschewing of Idolatry:
yea, the image of God himself is not only expressly forbidden to be
worshipped, but even to be made. The reason is given, that no eye ever saw God:
and how can we paint his face, when Moses, the man that ever was most familiar
with God, never saw but his back parts? Surely since he cannot be drawn to
the view, it is a thankelesse labor to mar it with a false representation;
which no Prince, nor scarce any other man would be contented with, in their
own pictures. Let them therefore that maintain this doctrine, answer it to
Christ at the latter day, when he shall accuse them of Idolatry, and then I
doubt, if he will be paid with such nice Sophistical distinctions.]
Hitherto his Majesty, then which, I see not what could be to this point more
fully and clearly spoken.

B. C.
13.
And for the blessed Sacrament, they do not worship the Accidents which they
see, but the Substance which they believe: and surely if Christ be there truly
and really present, (as your Majesty seems to grant he is) he is as much
to be worshipped as if we saw him with our bodily eyes: neither is there any
more Idolatry in the one then in the other. If our blessed Savior himself
should visibly appear in person, as he was upon the earth, Jews and Infidels
would hold it for Idolatry to worship him, and would crucify him again, and
so would all heretics also, who refuse to worship him in the Sacrament where
he is really present.

G. H.
13.
You tell us, that the people do not worship the accidents which they see, but
the substance which they see not: but the question is, whether they rightly
believe the substance of Christ's body to lie hidden, and as it were buried
under those Accidents? which I am sure Saint Augustine (on whom you so much
rely) is so far from defending, or else the adoration of Images before
mentioned, that in diverse places he maintains the clear contrary to both.
And to grant that after the words of Consecration pronounced, the body of
Christ is there folded or kneaded up in a bodily manner, yet whether the Priest
that pronounces them, be rightly Ordered, and if he be, whether he pronounce
them with the intent that the Church intends, they may justly make a doubt, and
consequently a question, whether their worship be idolatrous or no: for in
such cases by confession of all, in stead of Christ's body, they worship the
bread: for our parts, we constantly believe him to be in heaven, and not in
the bread, whereas we make a just doubt whether a great part of them, who
believe him to be in the bread* do with like constancy believe that he is in
heaven. You further add that if he be truly and really present (as his
MAJESTY seems to grant) he is as much to be worshipped, as if we saw him
with our bodily eyes. But indeed it is not the seeing of him with our bodily
eyes, that makes the matter, or gives occasion of worshipping, for then a blind
man could not worship him at all, nor a seeing man in the dark; but the
believing of him to be present in a bodily manner. We believe him then with
his MAJESTY (it being Caluins opinion expressed in the very self same terms)
to be truly and really present; but in a manner Sacramental, not bodily, and
consequently not to be worshipped there, as being not wrapped up under the
accidents of bread, but triumphing in heaven.

And here by your leave how submissiuely soever you would seem in other places
to carry your self toward his Majesty, you make bold to put the title of
Heretic upon him, and to rank him among no better then ^ewes and Infidels:
But our just defense is, that after the way which you call Heresy, we give
more true and lawful honor to our blessed Savior then you, casting all that
religious worship which you give to the blessed Virgin, to Angels, to Saints,
to the bread in the Eucharist, to Images, to Relics, to the Cross* and all
that opinion of Merit, of Supererogation, and Satisfaction, which you ascribe
either to your selves, or others, wholly and solely upon him, either as God, or
as Man, or as Mediator betwixt God and Man: only we deny to give that
honor to his Image, or the bread in the Eucharist, which is as essentially due
to him, as to them undue.

B. C.
14.
After diverse other objections I told you before you were prepossessed with
prejudice, which made you object so weakly*
not so much because I was not, as be cause I desired not to be satisfied, I
came to the Popes supposed pride and tyranny over Kings and Princes, and told
them of the most horrible Treason intended and practiced by Catholics against
your MAJESTY, which has not yet been iudicially condemned by the Church of
Rome. They all seemed to Had it taken effect they would have abhorred it as
Sixtus did the Friars murdering of Henry the III. of France in the Consistory
of Cardinals, where he compares it to the work of our Redemption.
abhor the fact, as much as the best Subiests in the world, and much more to
favor and defend the authority of Kings and Princes then Heretics do. And
they said that although your Majesty were out of the Church, yet they doubted
not but if A likely matter that his Majesty should make complaint in a
judicial proceeding to him, in whom he professes that he acknowledges no
right of proceeding iudicially in the censure of his own Subjects.
complaint were made in a judicial proceeding, that fact should be iudicially
condemned. In the mean time it was sufficient All those Writers whom you call
Catholics, do so condemn it, as they seem rather to think it unfortunate
in the success, then mischievous in the plot.
that all Catholic writers did condemn it, and that the Pope by his Breue had
condemned it, exhorting the Catholics of England to all Christian patience and
obedience, and as for any What authority this is, will appear in Pius his
Bull, whose words are these, And him alone has he made chief over all
nations and kingdoms, who may alone root out, destroy, scatter, waste, plant,
and build that the faithful people knit together with the band of mutual
charity, might be kept in the unity of the Spirit.
other authority or superiority of the Pope, then such as is spiritual and
necessary for the unity of the Church, I have met with none that do stand upon
it.

G. H.
14.
You well say they seemed to abhor the fact, it being of the nature of those
whereof Tacitus speaks, Quae nunquam laudantur nisiperacta, which are never
commended till they are ended, had it taken effect according to their designs,
for the setting up of their Religion among us, it had undoubtedly bin recorded
a most happy and fortunate success, which now by abortion only and
miscariage, is styled an horrible Treason. And if they defend the authority of
Kings and Princes, much more then they, whom they call Heretics, I would feign
know how it comes to pass, that more of those Princes w^om you call
Catholics, permit within their Dominions the public exercise of Religion to
those Heretics, then the contrary. Surely in my judgment it is an evident
argument, that Christian Sta^es conceive reason to be more jealous of the one,
then of the other, neither is the reason far to be sought, ^ince the one
acknowledges no Supreme foreign power which the other does: but the Pope (you
say) condemned the Powder Plot by his Breue. I much desire to see that Breue of
the Popes which condemns it. I suppose it is most like to be found on the
backside of Constantins donation, as an Ambassador of Venice told the Pope
touching his right to the Adriatique Sea, or we may say of it, Breuis esse
laboro obscurusfio, he is so brief and obscure in it, as we can find no such
matter. Two Breues of Clements I remember I have heard of for the withstanding
of his Majesty's entrance to the Crown, and two others of Paulus V. against
the taking of the oath of allegiance (which I marvel M. Doctor never
vouchsafed so much as once to remember through his Letter) but any against the
Powder Plot, I cannot call to mind I have seen, or so much as heard of.
Lastly whereas you bear us in hand, that the Popes favorites stand upon none
other authority for their Master, then such as is spiritual and necessary for
the unity of the Church, I guess their meaning to be Bellarmines [indirect
power in temporals, or temporal power in ordine as spiritualia, in relation to
spiritual duties,] which is in truth upon the matter, as much as can be
demanded by them, and more then must be granted by us; it reaching to the
deposition of Princes from their thrones, and the disposition of their Crowns,
when his Holiness shall judge it fit for the unity of the Church, as well
appeared in his Bulls, both against King Henry the father, and Queen Elizabeth
the daughter. And thus far Cardinal Perron that peaceable man, and your
great Patron, expressed himself in the last assembly of the three estates of
France, for which the Pope gave him, and the rest of the Clergy, who stuck to
him in that business, as great thanks, as if they had saved Saint Peter's
ship from sinking: both the Cardinal and the Pope supposing as it seems,
[that those sparks flew into France from the fire of England.] howsoever sure
it is they were quenched by the water of Tyber.

B. C.
15.
So that whereas my How could your hope be such, since your resolution was to
the contrary, as appears by your own words in diverse passages before.
hope was that by finding out the Your self within a few lines after,
acknowledge you found many.
corruptions of the Church of Rome, I should grow further in love with the
Church of England, and joyfully return home, and by inueighing against the
Papists, both enjoy my present preferments, and obtain more and more, I saw
the matte^ was like to fall out clean contrary. It is true indeed that there
are many corruptions^ in all States; God has not his wheat field in this world
wherein the devil has no tares growing, and there are not tares So that it
seems by your own confession the greatest corruptions are to be found in the
Church of Rome, seeing by Gods wheat field in your understanding, can be
meant none other, but that Church, in which, in your opinion, grace most
abounds.
more rank then those that grow among the wheat: for optimi corruption pessima,
and where grace abounds, if it be contemned, there sin abounds much more.
But seeing my reading and experience has now taught me, that the truth of
Christian Religion taught and practiced at this day in the Church of Rome, and
all the obedient members thereof, is the very same in Belike then you saw some
broad difference in the circumstance.
substance which was pre^igured and prophesied from the beginning of the world,
perfected by CHRIST himself, delivered to his Apostles, and by them and their
Successors perpetually and universally practiced until this day, without any
W substantial alteration, and that the new religion in X England wherein it
does differ, has no ground, but either the pleasure of the Prince and
Parliament, or the common cry and voice of the people, nor no constancy or
agreement with it self, what should I now do? It is not in my power not to
know that which I do know, nor to doubt of that which I have spent so much
time, and taken so much pains, and bestowed so much cost, and made so many
trials to find. And I know if I should yield to be reconciled to the Church, I
should be in this world in all likelihood You made sure work for that, by
carrying over store of moneys with you, and by obtaining pensions from the
Pope, the Q. Mother of France, and Cardinal Pe^^on.
utterly undone, and which grieved me more, I should be rejected of your
Majesty my most redoubted Lord and Master, and despised by all my dear
friends and lovers in England.

G. H.
15.
W The Church of Rome holds indeed the substance of Christian Religion in
profession, but yet by consequence shakes the foundation of it, as it holds the
death of Christ to be satisfactory for sin, and yet adding thereunto her own
meritorious satisfaction consequently by the latter, she overthrows the
former, for [ Gal. 2. 21.
If righteousness be by the Law, then Christ died without a cause:] and in
reason impossible it is, if traditions be held of equal value with the
Scriptures, for the constituting of substantial points, but that in short time
there should ensue a substantial alteration, and he that knows not that the
Church of Rome holds many things now, as parts of the Catholic faith, which it
helds not in former ages, knows little what has been anciently held, or now
is.

X If by the religion of England you understand that, which is by Law
established) as in common construction you cannot otherwise be understood,) you
condemn your self out of your own mouth, in as much as you acknowledge
before, that the religion established by law in England, was the same (save
only it was somewhat defective) which now is, and ever had been held in the
Catholic Church: and yet here you say, it has no ground, but the pleasure of
the Prince and Parliament, whereas in truth we build upon the Rock of the
Scriptures, but you upon the sand of traditions, and which of us has the
sounder foundation, I appeal no farther, then reason it self to judge. You as
though you were not yet [ Col. 2. 20, 21, 22
dead from the ordinances of the world, burden your selves with traditions, as
touch not, taste not, handle not, which all perish with the using and are after
the commandments and* doctrines of men: but we have a most sure word of the
Prophets, taking heed thereto] according to S. Peter's counsel, [ 1. Pet. 1.
19.
as to a light that shines in a dark place,] and as our ground is sure; so is
our agreement constant, and uniform in all points material and necessary to
salvation: whereas in the building of your tower of Babel, such diversity of
languages is heard, that there is hardly any exposition of Scripture, or point
in controversy, which has not been, or is called into question, either
directly or by consequent, by some that lived and died in that Church, which
you call Catholic, as will easily appear to him, who shall turn over the
volumes of of Cardinal Bellarmine, which is the true reason, as I suppose,
that his works are not allowed to be read of all, but of public professors,
and such others as have special permission from their Superiors.

B. C.
16.
These were my thoughts at the Spaw: which did so vex and It may be those
afflictions served to free you from Purgatory, as you presume in the
conclusion of your letter, otherwise I see not, why you should afflict your
self for choosing the only supposed means of your salvation.
afflict my soul, as that the waters could do my body no good at all, but
rather much hurt; nevertheless I You disputed with such learned men as you
could meet with, and yet avoided the company of Catholics, you promise his
Majesty to remember him at the daily oblation, and yet you abstained from their
Churches.
avoided the company of Catholics, abstained from the Church, and did both
dispute and write against the Church of Rome, as occasion was offered. I still
hoped that time would give better counsel, and therefore resolved to go from
the Spaw to Heidelberge, to do my duty there; in the mean time, I thought
with my self, it may be, God has moved his Majesty's heart to That which you
call peace, is a betraying of (...) the truth, and (...) that which you call a
reconciliation, is a rent from foreign reformed Churches.
peace and reconciliation, I know his disposition was so in the beginning, and
I remember M. Casaubon told me, when I I marvel who gave you authority to
bring M. Casaubon over from France.
brought him out of France, that his errand was nothing else but to mediate
peace between the Church of Rome and the church of England. Therefore I
thought, before I would submit my self to the Church of Rome, I would write
unto M. Casaubon such a letter as he might show unto your Majesty, containing
such conditions as I thought might satisfy your Majesty, if they were
performed by the Church of Rome. The copy of which letter is too long here to
set down: But when M. Casaubon answered me, that he knew your Majesty was
Having received this answer, What moved you to be so saucie and importunate to
move his Majesty the second time to entertain Society with that Church.
resolved to have no society with the Church of Rome, upon any condition what
soever, and that it would be my undoing if those my letters should come to your
Majesty's hands, or of those that bare the sway, I began to despair of my
return into England, unless I would overthrow both the health of my body and
the quiet of my mind, and either utterly damn mine own soul, and greatly
endanger not only my living and credit, but my Though you loved that Romish
religion well, you loved your life better.
life it self also, by reason of your Majesty's displeasure, and the severity
of the Statutes made and in force against Catholics and Catholic Religion.

G. H.
16.
The better counsel, which you expected, and held you in suspense, was in all
likelihood so^^ ^^ewes of a Bishopric, or a Deanery, for the quieting of your
perplexed thoughts: and therefore it may be thought, you resolved to go to
Heidelberge to do your duty there, that so you might procure letters of
recommendation; for otherwise I cannot imagine what errand you should have
thither, being scarcely known (for any thing I can learn) to the Prince
Palatine, or the Princess, except it were out of the like gadding humor, as
you had of going into Scotland, as being publicly employed, though it had been
upon your own private charge. What his Majesty's disposition in the affairs
of religion might well be presumed to be at his first entrance, if we should
judge by reason, and not by affection, I have already touched in the 9. Section
of this chapter, so far as I presumed it might suffice to content any
reasonable man: yet for further satisfaction (because you harp still upon the
same string, and press the same point afresh, I will relate his Majesty's own
words touching that business, as he uttered them in Parliament, the first day
of the first Parliament of his Majesty's reign. ^As for mine own profession (
says he) you have me your head now amongst you, of the same Religion that the
body is of, as I am no stranger to you in Blood, no more am I a stranger to
you in Faith, or in the matters concerning the house of God: and although this
my profession be according to my education, wherein I thank God I sucked the
milk of Gods truth with the milk of my nurse, yet do I here protest unto
you, that I would never for such a conceit of constancy, or other preiudicate
opinion, have so firmly kept my first profession, if I had not found it
agreeable to all reason, and to the rule of my conscience: and again in the
next leaf, for the part of the Clerickes, I must directly say and affirm,
that as long as they maintain one special point of their doctrine, and
another point of their practice, they are no way sufferable to remain in this
Kingdom. Their point of Doctrine is, that arrogant and ambitious Supremacy of
their he^^ the Pope, whereby he not only claims to be spiritual head of all
Christians, but also to have an Imperial civil power over all Kings and
Emperors, dethroning, and decrowning Princes with his foot as pleases him,
and dispensing and disposing of all Kingdoms and Empires at his appetite. The
other point which they observe in continual practice is, the Assassinates and
Murders of Kings, thinking it no sin; but rather a matter of salvation to do
all actions of rebellion and hostility against their Sovereign Lord, if he be
once our sed, his Subjects discharged of their fidelity, and his Kingdom
given a prey by that three Crowned Monarch, or rather Monster their head, and a
little after, having wished it would please God to make him one of the
instruments for effecting a general Christian Union in Religion, if they would
leave and be ashamed of such new and gross corruptions of theirs, as
themselves cannot maintain nor deny to be worthy of reformation, he turns
his speech again to the Papists under his dominions, willing them to be
admonished, that they presume not too far upon his lenity, because ( says
he) I would be loathe to be thought a Persecutor, as thereupon to think it
lawful for them daily to increase their number and strength in this Kingdom,
whereby if not in my time, at least in time of my posterity, they might be in
hope to erect their Religion again. No let them assure themselves, that as I
am a friend to their persons, if they be good Subjects, so am I a vowed
enemy, and do denounce mo^tall wars to their errors, and that as I would
be sorry to be driven by their ill behavior from the protection and
conservation of their bodies and lives, so I will never cease as far as I
can, to tread down their errors and wrong opinions: for I could not permit
the increase and growing of their Religion, without first betraying of my self
and mine own Conscience, secondly, this whole Isle, as well the part I am come
from, as the part I remain in, in betraying their liberties, and reducing them
to the former slavish yoke, which both had casten off, before I came amongst
them: and thirdly the liberty of the Crown in my posterity, which I should
leave again under a new slavery, having found it left free to me by my
Predecessors, and therefore would I wish all good Subjects, that are deceived
with that corruption: First, if they find any beginning of instinction in
themselves of knowledge and love to the Truth, to foster the same by all
lawful means, and to beware of quenching the spirit that works within them;
and if they can find as yet no motion tending that way, to be studious to
read and confer with learned men, and to use al such means as may further
their resolution, assuring themselves ( which by the way is worth our
observation) that as long as they are disconformable in Religion from us, they
cannot be but half my Subjects, nor be able to do but half service, and I to
want the best half of them, which is their souls. And here I have occasion to
speak to you my Lords the Bishops; for as you my Lord of Durham said very
learnedly to day in your Sermon; Correction without instruction is but a
tyranny, so ought you and all the Clergy under you to be more careful,
vigilant, and diligent then you have been to win souls to God, as well by
your exemplarie life, as doctrine. And since you see how careful they are,
sparing neither labor, pains, nor extreme peril of their persons to divert
(the devil is so busy a Bishop) you should be the more careful and wakefull
in your charges. Follow the rule prescribed by Saint Paul, Be careful to
instruct and to exhort, in season and out of season: and where you have been
any way sluggish before, now waken your selves up with a new diligence in this
point, remitting the success to God, who calling them at the second, third,
tenth, or twelfth hour, as they are alike welcome to him, so shall they be to
me his lieutenant here.^ Hitherto his Majesty. Now would any man of common
understanding (Mr. Dr. excepted) from hence gather, or think it gatherable,
that his Majesty had a disposition at his entrance to become a Papist, or to
tolerate the exercise of Popery, or to be reconciled to Rome, or to submit
himself and his Realms to the yoke of the Bishop thereof? if these or the
like inferences may from so many and plain words, so many and forcible
arguments to the contrary, be deduced, I must confess I know not what belongs
to Logike: and for other passages in the same speech, which seem to favor
your cause, you must either injuriously wrest them from the authors meaning, or
make them by reasonable construction suitable to these.

Howsoever, your self being a Churchman, and one of those whom he sharply
taxes, [ for changing their coats through curiosity, affectation of novelty,
or coffeehouse in their private humors,] cannot possibly be ranked amongst
them [ to whom as to minds only retaining the liquor they first drank in, out
of his special clemency he proposes more favorable conditions] and yet
among these too, he has since discovered an unnatural disposition, whom he
hoped to find by moderate and gentle usage, in the matter of natural
subjection, quiet and well minded men,] and therefore no marvel if his
Majesty be since more exasperated, and farther off from any reconciliation
with that Religion then before. But Mr. Casaubon, you say, told you that his
errand hither was nothing else, but to mediate peace between the Church of
Rome, and the Church of England. It is certainly false that Mr. Casaubons
errand was by his Majesty intended to b^ such, and most unlikely to be true,
that it was by Mr Casaubon so reported to you, considering his direct and
express writings, both before his coming over, and since, against the chief
Patrons and controuersed points of the Church of Rome, and among the rest, in
the conclusion of his Epistle to Cardinal Perron, where he assures him from
his Majesty's, mouth, and in his name, [that his constant purpose and full
resolution was, as long as the Church of Rome yielded not to antiquity and
truth, to entertain no society with her at all, which you might have read
before your departure, and spared the pains of writing to M. Casaubon, whom
that I may yet more fully clear from this imputation, being not able now to
speak for himself, I will here set down his Letter, written with his own
hand to my Lords Grace of Canterbury, upon this very occasion, in which he
terms the report no better then the slander of a wicked Apostate.

Illustrissimo and Reuerendissimo Praesuli, Domino Cantuariensi, totius Angliae
Primati, and Domino meo, summa obseruantia colendo.
Illustrissime Reuerendissime Domine,
HEri quum essem in Aula, ostendit mibi Regia Maiestas librum a Carerio sibi
missum, in quo mira quaedam de me narrantur; puto Serenissimum Regem tuae
Reuerentiae illa ostendisse. Ego Dei gratia puto me sic vixisse, and priusquam
in hoc regnum venirem, and postqua^ veni in Angliam, vt curare non debeam quid
perditus apostata de^me garriat aut scribat; apparet ipsum grauissim^ iratum
esse mihi propter Epistolam quam illi scripsi, vt ab hoc insano consilio eum
reuocarem: propterea id agit vt meum nomen apud Regiam Maiestatem and tuam
Reuerentiam infamet. Sedspero meliora and de Regesapientissimo, and de te
(Illustrissime) Presul; apud quem si mihi opus esse apologia crederem, omnia
omisissem, vt tuae Reuerentiae praesens me purgarem. Sed non puto adeo
infoeliciter mecum agi, vt in^andi apostatae calumniae aliquid apud te contra
existimationem meam valiant. Si iusseris, statim adero, et ad omnia tuae
Reuerentiae satisfaciam. Interim quam sim occupatus in colophone imponendo
operimeo, narrabit tuae Reuerentiae Vederburnus noster, vere pius iuuenis, and
tua beneuolentia, Presul (Illustriss.) non indignus. Deus immortalis te seruet
Ecclesiae suae. In Musaeo XIV. Kal. Ian. MDCXIII.

Tuae Illustriss. Reuerentiae obseruantissimus cultor, ISA. CASAVBONVS.


Right Reverend, and my Gracious Lord,
YEsterday being at Court, the KINGS MAJESTY showed me a book sent him from
Carier, wherein certain strange things are reported of me. I think his
MAJESTY has showed them unto your Grace. I hope I have by the grace of GOD so
lived, both before I came into this Kingdom, and since I came into England,
that I ought not to care what a forlorn Apostate pratleth, or writes of me.
It appears he is very angry with me for a letter I wrote him, to reclaim him
from that mad course: thereupon he goes about to traduce me to the KINGS
MAJESTY and your Grace. But I hope better both of that most wise KING, and of
you most renowned Prelate. Unto whom if I thought there were need of Apology,
I would, laying all other things aside, in person purge my self unto your
Grace. But my case, I trust, is not so unhappy, that the slanders of a lewd
Apostate should be of any force with you against my reputation. If you command,
I will forthwith repair unto you, and satisfy your Grace unto the full. In
the mean time, how busily I am occupied about the conclusion of my work, my
friend Vederburne, a very religious young man, and not unworthy of your Graces
favor, can show your Grace. God Immortal preserve you unto his Church. From my
study, December. 19. 1613.

Your Graces most respective Obseruer, ISA. CASAVBON.


And that it may appear how auerse he was from union with that Church, I will
hereunto add a former Letter, written likewise to my L. Grace of Canterbury,
touching the same business before he was thus provoked by D. Carier, upon
occasion of a Letter written to the same effect from the Doctor to him.

Illustrissime and Reuerendissime Domine,
MItto Reuerentiae Epistolam de qua inaudiuisti. Ego acceptam Epistolam, vt
Regi communicaretur, putaui premendam, neque ostendendam cuiquam mortalium. Non
enim possum probare consilium viri illius eruditi qui epistolam scripsit. Quare
respondi illi statim, and multis cum illo egi, vt ab eo proposito desisteret.
Multas rations ei attuli cur certo crederem, amentiam esse, aut poti^s
furorem, boni aliquid sperare a Romano Phalari (nam hoc verbo vsus sum) qui
nostra mala, si quae sunt inter nos ridet. Proposui ei ob oculos, quam essent
alieni proceres Romanae Ecclesiae ab omni aequitate* imprimis Bellarminus, de
cuius impietate plura ad eum scripsi. Posui illi ante oculos, quanto cum suo
periculo patronum Papae videretur agere. Attuli testimonia Matthaei Paris de
summa Angliae infoelicitate, quando Papae To. paruit. Addidi exemplum illius
Narbonensis, qui nuper ad Ser. Regem similis argumenti librum miserat: me
iussum a Rege loqui eum librum detestatum esse, and D. Regem voluisse in latere
libri animaduertere. Posthaec quid factum sit Carerio nescio. Hoc ego volui
Reuerentiae tuae significatum. Sed expectabam donec ad vrbem redijsses: nam me
libri mei editio domi tenet. Sunt alia quaedam grauia de quibus acturus sum cum
tua Reuerentia post vnum aut alterum diem, Deo volente. Qui te seruet
Illustrissime Domine. Londini, VIII. Eid. Sept. MDCXIII.

Tuae Reuerentiae obseruantiss. cultor IS. CASAVBONVS.


Right Reverend, and my Gracious Lord,
I Send unto your Grace the Letter whereof you have heard. The Letter was sent
me with intent it should be communicated unto the King, but I thought it fitter
to be suppressed, and to be showed unto none. For I cannot approve the drift
of that learned man who wr^te the Letter. Wherefore I answered him for^^with,
and with many words advised him to desist from that purpose. I brought him many
reasons why I certainly believed, it was folly, or rather frenzy to hope for
any good from the Romish Phalaris, (for that very term I used) who laughs at
our evils, if there be any amongst us. I laid before his eyes how auerse the
Peers of the Romish Church are from all equity: specially Bellarmine, of
whose impiety I wrote at large unto him. I set before his eyes with how great
danger to himself he seemed to become the Popes Patron. I alleged testimonies
of Matthew Paris of the great misery of England when it was under the Popes
obedience. I added the example of that Narbonois, who of late sent unto the
Kings MAJESTY a book of the like argument: that being commanded by the KING to
say my mind, I professed my detestation thereof, and that it was his MAJESTY'S
will to have some animaduersions set in the margent of the book. After which,
what became of Carier, I know not. This I thought good to signify unto your
Grace: but I expected until you were returned unto the City: for the
publishing of my book stays meat home. I have other weighty matters whereof
to advise with your Grace within this day or two, God willing, who preserve you
my gracious Lord. London. Sept. 6. 1613.

Your Graces most respective Obseruer, ISA. CASAVBON.


B. C.
17.
There is a statute in England made by King Henry the VIII. to make him
supreme head of the Church in spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes, which
Statute enioynes all the subjects of England, on pain of death, to believe and
to swear they do believe that it is true: and yet all the world knows, if
King Henry the VIII. could have gotten the Pope to divorce Queen Katherine,
that he might marry Anne Bullen, that Statute had never been made by him: and
if that title had not enabled the King to pull down Abbeys, and religious
houses, and give them to Lay men, the Lords and Commons of that time would
never have suffered such a Statute to be made. This Statute was continued by
Queen Elizabeth to serve her own turn, and it is confirmed by your Majesty
to satisfy other men, and yet your Majesty yields the Church of Rome to be
the In what sense Rome may be termed the mother church, see in mine answer to
the 45. Section.
mother Church; and the Bishop of Rome to be the chief Bishop or His Majesty
terms him the Patriarch, but not the Primate of the West.
Primate of all the Western Churches: which I do also verily believe, and
therefore I do verily think he has, or ought to have some spiritual
jurisdiction in England, and although in mine younger days the Where was your
great zeal then to swear against your conscience for fashion? but did you not
take it again when you came to years of discretion at the taking of your
degrees, at your institution in your Benefices, at your admittance to your
Prebendry and Chaplenship, and often recognize the truth of the sum of the said
oath in your prayer before every sermon you made? How then comes it now to pass
that you would not take it again to gain the greatest pre^erme^t in y^ world,
but that you were out of hope to get any, or by your own confession long to
enjoy it?
fashion of the world made me swear, as other did, (for which I pray God
forgive me) yet I ever doubted, and I am now resolved, that no The Bishops in
K. Hen. the 8. time thought themselves as good Christians as your self, yet
they took it, or at least made a show of taking it with a good conscience,
besides you call the consciences, or the Christianity of your honest brethren
of the Clergy into question, who have taken the same oath it may be more then
once, and yet being good Scholars (as you pretend) they could not be ignorant
what offense they incurred in taking it.
Christian man can take that oath with a safe conscience, neither will I ever
take it to gain the greatest preferment in the world.

G. H.
17.
The Statute, here intended, can be none other, then the S^tute 26. of H. VIII.
Cap. 1. for that is the first Statute that medleth with the Supremacy; which
Statute is, as the Common Lawyers term it, Statutum declaratiuum, not
introductiuum noui iuris: as does clearly appear by the Preamble, which has
these words: [ Albeit the Kings Majesty justly and rightfully is and ought to
be taken and accepted supreme head of the Church of England, and so is
recognized by the Clergy in their Convocation, yet nevertheless for
corroboration and confirmation thereof, Be it enacted, that the King shall be
taken, and accepted Supreme head, etc.] So that the Doctor is fowly mistaken to
say that there was a Statute made by K. Henry the VIII. to make him Supreme
head: for it was his ancient right that made him so, and it was his Clergy
that had acknowledged him to be so, before the making of this Stat^te; nay the
very phrase and letter of this Statute it self does purposely renounce the
power of making, and assumes only the authority of confirming.

Whereby it is clear that Henry VIII. made not a statute to make himself
Supreme in Ecclesiastical causes, as Mr. Doctor affirms; but to confirm
those Statutes and Rights, which his noble Progenitors as iu^tly challenged to
belong to their Crown, as the Bishops of Rome unjustly pretended to be annexed
to their Myter. And where he says, that the Statute which (according to his
understanding made him Supreme head) did also enjoin the Subject to believe
and swear it t^ be true, it is manifest, that there is not any mention at all
of any oath in that Statute: but it is true indeed, that in the 28. of Henry
VIII. chap. 10. there is an oath of Supremacy ordained, the refusal whereof
by some certain persons enjoined by that Act to take it, was made high
Treason. And herein again is the Doctor deceived, nay which is worse seeks
to deceive others; for only some certain persons were bound by that Statute
to take the oath, and not all the Subjects of England, as he falsely surmiseth.
Anno 35. Henry VIII. cap. 1. the oath of Supremacy ordained by 28. was
repealed, and a new form of oath prescribed and extended to more persons, but
never to all in general. The same Parliament Cap. 3. enioyneth that the style
of Supreme head be received and used, and this was all that was done by Henry
VIII. in the point of Supremacy by way of Statute: So that to say as Master
Doctor does, that all the Subjects in England are bound upon pain of death to
believe the Supremacy, is a malicious fiction in two respects: First touching
the persons enjoined to take the oath, and liable to the punishment; and then
again as touching the offense, for that belief alone, which is a secret
inclination of the mind known only to God, the searcher of the heart, and
not issuable nor tryable by any Law humane, should be made an offense
punishable by death; is in it self so absurd, as it cannot but appear to be
a false imputation to charge our Lawmakers therewithal. Lastly, whereas he
says that Henry the VIII. would never have made that Statute, if he could have
gotten the Pope to have divorced Queen Katherine that he might have married
Anne Boleine it is clear, and all the world may know, that if King Henry would
have joined with Francis the French King in the war of Naples against Charles
the Emperor, the Pope would not have stuck to have given way to that divorce:
for the better procuring of which Combination he did not only refer this
Matrimonial cause to the hearing and determining of his Legates: but gave
Campeius a secret Bull in his bosom, as witnesses Master D^^lington in his
inference upon Guicciardines Degression, Page 3.
Francis Guicciardin in the 19th Book of his History (a Catholic in his
profession, no man more a reporter of things he saw, no man truer, and a
creature of the Popes employed in honorable charges) the Copy of it is to be
seen in Page 200.
Anti-Sanders, dated in the year 1527. the 17th of December, and the fifth
year of Clement the seuenths Popedom, wherein he infringeth the former Which
Dispensation was first granted contrary to the opinion of all the Cardinals of
R^me being Divines. Hall. ann, H^nry 8.
dispensatio^, affirming that ( the King could not continue in such Matrimony
without sin:) whereupon he decreed that after the delaration of the nullitie
of the former marriage, and the Kings absolution, it should be lawful for him
to marry another. This Bull he forbad him to show to any, save only to the
King and Cardinal Wolsey, his fellow Commissioner in that business: and
though openly he commanded him to handle the cause with all expedition, yet
secretly he willed him to protract the time, promising that himself would
watch an opportunity to publish the Decree; so the King and Queen were cited
to appear before them in May following, at which time after some debating of
the cause, they protracted the sentence till the beginning of August, and after
many delays, finding that King Henry could not by hope of the divorce be
drawn to side with the French, the Pope commanded Campeius to burn his Bull,
and to return home: whereby it appears that King Henry might easily have had
the nullitie of his marriage with Queen Katherine ratified at Rome, without
taking the title of Supreme head, if he would have yielded to the Popes
conditions. But the Lords, you say, and Commons would never have suffered such
a Stat^te to be made, had not that title enabled the King to pull down Abbeys
and Religious houses and give them to Lay men. I would feign know then what
moved the Bishops to give way to it, who had no share in that division, yet
had they with the consent of the Clergy, passed it in Convocation, before it
was so much as proposed in Parliament, and for the Commons a very little share
fell out to their parts. And if ^he assuming of that title were indeed so
needful (as you pretend) for the supressing of those houses: by what
authority did Cardinal Wolsey dissolve some, and the King by his example
more, before that title was by him publicly assumed?

Now for Queen Elizabeth, it is true that she revived those Statutes of
Supremacy enacted by her father, and repealed by her sister, but not without
diverse exceptions, as may appear by the books; in so much as a new form of
Oath was established by her, which is the Oath at this day in force, the
refusal of which upon a second offering by such as stand convicted of a former
refusal, is by the Statute of 5^ Eliz. cap. 1. made high Treason, and it is
none otherwise. Nay further, by an express prouiso in that Statute, none are
compellable to take the Oath the second time but Ecclesiastical persons, and
some few others, especially named in that Statute, neither does she take to
her in that or any other Statute the title of Supreme head, but of Governor,
by which what she understood, herself expressed in her Injunctions, and her
Clergy in their 37. Article confirmed In the year 1562. and again in 1571.
in two several Conuocations, where they thus speak, [Where we attribute to
the Queens Majesty the chief Government, by which title we understand the
minds of some slanderous folks to be offended, we give not to our Princes
the ministering either of Gods word, or of the Sacraments, the which thing the
Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen, do most plainly
testify: but that only prerogative which we see to have been given always
to all godly Princes in holy Scripture by God himself, that is, that they
should rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the civil sword, the
stubburne and evil doers,] neither do I see how Osorius in his Epistle to her
can be interpreted to afford her less, where he professes, that all Kings
are Pro part suaiuris diuini Vicarij, Vicars of Gods Law in their places.

From Queen Elizabeth you pass to his Majesty, and tell him, that he
confirmed the same Statute to satisfy other men, arguing therein his Majesty
of great weakness, either as being not able to judge what he did, or as being
carried by others against his own judgment. But that his MAJESTY did it
advisedly, and rather to satiffie himsel^e, then others, appears by this, that
he was invested with the same power, which that Statute gives him, before his
receiving of the Crown of England, and since himself with his own pen has
thus both justified and Apol. for the Oath of alleagiance. p. 108.
explained it [ if these examples (says he) sentences, title and prerogatives,
and innumerable other in the old and new Testament, do not warrant Christian
Kings, within their own dominions, to govern their Church as well as the rest
of their people, in being Custodes vtriusque tabulae, not by making new
Articles of Faith (which is the Popes office as I said before) but by
commanding obedience to be given to the word of God, by reforming the
Religion acc^rding to his prescribed will, by assisting the Spiritual power
with the Temporal sword, by reforming of corruptions, by procuring due
obedience to the Church, by judging and cutting off all frivolous questions,
and Schisms (as Eusebius lib. 3 de vita Constant^i.
Constantine did) and finally by making decorum to be observed in every thing,
and establishing orders to be observed in all indifferent things, for that
purpose, which is the only intent of the Oath of Supremacy; if this office of
a King (I say) do not agree with the power given him by Gods word, let any
indifferent man, void of passion, judge.] But yet his Majesty (you say)
yields the Church of Rome to be the Mother Church, and the Bishop of Rome to
be the chief Bishop or Primate of the Western Churches. Indeed his Majesty
in his first speech in his first Parliament, called after his entr^nce to this
Kingdom* is pleased to acknowledge the Roman Church to be our Mother Church,
this M. Doctor is content to urge, but to conceal that which he adds,
[defiled with infirmities and corruptions, as the Jews were when they
crucified Christ, and as I am none enemy (says he) to the life of a sick man,
because I would have his body purged of ill humors; no more am I an enemy to
their Church, because I would have them reform their errors, not wishing
their throwing out of the Temple, but that it might be purged and cleansed from
corruption, otherwise how can they wish us to enter, if their house be not
first made clean?] Herein Mr Doctor dealing with his Majesty, as the devil
did with our Savior, he pressed that out of the Psalm which made for
himself [ Psalm. 91, 11.
He will give his Angels charge over thee] but suppressed that which made
against him [to keep thee in all thy wayes] now if any man farther desire his
Majesty's meaning in calling Rome the Mother Church, he has fully expressed
himself in his Premonition, [Patriarchs (says he) I know were in the time of
the Primitive Church, and I likewise reverence that institution for orders
sake: and amongst them was a contention for the first place. And for my self
(if that were yet the question) I would with all mine heart give my consent
that the Bishop of Rome should have the first seat, I being a Western King
would go with the Patriarch of the West] whereby it is clear that his
Majesty's meaning was, and is, to yield the Bishop of Rome over other Western
Bishops, (in case they should meet i^ Council,) a prioritie in sitting, not a
superiority in commanding, a primacy or Such a precedenci^ has the Emperor
before Christian kings, but no command over them.
precedence in order, not a supremacy in power, and jurisdiction, it being
the mark which Mr. Doctor drives at, and from thence labors cunningly but
maliciously to infer, contrary to his Majesty's both mind, and words. I
conclude this point with a Reverend B. Bilson part 2 of Christian subjection,
p. 237.
Prelate, [His Vicarship to Christ must be proved by stronger and plainer
evidence then you have yet showed, before we may grant it, and for his
Patriarkeship (says he) which you now take hold of, by Gods law he has nne in
this Realm, for ^ixe hundred years after Christ, he had none; for the last
six hundred (as looking to greater matters) he would have none: above and
against the sw^rd, which God has ordained, he can have none, to the subversion
of the faith, and oppression of his brethren: in right reason and equity he
should have none, you must seek farther for subjection to his tribunal, this
land owes him none.

B. C.
18.
There is another statute in England made by Queen Elizabeth, and confirmed by
your Majesty, that it is This penalty was not inflicted for taking Orders, but
for returning after Orders taken, such a penalty did Solomon impose and execute
upon Shimei, 1. King. 2.
death for any English man to be in England, being made a Priest by authority
derived, or pretended to be derived from the There is less doubt of the
Episcopal being of our Bishops, then of those that derive their being from the
Popes, in regard of their manifold schisms, and if it came to scanning, the
Archbishop of Canterbury has fai^er evidence to show for his right to that
See, then the Bishop of Rome to the Popedom; nay the Pope to the Bishopric
of Rome.
Bishop of Rome. I cannot believe that I am a Priest at all, unless I be
derived by authority from Gregory the great, from whence all the Bishops in
England have their being, if they have any being at all.

G. H.
18.
The Statute intended is the 27. of Eliz. Cap. 2. which indeed, in the body
thereof, has words sounding to that purpose; but the sense is maliciously
perverted, and the inference thereupon; for he that shall read through that
Statute, and consider all the parts, shall clearly perceive, that thereby none
other Priests are intended then Popish Priests, made and ordained by Popish
Bishops, and not such as Mr. Doctor was, made in England by any of our Bishops
here: Though perhaps it were true, that our Bishops did derive their first
authority from Gregory (which we do not yield unto,) considering that Augustine
from whom they are pretended to derive it, was not consecrated by him, but by
Aetherius Archbishop of Arles, (if we may believe our own Venerable Bede) for
the title of the Statute is, An Act against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and
such other like disobedient persons, and the preamble of the act has these
words, [Whereas diverse persons, called or professed Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
and other Priests, which have been, and from time to time are made in the
parts beyond the Seas, by or according to the order and rites of the Romish
Church, have of late years commen, and been sent into England, etc.] So that
if according to the rule [Praefatio est clauis Statuti,] we shall interpret
the body by the title, or preamble, howsoever the words in the body of the
act be somewhat general, yet what Priests are intended by the Lawmakers, is
evident enough; and except M. Doctor were a Priest according to the Order and
Rites of the Romish Church, by shauing, anointing, and imposition of hands by a
Popish Bishop, and that since the first year of Queen Elizabeth, he needed
not to have feared the danger of the Law.

B. C.
19.
There is another Statute in like manner made and confirmed, that it is death to
be reconciled by a Catholic Priest to the Church of Rome, I am persuaded that
the Church of Rome is our mother Church, and that no man in England can be
saved, that continues wilfully out of the visible unity of that Church, and
therefore I can not choose, but persuade the people to be reconciled thereunto
if possibly they may.

G. H.
19.
This Statute also is either purposely or ignorantly mistaken, and is not
distinct from that following, but are both one, namely 23. Eliz. cap. 1. The
title of it is, [An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in due
obedience] and the preamble recites that [whereas diverse ill affected persons
have practiced to withdraw the Queens Subjects from their natural
allegiance.] the purueiw of the Act follows that [all persons which shall
put in practice to ^bsolue, persuade or withdraw any of the Queens subjects
from their natural obedience to her Majesty* or to withdraw them for that
intent, from the religion established, (and so forth) shall be traitors, and
the person willingly absolved, or withdrawn, as aforesaid, to be likewise a
traitor.] so that the withdrawing of the Subject from their natural
obedience, or for that intent, from the religion established, is the offense
made treason, and not simple exhorting to the Romish religion, as is alleged:
And yet to speak a truth, I see not how any exhortation to an absolute
submission of the understanding and the will to the Bishop of Romes
Jurisdiction, which now is made the only essential form of that religion,
can well be severed from such an intent. But Rome (you say) is the mother
Church, and no man in England can be saved, that continues wilfully out of the
visible unity of that Church. Where if you term it the mother Church in that
sense that his MAJESTY does, we embrace it; but if your meaning be, that
she is our mother, either in regard that we received the first life, or still
should receive the nourishment of religion from her, we deny it; our nation
being first converted to the Christian faith by Joseph of Arimathea, who
intombed the Corpse of our Savior, and lies himself interred at Glastenbury,
together with twelve disciples his assistants, where they first preached the
Gospel, as Gildas affirms in the life of Aurelius Ambrosius, and Malmesbury
in the Book, entitled, The Antiquity of Glastenbury, written to Henry of
Bloys, brother to King Steven, and Abbot of the same place; and it is consented
unto by the learned Antiquaries of later times, as namely, Mr. Cambden, John
Bale, Matthew Parker, Polydore Virgil, and others, grounding themselves upon
the authority of the best approved, and most ancient writers: and withal
considering our keeping of Easter, and other Ceremonies were after the fashion
of the Eastern Church, and not of the Western, at the coming of Austin. I
may very well conjecture that our first conversion to Christian religion was
from the Jews, or Grecians, and not from the Romans: so that if Rome be
rightly ^ermed o^r mother Church, it must be in regard of later supplies from
Eleutherius and Gregory, not of our first Conversion: howsoever the holy City
being now become an harlot, we have no more reason to reverence her as a
mother: but as a strumpet (till she repent and amend) to shun^e all union with
her.

S. Paul writing to the whole Church of Rome, and giving them their due praise
for their devotion and zeal, and entering at last into the reiectio^ of the
Jews, for their unbelief he warns expressly the Romans in these words, [
Ro^. 11. 18, etc.
Boast not thy self against the branches, and if thou boast thy self, thou
bear not the root, but the root thee. Thou will say, the branches were
broken off, that I might be graft in, well: through infidelity they are broken
off, and thou stand by faith: be not high minded, but fear. For if God
spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he spare not thee. Behold
therefore the goodness and severity of God: toward them which have fallen,
severity; but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness;
otherwise thou also shall be cut off.] Now whether the Apostle spoke generally
to the Gentiles, and inclusiuely to the Romans, or namely to the Romans, and
proportionably to the rest, it is all one to us, one of the twain he must
needs. Origin says upon these words of Paul, [I say to you Gentiles.] Now he
plainly turns his speech to the Gentiles, but chiefly to those of the city
of Rome that believed S. Paul.] speaking then to the Romans, no man may except
the Romans, and they being included, his admonition to them, if there could be
no danger in them of swaruing from the faith, was utterly superfluous, and the
condition implied ridic^lous, and the commination odious, and the reason
frivolous. Now that which S. Paul there threatened, we find come to pass; so
that we cannot, we dare not join hands with her; nay we are so far from
believing, that none can be saved, that continues out of the visible unity of
that Church: that on the other side, we constantly believe, that the means to
be saved, is to separate our selves from the unity of that Church, till she
separate her self from her errors, specially since in your understanding, the
continuing in the visible unity of that Church, is in a manner nothing else,
but the acknowledging of the Bishop of Rome to be the visible head of it: and
if none can be saved without that, what shall become of your honest brethren
of the English Clergy? whom you profess you are so far from condemning, as
you do account your self one of them? what of so many millions of souls in
the Eastern and Western Christian Churches, more in number by many degrees,
then those that yet continue in that visible unity, and better both in life
and belief, then those who acknowledge it, or the visible head himself of it.

B. C.
20.
There is another Statute in like manner made and confirmed, that it is death
to exhort the people of England to Catholic religion, I am persuaded that the
religion prescribed and practiced by the Church of Rome is the true Catholic
religion which I will particularly justify from point to point, if God give
time and opportunity, and therefore I can not choose but persuade the people
thereunto.

G. H.
20.
For the Statute here pretended, I have already answered that it is none other
then a branch of the former: And for your promise of justifying from point to
point the religion prescribed and practiced by the Church of Rome, if it be
performed, when we shall see it published, I doubt not but a Confutation will
be found as particular and plain, and more true, then your Justification: but
in the mean time, I cannot but wonder what you can say more herein then has
often been said by as earnest, and more learned Proctors of that Church then
your self* Besides, how comes it to pass you should be suddenly expert, and
so peremptorily confident in all the controuersed points, except you were
resolved in most of them before your parting hence: I remember Duke Humfrey
discovered a notable piece of knavery in a beggar, who pretending blindness
from his birth, undertook to judge of colors instantly upon the recovery of
his sight; this your vain offer to justify all points in controversy
presently upon your breathing of outlandish air, cannot but give us just
occasion to suspect the like hyopocrisie. Lastly, if the religion prescribed
and practiced by the Church of Rome be in all points the only true religion,
why would his holiness permit the exercise of ours with little, or no
alteration, as afterward you bear us in hand, upon conditions his MAJESTY, on
the other side, would admit of his supremacy, and the Mass.

B. C.
21.
It may be these are not all several Statutes; some of them may be members
of the same, ( He that examines the writings will easily find you wrote without
book.
for I have not my books about me to search) but I am sure all of them do
make such felonies and treasons, as were the greatest virtues in the Primitive
Church, and such, as I must confess my self I cannot choose, if I live in
England, but endeavor to be Such a Catholic then as your self (the S^ate
standing as it does) can by your own confession be no good subject.
guilty of, and then it were easy to find As if only Puritanes were at the
making of those Statutes, or they alone make care and conscience of the
execution of them.
Puritanes enough to make a jury against me, and there would not want a A
m^rueile it is that a man of your age and experience should conceive or affirm
that to belong to the office of a Justice of Pe^c^, which appertains to the
Judges or Justices itenerant.
Justice of peace to give sentence, and when they had done, that which is worse
then the persecution it self, they would all swear solemnly, that D. Carier
was not put to death for Catholic Religion, but for felony and treason, I have
no hope of protection against the cruelty of those laws, if your Majesty be
resolved upon no conditions whatsoever, to have society at all, nor no
Communion at all with the Church of Rome; and therefore while the case so
stands, I dare not return home again. But I cannot be altogether out of Your
hope must needs be grounded upon a vain presumption of some strange and
sudden alteration in his Majesty considering his full resolution, and your
many infirmities, but your hope is perished with your self, and so may all
they who entertain the like.
hope of better news before I die, as long as I do believe that the Saints in
heaven do rejoice at the conversion of a sinner to Christ, and do know that
your Majesty by you^ You speak as if the natural birth of a man gave him
interest in the Saints of heaven* whereas there they put off all carnal
affections, and become like unto the Angels.
birth has so great an interest in the Saints in heaven, as you shall never
cease to have, until you cease to be the son of such a mother, as would
rejoice more then all the rest, for your The Saints of heaven have no knowledge
of the particular conversion of a sinner, by any ordinary intuition, but by
reu^lation extraordinary.
conversion, and therefore I assure my self that she with all the rest do
pray, that your Majesty before you die, may be militant in the Communion of
that Church, wherein they are Many Saints no doubt are triumphant, which were
never militant in that Church, which acknowledges the Pope her head.
triumphant. And in this hope I am gone before to join my prayers with theirs,
in the unity of the Catholic Church, and do humbly pray your Majesty Where no
offense is committed, there needs no pardon to be either demanded or granted.
to pardon me for doing that which was not in my power to avoid, and to give
me leave to live, where I hope shortly to die, unless I may hope to do your
Majesty The service you intended, was nothing else but a plotting with the P^p^
and his Factours, how you might betray the liberty of your Country, and submit
your Sovereigns neck to the yoke of his service.
service, and without the prejudice of any Unless the Church of Rome draw
nearer to us, then hitherto she has made she^ of, it cannot be, but with the
prejudice of all the honest men in England, and honesty it self, that a nearer
union betwixt her and the Church of England should be concluded, then already
there is.
honest man in England, to see some unity betwixt the Church of England and her
mother the Church of Rome. And now having declared the means of my couersion
to Catholic religion, I will briefly also show unto you the hopes I have to
do your Majesty no ill service therein.

G. H.
21.
It is true indeed that those Statutes which you allege are not several in
themselves, but members of the same. And it appears well, though you had not
professed it, that at the writing hereof you had not your books about you, you
affirm things uncertain so confidently, and things certain so falsely: But
you are sure (you say) they make such fellonies and treasons, as were the
greatest virtues of the Primitive Church: whereas we are more sure, that the
greatest virtues and fattest sacrifices* and shortest cut to heaven (as they
are now esteemed in the Church of Rome) were in the Primiti^e Church held none
other, but murders, and parricides, and felonies, and treasons [Thou do
promise (says Contr^ liter^^ Pat^^. 2. c. 92*
Augustine to Patilian) that thou will reckon many of the Emperors and judges,
which by persecuting you, perished, and concealing the Emperors, thou m^anest
two judges or deputies, why did thou not name the Emperors of thy Communion?
were thou afraid to be accused as guil^y of treason? where is your courage,
which fear not to kill your selves?] To say the Emperors perished for
persecuting, was treason in his time: in our age you think it much, that
reproching of Princes as tyrants and heretics, and aiding the Pope with your
persuasions, absolutions, and rebellions to take their Crowns from them,
should be punished, or adjudged treason, how beit a certain truth it is, that
there is no conspiracy so pernicious, and dangerous to the state, as that
which is whispered into men's ears, and conveyed into their hearts upon a sense
of devotion, and outwardly covered with a show of religion, notwithstanding as
true it is that in England none are put to death for Ca^hol^ke religion* no nor
for the Romish, which you call Catholic, as has been at large justified in a
book, written by a This Book was written by my L. Burleigh* L. Treasourer,
wherein he p^ou^s, that no Romish Catholics were then executed, but for
justifying the Bull of P^us V. which Card. Allen replied unto, but so weakly,
as the truth is thereby stre^gthened.
Peer of the Realm, inti^uled, the defense of the justice of England, and is
verified by his Majesty in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance in the very
entrance of his answer to the Popes first Breue, where he not only clears
himself at large from this imputation, but the late Queen, that blessed
defunct Lady (as he there calls her) [in whose proceedings (says he) who
list to compare with an indifferent eye the manifold intended i^uasions against
her whole kingdom, the foreign practices, the internal public rebellions,
the private plots, and machinations, poysonings, murders, and all sorts of
devises, daily set abroach, and all these wares continually fostered and
fomented from Rome, together with the continual corrupting of her Subjects,
as well by temporal bribes, as by fair and spaci^us promises of eternal
felicity, and nothing but book upon book, publicly set forth by her
fugitives for approbation of so holy d^signes; who list (I say) with an
indifferent eye to look on the one part upon these infinite and intolerable
temptations, and on the other part upon the just, yet moderate punishment of a
part of these heinous offenders, shall easily see that that blessed defunct Lady
was as* free from persecution, as they shall free these hellish instruments
from the honor of Martyrdome] And again^ his Majesty maintains the same in
his Premonition to Christian Princes, not far from the conclusion: [As for
the cause of their punishment, says he, (speaking of Romish Catholics) I do
constantly maintain that which I have said in my Apology, that no man either
in my time, or the late Queens, ever dyed here for his Conscience: for let him
be never so devout a Papist, nay though he profess the same never so
constantly; his life is in no danger by the Law, if he break not out into some
outward act expressly against the words of the Law, or, plot some unlawful or
dangerous practice or attempt: (Priests and Popish Churchmen only excepted)
that receive orders beyond the Seas; who for the manifold treasonable practices
that they have kindled and plotted in this country are discharged to come home
again under pain of Treason after their receiving of the said orders abroad;
and yet without some other guilt in them then their bare home coming, have
none of them been ever put to death.] Hitherto his Majesty. This sam^ poi^t
is again^ confirmed by his Majesty in his book D^ dro^^ d^s R^ye^. Pag^ 113.
Whereas on the otherside we justly complain that they execute our
professors, though strangers, for Religion, and only for Religion, and in that
most bloody and barbarous manner, specially where the Inquisition is in force,
that whore of Babylon being drunk, and yet not filled with the blood of the
Saints: And whereas you impute cr^elty to our Laws, what tragical cruelties
were exercis^d in Queen Mary's days, even upon women and children? nay, which
is most odious and unnatural upon women great with child, I pray, God as well
forget, as some yet alive well remember. Now as you hold and handle our
Martyrs worse then Traitors* So your most notorious Tra^tors must stand
registered in the Calender of Martyrs.

Not many days before Garnet suffered, there came to visit him at his lodging
in the Tower, certain choice Divines, amongst whom the chief were* My Lords
the Bishops of Bath and Wells, of Lincoln, and Leichfield, as now they are;
among other questions one of them proposed this, Whether if the Church of Rome,
after his execution, should declare him a Martyr, he did approve thereof, he
deeply sighing, and shrinking up his shoulders, made this answer. [Me a
Martyr? O what a Martyr! but the Church will n^uer do it, and I pray God it be
never so much as thought upon: Indeed if I had dyed for the Catholic Religion,
and (unhappy man!) had been acquainted with nothing else, but that which was
revealed me in Confession, I might perhaps seem not unworthy the honor of
Martyrdom, and merit the judgment of the Church: but now as the case stands,
I must acknowledge my fault, and confess the sentence of death pronounced
against me most just; Then again doubling and trebling his sighs, and showing
tokens of unfeigned sorrow, I would to God (says he) what is done, might be
undone, I could wish that any other chance had befallen me, rather then my name
should thus be stained with the blot of Treason, which offense, though most
grievous, yet I distrust not, but it may be washed away with the tears of
repentance, and that Christ will have mercy on me. Sure I am, that if I had
all the world in my power to bestow, I would willingly give all, that I might
be freed from the guilt and imputation of treason, which lies heavy upon my
conscience, and shall stand recorded in the sentence of my condemnation.]
Notwithstanding all this, is he recorded a Martyr, apologized by Eudemon, and
by Delrio paralelled with Denis the Areopagite. What would Mr. Doctor say to
this now? had we not some reason here to swear, that Garnet was not put to
death for Religion, but for Treason?

The like might be verified of Campian, who in the year 1580. came covertly
into England, in the company of Robert Parsons, with a Faculty obtained of
Gregory the XIII. conceived in these very words.

Petatur a summo Domino nostro explicatio Bullae declaratoriae per Pium Quintum
contra ELIZABETHAM, and ei adhaerentes; Quam Catholici cupiunt intelligi hoc
modo, vt obliget semper illam, and haereticos; Catholicos vero nullo modo,
rebus sic sta^cibus sed tum demum quando publica eiusdem Bullae executio fieri
poterit. Has praedictas Gratias concessit summus Po^tifex Patri Roberto
Parsonio, and Edmundo Campiano in Angliam profectur is die 14. Aprilis 1580.
praesente Patre Oliuerio Manacro, Assistente.

Let Petition be made to our highest Lord that some explication be made of the
declaratorie Bull of Pius Quintus against ELIZABETH and her adherents, which
the Catholics desire so to be understood, that it may bind her, and heretics,
but Catholics by no means, as the case now stands, but then only, when the
said Bull may publicly be put in execution. These Faculties the Highest Bishop
granted to Robert Parsons and Edmund Campian, being bound for England, the 14.
of April 1580, in the presence of Oliver Manacar, Assistant.

Here again I would demand of Mr. Dr, how many of the Romish profession are
ready to swear solemnly (as the old Romans did in the Deifying of their
Emperors) that he is now a Saint, and that he died a glorious Martyr, not
for treason but for religion? But were not Heart, and Horton, Rishton, and
Bosgraue of the same religion, Priests by their order, and some of the same
society, and yet died not for it? Are there not at this present diverse
Seminary Priests at Wisbich, and Baldwin the famous Jesuit in the Tower?
Certainly if there be any fault in their usage, it is, that they find too
much mercy, their merciless disposition toward us having so lately, so fully,
and so often been tried. I will conclude this point with a case of conscience
wherewith your Romish Priests were to arm themselves and their disciples in the
reign of Q. ELIZABETH, in case they should be apprehended, and examined to the
55. Article, when the question is demanded, Whether notwithstanding the Bull
of Pius the 5th, that was given out, or any Bull that the Bishop of Rome can
hereafter give forth, all Catholics be bound to yield obedience, faith and
loyalty to Queen ELIZABETH, as to their lawful Prince and Sovereign, this
resolution is framed: Qui hoc modo interrogat, illud quaerit; Anid potuerit S.
Pontifex facere, cui quaestioni quid debeat Catholicus respondere clarius est,
quam vt a me h^c explicetur: sirogatur ergo Catholicus, Credis Romanum
pontificem ELIZABETHAM potuisse exauthor are? respondebit, non obstant e quouis
metu mortis, credo, question enim haec ad fidem spectat, and exigit confessionem
fidei.

He that demands this question, asks in effect, Whether the Pope might do
it or no? to the which demand, what a Catholic ought to answer, it is
plainer, then need here be further expressed; if therefore a Catholic be
asked, Do you believe the Bishop of Rome may deprive Queen ELIZABETH of her
Crown? he must answer, not regarding any danger of death, I believe he may,
for this question is a point of faith, and requires the profession of our
faith.

If any such Cabale (only the names changed) run yet as current among such
as be reconciled to the Church of Rome at this day (as I know nothing to the
contrary, but it may) if Mr. Dr. had returned, and upon his return, endeavored
to have framed his Proselites to those, or the like conditions, he might justly
have suffered for it, without any aspersion, either of persecution upon his
Majesty's government, or cruelty upon his Laws, howsoever it has been
discovered by the Ego intraproximum (trimestro ^el s^mestre) tot (puta quinque
vel sex) reconciliaui, pro quibus spondere ausi^ quod quaecunque occasi^
inciderit a part n^stra ^^turi sint omnes, T^rt. Torti 138.
Missiues of of some such reconcilers sent to their General, that [for so many
as they have reconciled, they dare swear, upon what occasion soever may fall
out, they will be ready to side with them;] and for such, for mine own part,
I dare not swear, being convicted and sentenced, that they die for religion:
But yet I commend Mr. Doctors wit above the zeal he boasts of, that he
thought it fitter to stay there and dispute the matter with his pen, then by
coming over, and practicing put his person in hazard. And herein (as through
his whole discourse) he plays the Politician, choosing rather to sleep in a
whole skin, then to resist unto blood, and to endanger his body for the gaining
of souls.

CHAP. II.
The hopes I have to do your MAJESTY no ill service in being Catholic.
B. C.
1.
MY first hope is, that your Majesty will accept of that for the best A service
I can do you, which does most further the glory of our blessed Savior, and
mine own salvation. B Indeed there are kingdoms in the world, where the
chief care of the governor is, non quam bonis praesit, sed quam subditis.
Such were the heathen kingdoms, which S. Augustine describes in 2. de Ciuitate
Dei, Cap. 20. In such Common wealths the way to be I suppose your meaning is to
be accounted so.
a good Subject, is not to be a good man, but to serve the times and turns of
them that bear the sway, whatsoever they are. C But if it be true, that (as I
have not met with any that teaches it but holy Father Aristotle, in the
entrance of his Politikes.
some holy and learned Fathers teach) in a well ordered government there is
eadem foelicitas vnius hominis, ac totius ciuitatis, then I am sure it must
needs follow, that in a Commonwealth truly Christian, there is ^adem virtus
boni viri, ac boni ciuis. And therefore being a Minister and Preacher of
England, if I will rather serve your Majesty then my self, and rather procure
the good of your kingdom, then mine own pref^rment, I am bound in duty to
respect and seek for those things above all other, that may advance the honor
of God, and the salvation of my own soul, and the souls of those which do
any way belong to my charge. And being sufficiently resolved that nothing can
more advance the honor of our Savior, and the common salvation, then to be in
the unity of his Church, I have done you the best service I could at home, by
preaching peace and reconciliation; and being not able for the That which you
call the malice of the times was the just censure of your superiors procured
by your own malice against the truth.
malice of the times to stand any longer in the breach at home, I think it
safest in this last cast, to look to mine own game, and by my daily prayers
and What service could you do by dying, but by removing a dangerous instrument.
dying to do your Majesty the same service in the unity of the Church, So then
you seem to confess that for religion you were of the same mind long before
you went hence, as since you have declared your self, which notwithstanding in
diverse other places you contradict.
which by my daily preaching and living, I endeavored to do in the midst of
schism.

G. H.
1.
A In furthering the glory of God, you shall do others as much, and in saving
your own soul, your self more service, then his Majesty: but if you pretend
both, and in the end perform neither, it is the worst piece of service you can
do.

B I suppose there is no governor in the world (who deserves that name) but
that a chief part of his care is, to make his subjects at leastwise morally
good, that so he may find them the more obedient, and some of those very
heathen kingdoms, which S. Augustine describes in his books of the city of
God, specially that of the Romans, yielded more rare examples of moral
goodness, namely of justice and temperance, then it does at this day, though
it profess Christ. And for the serving of the times and turns of those that
bear the sway, I doubt not but as many may be found in those kingdoms which
you call Catholic, who are as able and willing to do it for their own
advantage, as amongst the heathen themselves.

C It is true that the happiness of the whole State extends to every
particular member of the same, in as much as they all belong to the same body:
but that the happiness of every particular member, should reach to the whole
body of the State, is not alike certain. But to grant both, I must confess my
dullness, I conceive not how from thence it follows, that the virtue of a good
man and a good citizen is always and necessarily the same. Once I am sure that
Pol. lib. 3. cap. ^.
Aristotle who defends the one denies the other, and In method^ hist^. vt
apparet in (...) ex purgat^ri^.
Bodin both a Christian, and a Catholic of your own, in my judgment truly
observes, [that the best men for the most part are the worst Statesmen, in as
much as being carried up to heaven by contemplation, they shun society, and
seek out deserts and solitary places for their abode.] And I would feign know
of your Monks, and Friars, and Hermites, and Anchorites, who presume by their
virtue and goodness, not only to merit for themselves, but to supererogate
for others, what good they do as members for the Common wealth, but only by
means of that imaginary Supererogation, which is no less hard for a wise man
to believe, then for a good to perform. But to let pass the examination of
the truth of both those positions, and the dependence of the later upon the
former, your inference thereupon to justify your self and your own
proceedings, is both in it self more untrue, and in regard of the premises
more loose and inconsequent; in as much as by leaving your station, and
betaking your self unto, and consulting with the enemies of his Majesty and
the State, for the ruin and destruction of both, (which you mask under the
glorious titles of honor of our Savior, common salvation, unity, peace,
reconciliation, service to his Majesty, good of his kingdom,) you neither
perform the part of a good Common wealths man, not yet of an honest man, and
consequently endanger (as far as in you lies) not only the happiness of
the State in which you lived, and Church in which you were baptized, but of
your own together with them: but above all a marvel it is, that
acknowledging your self a member of the Church of Rome, you notwithstanding
still profess your self a Minister of the Church of England, since your
common opinion of us is, that amongst us there is no lawful calling to the
Ministry, no suc^ession or conferring of holy Orders, no Ephod, no Teraphim,
but that our Ministers are in the state of Laymen and none other. Of this
cunning dealing, I can conceive none other reason, but that you may with more
ease, and least suspicion, convey your poison into the readers mind.

B. C.
2.
And although it be sufficient for a man of my profession to respect only
matters of heaven, and of another world: yet because this world was made for
that other, That is, you have put off a Divine to put on a Statesman, but the
proverb is, Monachus in aula, piscis in arido, and your own saying is, that
false Religion is but a policy for the temporal service of Princes.
I have not regarded mine own estate, that I might respect your Majesty's
therein: And after long and serious meditation what religion might most honor
your Majesty even in this world, I have conceived undoubted hope, that there
is no other Religion that can procure true honor and What security did it
procure to Henry the IIII. and the 7. Emperors, or to Chilperike, Phil. leb^l,
Lewis the XII. or the 2. last Hen. of France, and if there be no security, but
in that religion, what religion is that, which will admit of no security in any
but it self?
security to your Majesty, and your posterity in this world, but the true
Catholic Roman Religion, which was the very same, whereby all your glorious
Predecessors have been They were advanced by the grace of God, and their own
right, not by the Roman Religion, which in a manner is all one with the Bishop
of Romes authority, by which Histories record how king John and diverse other
his Majesty's predecessors as well of England as France, and Scotland have been
advanced and protected.
advanced and protected on earth, and are ^uerlastingly blessed in Why then, if
the Roman Religion had remained amongst us, should they still have been prayed
for, as if they had remained in Purgatory.
heaven.

G. H.
2.
The devil howbeit he be rather a Politician, then of any other profession,
yet when he came to tempt our LORD took upon him the habit of a Divine: but
you in tempting the LORDS anointed, lay aside the habit of a Divine, and
wholly take upon you the person of a Politician: But herein if I should tell
you, you played Phormioes part before Hannibal, you would think your deep
Policy much impeached. Now as you differ from the Devil in that he turned
himself in appearance into an Angel of light, being indeed a Spirit of
darkness, but you being an Angel in profession, turn your self into a
tempter: so in this you both agree, as if you had learned your method from
him, and proposed him as your pattern, that as he being beaten from
Scripture, betook himself (as being his last refuge) to the showing of the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them to our Savior, promising him
all, if he would but fall down and worship; so you perceiving belike all
other arguments to be spent in vain, at length you purpose to try what use
may be made of the devils last motive, by promising his Majesty all worldly
honor and security for himself and his posterity, if he would but fall down
and worship your Lord the Pope: but as the devil promised that which was none
of his to give; so does your Lord too, in the disposing of those kingdoms, and
the glory of them which no way belong unto him, except it be by the title of
being heir apparent to the god of this world, and the prince that rules in
the air: but were it not for fear of interrupting of your deep and serious
meditations, I should make bold to put you to the question, whether these were
the baits that Saint Peter angled with to catch souls, or the weapons that
Saint Paul fought with when he professed, that they were not carnal, but
mighty through God to cast down holds: they proposed not honor and
security to the disciples of CHRIST, but hazard and baseness.

I insist the longer upon this argument because the whole following discourse
is stuffed with nothing else but reasons of this nature, as if in the
profession of Religion, not the sincerity and truth of it were so much to be
regarded, as those secular and temporal commodities which sometimes attend it,
as the shadow does the body. His Majesty's own words to his son of fresh
and blessed memory touching this point are most remarkable, worthy to be
written in letters of gold, and to be engraven in a pillar of brass or marble.
[If (says he) my conscience had not resolved me; that all my Religion
presently professed by me and my Kingdoms, was grounded upon the plain words
of the Scripture, without the which all points of Religion are superfluous, as
any thing contray to the same is abomination, I had never outwardly auowed it
for pleasure or awe of any flesh.]

I take his meaning to be either for love, or fear of any mortal man, or
rather for any worldly and fleshly consideration, whether it were to gain and
make advantage by entertaining and embracing it, or to loose and suffer
disadvantage by rejecting and opposing the contrary.

I speak not this as if (by Gods grace) as much and more, both honor and
security did not wait upon our Religion as upon the Romish, but only to show
that these are no sufficient inducements to draw so much as a private man, much
less to move the divine and noble spirit of a Christian prince, (specially
such a prince as has often showed himself able to judge of reasons of a
higher strain) to the accepting of a new belief, and another form in the
service of God, but only the plain demonstration and clear evidence of the
truth of that belief and necessity of that form.

B. C.
3.
The first reason of my hope is, the promise of God himself to bless and
honor those that bless All this must be understood of the Church of Rome,
which first curses, and then by all means labors to confound such as
oppose against her, imputing her own deuillish plots to Gods working.
his Church, and honor him, and to curse and confound those that curse his
Church and dishonor him; which he has made good in all ages. There was never
any man, or City, or State, or Empire so preserved and advanced, as they that
have preserved the unity and advanced the prosperity of the Church of Christ,
nor any been made more miserable and inglorious then they that have dishonored
Christ, and make havoc of his Church by Schism and heresy.

G. H.
3.
To grant that which you assume, that the Church of Rome is the only true
Church; this argument drawn from temporal blessings is sometimes false,
uncertain always: and your assertion, that never any man, or City, or State
was preserved and advanced, as they that have pres^rued the unity, and
advanced the prosperity of the Church of Christ, is very broad and too large,
considering it extends even to Solomon himself, who though he advanced the
Church, yet can it not properly be said that he advanced the Church of
Christ, nay out of the Church who were ever more prosperous and succesfull in
their affairs, then Augustus and Traian? Of the former of whom it is said,
that he found Rome of Brick, and left it of Marble: of the later that he
raised the Roman Empire to the highest pitch of glory, and spread the power of
their Command unto the farthest borders, and largest circuit that ever before
or since has by them been possessed: for the kingdom of Dacia he subdued,
Armenia, Parthia, and Mesopotamia made subject, Assyria, Persia and Babylon
conquered, passed Tygris, and stretched the confines of the Roman Empire unto
the remotest dominions of the Indies, which never before that time had seen
the Roman Banners, or so much as heard of their name; besides his moral
virtues were such, that in the choice of a new Emperor, they ever wished for
one more happy then Augustus, better then Traian: and yet this man with whom
for outward prosperity no Christian Emperor can be balanced, was not only
out of the Church, but an enemy to it, and raised against it the third, and
one of the hotest persecutions of the ten. For further proof hereof, I
refer the reader for this point to S. Augustines first 10. books of the
City of God, and surely he that shall duly consider the flourishing greatness
of the Assy rian and Grecian, but especially the Sea Lipsius his admiranda or
de magnitudine Remani Imp.
Roman Monarchy, will easily discover the lightness of this reason, and the
vanity of the assertion. I speak not to detract from the Christian and truly
Catholic religion, even in regard of outward blessings, but only to prove
that God bestows them sometimes upon the good, thereby to show that absolutely
and in themselves they are not bad: sometimes again upon the bad, to show that
in themselves they are not good, and takes them sometimes from both, to show
that in their own nature they are indifferent.

B. C.
4.
If I had leisure, and books, it were easy for me to enlarge this point with
a long enumeration of particulars: but I think it needless, because I cannot
call to mind any example to the contrary, except it be the State of Queen
Elizabeth, or some one or two others lately fallen from the It is rather Rome
that is fallen from the unity of Christ's Church.
unity of the Catholic Church, or the State of the great Turk, that does
still persecute the Church of Christ, and yet continues in great glory in this
world: but when I consider of Queen Elizabeth, I find in her many
singularities; she was a woman, and a You are somewhat more favorable to her
herein, then Bocius in his 12. book and 3 chapter of the signs of the Church;
Terenixa passim pradicatur ex illicito coitu, ac propterea, fuitincemitijs
Angliae publicis decretum vt illi defunctae in regno possent succedere ex
huiusmodi concubinatunati. A most malicious lie.
maiden Queen, which gave her many advantages of admiration, she was the last
of her Race, and needed not care what became of the world after her days were
ended: she came upon the She came upon the religion professed and established
in her sisters reign, which you call remainders of devotion, and we deny it
not: but how comes it to pass that her sister was so unfortunate, if the only
coming upon her remainders made Q. Elizabeth so happy?
remainders of devotion and Catholic religion, which like a Bowl in his
course, or an Arrow in his flight, would go on for a while by the force of the
first moouer, and she had a practice of That which you call maintaining of
war amongst her neighbors, his Majesty in her ensuing Epitaph terms the
relieuing of France, and supporting the Netherlands: he might justly have
called it the setting up of a just King in his own kingdom, and the freeing
of a free Estate from the unjust usurpation of a foreign power.
maintaining wars among her neighbors, which became a woman well, that she
might be quiet at home, and whatsoever prosperity or honor there was in her
days, or is yet remaining in England, I can not but ascribe it to the Church
of Rome, and to Catholic religion, which was for many hundred years together
the first mouer of that government, and it is still in every settled kingdom,
and has left the steps and shadow thereof behind it, which in all
likelihood cannot continue many years without a new For fear of failing, we
are yearly supplied with a new Mission of shauelings from the fountain: but
sure I am persuaded if this current were stopped, our peace and prosperity
would be both more honorable and certain then it is.
supply from the fountain.

G. H.
4.
Why you should join Queen Elizabeth with the great Turk, I see no reason,
but only for the justifying of Rainolds his book of Caluino Turcisme.
Otherwise a marvel it is that you would instance in her happiness, whom the
Pope in his Brief declared amiserable woman, and yet her government was not
more happy, then her sisters (who notwithstanding she submitted her neck to
the Roman yoke) was unfortunate, howbeit in her own disposition, she is
reported to have been a gracious and virtuous Lady, instance may be brought in
the bringing in of a forreiner, the frustrating of the great hope of her
conception, her short and bloody reign, extraordinary dearths, and hurts by
thunder, and fire, and lastly the loss of Calis, the last footing we had in
France, being held by her predecessors the space of about 250 years: whereas
Queen Elizabeth oppugned and accursed from her very Cradle by the Church of
Rome, their thunderbolts returned upon their own heads, and her self like a
tender plant after a thunder shower prospered the more, and being no less full
of honor then days, she was gathered to her fathers as a ripe sheafe of corn
that is carried into the barn, in so much that her Successor our most
renowned SOVEREIGN, in admiration of her singular virtues and excellencies,
erected to her everlasting memory a princely Monument in the magnificent
Chapel of her grandfather Henry the seventh; inscribed with this ensuing
Epitaph of her greatness.

Sacred unto memory Religion to its primitive syncerity restored, Peace
thoroughly settled, Coin to the true value refined, Rebellion at home
extinguished, France near ruin by intestine mischiefs relieved, Netherland
supported, Spaines Armado vanquished, Ireland with Spaniards expulsion and
traitors coercion quieted, both Universities Revenues by a law of provision
exceedingly augmented, finally all England enriched, and xlv. years most
prudently governed, ELIZABETH, a Queen, a Conqueresse, a Triumpher, the most
devoted to piety, the most happy after lxx. years of her life, quietly by
death departing, has left here in this most famous Collegiate Church, (which
by her was established and refounded) these remains of her mortality, until at
Christ's call they shall again rise immortal.

She died the xxiiij. of March, the year of Salvation MDCII. of her reign
xlv. of her age lxx.

For an eternal memorial.

Unto ELIZABETH, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, daughter of King
Henry the VIII, grandchild to K. Hen. the VII, great grandchild to K. Ed. the
IIII, the mother of this her Country, the Nurse of Religion and Learning, for
perfect skill of very many languages, for glorious endowments, as well of mind
as body, and for regal virtues beyond her Sex.

A Prince incomparable,

JAMES of Great Britain, France, and Ireland King, inheritor both of her
Virtues and Kingdoms, to her so well deserving, piously has this erected.

Which I have the rather set down at large, as well for the reverence I bare her
memory (in whose reign it is not the least part of my comfort that I was
borne and baptized) as to commend to posterity his Majesty's Royal
disposition, in giving her right so far, as were it not authorized by his
princely testimony, future ages would think it fabulous, but specially to
show that he ascribes all her honor and prosperity, not to the Church of
Rome, as Mr. Doctor does, or to the religion by him called Catholic, but to
her devotion and piety, and the restoring of religion to its primitive
syncerity: For with it as she made the entrance of her reign, so does he of
her Epitaph, both esteeming it as the head spring from whence all that ensuing
happiness did flow and was derived; neither can it in mine understanding be
otherwise ascribed to Rome, then in granting that the reputation and renown
which she wanne was in part gained and much increased by escaping (through
Gods especial providence ever watchful over her) the manifold treasons, and
frustrating the barbarous attempts that were hatched at Rome, and to be acted
by Romish vassals, as well against her person as estate: which made her greatest
enemies confess [the finger of God is heere] and surely had not Rome
endeavored by might and maine to quench and eclips^ her light; witness the
Bull of Clement the 7th, while she was yet in her mothers womb, and afterward
of Pius and Sixtus, and Cardinal Comoes letter to Parrie, and Cardinal Allens
book to the Nobility of England in the year 1588. I am clearly of opinion
the beams of her honor had not shined so clearly and gloriously to the
world, as they did. Lastly, those singularities which you bring of being a
woman, a maiden Queen, and the last of her Race, they were indeed advantages
of admiration: but such in my judgment, as rather show that she was blessed
from heaven, then by any earthly means, in as much as living and dying both
without the help of an husband, and hope of an heir from her own body, she
notwithstanding proiected and effected so great matters, and so much good to
the State she governed.

B. C.
5.
As for the honor and greatness of the Turk and other Infidels, as it
reaches no farther then That is, as far as the drift of your reason proposed
in the 2. and 3. Section of this Chapter.
this life, so it has no beginning from above this world. And if we may
believe S. Ambrose in Luc. 4. and alib^, those honors are To confer is not
properly by a bare permission, but by donation.
conferred rather by Gods permission, then his donation, being indeed ordained
and ordered by his providence, but for the Kingdoms may be bestowed upon
wicked men for many other reasons besides the sins of the people: as to be a
scourge to other States, or for some other temporal service which either their
predecessors had done or themselves might do* or lastly as S. Jerome notes,
God thereby inuites them by his bounty that themselves should be converted
from their own sins. See T. Fitz^herbert of this poi^t in his treatise of
Policy and Religion, part. 1. ca. 17.
sins of the people, conferred by the Prince that rules in the air. It is
true that the Turkish Empire has now continued a long time, but they have
other principles of State to stand upon; the continual guarde of an His
ordinary guarde in Constantinople, and there about, are but 24. thousand, and
though many of them be taken from the breasts of their Christian mothers, yet
is it not the greatest part as you avouch.
hundredth thousand Soldiers, whereof most of them know none other Parents but
the Emperor, the tenure of all his Subjects, who hold all in Capite, ad
voluntatem Domini, by the service of the Sword, their enjoined silence and
reverence in matters of Religion, and their facility in admitting other
Religions, as well as their own to the hope of salvation and to tolerate them,
so that they be good Subjects. Their facility in admitting other religions
as well as their own to hope of Salvation, should in reason rather weaken their
Empire then fortify it, and those other principles of great importance rather
serve to make a tyrant, then to increase or maintain a temporal Christian
government.
These and such like are principles of great importance to increase an Empire,
and to maintain a temporal State: But there is no State in Christendom that
may endure these Principles, unless they mean to turn Turks also, which
although some be willing to do, yet they will neither hold in Capite, nor hold
their peace in Religion, nor suffer their King to have such a guard about him,
nor admit of Catholic Religion so much as the Turk does

G. H.
5.
You might with the Turk as well have joined the King of China, the Sophie of
Persia, the Chame of Tartarie; the great Magore, Presbiter John and the like,
whose estates few Christian Princes exceed, or can match in riches and
greatness: But that they should have their estates Conferred on them by the
Prince that rules in the air, neither Ambrose affirms it, nor is it in it
self true* Saint Ambrose his words are these, A Deo, potestatum ordinatio,
amalo, ambitio potestatis: The ordaining of the power is from God, but the
ambitious desire, not the conferring of it, from the devil. Indeed it is his
challenge in that chapter, [To whomsoever I will, I give it,] speaking of the
power and glory of earthly Kingdoms; but it is the voice of God speaking in
the person of wisdom, Romans 13.
in the 8th. of the Proverbs, [By me Kings reign,] and Saint Paul teaches
us, [There is no power, such as himself lived under, but of God,] to which
purpose it is well said of S. Augustine (whom M. Doctor pretends to follow
most among the ancients) [Qui dedit Mario, De Ciuit d^i. lib. 5. Cap. 21.
ipse and Cesari: Qui Augusto, ipse and Neroni: Qui Vespasiano vel patri, vel
filio, suauissimis imperatoribus, ipse and Domitiano crudelissimo: and ne per
singulos ire necesse sit, Qui Constantino Christiano, ipse apostatae Iuliano:
He that gave it to Marius, gave it to Caesar: He that gave it to Augustus,
gave it to Nero: He that gave it to Vespasian* the father or his son most
sweet Emperors, gave it also to Domitian the most cruel: and that I should
not need to reckon up the rest in particular, He that gave it to Constantine
the Christian, gave it to Julian the apostata.] So then in Saint Augustines
opinon God did not only order those honors by his providence, as you would
have it, but confer them by his bounty. Neither have we any reason to think,
but that he who called Cyrus his Shepherd and his Anointed, and gave him the
treasures of darkness, and assured Nabuchadonosor by his Prophet, that
himself had given to him a Kingdom, and power, and strength, and glory, may
as truly be said to have conferred that government upon the Turk which now
he holds. But it seems you aim through the Turks sides to strike at Queen
Elizabeth, and through her at King James, Infidels and Heretics being in the
Roman language ranked together: So that their king domes being not by Gods
donation, they might lie loose, and by occasion fall as it were by excheate to
his holiness gift. Your reasons of the largeness and long continuance of the
Turkish Empire are as far from the purpose, as your whole discourse is from
any sound Divinity: for not to stand upon the sifting of the truth of them,
which in some of them may not unjustly be questioned, your inference is that
such principles are of great importance to increase and maintain a temporal
estate: But the point is, whether any can be of sufficient importance to uphold
any estate, when God for the dishonouring of his CHRIST is purposed to ruin
it, and as the Psalmist speaks [of a fruitful land to make it barren for the
iniquity of the people that dwell therein] before you speak of a Supernatural
judgment of God in destruction, and here of a Natural and humane invention
for preservation, which can hold no more proportion with the former, then a
Venice glass with an iron pot, or an earthen vessel with a brazen. Lastly,
what states you should mean that are willing to become Turkish, I know not;
but what they are that enjoy their estates in capite Ecclesiae ad voluntatem
Domini Papae, and enjoin the greatest silence, and outward reverence in
matters of Religion, and withal are content to admit the toleration of Jews
and Turks too, in their Dominions, rather then of Christians, your self when
you wrote this could not be ignorant. Nay, some of the Popes themselves, as
namely Alexander the VI. and Paulus the III. if we may credit Thuanus, had
secret commerce with the great Turk against the Christian Princes, and the
former of them, if Iouius, and Guicciardin mistake not, took under hand of the
Turk Baiazets two hundred thousand Crowns, to kill his brother Gemen. And
Alexander the III. wrote to the Sultan, that if he would live quietly, he
should by some slight murder the Emperor Frederike Barbarossa, and to that
end sent him the Emperors picture.

B. C.
6.
It is most true which I gladly write, and so give out with all the honor I
can of your Majesty, to speak that I think there was never any Catholic king
in England, that did in his time more embrace and favor the true body of the
Church of England, then your Majesty does the Since it was first a Church,
there were never so many able laborers in it, nor religion so sincerely
preached and professed, as by Gods grace it is at this day: so that it rather
deserves the name of a body, and yours of a shadow.
shadow thereof that is yet left: and my firm hope is that this your desire to
honor our blessed Savior in the shadow of the Church of England, will move
him to honor your Majesty so much, as not to suffer you to die out of the body
of his true Catholic Church; and in the mean time to let you understand, that
all honor that is intended to him by By Schism and Heresy you understand
schismatikes and heretics, and among them you rank his Majesty: Such is the
great* honor you do him, as the Jews dealt with Christ, so do you with his
anointed, they said, Hail King of the Jews, and they (...) him with the^r
rods. John 19. 3.
schism and heresy, does redound to his great dishonor, both in respect of
his realla, and of his mystical body.

G. H.
6.
You honor his Majesty much indeed, in giving out that he imbraceth a shadow
in stead of a substance, as Ixion did a cloud in stead of Juno, and Jacob
bleare-eyed Lea in stead of Rachel, but in truth of the Church of Rome we may
safely say, that with Esops dog in snatching at the shadow, she has lost the
substance of religion, she has so covered over all the parts of divine service
with the leaves of ceremonies, that hardly is the fruit it self to be seen,
she has so bepainted the face of Gods worship, that not easily is the native
complexion thereof to be ^ound. The Poet spoke it of the women of his time,
Pars minima est ipsa puellasui. But we may more truly affirm it of the Romish
religion, her ornaments and apparel are such, that a man may seek Rome in
Rome, and her religion in her religion, and not find either. I will give but
one instance for all. Bellarmine in the conclusion of his controversies of the
Sacrament of Baptism, makes no less then twelve ceremonies to march before
it, five to assist, and five to hold up the train, of which some are profane,
the greatest part ridiculous, and few or none (wherein we differ) so much as
known to the primitive Church. Now if the Church of England have scowred off
the dross, and pared away the superstition, and nouelty, retaining the
substance, together with the most comely and ancient ceremonies, as well in this
Sacrament, as in other parts of divine service, and his Majesty follow her
therein, shall he therefore be said to embrace the shadow and not the body?
whereas in truth if ever King of England embraced the body of religion without
respect to the shadow of vain and needless ceremonies, it is his Majesty,
which while he does, there is little fear (by Gods grace) of his dying out of
the body of Christ's true Catholic Church, whose head is, not the Bishop of
Rome, but Christ himself, understood in the 10. of S. John's Gospel [and there
shall be one sheepefold and one sheepeheard.]

B. C.
7.
For his real body is not (as the vbiquitaries would have it) every where,
as well without the Church as within, but only where himself would have it, and
has ordained that it should be, and that is amongst his Apostles, and
Disciples, and their successors in the Catholic Church, to whom he delivered
his Sacraments, and promised to continue with them until the worlds end: So
that though Christ be present in that Schism, by the power of his dietie (for
so he is present in Observe the moderation of this reconciler, who would bear
the world in hand that Christ is none otherwise present among us in our
Churches, then he is among the devils in hell.
hell also) yet by the grace of his humanity (by participation of which grace,
only there is hope of salvation) he is not present there at all, except it be
If they shall say unto you, Behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it
not. Mat. 24. 26.
in corners, and prisons, and places of persecution: and therefore whatsoever
honor is pretended to be done to Christ in schism and heresy, is not done to
him, but to his utter enemies.

G. H.
7.
By the real body of Christ, I suppose you understand the natural, his
mystical body being also real, but not natural: and I see not but this
natural body may as well be every where (wherein you tax the Vbiquitaries)
as in heaven and on earth, and upon earth in ten thousand places at the same
instant, which the Church of Rome maintains: but it seems by confining of him
to the Church on earth, your purpose is to exclude him from heaven; and surely
mine opinion is (God forgive me if I think amiss) that a great part of those
who profess his natural body to be here, doubt much of his being there. And
for the grace of his humanity (as you call it) thus much no Christian man will
deny, that when Christ sanctified his own flesh, giving as God, and taking as
man the holy Ghost, he did not this for himself only, but for our sakes, that
the grace of sanctification and life which was first received in him, might
pass from him to his whole race; as malediction came from Adam unto all
mankind. That which quickens us is the spirit of the second Adam, and his
flesh that wherewith he quickneth; our corruptible bodies could never live the
life they shall live, were it not that here they are joined with his body which
is incorruptible, and that his is in ours as a cause of immortality, and as
little doubt there is but that this vital and saving grace which flows from
the humanity of Christ, is imparted unto us by means of the Sacraments, they
being sensible instruments for the conueying of those blessings to our souls,
which are in themselves incomprehensible. And for that Sacrament which is most
properly said to impart life unto the receauer (as the other does food and
sustenance) it is acknowledged by those very men, who are otherwise most bitter
and uncharitable toward us, that children baptized with us, are thereby made
capable of eternal salvation, as far forth as if they had received that
Sacrament in that Church, and after that form which they call Catholic, and
consequently you are enforced (out of the strength of your own principles) to
grant (howbeit out of malice you labor to deny it,) that the grace of Christ's
humanity is not only present with us in corners and prisons among your
accomplices, but in our public congregations in a more special manner, then by
the power of his dietie, by which he is as well present among the devils in
hell, as among the Pope and Cardinals, assembled in consistory for the
subversion of states and ruin of kingdoms: yet to affirm, that he is none
otherwise present in that Church (except in corners and prisons and places of
persecution) but only by the power of his dietie, and not at all by the grace
of his humanity, I will neither be so unadvised as to deliver, nor so
uncharitable as to conceive; howbeit I have good reason both to conceive and to
deliver thus much, that the honor which you pretend you do him in your
will worship, cannot but redound to his great dishonor, nay our assurance is,
that being successors of his Apostles and Disciples in doctrine, as you are of
the Pharisees in traditions, the promise of his presence to the worlds end, as
well by the sanctification, as the direction of his holy Spirit, is rather made
to us then you.

B. C.
8.
And for his mystical body, which is his Church and Kingdom, there can be no
greater dishonor done to Christ, then to maintain Schism and discention
therein* What would your Majesty think of any subjects of yours, that should
go about to raise Who are more guilty of this, then your Priests and Jesuits?
civil dissension or wars in your Kingdom, and of those that should foster
and adhere unto such men? It is the fashion of all rebels when they are in
arms to Was not this the pretense of Thomas P^r^y Earl of Northumberland, and
Charles Neuill Earl of Westmerland, when they took arms, and raised forces
against their Sovereign in the year 1569. and yet sent out Proclamations and
Commissions in her name? which notwithstanding they ceased not to be Popish
traitou^s, howbeit the Spanish expurgatory index labors to clear them from
that imputation, as also the Earl of Desmond, and a notorious traitor of
Ireland, by rasing that ^estimonie of them in M. Cambden, who justly records
them so to posterity.
pretend the safety of the king, and the good of the country; but pretend what
they will, you cannot account such men any better then traitors; and shall we
believe that our blessed Savior the King of kings, does sit in heaven, and
either not see the practices of those that under color of serving him by
reformation, do nothing else but Who have served their own turns most, and
raised more sedition, the Clergy of Rome, by their unjust usurpation, or the
Clergy of England by their just reformation, I leave to the world to judge.
serve their own turns, and distract his Church, that is his kingdom on
earth by sedition? or shall we think that he will not in time revenge this
wrong? verily he sees it, and does regard it, and will in time revenge it.

G. H.
8.
We as willingly grant, as you are ready to prove, that a great dishonor is
done to Christ, by maintaining Schism and dissension in his Church, which
ought to be without seame, as his coat. But we demand, who were the authors
of this Schism? they which departed not from the Church it self, but from the
corruptions thereof, or they who stiffely maintaining those corruptions,
enforced this departure? when Jacob was driven to depart from Laban by his ill
usage, was the breach in Jacob, or in Laban? when God commands his people to
go out of Babylon lest they should partake of her sins and plagues, does
the going out of the people make a Schism, or the sins of Babylon? It is
true that we have forsaken that society which we held with Rome, but no
farther then Rome it sel^^ ^ath forsaken Christ: and howsoever she pretend the
hon^^^ of Christ, as rebels do the name of the King and State, yet in truth
she is Antichristian in persecuting the members of Christ, and as in many other
things, so chiefly in challenging that universality of power and infallibility
of judgment to her self, which is only due to our Savior. And shall we
think that he will not in time revenge this wrong? It cannot be but that [her
sins are come up to heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities, and in due
time that command will take place, Reward her as she has rewarded you, and
give her double according to her works, and in the cup that she has filled
to you, fill her the double; in so much as she glorified her self, and lived
in pleasure, so much give ye to her of torment and sorrow: for she says in
her heart, I sit being a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning*
Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and
she shall be burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord God, which will condemn
her.] And thus our assurance is, that your threats shall return upon your
selves, verily he sees it, and does regard, and will in time revenge it.

B. C.
9.
But I This is the hope and prayer o^ you all, as long as you want st^ength,
but if you had that once, we should quickly hear you change your note, and
sing another song. In the mean time we can account your prayer none other then
as theirs in the last Psalm, save one who have the praise of God in their
mouth, and a two edged sword in their hands, either be what you would seem, or
seem to be what indeed you are.
hope and pray that he will not revenge it upon you nor yours: but rather that
he will show that your desire to honor him, is accepted of him, and therefore
will move you to honor your self and your posterity, with bestowing the same
your favor upon his Church in the unity thereof, which you do now bestow in
the Schism, and that he will reward both you and yours for the same,
according to his promise, not only with everlasting glory in heaven, but also
with long continued temporal honor and security in this world, and this is
the first reason of my hope grounded upon the promise of God.

G. H.
9.
You are herein somewhat more manerly in words, though little less malicious in
heart then Dr. Bishop, a bird of the same feather, who in an Epistle directed
in like manner to his MAJESTY as yours is, spares not to speak out, but tells
him plainly [when they see no hope of remedy, the state being now settled, and
a continual posterity like to ensue of one nature and condition, God knows
what that forcible weapon of necessity may constrain and drive men unto at
length:] But thanks be unto God the Father of our Lord Jesus CHRIST, who has
so fixed and stablished the Royal heart of our gracious Sovereign, as that
neither his bloody threats, nor your sugared promises, can move it one point
from the center of that truth which himself has still professed, and in
which his posterity are trained up. And thus the weakness of the foundation,
upon which the first reason of your vain hope is grounded, is discovered. God
in his promises is always most sure, but this your reason pretended to be
grounded thereupon most unsure, since neither the true Religion is found at
this day in that Church which you call Catholic* neither are temporal
blessings always annexed to that Religion which is indeed true. Thus much you
might have learned of Hall the Jesuit, who after the discovery of the
Powderplot, recites unto Littleton for his comfort certain examples of
Heretics ouercomming Catholics in battle, and Infidels overthrowing
Christians, or of father Robert Parsons in his Reply to his MAJESTY touching
Queen ELIZABETH'S happiness; [outward felicities (says he) are worldlings
arguments, no necessary improuements of Gods blessing,] howbeit Father Robert
Bellarmine makes it one of the 15. and Bozius one of his 100. notes of the true
Church: but much rather and better might you have learned it of the Prophet
David, who was so sorely perplexed with this point, that till he went into the
Sanctuary of God, and there upon consultation with him understood the reason
of it, he was well nigh at his wits end, saying to himself in a kind of
despair, [ Psalm. 73.
Then have I cleansed mine heart in vain, in vain have I washed mine hands in
innocence.] Yet if the argument were infallible, God has approved the truth
of his Majesty's Religion by those manifold outward blessings and miraculous
deliverances, which of his merc^e he has vouchsafed him: So that his Majesty
might justly take up that of the same Prophet in another place, [ Psalm. 103.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: who redeemeth
thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness, and tender
mercies] and our hope and unfeigned prayer to God is, that whiles his Majesty
cease not in this manner to honor God, God will not cease in like manner to
honor him and his posterity, with many blessings in this world, and in the
next with eternal happiness.

B. C.
10.
The In the front of this reason, you seem to disstinguish it from the former,
but in the pursuit of this Section you merely confound them.
second reason of my hope that Catholic Religion may be a great means of
honor and security to your Majesty's posterity, is taken from the
consideration of your neighbors, the Kings and Princes of Christendom; among
whom there is In saying so, you cannot but put his Majesty to rebuke also,
there being the like, and none other reason of him and of other Kings, who have
disclaimed union with Rome.
no state ancient and truly honorable, but only those that are Catholic:
The reason whereof I take to be, because the I marvel much where those rules
were to be found, for the space of the first 300. years after Christ, and
whether ye greatness and Majesty of the great Turk, or King of China be not
beyond all the rules that Catholic Religion delivers in that kind.
rules of Catholic Religion are Eternal, Universal, and Constant unto
themselves, and with all so consonant to Majesty, and Greatness, as they have
made and preserved the Catholic Church reverent and venerable throughout the
Christian world for these thousand and six hundred years, and those temporal
states that have been conformable thereunto have been always most
honorable, and so are like to continue until they hearken unto Schism. And
as for those that have rejected and opposed the rules of Catholic Religion,
they have been driven in short time to degenerate, and become either
tyrannical or popular. Your Majesty I know does abhor tyranny, but if
Schism and Heresy might have their full swinge over the Seas, the very shadow
and relics of Majesty in England should be utterly defaced, and quickly
turned into Heluetian or Belgian popularity: for they that make no conscience
to profane the Majesty of God, and his Saints in the Church, will, when they
feel their strength make no bones to What they are that despise government,
and speak evil of those that be in authority, his Majesty is not now to
seek.
violate the Majesty of the King, and his children in the common wealth.

G. H.
10.
Having opened your entrance to a second reason in show, but indeed the same
with the former, you tell us that among all the Kings and Princes of
Christendom, there is no state ancient and truly honorable, but only those
that are Catholic; wherein you do the King of Denmark and Sweden, specially
the former, great honor, in consideration belike of his near alliance to his
Majesty, as also to all the secular Princes of Germany, (the house of Austria
and the Duke of Bauaria only excepted) and among the rest the Prince Elector
Palatine of Rhine, his Majesty's son in law is most bound to thank you, and
it seems you conceived so much by intending your journey to Hydelberg: and
good reason you should have been welcome, considering you make both him and all
the rest of the Kings and Princes of Christendom that have forsaken Communion
with the Church of Rome, to be both base and tyrannical: whereas I may be bold
to say it, that at this day there are none more moderate in their governments,
then those whom you call Schismatikes, and of them the greatest part were never
so flourishing, as since they renounced society with that Church, specially
the Heluetians and Belgians, in whom you instance, being grown more rich, more
powerful and politic in their affairs, then ever before: And for popularity
the Heluetians had it long before any change of religion, and those very
Cantons which call themselves Catholic, retain that form and none other unto
this day: And for the Belgians it appears by the Prince of Orange his
Apollogie, that they ever challenged their freedom as due by the Capitulations
between them and their governors the Dukes of Burgundy, and now at last after
so much Christian blood spilt (as all the world knows) in the Articles of
peace concluded between the King of Spain and them, they are declared a free
State. Now whether they make any conscience of profaning the Majesty of God,
let their published Confessions which testify, and he that compares their
practice with that of the Italians, may easily judge of the tree by the fruits,
whether we regard the profanation of his Majesty in the blaspheming of his
Name, or the disgracing of his word, or the vnsanctifying of his day; and for
his Saints they all agree (I speak for the maine body of their guides and
professors) in giving them as much honor as they are lawfully capable of, or
would themselves willingly receive; and if this be the heresy you mean, we
profess it has had its full swinge over seas already, but do not yet
perceive that ther^by the Majesty of our King is any way violated, but rather
strengthened and increased. Lastly, whereas you tell us that you take the
reason of all this to be, because the rules of Catholic religion are
eternal, universal and constant to themselves; I grant there is and ought to
be a mutual dependence betwixt religion and civil policy, the one both
giving and receiving life and strength unto, and from the other: yet true
religion medleth not so much with the temporal state, as to hinder or further
the proceedings of it, otherwise then by the force of the word and the power of
Ecclesiastical censures: but that which you call the Catholic religion, has
(like the Iuie that grows into the wall) so incorporated and intwisted it
self into the bowels of those States where it is settled, that it can hardly
be rooted out, or removed without endangering the bodies of the States
themselves, which cannot but give us just occasion to suspect, that it is for
the most part in the points controuersed between us, nothing else but a
policy invented of men, to serve their own turns. And consequently according
to your own rule set down in the second Section of your first chapter, a
false and counterfeit religion. And in truth when we shall come to examine
the rules of that Church, we shall find that they are not so consonant to the
Majesty and greatness of temporal Princes, as you pretend, but rather tend
to the trampling of their Majesty under foot, and laying their honor in the
dust, and to the advancing and raising of the greatness of the Bishop of Rome
to the utmost pitch and possibility of height. Some of these rules which make
so much for the Majesty of Kings are brought by Bellarmine, and by his
Majesty truly observed and quoted in the latter end of his Apology for the
Oath for Allegiance, which because they are so pat to this present purpose, I
will crave pardon to borrow and annexe hereunto: they are twelve in all, a fit
number for the Jesuits Creed, or to make up a full Jury to pass a verdict
upon Mr. Doctors Assertion.

De La^ci^* cap. 7
That Kings are rather slaves then Lords.

De Ponti. To. lib. 1. cap. 7.
That they are not only subjects to Popes, to Bishops, to Priests, but even to
Deacons.

Ibidem.
That an Emperor must content himself to drink, not only after a Bishop,
but after a Bishops Chaplen.

Ibidem and de Cler. cap. 20.
That Kings have not their authority nor office immediately from God, nor his
Law, but only from the law of nations.

De Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 16.
That Popes have degraded Emperors, but never Emperor degraded the Pope: nay,
even Lib. 5. cap. 8.
Bishops that are but the Popes vassals, may depose Kings, and abrogate their
laws.

De Laicis, cap. 8.
That Churchmen are as far above Kings, as the soul is above the body.

De Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 8.
That Kings may be deposed by their people for diverse respects.

De Pontif. lib* 2* cap. 26.
But Popes can be deposed by no means: for no flesh has power to judge of
them.

De Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 15.
That obedience due to the Pope is for conscience sake.

D^ Clericis, cap. 28.
But the obedience due to Kings is only for certain respects of order and
policy.

Ibidem.
That those very Churchmen that are borne and inhabit in Sovereign Princes
countries, are notwithstanding not their Subjects, and cannot be judged by
them, although they may judge them.

Ibidem.
And that the obedience that Churchmen give to Princes even in the meanest and
mere temporal things, is not by way of any necessary subjection, but only
out of discretion, and for observation of good order and Custom.

His Majesty's inference hereupon is this: These contrarieties (says he)
between the Book of God and Bellarmines books, have I here set in opposition
each to other, [vt ex contrarijs iuxta se positis veritas magis elucescere
possit:] and thus far I dare boldly affirm, that whosoever will
indifferently weigh these irreconciliable contradictions here set down, will
easily confess that Christ is no more contrary to Beliall, light to
darkness, and heaven to hell, then Bellarmines estimation of Kings is to
Gods, by whom they are called (as his Majesty notes before) 2. Sam. 7. 14.
The sons of the most High, nay, Psalm 82 6.
Gods themselves, 1. Sam. 24. 11.
The Lords anointed, 2. Chro. 9. 8.
Sitting in his throne, 2. Sam. 14. 20.
The angels of God, 2. Sam. 21. 17.
The light of Israel, Isay 49. 23.
The nursing fathers of the Church, with innumerable such styles of honor,
wherewith the old Testament is filled; and as for the New Testament, Every soul
is commanded to be subject unto them, even for conscience sake. All men must be
prayed for, but specially Kings, and those that are in authority. Romans 13. 5.
The Magistrate is the minister of God to do vengeance on him that does evil,
1 Timothy 2. 2.
and reward him that does well: yea, we must obey all higher powers, but
specially Princes, and those that are supereminent. Romans 13. 4.
Give unto Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is Gods: Matthew. 22. 11.
So that we may justly conclude out of his Majesty's true collections, and
just inferences, that the rules of holy Scripture which we make our principal
and only infallible level, as well in matter of manners as of doctrine, are
indeed most consonant to the majesty and greatness of Kings; but the rules of
that religion which you call Catholic, as they are reported by Bellarmine,
(next his Holiness, the chief pillar and Proctor thereof this age has
aforded) most disconsonant and repugnant thereunto. I cannot but wonder then
what Mr. Doctor meant to write thus to his Majesty, who having so particularly
and exquisitely published his mind to the world in this point, it must needs
argue gross ignorance and negligence in him, not to have read or observed what
was by him written, or a strong presumption of his own ability with one
breath of his mouth, or blot of his pen to persuade his Majesty to the contrary.

B. C.
11.
I know well that the Puritans of England, the Hugonots of France, and the
Geuses of Germany, together with the rest of the Caluinists of all sorts are a
great faction of Christendom, and they are glad to have the pretense of so
great a Majesty to be Neither the Dutch nor the French acknowledge his
Majesty their chief.
their chief; and of your posterity to be their hope: But I cannot be
persuaded that they ever will or can join together to advance your Majesty or
your children further then they may make a present gain by you, they are not
agreed of their religion, nor of the principles of universal and eternal
truth, and how can they be constant in the rules of particular and transitory
honor, where there is nullum principium ordinis, there can be nullum
principium honoris: such is their case, there is a voice of confusion among
them as well in matters of State, as of Religion: their power is great, but not
to edification: they join together only They join together against the
visible Monarchy of the church, or rather the tyranny of the Pope which you
call order, but good it can not be, being not from God.
against good order which they call the common enemy, and if they can destroy
that, they will in all likelihood turn their fury against themselves, and like
devils I desire to learn where you find that the devils torment one another:
once we are sure, if they did but help to cast out one another, their kingdom
could not stand.
torment, like serpents devour one another: in the mean time of they can You
seem to intend the Netherlands, which notwithstanding was never a kingdom,
nor their Bourgers Princes: but how the Pope has turned the ancient kingdom
of the Romans into a new State, and made himself of a Priest, a temporal
Prince, we are not ignorant.
make their Bourgers Princes, and turn old kingdoms into new States, it is
like enough they will do it, but that they will ever agree together to make
any Neither can I persuade my self that your Catholics will ever join
together to make one King over them all, though the Jesuits it may be both
desire and endeavor it.
one Prince, King or Emperor over them all, and yield due obedience unto him
further then either their gain shall allure them, or his sword shall compel
them, that I cannot persuade myself to believe: and therefore I cannot hope
that your Majesty or your posterity can expect the like honor or security
from them, which you might do from Catholic Princes, if you were joined
firmly to them in the unity of Religion.

G. H.
11.
His Majesty neither needs nor desires advancement from foreign parts, or
parties: yet we cannot but acknowledge that those whom you call The word Geuse
in their language signifies a beggar.
Geuses of Germany (a nicke name first imposed on the Netherlanders by
Barlamont a Spanish factor) (who withstood the bringing in of the Spanish
Inquisition among them, and upon occasion of that name, took for their device
a wallet and a dish, with this Inscription; Faithful to God and the King even
to bear the Wallet: Inferring thereby, that they were better Subjects then
Barlamont and his adherents) are more able upon all occasions to second his
Majesty, specially upon the Seas, then any other State in Christendom. What
service they did us in the year 1588. by keeping the Prince of Parma from
joining with the Spanish fleet, which had swallowed us up in conceit, it is
well known, and no doubt but being confederates and friendly used, they would
be ready upon like occasion to perform the like friendly office. And for
those whom you call Catholics, I would know how many of them labor to advance
their confederates farther then it stands with their own advantage or
reputation.

In matter of Religion the Netherlander, Heluetian, and French differ not at
all: and from some States of the higher Germany, they differ not so much as
the French Catholic, from the Romish and Spanish, in as much as the latter
admit of the Council of Trent, the former not so: and again, (which is
another notable and maine point of difference) the former submit the Pope to a
general Council, the latter not, but as they have made him transcendent over
Kings; so have they over Bishops too, not only single, but assembled in
Synod. So that upon the matter they were as good keep themselves at home, and
save so much travel and charge: But to grant those (whom notwithstanding you
call Caluinists without exception or distinction) were not agreed of their own
religion, yet to say that the rules of particular and transitory honor depend
upon the principles of universal and eternal truth, it can by no means be
admitted as a true principle, since those rules by reason may be, and by
practice are as certain and constant amongst Infidels as Christians. No people
were ever more punctual and precise in terms of honor then the ancient
Grecians and Romans, yet were they we know without God in the world, without
the knowledge of universal and eternal truth. And the same may be justified
of many of the Eastern princes at this day: but I cannot but marvel at your
folly (specially taking upon you to play the Statesman) in telling his Majesty
that the Caluinists will never agree together in making any one king over them
all, as if any Prince in Christendom were so senseless as to expect it, or
they so mad as to offer it, considering they are all either under the obedience
of other Sovereigns, or free Estates of themselves: And yet no doubt but as
great security may be expected from them, as from your Catholics, though his
Majesty were united to them in Religion, in as much as they maintain not the
lawfulness of aequiuocation, nor acknowledge any superior power able to
assoile them from the obligation of their oaths, and solemn promises. What
reason has his Majesty (if he were as firmly joined to them in the unity
of their Religion, as the Pope himself could desire) to expect greater
security from them then his Predecessors found at the hands of their
Ancestors, or themselves upon occasion and opportunity find at the hands each
of other? Nay if they find no security many times from the Popes themselves,
who are the pretended heads of that Religion, with what assurance can they
expect it one from another, being thereby only linked together as members unto
that head? It has been said of some of them, how justly I leave to those who
have made trial, that they neither sing as they prick, nor pronounce as they
write* nor speak as they think: the latter of which (if we may credit
Comines) might justly be verified of Lewis the XI. of France, who made show of
devotion in the unity of that religion, no man more, in so much that he would
often swear by, and kiss his Nostredam of lead which he ever wore as a brouch
in his hat, yet what little security other princes of the same religion found
at his hands in their contracts with him, the same historiographer who was well
acquainted with his secrets, witnesses, and were he silent, yet his counsel
given to his son Charles the eight, that he should learn no more latin but
this, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare, would speak as much; which
lesson is indeed only recorded of him, but it may rather be wished, then
thought that it is not learned and practiced of the greatest part of the great
ones in the world; Machiauels name being hateful and odious to all, but his
rules and preceps too much embraced of some.

B. C.
12.
The third reason of my hope that Catholic religion should be most available
for the honor and security of your Majesty and your children, is taken from
the consideration of your subjects, which can be kept in obedience to God and
to their king by no other religion, and least of all by the Bellarmine charge
not only Calum with this opinion, but Zuinglius and Kellison, Melancthon, who
were not Caluinists.
Caluinists: for if their principles be received once, and well drunk in, and
digested by your Subjects, they will openly maintain that God has as well
predestined men to be Surely that Pope who in his Conclaue told his Cardinals
that the dominican Friar murdered the French King by the will of God, by his
ordinance, by the aid of the Almighty, by his special help, spoke little
less, yet is that oration verified by Warmington a Romish priest, sometimes
Chapleine to Card. Allen, from whom himself got a copy.
traitors, as to be kings, and he has as well predestined men to be
thieves, as to be judges, and he has as well predestined that men should
sin, as that Christ should die for sin; which kind of disputations I know
by my experience in the country, that they are ordinary among your country.
Caluinists, that They might quickly be as learned as your self in the
Scriptures, for any thing appears in this Epistle.
take themselves to be learned in the Scriptures, especially when they are met
in an Belike your self were present to take your part of the ale, or you had
good intelligence with the alewise.
alehouse and have found a weaker brother whom they think fit to instruct in
these profound mysteries: and howsoever they be not yet all so impudent as to
hold these conclusions in plain terms, yet it is certain they all hold
these principles of doctrine from whence working heads of greater liberty, do
at their pleasures draw these consequences in their lives and practices: and is
this a religion fit to keep subjects in obedience to their Sovereign?

G. H.
12.
Your third reason to persuade his Majesty to the renouncing of his own
religion, and the embracing of yours is, by bearing him in hand that none other
will keep his subjects in obedience, and least of all the Caluinisticall. But
is it possible so learned and so wise a man as you take your self to be,
should write in this manner, and withal remember that your letter was directed
to his Majesty, who has long since 1 In his speech in Parliament after the
Powder treason.
proclaimed it to the world that [ no other sect of heretics, not excepting
Turk, Jew, nor Pagan, no not even those of Calicute, who adore the devil, did
ever maintain it by the grounds of their religion, Mark (by the grounds of
their religion) that it was lawful or rather meritorious (as the Romish
Catholics call it) to murder princes, or people for quarrel of religion: And
although particular men of all professions of religion, have been some
thieves, some murderers, some traitors, yet ever when they came to their end
and just punishment, they confessed their fault to be in their nature, and not
in their profession, these Romish Catholics only excepted.] And if that be
your religion which we find maintained by the chief pillars and Doctors of
your Church, and determined to be Catholic by your Popes and Cardinals,
surely we have as little reason to entertain your doctrine, as we have good
reason ever to be jealous of your practice. Your doctrine is, That the Pope, if
he think good, may excommunicate and depose kings, and dispose of their
kingdoms, by absoluing their subjects from their allegiance, and setting
foreign princes to invade there dominions, as if they held not their Crowns
from God, but from him, and as if they were to write no more in their styles,
by the grace of God, but by the Popes grace, king of such or such a kingdom.
Your doctrine is, that treason delivered under the seal of confession is not
to be discovered, though it be to the indangering of your Soueraigns person,
and the subversion of the whole body of the State. Your doctrine is, That as
many Churchmen as are in the Kingdom (which in most is a third part, in some
more) they are all exempted from the coertion of the civil Magistrate, being
for punishment, whether in body or in estate, only liable to the censures of
Ecclesiastical courts, which have both dependence upon the Popes authority,
and direction from his Canon Law. Your doctrine is, That as many Bishops and
Archbishops as are any where consecrated, ought to take their oath to be true
and loyal to their good Lord and holy Father of Rome, to the utmost to execute
and further his Commands, without any limitation or reference to the
authority of their Sovereign Lord the King, as may appear by the tenor of
the oath here ensuing, which I have annexed, to the end the Reader may judge
whether this be the only Religion (as Mr. Doctor pretends) to keep
Subjects in obedience to their Kings.

[I John Bishop or Abbot of A. from this hour forward, shall be faithful and
obedient to S. Peter, and to the Holy Church of Rome, and to my Lord the Pope
and his Successors Canonically entering. I shall not be of counsel, nor
consent that they shall lose either life or member, or shall be taken or
suffer any violence or any wrong by any means. Their counsel to me credited
by them, their messengers or Letters, I shall not willingly discover to any
person. The Popedom of Rome, the rules of the holy Fathers, and the regalities
of S. Peter, I shall help, retain and defend against all men. The Legate of
the Sea Apostolic going and coming, I shall honorably entreat. The rights
honors, privileges, authorities of the Church of Rome, and of the Pope and
his Successors, I shall cause to be conserved, defended, augmented and
promoted. I shall not be in Counsel, Treaty, or any act in the which any
thing shall be imagined against him or the Church of Rome, their rights,
states, honors or power: And if I know any such to be moved or compassed, I
shall resist to my power, and as soon as I can, I shall advertise him, or such
as may give him knowledge. The rules of the Holy Fathers, the decrees,
ordinances, sentences, dispositions, reseruations, provisions, and
commandments Apostolic, I shall keep to my power and cause to be kept of
other. Heretics, Schismatikes and Rebels to our Holy Father and his
Successors, I shall resist and persecute to my power. I shall come to the
Synod when I am called, except I be let by a Canonical impediment. The lights
of the Apostle I shall visit personally, or by my deputy: I shall not aliene
or sell my possessions without the Popes Council, so God me help and the
holy Evangelists.]

No marvel then that Henry the eight when he commanded the form of this
Oath to be publicly read in Parliament, complained to the Speaker Sir Tho.
Audely and some others, whom for that purpose he sent for, that he had thought
the Clergy of his Realm had been his Subjects wholly, [but now we have well
perceived (says he) that they are to us but half Subjects, or indeed scarce
Subjects at all.] Finally, your doctrine is, that the Christians in the
Primative Church abstained from taking arms, not so much for conscience sake,
as because they wanted strength: which must needs open a wide gappe to the
people, upon any humorous discontent, when they once feel their own strength,
like an untamed horse to cast their rider if they may; and that I may speak in
your own phrase, to make no bones of violating the Majesty of the king and his
children, and is this a Religion fit to keep Subjects in obedience to their
Sovereigns?

Whereas our doctrine on the other side is, That the persons of princes are
sacred, and by Gods ordinance privileged from all violence: and for their
actions, that they are only accomptable to God, their Crowns and Scepters not
disposeable by any; but by him who set the one upon their heads, and the other
in their hands, who has the name written on his thigh, King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, (who as Job speaks) [ Job. 12. 19. 21.
leads Princes away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty, and again he
powers contempt upon Princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty.]
Lastly, our doctrine is, that the Subjects duty is not by any dispensable,
but by him alone, who by his divine providence subjected them to that power.
Now whether of these doctrines, ours or yours is most likely to keep men in
obedience, even our enemies shall be our Judges: Yet this to be your doctrine
your books witness, and no man of learning and ingenuitie among you will
deny.

But for our doctrine you pretend the opinions of Caluinists, and those
country Caluinists, and those met in an Alehouse, not in plain terms, but by
consequences gathered, not by sober or settled brains upon judgment, but by
working heads of greater liberty at their pleasure, and that not in their
books or speeches, but in their lives and practices. Thus the mountains swell
as if we should have a giant borne; but at length after much expectation we
have a little mouse brought into the world. What Mr. Doctor, are there no
principles in the Romish Catholic Religion, from whence working heads, of
greater liberty, do at their pleasures draw the like dangerous consequences
in their lives and practices? If there be none, how comes it to pass that
there are so many of that profession by whose deeds a man may safely guess,
they say in their hearts there is no God? If there be any, why do you so
pathetically exclaim against Caluinists, as if they stood single in this bill
of indictment? Shall we accuse our Blessed SAVIOVR, because he is to some a
rock of offense, or his precious Word, because to some it proves a savor of
death unto death? and if we must acquit him, and lay the fault where it is, on
them who draw poison to hurt themselves out of the sweetest flowers, and dazell
their own eyes by looking on the comfortable beams of the Sun, surely you
have no reason in my judgment in this case (as by your self it is opened) to
accuse our doctrine.

I am not ignorant that all the Popes chiefest Proctors lay it confidently to
our charge, In 1. 2. d. 129. n. 2.
In 1. Iac.
That we make God the author as well of sudas his treason, 10. reas. cap. 8.
as Paul's vocation; Demonst. 1 3 7.
as well of David's adultery as Joseph's chastity; Lection. 8. par. ^.
as namely Vasquez, De sig. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Feuardentius, Campian, In h^^ epist. to Cham.
Hayus, Panigirolla, Bozius, Ignatius, Armandus, Kellison, Posseuin, Bellarmin.
In his Suruay. l. 5. c. 2.
But I will be bold to say it, there is none of our writers of note, even among
them, who are reputed the most zealous followers of Calvin, Bib. sell. li. 8. c.
11
have written any more in this point then Occham, De amiss. gra. lib. 2. cap. ^
3.
Hugo de Sancto Victore, Lib. 3. q. 12.
Gregorius Ariminensis, de sac. l. 1. pa. 4. c. 12.
Cardinal Cameracensis Medina, Durandus, Bannes, Scotus, Thomas, and
Bellarmine himself, who as his Majesty rightly observes in the Catalogue of
his contradictions set down in his Apology, 2. d. 34. q. 1. art. 3.
manifestly opposes himself touching his opinion in this point, 1. q. 13.
art. 1. pa. 1 9 3.
in the Book and Chapter before quoted, 1 2. q. 93. art. 6. pa. 4 96.
in as much as he affirms in the 3. Section thereof, 2. d. 37. q. 1.
that God does not incline a man to evil either naturally or morally, 1. par.
q 49. ar. 2
Lib. 1. did. 41.
In 9. ad Romans lect. 3.
and in the tenth Section of the same Chapter avouches the clean contrary,
namely, that God does not incline to evil naturally but morally: and in the
same place he is bold to say, that God not only permits wicked men to do
many evils, but that by a figure he commands it, and exciteth men unto it, as
a huntsman sets the dog upon the Hare, by letting go the slip that held
the dog: Nay, he further adds, he fits as president over the wills of
wicked men: he rules and governs them, Torquet ac flectit in eis
inuisibiliter operando.
he boweth and bends them by working inuisibly in them, and that positiuely,
as he acknowledges within a few lines, though before he deny it: These very
words of Bellarmine does Kellison reprehend in Calvin, in the 1. Chap. of his
book of his Suruay, the same man makes Calvin to teach that God is the only
sinner, in as much as he doubts not to say, that the will of God is the
necessity of things, whereas indeed they are S. Augustines words, de Genesis ad
lit. lib. 6. cap. 15. and so rightly quoted by Calvin, though Kellison profess
S. Augustine have no such thing in the place by him alleged. So that if they
had the charity to interpret the speeches of our men as gently and favorably
as they do their own, there would appear little difference, or none at all,
and I will undertake to show, if I be put to it, that many speeches and
passages go for current and Catholic doctrine among them, which if they
should be alleged out of Calvin, would be censured as heresy: but it seems
the ground of the song which Mr. Doctor here descanteth on, was taken out of
Kellison in the forenamed book and chapter, where he alleges Caluins words
to be these, but falsely quoted out of his 37. Book: [I grant that thieves and
murderers, and other evil doers are the instruments of Gods providence, whom
the Lord does use to execute those judgments which he has himself
determined,] as if Calvin said any more, or so much herein then S. Peter has
given him warrant for, in the 4 chap. of the Acts, where he thus speaks, [
Verse. 27. 28.
Of a truth against thy holy child JESUS whom thou have anointed, both Herod
and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel were gather^d
together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to
be done.] or Joseph in the 45. of Genesis, comforting his brother, Verse. 5.
God did send me before you to preserve life: or Job when the Caldeans had
robbed him of his cattle, and flaine his servants, Cap. 1. 21.
The Lord has taken away: or the Prophet Esaias, where he likeneth the King of
Assyria to an Cap. 10. 15.
Axe, to a Saw, to a Rod, to a Staff moved and directed by the hand of God,
for the execution of his judgments: wherefore let Kellison either accuse these
holy penmen of God, and teach them to correct their manner of speaking, or let
him cease to accuse Calvin for this passage, who there in affirms no more,
nor so much as they do.

To conclude, what we maintain in this point touching the will or cooperation
of God in sin or with sinners, is among many others fully and clearly
delivered by the pens of the most Reverend father in God the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, now being, in the last of his six solemn Lectures, read
in the University of Oxford, for his degree of Doctorship, of Doctor Abbot now
L. Bishop of Salisbury in his answer to Doctor Bishops preface to his second
part, of Doctor Morton Deane of Winchester in the first Book and 25. Chap. of
his Cath. Apology, of Doctor Field Deane of Gloucester in his third Book and
23. Chapter of the Church, and lastly of my late worthy Colleague Doctor White,
in the 41. Digression, and 50. Paragraph of The way to the Church. The sum of
all is this, that about and concerning sin God does three things; first as a
cause universal he sustaineth and vpholdeth the being and moving, both of
the nature and actions whether good or bad of all mankind: Secondly, by
withdrawing his grace which should lighten the understandings and soften and
mollify the hearts of men: Thirdly by giving way to Satan, to work upon them,
and no way either strengthening them against him, or weakening his force:
Fourthly, by ordinating sin, which is nothing else but the disposing and
directing of it in such manner and measure, as to him seems best, that it
stretches it self no further or otherwise, either for time or place, or
persons, then his good pleasure wills: sometimes he turns it to another end
then the person doing it thought of, sometimes he makes way for it by shutting
up and stopping all other passages by which it might break forth, sometimes
he punishes one sin with another, as pride is punished with envy, he being
not the author of envy, as it is sinful, but as is it carries a sting with
it, implying a contrariety between it and the soul of man, which makes it
bitter and afflictiue. Fifthly and lastly, by occasioning sin accidentally, as
when God does that which in it self is good, and yet knows through the
evil disposition which is in men, it will give occasion to increase their
wickedness, and make it greater then it was before. This I take to be the
substance and effect of that we hold touching this point, and I doubt not but
the undertaking of my deceased fellow Chaplain may be made good, in showing
every parcel of this doctrine in the writings of those, who either live or
died in profession, members of the Church of Rome. To conclude then, God
predestinateth no man to be a Traitor or a Thief, but foreseeing he will
be so, he determines to make use of their theft or treason for the
advancement of his own glory, and the advantage of his Church and children,
he being in himself so good as he would suffer none evil in the world, were
he not withal so powerful, as out of every evil to draw some good, as by
the same power he brought light out of darkness and caused water abundantly
to flow out of the hard and dry rock.

B. C.
13.
Here I know the great masters of schism will never leave obiecting the Foelix
scelus virtus vocatur, had it taken effect, that which now is styled an
horrible treason had been a most honorable and meritorious act.
horrible treason of certain Catholics against your Majesty, which if the It
was the devil indeed that wrought it, it being beyond all humane invention, yet
you cannot deny, though you are unwilling to grant it, that he used none but
pretended Catholics for his instruments in that business.
devil had not wrought to their hands, they had had little to say against
Catholics before this day: But I humbly entreat that the fact of some few men
may not for ever be objected against the truth of a general rule. It is not
the question, which religion will make all your subjects true, but which
religion is most likely to make all true. It is certain there be traitors
against God and man of all religions, and Catholics as they are the The latter
we easily believe, but leave you to prove the former.
best subjects; so when they fall to it, they are the worst traitors. But if
we will look upon examples, or consider of reasons, the Catholic is the only
religion, which as it does duly subordinate kings unto It may be by God you
understand him, who exalts himself above all that is called God, and by
lawful obedience as much, and as far as he shall think fit.
God; so does it effectually bind subjects to perform all lawful Whether our
religion or yours bind subjects, more to the performance of their duty, let my
answer to your 12. section make proof.
obedience unto their kings. I will not repeat examples, because the ancient
are tedious, and the present are Indeed the fresh examples of the death of the
2. last Henr. of France, and the infinite tr^^^sons against Q. Elizabeth, and
our present Sovereign, cannot be but odious to all good Christians.
odious: but if there can be but one king named in all the world, that did ever
receive honor from Caluinists, farther then to be their champion or
protector, until their turn were served: then I may be content to believe
that your Majesty and your family shall receive Perpetuity of kingdoms is
only from God, but yet may his Majesty more justly expect perpetuity from his
subjects, who acknowledge none other Sovereign, then those Princes from
theirs, who acknowledge them deposeable by a foreign power.
perpetuity from them, But if your Caluinists do profess to honor you, and
all other Caluinists do overthrow their kings and princes wheresoever they can
prevail, I can hardly believe that yours mean any more good earnest, then the
rest. There is certainly some other matter that they are contented for a time
to honor your Majesty, it cannot be their religion ties them to it, Their
religion being grounded only upon the lively oracles of God, cannot but tie
them more effectually to it self then your humane traditions.
for it does not tie them to it self. There is no principle of any religion,
nor no article of any faith, which a Caluinist will not call in question, and
either altogether deny or We assume no liberty of expounding articles of faith
at our pleasure, as his Majesty has declared it in his book against Vorst.
but a freedom by Christ, from the rigor of the Law, from the guilt and
punishment of sin, and from observing humane traditions as religiously, as
divine ordinances.
expound after his own fancy: and if he be restrained, he cries out by and by
he cannot have the liberty of his conscience, and what bound of obedience can
there be in such a religion?

G. H.
13.
The world is now come to a good pass, that those who object the haynousnesse
of horrible treasons, shall carry the title of the great masters of schism:
But notwithstanding we be held Schismatikes for our labor, we will not leave
to object it, and not only to object it, but cry and thunder against it,
being as his Majesty has rightly observed [not only a crying sin of blood,
but a roaring and thundering sin of fire and brimstone:] and the rather for
that we do not therein so much object the fact of those who were to be the
actours in it, as the rules of those their ghostly fathers and spiritual
guides, who were acquainted with it, and consenting to it, Garnet by Eudaemon.
some of whom have since been apologized by the pens of Romish writers, and
Greenwell and Gerrard.
other some protected and countenanced in or by the court of Rome it self. One
reports it that the Pope caused the massacre of Paris (what time in diverse
places of France were murdered about 60000 persons) to be painted in his
palace, it should seem ad perpetuam rei memoriam, lest so extreme wickedness
should be forgotten. So no doubt should this Powder work have been painted by
it, if it had not miscarried, save that no art could have imitated the
confusion, no color have represented so barbarous cruelty. What stain could
shadow the blood of so royal Princes? what red were sufficient to paint the
blood of so many and noble Christians? what black the darkness of that day?
what azure the unmercifulness of that fire? what devise, what invention could
have expressed the woeful cry of the innocent, and the infernal noise of the
blow? it was the uttermost point of all villeny, beyond which is terra
incognita, no man can devise what should be between Hell and it: and shall
they then be reputed masters of schism who object the foulness of a treason
by your own confession so horrible? then let our greatest Bishops, our wisest
Counselors, our grauest Judges, and our Sovereign himself, be all
accounted the great Masters of schism, who describe it by so much more lively
then others, in as much as they looked more narrowly into the particular veins
and bowels of the plot, were more capable to conceive the vast extent of the
mischief likely to have ensued upon it, and lastly were more sensible of the
horror of it, in regard of their own danger. Yet thus much we all conceive,
that if all the devils and damned spirits in hell, together with all the
reprobates on earth, should meet in Conclaue, and set all their inventions
aworke to the uttermost, they could never find out again the like hellish and
damnable design.

But had not the devil (you say) wrought this to their hands, we had little to
say against Catholics before this day: As if the Bull of Pius Quintus, the
intiteling of the Spaniard to the kingdom of Ireland, the rebellion of
Northumberland and Westmerland were now quite forgotten, or the practices of
Sommeruile set aworke by Hall a Seminary Priest of Spain, furnished at the
Popes charge, with fifty other resolutes, of Throgmorton, solicited by
Bernardine Mendoza, the Spanish Leiger Ambassador lying in London, of Parry,
encouraged by Cardinal Comoes persuasion, of Ballard and Babington, together
with twelve other gentlemen imboldened by the same Mendoza, of Stanly
apologized by Cardinal Allen, of Cullen an Irish fencer hired by Stanly for
thirty pound, of Lopez a physician and Portugal by birth, set a work by
Christophero de Moro, a special counselor of the king of Spain, for a jewel
of gold garnished with a great diamond, and a large rubie in hand, and the
promise of 50000. crowns more to be pay^d, of York and Williams intised by
Holt a Jesuit, and Owen an English fugitive, and Spanish pensioner, and lastly
of Squire animated and instructed by Walpoole, were not yet fresh in memory:
besides infinite other conspiracies of Romanists plotted against the State and
person of our late renowned Sovereign. Had not her Majesty just cause then to
complain as she did, in open Parliament, That she knew no creature breathing,
whose life stood hourly in more peril then her own, and that even in the
first entrance into her estate, she entered into infinite dangers of life, as
one that was to wrestle with many and mighty enemies? And that it may appear
to the world, that his Holiness could not plead ignorance or innocence in
these proceedings, I will hereunto annexe the copy of the Cardinals letter to
Parry translated out of the Italian original, very worthy in my judgment not
to be buried in forgetfulness, but to be commended to the knowledge of
succeeding ages.

SIr,
his Holiness has seen your Letter of the first, with the assurance
included, and cannot but commend the good disposisition and resolution, which
you write to hold toward the service and benefit public, wherein his
Holiness does exhort you to persevere, with causing to be brought to effect
that which you promise; and to the end you be so much the more helped by that
good Spirit which has moved you thereunto, his Holiness does grant you
Plenary Iudulgence, and remission of all your sins, according to your
request, assuring you that beside the merit that you shall receive therefore in
heaven, his Holiness will further make himself debtour to acknowledge and
require your deseruings by all the best means he may, and so much the more in
that you use the more modesty in not pretending any thing. Put therefore to
effect your holy and honorable determinations, and attend your health, and to
conclude, I offer my self unto you, heartily wishing all good and happy
success.

From Rome, the 30. of Ian. 1584. At your disposing, N. Card. of Como.


Now if this be not directly to make God the authou of treasons, as well as of
kingdoms, to persuade men that they are moved thereunto by the good Spirit,
that they are not only satisfactory for sin, but meritorious, holy,
honorable, for mine own part I know not what is. But to proceed, who were
they, but pretended Catholics, that were authors of the Prince of Aurenge his
untimely death? of that bloody and barbarous massacre in France, of which It
was the speech of Christopherus Thua^^^s reported by Iacobus Aug. his son.
one of their own Catholic historians writes, Excidat illa dies aeuo, nec
postera credant
Saecula.
And were not Philopater and Doleman, and Rossaeus Peregrinus the bastards of
Creswell and Parsons, and Reynolds long since censured here at home, and lately
the seditious books of Mariana, Becanus, Suarez, all Romish Catholics, and
Jesuits, condemned to the fire by the high Court of Parliament of Paris? and
yet notwithstanding all this and much more that might be brought to this
purpose out of his Majesty's Apology, would you now bear him and us in hand,
that had it not been for the Powder Treason, we had had little to say against
Romish Catholics before this day? Certainly it must needs argue (when you
thus wrote) either your extreme ignorance in not understanding the passages of
our estate, or extreme malice in publishing the contrary to that which in my
judgment you could not but understand.

But you demand, one king to be named in all the world that ever received
honor from Caluinists, farther then to be their champion and protector, until
their turn were served; as if you were ignorant what honor Calvin himself
yielded to Francis the first, in his Epistle prefixed to his institutions,
howbeit he were rather a persecutour, then a protector of that profession, as
appeared by his commending the destruction of Mirandol and Cabrieres to the
Parliament of Prouence, howbeit afterward he repented himself of the fact, and
gave charge to Henry his son, to do justice upon the murderers: Henry the
III. they forsook not to the last being persecuted, and at last murdered by
the leaguers: and as for Henry the IV. surnamed the great, they not only
stuck close to him in all his distresses, when his Romish Catholic subjects
banded themselves against him, but when he had quitted his own and their
religion, and of their champion became a great patron and benefactour of the
Jesuits, their most malicious opposites; yet did they not cease to honor him
still as much as any his most loyal and loving subjects, both living, by their
pens and tongues, and persons, and states, and being dead with their tears,
and desire of search to be made, and justice to be done upon such as should
be found to have any finger in his death: Or if you were ignorant of these
foreign examples, yet could you not but remember that here at home Edward the
sixth, and Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, and our present gracious
Sovereign, received as much honor from those whom you call Caluinists, as
ever any prince in the world, from his pretended Catholic subjects, and that
not so much for the serving of their own turns, as for conscience sake, and
the performance of their duties. What turn can they now expect to be served
from Queen Elizabeth being gathered to her fathers, yet does her name remain
always honorable among them, and the memorial of her precious, as the
remembrance of Josias, [ Eccles. 49. 1.
like the composition of the perfume that is made by the art of the Apothecary,
sweet as honey to all mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine.] whereas many
of her Romish Catholic subjects endeavored what they could to have taken her
heart blood from her being living, and still endeavor what they can to take
her good name from her being dead. At his Majesty's entrance some of them
pretended to honor him, none more, but it was for the serving of their own
turns, in hope of a toleration: for when once they saw the constancy of his
MAJESTY'S mind, and the vanity of their own hope, they hoped to have served
him and his posterity such a turn, as should have sounded through the
Christian world, and have made the ears of him to tingle, that should have
heard it: whereas they who received not that satisfaction at the conference of
Hampton Court, which they desired, and hoped for, continue notwithstanding
faithful and loyal Subjects to their Sovereign. Lastly for Queen Mary
though they could expect no good turn from her in regard of their profession,
but rather all the shrewd turns that her misguided zeal, and the malice of
others could heap upon them, yet the Norfolk and Suffolk Protestants, were
her strongest furtherance to attain the Crown, and afterward the rest as well
as they, ceased not to honor her as far forth as the honor due to God would
give them leave, except some few, who opposed themselves not so much against
her Person or Government, as against the marriage with a forreiner, whose power
they feared would be prejudicial to the Realm, and yet was not this attempt
neither seconded or approved by the maine body of that profession: [But all
other Caluinists (you say) do overthrow their Kings and Princes wheresoever
they can prevail,] in which passage can none other be intended but the
Netherlanders, of whom touching this point, I will say no more, that they are
now after the wasting of so much treasure, and the shedding of so much
Christian blood, declared a free estate by him, whose Regal right you pretend
they overthrow.

Lastly, those whom you call Caluinists, either deny, or call into question as
few principles of Religion or Articles of Faith, as any Romish Catholic: nay,
I will be bold to say it, and ready to make it good, that the former maintain
some of them strongly, which the latter overthrow, if not in plain terms and
directly, yet at least indirectly and by consequence, by establishing their
own Articles: Unknown to the Apostles and the Primitive Church, they make the
Articles of our Christian Creed of none effect; and for exposition which
concerns not points in difference between us, and the Church of Rome, if I
can judge any thing, your Writers differ more among themselves, and assume to
themselves a greater liberty in expounding then ours: and if they be
restrained of their Allegorical, Tropologicall, and Anagogicall
interpretations, (as impertinent many times to the point in hand as wide from
the scope of the Text) they will presently cry out that we despise the
authority of the Church, when it may be they have wrested the meaning of one
or two latter Fathers against the stream of Antiquity; and what bond of
obedience can there be to God or to Kings for Gods sake in such Religion?

B. C.
14.
It is commonly objected by Statesmen that it is no matter what opinions men
hold in matters of Religion, so that they be kept in awe by Justice and by the
sword. Indeed for this world it were no matter at all for Religion, if it were
possible to do Justice and to keep men in awe by the Sword: In Military
estates while the Sword is in the hand there is the less need of Religion; and
the greatest and You seem to mean the ancient Romans, who made more
conscience of an Oath (in which particular act of Religion you afterward
insist) then the Romish Catholics at this day.
most martial estates that ever were, have been willing to use the Conscience
and reverence of some Religion or other, to prepare their Subjects to
obedience: but in a peaceable government, such as all Christian kingdoms do
profess to be if the reins of Religion be let loose, the sword commonly is
too weak, and comes to late, and is like enough to give the day to the Rebel.
And seeing the last and strongest bond of justice is an Oath, which is a
principal act of Religion, and were but a mockery if it were not for the
punishment of Hell, and the reward of Heaven; it is impossible to execute
justice without the help of Religion, and therefore the neglect and contempt
of Religion has ever been, and ever shall be the forerunner of destruction in
all settled States whatsoever.

G. H.
14.
Having now spent your powder and shot in discharging your three substantial
reasons, and the Apologizing of the Powder Treason; for the filling up of your
paper, but to the abusing of his Majesty's leisure and patience, you here begin
a fresh with a solemn discourse of the necessity of Religion for a well
ordered Commonwealth, under color of meeting with an objection of Statesmen,
that it matters not what opinions men hold in matters of Religion, so they be
kept in awe by justice, and by the sword: But these Statesmen I take to be of
Machiauels sect, who, of what nation he was by birth, and of what religion by
profession, we are not ignorant. The ancient Romans indeed being themselves.
Lords of the world, became vassals to the Idols of all nations, by admitting
the free use of their diverse Religions of them all, holding that (as it
seems) the most perfect Religion, which refused none as false: neither is the
Turk much different from that opinion, howbeit he prefer his own Religion
before all others: but all other Statesmen who are so conversant in affairs
of State, as they neglect not Christanitie, can not but hold the Christian
religion alone, admittable in Christian Commonwealths. Now as we grant in all
States some Religion necessary, and in Christian States only the Christian
admittable: So with all we confess an Oath to be a principal act of that
Religion: But how it is abused by Romish Catholics for serving their own
turns, by Dispensations, by aequiuocations, and Mental Reseruations, both
Histories witness, and we have had too great experience: By which means that
which indeed should be the surest and strongest band of truth and justice, and
as the Apostle speaks, [ Ebr. 6. 16.
an end of all strife,] is become the matter of quarrel, and a mere visard
for injustice and falsehood to mask under: and by the same means, as the
Romish Religion is grown odious to us; so for their sakes, both ours and
theirs, (going both under the common name of Christians) is in that respect
grown odious to the very Turks, who observe an oath made by the name of their
Mahomet more inuiolably, then we by the Name of CHRIST one to another; as well
appeared by our King Henry the third, who being a great exactor upon the poor
Commons, as ever was any king before him, or since, and thinking thereby to
win the people sooner to his devotion, most faithfully promised them once or
twice, and thereunto bound himself with a solemn oath, both before the
Clergy and Laity, to grant unto them the old liberties and Customs of Magna
Charta, and Charta de Foresta, perpetually to be observed, whereupon a
Quindecim was granted to the King: but after the payment was sure, the King
trusting the Popes dispensation for a little money to be discharged of his oath
and covenant, went from that he had promised, and solemnly sworn before. In
like manner the said King at another time being in need of money, signed
himself with the cross, pretending and swearing deeply in the face of the
whole Parliament, that he himself would go in person against the Saracens:
but as soon as the money was fingred, small care was taken for the performance
of the oath, being so put in head by certain about him, that he needed not to
pass of that perjury, for so much as the Pope for an hundred pounds or two,
would quickly discharge him thereof, as Matthew Parris reports it, who lived at
the same time, and was often in Court with him, this was then the account
(which by reason of the Popes easy dispensations) Kings made of their oaths
to their Subjects.

The like account by the same means did Charles the 9th. of France and the
Queen his mother make of their oath taken to the King of Navarre, the Prince
of Condie, the Admiral, and the rest of the Protestant profession, at what
time his sisters marriage was made more red with their blood then his wine; but
this blood crying for vengeance, himself at his death issued blood at all the
passages of his body: Neither did Subjects make any other reckoning of their
oaths, taken to their Kings, if they had the like dispensations, or Kings to
Kings, or Subjects to subjects: And if this be not to make a mere mockery of
oaths (which should be made Iere. 4. 2.
in truth, in judgment and in justice,) and consequently of religion, as if
indeed there were no punishment of Hell, no reward of heaven, I conceive not
what is: and by your own rule this contempt of religion cannot but in time
draw on the destruction of those States, which thus under pretense of religion
and obedience to their holy Father, neglect and contemn it. Lastly, if they
esteem so little of oaths made one to another, what should we expect at their
hands, to whom they hold Faith is not to be held, be it never so solemnly
plighted: whereas Genesis 21.
Abraham made conscience of his oath taken to Abimelech, and Genesis 31.
Jacob to Laban, both Idolaters; and so did they again, though Idolaters or
Infidels, to Jacob and Abraham.

But let such as maintain that position, That faith given or sworn to
Heretics or Infidels is not to be held, call to mind what success it took
at the battle of Varna in Bulgaria, in the year of our Lord 1404, what time
Ladislaus the young King of Polony, by the dispensation of Pope Eugenius, and
the persuasion of Iulianus his Nuntio, broke his Oath and League made with
Amurath the second, Emperor of the Turks: in which battle the King (his
horse being first killed under him) was stricken down and slain, the Popes
Bishops that were in the field to encourage the soldiers, fleeing to save
themselves fell into Bogges and Marshes, and there perished: Iulianus the
Cardinal, which with the Pope was the chief doer in breaking the League, was
found dead in the way, being full of wounds, and spoiled to his naked skin,
and all the ditches and trenches were filled with the blood of Christians: A
memorable spectacle of Gods vengeance upon the breach of oaths made even to
Infidels.

Discite iustitiam moniti, and non temnere Diuos. B. C.
15.
The devil that intends the destruction as well of bodies as of souls, and
of whole States as of particular men, does not commonly begin with men's
bodies, and with matters of State, but being himself a Spirit, and the father
of lies, he does first insinuate himself into men's understandings by false
principles of religion: whereunto he has the more easy entrance, because he
has persuaded their Is not this Romish opinion which holds it sufficient to
believe as y^ Church believes, so that they live morally well? but for our
selves we have had experience, y^ where our religion most prevails, and men
are brought to the knowledge of the truth, there barbarism and inciuility are
the more banished.
governors to believe, that it is no great matter what opinions men hold in
matters of religion, so that they look well into their actions, and keep them
in obedience: Which persuasion is all one, as if the enemy that besieges a
city, should persuade the garrison that they might surrender the Castle to him
well enough, and keep the base town to themselves. But when the devil has
prevailed so far, as by the matters in the first truth, that is of religion,
to get the understanding in possession, which is the Castle, as it were, and
watchtower of both the soul and body, and state, and all, he will
peradventure dissemble his purpose for a while, and by slandering of the
truth, and pleasing them with the trifles of the world (which by Gods
permission are in his power) make men believe that the world is amended: For,
The words of the Poet are, nemo repent fuit turpissimus.
nemo repent fit pessimus, but shortly after when he sees his time, he will
out of his In stead of the arse^all, you should have said the Capitole.
arsenale of false apprehensions in the understanding, send forth such
distorted engines of life and actions, as will easily subdue both bodies, and
states, and goods, and all to his devotion.

G. H.
15.
This Section together with your former (for any thing I can gather) serve
only to make a large Portall to a little Cottage, and wide Gates to a City
that may run out of it: you fetch a great swinge to strike a little blow, and
a full carriere to leap over a straw. It is throughout a mere flourish, and
rather intended, as it seems, to amaze the reader, as Mountebankes do their
hearers with arsenals of apprehensions, and distorted engines of actions, then
to teach him the plain and simple truth, scarce so good as a Metaphor, which
I have heard tending to the contrary of yours, that if the Faux of our
concupiscence, should once give fire to the powder of our appetite, it were
likely to blow up the Parliament house of our reason. The scope you drive at
(as I conceive) is this, that the understanding being misinformed in religion,
produces answerable effects in the conversation, which we as easily grant as
you unnecessarily go about to prove. The heathen Philosopher could tell us,
Se^^c. frag.
[ Si cui intueri vacet quae faciunt, quaeque patiuntur superstitiosi, inueniet
tam indecora honestis, tam indigna liberis, tam dissimiliasanis, vt nemo fuerit
dubitaturus furere eos si cum paucioribus furerent: nuncsanitatis patrocinium
est insanientium turba. If a man had the leisure to look on those things,
which men possessed with superstitious opinions, both do and suffer, he
should find the^ busied about matters so unbeseeming honest minded men, so
unworthy of free and ingenuous spirits, so unlike the effects of sober and
settled brains, that a man would swear they were stark mad, were but the
number of them less that went a madding, whereas now the only cloak to
palliate and patronize their madness is, the multitude of mad men.] Which
words sound to me, as if the mark they shoot at, had been the practice of the
present Church of Rome, issuing from their false and superstitious opinions
touching Gods worship: In which, whether we consider the things they do in the
administration of their Sacraments, about the relics of dead men, in setting
forth the feasts of our Savior and the Saints, or what they suffer in
Pilgrimages, in Penances, and the like, if the same things were acted but by
few in number, which now by long custom and common consent are grown
familiar to them, being practiced by multitudes, I cannot judge them so unwise,
but themselves if they stood by and looked on would judge them mad. I have
heard of a Turk, who coming to Rome, and beholding their most abominable and
licentious disorders at their Carneuals, and presently upon it their counterfeit
sadness, and hanging down their heads like a bul^ush upon Ashwednesday (so
named for the ashes which they took) he conceived that the sprinkling of ashes
had been a special remedy for the curing of madness; but to the matter.

It is true indeed that where Idolatry and ungodliness goes before, there a
giving up to a reprobate sense and worldly lusts follow after, as S. Paul
rangeth them in his first to the Romans, and his second to Titus: Yet on the
other side it is as true, that upon the putting away of good conscience in the
entertainment of worldly lusts, as often ensues a shipwrake of Faith, in
opening a gappe to ungodliness, as we learn of the same Apostle. 1. Tim. 1. I
have observed it in mine own experience, and so I think have others, that few
have forsaken our Religion to embrace the Roman, but such as have been first
in their lives notoriously deboshed, or extremely thirsty and ambitious of
honor and preferment, beyond the opinion of other men, and their own desert.
And whether more distorted engines of actions be sent forth from the arsenall
of Romish apprehensions, or English, in regard of Religion, let the barbarous
Massacre of France, and the untimely death of their two last Henry's, the often
attempts upon the person of our late happy and famous Queen, and of late the
damnable Powder Treason intended against our gracious SOVEREIGN and the State,
and lastly, the cruelty and ambition, the unnatural, and unmeasurable lust,
even of those nations which are most zealous of the Popes greatness, and are
therefore accounted most Catholic, decide the controversy.

It was a good answer which was returned by one of our side to a pretended
Catholic, demanding what reason he had, not to embrace that Religion: why
says he? Because it teaches a man to eat his God, and kill his King. And in
any Religion whatsoever, it is not so much the knowledge of the truth, which
makes an honest and happy man, as the practice of that we know. The devil
himself when we have done our best, will know more then we: howbeit it is
certain we must endeavor to know the will of God, before we can do it, and
therefore the good Angels are so much more foreward and constant in the
execution of his will then we, as they know it better then we: [ 1. Cor. 13. 12.
We see through a glass darkely; but they face to face: We in part know; but
they even as they are known.]

B. C.
16.
The Caluinisticall preacher, when he has gotten his honest abused and
misguided flock about him, By this it appears you intended the publishing of
your letter at the writing of it.
will cry out against me for this Popish collection, and call God and them to
witness, that he does daily in his Sermons exhort men to good works, and to
obedience to the Kings MAJESTY: and am not I and my brethren (says he) as M.
Doctor himself in the 8. Section of his 1. Chapter. confesses, that he
knows diverse very honest men of these Preachers.
honest and as civil men as any Papist of them all? for mine own part Having
made them before the Seeds-men of Sedition, and Authors of all error in
doctrine, and corruption in manners, it is then good time of day to tell us you
will not accuse them.
I will not accuse any Caluinist though I could, neither can I excuse all
Papists though I would: Iliacos inter muros peccatur and extra: But I must
never forget that most true and wise observation, which the noble and learned
Sir Francis Bacon is more beholding to you for quoting his Essays, then S.
Matthew* for alleging his Gospel, or S. Paul for his Epistles: but I am sure he
is too noble a Gentleman, to hold it any commendation to be quoted or commended
by such as your self.
Sir Francis Bacon makes in one of his first Essays, viz. [that all If they
utterly fail in the Precepts of the first Table, they may well be called
Heretics, rather then Schismatikes.
Schismatikes utterly failing in the precepts of the first Table, concerning
the Religion and worship of God, have necessity in policy to make a good show
of the second Table, by their civil and demure conversation toward men: for
otherwise they should at the first appear to be, as afterward they show
themselves to be, altogether out of their ten Commandments: and so men would
be as much ashamed to follow them at the first, as they are at the last.] It
is a sure rule of policy, that in every mutation of State, the authors of the
change will for a while show themselves honest, rather of spite then of
conscience, that they may disgrace those whom they have suppressed: but it
does never hold in the Since the first reformation, above a generation has
passed, and yet by your own acknowledgement there remain diverse very honest
men even among those whom you labor most to disgrace.
next generation. You scarce hear of a Puritan father, but his son In your
construction a Puritan and a Caluinist are reciprocal* and you make all the
reformed Netherlanders, the Heluetians, the French, and the greatest part of
the English to be Caluinists: so that the greatest part of all their sons
must prove Papists or Atheists, or else your observation fails.
proves either a Reformers you tell ^s before commonly degenerate in the next
generation, and here you show us, how by turning Papists or Atheists, as if
Papi^me, and Atheism were so near of kin, or ^o resembling in condition,
that the one might easily be mistaken, for the other; or the one prepared away
to the other.
Catholke, or an Atheist. Mutinous soldiers whiles the enemy is in the field
will be orderly, not for love of their general; but for fear of their enemy:
but if they be not held in the ancient discipline of wars, they will upon the
least truce or cessation quickly show themselves.

G. H.
16.
Whatsoever fond conceit your idle brain fancieth to it self, or your pen
paints forth to others, touching our Preachers whom you term Caluinistical,
we may freely speak it, and thank God for it, that this Island affoords as
many learned sufficient Preachers, and that in a more substantial conscionable
fashion, then all the Popes hierarchy: it may seem a bold assertion, but he
that in foreign parts has seen, and observed the apish action, and heard the
ridiculous and unsavory tales of their Friars, who are commonly their most
famous Preachers, will undoubtedly grant as much: Nothing so frequent with them
as fictions against Lutheranes, and Caluinists, of fables out of their golden
legend, devised by leaden brains, and uttered by brazen foreheads: whereas the
word of God, the only means of rightly informing the understanding, and
conuincing the conscience, they either use not at all, or very sparingly, and
that commonly in Latin, without quotation of verse or chapter, as if they
feared indeed the people should have too much knowledge of it, whereas S. Paul
professes that 1. Cor. 14.
[hee had rather speak five words in the Congregation to the instruction of
others* then ten thousand in a strange tongue.] But herein he scarce shows
himself a good Catholic, and a marvel it is the index expurga^ory had not
wipte it out. Now for the piece of the Sermon which you put into the
Caluinisticall Preachers mouth* that himself and his brethren and their flocks
were as honest civil men, as any Papist of them all, howsoever you are pleased
to play the iester, and make your self merry in such kind of flouting, yet I
may truly say, and I think it will not be denied, that many of those
preachers and their brethren, are honester men then the Pope and his brethren
the Cardinals, whose excessive pride and luxury, had it not been
counterballanced by the fained humility of the Friars, impossible it is that
their kingdom could have stood thus long, which made Panigirolla (as I
suppose) when he came to speak of Sanctam Ecclesiam in his sermons at Turim in
Sauoy, to fetch the word sanctam from The same conceit has Charron in his
book de trois v^r^te, lib. 3. c. 12.
sancio, sancis, sanciui, distrusting as it seems to prove the Romish Church
the true Catholic by the mark of sanctity and holiness, which he saw rather
to agree to the Caluinists then to them; otherwise it was impossible he should
so childishly wrest the meaning of the Apostles, the ordinary sense of the
Latin word, the only sense of the Greek word, and the common consent of all
antiquity: And it seems your self foresaw so much when you tell us, you could
not excuse all Papists, though you would. And for mending the matter, you
press us with the authority of Sir Francis Bacons Essays, that all
Schismatikes failing in the precepts of the first table, concerning the worship
of God, have necessity in policy to make a good show of the second Table, by
their civil and demure conversation toward men: But herein in my judgment
you do that noble and learned gentleman (as you deservedly style him) some
injury in applying his observation (if it be his) against the religion which
himself professes: whereas in truth it fits it self more properly to your
Romish Catholics here at home among us, who pretend some of them great show of
moral virtue and civil honesty, specially in matter of mortification and
charitable works, whereas they mangle the precepts of the first Table in their
number, making of four but three, and of those three they break the first and
second, in worshipping the Blessed Virgin, Angels, Saints, Relics, Images
with divine worship, and in special the Crucifix and Sacramental Bread,
professedly with the same kind of worship which is due to Christ as God, and
what account they make of the other two, their little reckoning of blaspheming
and profaning Gods Name, and Gods day, give but too sufficient demonstration to
the world. But to be plain with you, I find no such words in Sir Francis
Bacons Essays printed the year 1612. I have since found words to that purpose
in his Meditation^s sacrae, but not as M. Doctor quoteth them.
which upon this occasion I have reuised, there being only one of religion,
and that the very first which speaks so wittily, so learnedly, so fully
against your drift in this place, and the former section, which shows how the
devil out of the arsenall of false apprehensions, sends forth the distorted
engines of actions, (they be his own words in that place:) as I cannot but
hold it both a fence and a grace to insert it into mine answer whole and
entire, (as himself has delivered it:) lest I should do him injury by
mangling it.

[The quarrels and divisions for religion, (says he) were evils unknown to
the heathen* and no marvel, for it is the true God that is the ielous God, and
the gods of the heathen were good fellows: but yet the bounds of religious
unity are so to be strengthened, that the bounds of humane society be not
dissolved. Lucretius the Poet when he beheld the act of Agamemnon, enduring
and assisting at the sacrifice of his daughter, concludes with this verse,
Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum. But what would he have done if he had
known the Massacre of France, or the Powder treason of England? Certainly he
would have been seven times more Epicure and Atheist then he was: nay, he
would rather have chosen to have been one of the mad men of Munster; then a
partaker of those counsels: For it is better that Religion should deface men's
understanding, then their piety and charity, retaining reason only but as an
Engine and Chariot-driuer of cruelty and malice. It was great blasphemy when
the devil said, I will ascend and be like the highest: but it is a greater
blasphemy, if they make God to say, I will descend and be like the Prince of
darkness: And it is no better, when they make the cause of Religion descend
to the execrable actions of the murdering of Princes, butchering of people,
and firing of States; neither is there such a sin against the person of the
holy Ghost, (if one should take it literally) as in stead of the likeness of a
Dove, to bring him down in the likeness of a Vulture or Raven; nor such a
scandal to their Church, as out of the Bark of S. Peter to set forth the
flagge of a Barge of Pirates and Assassins. Therefore since these things are the
common enemies of humane society, Princes by their power, Churches by their
decrees, and all learning, Christian, Moral, of whatsoever Sect or opinion, by
their Mercury rod, ought to join in the damning to Hell for ever these
facts, and their supports* and in all counsels concerning Religion, that
counsel of the Apostle would be prefixed, [Ira hominis non implet iustitiam
Dei.]

The same noble gentleman speaks much to the same purpose in his Essay of
Superstition, as [that it erecteth an absolute tyranny in the minds of men,
it has been the confusion and dissolution of many States, an^ brings a new
Primum mobile* that rauisheth all the Spheres of government. The master, says
he, of Superstition is the people, and in all superstition wise men follow
fools, and arguments are fitted to practice in a reuersed order.] And thus I
hope by this time Mr. Doctor has gained little to the advantage of his cause
from the true and wise observations of Sir Francis Bacon. Lastly, for your
instance in Mutinous soldiers, I cannot conceive whither your discourse tends,
but to show that more honesty is yet left amongst us, then in those of your
profession, and is like to be as long as we fear the assault of a common
enemy, which is like to be as long as you remain in opinion and condition
like your selves.

B. C.
17.
And as for their exhortations to obedience to your Majesty, when they have
first infected the understanding of your Subjects with such principles of
rebellion, as have disturbed and overthrown all other States where they had
their will, it is a ridiculous thing to think upon such exhortations, and all
one as if a fantastical fellow finding a You tell us before of sure rules in
policy, and mutinous Soldiers, and here you show your skill in Cowh^rdship,
that we may know you are aliquid in quolibet, though nihil in toto.
herd of young cattle in a close, should first break down the hedges, and
then cry aloud to the cattle, they do not venture to go out, not seek any
fatter Pasture, for fear they be put in the pound, and if they chance to
feed where they are, because they have no experience of other, and to tarry in
the Close for an hour or two, then the unhappy fellow should run to the
honor of the cattle, and tell him what great service he had done him, and
how he had kept his cattle in the Close by ^is goodly Notwithstanding those
charms your Romish Catholics cannot be kept within their bounds, charm the
charmer never so wisely.
charms and exhortations. Let them say what they list, of their own honesty,
and of their exhortations to obedience, Mutato nomine de tuis ^abula narratur.
as long as they do freely infect the peoples souls with such false opinions
in religion, they do certainly sow the seeds of disobedience and rebellion in
men's understandings, which if they be not prevented by your Majesty's giving
way to Catholic religion, will in all likelihood spring up in the next
generation to the great prejudice and molestation of your MAJESTY, and your
posterity; so that whether I do respect heaven or earth, mine own soul or
the service of your Majesty, God or your neighbors, or your subjects, my
assured hope is that by joining my self to the Catholic Church, I neither
have done nor shall do any ill duty or service unto your Majesty.

G. H.
17.
You say that our exhortations to obedience are ridiculous, the understanding
being once infected with such principles of rebellion as we teach: Had you
vouchsafed to have stooped to the nominating of those principles in particular,
you had dealt ingenuously, and given some matter of reply: but as you would
show your self a politician in the whole body of your discourse, so do you
specially in this, that throughout you insist upon universals, which not only
dazell the eyes of their vulgar Reader, but yield starting holes of evasion to
the author. What your Principles are, and what ours touching obedience to the
civil Magistrate, I have already opened in mine answer to the twelfth and
thirteenth Sections of this Chapter. Now the remedy, you say, to prevent the
mischief likely to ensue upon such doctrine, is, the admission of Catholic
religion, as if we never heard nor read of any rebellion abroad nor at home
raised from the professors of that religion during the space of a thousand
six hundred years, for so long you say has it lasted, whereas in truth, if
that be true, where our religion has yielded one rebel (to speak within
compass) yours has yielded a thousand: and if the Principles of our religion,
as the case now stands, induce men to rebellion, surely in common reason it
should much rather do so, if a contrary be once admitted to confront it: So
that whiles you pretend to persuade his Majesty to the safest course, you
advise him in all likelihood to the most dangerous. Whether his Majesty then
respect heaven or earth, his neighbors abroad or his Subjects (...) home, his
securest course will be to maintain and allow that only religion which he
professes, and consequently in laboring to draw him to the contrary you
cannot but do him very ill service.

B. C.
18.
But perhaps there is such opposition both in matter of doctrine and matter of
State, as it is impossible that ever there should be any reconciliation at all
betwixt the Church of England and the Church of Rome; of which I humbly pray
your Majesty to give me leave to show to you what I have observed.

G. H.
18.
Your imaginary possibility of reconciling England with Rome, is a fond
speculation of an idle brain, and nothing else but a Castle built in the air,
whether we consider (as a later writer of our own has well observed) D. Hall
in his Roma irreconcili^^il^^.
the indisposition of the parties, or the quality of the Controversies, or the
difficulty of the means. For the first of which were we never so peaceably
disposed, yet such a stiff auersenesse there is in the Romanists, that they
suffer not their adherents to join with us in any religious exercise, against
which notwithstanding themselves can no way except. They excommunicate their
Subjects who travel or traffic into our countries; they straightly charge
them not to read or keep any of our Books, though merely tending to the
practice of piety, no nor the Bible it self, without special leave, though of
their own tran^lation: And for us, they esteem no better of us then of Jews
or Turks; nay to the Jews they allow Synagogues within Rome it self, whereas
us they persecute with fire and sword; and for the Turks they hold their
Alcoran in nothing inferior, and in some things much bette^ then our religion,
or our Translation of the Bible: No marvel then though Cassander by laboring
to mediate a reconcilement, howbeit he were set a work by Ferdinand and
Maximilian, both Emperors, has carried away blows on both sides, which it
seems Bellarmin in his 3. book and 19. Chap. of Laiks, thought he well
deserved, helping to lay on load upon him. The second thing that makes us
irreconcilable, is the quality of our controversies, they being not verbal
differences, as some would have, but material, and that of the highest nature,
no less then the redemption of mankind, and the justification of a sinner, but
above all that (upon which the rest depend) of the Bishop of Romes power in
judging and determining in^alliblely of all controversies arising in matter of
religion, we may be sure they will ever while they are able, without yielding
an inch, as stiffely maintain, as we justly oppugn: which the latest
writings of their Jesuits have given us so sufficient occasion (by advancing
and enlarging this power to the utmost) to be confident of, that we need
make no farther doubt of that matter. The third thing which makes us
irreconciliable is the difficulty in the means of reconcilement, which in the
judgment of the wisest is in likelihood the definition of a general Council,
or nothing. But who shall call this Council? and prescribe the time and place
of meeting, and persons that shall meet? who shall sit as President in it?
what shall be the rule of disputing? and means of executing what is
determined? we shall need a former Council to define.

B. C.
19.
It is true that the breach has continued now these many years, and it is much
increased by so long continuance: so that it was never greater then it seems
to be at this day, nor never more dangerous to deal withal. For if a man do
but go about to stop it, there arises presently a great and fearful noise,
and roaring of the waters against him; but yet nevertheless the greatness of
the noise ought not to discourage us; but rather to give us hope, that though
it be wide, yet it is but shallow, and not far from the bottom, as
proceeding from affection, which is sudden and violent, and not from judgment,
which is quiet, constant, and always like it self* For if a man ask in cold
blood, whether a Roman Catholic may be saved, the most learned Churchman will
not deny it: and if a man ask whether a Roman Catholic may be a good
Subject, the most wise Statesman will easily If others might be good Subjects,
your self could not be so, in as much as, in the last Sect. of the 1. cha. you
confess, that living in England, you could not choose but be guilty of the
breach of many of our Statutes.
grant it. May we be both saved? then we are not divided in God. May we be
both good Subjects? then we are not divided in the King. What reason is there
then that we should be thus hotely and vnplacably divided?

G. H.
19.
The increase of the reformed Churches (which you call a breach) so that their
strength was never greater, nor more dangerous to deal withal then at this
day, though the disciples of Rome grieve and gnash their teeth at it, and
consume away to see it, yet have we good reason to thank God for it, in as
much as neither the devil, nor the Pope, neither Rome nor the gates of Hell
with all their bloody Persecutions, their holy Leagues, and mischeiuous
Combinations, could ever yet prevail against it: Nay hitherto, the more they
have labored to quench it, and trample it under foot, the more has it shined
like a bright torch, and flourished as the Palm tree, which the more it is
pressed down, the more it spreads. Their blood hitherto has proved the
seed of the Church, and that which S. Augustine speaks of the first
Christians may be verified of them, [they were mangled, they were scourged,
they were stoned, they were burned, they were multiplied,] and because you
cannot with all your malice and power and policy destroy it, we argue with
Gamaliel that it is from God: neither can you justly call that sudden or
violent, which as your self before confess has now continued these many
years, and has increased by continuance, whereas sudden things in their
ordinary course, and by discourse of reason last little, and by continuance
rather decrease, it being proper only to natural motions to gather strength
and fortify themselves in going. And for that great roaring of the waters
which you pretend, though it be a noise fearful to you, yet to us is it
acceptable, as being occasioned not so much from the shallowness of the waters
themselves, as from the stoppings and opposition of others, and their own
concurrence, to remove and bear down by all lawful means that which is
opposed for the stopping of their current.

But the reason which you add why we should think them shallow, as
proceeding rather from affection then judgment, is this, because if a man ask
(you say) in cold blood, whether a Roman Catholic may be saved, the most
learned Churchman will not deny it: Wherein if we be more charitable to you,
then you are to us, in passing censures of damnation, it should in my judgment
rather argue the goodness of that Religion from whence such charity flows
toward men's persons, then be urged as a proof for the approbation of that
erroneous doctrine, which in it self it condemns. The Turk is too liberal in
admitting all Religions to the hope of salvation, and on the other side you are
too niggardly and sparing in shutting out all from the hope thereof, which
receive not the mark of the beast in their foreheads or hands. We desiring to
run a middle course betwixt both extremes, as we shut out all such who
directly deny the merits of CHRIST: so do we pass a favorable censure on
those who deny him not of malice, but of ignorance, and that not directly but
by consequence. It is true that S. Paul has in the fifth to the Galatians,
[*If ye be circumcised CHRIST shall profit you nothing,] That is, if a man put
his trust in Circumcision, or in any thing else beside Christ, (though with
Christ) in the matter of justification, he is abolished from Christ, and the
merit of his death and Passion. Now what confidence the Romanists put in their
own satisfaction for venial sins and temporal punishment, either in this
life or in Purgatory, due to mortal, their writings testify: but yet our
assurance is, that many of them when they come to make their last account
betwixt God and their own Conscience, and thoroughly consider of the weakness
and corruption of their own nature, for the uncertainty of their own proper
righteousness, and for the avoiding of vaineglory, according to Bellarmins
advise, Lib. 5 de Iusti^. cap. 7.
they rest wholly in the alone mercy and goodness of God, renouncing in
particular that merit of work which their Church in general for her own
advantage maintains, and teaches them to maintain. Or lastly God of his
Graciousnesse may accept of their repentance for unknown sins, and
consequently for their erroneous opinons, which by reason of their education
they unwittingly embrace; yet this charitable construction of ours can be no
sufficient warrant for us, either to shut our eyes against a known truth, or
to open our ears to hearken to any motion of reconcilement to a known error.

Now whether a Roman Catholic may be a good subject, wholly submitting
himself to Romish positions, I refer the reader to his Majesty's speech in
Parliament in the year 1605 (who should know what belongs to his own state)
and to mine answer, to the 12. Sect. of this Chapter; a part of his Majesty's
very words in that speech are these: [I therefore do thus conclude this point,
that as upon the one part many honest men seduced with some errors of Popery,
may yet remain good and faithful subjects: Of this rank was M. Doctor, as
appears in the 19. Sect. of his first Chap. where he promises to justify
all the present doctrine of the Church of Rome from point to point.
so upon the other part none of those that truly know and believe the whole
grounds and school conclusions of their doctrine, can ever prove good
Christians or faithful subjects.] If then we be so far divided both in God
and in the king, how can we but be utterly divided in our selves?

B. C.
20.
Truly there is no reason at all, but only the violence of affection, which
being in a course, cannot without some Here your rules of policy failed you, in
as much as violence of affection is rather by time to be qualified, then
withstood by force.
force be stayed: The multitude does seldom or never judge according unto
truth* but according unto customs, and therefore having been bred and
brought up in the hatred of Spaniards and Papists, cannot choose but think they
are bound to hate them still, and that whosoever speaks a word in favor of
the Church of Rome or of Catholic religion, is their utter enemy: and the
Puritanicall Preacher who can have no being in charity, does never cease by Who
they are that blow the coals for the burning of others, and warming of
themselves, if I were silent, the stones of the Parliament house would speak.
falsifications and slanders to blow the coals that he may burn them, and
warm himself.

But if your Majesty shall ever be pleased to command those make-bates to
hold their peace a while, and to say nothing, but that they are able to prove
by sufficient authority before those that are able to judge, and in the mean
time to admit a You might have done well to have persuaded the Pope or the King
of Spain, to have held such a conference in their dominions.
conference of learned and moderate men on either side, the people who are now
abused, and with the light of the Gospel held in extreme ignorance, are not yet
so incapable, but they will be glad to hear of the truth when it shall be How
simply and evidently your Postillers and Friars use to deliver the truth in
their Sermons, we are not ignorant, but whom you should mean by your honest
men, but your self and your companions, we know not.
simply and evidently delivered by honest men; and then they will plainly see
that their light of the Gospel, which they so much talk of, is but a
counterfeit light in a thieves lantern, whereby honest men's eyes are Who they
are that dazell men's eyes, and rob their purses, your glorious outside in
Gods worship, and your infinite tricks to get money, sufficiently testify.
dazeled, and their purses robbed: and it will also appear, that there is not
indeed any such How reconciliable the differences between us are, I have
declared in mine answer to the 18. Sect. of this chap.
irreconciliable opposition betwixt the Church of England and the Church, as
they that live by the schism do make the world believe there is, neither in
matter of doctrine, nor in matter of State.

G. H.
20.
You farther endeavor to prove in the entrance of this Section, that the
division of the Church of England from the Church of Rome arises rather from
affection then judgment, in as much as the multitude does seldom or never
judge according to truth: but according unto customs. Now whether it be the
Church of England or the Church of Rome that stands upon multitude, and that
multitude upon custom, the Bishop of Rome himself shall be the judge; nay not
only your multitude, but the chiefest pillars of your Church stand most upon
it: if you had but looked into your great Lib. 4. de mili. Eccles. cap. 5.
Cardinals notes of your Church, you should have found antiquity or custom to
have been the second, howbeit both De salute Indorum, lib. 2. c. 18.
Acosta and Lib. 4. epist. 1.
Xauerius in their several writings made the Indians standing upon their
customs, the chief difficulty of their conversion to CHRIST. It was Symmachus
the Pagans argument in his Epistle to Theodosius the Emperor, recorded by Lib.
5. epist. 30.
S. Ambrose: [Seruanda est tot saeculis fides nostra, and sequendi sunt maiores
nostri, qui secuti sunt foeliciter suos. Our religion which has now continued
so many years is still to be retained, and our ancestors are to be followed
by us, who happily traced the steps of their forefathers;] and is not this Mr.
Doctors own argument to persuade his Majesty to the Romish religion in the 2.
and 10. Sect. of this Chapter, how comes it then to pass that in this place he
finds fault with those that judge according to custom, and makes it a popular
error? teach that a while, and indeed we may be brought to shake hands with
Rome, she standing upon a pretended truth of antiquity, but we upon the
antiquity of truth, in as much as our Savior said not, I am antiquity, but I
am truth: And S. Cyprian his blessed Martyr, Antiquity without truth, is
nothing else but ancient error. Now the reason you give that our multitude
judge according to custom, is because that they being bred and brought up in
the hatred of Spaniards and Papists, can not choose but think they are bound
to hate them still. We might give the same reason with more show of truth, of
your multitude, trained up in the hatred of those who you call Lutheranes and
Caluinists, whom they are taught to hate more then ours, either a Spaniard or
Papist; which two, what reason you have to couple together, I understand not,
except it be to justify the front of Puentes his book, Chronicler to the King
of Spain, which sets forth Rome as the Sun, with this inscription, Luminare
maius vt praesit vrbi and orbi* and Spain as the Moon, with this, Luminare
minus vt subdatur vrbi, and dominetur orbi, over both is written, Fecit Deus
duo magna luminaria; and in the midst between both are the arms of Rome and
Spain knit together, with this motto, In vinculo pacis, under the one is set
Rome as a conqueror, and under the other Spain as a warrior, both supporting
between them the ball of the world, under which is this title: [Tomo Primero
de la conueniencia de las dos Monarquias Catholicas la de la Iglesia Romana, y
la del Imperio Espanol, etc.] Neither are we ignorant who they are that do not
whisper it in corners, but publish it to the world in their books, that GOD
MADE TWO GREAT LIGHTS.

The greater, to be the Sovereign of the City, and the World.

The lesser, to be ruled by the City, and to overrule the World.

IN THE BOND OF PEACE.

THE FIRST VOLVME OF THE CONVENIENCIE OF THE TWO CATHOLIC MONARCHIES; THAT,
OF THE CHVRCH OF ROME, and the other, of the Spanish Empire: With a Defense of
the Precedencie of the Catholic KINGS of SPAIN, before all the KINGS of the
World.

TO THE MOST GLORIOUS PHILIPPO ERMENIGILDO OUR LORD, EMPEROVR OF THE KINGDOMS
OF SPAIN, AND SENIOR OF THE GREAtest Monarchy that ever has been amongst
men, from the Creation of the World, to this age.

AVTHOR, Mr. Fr. IVAN de la Puente, of the Order of the Predicants, Chronicler
to the Catholicall Majesty, Calificador to the Inquisition, and Prior of S.
Thomas in Madrid. 1612.

We have the true resemblances of royal linages.

ROME SPAIN IN MVTVALL AID.

At MADRID, Out of the Kings Print.

P.P. fe.

FECIT DEVS DVO LVMINARIA MAGNA

Luminare maius vt praesit Vrbi et Orbi

Luminare minus vt subdatur vrbi et dominetur orbi

In vinculo pacis

TOMO PRIMERO DE LA conueniencia de las dos Monarquias Catolicas la de la
Iglesia Romana y la del Imperio Espanol y defensa de la Precedencia de los
Reyes Catolicos de Espanna a todos los Reyes del Mundo.

AL GLORIOSISIMO FILIPO Ermenigildo nuestro Sennor Emperador de las Espan^as y
Sen^or de la mayor Monarquia que antenido los hombres des de la creacion hasta
el Siglo present.

Author el Maestro fr: Iuan de la Puente de la orden de Predicadores Chronista
de la Maga Catolica Calificador dela Inquisicion y Prior de Sto Tomas de
Madrid. 1612.



as there is one head who guides all in spiritual: so there should be but one
(to do well) See Lipsius in the conclusion of his book de Mag. Romans
in all Christendom to govern all in civil affairs: and not unlikely Mr.
Doctor, when he thus joined Spaniards and Papists together, might secretly aim
at some such matter, and yet are not the Pope and the Spaniard so firmly
united between themselves, but that Charles the V. was content to wink (at
least) at the sacking of Rome by Charles Burbon, then under his pay: and
Phillip the II. his son, being one of the pretenders to the Crown of
Portugal, refused to stand to his Holiness arbitrament in the decision of
that controversy: and they both while they lived were, and this present king
yearly is accursed, at least inclusiuely, for withholding the kingdoms of
Naples and Sicilie, as being of right, parts of S. Peter's patrimony.

But all that is objected against the Papists or Spaniards, are in your account
the falsifications and slanders of puritanicall Preachers, howbeit, who they
are that labor by that means to disgrace their opposites, let the Pictures
forged and printed, of our fained persecutions, in covering your Catholics
with Bears skins, and baiting them with dogs testify, and your reports
which my self have heard from your Friars in their Pulpits of our strange
barbarism, as well in manners as religion, as if no spark of civility, or
knowledge of God, were left amongst us. It is your practice, if not your
doctrine, Calumniare audacter, semper aliquid haeret: Be bold to lay on load
with slandering, somewhat will always stick to; though the wound be closed and
cured, some scarre will ever remain: though a man purge himself never so
sufficiently, yet such is the nature of slander, that it runs faster, and
spreads farther then the purgation. Many who heard the one, never heard of the
other; or if they heard it, through malice and natural corruption they more
willingly hold fast and entertain the one, then the other. I have heard it
credibly reported, that a Spaniard coming to Oxford, and seeing the Trinity
pictured (long ago) in the Divinity school window, he wondered at it,
considering he had been taught by their Preachers that we denied and
blasphemed the Trinity. And here the Pamphlet written and published of Bezaes
death and revolt, which himself lived to answer with Bezarediuiuus, though it
be famously known, yet it is not amiss to revive it, being so notable and
shameless an imposture.

Touching your motion to his Majesty for the silencing of those Preachers,
upon whom, for speaking freely against the abuses of the Church of Rome, you
bestow the liuerie of Make-bates, it is not unlike for the manner of it to
Philips capitulating with the Athenians, that for the better negotiating of a
peace, they would be content for a while to deliver over their Orators into his
custody: But Demosthenes finding himself to be chiefly interessed in that
business, told his citizens that it was as much, as if the woolues should
desire to have the dogs in their keeping that guarded the sheep. His Holiness
may permit and countenance, and by rewards encourage his Jesuits and Friars to
speak and write what they list of Kings and Princes, and namely, of his
Majesty, our most renowned Sovereign, (witness the railings and slanders of
Pacenius, Christanouie, Becanus, Coquaeus, Eudaemon, Schoppius, Rebullus,
Parsons, Coffeteau, Peletier, Gretser,) their pens may walk at liberty,
their tongues are theirs they ought to speak, what Lord shall them control:
But his Majesty shall do well to bridle and restrain his most painful and
duetifull Ministers, who stand in the watchtower, and keep Sentinel to
discrie the incursions of the enemy, and to discover such false Prophets as
come to us in sheep clothing, but within are ravening woolues: or if they be
not silenced, they must say nothing but what they are able to prove by
sufficient authority, before those that are able to judge; as if our Bishops
were ignorant that it belonged to their charge to take notice of the preaching
of unsound doctrine within their Diocese, and accordingly to censure it, or
knowing what is their duty in that behalf, they were more unwilling or unable
to perform it, then Doctor Carier, and his College of Critickes; and in the
mean time a conference must be had of learned and moderate men on either side,
such belike as your self, like Metius Suffetius, lukewarm, halting betwixt
two opinions, rowing to the shore and looking to the Sea, holding with the hare
and running with the hound, who publicly pray for the King, and privately
work for the Pope: true learning we reverence, and Christian moderation we
highly esteem; but 1. Tim. 6. 20.
Science falsely so called, bent to the patronage of falsehood and neutralitie,
under the vizard of moderation, to the reconciling of error to truth, is but
the abusing of fair and honorable Titles, to base and malicious ends, which
imputation you labor to fasten upon us, as if by the light of the Gospel we
held the people in extreme ignorance, whereas the Prophet David tells us, that
Psalm. 119. 105.
the word of the Lord was a lantern to his feet, and a light unto his paths:
and S. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
You have a most sure word of the Prophet, to which you do well that you take
heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place; but you bear us in hand,
that the light of the Gospel holds men in extreme ignorance. Zachary
prophesied of his ^onne the Baptist, that Luke 1. 79.
he was ordained to give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death, to guide their feet into the way of peace, and the Baptist himself
of CHRIST, that he was John 1. 9.
that true Light which lights every man that comes into the world: But you
tell us, that it serves to dazell men's eyes, and rob their purses: And no
doubt, had you lived among the Pharisees in the time of CHRIST, or John the
Baptist, you would have called their doctrine a counterfeit light in a thieves
lantern, as well as ours, being in substance the same with theirs. And for
ignorance, I may be bold to say it, with a thankful acknowledgement to God
for it, that a good part of our people are more expert in the Scriptures, and
are better able to yield an account of that faith which is in them, then many
of your Prelates and Priests, whereof some bear the name of the brotherhood of
ignorance, and all (at least by your practice) acknowledge her the mother of
devotion, in as much as you Romans 1. 18.
withhold the truth in unrighteousness: like Esopes dog, you neither eat hay
your selves nor suffer others to eat it: You pretend the key of Knowledge, but
you neither enter in your selves nor suffer others to enter; you neither read
nor esteem the Scriptures your selves as you ought, nor suffer the people to
read them, but seal them up in an unknown language to the use of a few, with
who^ you please to dispense.

B. C.
21.
For matter of doctrine there is no reason that your Majesty or the Kingdom
should be molested or burdened for the mainetenance of Caluinisme, A most
notorious untruth, if by Caluinism^ you understand Caluins doctrine.
which is as much against the Religion of England, as it is against the
Religion of Rome, and will by necessary consequence overthrow not only How
Caluins doctrine overthrows al these, or any of these, let his books testify.
the Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, and the forgiveness of sins,
but also all the Articles of the Creed, save only so much as the Will the
Turk believe Christ to have been the Son of God by eternal generation? or
to have been conceived by the holy Ghost? or to have risen from the grave by
his own power the third day after his burial? or visibly to have ascended
into heaven? or that from thence he shall return again, to judge the quick
and the dead? or is Calvin charged by any adversary to overthrow any of these,
so much as by consequence? where then is M. Doctors moderation?
Turk himself will be content to believe, which will be easy to prove upon
better I think we shall expect long before that leisure be offered.
leisure.

The doctrine of England which is contained in the Common prayer book, and
Church Catechism, confirmed by act of Parliament, and by your Majesty's Edict,
wherein all Englishmen are If all English men, then your self were baptized in
that doctrine, in which notwithstanding you were not confirmed as you ought, or
at lea^t wise it was not sufficiently confirmed in you.
baptized, and ought to be confirmed, and therefore there is some reason that
this should be stood upon.

But this doctrine, in most of the maine points thereof, as has been It was
touched indeed but not proved.
touched before, and requires a That just treatise will prove nothing else but
an unjust calumny, if by Caluinisme you understand Caluins doctrine.
just Treatise to set down in particular, does much differ from the current
opinions and Catechismes of Caluinisme; does very near agree with, or at least
not My Table of comparison here annexed to mine answer, will manifest many
plain contradictions, and that in the mainest points of doctrine.
contradict the Church of Rome, if we list with We profess the patience of
doves, but not of asses, such as you would prove us to be, if you make us in
that to believe what you promise to prove.
patience to hear one another, and those points of doctrine, wherein we are
It is the obstinacy of the Church of Rome, that inforceth us to be at wars
with her.
made to be at wars with the Church of Rome, whether we will or not, do
rather arguethe Whether the contradiction of the doctrine (which you here
confess, but denied before) rather argue the corruptions of State, from whence
they come, then are argued by the grounds of that Religion, whereupon they
stand, we shall have fitter opportunity to examine in the Sections following.
corruptions of the State, from whence they come, then are argued by the
grounds of that Religion whereupon they stand, and the contradiction of
doctrine has followed the alteration of State, and not the alteration of State
been grounded upon any truth of doctrine.

G. H.
21.
We are now come to one of the maine points you drive at (howbeit you seem
only to glance at it in passage, and to draw it on upon the bye) which is to
put us off from all fellowship and communion with those Churches, who
acknowledge Calvin to have been an excellent instrument of God, in the
abolishing and suppressing of Popery, and the clearing and spreading of his
truth, that so being separated from them, we may either stand single and be
encountered alone, or return again to our old bias, and relaps upon Rome, and
so through Caluins sides you strike at the throat and heart of our Religion:
For our parts, we all wish with the Reverend and learned My Lord of Ely.
Prelate of our own Church, that you were no more Papists then we Caluinists,
no more pind on the Popes sleeue, then we on Caluins, who^ we esteem as a
worthy man, but a man, and consequently subject to humane error, and frailty.
We maintain nothing with him because he affirms it, but because from
infallible grounds he proves it; whereas the Popes bare assertion with you is
proof sufficient. You are so sworn to his words, that they are of equal or
higher authority with you then Pythagoras his precepts with his Scholars,
ipse dixit, is enough for your warrant: but for us, we embrace Calvin as
himself does authors not divine, vsque ad aras, so far forth as with divine
he accords, and no farther. This is our judgment of Calvin: but to say that
the doctrine which he maintains, is as much against the Religion of England,
as it is against that of Rome, is a desperate assertion, and such as can never
be made good, did all our fugitives lay their heads together, and were all
their wits turned into one. And I much marvel what you meant, pretending so
much tenderness of conscience, and diligence in search of the truth, to
suffer your malice so far to prevail upon your judgment, as to let so foul
a blot, so manifest a falsehood to drop from your pen, and not only so; but to
present it to the scanning of so learned a Prince, and to publish it to the
view and censure of the world: For if Caluins doctrine be as opposite to our
Religion as to the Romish, then must it needs follow that either ours and the
Romish agree in one: or that ours is as distant from Caluins as Caluins is from
the Romish; both which to be untrue appears as well by the testimony of all
other Romish writers, and the authority of the Pope himself in his The words
of the Bull are these, Impia mysteria and instituta ad Caluini praescriptum a
se suscepta and obseruata etiam a sub ditis s^ruari mandauit.
Bull against Queen ELIZBAETH, as those whom they term Lutherans, who
Observe their ye^rely Catalogues that come from the Mart of Frankeford.
ever range us among the Caluinists, as also of our own writers, and those of
foreign Churches by you termed Caluinistical, because with him they join in
profession of the same truth: the manifold I have in mine hands Letters
written from Beza to Archbishop Whitgift, and from him again to Beza, wherein
they both acknowledge that we agree in the substance of true religion.
Letters by them written, and Books dedicated to our late blessed Queen, our
Bishops and Noble men, by French and Heluetian Divines, specially of Zurich and
Basil, testify to the world, that they then held their religion to be the
same with ours, and ours with theirs: and for any thing I know, neither theirs
nor ours is since changed, save only some such neutrals as your self labor
to draw us nearer to Rome then they can be drawn, or the truth it self
will permit that we should.

Among many other testimonies I will only instance in two, the one an
Heluetian touching our conformity with foreign reformed Churches in former
times, the other a French man touching the present: the Heluetian is Bullinger,
who dedicating his Commentaries upon Daniel to Horn, Bishop of Winchester*
Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, Sands, Bishop of Worcester, Parkhurst, Bishop of
Norwich, and Pilkington, Bishop of Durham, in his Epistle Dedicatory professes
he did it chiefly to this end, that posterity might understand their
indissoluble knot of friendship, and the mutual consent between England and
Suisserland in matter of Religion, howbeit they were removed far asunder in
situation of place. The French is Peter Moulin, who in defense of his Majesty's
Book against Coffeteau acknowledges that we had enough sufficient men of our
own to defend the Cause, but that he undertook the work to let the world
know, that the same Confession which his Majesty had made was also theirs,
and that they and the truth were assailed in his Person and Writings.

But what need I stand upon the particular testimonies of private men, since
the Confessions of our Churches are extant to be compared, as well in the
Book, entitled, The Harmony, as in that other termed The body of
Confessions? In the mean time to give the Reader some satisfaction, I will set
down the doctrine of the Church of England in points of difference together
with Caluint on the one side of it, and the Romish on the other, that so we
may make some estimate whether Caluinisme be as opposite to the Religion of
England, as to that of Rome. Now for the doctrine of the Church of England, I
will not extend it so wide as to the Books and Lectures of our Bishops, and
public professors, the lights and guides of our Church and Universities, nor
yet contract and confine it, as Mr. Doctor does, within the narrow compass of
the Common prayer Book and Church Catechism, the book of Canons, and therein
Nowels Catechism, Can. 79. being confirmed and allowed by public authority.
But above all I very much marvel Mr. Doctors memory should so far fail him,
as quite and clean to forget the Book of Articles, solemnly agreed upon by
the Reverend Bishops and Clergy of this kingdom, at two several meetings or
Conuocations of theirs in the years of our Lord 1562, and again 1604, and
lately again confirmed by two several Canons, the 5, and 36 in number, since
himself subscribed to them at the taking of his Orders, if not of his Degrees,
and living a long time as Chaplen in house with Archbishop Whitegift, and since
keeping his ordinary turns of waiting at Court, and residence at Canterbury,
he could not be ignorant of them, nay, I can show it under his own hand,
which argues he fought against the light of his own conscience, that setting
down the differences between the Old English, and New French divinity, as
he calls it, he quotes diverse of those Articles for the doctrine of the
Church of England, and besides, professing himself so skillful in the
Statutes, Eliz. 13.
he could not but know that The Book of Articles and Injunctions, is by them
as well confirmed and authorized, as The Book of Common Prayer, Art. 35. 36.
in which Articles are also allowed and ratified The second Book of Homilies
and holy Orders; so that whatsoever is doct^inally delivered in any of these,
may safely be called, The doctrine of the Church of England: But for the
present I will content my self with the Book of Articles only, and for the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, with the Canons and positions of the Tridentine
Council and Catechism, and for Caluines doctrine, with that specially which
he has delivered in his 4. Books of Christian Institutions.

Here follows the Table of differences.

B. C.
22.
For when the breach was resolved on for the personal and particular ease of
Henry the VIII. and the How could it be for the ea^e of his later wives and
their children, since the breach was made upon the taking of his second wife,
or ^ather his first (if his marriage with Queen K^ther^ne were a nullitie) and
that before he had any child by her.
children of his later wives, it was necessary to give every part of the
Commonwealth Yet hereafter you go about to prove, that in temporal respects
the Romish religion is the fittest to give contentment to the several members
of the State.
contentment, for which they might hold out in the heat of affection, and
study to maintain the breach, otherwise it was likely that in the clearenesse
of That untimely growing together, would rather have been a cause of festring
and rankling, so that the breach is kept open rather upon judgment then upon
affection.
judgment it would quickly have grown together again, and then the authors
thereof must have been You make the King the author of it, who should have
excluded him or called him to an account?
excluded and given account of their practice.

G. H.
22
Howbeit Henry the VIII. actually indeed made that breach with Rome, which
continues at this day (and is like to do till Rome by her reformation endeavor
to make it up) yet they certainly err, who seek the cause of it, only in
him and in his times, or fixing their eyes upon his person and quarrel, look
not up to the state and course of former ages: for as no wise man would assign
the cause of death to some accident falling out in the last point and period of
life, but to some former distemper or intemperancie: so the reasons of
vnhorsing the Pope, and rejecting his authority with the general applause of
all the estates of the Realm, having been so long an^ so deeply rooted in
men's minds, are not to be searched for in the personal and particular
proceedings of Henry the VIII. but in the ancient Records and evidences of our
Histo^ians, who all complain of the spurring, and gauling, and whipping of our
land by those Italian riders, until like Balaams ass, she turned again,
opened her mouth to complain, and being out of all hope of relief by
complaint, cast her rider. As many witnesses we have hereof well near, as
Writers since the last 600. years: as many clear testimonies as there be
leaves in Mat. Paris, the most learned and sufficient Writer (unless you will
except William of Malmesburie) that those times afforded. It was a memorable
speech of Robert Grosteed Bishop of Lincoln, who lived 358. years since, in
the time of Gregory the IX. Caelestine the IIII. Innocent the IIII. and
Alexander the VI. who lying upon his deathbed, the very night of his
departure, making a lamentable and bitter complaint to the Priests and Monks
that stood about him, of the miserable estate of the Church, and laying the
burden of so great a mischief upon the Popes shoulders (whom therefore he
called Heretic and Antichrist) at length he yielded up his soul unto God
with these words in his mouth, [Non liberabitur Eccles^a ab Egiptiaca
seruitute, nisi in ore gladij cruentandi. The Church will never be freed from
this Egyptian slavery, but by the point of a bloody sword.] Thus did this holy
man foresee and foretell, as it were by a Prophetical Spirit, that which we see
accomplished: So that Henry the VIII. served only as a midwife to bring to
the world that birth, wherewith our country had been in travel many years
before; and had not he been borne, some other means would have been found out
for the doing of that which he did; and what we see already done in England,
will also undoubtedly be brought to pass in other Nations, when their measure
is full, and God will. In the mean time that the truth of this assertion may
the better appear, I will add to those examples, and instances brought to
this purpose by his Majesty in his Premonition, two others (in my judgment
very obser^able) the one of William surnamed the Conqueror, the other of
Henry (for his learning) surnamed Beauclerke his third son, and second
Successor in the Kingdom, both out of the Manuscripts of that noble
Antiquarie, Sr Robert Cotton knight Barronnet. The father thus writes to
Gregory the VII. commonly known by the name of Hildebrand, upon notice given
him from his Legate Hubert, that he was to do him fealty, and ^o pay him
money as his ancestors had done.

[Hubertus Legatus tuus (Religiose Pater) ad me veniens, ex tua part me
admonuit, quatenus tibi and successoribus tuis fidelitatem facerem, and de
pecunia quam antecessores mei ad Romanam Ecclesiam mittere solebant melius
cogitarem; vnum admisi, alterum non admisi; fidelitatem facere nolui, nec volo;
quia nec ego promisi, nec antecessores meos antecessoribus tuis id fecisse
comperio.]

Hubert your Legate (Religious Father) coming unto me, advertised me as from
you, that I was to do fealty to you, and your Successors, and that I should
bethink my self better of the money which my Predecessors were wont to send
to the Church of Rome; the one I admitted, the other I admitted not. The
fealty I would not perform, neither will I, because neither my self promised
it, nor do I find that my Predecessors performed it to yours.

Upon which occasion as it may well be supposed, Gregory 7 Re^^ lib. 7. ^pist.
1. (...) 3. council. pa. 1244, edit. B^^ij.
the Pope returned this answer to his Legate Hubert, after signification; how
little he esteemed money without honor given him; he comes to the person of
the King in these terms.

[Multa sunt vnde Sancta Romana Ecclesia aduersus eum queri potest, nemo enim
omnium Regum etiam Paganorum, contra Apostolicam sedem hoc praesumpsit tentare,
quod is non erubuit facere.]

There are many things whereof the holy Roman Church may complain of against
him, in as much as none of the Pagan kings have attempted that against the Sea
Apostolic, which he has not blushed to put in execution.

Now for Henry the son, who in this regard swarued not from his fathers
steps, part of Pope Paschals letter unto him, runs thus.

[Paschalis seruus seruorum Dei, dilecto filio Henrico, illustri Anglorum Regi,
Salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem. Cum de manu Domini largius honorem,
diuitias, pacemque susceperis, mir amur vehementius, and grauamur quod in Regno
potestateque tua beatus Petrus, and in beato Petro, Dominus honorem suum
iustitiamque perdiderit. Sedis enim Apostolicae nuncij, vel literae praeter
iussum Regiae Maiestatis, nullam in potestate tua susceptione^ vel aditum
promerentur, nullus inde clamor, nullum inde iudicium ad sedem Apostolicam
destinatur.]

Paschal the servant of the servants of God, to our beloved son Henry, the
most renowned King of England, health and Apostolical benediction. Sythence
you have plentifully received honor, riches and peace, from the hand of the
Lord, We exceedingly wonder, and take it in ill part, that in your Kingdom,
and under your Government S. Peter, and in S. Peter, the Lord has lost his
honor and right, in as much as the Nuntioes and Breues of the Sea Apostolic,
are not thought worthy entertainment or admittance in any part of your
Dominions, without your Majesty's warrant, No complaint now, no appeal comes
from thence to the Sea Apostolic.

To which the King (after terms of complement,) replies in in this manner.

[Eos honores, and eam obedientiam, quam tempore Patris mei antecessores vestri
in Regno Angliae habuerunt, tempore meo vt habeatis volo; eo videlicet tenore,
vt dignitates, vsus, and consuetudines, quas pater meus tempore antecessorum
vestrorum in regno Angliae habuit* ego tempore vestro in eodem regno meo
integre obtineam. Notumque habeat Sanctitas vestra, quod me viuente, Deo
auxiliante, dignitates and vsus regni Angliae non minuentur: Et si ego (quod
absit) in tanta me deiectione ponerem, Optimates mei, imo totius Angliae
populus id nullo modo pateretur. Habita igitur (Charissime Pater) vtiliori
deliberatione, ita se erga nos moderetur benignitas vestra, ne (quod inuitus
faciam) a vestra me cogatis recedere obedientia.]

That honor and obedience which your predecessors had in the Kingdom of
England during the Reign of my father, my will is you should have in my time,
with this condition, that my self fully and wholly enjoy all the Dignities,
Prerogatives and Customs, which my father enjoyed in the said Kingdom, in the
time of your predecessors; and I would your Holiness should understand, that
during my life the digninities and prerogatives of the Crown of England, by
Gods grace, shall not be minished* and if I should so far abase my self
(which God forbid) my Lords and Commons would by no means endure it: wherefore
(most dear Father) upon better advice, let your gentleness be so tempered
toward us, that I be not enforced (which I shall unwillingly do) to withdraw
my self from your obedience.

Whereby it appears, that Henry the first began to hammer and beat upon that
which Henry the last, by Gods appointment, in the fullness of time brought to
perfection: and though these two Kings, the Father and the Son, gave way to
some part of the Popes jurisdiction, as I showed before; Yet hereby it appears
it was a burden unto them.

B. C.
23.
Therefore to the Lords and Were not those favorites favorers of the Romish
religion?
favorites of the Court, was given the lands and inheritance of the Abbeys and
religious houses, that having once as it were washed their hands in the bowels
and blood of the Church, both they and their posterity might be at utter*
defiance therewith; and so having overthrown and profaned the good works of
the If they were Saints, why did you still pray for them, as if they had been
in Purgatory.
Saints, it was necessary for them to get them Chaplins, that might both
dispute, preach, and write against the merits of good works, the invocation of
Saints, Of these two last you may say as they in the 19. of the Acts, who made
silver shrines for their great Goddess Diana, By this craft we have our wealth.
the sacrifice of the Altar, prayer for the dead, and all such points of
Catholic doctrine, as were the grounds of those Churches and religious houses,
which they had overthrown and profaned: And it was not hard for those
Chaplines by some show of Scripture, to prove that which their Lords and
followers were so willing to believe.

G. H.
23.
The Abbeys and Religious houses were grown to that height of idleness, the
mother of ignorance and luxury, within themselves, and by reason thereof into
that contempt and base estimation with the people, that it was high time some
blood should have been drawn from their swelling veins; specially
considering the little use the Commonwealth had of them, but chiefly for that
they were so far degenerated from the primitive institution: Their number was
great, it being 645. monasteries of men and women, accounting the Priories and
Frieries, besides Chaunteries and free Chapels; their seat commonly in the
fairest and fattest part of the land, their revenues amounting to an
inestimable sum, as in the original book thereof taken by Commission, and
given to the King may appear; though at their dissolutions their values were
favorably and far under rated, in so much as in the reign of Edward the
first, a statute of Mortmaine was made for the restraining of that excess: And
had not Henry the fifth been wisely diuerted upon the French wars by
Archbishop Chichly, he had in all likelihood prevented Henry the eight in
diminishing, if not demolishing those houses; being s^t on by his Parliament
held at Leicester, in the beginning of his reign* in which a bill was
exhibited, complaining how their revenues given for devotion, were most
desorderly wasted upon Hounds, and Hawks, and Horses, and Whores which if
better employed, would serve for the defense of the land, and honor of the
King, and suffice for the maintenance of fifteen Earls, fifteen hundred
Knights, six thousand two hundred Esquires, and one hundred Almes-houses, for
relief of impotent and diseased persons, and besides all this to the Kings
Coffers, there would thereby yearly accrue, twenty thousand pounds. And to
speak a truth, Cardinal Wolsey was the man who by pulling down the smaller,
both showed and made a way to the King, Henry the eight, for taking the like
order with the bigger.

Neither did he think his hands less bound toward his own subjects, then
the Pope and French King did theirs, for the rooting out of the rich and
powerful order of Templars through Christendom, accusing them of like
grievous and unnatural offenses, as were in open Parliament laid to the
charge of our monastical professors, upon the relation of such Commissioners,
who were appointed to make search to that purpose: no marvel then that as
after the dissolution of that order (which fell out in the reign of Edward the
second, as Thomas de la More report^ is, who at the same time lived as an
officer in his Court) the heirs of the donors, and such as had endowed them
with lands reentred upon those parts of their ancient patrimonies: so in the
downfall of Monasteries, the Lords took their share of those lands which
their ancestors had formerly bestowed to piou^^vses, but were at that time very
much abused by the posses^ours. But a great part of them, about, or somewhat
above 600. years since, were thrust into the possessions of married Churchmen,
by M. Cambden in his description of Worcestershire.
Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury, so that if every bird had his feather at
their dissolution, the greatest part of their lands had returned to the
Clergy, or at least their impropriations, which were as improper to them,
though they held them by dispensation, as now it may well be disputed, they
are to the By the common laws of England it is euid^nt, (...) no man (...) he
be Ecclesiastical* or have Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, can have inheritance
of tithes. My L Cook^ in his fi^t part of reports 2^ Ed. 3. lib. Ass. pl. 75.
possess^urs of them: A part whereof notwithstanding are so far off from
being at defiance with your Church, that they are professed Roman Catholics.
And in Queen Mary's days among all those that entirely embraced that
Religion, not so much as one was found that could be drawn to disgorge those
sweet morsels they had devoured, or to make restitution of a foot of land,
though the Queen her self (the rather to draw them on) had offered all she
held in possession.

Then was your doctrine of good works, your Invocation Saints, your sacrifice
of the Altar, and your prayer for the dead restored, which were the grounds
(you say) of those religious houses: yet the land which had been their
maintenance, was not restored. And as the reviving of those doctrines could not
serve to give new life unto the carcasses of those ruined houses, so the
ruining of those houses was not the cause (as you pretend) of the impugning of
those doctrines, since they were impugned (by the confession of your own
Writers) by the Waldenses, by the Albingenses, by Wicliffe, by Husse, by
Luther, by Zuinglius, by Calvin, before those houses fell, and continued for
the most part, during all the reign of Henry the eight, as may appear by the
six articles, commonly called the whip with the six cords. And for any thing
I find* he altered nothing (excepting the taking down of Monasteries and the
Popes authority) but only the translation of the Bible, and the singing and
reading divine service in our mother tongue: so that it is clear to any
indifferent judgment, that the contradicting of those doctrines rather caused
the ruin of those houses, then their ruin (as you would bear us in hand) the
contradicting of those doctrines. And it were no hard matter, not by show of
Scripture, but by Scripture it self, to prove their unsoundness: But an
harder I am sure it were, for his Holiness Chaplains, from thence to prove
their soundness, in that sense as they are now defended in the Church of Rome,
howbeit you are as willing to believe the truth of them for the Were not the
fire in Purga^ory (in which the ^oules of those dead are supposed to be) very
hot, the fire in the Popes and Monks kitchins would quickly be very cold.
advantage you reap by them (specially by the sacrifice of the Altar, and
prayer for the dead) as any can be upon the like reason to believe the
contrary.

B. C.
24.
To the Commons was given great hope of relief for their poverty, ease of
subsidies, and the burden of so great a Clergy, and many other Your pompous
and empty shows in Gods service well deserve that title of goodly gay nothings.
goodly gay nothings: And for the present, they should have liberty, and the
benefit of the common Law, that is leave to live by such Laws as themselves
list to make, and to contemn the authority of the Church; which although it
were for their benefit every way, yet because it crossed their affections, like
wayward children they could never abide it: and was not this reason enough for
them to hold out the breach, and to study Scripture themselves, that they might
be able to confute Confession, Satisfaction and penance I take to be both one
in the language of Rome, though you seem to put a difference between them.
Satisfaction, Penance, and to declaime against that tyranny of the Church of
Rome, whereby themselves and their forefathers had been kept in awe and Whether
the people were kept in obedience by the Popes authority, let the manifold
troubles by his means raised, testify*
obedience unto God and their kings?

G. H.
24.
The Commons might have been disburdened of their Subsidies, had those
revenues and treasures which came, or might have come to the Crown by the
downfall of monasteries, been employed as they might have been: the plates and
wires of gold of Beckets only shrine, together with the pearls and precious
stones of inestimable value, filling two great chests: But God so ordered the
matter for their laying of sacrilegious hands, (as it may be thought) upon
those tenths which by himself were consecrated to himself, that neither it,
nor the rest prospered, neither was the king thereby much enriched, nor the
Commons relieved, it being like the dead fly in the box of ointment, or the
Colloquintida in the Prophets pottage. Now for the peoples liberty in making
laws at their own pleasure, to live as they listed, it is a matter fondly
surmised and published of you, not promised by the State, nor demanded or
expected by them. The Laws Ecclesiastical were in King Henry's time, and by
his authority appointed to be compiled and digested, by a certain company of
Bishops and other divines joined in Commission, with Civil and Canon-Lawyers,
to the number of 32. but this work being le^t imperfect by the death of that
king, was afterward finished in the days, and by the command of his son
Edward, which my self have seen, though by the untimely death of that king
also, it never yet received public allowance. And for other laws, as the
world knows, they neither could nor can make any without the consent of the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and the approbation of the king. And lastly how
the laws of your Church crossed their affections, let their often and
dangerous rebellions for the restoring of them testify, there being none in
truth more fitting to the humor of a natural minded man, as may appear by
this, that a man of no religion, and like white paper, or sponged tables apt to
receive any impression, will sooner embrace yours, then any other in the world.

From this you digress to their studying of the Scriptures, that they might be
able to confute confession, satisfaction, penance, and to declaime against that
tyranny of the Church, whereby themselves and their forefathers had been kept
in awe and obedience to God and their king. For their studying of the
Scriptures, it is indeed a great eyesore to you, because thereby your malice
in withholding your followers from reading them, and withal your burdensome
traditions thrust upon them for your own honor and gain, but to their pain
and grieuance, are clearly discovered and discerned, from that which before
you call eternal truth; but to them nothing can be more profitable, or to
their guides more comfortable, so it be done with reverence and ^obriety, and
(as our Preface to the Bishops Bible exhorts) [not so much to dispute and
contradict, as to learn and obey] as being a practice which both our Savior
himself, and his Apostles, and the holy Fathers of the Primitive Church,
(specially S. Chrysostom) in diverse homilies often and earnestly exhort their
hears unto. And for the confutation of those points you name, I am of opinion
(and I think not without reason) that many of our people are better able by
Scriptures to confute them, as they are now held and used amongst you, then
your greatest Bishops and Cardinals are from thence able to prove them, of whom
some have not sticked to profess that they thought that time which they passed
in reading the Scriptures to be of all other the most unprofitably spent,
preferring Tullies Orations before Paul's Epistles, and Aristotle's Ethikes
before Solomon's Proverbs.

B. C.
25.
To the Clergiemen that would turn with the times, beside the possibility of
present preferment by the alteration, was given shortly after leave to marry,
and to purchase, and to enjoy the profit and pleasure of the world, as well as
the laity, and what What carnal minded Priest or Monk would not rather
entertain variety of Concubines then be tied to one wife.
carnal minded Monk or Priest would not with might and maine keep open the
breach after he was once plunged in it rather then to be in danger to forgo so
pleasing a commodity: Hence did arise a necessity of speaking and writing
against Vows, Vrginitie, Poverty, Fasting, Praying, Watching, Obedience, and
all that austeri^ie of life, which is by the Laws of the Church required in a
monastical and Priestly conversation.

G. H.
25.
Little hope was there given for the present to the Churchmen that yielded to
the King for matter of preferment, since the Abbots and Priors were not only
turned out of doors, but their houses rased, and their goods and lands
confi^cated. And for the Bishops, none of their places thereby fell void, they
all ( Rochester only excepted) jointly concurring with the king in casting off
the Romish yoke: and for their marrying and purchasing, neither of the^ were
permitted, during the reign of king Henry, who lived and reigned somewhat
above 14. years after the breach with Rome: Howbeit if we may credit Mr.
Cambden, an impartial Antiquarie, Churchmen were not forbidden marriage in
England till the year 1102. [then Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury (says
he) offered violence both to nature and to the Scriptures] which he writes
upon occasion of one Ealphegus, a Priest famous for his learning, who was
married and dwelt in the South part of Devonshire: And further he alleges the
words of Henry of Huntindon touching that act of Anselme [He forbadwiues to the
English Priests, being never before forbidden, which to some seemed a thing
very decent, to others as dangerous, least whiles they aimed to a purity above
their reach* they might fall into horrible impurities, to the dishonor of
CHRIST'S Name, and their profession.] Those words of Cambden before quoted,
together with these of Huntindon by him alleged, are commanded to be rased by
the Spanish Index: Sacerdotibus magna ratione sublat^s nuptias, (...)
restitu^nd^^ vider^.
But they might as well have rased those of Pius the ^I. in Platina, auouching
that he saw great reason why Priests should be restrained of marriage; but
greater why it should be restored them, or those of Cassander [by that over
rigorous and unseasonable constitution (speaking of restraint of marriage in
Churchmen) we see much grievous and abominable scandal to have arisen in the
Church,] or those of Mantuan touching S^. Hillary, Bishop of Poictiers in
France.

Non tibi progenies nocuit, non obfuit vxor
Legitimo coniuncta toro --
Or lastly those of the same Poet, speaking of the father of Nazianzen.
Praesule Patre satus, nam tunc idiura sinebant,
-- non horruit illa
Tempestate Deus Thalamos, cunabula, toedas.


And in another place of the father of Basil, and Gregory Nyssen, Tutius esse
volunt qua lex diuina sinebat
Isse via, veterumque sequi vestigia patrum:
Quorum vita fuit melior cum coniuge, quam nunc
Nostra sit exclusis Thalamis, and coni^gis vsu.


And if marrying be allowed them, I see no reason but they should withal be
allowed purchasing, as they are and always have been in the Eastern Church,
1* Tim. 5. 8.
he being worse then an Infidel that provides not for those of his own
household.

To conclude we neither speak nor write against lawful Vows, but the
rashness of them, and impossibility in performing them: Not against true
Virginity; but the fained show of it, and the preferring it by so many degrees
before the honorable estate of marriage: Not against necessary Poverty, but
the voluntary choice of it, when more good may be done by possessing and using
those means God has sent us: Not against Fasting; but the pharesaicall use of
it, and making it part of divine worship: Not against Praying; but the
performance of it in a strange tongue, rather for custom then for conscience,
rather by number then by weight, in drawing near unto God with our lips,
when our hearts are far from him: Not against Watching; but the pretended
apish imitation and merit in it: Not against Obedience; but the abuse of it in
the enterprising of damnable and desperate attempts. Lastly, not against
austeritie of life; but inciuilitie, and that show of wisdom which S. Paul
censureth in the second to the Col. Consisting in voluntary Religion and
humbleness of mind, and not sparing the body. You do well to add that all
these are required in a Monastical conversation, but how they were or are
performed, God knows, and the world not undeservedly suspects.

B. C.
26.
Upon these conditions, the Lords, the Commons, and the Clergy were content to
believe, that the King was Supreme head of the Church of England: Not that they
did think so indeed, or that they desired to augment his authority; but that
they might be protected by him, and freely enjoy those commodities which they
thought schism had brought unto them, and feared the unity of the Church might
again take from them: Hence did arise a necessity of inueighing against the
Pope and the Church of Rome, as against Antichrist and Babylon, and the
greatest enemies of the State of England: Insomuch that that Clergy man was
most acceptable to them, and in their opinion most worthy of preferments, that
could most confidently preach and write the most foul and monstrous assertions
of the Pope, and the Church of Rome, though they were never so false. Those
doctrines being set on foot, and maintained (as I have showed before) long
before our division from Rome, might well cause it; but could not be caused by
it.
These and such like are those temporal respects, which would feign seem the
daughters of those doctrines which themselves have brought forth, and to be
divided from the Catholic Church by doctrine, when they themselves have caused
the doctrine of division.

G. H.
26.
Upon these conditions, you say, that the Lords, and Commons, and Clergy, were
content to believe, that the King was supreme head of the Church of England,
whereas your self before confess, that these conditions were afterward
granted to the Clergy, who notwithstanding, were the forwardest in persuading
the King to accept and assume that title, as may appear by the book set out
by the whole Convocation of England, entitled, The Institution of a Christian
man, besides the Treatises of diverse particular Bishops to the same purpose, as
namely Stephen Gardiners discourse of true obedience, together with Bonners
Preface annexed to it, Longelands Sermon, and Tunstals Letter to Cardinal
Poole, all which are extant to be read and seen at this day, and surely he
that shall observe their vehement protestations, specially of Gardener, whom I
hold the most sufficient among them for learning, and withal the soundness
and weight of the reasons, which they enforce against the Popes pretended
jurisdiction, will easily believe, that they thought in very deed as they
wrote, that their minds and their pens concurred in one. But from hence (you
say) arose a necessity of envying against the Pope and the Church of Rome, as
against Antichrist and Babylon, as if his Holiness had never been graced with
the title of Antichrist, before Henry assumed his title of supreme head; nor
Rome called Babylon before England was freed from that Babylonish captivity.
Whereas your famous Cardinal has none other proof from Scripture, that S.
Peter was ever at Rome, but by expounding Rome to be the Babylon, from whence
he dated his first Epistle: And when the several marks of Antichrist shall be
applied to any so properly, as to the Bishop of Rome, I will confess he is
injuriously so styled; in the mean time, I can hardly imagine any so foul and
monstrous assertions, which some of your Popes have not deserved, even by the
confession of your own Writers, it being enough to make a modest man blush in
reading, and relating that which they blushed not to act, nay boasted of being
acted: in so much as I doubt not, but I may confidently affirm, that neither
the Catalogue of Emperors, taking in the Heathenish among the Christians, nor
any one succession of Kings in the world, since the first creation of it to
this present age, ever afforded so many monsters of men, so many incarnate
devils, so expert in all kind of villainies, as that of your Popes: neither can
any one King or Emperor be named, whom some of your Popes have not
out-stripped. And what needed then any imitation of your side, in faining false
assertions, where true were so plentiful?

B. C.
27.
In all these and all other doctrine of division, men have received great
countenance and encouragement from Geneua: For although M. John Calvin were
never any good subject, or friend to Bishop, You had small reason to make him an
enemy to Dukes, save only for not betraying his City to the Duke of Sauoy.
Duke, or King, yet he did so fit the common people with new doctrine, that no
Gospel can be so Why his doctrine should be so pleasing to the common people,
I see no reason but only the force of truth, since it restrains them of
much liberty, which the Romish affords.
pleasing to them, nor so light some as his: for finding Geneua to be fallen
out both with their Bishop, who was their ancient Prince, and their Duke, to
whom they They were fallen out with their Duke, and yet pretended to him,
whereas in truth the Duke pretended to them, not they to him. Duke Amadius
indeed got that donation from Pope Martin, but neither himself nor any of his
successors could ever enjoy the possession, and as I hear Philibertus their
present Duke publicly renounced his pretense unto it, in the last assembly of
the Protestants of France at Grenoble.
pretended against their Bishop, and to be all in a combustion amongst
themselves for want of government, although he were then a stranger, and a very
Better an young reformer then an old apostate.
young man, of some six and twenty or seven and twenty years old at the
most, yet he thought good upon the opportunity to give the venture, and to step
in himself to be founder of a new Church and state amongst them: And for that
purpose, he He found the substance of it in the Scriptures, though not the
form or method.
found them such a Catechism, as they might easily contemn all ancient
learning and authority, and save themselves by a strong fancy, which he
called Your faith of Rome comes not so far as a strong imagination, it
contents it self with a bare speculation or naked apprehension, some
reprobates going as far in believing, and all devils farther.
faith: And this pleased the Bourgers of Geneua so well, that they called a
meeting, and caused all the Citizens to swear, that that Catechism was true,
and all B^zaes words are, Eiurato pal^m Papatu, by which I take to be
understood, the renouncing of the Papacy or the Popes authority, not the
swearing of all Popery to be false: or the abi^^ing of a man's hope of
attaining the Popedom, as a relapsed ^riar lately expounded himself.
Popery false; as may appear in Caluins life written by Beza, and prefixed to
his Epistles. And although the ministerial Presbitery of Geneua have lost much
of M. Caluins greatness, yet the City has had the That which was affected by
Gods special providence in their often and miraculous deliverances, you
maliciously ascribe to fortune and the help of their neighbors. How could the
Bishop and the Duke be both their ancient governors?
fortune ever since by the help of their neighbors, to hold out against their
Bishop and the Duke, and all their ancient governors.

G. H.
27.
You pass on in this Section, and the next to pass your censure upon Geneua
and Calvin, in as much as from them we have received great countenance and
encouragement; whereas neither Geneua nor Calvin were either of them of so much
greatness, as to afford us any great countenance. Yet for Geneua may truly
thus much be said, even out of the mouth of Bodin a professed enemy in
religion, Method. hist. cap. 6.
that neither drunkenness, nor idleness, nor professed Beggerie, nor open
wantonness were to be found in that City, and that it flourished not so much
in riches and power, as in piety and virtue, which God himself by strange and
miraculous deliverances of them at sundry times, has in some fort testified to
the world: Howbeit as a worthy Knight has well observed, [the Friars would
make their followers believe, that it is above all other places a professed
retreat and sanctuary of Roguerie, giving harbor to all the runnagates,
traitors, rebels, and wicked persons of all other Countries; by which speech
very generally in Italy spread and believed, some memorable accidents have at
some time happened, sundry of their picking and loose Friars, hearing Geneua to
be a place of good fellowship, and thinking the worse prankes they played with
their own ere they came thither, to find the better welcome at their coming,
robbed their Couents of their Church-plate, and other repositaries, and brought
away the booty in triumph to Geneua, under the color of being reformed in
their religion, where their advancement has been straight to the gibbet, for
their labor; a reward unexpected, and such as caused them to complain
pitifully of their wrong information. For such is the extraordinary seuer^ty
of this City, as to punish crimes committed without their estate, with no
less rigor then if they had been amongst them. And not many years since, it
was the lot of a Spanish Gallant, who stood upon his state, and carried a Mint
about him, to repair thither to have stamps made him for the coining of
Pistolets: being apprehended and charged with it, his defense was, that he
understood their City was free, and gave receite to all offenders, but withal
(said they) when they were come they punished their offenses, a distinction
which the poor Gentleman never before studied, and the learning of it then
cost him no less then his head-peece,] And for Calvin I marvel that having
so diligently read S. Augustine, and so highly esteeming him, you should have
such a tooth against Calvin, who professes of S. Augustine in the latter end
of his Chapter of the Sacraments in general, that he often quoted him [vt
optimum, and ex tota antiquitate fidelissimum testem] as the best and soundest
witness which antiquity afforded: and he might well say he quoted him often,
there being no Tome, and scarcely any one book of Augustines, out of which
Calvin through the four books of his Institutions, cites not many passages
to the number of 280. if my computation fail not: and for the greatest part so
iudiciously to the purpose, that I may well doubt, or rather indeed not doubt
at all whether Mr. Calvin or Dr. Carrier had read S. Augustine with the greater
attention and judgment: And for their knowledge in Scriptures, I am sure malice
it self will easily acknowledge, there was no comparison. Dr. Stapleton who
was not otherwise very favorable to Calvin, yet sends this testimony after him
in the Preface of his Antidote against Caluins exposition of the Acts of the
Apostles, [that his Commentary on that book was most elaborat, and his
disputations acute and accurate] and in another place [for the literal sense
he is a diligent interpretour, so moral, so elegant, so sweet, that he is
read greedily of the Catholics themselves, whom I have heard sometimes wishing
that those things being cut out which make against our Church and belief,
he might come abroad gelded, and that by that means his Commentaries might
prove ^xceeding profitable.] Thuanus doubts not to testify of him that he was
[ Tom. 2. part. 1.
acrivir, acvehementi ingenio, and admirabili facundia praeditus: a man of a
smart and strong wit, and endued with admirable eloquence, [who when he had
spent seven years (says he) in wrestling with diverse diseases, yet was his
diligence in his vocation thereby nothing lessened, neither did he spare
himself in the continual course of his writing:] but Panig yrolla his
testimony is yet more obserueable, in as much as he was an Italian and a Friar,
and purposely preached many bitter Sermons against Calvin at Thurin in Sauoy:
His words in effect are these, [ In the (...) part of his Sermons against
Calvin preached at Thurin, (...)* 1582.
Calvin to speak the truth, was a man of a quick understanding, and clear
judgment, of great variety of reading, and rare indowments of nature.]

Salmeron, one of the first ten of Loyolaes foundation, of whom Ribadeneira in
his Catalogue of the Jesuitical writers witnesses [that by his speaking in
the Council of Trent, he bred admiration, and an opinion of great learning in
his hearers, being a professed and perpetual enemy of heretics, who^ he
persecuted and quelled by his disputations, his lectures, his writings,] yet
^his very man as eager and stout a champion as he was for the Church of Rome,
and against the Caluinists, makes no bones to borrow almost whole pages from
Calvin, as may appear to any that please to compare their expositions on the
second chapter to Titus, the 11. and 12. verses, a taste whereof I will here
present unto the readers view;

[Apparuit enim gratia Dei salutaris omnibus hominibus. Calvin. A fine
redemptionis argumentatur, quem docet esse studium pie and recte viuendi, vnde
sequitur boni Pastoris officium esse, potius hortari ad sanctam vitam, quam
vanis quaestionibus occupare hominum mentes. Redemitnos (inquit Zacharias in
suo cantico) vt in sanctitate and innocentia seruiamus illi omnibus diebus
vitae nostrae. Eiusdem rationis est quod dicit Paulus, Gratia Dei apparuit nos
erudiens; significat enim vice institutionis esse nobis debere ad vitam recte
formandam.]

[Salmeron upon the same words, Dicendumest Apostolum argumentari a fine
redemptionis, quae docet studium sobrie and just and pie viuendi: nam praestat
Doctorem ad honestam vitam homines adhortari, quam vanis quaestionibus mentes
hominum occupare; nam ad id sumus redempti, vt in sanitate and iustitia
seruiamus De^ omnibus diebus nostris, and ob id apparuit gratia Dei, vt per eam
instituamur ad vitam recte formandam.]

From this collation we cannot but infer, as one does of Plato, and Philo the
Jew, vel Philonizat Plato, vel Platonizat Philo, and another of Ramus and
Viues, aut Ramizat Viues, aut Viuizat Ramus: so of Calvin and Salmeron, aut
Salmeron Caluinizat, aut Caluinus Salmeronizat; either Salmeron borrowes from
Calvin, or Calvin from Salmeron, it being in my apprehension (without the
help of a miracle) utterly impossible, and consequently incredible, that two
men should fall so near upon the same conceptions and words, without the
sight one of another writings, now that Salmeron is the borrower, and not
Calvin, it appears from hence that in his exposition of the 10. verse of the
third Chapter of the same Epistle, he mentions Marlorates Commentary on that
place, which was compiled out of the Comments of diverse other learned men, but
specially out of Caluins; besides Calvin died in the year 1564. as Beza
witnesses, and Salmeron in the year 1595. as Ribadineira has left it upon
record: So that it might well be, and I verily think it was so, that Calvin
was dead many years before Salmeron set upon this exposition of the Epistles,
specially of that to Titus, which among his sixteen several Tomes is ranged
in the last save one: So that it seems he wrote it not long before his death,
and consequently many years after Calvin was dead. Lastly the uniformity of
the style, and the tenor of writing plainly discouers that Calvin was the
creditour, and Salmeron the debtor, or rather the Thou which teach, another
man should not steal, do thou steal?
thief, which I the more marvel at, considering in the Preface of his
exposition upon the Epistles he professes, [his intent was chiefly to dispute
against the heretics of these times, who called themselves Pa^ls Divines, and
gloried in his doctrine.] And in the third part of his first book next
following, proposes diverse questions touching the Church, and the government
against Luther and Calvin, by name. Now for Maldonate and Iansenius, though
they color the matter more cunningly in the change of words, yet are they
nothing less beholding to Calvin in many places for the sense: And thus we see
how out of the mouths and pens of those, who for reputation of learning were
far above, and for bitterness of malice were nothing inferior to Dr.
Carrier. Caluins rare and singular gifts are truly acknowledged.

But he was never (you say) any good subject or friend, to Bishop, Duke or
King: It was the same imputation which by the Jews was cast upon Christ; and
by the Pagans upon the Christians, in the Primitive Church, as may appear in
Tertullians apology for them delivered by him to the Empero^rs Seuerus and
Antoninus; a great part whereof is spent in wiping off that aspersion, and
therefore Calvin may bear it at your hands with the greater patience. Against
the state of Bishops, if he any where write otherwise then becomes him, we may
well impute it to his zeal against the great abuse of that order in the Roman
hierarchy, and his desire of establishing his own discipline, which though he
did well to erect at Geneua (as being a kind of government most fit for that
city;) yet to show that we make him no god, we profess he did ill in imposing
it as necessary on all other Churches. What friend he was to Kings, beside
infinite other passages through his voluminous writings, his only Epistle to
Francis the French king, prefixed to his Institutions, does sufficiently
declare, which (as Beza not without good reason thinks) if that king had but
read, it would have occasioned the giving of some deep wound to the whore of
Babylon, he being not of the humor of those kings that followed after him in
the kingdom, but a sharp censurer, of a deep judgment, a great patron of
learning, and of himself not auerse from that side, and though in his
Commentaries upon Amos, he seem to mislike Henry the 8th. his title of
Supreme Head, which by Stephen Gardener and other sycophants of Court, was
then interpreted to spread as far, and include as ample power as that he had
taken from the Pope, yet the lawful Supremacy of kings, he both allows and
defends, as his Majesty truly witnesses for him in his Catalogue of Tortus
lies annexed to his Premonition, and therein he shows himself a better
friend to kings, then D. Carrier was when he thus passed his censure on him;
for though he often drank to his Majesty's health, as he professes in a
letter which he thought worthy the imparting to all well minded Catholics; yet
withal he labored by might and maine to readuance and reestablish his
authority amongst us, who has professedly crossed and dashed the taking of
that oath, by which is only testified that natural allegiance which we owe
his Majesty. [Now for his coming to Geneua, and the founding of that
government and discipline there, which continues in force amongst the^ with no
ill success at this day, whereas you tell us, that being a very young man, of
some 26. or 27. years old at the most, yet he thought good upon the opportunity
to give the venture and step in himself.

For his age I will not much strive with you, but only desire you to remember
that some of your So that a man might truly say of them as the O rator does of
some of his time, Prouenie^ant ad rompub. noui orator^^ adolescentuli.
Popes; but many of your Bishops, and Archbishops, and Cardinals have bin
thrust, or at least have thrust themselves into places of greater charge,
before they arrived to those years, and perchance before they saw one half, or
a quarter so many. Yet it cannot be denied but it pleases God sometimes to
raise up the Spirit of a young Daniel, or a young Samuel, or a young Timothy, for
the effecting of that which an old Ely is unfit for, young men for the most,
being most zealous and aduenturous, but with all more inconsiderate, and old
men more cold and remiss, but withal more wary and circumspect, according to
that of S. Jerome in one of his Epistles to S Augustine, Bos lassus fortius
figit pedem, The advice of an old man is commonly best, but the execution of
young: The former have always been accounted fitter for settled business, but
the latter for new enterprises, in as much as men of age commonly object too
much, consult too long, adventure too little, repent too soon, and seldom
drive business home to the full periode; but content themselves with a
mediocritie of success, as loving to sleep in whole skin. I am not of that
Rabbyes mind, who because in Scripture [Yong men are said to see visions, and
old men to dream dreams,] thereupon infers, that young men are admitted
nearer to God then old, because vision is a clearer revelation then a dream:
But yet experience teaches us, and a noble Gentleman before named, has
rightly observed it, that the more a man drinks of the world, the more it
intoxicateth, and age does profit rather in the powers of understanding, then
in the virtues of the will and affections: So that Calvin though he had been
younger when he came to Geneua, then you make him; yet had his youth bin no
sufficient cause to See no man despise thy youth. Tit.
despise him, considering, as the Lawyers for the punishing of a malefactor
under age are wont to say, malitia supplet aetatem, so may I much rather for a
just defense, scientia or prudentia supplet aetatem, which shows it self in
this, that before his coming thither, he had written his excellent Commentary
upon Seneca de Clementia, and at Orleans had been offered the degree of
Doctorship in the laws, without paying so much as the ordinary fees, by the
general consent of all the public professors of that faculty: whereas their
common determination is now said to be, Accipiamus pecuniam, and dimittamus
asinum in patriam: but to draw nearer to the purpose: Calvin, how rare and
singular soever his gifts were, even beyond his age, yet withal they were so
tempered and seasoned with modesty, that single he attempted nothing in the
reforming of that Church, as Mr. Doctor pretends; but by advise, and with
consent of the chief Pastors, whom he found there, Farell and Viret, which
three, a fourth Minister in the same city has thus happily joined together.

Gallica mirata est Caluinum Ecclesia, nuper
Quo nemo docuit doctius:
Est quoque te nuper mirata Farelle tonantem,
Quo nemo tonuit fortius:
Et miratur adhuc fundentem mella Viretum,
Quo nemo fatur dulcius:
Scilicet, aut tribus his seruabere testibus olim,
Aut interibis Gallia.
Nay he was so far from excluding them, or putting himself out of his
ambition into the business (as Master Doctor would have it,) that by the
former of them himself was in a manner drawn into it: for passing through
Geneua by chance, and intending to travel for his studies into farther parts,
to Basil, or Strasbourge, Farel requesting him long and earnestly to set up his
rest there, and to join his labors with them, for the good of that City,
when he saw he could not prevail, being a man inspired with an Heroical
spirit, he suddenly breaks out into this vehement speech, [At ego tibi sludia
tua praetexenti denuntio omnipotentis Dei nomine, futurum, vt nisi in opus
istud Domini nobiscum incumbas, tibi non tam Christum quam te ipsum querenti,
Dominus maledicat.] But I (says he) denounce unto you pretending your studies;
in the Name of God Almighty, that except you set your self with us to this
work of the Lord, it will come to pass, that seeking your self and not
Christ, he will send a curse upon your proceedings.] With which dreadful
threat, Calvin being terrified, submitted himself to the disposition of the
Presbiterie and Magistracy: whence we may also gather that Calvin was neither
the sole, nor first founder of that government, but that the seeds of it were
sown, and the foundation laid before his coming thither. Now let the Reader
judge of the truth of that which Mr. Doctor has published, namely that Calvin
thought good upon the opportunity to give the venture, and to step in himself
to be the founder of a new Church, and State among them, and withal consider
whether Mr. Dr. professing that he had read Caluins life witten by Beza (from
whom I have borrowed, what touching this point I have delivered; he fought not
against the light of his own conscience, when he thus wrote touching Calvin:
Neither (to speak a truth) can I conceive any likely reason why he should
aspire to be sole or chief commander in that City, which (as Beza truly
witnesses of it,) is and has been Paupertatis officina, the shop of
poverty, in so much that when he dyed, his whole estate (together with his
study of books sold at a dear rate, could hardly be valued at 300. Crowns,
verefying therein that notable speech of his own in the Preface of his
Commentary on the Psalms: that Me non esse pecuniosum, si quibusdam viuus non
persuadeo, mors tamen ostendet.
I am no money-monger (says he) if living I cannot persuade men, my death
will put it out of doubt.

Lastly, for the better clearing of this point, and the discovering of the
truth of his proceedings at his first coming to Geneua, I will hereunto add
the relation of one, who professedly wrote against the necessity of imposing
that discipline on other Churches, which he there erected, and therefore may
well be thought not to speak partially on his behalf, and yet for his
learning and singular judgment to have understood what he wrote better then
Dr. Carier: His words are. M. Hooker in his Preface to his Ecclesiastical
discipline.
[A founder it had (says he) whom for mine own part I think incomperably
the wisest man that ever the French Church did enjoy, since the time it enjoyed
him, his bringing up was in the study of the civil Law: divine knowledge he
gathered, not by hearing or reading so much, as by teaching others: for though
thousands were debtors to him as touching knowledge in that kind, yet he to
none, but only to God the author of that most blessed fountain the book of
life, and of the admirable dexterity of wit, together with the helps of other
learning which were his guides, till being occasioned to leave France he fell
at the length upon Geneua, which City the B^zaes words are Pl^risque ex
collegi^, timiditate turbas fugi^ntibus.
Bishop and Clergy thereof, had a little before (as some do affirm)
forsaken, being of likelihood frighted with the peoples sudden attempt for the
abolishment of Popish Religion: the event of which enterprise they thought not
safe for themselves to wait for in that place. At the coming of Calvin
thither the form of their civil regiment was popular, as it continues at
this day: Neither King, nor Duke, nor Nobleman, of any authority or power over
them, but Officers chosen by the people, yearly out of themselves, to order
all things with public consent: For Spiritual government they had no Laws
at all agreed upon, but did what the Pastors of their Souls by perswation
could win them unto. Calvin being admitted one of their preachers, and a
Divinity Reader amongst them, considered how dangerous it was that the whole
estate of that Church should still hang on so slender a thread, as the liking
of an ignorant multitude is, if it have power to change whatsoever it lists:
wherefore taking unto him two of the other Ministers for more countenance of
the action (albeit the rest were all against it) they moved and in the end
persuaded with much ado the people to bind themselves by solemn oath, first,
never to admit the Papacy amongst them again, and secondly, to live in
obedience unto such orders concerning the exercise of their Religion, and the
former Eccesiasticall government, as those their true and faithful Ministers
of Gods word had agreeably to Scripture set down for that end and purpose.]
Whence we may observe, first, that Calvin was no founder of a new State
amongst them (as Mr. Doctor would bear us in hand) but as he found it popular
at his entrance, so at his death he left it: Secondly, the citizens swore not
that all Popery was false, as Mr. Doctor assures, but bound themselves with an
oath, never to admit of the Papacy (that is as I take the Popes usurped
authority) amongst them again, and for his Catechism one he wrote which
Beza calls opus admirandum, an admirable piece of work, so much desired of
all nations, that himself having first written it in Latin and French, it was
afterward at the request of strangers translated into High Dutch, Low Duch,
English, Spanish, and by Immanuel Tremelius into Hebrew, and by Henry Stephens
into Greek: but that (as I suppose) which you mean was the heads of Christian
Religion comprised in a few positions, not unlike our Book of Articles which
we are bound to subscribe unto: wherein, for any thing I can find, he
speaks none otherwise of Faith, then the Scriptures give him warrant, which,
it may be in your opinion are but a strong fancy neither: but had you as
thoroughly read him upon that point of Justification by faith, as Pighius did,
though with a mind to confute him, you might have had the grace to have yielded
in opinion to him, as he did by the confession of Tapper in the 8th. Article
of his second Tome, sometimes his fellow-pupil under Adrian, the VI. Pope of
that name, neither does he in that Catechism teach them to contemn all
ancient learning and authority as you feign, but fained authority and
learning falsely so called: For what learning have we more ancient then the
Scriptures? or what authority more binding; and yet for authority of the most
ancient Councels and godly Fathers, I think he voucheth more then ever
Doctor Carrier read, though he built not his faith upon them, and teach others
to do the like: in regard of such ancient learning and authority, being but
humane (the advice of the Prophet is to be regarded, or rather the command of
God by the Prophets mouth to be obeyed, Ierem. 6. 16.
Thus says the Lord, Stand in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your
souls: For it is true, that with all wise and moderate persons, that kind of
antiquity obtain^th that authority and reverence, as it is sufficient matter
to move them to make a stand, and to discover and take a view, but it is no
warrant to guide or to conduct them, a just ground, I say, it is of
deliberation, but not of direction: but on the other side (as it is well
observed by a writer whom Master Doctor himself before names with honor) who
knows not that time is truly compared to a stream, that carries down
fresh and pure waters into the salt sea of corruption, which enuironeth all
humane actions; and therefore if man shall not by his industry, virtue, and
policy, as it were with the Oar, row against the stream and inclination of
time, all institutions and ordinances (be they never so pure) will corrupt and
degenerate.

Finally, for the justifying of that which you have delivered touching Calvin
and his proceedings, you send us to Bezaes narratio^ of Caluins life, but had
you not in the perusal thereof shut up the eye of charity, and only opened
that of malice and envy, you might as easily have seen and observed in the
same narration, his wonderful assiduitie in reading, in preaching, in writing,
in conferring; insomuch that being advised by his physicians, and by his
friends requested a little to forbear, in regard of the weakness of his
body, and his manifold infirmities, his usual answer was, that [idlenesse to
him was the greatest sickness, or Vultis me otiosum a Domino deprehendi, will
ye that the Lord when he comes should find me doing nothing?] his zeal to
Gods truth, and courage in maintaining it, such, that he not only crushed the
errors of the Church of Rome, but quelled like another Hercules so many new
monsters of opinions by the clubbe of Gods word, that the very me^tioning the
names of the authors, and summ^ of their several heresies, would take up much
time and many lines: his sound and profound knowledge in his profession such,
that Melancthon, no child in Divinity, was wont to style him by an
excellency The Divine: his temperance such, that for many years he took but
one repast a day: his modesty such that by his will he ordained after his
death, there should be no monument erected to him, or so much as a Tombe-stone
laid over him; yet Beza his Colleague would not spare to bestow this ensuing
Epitaph on him, which he was as able, as (upon that sad occasion) unwilling to
afford, and the other (out of his deserts) as worthy, as (out of his modesty
the crown of all his other virtues) unwilling to receive.

Romae ruentis terror ille maximus,
Quem mortuum lugent boni, horrescunt mali,
Ipsa a quo potuit virtutem discere virtus,
Cur adeo exiguo, ignotoque in cespite clausus
Caluinus lateat rogas?
Caluinum assidue Comitata modestia viuum
Hoc tumulo manibus condidit ipsa suis.
O te beatum cespitem tanto hospite:
O cui inuidere cuncta possint marmora.
After his death many of the citizens who had often seen him before, yet much
desired to see him again, and many strangers came from foreign parts
purposely to know him, and to be known unto him; among whom was a worthy
Gentleman at that time Ambassador in France for the Queen of England: and
howsoever malice have found Lucianus in his name, charity has found Alcuinus.

B. C.
28.
Now it is the nature of all common people especially of Ilanders, not only
still to affect more and more You have made your observation good by your own
affecting of n^ueltie in the change of your religion.
novelty and There must needs be more liberty in that pr^fession where
indu^gences are so rise, and dispensations so easy.
liberty, and to be weary of their If by the old Clergy you mean the
ancient form of Ecclesiastical government, it remains at this day unaltered.
old Clergy, but also to The admiring of all that comes from beyond seas, may
better be applied to your Roman Catholics then any other to whom omn^
longinquum pro magnifico est, as also their com^orting one another with reports.
admire any thing that comes from beyond the Seas, and to cherish and comfort
one another with reporting the good success which Schismatikes and Rebels
happen to have against their lawful Prelates, and ancient governors, and to
impute all their good fortune to their new Religion. Hence it is come to pass
that that doctrine which is indeed the lawful doctrine of the Church of
England, is neglected or contemned, as a relike or a But by the Papists it is
condemned as heresy.
ragge of Popery, and Caluins institutions being come from Geneua, and fairly
bound up with the I cannot possibly conceive what you should mean by the
preface of the Gospel in this place, except your intent be as well to scoff at
the Gospel, as at Caluins Instit.
Preface of the Gospel, is dispersed throughout all Schools, Cities and
Villages of England, and has so infected Priest and people, as although it be
I desire the sight of that Law which makes against the doctrine of it.
against law, yet is it If it be cried up by voices, it is by the voices of the
grauest Bishops, and learned divines of our land, as I show in mine answer.
cried up by voices to be the only current Divinity in Court and Country, in
hope belike that it may one day serve the turn in England, as well as it has
done in Geneua, and in By other places belike you mean the Netherlands, which
I have already answered.
other places where it has prevailed.

G. H.
28.
Your Contrymen are herein much bound to you, in that you make Ilanders so
much to affect nouelty, ascribing their change of religion to the
changeableness of their nature: whereas other nations in the continent of
Europe, are by consent of those, who are interessed in neither, by nature more
changeable then they. That Polander who first by his pen encountered his
Majesty's Premonition, laboring to wype off the stain of the Powder Treason,
from the religion of the actours, laid it upon the nature of an English man,
whom in all religions he accuses to be naturally disloyal to his Prince; to
his imputation of disloyalty, you add the affectation of nouelty, thereby to
lay a stain upon our religion: But, Qui mala non mutat, in bonis non
perseuerat. The servant is not above his lord, nor the disciple above his
master: and we know that it was the question which the Jews proposed to our
Savior, [ Ma^^. 1. 27.
What new doctrine is this?] and of the Grecians to S. Paul, [ Acts 17. 18.
May we not know what this new doctrine whereof thou speak is?] but we may
truly answer both in their defense, and our own, Cons^nti^^us in eo quod
conuenit, non in ^e quod ^eceptum est. Mor^sa^ mori^ retenti^ res turbulent^
^que ac nouitas.
Nos non sumus nouatores, sed vos estis veteratores, It is not we that affect
nouelty: but you the counterfeit face of antiquity, thereby laboring to make a
peace, and to strike a league with us, as the Gibeonites did with Joshua, Josh.
9. 4, 5.
deceiving him by the show of old sackes, old bottles, old shoes, old
garments, and bread that was dry and moldy. You farther charge us with
comforting one another in reporting the good success which Schismatikes and
rebels happen to have against their governors, whereas the very enemies of
those whom you call Schismatikes and Rebels have been many times enforced to
acknowledge their good success to have come, not so much from good fortune, as
from the extraordinary hand of God; so that they have been constrained to cry
out with Pharaohs sorcerers, The finger of God is here. At the siege of
Rochell, the inhabitants being brought to great want, (as Thuanus reports it)
every tide were brought in a kind of shel-fish, (he calls them Surdones, or
Pectunculos) which I take to be little scallops or muscles, and that in great
abundance, for the relieuing of the besieged; they having never been seen upon
that coast before that time, nor since. Of Ziska the Bohemian, Aeneas Syluius,
afterward Pius the second (being Pius indeed before he was so in name)
recorded it to posterity, that eleven times in fought battles, he returned
conqueror out of the field, and was himself never foiled. The Duke of Medina,
General of the Spanish invincible navy, sent against us for the rooting of us
out in the year 1588. and blessed by the Apostolical benediction, when he
saw how the winds, and the waves, and the stars in their order fought
against them, professed he thought Jesus Christ was turned Lutheran. [Hispanus
ipse (says our famous Annalist) Cladem acceptam, Cambden in vita Regi: Elizab.
vt a Deo, composito animo tulti, Deoque et Sanctis quod non tristior fuerit
gratias egit, et per Hispaniam agi iussit. The King of Spain himself took
the blow patiently, as given by God, and both himself gave thanks, and
commanded his Subjects through Spain to do the like, that it fell no
heavier:] in the consideration of which admirable success, we might apply that
to our Church and Religion, which was written of the Emperor Theodosius. O
nimium dilecta Deo, cui militat equor,
Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti.
Upon that occasion, and not without reason were some coins stamped, with this
inscription: Glory to God alone, others with this, Man proposes, God
disposes: and lastly, others with this, Impius fugit, nemine sequente. Which
all tend to this purpose, that it was God fought for us in the maintenance of
his own cause. I will conclude this point with the testimony of Bizarro an
Italian, and, for any thing I can find, no Protestant, speaking of our late
renowned Sovereign, (...) lib. in quo partim Belgarum motus exorts* etc.
[ Quod vero ad me attinet, id tantum in praesentia dixerim, Elizabetham
Britanniae Reginam, singulari Dei opt. max. bonitate, ac prouidentia gubernari.
Quamuis enim ipsamet egregia virtute ac sapientia praedita sit, et apud se
consiliarios habeat summo iudicio, summaque prudentia prestantes; tamen
fatendum est humana consilia persaepe inania reddi, nisi ea diuinitu regantur:
Id vero vt ita esse iudicem, superiorum temporum facit recordatio, cum cogito
quot interni externique hosts huic opt. Reginae insidiati sint, et quam
mirabiliter illam Deus ab eorum insidijs, atque conatibus eripuerit. Touching
my self, I will only say this for the present, that Elizabeth Queen of
Britanny, has been hitherto preserved by the singular goodness and
providence of almighty God. For though her self be endued with singular virtue
and wisdom, and she have about her Counselors of excellent judgment and
foresight in the managing of her affairs, yet must we confess that humane
Counsels are often frustrated, unless they be guided from heaven; and that I
should so think, the remembrance of the passages of latter times inforceth me,
when I call to mind how many homebred and foreign enemies have laid in
wait for the life of that virtuous Queen; and how miraculously God has freed
her from all their plots and assaults.]

You go forward, and tell us that from hence it is come to pass, that the
lawful doctrine of the Church of England is contemned as a ragge of Popery,
and Caluins Institutions cried up by voices in Court and Country, in hope it
may one day serve the like turn in England, as it has done in Geneua, as if
Geneua had not discharged her self of the claim of her Bishop and Duke,
before Calvin compiled his Institutions, or as if we knew not that Caluins
Institutions make nothing against the government of lawful Magistrates; or if
it be a book so dangerous as you would make it, a wonder it is to me, that
neither your self nor any as yet of that side, have so much as undertaken a
through confutation of it. Must it needs be that all who embrace his pains
and learning in those Institutions, intend the subversion of the state, or
presently contemn the doctrine of the Church of England? Your old Master,
Archbishop Whitegift was of another mind, who maintained to his utmost the
doctrine of the Church of England, and yet gave he Calvin his due also,
laboring always where any occasion was offered, to countenance his writings
with Caluins authority, and specially out of that book which you most mislike,
yielding him the title of a famous and learned man: Nay, even in the use of
things indifferent, he gives this testimony of his judgment and moderation.
[ Tract. 2 cap. 4.
If Mr. Calvin were alive, says he, and rightly understood the state of our
Church and Controversy, truly I verily believe that he would condemn your
doing, and I am the rather induced to think so, because I understand him to
have allowed many things in the English Church, being at Geneua, which you
altogether mislike.] To this Archbishops testimony, I could add the opinion
of his predecessors, Cranmer Grindal, and Parker, gathered out of their
several Epistles to Calvin and other writings; but I will content my self
with that of Bishop Jewel, who was so far from neglecting or contemning the
doctrine of the Church of England, as a relic or ragge of Popery, as that
the Confession extant in his Apology for our Church, is registered as the
authentical doctrine of our Church, as well in the body, as in the harmony of
Confessions: But Archbishop Tract. 8. cap. 3. diuis. 31.
Whitegift goes farther, making both his Apology and the defense thereof, to be
the doctrine of the Church of England: And by this Archbishops authority was it
ordered, that those his books should be bought of every Parish, and chained in
their Churches to be read of the people at vacant times: Yet this worthy Bishop
in the defense of his Apology, Cap. 7 diuis. 4.
terms Calvin a reverend Father, and worthy ornament of the Church of God.
Now touching his book of Christian Institution in particular, M. Hooker (who
is well known not to have contemned the doctrine of the Church of England, as
a ragge of Popery) thus writes. [Two things (says he speaking of Calvin, in
his Preface to his books of Ecclesiastical policy) of principal moment
there are, which have deservedly procured him honor through the world: The one
his exceeding pains in composing the Institutions of Christian religion: The
other his no less industrious traua^les for exposition of holy Scripture,
according to the same Institutions: In which two things whatsoever they were
that afterward bestowed their labor, he gained the advantage of prejudice
against them, if they gaine-sayed, and of glory above them, if they consented:
Then which I cannot imagine what could be uttered more effectually. Thus
malice would not suffer you to see that worth in Calvin and his Writings, which
these Worthies professed and published, who were notwithstanding more earnest
and zealous Patrones of the doctrine of the Church of England, then your self:
But it may be you thought it would be credit enough for you only to enter the
lists with so stout and renowned a champion: howbeit, to hunt after applause by
dishonouring the names of famous men, was held by S. Jerome, and is accounted
by all good and wise men, but a trick of vain and childish arrogancy, there
being less comparison betwixt Carier and Calvin, then Calvin and Stapleton,
whom notwithstanding D. Whitakers duplicationis. cap. 1.
a great Divine and public professor of one of our own Universities,
comparing together, professes there was more sound Divinity in Caluins little
finger, then Stapletons head or whole body. I will conclude mine answer to
this Section, with the words of a grave B. Bilson in his book of the true
difference between, etc. part. 3. page 509.
Bishop yet living, no enemy to the doctrine of the Church of England, as his
Writings show: Calvin is so well known (says he) to all those that be
learned or wise, for his great pains and good labors in the Church of God,
that a few snarling Friars cannot impeach his name, though you would never so
wretchedly pervert his words.] Thus much of Calvin and his Writings, for I
durst not go so far as Thurius.

Praeter Apostolicas post Christi tempora chartas,
Huic peperere viro saecula nulla parem.
B. C.
29.
These reasons or rather corruptions of State have so confounded the doctrine
of the Church of England, and so slandered the doctrine of the Church of Rome,
as it has turned men's brains, and made the multitude on The multitude the^ on
your side are made fools by your own confession: but if any of us should say
so much, it were presently a slander.
both sides like two fools, which being set back to back do think they are
as far asunder, as the horizons are, they look upon: But if it please your
Majesty to How should his Majesty command them to turn, who are under the
Popes command, and must look which way please his H^linesse? and he for his
part will hardly be persuaded to permit them to look so much as a quarter
about.
command them to turn each of them but a quarter about, and look both one way
to the service of God, and your Majesty, and to the salvation of souls, they
should presently see themselves to be a great deal more near in matters of
doctrine^, then the Pu^itanicall Preachers on There are some Purita^call
Preachers then on your side, as well as on ours: belike you mean the Jesuits,
with whom notwithstanding, if we may believe Pelit^^rs report, you sided at
your coming to Pari^, and dyed amongst them.
both sides do make them believe they are. I can not in the breuity of this
discourse descend into particulars; but if it please your Majesty to command
me, or any other honest man that has taken pains, to understand and observe
How well you understood all sides, I made it appear before in the Controversy
of Images, in the mean time you do well to commend your own honesty and
learning.
all sides freely, and plainly to set down the The difference betwixt these
three, I have already set down, and if the matter of doctrine may by his
Majesty be compounded, it must either be by abrogating the Trident Canons, or
the English Articles, or by reconciling the one to the other, the
impossibility whereof, things standing in the terms they do, I have already
proved.
difference betwixt Caluinisme, and the doctrine of England, established by
Law, and then to show Locos Concessos, and Locos Controuersos, betwixt the
Church of England and the Church of Rome, I doubt not but the distance that
will be left betwixt for matter of doctrine, may by your Majesty be easily
compounded.

G. H.
29.
Whether reason, or rather corruption of State have not bred confusion, rather
in the doctrine of the Church of Rome, then of England, let Romes infinite
ambition and insatiable covetousness, masked under pretense of doctrine
testify. As long as the Bishops of Rome kept them to their profession in the
gaining of souls to God, matters went well for doctrine: but when once they
turned Statists, and in stead of gaining souls, cast about for the government
of the world, then were their Friars and flatterers found, who were as ready
to shape and frame her Doctrine according to the model of State. Before the
Council of Trent (which was called in the memory of some yet living) it is
made evident by my learned brother Dr. Carleton in his Consent of the Catholic
Church against the Tridentines, that the Doctrine of the rule of Controversies
of the Church, of Justifying Faith, of Grace, was the same in the Church of
Rome, which is now publicly taught and professed with us. If by the Church of
Rome, we will understand her chief Prelates, not those Friars and flatterers
which belonged rather to her Court then her Church; from whence then arose this
confusion of doctrine which followed after, but only from that corruption of
State which went before? and yet it cannot but be acknowledged, that as our
bodies first warm our clothes, and then our clothes serve to keep warm our
bodies: so the corruption of State first brought forth this confusion of
doctrine; but being brought forth, the daughter serves to nourish and
maintain the mother. Now for the confounding of our doctrine, we answer with
S. Paul, [ 1. Cor. 4. 3.
If our Gospel (says he) be hid, it is hid to them that are lost;] So we if
our doctrine be confounded, it is to them, Verse 4.
whom the God of this world has confounded and blinded, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of CHRIST, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.

The second thing which you charge us with, is the slandering the doctrine of
the Church of Rome: and are your Romanists clear of that accusation, or dare
any man of judgment and learning discharge them? does not In Cap. 9. ad Romans
disp. 5.
Pererius accuse Catharinus for calling that an intolerable and desperate
opinion of Luther touching Reprobation, which notwithstanding was the same
opinion, and none other (as Pererius confesses) then C^m ea tamen ip^issima
sit D. Augustini sentantia.
S. Augustine maintained touching the same point? Does not Cal^in^ Tur^is. lib.
^. cap. 7.
Reynolds our Country man (howbeit otherwise maliciously bitter against
Calvin, specially in his Caluino Turcisme) in his judgment free Calvin from
the imputation of making God the author of sin in his latter years, which
notwithstanding is still pressed upon him, both by your self and others? Does
not De Christo li. 2 cap. 19.
Bellarmine clear him from making the second person in Trinity to be from
himself, and not from the first, with which error notwithstanding he is
charged by Lib. 1^. de Trinitate.
Genebrard, by Secund^ dialogo quem inscribit Dubitantius.
Lyndan; by In Pr^fatione libri de Sancto Ioh. Baptista.
Canisius? And for our own Church does not Demand 48.
Bristow affirm, that our Religion is proved by experience to be indeed no
Religion? Does not Apol. cap. 1.
Allen speaking of our Sacraments, Service, and Sermons, call them things which
assuredly procure damnation? Does not Reynolds in the book before named,
endeavor to make our Religion worse then the Turkish, not distinguishing
betwixt Caluinisme, and the doctrine of the Church of England? But one example
for all may be that lewd libeller, who in the very entrance of his libell
exclaimeth, [That the Protestants have no Faith, no Hope, no Charity, no
Repentance, no Justification, no Church, no Altar, no Sacrifice, no Priest, no
Religion, no Christ.] What shall we say to these intemperate Spirits? if they
speak of malice, then I say with Michael the Archangel. Jude. 9.
The Lord rebuke them: But if they speak of ignorance, then I say with the
holy Martyr S. Steven Acts ^. 60.
Lord lay not this sin to their charge, or with our blessed SAVIOVR, Luke 23.
34.
Father forgive them they wot not what they do. Now for our slandring the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, when you or any other shall produce the like
Assertions out of any Writer amongst us of note and credit, I shall be content
to yield farther credit to your Assertion, then as yet I find reason I
should: for the residue of this Section I refer the Reader to my marginall
notes, as deserving, in my judgment, no better or other answer.

B. C.
30.
But perhaps there is so great opposition in matter of State, that although the
doctrine might be compounded, yet it is impossible to hear of agreement; and
if there be the same reason of State which there was in beginning, and
continued all Queen Elizabeth's days, there is as little hope now that your
Majesty should hearken unto Reconciliation, as then was that King Yet in the
next Section you assure us that King Henry wished himself in the Church again.
Henry the VIII. or Queen Elizabeth would: but when I do, with the greatest
respect I can, consider the State of your Majesty, your Lords, your Commons,
and your Clergy, I do see as little cause in holding out in reason of State as
I do in truth of doctrine.

G. H.
30.
From the matter of doctrine you pass to thereason of State, in which, if your
reasons be of no greater weight or truth then in the former, his Majesty, his
Lords, his Commons, his Clergy, have no more reason to hearken to
reconciliation with Rome, then King Henry, or Queen Elizabeth, or the Subjects
in their times had: which he that looks not through the spectacles of a
preiudicate opinion, will as easily discover, as you confidently affirm the
contrary.

B. C.
31.
King Henry the VIII. although he had written that Book against the Schism
of Luther, in defense of the Sea Apostolic, for which he deserned the title of
Defensor fidei, yet when he gave way to the lust of Anne Bullen, and the
flattery of his Were not those favorites Roman Cath.
favorites, and saw he could not otherwise have his will, he excluded the
Pope, and made himself Supreme head of the Church, that so he might not
only He dispensed not with himself, but the Archbishop of Canterbury dispensed
with him by the consent of our own and many foreign Universities, all our
Bishops concurring therein, only Rochlster excepted.
dispense with himself for his Lust, but also supply his excess with the
spoil of the Church, which was then very rich: But when he saw God blessed
him not, neither in his wiuing nor in his thriuing, he was weary of his
Supremacy before he died, and wished himself in the Church again: but he
died in the curse of his father, whose His fathers chief foundation I take to
be the Chapel he built at Westminster* and that he overthrew not.
foundations he overthrew, and has neither child to honor him, nor so much
as a Tomb upon his grave to remember him, which some men take to be a token
of the Curse of God.

G. H.
31.
King Henry the VIII. wrote a Qui (...) 7. Sacramenta, (...) quorum defe^s^nem
Titulus datu^ est, sed due v^ tri^ tanium es^e cont^^dit, Page 20.
Book indeed, or at least a Book was in his name written, in defense of the
seven Sacraments, against Luther, (as Mr. Doctor might have learned, if no
where else, yet out of Cardinal Bellarmins Apology.) But in defense of the Sea of Rome (which he calls Apostolic,) I have not met with any; and it
should seem by his mistake of the subject, handled in that book, himself
never met with it: as for the Title which King Henry received, the world is
not ignorant, how liberal his Holiness is in bestowing Titles, where he
expects some greater advantage, sticking down a feather that he may quietly
carry away the goose. Thus did he entitle Philip the 2. King of Spain^ to
Irdand, in the year 1580.
Thus did he give Charles the Emperor, near about the same time, the Title
of Defensor Ecclesiae, for directing a Writ of Outlawrie against Luther,
whereupon at the Emperors being here in England, those verses were set up in
the Guildhall in London, over the door of their Council Chamber, where they
yet remain. Carolus Henricus viuant, defensor vterque:
Henricus fidei, Carolus Ecclesiae.
And in the Bull, by which Leo the tenth confirmed this Title to the King,
subscribed with his own name, and the names of five and twenty Cardinals and
Bishops, it appears that their chief scope of honoring him with this Title
was, to tie him and his posterity faster to that See: But as a learned and
grave Prelate of our own has well observed, being the high Priest for that
year (not so in the next) Ad Card. B^ll. Respons. page 55.
he foretold by way of prophecy what the King of England should be, which we
find to the honor of CHRIST, and the glory of our kingdom, most truly and
happily accomplished in our Gracious Sovereign, now reigning, who has to the
utmost defended the truly Christian and Catholic faith by his Pen, and will no
doubt be as ready to do it, when occasion shall serve, with his sword: and yet
were it not for fear of crossing your imaginary reconciliation, you would
with Bellarmine tell us, that his Majesty in present, as undeservedly retains
that Title, as King Henry received it deservedly, who afterward notwithstanding
as deeply incurred his Holiness disfavor, as well by calling into question
that Title which the Bishops of Rome had assumed to themselves, of Pastors
universal, S. Peter's successors, and Christ's Vicars: as by resuming to
himself that Title which some of the Popes had yielded his predecessors, as
may appear in the Letter of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, to Lucius King of
Great Britain, in which Eleutherius attributes to the King the Title of Gods
Vicar within his kingdom: which letter, howsoever the Author of the Threefold
conversion labor to stain with the blemish of forgery, yet is it to be found
Lib. de Priseis Anglorum legib^s, ^ol. 13^. The original of which Treatise was
preserved in the Library of the City of London, and there found and published
by Mr. Lambert.
enrolled in the Copy of King Edward the Confessors Laws.

Neither is it true, that Henry took this Title to himself: it was given him
by the Parliament of his Lords, and Commons, and Convocation of his Clergy,
not as a new thing but as renewed. And if he were desirous to change his
bedfellow in hope of heirs male, as you tell us before, it was not to give way
to the lust of Anne Bulleine, as here you affirm; and if he might have had
his will in being dispensed with by yielding to the Popes will, in joining with
Francis the French King, against the Emperor Charles as before it is proved,
then did he not exclude the Pope, and take that Title to dispense with
himself, especially being moved with the approbation of so many Universities
and learned men: But if thereby he made himself a way for the supply of his
excess with the spoil of the Church, we have not wherein so justly to excuse
him, howbeit he converted much of it to good uses, namely to the erecting of
six Bishoprics, to wit, Westminster, Chester, Peterborough, Oxford, Bristol
and Gloucester, whereof the five last are yet in being; at which time he also
erected at Canterbury a Deane with 12. Prebends, at Winchester another with 12.
more, at Worcester another with ten, at Chester another with six, at
Peterborough another with six, at Oxford another with eight, at Ely another
with eight, at Gloucester another with six, at Bristol another with six, at
Carlisle another with four, at Durham another with twelve, at Rochester another
with six, and lastly, at Norwich another with six; Besides all this he
bestowed the revenues of the Gray Friars in London upon the City of London,
toward the relief of their poor, making of the Friery a Parish Church,
whereunto he gave 500. marks yearly of lands for ever: one thousand marks
also he commanded to be given to the poor, and to twelve poor Knights at
Windsore, each of them twelve pence a day for ever.
so that we have good reason to think he returned again to the Church much
out of the Abbey lands: and if, notwithstanding all this, God blessed him not
in his thriuing, we have nothing else to answer but that of Solomon, [It is a
snare to the man who deuoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make
inquiry]

But in his wiuing he so blessed him, (though in this too he showed himself
a man, and consequently subject to humane passion, and frailty) that three of
his children successively wore the Crown after him, of which the first was
renowned for his virtue beyond his age, and the last beyond her Sex; of the
one, and his mother it was written, Phoenix Ianaiacet, nato Phoenice; dolendum
Saecula Phoenices nullatulisse duas.
And to the other might be applied, Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra
superbam,
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.
And though they all died without issue, yet does his honor still live in
theirs. Henry the II. of France died in the unity of the Church of Rome; yet
three of his sons reigning after him left the Crown to a neighbor Prince, as
the children of Henry the VIII here with us did, yet none that I have met with
hold him in that regard accursed of God, and if in that respect God cursed
Henry, because he renounced the pretended authority of the Church of Rome,
then should he by virtue of that reason have blessed Henry's eldest daughter
with issue, who with great submission and devotion reconciled her self to that
Church, and married to the most Catholic King; and though the world were for a
while so borne in hand; yet in the end the great and solemn expectation
thereof vanished into smoke.

Now that Henry was weary of his title of Supremacy before he died, it
appears not, and that he wished to be reconciled to the Pope, which you
call, being in the Church again, is as unlikely, since no doubt is to be
made, but upon notice given of his Contrition, and desire of Satisfaction, he
might as easily have been absolved as wished it: But certain it is, that he
wished it not, if we may make conjecture of his wishes from those speeches,
which a little before his death he delivered to Mounsieur de Hannibault, Lord
Admiral of France, and Ambassador to the French king, being then at Hampton
Court in the month of August, and in the year 1546. in the hearing of Cranmer
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning the reformation of Religion, and
afterward more near his death, and more openly to Bruno Ambassador of John
Frederike Duke of Saxony, unto whom the King gave this answer, in the hearing
of these four sufficient witnesses, the Lord Seymer, Earl of Hartford, Lord
Lisley, then Admiral, the Earl of Bedford, Lord Privy Seal, and the Lord
Paget, [That if the quarrel of the Duke of Saxony were nothing else against
the Emperor, but for matter of Religion, he should stand to it strongly, and
he would take his part, willing him not to doubt nor fear,] and with this
answer dismissed him. Besides the manner of his son and heir Apparent,
Prince Edwards education, the quality and disposition of those persons whom he
named as the principal overseers of his Will, (from which number he excluded
the Bishop of Winchester, the most busy and forward instrument in those times,
for the maintenance of the Romish Religion, though he had once admitted him,
and was earnestly solicited by some of his bed chamber to readmit him) are to
me so many evident demonstrations, that he was so far from wishiug
reconciliation with the Church of Rome, that he rather desired and intended,
if God had spared him life a while longer, some more full and perfect
reformation of Religon: But the secret working of Gods holy providence which
disposes all things after his own wisdom and purpose, thought it good,
rather by taking that King away, to reserve the accomplishment of that work
(as he did the building of his Temple to Solomon,) to the peaceable time of his
son Edward, and Elizabeth his daughter, whose hands were undefiled with any
blood, and life unspotted with any violence or cruelty.

Lastly, not content to rippe up the disgraces of his life, you dog him to
his very grave, bearing us in hand, that he was accursed of God, in as much as
he wanted a Tomb; which was the want also of Queen Mary his daughter: But if
the want of a Tomb be a token of Gods Curse upon Henry, then the having of it
must consequently be a token of his blessing upon Elizabeth, whom
notwithstanding you wrappe in the same Curse: Nay how many of your Bishops of
Rome then are Cursed of God, of whom a number are not only without Tombs; but
some in the first age of the Church, by the fury of their persecutors, and some
in latter times, by the malice of their Successors without Graves also? Indeed
we read of David, a man after Gods own heart: Act^ 2. 29.
His Sepulcher is with us unto this day But of Moses a faithful servant in all
the house of God, D^ut. 34. 6.
No man knows of his Sepulcher unto this day. And yet in my remembrance we
read it no were, that either David was more blessed of God for the one, or
Moses cursed for the other; the heathen Poet could tell us, Coelo tegitur,
quinon habet vrnam. And S. Augustine that these kind of Monuments and
Memorials, are [ Solatia viuorum, not su^sidia mortuorum, comforts only for the
living; no helps for the dead] and many noble spirits may be of Catoes mind,
desirous rather that after their deaths, it should be demanded [why they have
no statue erected to their memory, then why they have one.] This I speak only
to show that had he had no Tomb, yet were it no great dishonor to him: But if
we may credit the last, but not the worst compiler of the History of our
Country, he was with great solemnity buried at Windsor, under a most costly
and stately Tomb, begun in copper and guilt, but never finished; In the
enclosures of whose grates is curiously cast this Inscription. Henricus
Octauus, Rex Angliae, Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae, Fidei defensor. And that it
might appear to posterity how Artificial and Magnificent this work was
intended, he there sets down the several parcels and pieces of the Model
thereof, as he found it described in a Manuscript, received from Mr. Lancaster,
one of the Heralds at Arms, the title whereof was this.

The manner of the Tomb to be made for the Kings Grace at Windsor. So that I
cannot but wonder, how either our Historiographer and our Herald should be so
much mistaken, or (which I rather think) how Mr. Doctor, so great a
Politician, should be so sowly deceived, and so confidently lead others into
the same error.

I will conclude this Section, with the conclusion of ourfamous Annalist,
touching this Prince, [ Princeps Magnanimus, in cuius maximo ingenio inerant,
confuso quodam temperamento, virtutes magnae, and vitia non minora. A stout and
gallant Prince he was, in whose brave spirit a man might observe, blended and
tempered together, by a rare kind of mixture, great virtues, and no
lessevices.] But had he honored the Sea Apostolic, as much at last, as he
did at first, his vices had been buried in silence, and his virtues highly
extolled: whereas now by opposing himself against it, his virtues are
suppressed, and his vices racked upon tenterhookes, and set upon the Stage:
which course were enough to make the best Princes, nay the best men to appear
monsters to the world.

B. C.
32.
Queen ELIZABETH, although she were the daughter of Schism, yet at her first
coming to the Crown, she would have the Common Prayer Book and Catechism
so set down, that she might both by English Service satisfy the Commons, who
were greedy of alteration, and by Catholic opinions, gave hope to her
neighbor Princes, that she would her self continue Catholic; and all her
life long she carried herself so betwixt the Catholics and the Caluinists, as
she kept them both still in hope: But yet being the daughter of the
breach-maker, and having both her Crown and her life from the Schism, it was
both dishonorable and dangerous for her to hearken to Reconcilement: And
therefore after she was provoked by the Out of this Bull, as out of the Tro^an
horse, issued so many Conspiracies as followed after.
Excommunication of Pius Quintus, she did suffer such Laws to be made by her
Parliaments, as might cry quittance with the Pope and Church of Rome: This
course seemed in policy necessary for her, who was the daughter of King Henry
the VIII. by Anne Bulleine, borne with the contempt of Rome, the disgrace of
Spain, and the prejudice of Scotland.

G. H.
32.
From Henry the father you descend to Elizabeth, the daughter (as you call her)
of Schism: howbeit she were indeed the Nursing mother of the Church. And for
the Common prayer Book which she allowed, it was the same, with very little
alteration, which was current by public authority, during the reign of her
brother King Edward: So that it was no invention of hers to satisfy the
Commons, as you falfly suggest, but an imitation of her renowned brother for
the satisfying of her own conscience, and the furtherance of the service of
God in a known language. You add that by Catholic opinions she gave hope to
her neighbor Princes, that she would continue a Catholic: whereas the world
knows that her mother was otherwise affected, being brought up in France,
under the Lady Margret Alencon, a principal fauouresse of the Protestant
religion there, after she had a while waited upon Q. Mary, younger sister of
king Henry the VIII. and wife to Jews the XIII. the French king, and as long
upon Claudia, sister to the Guise, and wife to Francis the first; and in regard
she was this way affected, the holy maid of Kent, was by Clergy men suborned
to prophecy against her, Mich, Sands.
and (as one writes) it seems very plain, that the crimes supposed against
her, were matters contrived by the Pope, and his instruments her chiefest
enemies, none of them all that were accused in the same treason confessing the
act even unto death, but have left direct testimonies in writing to the
contrary, (one mean groom excepted, namely Mark Smeton, who made confession
upon some promise of life belike, but was executed before he was aware, or had
time to recall what he had said,) Now the mother being thus affected, and that
before king Henry cast his affection toward her, or disaffected Rome, in
likelihood the daughter had been that way also affected, whether the breach
with Rome by her mothers marriage had been made or no. It was S. Paul's argument
to Timothy, [ ^. Tim. 1. 5.
that the faith first dwelt in his grandmother Lois, and his mother Eunice, and
therefore he was well persuaded of him also.] He argues not from his father and
his grandfather, but from his mother, and his grandmother; so may we by the
same reason, from the faith, which dwelt in the mother of Queen Elizabeth,
make some conjecture of her faith, that it was not different from her mothers:
But her education under Roger Ascham, (who was himself that way affected, and
to continue her so, read unto her among other authors for her divinity
exercise, Melancthons common places) will yet farther clear this matter: but
the suspicion cast upon her, (though most unjustly) as having a finger in Wyats
conspiracy, and Stories damnable advise [ to leave lopping at the branches, and
strike at the root,] will put it out of doubt; and doubtless as in that
regard she suffered much hardenesse, during the reign of her sister, so had
she not suruiued to have worn the Crown, had not God in his providence
moved the heart of the Spaniard to preserve her alive, not so much out of any
love of her person, or pity of her ruefull estate, as out of reason of state,
lest she being taken out of the way, and her sister dying (as she did) without
issue, the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, might in time be united
and annexed to the Crown of France, by means of the Lady Mary, Queen of
Scotland (next heir in right after Queen Elizabeth) then affianced to Francis
Dolphin of France, and heir apparent to Henry the second, the French King;
then which the Spaniards thought nothing could happen more disasterous to their
affectation of greatness.

Besides all this, being as she was the miracle of her sex and rank, for wit
and learning, it is not improbable that, as the knowledge of the Arts and
Languages, and the light of the Gospel brake forth both together; so in her
person the one might have prepared, and as it were beaten out a way for the
entrance of the other, though neither her Mother had been that way affected,
nor her Father made any breach, as we see his Majesty that now is, to the
glory of God and our great comfort, though his Father were slain before his
birth, and his Mother lived and died in that Religion, in which she was
brought up, yet by the excellency of his natural parts and learning (but
especially by the working of Gods holy spirit) has attained to such a light of
Religion, that he has not only discovered the truth, but chosen and professed
it being discovered, and with his Pen maintained and defended that which he
professes. True indeed it is, that Queen Elizabeth, during the reign of her
sister, tender both by sex and age, and wrought by the frowns and threats of
Cardinal Poole, then Archbishop of Canterbury, the Popes Legate, and in
England the principal Proctor and Champion, for the advancing of his
authority, was once brought to acknowledge that she was a Roman Catholic,
but herein she did no more then St. Peter did (whose successor the Bishop of
Rome pretends himself) in denying his Master: No more then the Prince of
Condie, the King of Navarre and his sister, who at the massacre of Paris, for
fear renounced their Religion, and were by the Cardinal of Bourbon reconciled
to the Church of Rome; though after ward being at liberty they reimbraced their
former profession: Nay, no more then Queen Mary her self, who being terrified
with her Fathers displeasure, wrote him a Letter with her own hand (yet to be
seen) in which for ever she renounceth the Bishop of Romes authority in
England, and acknowledging her Father under Christ supreme head of the Church
of England, confesses his marriage with her Mother to have been unlawful and
incestuous.

But I would feign know, after Queen Elizabeth came to the wearing of the
Crown, by what Catholic opinions she gave hope to her neighbor Princes that
she would continue Catholic? If it were so, (as Mr. Doctor would bear us in
hand) how was it that the reformed Churches through Christendom applauded her
coming to the Crown, as it had been the appearance of some luckie star, or
the rising of some glorious Sun for their Comfort and relief, and your
pretended Catholics hung down their heads as if they had seen some Come^ or
blazing-starre? How she was then affected in religion, and so professed her
self, may appear, if no where else, yet in Cum accepis^^m quantum valeres
^ngeme, and qu^ntos progressi^s in literis Graecu and Latinis haberes. f. 2. p.
1.
Osorius his Epistle which he wrote her not long after her coming to the
Crown, where he highly commends her for her wit, Quid admirab^lu^s quam in
foemin^ virilem constantiam, in virgin senilem prudentiam, in summa opum
aff^uentia (...) modestiae laude^ emineres, page 2.
for her learning, for her clemency, for her constancy for her wisdom, for
her modesty; but disswades her by all the arguments he could invent, from the
opinions she had conceived, and did express in the matter of Religion. Pius
Quartus does the like in his letter which he sent her about the same time by
the hands of Vincentius Parpalia, Abbot of Saint Saviors, Laudibus
man^uetud^uis and lenitatis, quae cumistius formae venustate co^sentiunt
excellis, fol. 3. p. 1.
who as it appears in the Letters, dated the 5th. of May 1560, had private
instructions to impart to the Queen; among which the chief were thought to
be (as it is reported by the most diligent M. Cambden in his Annals of Q.
Eliz. fol. 58. where the copy of the letter is to be seen.
searcher of truth) that if she would reconcile her self to the Church of
Rome, and acknowledge the Supremacy of that See, the Pope for his part would
H^c curantibus ^liquot aurcorum millia fuisse promissa fama ob^inet, The same
author.
bind himself to declare the sentence pronounced against her mothers marriage
to be unjust, to confirm by his authority The English Liturgy, and to permit
the administration of the Sacrament here in England, under both kinds: By
which it appears* that at that time she then maintained the same opinions
which during her life she altered not. And here it may be worth the
remembering, that the fourteenth day of January, about two months after her
sisters death, as she passed in her triumphall Chariot through the streets of
London, when the Bible was presented unto her at the little Conduit in Cheap,
she received the same with both her hands, and kissing it, laid it to her
breast, saying, [That the same had ever been her chiefest delight, and should
be the rule by which she meant to frame her government.] Before this a
Proclamation came forth, that the Letanie, the Epistles, and Gospels, the
Decalogue, the Creed and the Lords Prayer should be read in all Churches in
the English tongue; and though it were the 14th. of May after, being
Whitsunday, before the sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and the book of
the uniformity of Common Prayer, and the administration of the Sacraments
publicly received; and July following, before the Oath of Supremacy was
proposed; and August, before the Images were by authority moved out of the
Churches, broken and burnt; (so moderately did she proceed in this business
of reformation by steps and degrees) yet is it plai^e, as well by the choice
of those Marquess of North. Earl of Bedford. Thomas Parry Edward Rogers.
Ambrose Cave. Francis Kn^lles. William Ce^ill. Nicholas Bacon
eight whom she added to her sisters Counsel, being all in profession
Protestants (which Pius 5tus in his Bull makes a part of his grievous
complaint) and those whom she either Will. Par^^ Edward Sey^ur. Thomas Howard
Henry Carry. Oliver Saint-Iohns.
restored to their former dignities, or advanced to new, being likewise as
auerse from the Roman Religion, as also by the refusal of Nicholas Heath,
then Archbishop of York, (the Sea of Canterbury by the death of Cardinal
Poole, who deceased the same day that Queen Mary did, being then void) and of
the rest of the chief Bonner of London. Tunstall of Durham, White of
Winchester, Watson of Lincoln, Thurby of Ely. Bourne of Bath and Wels,
Christopherson of Cicester, Ba^^e of Cou. and Leich. Turberuile of Exeter, Pole
of Peterborough.
Bishops to anoint and consecrate her at her Inauguration, it being therefore
performed by Owen Oglethorpe Bishop of Carlisle: by these proceedings I say it
is plain, that at her first entrance to the Crown, she sufficiently declared
her self to be the same in matter of Religion, as afterward they found her.

Whereunto, if full satisfaction be not yet given in this point, for farther
proof might be added, that when Philip of Spain wooed her for marriage (the
funerals of her sister being not yet solemnized) The French King by his Agent
the Bishop of Engolesme labored (if it had gone forward) to stop their
dispensation at Rome, under color that Queen Elizabeth favored the
Protestants Religion, and the Earl of Feria, the Spaniards Agent here in
England, bore our pretended Catholics in hand, that except that match went
forward, it could not go well with them; so far was she at her first
entrance from giving hope to her neighbors (as Mr. Doctor would persuade the
world) of continuing or turning Catholic, by show of Catholic opinions,
unless her retaining the ancient form of Ecclesiastical policy, and the
godly Ceremonies used in the Primitive Church be accounted Catholic opinions,
as in truth, if we take the word Catholic aright, they may: But no marvel
he should thus boldly and falsely charge the dead, since he spares not in
the same kind his Majesty now reigning, and by Gods grace long to reign
amongst us, to the confutation of such slanders and confusion of such
slanderers.

He goes on and tells us, that all her life long she carried her self so
betwixt Catholics and Caluinists, as she kept them both still in hope: But
herein he mainely crosses himself, as well in that which he has delivered in
the Section next save one going before, that [if there be now the same reason
of State, as there was all Queen Elizabeth's days, there is as little hope
that his Majesty should hearken unto reconciliation, as then there was that Q.
Elizabeth would:] as also in that which afterward he adds in this Section,
that [ being provoked by the excommunication of Pius Quintus, she did suffer
such laws to be made by her Parliament, as might cry quittance with the Pope
and Church of Rome.] And in the next Section he says, [ It was necessary, in
reason of State, to continue the doctrine of division, as long as the fruit of
that doctrine did continue.] Thus his own testimonies, like the false
witnesses which deposed against our Savior, agree not together, but is it
likely that she carried her self all her life long with such indifferency;
considering she sent help, both by men and money, to the Protestants in
Germany, in Scotland, in France, in the Netherlands; She harbored and
succored such Italians, French, and Dutch, as forsaking their own Countries
for conscience sake, fled for refuge into her Dominions, as to a common
Sanctuary of piety and Religion, affording them convenient places for the
exercise of their devotions, in the Isles of Iersey and Garnsey, in Hampton, in
Norwich, in Sandwich, in Maidston, in Canterbury, in Colchester, and in London
it self: Moreover, she that would not so much as admit Pius Quartus his
Nuntio in the year 1561. to enter her Kingdom, though he brought with him
very friendly Letters from the Pope: She that would not be entreated by the
Emperor, and other Princes solicitations to send her Bishops or Ambassadors
to the Council of Trent, nor to yield any toleration of the Ro^ish Religion
within her Dominions, alleging that it would be dishonorable to her self,
repugnant to the decrees of her Parliament, prejudicial to her Realm,
pernicious to her Subjects, unlawful in it self, offensive to God, scandalous
to her neighbors, and unsafe for the Roman Catholics themselves: She that
was sought unto for marriage, from By the Earl of Arran.
Scotland, from Adolphe duke of Holts.
Denmark, from By Erike king of Sweden.
Sweden, in regard of her Religion, and in treatise with the Emperor Ferdinand
for his son Charles, and with the French King and Queen mother; first for
the Duke of Aniou, afterward King of Poland and France, by the name of Henry
the third; and secondly for the Duke of Alencon his younger brother, commonly
known by the name of Monsieur, afterward Duke of Aniou; always interposed
this condition, That they should innouate nothing in Religion, only having the
exercise of their own in some private place to themselves: She that in the
year 1579 entertained with all honorable respect John Casimere, son to
Frederike the third, Count Palatine, and great Uncle to Frederike the fifth, who
now gouernes, himself a Protestant, and having led an army of Germans in
defense of the Protestants, as well into France as into the Netherlands,
bestowing on him the noble Order of the Garter, which with her own hands she
put on, together with many rich presents, and an yearly pension during his
life bestowed on him: She that was voyced by the Papists to conclude all her
Parliaments with Axes and Taxes, because of her exactions upon Recusants, and
rigorous Laws (as they pretended) against Seminary Priests and Jesuits, in
regard whereof they compared her to Nero and Dioclesian, the most bloody
Emperors and cruel persecutors of the Christians: Lastly, She that could not
be won to yield one jot either by the flatteries and fair promises of Paulus
Quartus, nor to show any token of being dismayed or dishartened by the threats
and thundering Bull of Pius Quintus, is it possible (I say) that she, who
(notwithstanding all the difficulties and dangers that might from then
cearise,) was from her cradle to her grave thus zealous and constant in her
Religion, suitable to that Motto which she had chosen to her self, Semper
eadem, should now be said or thought to have carried her self all her life
long so coldly and indifferently, as to have given hope to both contrary
factions.

[ But being, you say, the daughter of the Breach-maker, and having both h^
Crown and her life from the Schism, it was both dishonorable and dangerous
for her to hearken to Reconcilement:] whereas in truth she had her life, and
held her Crown from the Author of life and grand Commander of Crowns, to
which she had far better right then he, that would have deposed her, to his
triple Crown, the one being held of her by lawful succession, (which had
been so acknowledged by the Bishop of Rome himself, would she have submitted
herself to the power of that See,) but the other of him by unlawful
usurpation. And if in regard she was the daughter of the Breachmaker, it was
both dishonorable and dangerous for her to hearken to Reconcilement, it must
consequently follow, that likewise dangerous and dishonorable it would have
been to keep the Pontifician party in hope: and though she were justly
provoked by the biting Excommunication of Pius Quintus, being stricken by him
before she was Legally cited or warned, in so much as some of the Romish
Catholics themselves, thought it a piece of rashness in that Pope so to deal
with her, yet before this Bull was extant, she gave so little hope to those
whom you call Catholics, that the Pope therein labors to paint her forth as
a barbarous and bloody Persecutour: and we may well imagine, that had she
given such hope as you pretend she did to the Romanists, the world had never
heard the bellowing of that Bull: But thanks be unto God Math. 7. 25. 1. Cor.
10. 4.
The rain fell, the floods came, the winds blewe, and beat sore upon her
house; but it fell not: for it was founded upon a Rock, and that Rock was
CHRIST. During her happy and glorious reign somewhat above the space of 44.
years, she saw the change of no less then 8. Popes, Paulus the 4th. sitting
in that See at her entrance, and Clement the eight at her death, between which
two came these seven, Pius 4. Pius 5. Cregorie 13. Sextus 5. Urban. 7. Gregory
14. and Innocent the 9th. all which wrought more or less both against her
Person and State; so that she might deservedly take up that of the Psalmist: [
Psalm. 22. 12. 13.
Many Bulls have compassed me, strong Bulls of Bashan have beset me round,
they gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and roaring Lyon]: But
being by his Gracious providence, (who set the Crown upon her head,) delivered
from all their snares, she might well stamp that of the same Psalmist upon
her coin as she did, and with all no doubt upon her heart: Posui Deum
adiutorem meum, and sing with Deborah after her victory upon Sisera. I^dg. 5. 21
O my soul, thou have marched valiantly; or as some read it, thou have trodden
down strength. Now that which sharpened her against Pius Quintus, was not
only his Bull (though that were in it self cause sufficient to inrage her)
but the setting aworke of one Ridolphus a Florentine, who under the color of
Marchandizing, became the Popes agent for blowing the coals, and stirring up
the minds, as well of her own Subjects, as of foreign Princes against her, by
whom the old Fox promised if need were to go in person himself against her,
and to lay to pawn if occasion so required all the goods of the Sea
Apostolic, even to the Chalices, the Crosiers, the Relics and the Holy
Vestments: Besides all this he conferred an yearly pension, and titles of
honor upon Tho Stanley a His discontent arose for being put by the Government
of Wexford which he hoped for.
discontented fugitive, only for ra^ling upon her, and vainly bragging that he
would set on fire her Navy, and with three thousand Spaniards ^ subdue Ireland
to the Spanish dominion. These and many other sufficient reasons to provoke
her, we find recorded by Hieronimus Catena, in the life of Pius Quintus, who
was Secretary to Cardinal Alexandrin that Popes Nephew, so that though he
have in that discourse discovered many things to the world, of Pius his
proceedings against that Queen, before unknown to our English, yet may we
well by reason of his place afforde him credit, as also in regard his book
was Printed and published in Rome it self, with the Privilege and approbation
of Sixtus Quintus, next Successor to Pius save one.

And had she not good reason then to suffer such Laws to be made by her
Parliament, as might cry quittance with the Pope and Church of Rome? Yet I
will be bold to say that less innocent blood, nay, less blood was shed in
her 44. years in maintenance of Christ's and her own authority, against the
usurpation of the Pope, then in her sisters four years in maintenance of the
Popes usurpation against her own and her Successors lawful authority,
insomuch as an Italian, and he no Protestant (as I guess) gives this
testimony of her, [ Bizar. hist. Gen^ens. page 568.
Tanta extitit eius animi moderatio, atque innata clementia, vt non immerito,
etc. So great and so apparent was the moderation of her mind, and inbred
cleme^cie, that not undeservedly it may be said of her, which the ancient
histories have left to posterity of Alexander Seuerus, borne of his mother
Mammaea, (Nempe Anaematon) hoc est citra sanguinem: namely, that she has
governed her kingdom without bloodshed, Cum suapte natura, semper a caedibus
and crudelitate abhorreat, for even her nature does abhor the thought of
slaughter or cruelty.] and so he goes on in a large discourse of her praise:
And when he thus wrote, she had reigned twenty years, it being a marvel (as
the late Bishop of Lincoln in his answer to Parsons has well observed) their
Index expurgatorius had not scowred him ere this, and for this; nay, their own
Priests shall speak for Queen Elizabeth's Laws, who Quodlibet. page 269. 277.
say that [considering Jesuitical practices shadowed under the cloak of
Religion, all the Laws enacted against Catholics, were made with great
moderation and clemency, as coming from a Prince most mild and merciful:
nor have they cause to urge repeal of any Statute made, so long as Jesuits
take such courses.] Nay, which is more, Parsons himself in the Preface to the
first part of his triple conversion commends Queen Elizabeth for her
moderate government, and that was in the last year of her reign: and yet by
the way it is worth the noting, that in one and the same leaf, having so
commended her, in one page (mary then she was alive) in the very next page,
(for then he heard she was dead) in a Preface to his Majesty, he compares her
to Dioclesian for cruelty, whereas her sobriety and clemency was such, that
her brother King Edward was wont commonly to call her, His sweet sister
Temperance; neither did she ever hear of any capital punishment (though
never so deserved) upon offenders, even of such as had sought her own death,
but it bred a kind of horror and sadness in her, whereby had not her
Counselors earnestly inculcated the necessity of some exemplary justice, many
dangerous attempters had escaped due punishment; which moved her to say, being
once questioning with a great D.R. of C.C.C.
Divine in Oxford, about books meetest for Princes to study on, that her
reading of Senecade Clementia, had done her much good; but some would persuade
her it had done her State as much harm: howsoever I will shut up this point
with S. Epist. 48.
Augustine, (when he was entreated to mediate for a mittigation of some strait
Laws) if Princes serve Christ in making Laws for Christ, they do what they
ought, I will not gain say them; and your self grant, that this course
seemed in poli^ie necessary for her, who was the daughter of King Henry the
VIII. by Anne Bulleine, borne with the contempt of Rome, the disgrace of
Spain, and the prejudice of Scotland: and it is true indeed that it both
seemed, and was a necessary course for her, not only in policy, but in
piety, who was the daughter of him, who upon just reason unhorsed the Pope of
his pretended authority, by her who was not only a zealous professor, but a
Patroness of that truth which we profess: and for her birth with the
contempt of Rome, and disgrace of Spain, it seemed by her courses she was not
unwilling to have it so int^rpreted: but for the prejudice of Scotland, she
was upon all occasions (so far as she conceived it stood with her safety
and honor) most willing to express the contrary: and surely by her living and
dying in a single State without marriage, she rather prepared a way to the
furtherance of that Title, which we now see to our great comfort, as she would
also no doubt to hers. (Si quis modo sensus in vmbris, if there were any
feeling or knowledge in the dead of these temporal and transitory affairs)
seeing it is fallen out to be as true in that succession, as it is in its own
nature strange,

Mira cano, Sol occubuit, nox nulla sequuta est. B. C.
33.
But now that your Majesty is by the consent of all sides come to the Crown,
and your undoubted Title settled with long succession, the case is very much
altered: for your Majesty has no need of dispensations, nor will to pull
down Churches, nor no dependence at all on Henry the VIII: and if this Schism
could have prevented your Title with the divorce of one wife, and the marrying
of five more, neither your mother, nor your self should ever have made Queen
Elizabeth afraid with your Right to the Crown of England; and therefore though
it were necessary, in reason of State, to continue the That which you call the
doctrine of division was taught long before the division you speak of, was
made, as has been already showed, and his Majesty; in regard of his father
and grandfather, may as well be called the fruit of Schism as Queen Elizabeth
doctrine of division, as long as the fruit of that doctrine did continue, yet
now the fruit of Schism is all spent, and that Parenthesis of State is at an
end, there is no reason but that the old sentence may return again, and be
continued in that sense, as if the Parenthesis had been clean left out, and
that God had of purpose crossed the fleshly pretense of Schism, and raised
your Majesty to restore it as your most wise and Catholic progenitor King
Henry the VII. did leave it.

G. H.
33.
If his Majesty, by the consent of all sides be come to the Crown, why did
Clement the VIII. the year before his entrance, and that as his Majesty
witnesses in the Conclusion of his answer to Paulus Quintus his first Breue,
[contrary to his manifold vows and protestations at the same time, and as it
were with the same breath delivered to diverse of his Majesty's Agents abroad]
send to See the Relatition of the whole proceedings against the traitors
Garnet and his consederates.
Henry Garnet Jesuit, their Archpriest in England, two Bulls to the
contrary, the one to the Clergy, and the other to the Laity. The Title of the
former was, [ Dilectis filijs, Archipresbytero, and reliquo Clero Anglicano,
and the other, Dilectis filijs, principibus, and nobilibus Catholicis
Anglicanis, salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem: The sum of both thus: To
our Beloved sons the Archpriest, and the Clergy, the Peers and nobles,
Catholics of England, greeting and Apostolical benediction.] The tenor was,
[That after the death of her Majesty then living, whether by course of nature
or otherwise, whosoever should lay Who was herein touched so near as his
Majesty.
Claim or Title to the Crown of England, though never so directly and nearly
interessed by descent, should not be admitted to the throne, unless he would
first tolerate the Romish religion, and by all his best endeavors promote the
Catholic cause, unto which by a solemn and sacred Oath, he should
religiously subscribe after the death of that miserable woman] (for so it
pleased his Holiness to term Elizabeth, that most great and happy Queen;)
By virtue of which Bulls, (if virtue may be in any such vicious libels) the
Jesuits dissuaded the Romish minded Subjects, from yielding in any wise
obedience unto our most gracious Sovereign now being. But this not working to
their wished effect, and he now solemnly proclaimed with an universal
applause, love, and peace, their hopes began to wither and grow cold; and
no succors from Spain being now to be expected, Garnet the Superior for the
avoiding farther dangers, sacrificed these starued Bulls to the God of fire.
Moreover, in the year 1588. when his Holiness blessed that invincible Spanish
Navy, was it to settle the Crown upon his Majesty after Queen Elizabeth
should be deposed? Surely his Majesty both rightly conceived, and freely
expressed the contrary to Sir Robert Sidney, at that time sent into Scotland
from Queen Elizabeth, affirming that he expected none other good turn at the
Spaniards hands, but that which Polyphemus promised to Ulysses, that others
being first devoured himself should have the favor to be swallowed last: And
did not the greatest part of Pius his Bull, aiming principally at her, through
her sides also strike his Majesty? And did not one Robert Parsons who sat at
the helm in Rome, write a certain Book of Titles, entitled Doleman, wherein
he excludes his Majesty, and prefers the Infant a of Spaines right before all
other pretenders to the Crown? but when he once saw his Majesty settled
beyond all hope and expectation, he made as you do, and the rest at that time
did, a virtue of necessity, acknowledging his undoubted and lawful Claim, in
his Preface to his Triple conversion, whereof for mine own part I can give
none other reason then that which you add to another purpose, the case is
altered: Whiles his Majesty was only in hope you showed your selves in your
own colors: being now quiet in possession, you pluck in your horns, yield
to the times, and are content to be carried with the stream.

And though the personal case be altered in regard of his Majesty, and Henry
the VIII. yet if his Majesty either needed the like dispensations, or had the
like will to pull down Churches, I make no question but his Holiness would
without any great difficulty give way to both, conditionally that his
pretended, but usurped authority might be restored: But as he is a public
person, and represents the body of the State, the case is no way different,
which is the freeing of it from foreign and unjust usurpation: And for Queen
Elizabeth I will be bold to say it, that at her coming to the Crown, she was
not so far engaged for the defense of that religion, which she constantly
maintained to her dying day, as his Majesty has by manifold obligations bound
himself to the maintenance and continuance of that which she at her death
left, and he at his entrance found established amongst us. For testimonies we
need go no farther then his frequent and solemn protestations, as well by his
pen, as by word of mouth, and that not only before, but since his coming to
the Crown; to which if we add the careful education of his Son, the most
noble and hopeful Prince, even in that respect, the bestowing of his only
daughter that most sweet and virtuous Lady upon the Prince Palatine, not only
a Protestant, but as you term them, a Caluinist, the honorable entertainment
of Isaac Casaubon, and Peter Moulin, the liberty given to the French and Dutch,
for the free and public exercise of their religion in diverse parts of his
Majesty's Dominions; and lastly his constant refusal of so much as the
Toleration of any other religion, notwithstanding the importunity of suits and
supplications for it; the matter as I suppose will be clean out of doubt. And
as Queen Elizabeth was provoked by Pius V. so was his Majesty by Paulus V. in
a degree very little different; the one absoluing her subjects from their oath
of Allegiance, and the other forbidding his to take such an oath: So that
though the Parenthesis in regard of personal succession be ended, yet in
respect of profession (which of the two is the more to be regarded) the
sentence as yet runs on, and as we hope will have no period, but with the
worlds end. But the more to exasperate his Majesty against King Henry the VIII.
and his daughter Queen Elizabeth, you tell him that if the Schism could have
prevented his title, neither his Mother, nor himself should ever have made
Queen Elizabeth afraid with their right to the Crown of England. For the
justness of the divorce I have already delivered mine opinion at large; and
yet if any desire farther satisfaction, let him read the first dialogue of
Antisanderus, who both strongly maintains the equity of the Kings proceedings
in that business, and clearly confutes the slanders of that base fugitive;
and for his wives, had the way been fairly made unto them, no just exception
could be taken to the number. Philip the II. of Spain, besides his Mistresses,
had successively From England. From Portugale. From France. From Austria.
four wives, whereof the first was his fathers Cousin germane, and the last
his own: For the compassing of which, what strange courses he took, I list
not to relate, but refer the reader to the Prince of Aurange his Apology;
yet none that I know has taxed him for his multitude of wives, in as much as
he lived and died a Roman Catholic. Did not Henry the last of France divorce
his first wife, after they had been almost as long married, and upon less show
of just reason, then Henry the VIII. but the one made semblance at last of
subiecting himself to the Sea Apostolic, which the other by no means could
be brought unto, as he did at first, this alone being it that varied the
case, and that which he did herein, may well be interpreted to have sprung from
a desire of settling the Crown in his own posterity, rather then of
preiudicing the title of Scotland; For though during his reign, some
discontentments there were between the two nations, yet not long before his
death he concluded a match betwixt his son Prince Edward, and Queen Mary of
Scotland, that as his father had united the white and the red Roses in the
royal branches of York and Lancaster, so his son might unite the Lions
passant and rampant, in the arms of England and Scotland, but it so pleased
God, that that match upon occasion fell asunder, and that happy union was
reserved to our times.

Now for Queen Elizabeth's fear, those of her Sex indeed by their nature are
fearful, and great Princes by reason of the place they stand in, are
Dominantibus semperinuisus qu^squis pr^^^i^us designatur.
^ealous, specially of the heir apparent, if he be potent, if near at hand,
if remote in blood, if in Religion different: yet all the fear she conceived
from his Masties Mother arose partly from the practices of the French, with
whose King she matched, and partly of the Seminary Priests and Jesuits, and
pretended Catholics, ever making her the highest mark and pitch of their
ambition, till they had brought her to the lowest ebb of her misfortune; which
was also hastened through her Subjects fear, rather then their own, as appears
by her several answers, and replies to the demands of the Parliament, and
propositions of her counsel touching that point: as also in that, as soon as
the news of it was brought to her, not thinking on any such matter, she
received it with indignation, her countenance and her speech showed it, with
excessive grief; for a while she stood as it were astonished, and afterward
betook her self in private to mourning and weeping, she sharply entertained
her counselors, removed them from her presence, and commanded Dauison her
Secretary, whom she accused of being more foreward and officious in that
business, then she either desired, or expected to be brought to his trial in
the Star Chamber, where he was deeply censured in a mulcte of ten thousand
pound, and imprisonment at the Queens pleasure; but her displeasure was so
heavy against him, that he continued there long, and as soon as the excess of
her grief gave her leave, she thus briefly wrote with her own hand to the
King of Scotland, now our gracious Sovereign.

Most dear Brother,
I Wish you understood, This Letter was sent by Sr. Robert Carry.
but felt not with what unmatchable grief my mind is perplexed, by reason of
that woeful accident executed against my meaning, which my pen trembling to
mention, you shall understand by this my cousin. I shall request you that as
God, and many others can testify mine innocence herein; so you would rest
assured, that had I commanded it, I would never have denied it. I am not of so
base a mind, as either to fear to do that which is just, or to deny it
being done. I am not so degenerate, or of a Spirit so ignoble: but as it is no
Princely part to cover the inward intention of the mind with the outward
speech; so will I never dissemble mine actions, but labor rather that they may
appear to the world in their proper colors. Be you therefore fully resolved
as the truth is, that had I intended such a matter, I would never have cast it
upon others; neither have I reason to charge my self with that which I
intended not: For other matters, this Bearer will impart them to you; and for
my self believe it, there is none living, that loves you better, and more
entirely, or is more carefully provident for you, and your good, and if any
happen to suggest any thing to the contrary, persuade your self, that such
thereby aim at their own advantage, rather then yours.

God keep you long and long in safety.


Yet out of the black cloud of this sad accident, did the disposition of
divine providence, as some wise men have observed, most clearly shine, in as
much as those things which both Q. Elizabeth of England, and Q. Mary of
Scotland chiefly desired, and shot at in all their consultations, were by this
means effected: The latter (as at her death she witnessed) wished nothing more
earnestly, then that the two divided Realms of England and Scotland might be
united in the person of her dearest son: The former, that true Religion,
together with the safety and security of the Kingdom might be preserved
entire; and that God was pleased to grant both their wishes, to our comfort,
we feel, and can not but most willingly acknowledge: And for his Majesty; he
both signified to Queen Elizabeth by Sir Francis Walsinghame, in the year
1583. (almost four years before his mothers death,) that he would most
constantly maintain the same Religion which was then publicly received, and
again, sent her the same message by Sir Robert Sidney about two years after;
So that she needed not to fear his right in that regard, and for his
affection otherwise, he both testified it before her death in the Preface to
his Basilicon Doron, where he thus speaks, [In England reigns a lawful
Queen, who has so long, with so great wisdom and felicity governed her
kingdoms, as I must in true sincerity confess, that the like has not been
read or heard of, either in our time, or since the days of the Roman Emperor
Augustus.] And since her death, he has yielded the like testimonies of her,
as well in his Apology, as also in his Premonition, where he remembers, that
being chosen to be his Godmother, she sent into Scotland the Font wherein he
was baptized: So that (if by outward actions and speeches, we may make
conjecture of the inward thoughts and Passions of the mind) she was so far
from fearing his Majesty's right to the Crown, as she endeavored rather by all
convenient means to advance it: neither do I find it recorded by her friends,
or objected by her enemies, that, during all her reign upon any occasion, she
ever conceived a thought, or cast out a word toward the setting up of any other
Successor, or the preiudicing of his right; Nay in the year 1587. she sent
the Lord Hunsdon governor of Berwike into Scotland, to give him notice that
the Jesuitical faction even while his mother lived, proiected, how they both
might be put by their right, and the Spaniard brought in: and withal was
presented him an instrument, subscribed by the Judges of England, assuring him
that the sentence passed upon his mother, could no way be prejudicial in law
to the right of his title.

But it will be said she discovered her fear in stopping any declaration of
the heir apparent, specially being urged thereunto by the three estates
assembled in Parliament, in the year, 1566. whereas in truth she in reading
might have observed, that few or no Successors in collateral line had been
declared, a^ Lewis Duke of Orleans was not declared heir to Charles the eight,
yet succeeded peaceably, that it has often proved dangerous to name a
successor, not only to the possessours, but sometimes to the Successors
themselves: as it did to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, designed heir to the
Crown by Richard the second, his son Edmund being held in prison, and there
pining away upon none other reason. The like befell John de la Poole, designed
by Richard the third (after the death of his own son) to be his Successor,
himself being always even in that respect suspected of Henry the VII. till at
last he was slain, and his brother under Henry the VIII. beheaded. These
reasons might move her Majesty for the stopping of that declaration, not the
fear of his Majesty's right, but the care of preserving it, being sufficiently
proclaimed in his blood and descent. Whatsoever it were, since his Majesty who
had the nearest interest in that errand, has been content thus graciously to
pass it over, it cannot but argue want both of wisdom and charity in Mr.
Doctor, thus unseasonably, and maliciously to revive it.

Lastly, God of purpose no doubt raised up his Majesty, to cross the worldly
and devilish pretense of Rome, and to perpetuate the life of that Religion
which you call Schism, and I make no doubt but if King Henry the VII. had
found it left by his predecessor in the state, that his Majesty did, he would
in his wisdom have left it to his Successor, as he is like to do, and I am
the rather induced to think so; because in the first year of his reign, the
Pope having excommunicated all such persons as had bought allome of the
Florentines, by his permission, if not command, it was resolved by all the
Judges of England, that the Popes Excommunication ought not to be obeyed, or to
be put in Execution within the Realm of England: and in the same year he
suffered sharp laws to be made by the Parliament, to which himself gave,
being by his Royal assent for the reformation of his Clergy, then grown very
dissolute: and in the eleventh year of his reign, a Statute was enacted, that
[though by the Ecclesiastical Laws allowed within this Realm, a Priest
cannot have two Benefices, nor a bastard be a Priest, yet it should be lawful
for the King to dispense with both of these, as being mala prohibita, but not
mala per se,] all which argues that they then held the King to be personam
mixtam, as it was declared in the tenth year of his reign, that is a person
mixed, because he has both Ecclesiastical and Temporal jurisdiction united
in his person.

B. C.
34.
But perhaps the Schism, though it serve you to none other use at all for your
title, yet it does much increase your authority and your Mine answer touching
wealth I leave to the next Section which is the proper place for it.
wealth, and therefore it cannot stand with your honor to further the That
which you call the unity of the Church, is indeed the building of the kingdom
of Antichrist.
unity of the Church of Christ. Truly those your most famous and renowned
ancestors, that did part with their authority and their wealth, to bestow them
upon the Church of CHRIST, and did curse and execrate those that should
diminish and take them away again, did not think so, nor find it so: And I
would to God your Majesty were so powerful and so rich, as some of those kings
were that were most bountiful that way. You are our How is he a Sovereign, if
he have above him an higher power to command him?
Sovereign Lord: All our bodies, and our goods are at your command; but our
souls as they belong not to your charge, but as by way of protection in
Catholic religion; so they cannot increase your honor and authority, but in a
due subordination unto Christ, and to That is his Holiness of Rome.
those that supply his place Indirecte too (at least) and in o^dine ad
spiritualia, they supply his place in ijs qu^ sunt iuris human^.
in iis quae sunt iuris diuini. It was essential to Heathen Emperors to be
Pontifices as well as Reges, because they were themselves authors of their own
religion: But among Christians, where Religion comes from CHRIST, who was no
worldy Emperor, (though above them all) the spiritua^ and temporal authority
have two beginnings, and therefore two Supremes, who if they be subordinate,
do uphold and increase one another, but if the temporal authority oppose the
spiritual, it destroys it self, and dishonors him from whom the
spiritual authority is derived. Heresy does naturally We find that verified
in the spreading of the Romish religion*
spread it self like a ca^k^r, and needs little help to put it forward: So
that it is an easy matter for a mean Prince to be a What makes a great man
but great power in commanding, and if a great king cannot govern them* how
shall a mean prince be able to command them.
great man amongst heretics, but it is an hard matter for a great king to For
any thing I can find in my reading of the Chronicles, of our own land or
foreign histories, Princes had more ado in governing their subjects before
the reformation then since, I mean those Princes who have embraced that
religion.
govern them. When I have sometimes observed how hardly your Majesty could
effect your most reasonable desires amongst those that stand most upon your
Supremacy, I have been bold to be You might rather have been angry with them
who standing least upon his Mai^sties supremacy, not only endeavor to cross
his desires, but to endanger his person, and to cut off himself and his
posterity.
angry, but durst say nothing; only I did with my self resolve for certain,
that the keys were wont to do the By the keys doing the Crown service*
belike you mean the triple Crown*
Crown more service, when they were in the arms of the miter, then they can
do now they are tied together with the That the Keys are tied to the Scepter
is false, his Mai^sty neither having, nor challenging the right of binding and
loosing, but true that by the Pope both Scepter and sword too, are tied to the
Keys.
scepter, and that your title in spiritual affairs does but serve If his
M^^^sti^s title rather serve others then himself, we are sure his Holiness
title rather serves himself then others.
other men's turns, and not your own.

G. H.
34.
Having passed your supposed remoouall of all opposition both in doctrine and
State, thereby to make a readier way to your imaginary reconciliation, you now
come to an endeavor of clearing such objections, as you conceived would offer
themselves; whereof the first is, that the religion established, (which you
call schism) serves to increase his Majesty's authority and wealth, and
therefore it cannot stand with his honor to further the unity of the Church of
CHRIST: Indeed it must be confessed, and cannot be denied, that the religion
established, yields his Majesty the authority due unto him, which is more then
the Romish yields to the Sovereign Princes of her profession, and yet no more
then CHRIST and his Apostles in practice yielded, and in precept command: And
yet withal it cannot be denied, but some of his Majesty's ancestors, partly
through the insensible incrochment of some ambitious Popes, and partly through
the neglect of some weak kings, did part indeed with some of their authority,
to bestow it upon that Church, to which you entitle Christ: yet that they
reserved to themselves a power even in Ecclesiastical causes, I have already
made sufficiently to appear in mine answer to the 16* section of the first
chapter, and in diverse other places; to which I will presume to add that, which
his Majesty has published to the world touching this very point in his
Premonition to all Christian Princes and States.

[My Predecessors (ye see) of this kingdom, Page 28. 29. 30. 31. 32.
even when the Popes triumphed in their greatness, spared not to punish any of
their Subjects that would prefer the Popes obedience to theirs, even in
Church matters, so far were they then from acknowledging the Pope their
temporal Superior, or yet from doubting that their own Church men were not
their Subjects. And now I will close up all these examples with an Act of
Parliament in King Richard the II. his time, whereby it was prohibited that
none should procure ^ benefice from Rome, under pain to be put out of the
kings protection. And thus may ye see that what those kings successively one to
another by four generations have acted in private, the same was also
maintained by a public law. By these few examples now I hope I have
sufficiently cleared my self from the imputation, that any ambition or desire
of nouelty in me should have stirred me, either to rob the Pope of any thing
due unto him, or to assume unto my self any farther authority, then that which
other Christian Emperors and kings through the world, and my own
Predecessors of England in especial have long agone maintained. Neither is it
enough to say a^ Parsons does in his answer to the Lord Cook: that far more
kings of this Country have given many more examples of acknowledging, or not
resisting the Popes usurped authority; some perchance lacking the occasion, and
some the ability of resisting them: for even by the civil Law in the case of a
violent intrusion, and long wrongful possession against me, it is enough if I
prove that I have made lawful interruption upon convenient occasions.] Hitherto
his Majesty. And I cannot but wonder what Mr. Doctor meant, (if he had read
it,) not to take any notice of it, or if he read it not, how he durst presume
thus to write to his Majesty, without so much as the reading of his writings:
From whence we may gather, that what Henry the VIII* acted in that regard, was
but a manifestation of the intents and desires of his predecessors, which they
durst not fully express, and what they enacted, a preparatiue to the
roundnesse of his proceedings.

Besides I see not, but if his Majesty's predecessors granted that to his
Holiness, which was indiuidually annexed to the Crown, as being a special
branch of their prerogative Royal, his Majesty stands none otherwise bound to
maintain that grant, then they held themselves obliged to make that good,
which King John had yielded unto him, and if they did part with their
authority (as your self speak) then was it their own before they parted
with it, and not the Bishops of Rome, (as your Roman Catholics would have it)
by Divine right: and consequently being their own, as they upon occasion best
known to themselves, conferred it: so upon a contrary occasion (I see no
reason, but) either themselves or their successors might as lawfully resume
it: But the truth is, that it was not given by them, but stolen by the Bishop
of Rome, and by him held under color of prescription, yet your self by
discourse of reas^n, and force of truth are driven to confess, that our
bodies and goods are at his Majesty's command, either forgetting (...) whom you
wrote, or not remembering, or it may be so much as knowing what the Church of
Rome (whose defense you undertake) defends touching the Ex^mpti^ Clericorum in
rebus p^li^ici^, t^m quoad personas, tu^ quoad bona, introducta est iure human^
parit^r and diuino, Bell. l. de cle. cap. 28*
exemption, as well of the bodies, as the goods of Churchmen from the
jurisdiction of the secular, though Supreme power: and how his Majesty in
diverse parts of his writings, has most sufficiently proved the nouelty of
this doctrine: so that what you write herein can be imputed to none other but
to gross flattery, or palpable ignorance: flattery of his Majesty, in that
which he truly holds, or ignorance of that which is falsely held by the Church
of Rome; but like a shrewd Cow that has yielded a good meal o^ milk, and
then overthrows it with a spurn of her foot; so having subjected our bodies
and goods to his Majesty's command, you exempt our souls from his charge, but
by way of protection in Catholic Religion, as if you meant purposely to cross
that of the Apostle, [Let every soul be subject to the higher powers:] But I
would ^aine d^maund if his Majesty should not protect us in that Religion
which you call Catholic, whether our bodies and goods shall then be at his
command? Surely if his Holiness (whom you cannot but understand by those that
supply Christ's place, in ijs quaesunt iuris diuini, and to whom you would have
us subordinate,) have the command of our souls, and his Majesty only of our
bodies, the later may command what he list: but men will execute his commands
no farther then the former will be pleased to give leave, whereof we have had
often and fresh experience, as well in the Bulls of Pius Quintus, and in the
Breu^s of Paulus Quintus: and in truth ^ cannot but commend his wit, though
not his honesty, that he intitleth himself unto, and interesteth himself in
the more active and noble part, the body without the soul being as the shales
without the kernel, or the scabberd without the sword.

Those Kings that out of their Regal authority purged the Church of
corruptions, 2. Sam. 17. 6
and reformed the abuses thereof, brought the Arc to her resting place, 1.
Chron. ^3. 12.
dedicated the Temple, 2 Chr^n. 6.
and consecrated it with prayers, proclaimed fastes, caused the book of the
Law new found to be read to the people, 2. King. 23. 2.
2. Ch^o. 20. 3.
renewed he Covenant between God and his people, Nehem. 9. 38.
bruised the brazen Serpent in pieces, 2. King. 18. 4.
which was set up by the express commandment of God, and was a figure of
Christ, destroyed all Idols and false Gods, make a public reforma^ion by a
Commission of Secular men and Priests mixed for that purpose, 2. Chron. 17. 8.
deposed the high Priest, and set up another in his place, 1. King. 2. 27.
they that lawfully called General Councils, for the suppressing of heresies,
as Socr. 1. 9.
Constantine did the Nicene, Theod. 1. 9.
Theodosius the elder, the first at Constantinople, Theodoretus l^. 5 cap. 9.
Theodosius the younger, the Ephesin, Euagri^^. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Valentinian and Martian the Chalcedonian; they that made Laws for the
ordering of Churchmen and Church Matters, as Le^ Epist. 43.
Justinian and Charlemaine, cannot in the iu^gement of any indifferent man be
said, to have no charge of the souls of such a^ are committed to their charge,
but only by way of protection.

Neither does it follow that his Majesty in taking the charge of souls upon
him, according to the quality of his office, and Gods appointment, whose
officer he is, should therefore be himself a Priest, or be the author of his
own Religion, as you would maliciously infer, from the custom of the heathen
Emperors, no more then the Kings of Israel, or the Emperors of the Christian
Primitive Church were Priests, or authors of that religion, which by divine
ordinance they took care of, as well in the Priest, as in the people, as well in
confirming and countenancing what was in order, as in censuring and restoring
what was amiss: neither was it in the time of the law of nature held
unlawful, that both the Regal and the Ecclesiastical, the princely and the
priestly power should reside together in one person, during which Law we have
not many examples of Kings that governed a people, where the Church of God was
planted: there is only mention to my remembrance of Melchisedecke King of
Salem, Genesis 14. 19.
and of him it is said withal, that he was a Priest of the most High God; so
that in his person these two offices, the principality and the Priesthood,
were joined; both which followed the prerogative of the birthright: and to
this double dignity was answerable a double portion: the like do we read of
Anias, that he was Rex idem hominu^, Poebique Sacerdos; and it was the speech
of Apud Sto^. de regn^.
Diogenes the Pythagorean, that [to make a complete King, he had need be a
Captain, See to this purpose, Aristot. pol. lib. 3. cap. 11.
a Judge, and a Priest,] of which two of these were joined in Ely and Samuel,
and the other two in Moses. The name of Presbyter John seems to import that
they have been, or should be Priests, and at this day the Kings of Ferdin.
Lop^z. lib. 1. Hist. Iud. Cap. 14.
Malabar in the East Indies are all of them Bramenes, that is, Priests: whereby
it appears that the Office of a King, and a Priest are not incompatible in the
same person: but as they are not incompatible; so neither among the Heathen was
the Priesthood essentially annexed to the Regal power (as M. Doctor
affirms) Quia in Ciuitate bellicosa, plures Romuli quam Numae similes reges
putabat fore, iturosque ips^s ad bella, ne sacra desere^entur, flamine^ I^ui
assiduum Sacerdotem ^reauit Liu. lib. 1.
Romulus indeed joined them, but Numa disioyned them, and Augustus again
reioyned them, as well for the safety, as the honor of the Emperor; yet not
so, but that they might, and afterward did fall asunder. Indeed the Bishop of
Rome, now as he succeedes those Emperors in place; so does he in that
challenge, assuming to himself, (but in another sense then he spoke it, whose
Successor he pretends himself) Regale Sacerdotium, a royal Priesthood. And
being 2. P^t. 2. 9.
Christ's Vicar, he cannot for shame take to himself the title of Emperor or
King, but a power above them all, as you truly tell us CHRIST had: but to none
other purpose (as I conceive) but from him, to derive it to his Vicar, he being
not only 1. Cor. 2. 15.
that Spiritual man, who judges all things, himself being judged of none,
(by which he is enabled to depose Maynard. de priui. Eccl. art. 9.
Princes) but a Spiritual Prince himself, which is the most favorable
construction that possibly can be given of those words, Bulla P^^ Quin.
Hunc vnum super omnes Gentes, and omnia regna, principem constituit, where
Christ, (unto whom all power was given both in heaven and earth,) is made to
make the Bishop of Rome, his Vicar, the Sovereign Lord, and graund Commander
of all the Nations and Kingdoms in the world, applying that, as properly meant
of himself, which was figuratively spoken to the Prophet, [ Ier. 1. 10.
I have this day set thee over the nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root
out, to pull down, to destroy, to overthrow, to build, and to plant] but in
that he makes himself a Prince, he goes beyond even the literal Commission
of the Prophet.

The use has been that the Christian Emperors at their Coronation, See their
book of Sacred Ceremonies.
should administer to the Pope in place of Subdeacon, should put on a Surplis,
and be admitted as Canonicks, not only of S. Peter's Church in Rome, but of St.
John Laterane, which argues their acknowledgement of some Ecclesiastical
power, to have been in them: Nay Maximilian the first, a Catholic Emperor,
went so far as to attempt the Monit. Po^^^.
uniting of the Papacy to the Empire: The Pope never yet attempted so much in
open show, and plain terms; but has effected no less, nay more, indeed,
and in truth, in making the Papacy the Substantive, and the Empire the
Adjective: But among Christians, (says our Dr.) the Spiritual and Temporal
authority have two beginnings, as if he who gave his Apostles Commission to
preach the Gospel, did not also proclaim in the eight of the Proverbs [
Matthew. 28. 18.
By me Kings reigne] it is there delivered in the person of wisdom, by which
no doubt is to be understood the second person in Trinity, the wisdom of the
Father. It may be his meaning is, that the Spiritual authority is from the
good God, and the Temporal from the evil god, distinguishing as the
Manicheans did: Or that the Spiritual is from God, and the Temporal from the
people; or the Spiritual from Christ, and the Temporal from Antichrist:
Howsoever from a double beginning he inferres a double Supremacy, whereas to
speak properly; that is only Supreme which gives beginning, and not that
which receives, howbeit in themselves (since the institution of the Leuiticall
Law) we must confess them distinct and independent, the Priest depending on
the Prince, in regard of external coactiue jurisdiction, but not of inward
vocation, or outward ordination: Power of the keys, of administering the
Sacraments, of preaching the Word, in himself he has not, and consequently
cannot confer it upon others, and therefore was 1. Sam. 13. 13.
Saul reproved by Samuel for sacrificing a burnt offering, and 2. Cro. 26. 19.
Vzziah plagued with leprosy for burning incense in the Temple: Yet by special
dispensation, Exodus 28.
Moses the Supreme civil Without all contradiction the less is blessed of the
greater, Heb. 7. 7.
Magistrate consecrated Aaron the high Priest, and is in regard of
pre-eminence termed Exodus 4. 16.
his god, and Iehoshaphat King of Judah by his ordinary power gave
instructions, as well to the 2. Chron. 19.
Priests as to the Judges, how to administer their several charges, himself
being as it were the head, and these two as his two eyes or arms. Indeed
before the Kingdom was erected, I take the high Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
Priest, and the chief Judge among the Israelites, to have been as two heads,
without any appeal either from each to other, or to any Superior: But when
once they had a King, appeals lay to him from both. Thus did Saint Acts 25. 11.
Paul appeal from the high Priest of his own Nation to Caesar though an
Heathen Emperor, and from him was there no appeal at all: So that the
Spiritual authority was then subordinate to the Temporal: but when once it
began to interpose it self in Temporal affairs, and within a while after to
oppose it self against the Temporal power, it made a ready way to the
destruction of both.

B. C.
35.
As for your wealth, it is true that the Crown has more pence paid unto it
now, then in the Catholic times it had: but it has never the more wealth. It
is but the gain of the tellers to have more money. True wealth is (...) he is
the richest Prince that has means to maintain the greatest army, and to do
most magnificent works both in war and in peace: wherein the facts of your
Catholic ancestors do appear upon good Record: your Majesty's are but yet
hoped for, and if ever you have the help of Catholic Religion to assist you,
I hope you shall excel them all; otherwise I assure my self, the It is more
to be feared that Rome will do what she can to make him poor: but never
complain that he is not rich.
Schism will do what it can to make you poor, and then complain that you
are not rich. It was indeed one of the maine pretenses in the statutes of Henry
the VIII. that the Schism might enrich the King, and maintain his wars; but
God did not The reason why God did not bless it, I have given in mine answer.
bless it: for notwithstanding all the Church lands, and goods, and tenths,
and fruits, and premuniries: King Henry the VIII. was feign to abase his coin
more then once, and yet he died not so rich as his Catholic father left him.
And since his time what is become of the The Court of augmentation is annexed
to the Exchequer, and yields yearly to his Majesty as much as ever, as I
think.
Court of Augmentation? what benefit do you receive of all the Church lands,
more then your Progenitors did when they were in the As they were then in the
hands of the Clergy, they yielded nothing but at their pleasure.
hands of the Clergy? what ease have your Subjects of Subsidies thereby? or in
brief, how much your You object to his Majesty his empty Coffers, but labor
to make them more empty by subiecting him to Rome.
Coffers are enriched, you may be pleased to be informed, by those that have
to do in those offices, and can readily give you an account; for mine own
part, I have diligently read over the How diligently you have perused the
Statutes, I have made it appear in mine answer to the later part of your
first chapter, and yet it seems you are more skillful in them then in the
Satutes whereof David speaks, I will delight my self in thy Statutes. Psa.
119. 16.
Statutes made by Henry the VIII. and do find that the events are so clean
contrary to the Prefaces, and pretenses of them, as if God, of purpose would
laugh them to scorn.

G. H.
35.
If the Crown have more Pence paid in now then in former times, it must needs
follow, that were it not by default of officers the means might be greater to
do great works both in peace and in war; and whereas you vpbraid his
Majesty, that his are but yet hoped for, he has had other occasions (as the
world well knows) of expense, then his ancestors had, and those occasions
that they had, he has not, whether in building at home, or in warring abroad:
theirs it may be were more conspicuous, but his more necessary; and yet I doubt
not but upon just occasion his Majesty would be able to maintain as great
and as powerful an army as any of his predecessors, to the terror of Rome and
the Romanists, who are so far from complaining of his Majesty's wants, as
they would rather triumph most in this, that he were not rich. Gretser, (in
your account, I am sure a good Catholic) complains not, butscoffes at his
Majesty's need of money, in his answer to Monsieur Plessis his Epistle
Dedicatory to his Majesty, prefixed to his Mysteriu^ iniquitatis; in which his
Majesty being encouraged by that noble Lord, to lay by his Pen, and take his
sword in hand, though it were to the passing of the Alps, and the sacking of
Rome, Gretser in his reply makes it the burden of his song in diverse periods,
Sed deest pecunia. But the only sure way (you say) for his Majesty to enrich
himself, is, to turn Roman Catholic; as if it were not fresh in memory
what infinite masses of treasure the pretense of that Religion carried out of
the land, to the triple Crown of Rome, and other forreiners, well near as
much as was brought to the Crown of England it self; as appears in Bonners
Preface to Gardiners oration of true obedience: In the reign of King Henry the
third, it amounted by just computation, to the sum of 60000. marks, which
amounts to an incredible mass at this day, and was more then the standing
revenues of the Crown at that time, as the Author of the British antiquities
reports it, out of Matthew Paris, in the life of Boniface, Archbishop of
Canterbury: in which relation are also set down the grieuances which the
Bishops, the Abbots, the Barons, and the king himself exhibited in their
several Letters to his Holiness, touching the grieuousnesse of his exactions,
the effect whereof was as follows.

Pope being not content with that aid which is called Peter Pence, he made
money here in England, by a thousand cunning sleights and tricks, without the
consent of the King, against the ancient Right and Liberties of the Kingdom,
and against the Appeals put in by the Kings Ambassadors and Proctors in the
Council of Lions.

England, were by him conferred upon Italians and Romans, not able to speak,
or so much as to understand our language, and that many times, one Italian
succeeded another, as in lawful inheritance: the Church revenues being by this
means wasted and carried out of the kingdom, the word of God not preached,
Ecclesiastical duties not observed, hospitality, alms, and Divine Service
neglected, and lastly the walls and roof of Chancels and Parsonage houses
suffered to drop down, to the indangering of many souls, and the utter
desolation of the Church.



English were upon all occasions drawn by Citations to the Court of Rome,
against the Customs and Common Law of the Kingdom, and against the Popes own
privileges, formerly granted.

To like purpose is that which I find in a Manuscript of Mr. Hales, a man
renowned in his time, as well for his learning as his honesty; his words are
these, speaking of the cunning fetches of the Bishops of Rome, for the
enriching of themselves and their Clergy, to the impouerishing of the King and
the State.

First (says he) they exempted the Clergy, as well the Secular as the regular,
from the authority of the Kings of England, whereby they neither would obey
the Prince, but when and wherein it pleased them, nor albeit they had the
greater part of the possessions and profits of the Realm, they would be
contributory to the charges of the defense thereof, but when it listed them.

Secondly, they reserved to themselves the collations generally and specially
of all Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbeys, Priories, and all other dignities
and benefices in England, which many times they gave to aliants, that never
dwelt in England, nor ever came into England. So the revenues thereof were not
spent in the Realm, but carried out of the same, and when they gave them to any
of the Realm, they made them pay exceeding sums of money for Palls, Annats,
First fruits, Tenths, and such like, whereby the Realm from time to time was
very much impouerished.

Thirdly, they used to dispense, not only with their own Laws and Canons,
but also many times with Gods word in matters of Matrimony, and otherwise,
whereby they sucked no little treasure out of the Realm.

Fourthly, in causes testamentary, in causes of Matrimony, and divorces, right
of tithes, oblations, and obuentions, they had decreed that men might appeal
from any Court within this Realm to the Court of Rome, whereby the people of
this nation was very much troubled, by reason it was so far distant from this
Realm, and when they came thither, they could not in long time have redress,
but with long delays were constrained to spend whatsoever they had.

Fifthly, with dispensations for eating flesh, and white meats, for pardons and
redemption of souls out of Purgatory, for dispensations with vows, and such
like beggary, they scraped together infinite sums of money: and because no
fish should escape for lack of bait, they had their Dataries and Collectours
continually gaping for the prey, resident here in England.

Lastly, the Clergy of this Realm being animated by the authority of the
Bishop of Rome, the Archbishops, Bishops, and such as had Spiritual
Jurisdiction within this Realm, not only unreasonably troubled, and vexed the
people of this realm in their Courts, but also exceedingly pilled, polled and
robbed them under color of Fees and duties. The Parsons and Vicars were not
content with the moderate Mortuaries and Corse-presents, but also daily
increased the same, and would have what it pleased them, without any
consideration of the misery and poverty of the widow and children living, yea,
and many times where the dead had but a bare use, and no property in the goods
and chattels, they were found in his possession, and in many places they would
neither baptize nor marry, nor bury, but they would have some extraordinary
reward, and the common sort of Priests would not depart with any their Masses
or prayers, unless they were sure to have money.

Of these and the like most insufferable vexations, John of Sarisbury in his 6.
book, and 24. chapter De nugis Curalium, complains. Polidor Virgil himself
an Italian, in his 8th. book and second chapter De inuentoribus rerum, is not
sparing in the relation of them: and the book above mentioned, entitled
Antiquitates Britannicae is so full of them, as it seems to have been written
to none other purpose: which notwithstanding I find not gainesaid by any
Romanist. And can we expect then that his Majesty by the help of Romish
Catholic Religion, should ever be enriched? Surely in reason, that which is
the means of impouerishing his Realm, and his subjects, can not be a means
of enriching him: [In the want of people (says Pro^. 14. ^^.
Solomon, he might as well have said in the peoples want) is the destruction of
the Prince,] For as the multitude of people is the kings honor; so the wealth
of the people is the kings riches, and the welfare of the people the kings
safety.

But says Mr. Doctor, one of the maine pretenses of Henry the VIII. was, to
enrich himself in the spoil of the Church, which notwithstanding in event
proved to be contrary; to which I reply with the Poet, -- Careat successibus
opto
Quisquis ab euentu facta not anda putat.
Actions are not so much to be measured by their issues and events, as by the
causes from which they spring, and the ends to which they are directed. Exodus
36.
When the people exceeded too much in offering gifts toward the work of the
Sanctuary, by the discretion of Moses they were restrained, and a proclamation
made throughout the Camp they should bring no more: Why should it not be as
lawful for Henry the VIII. to restore it back again to the owners, if too
much were given, as for Moses to restrain them for giving: he took it out of
their hands who upon al occasions at the Popes command were ready to use it as
a weapon against himself, and in defense of their holy Father, and conferd it
upon those who therewith were to serve both himself and the State in peace at
home, and in wars abroad. As the Church prays for the civil state; so is it
to shield the Church: and better it were the Church should quit a part of her
maintenance, then that the whole should lie obnoxious to the ^acrilegious hands
of foreign usurpation: If in performance hereof, that which should have been
ordained to public, or sacred, was by some ill disposed persons, or the king
himself, turned to private and profane uses; or if that which inseperably
belongs to the maintenance of Ecclesiastical persons, were put into the
possession of those who served not at the altar, this manner of proceeding
might so stain and vitiate the whole action, as it might carry a secret curse
with it upon the authors and actours of it. No doubt but a good cause, and in
it self most just both may be and often is marred in the handling: and being
handled never so well, yet in the issue it may miscarry, Gods judgments being
always in themselves most just, but many times their causes hidden from us. I
undertake not the defense of Henry, or any other Prince or person in robbing
the Church, but to his unfortunate events, we may oppose the happy success of
Queen Elizabeth his daughter, and successor both in government and in
opposition to the Church of Rome: She maintained long and chargeable wars, in
diverse kingdoms abroad, against Balak and Balaam, Gog and Magog, to the
infinite expense of her treasure, and yet at her death she left more in her
coffers then her Romish Catholic sister, and immediate predecessor,
notwithstanding her peace abroad, her marriage with the Lord of the Indies, and
her readmittance (though with much ado) of the Popes authority.

Lastly for full satisfaction in this point, Mr. Doctor having so good
intelligence of his Majesty's disposition, and being so inwardly acquainted
with his secrets, as he makes himself, could not well be ignorant that his
Majesty* is so far from enriching, or hoping to enrich himself in the spoil
of the Church, under color of religion, that to his immortal fame since his
coming to the Crown, See the Statute.
he has bound his own hands and his posterity from alienating the revenues
consecrated to the Churches use: so that your inuectiue in this place is
malicious against King Henry, if in no other regard, yet because it is
impertinent in regard of his Majesty, who has no Monasteries to pull down,
nor (as your self before confess) will to pull down Churches: but though he
have no will to pull down Churches, but rather to set them up, it follows
not, but that he should be willing to Witness the Church of Saint Albons.
preserve that Church (whereof under God he is set by God as the chief
Governor) from the spoil and tyranny of foreign usurpers: Nay the latter
may not unfitly be inferred upon the former: And if in regard of that
preservation only we now pay his Majesty what those tyrants formerly
received, he receives nothing but what he rightly may, nor we pay but what in
duty and conscience we ought.

B. C.
36.
There is yet another objection or two in reason of state, concerning your
Majesty, which seem to be harder to answer then all the rest: Whereof the one
is, that your Majesty has undertaken the cause in writing, and set out a
book in print, and it must needs be great dishonor to you to recall it. This
indeed is it which I have heard the It seems then that they whom you call
Caluinists as touching the confession of his faith, are of the same judgment
with his Majesty
Caluinists of England often wish for before it was done, and much boast of
after it was by means effected, that your Majesty should no longer be able to
show your self indifferent, as you did at the first, but were now engaged upon
your honor to maintain their party, and oppugn the Catholics, and
altogether to suppress them: But there is To grant tha^ which notwithstanding
is not false as I have showed in mine answer to this Sect. yet are there many
things in the same book, which if his Mai^sty maintain, as upon his honor he
is bound to do, he can never turn Roman Cath.
nothing in that book why your Majesty may not when you please admit the Popes
Supremacy in spirituals, and you are partly engaged thereby to admit the
trial of the first general Councels, and most ancient fathers, and as for the
question of Antichrist, it is but an Hypotheticall Proposi^ion, and so reserved
as you may recall your self when you will: And howsoever that book cameforth,
either of your own disposition, or by the daily instigation of some others
that did abuse your clemency, and seek to send you of their own errand; it
cannot serve their turns, nor hinder your Majesty from hearkening to an end
of conte^tion. For if King Henry the VIII. in the judgment of Protestants
might save his honor and K. Henry never contradicted his book.
contradict hi^ book from very good to stark naught, they must not deny, but
that your Majesty may increase your Honor by altering your book from less
From thence it follows, that by your own acknowledgement, what his Majesty
has written is good.
good to much better.

G. H.
36.
There are not only two, but many more Objections that might be made in reason
of State concerning his Majesty, which not only seem, but are indeed harder
to answer, then your poor and slight euasions can give satisfaction to any
man of judgment; whereof a chief one is his Majesty's undertaking the cause
in writing, wherein we are bound to bless God that has set such a King over
us, whom he has endowed with such singular gifts, as to give occasion to such
an Objection. He was no fool that pronounced that Commonwealth happy, where
learned men had the government, or the governors were learned: and another who
holds those wise men in the Gospel who came from the East, are therefore held
Kings, because they were learned, which I speak not to derogate from other
Kings, but to thank God for our own, whose drops that fall both from his
tongue and Pen are as the Prophet David speaks in another case, like rain
falling upon the mowen grass, or as showers that water the earth. We have read
in our own Chronicles of one Bladud a British King, who studied at Athens, of
Alured a Saxon King, who translated the Psalter into his own language, of Henry
a Norman King, who for his great schollership was surnamed the Beauclarke, but
for a King (only David and Solomon excepted) that has written so much, and so
well as his Majesty, and exposing it to public censure, has left it as an
everlasting monument of his name to posterity, for mine own part I must
confess in my small reading, I have not met with any, either in our own or
foreign History: Some Kings have done some what in this kind, but he
excels them all: so that for a Christian King to write and to publish his
writings to the world, even in matter of Religion, is not without example. The
Book of Charlemaine in defense of the decree of the Synod of Frankeford,
which himself had thither called, and against the Canons of the second Nicene
Council, touching the controversy of adoring images, is yet extant to be
seen in the Palatine library: and so is it acknowledged by Augustinus Steuchus
in his second book of Constantines donation, where he presses some things in
that Book for the Popes advantage: Howbeit Bellarmine in his second Book of
Images and 15th. Chapter, labourto prove the contrary, granting that it was
sent by that Emperor to Pope Adrian, but not as his own. His Majesty's
Books, as well the former in defense of the Oath of Allegiance, as the later by
way of Premonition to the Christian States, are no doubt, as great corrasiues
and eyesores to you, as to us they are cordial and comfortable: and cannot be
but to him as dishonorable, if he should recall them, as now they are
honorable if he continue constant to himself and them.

Now that they should proceed rather from the instigation of others, then his
own disposition, is a surmise of your own, I know not, whether more foolish,
as being ignorant of that which he had both written and spoken and done since
he came to years of discretion conformably thereunto, or dishonest in calling
his Majesty's singular wisdom into question, in suffering himself to be so
far abused, as unwittingly to be sent on other men's errands, and to serve
other men's turns.

Howsoever, there is nothing (you say) in that book (by which you cannot but
understand both the Premonition, and the Apology, both bound together in one
volume, and titled together in one front) why his Majesty may not when he
please admit the Popes Supremacy in Spirituals: wherein first you dash (though
peradventure unawares) against your great Cardinal, who in his Letter to
Blackwell, professes, [that in whatsoever words the Oath of Allegiance (in
defense of which his Majesty wrote his Apology) be conceived, it tends to
none other end, but that the authorie of the head of the Church of England, may
be transferred from the Successor of S. Peter to the Successor of K. Henry
the VIII.] this indeed he affirms falsely, but both in his Tortus against his
Majesty's Apology, and in his Apology against his Majesty's Premonition, he
affirms truly that the usurped Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome is in them
both impugned: And I cannot but marvel at such shameless impudency as dares
thus to write to his Majesty touching his own writings, whose very words
toward the later end of his Apology are these (discoursing before of the
Supremacy of K. Henry the VIII. in Church Matters, for which Bishop Fisher,
and Sir Thomas Moore were pretended to have suffered.) [I am sure (says he)
that the Supremacy of Kings may and will ever be better maintained by the word
of God (which must ever be the true rule to discern all weighty heads of
doctrine by) to be the true and proper office of Christian Kings in their own
dominions, then he will ever be able to maintain his annihilating Kings and
their authorities, together with his base and vnreuerent speeches of them,
wherewith both his former great volumes and his late books against Venice are
filled.] Where he goes on and proves this Supremacy as well by the Old as the
New Testament, and the practice both of the Kings of Israel and the Christian
Emperors in the Primitive Church, both explaning and justifying the Oath of
Supremacy, as it is by him imposed, and taken by us, and in his Premonition
written afterward (though set before in the Book) he is so clear in this
point, that Mr. Dr. cannot but stand convinced either of gross negligence in
not reading, or unpardonable forgetfulness in not remembering what he had read:
His Majesty's words are these: [But as I well allow of the Hierarchy of the
Church for distinction of orders (for so I understand it) so I utterly deny
that there is an earthly Monarch thereof, whose word must be a Law, and who
cannot err in his sentence by an infabilitie of spirit. Because earthly
Kingdoms must have earthly Monarchies; it does not follow that the Church must
have a visible Monarch too: for the world has not one earthly Temporal
Monarch. Christ is his Churches Monarch, and the holy Ghost his Deputy, Luke
22. 25.
Reges gentium dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic. Christ did not promise
before his Ascension to leave Peter with them to direct and instruct them in
all things, John 14. 26.
but he promised to send the holy Ghost unto them to that end. And for these
two before cited places, whereby Bellarmine makes the Pope to triumph over
Kings; I mean John 21. 15. 16. 17.
Pasce oues, and Mat. 18. 18.
Tibi dabo claues, the Cardinal knows well enough the same wo^^s of Tibi dabo
are in another place spoken by Christ in the plural number: and he likewise
knows what reasons the ancients do give why Christ bade Peter Pasce oues: and
also what a cloud of witnesses there is, both of ancients, and even of late
Popish Writers, yea diverse Cardinals, that do all agree, that both these
speeches used to Peter were meant to all the Apostles represented in his
person, otherwise how could Paul direct the Church of Corinth to excommunicate
the Incestuous person Cum Spiritu suo, 1. Cor. 5. 4.
whereas he should then have said Cum Spiritu Petri? and how could all the
Apostles have otherwise used all their censures only in Christ's Name, and never
a word of his Vicars? Peter we read did in all the Apostles meetings sit among
them as one of their number, Acts 15.
and when chosen men were sent to Antiochia from that Apostolic Council at
Jerusalem, the text says, it seemed good to the Apostles and Elders, with the
whole Church to send chosen men, but no mention made of the head thereof; and
so in their Letters no mention is made of Peter, but only of the Apostles,
Elders, and Brethren. And it is a wonder why Paul rebukes the Church of
Corinth, for making exception of persons, 1. Cor. 1. 11.
because some followed Paul, some Apollos, some Cephas; if Peter was their
visible head: for then those that followed not Peter or Cephas renounced the
Catholic Faith: But it appears well, that Paul knew little of our new
doctrine, since he handles Peter so rudely, Gal. 2.
as he not only compares; but prefers himself unto him: But our Cardinal
proves Peter's Superiority by Paul's going to visit him: Indeed Paul says, he
went to Jerusalem to visit Peter, and to confer with him: Gal. 1. 18.
but he should have added, and to kiss his feet: To conclude then, the truth
is, that ^eter was both in age, and in the time of Christ's calling him one of
the first of the Apostles: in order the principal of the first twelve, and one
of the three, whom Christ for orders sake preferred to all the rest, and no
further did the Bishop of Rome claim for three hundredth year after Christ:
Subject they were to the general Councels, and even but of late did the
Council of Constance depose three Popes, and set up the fourth, and till
Phocas days, that murdered his Master, were they subject to Emperors: But
how they are now come to be Christ's Vicars, Gods on earth, Triple Crowned
Kings of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, Judges of all the world, and none to judge
them, heads of the Faith, absolute deciders of all controversies by the
infallibility of their spirit* having all power both Spiritual and Temporal
in their hands, the high Bishops, Monarchs of the whole earth, Superiors to
all Emperors, and Kings, yea Supreme Vice-gods, who, whether they will or not,
can not err. How they are now come, I say to this top of greatness I know
not: but sure I am, We that are kings, have greatest need to look to it. As
for me, Paul and Peter I know, but these men I know not, and yet to doubt of
this, is to deny the Catholic Faith, nay, the Word it self must be turned
vpside down, and the order of Bell. de Romans p^nt. lib. 1. cap. 27.
Nature inuerted, (making the left hand to have the place before the right,)
that this Primacie may be maintained.] Thus we see how clearly and strongly
his Majesty both in his Apology proves the Supremacy of Kings in causes
Ecclesiastical, and disproues in his Premonition the pretended Supremacy of
Popes, even in Spirituals, denying them to be Christ's Vicars, Peter's
Successors, visible Monarchs, heads of the Faith, deciders of all
controversies, high Priests, universal Bishops, and destroying the two maine
grounds of that Monarchy, the Supremacy of S. Peter, and their infallibility
in judging.

Truly in the Writing hereof me thought I was touched with shame and pity,
that a Divine should with such palpable falsehoods, belie his Sovereign, and
gull the world, and a Doctor of Divinity so fowlie stumble in so plain and
manifest a case: howbeit it cannot be denied to be true, which he adds, that
his Majesty by that Book is partly engaged to admit the trial of the first
general Councels, and the most ancient Fathers.

For the Councels [I reverence and admit (says he) the four first general
Councels as Catholic and Orthodoxe, and the said four general Councels are
acknowledged by our Acts of Parliament, and received for Orthodoxe by our
Church. And for the Fathers (says he) I reverence them as much and more then
the Jesuits do, for what ever the Fathers, for the first five hundred years,
did with an vnanime consent agree upon, to be believed as a necessary point of
salvation, I either will believe it also, or at least will be humbly silent,
not taking upon me to condemn the same: but for every private Fathers opinion,
it binds not my conscience more then Bellarmines, every one of the Fathers
usually contradicting others. I will therefore in that case follow S.
Augustines rule in judging of their opinions, as I find them agree with the
Scriptures: what I find agreeable thereunto I will gladly embrace, what is
otherwise I will with their reverence reject.] So that his Majesty admits
the four first Councels, not as Divine Oracles, or as the four Gospels, but
as Catholic and Orthodoxe, and reuerenceth the most ancient Fathers, not as
the holy Scriptures, but as consonant thereunto.

And if that trial should be made, your holy Father would thereby gain as
little for the countenancing of his usurped Supremacy, as Zozimus, Boniface,
and Celestine his Predecessors, in forging a Canon of the first Nicene
Council for their pretended Jurisdiction in appeals, and laboring to force
the Council of Carthage thereunto, whereas that Council in precise terms
confineth other Bishops, and Patriarchs to the exercise of their jurisdiction
within their own Diocesses or Provinces, as the Custom of the Bishop of Rome
was, the words are these, Can. 6.
[ Let old Customs be kept: they that are in Egypt, and Lybia, and Pentapolis:
that the Bishop of Alexandria have the pre-eminence of all these, because such
is the Custom of the Bishop of Rome too: likewise also in Antioch and in other
Provinces, let the Churches enjoy their dignities and prerogatiues] which words
of the Council grounding on the Custom of the B. of Rome, that as he had
preeminence of all the Bishops about him: so Alexandria and Antioch should have
of all about them; and likewise other Churches, as the Metropolitan each in
their own Provinces, do show that the Pope neither had preeminence of all
through the world before the Nicene Council, nor ought to have greater
preeminence by their judgment then he before time had.

This Council was called about 327. years after Christ, and there met in it
318. Bishops, the chief lights of Christian Religion at that time, Ambrose
saying, In prefat. lib. de fide.
that their number was mistically prefigured in those 318. Soldiers, by whom
Abraham got the victory over the five Kings.

The second general Council was held at Constantinople, against Macedonius,
who denied the Divinity of the holy Ghost consisting of 150. Bishops, about
the year 383. called by Theodosius the Elder, who both prescribed the place
and time, the matter to be discussed, and manner of proceeding in it, sent his
Deputy thither to supply his room, as moderator or president for the keeping
of order and observing of decency, and lastly by his Imperial power, ratified
the Decrees thereof: all which acts flowing from the prerogative of his place
and office, are now denied by the Pope and his flatterers any way to belong to
Emperors, or Christian Princes: besides this, the Council it self laid a
foundation for that which the fourth general Council further built upon, in
equalizing the Sea of Constantinople, or new Rome to that of the old.

The third general Council was held at Ephesus in the year 430. summoned by
Theodosius the younger against the Nestorian heresy, which divided Christ into
two persons, it consisted of 200. Bishops: This Council (in which S. Cyrill
was president) not only prescribed and limited the Popes Legate, and others
that were sent in embassage to the Prince, what they should do, but added this
threatening, [ Scire autem volumus vestram Sanctitatem, quod si quid horum
contemptum fuerit, neque Sancta Synodus habebit rata, neque vos Communionis
sinet esse participes: We give your Holiness to understand, that if any of
these things (which we have appointed you) be omitted by you, neither will this
holy Synod ratify your acts, nor receive you to the Communion:] By which it
is evident that the lawful and general Council of Ephesus, thought they
might, and said they would; not only control; but even excommunicate the
Popes Vicegerent, if he did not that which was enjoined him by the Synod.

The fourth and last general Council which his Majesty reuerenceth as
Orthodoxe, was the great Council of Chalcedon, consisting of 630. Bishops,
called by Martian the Emperor in the year 454. against Eutiches, who in
extreme opposition to Nestorius confounded the natures of Christ, making of
two distinct natures but one, whereas Nestorius rent asunder his person, making
of one two. This great Council then gave the Bishop of Constantinople equal
privileges with the Bishop of Rome, as may appear in the fifteenth Act of
that Council, and when Paschasinus and Lucentius, who represented the person
of Leo, then Bishop of Rome, the next day desired of the noble men that sat
there by the Emperors appointment, as Judges and Moderatours, that the matter
might be brought about again, and put to voices, pretending that it was not
orderly past, the Council that in the absence of the Popes Legates had made
this Decree, in their presence confirmed the same, they contradicting and
laboring, as it had been for their lives to withstand it.

And since his Majesty and the Realm have undertaken the defense of these
four Councils, it were to be wished they might, if not otherwise, yet by
public authority* be faithfully translated by some chosen men of our own,
out of their Originals; and where diverse readings offer themselves upon
comparing of the best printed Copies and Manuscripts, the most likely might be
given; the work would not be great and the benefit in my judgment issuing
from thence not small.

Now for such things as may in show be drawn out of these Councils to make
against us, and for the Church of Rome, I refer the reader to Page 89, 90,
91, 92. 93.
Bellarmines Apology against his Majesty's Premonition, where he has put
together whatsoever either diligence could observe, or malice wrest, so that
whosoever shall now gleane after him, shall gain as little credit to
himself, as advantage to his cause, yet whatsoever he has said, or for his
purpose pressed from thence, is so fully and sufficiently answered by a
reverend and learned Episc. Eli. in respons. ad Apol. Card. Bellar. page 167,
168, 169, 170* 171, 172.
Prelate of our own, as if our Doctor would have dealt either as a Scholar,
or an honest man, he should first have undertaken the confutation of that
answer, before he had again pressed his Majesty with the trial of those
Councils.

From the first General Councils, he proceeds to the most ancient Fathers;
but what need any farther question of single Fathers, since we have heard
them sp^aking, met together in Council? His Majesty confines himself to the
first 500. years, and to their Vnanime consent, and that in matters of
salvation, and all this granted, he does not always promise a steadfast
belief, but an humble silence. Now Bellarmine, despairing belike, to put the
matter to the trial of their testimonies, complains that his Majesty
descends not lower, and stoopes as well to the later writers, as Bonauent^re,
and Thomas, and Anselme, whereas our Controversies are of that nature, as they
cannot be received as sufficient witnesses in the deciding of them: they fell
upon those times, which the farther distant they were from the fountain, the
more filth they gathered, and as the winds are hot, or cold, dry or moist,
according to the quality of the Regions through which they blow, and waters
relish of the soil through which they run, so did they of the ages in which
they lived. And for the most ancient, Bellarmine himself commonly dazels the
eyes of the world, either with the bastardy of false, or the corruption of true
Fathers, whom he esteems, as they make more or less for his purpose, none
otherwise then merchants do their casting counters; sometimes in his valuation
they stand for pounds, sometimes for shillings, sometimes for pence, sometimes
for nothing. Lib. 5. vltra med. in Apol. 1. and 2. sapius repetit.
Ireneus, and Justin Martyr, who succeeded Polycarpe and Ignatius, the hearers
and disciples of S. John the Evangelist* held [that the devils were not
tormented, nor to be tormented, before the general day of Iudgement] in which
opinion they are seconded by In ha^^si Sethianorum in cap. vlt. 1. Pet.
Epiphanius and Oecumenius, neither do I see (says Bellarmin) how we may
defend them from error; of De Sanct. b^atit. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Origin he says who lived about 200. years after CHRIST, that he was seen
to burn in Hell fire with Lib. 2. de purgat. cap. 8.
Arrius and Nestorius; of De S. beat. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Tertullian (who lived about the same time) that he was an Arch-heretike of no
credit, Lib. 4 de R^. Pont. cap. 8.
Sozemen he accuses of falsehood in his Page 89.
Apology, touching Paphnutius his proceeding about the marriage of Churchmen,
and the Fathers yielding unto him in the Nicen Council; touching the
jurisdiction of Bishops: Lib. 1. de Romans Pont. cap. 8.
Ieromes opinion (says he) is false, and in its proper place to be refuted;
S. Augustine expounding those words as we do, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church, he charges with error out of his ignorance in
the Hebrew tongue: Whereby we may perceive what account themselves make of the
ancient Fathers, who call most hotly for a trial by them.

And in truth if Mr. Doctor had well considered how Policarpe, S. John's
scholar (as I said before) withstood Anicetus Bishop of Rome about the
observation of Easter, and Polycrates Victor in the same business; how
vehemently Stephen was resisted by Cypr-Epist. ad Pompo. cont. Epist. Steph.
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, dying as a martyr, and Canonized for a Saint, to
whom he imputes error, and the maintenance of the cause of Heretics against
the Church of God, the defense of things superfluous, impertinent, false,
naught, contrary to themselves, presumption, frowardness, perverseness,
blindness of heart, inflexible obstinacy: Lastly, how Athanasius that
renowned Patriarch of Alexandria, that stout champion of JESUS CHRIST, that
pillar of the Church, and hammer of Heretics, was persecuted for the Catholic
faith, Pope Liberius consenting and subscribing to the Synodal sentence,
whereby he was excluded from the Communion of the Church, as witnesses Page
474.
Binius in his first Tome of the Councils: If Mr. Doctor, I say, had well
co^^^ered this, together with that famous resistance made by the sixth Council
of Carthage (in which S. Augustine was a member) to the unjust claim of three
succeeding Popes, Zozimus, Boniface and Celestine, in the high business of
Appeals; he might in good discretion have forborne to press his Majesty to
the trial of the most ancient Fathers.

Now touching the question of Antichrist, it is not discussed by his Majesty
as an hypotheticall proposition, but as his opinion, his Majesty's words are
these, [As for the definition of Antichrist I will not urge so obscure a point
as a matter of faith to be necessarily believed of all Christians, but what I
think herein I will simply declare.] Cardinal Peron indeed makes the
proposition of deposing Kings, to be problematicall, and yet withal a part of
the Catholic faith; but his Majesty, though he make his opinion of Antichrist
no part of his faith, yet being his opinion, in regard of his apprehension,
you cannot make it hypotheticall, which he also declared to be his judgment
before his coming to the Crown of England, by his Commentary on certain
verses of the 20th. Chapter of the Revelation of S. John, neither is his
Majesty the only King that has been of that opinion. You may remember not
long since one of the French, who stamped on his coin, Perdam Babylonem;
until then, his Majesty's substantial and weighty reasons touching that
point, be disprooued, I see no reason he has to recall what he has
written; in the mean time his Majesty may more justly take up that, then the
Author of it, [ John 19. 22.
what I have written, I have written] lest he should incur the censure of [
Ecclus. 27. 11.
changing as the Moon.]

Lastly, for the example of Henry the VIII. it is both false and impertinent,
false, in that you say he contradicted his book, whereas his book (as I have
already showed) is only touching the seven Sacraments, which he held to his
dying day: impertinent, in that you take it as granted that his Majesty by
recalling himself should alter from less good to much better, which is the
thing always by us denied, but never was or ever can be proved by you. Indeed
we find that S. Augustine made his Retractations from naught or less good to
better, and Bellarmine in his Recognitions from bad to worse, and Dr. Carier to
have fallen from a formal Protestant, to a professed Papist: and as our
Savior speaks to Saint Peter, thou being converted, strengthen thy brethren;
So he contrariwise being himself perverted, labors to weaken his Majesty's
faith, but it is grounded on that Rock, against which the gates of hell with
their power, much less the instruments of Rome with their foisting and cogging
shall never be able to prevail.

B. C.
37.
The other and the greatest objection, that howsoever your Majesty before your
coming to the Crown, and in the beginning of your reign were indifferent;
yet after the Gunpowder treason you were so angered and auerted, as now you are
resolved never to be friends, and therefore he is no Indeed he cannot well be a
good subject, who either reconciles himself or persuades others to be
reconciled to that Church, which maintains heretics to be as infidels, if not
worse, and his Majesty an heretic.
good subject that will either himself be reconciled to the Church of Rome, or
persuade any of your subjects thereunto. I confess your Majesty had good cause
to be thoroughly angry, and so had all good men whether I guess at your
meaning, your Cath, had cause to be angry that it succeeded not.
Catholics or Protestants, but if your Majesty will hearken to Belike you
understand the Parliament, who persuaded his Majesty to the imposing of the
oath of allegiance.
those that work their own purposes out of your anger, you shall be driven
to His Majesty may both detest the fact, and punish the offenders, and
endeavor by wholesome laws to prevent the like mischief, and yet both live and
die in charity.
live and die out of charity, which although it be not so horrible to the
body, yet is it much more harmefull to the soul, then violent or sudden death.
It is hard I confess for a private man to assuage his anger on the sudden, and
there is as much difference betwixt the anger of a private man, and the
indignations of a Prince, as betwixt a blast upon the river which is soon
down, and a storm upon the sea, which having raised the billows to the
height, is nourished by the motion thereof, and cannot settle again in a long
time; but there is a time for all things, and seven years is a long time. When
a man is in the midst of his anger, it pleases him not to be entreated by his
neighbors, much less by his servants, but when a man has chidden and
punished until he is weary, he will be content to hear his servant speak
Where is that reason?
reason, and though he be not the wisest, yet he is the louingst servant that
will venture to speak to his master in such a case. God indeed is exorable, but
upon submission, and hearty contrition, which yet appears not, either in the
tongues or pens of Romanist.
God himself is exorable, and it pleases him to be entreated by his servants
for his enemies. I am persuaded there is no good Catholic in the world that
can be your Majesty's enemy, and therefore I do assure my self that God will
be pleased with you to hear them speak, and not be angry with me for moving
you thereunto. And if your Majesty do but vouchsafe so much patience, as to
give equal Quid opus est verbis, quum facta se ostendunt?
hearing, I doubt not but yo^ shall receive such satisfaction as will give you
great quiet and contentment, and disquiet none of your subjects, but those
only that do for their advantage His Majesty is as the Angel of God, wise to
discern who they are that labor to misinforme him, and misleade his people.
misinforme your Majesty, and misleade your people. And if your Majesty have no
such use of the Schism, as King Henry the VIII. and Queen Elizabeth had, and
that it does neither increase your authority, nor your wealth, nor your honor,
but rather hinder them all, and deprive you of that blessing which otherwise
you might expect from CHRIST and his Church, from your Catholic neighbor
Princes and subjects, and from the Saints in heaven, in whose Communion is the
comfort of every Christian both in life and death, then whatsoever some great
Statesman may say to the contrary, I do verily believe they do but speak for
themselves: And that there is no true reason that may concern your Majesty to
hinder you from admitting a It should seem then, you are fallen from the hope
of persuading his Majesty to become a Romans Cath. to the toleration of that
religion, which notwithstanding he cannot admit without double perjury, See
T^rtu^a Torti, page 82.
toleration of Catholics and Catholic Religion, that those who cannot command
their understanding to think otherwise, may find the comfort they do with so
great zeal pursue in the unity of the Catholic Church, amongst whom I
confess my self to be one, that would think my self the happiest man in the
world, if I might understand that your Majesty were content that I should be
so.

G. H.
37.
You come at last to the greatest objection, as you term it, which is the
Gunpowder treason, but doubtless in the judgment of any indifferent reader,
you say least in the clearing of it, seeming rather in conclusion to refer it
to a farther hearing, then for the present to answer the objection, or excuse
the plot: That which you have to say, is, that there is a time for all things,
and God himself is exorable, as if his Majesty were merciless and inexorable:
whereas he proceeded upon the discovery of that most barbarous design, with
such rare clemency and singular moderation, that justice was only taken upon
the very actors, and offenders themselves, and that in as honorable and
public a form of trial, as ever was used in this kingdom; and [although (as
his Majesty himself has well observed) the only reason they gave for
plotting so heinous an attempt was, the zeal they carried to the Romish
Religion; yet were never any other of that profession the worse used for that
cause,] as by his Majesty's gracious Proclamation, immediately after the
discovery of the said fact, does plainly appear, only at [the next sitting
down again of the Parliament, were there Laws made, enacting some such orders
as were thought fit for the preventing the like mischief in time to come,
amongst which a form of oath was framed, to be taken by his subjects, whereby
they should make a clear profession of their resolution, faithfully to persist
in their obedience, according to their natural allegiance, to the end a
separation might be made between so many of his Majesty's Subjects, who
although they were otherwise Popishly affected, yet retained in their hearts
the print of their natural Allegiance to their Sovereign, and those who being
carried away with the like fanaticall zeal that the Powder-traitours were,
could not contain themselves within the bounds of their natural Allegiance;
but thought diversity of Religion a safe pretext for all kind of Treasons and
Rebellions against their Sovereign:] Which godly and wise intent God blessed
with success accordingly; for very many Subjects that were Popishly affected,
as well Priests, as Laickes, did freely take the same oath, whereby they both
gave his Majesty occasion to think the better of their fidelity, and
likewise freed themselves of that heavy slander, that [ although they were
Fellow-professours of one Religion with the Powder-traitors, yet were they not
joined with them in treasona^le courses against their Sovereign, whereby all
quietly minded Papists were put out of despair, and his Majesty gave good
proof, that he intended no persecution against them for conscience sake; but
only desired to be secured of them for civil obedience, which for conscience
sake they were bound to performe] I use his Majesty's very words, because he is
best able to express himself, and I know not how to express my self better,
nor by many degrees so well.

These were the greatest effects of his Majesty's anger upon occasion of the
Powder Treason, which notwithstanding, to show your Rhetorike, you compare to a
storm upon the Sea raising up the billows to the height, making him
inexorable, impatient of any equal hearing, chiding and punishing, until he
were weary: whereas if his Mai^stie had but given way to the fury of the
multitude, the chief offenders (no doubt) had been torn in pieces before
they could have come to the place of execution, or of trial, and if the like
monstrous, and never heard of offense had been committed by Protestants, for
their Religions sake in other countries, the body of that profession had
suffered for it. Indeed his Majesty had sufficient occasion given, that his
wrath should have been as the roaring of a Lion, which is the Herald of
death: but bearing the Image of God, and being the Vicegerent of God on earth,
nay styled God, by God himself, his mercy so tri^mphed against his justice,
that he seemed not to be moved as the hainousnes of so horrible a fact
required, until his Holiness by his two Breues, and Cardinal Bellarmine by
his Letter to the Archpriest, thoroughly awakened him, they thereby dissuading
his Subjects from taking that most reasonable Oath of Allegiance, and checking
the Archpriest for taking it: to these his Majesty in his book Entitled
Triplici nodo triplex cuneus, or an Apology for the oath of Allegiance,
vouchsafed with his own Pen to frame a full and quick answer, as well for
the satisfaction of scrupulous consciences, as for the justifying of his own
proceedings, to which the Cardinal under the name of Tortus makes his reply,
and having on his visarde, dealt with his Majesty at his pleasure, in such
terms, as neither became a Churchman to give, nor a Prince to take: whereupon
his Majesty being now somewhat warmed, once again took his quill in hand,
and wrote that excellent Premonition to the Monarchs and free States of
Christendom (as the Prince of Aurange did his Apology to the States of the
Netherlands, having his head proscribed by Phillip the second King of Spain
for the sum of 25000. Crowns) wherein he not only refutes Bellarmines
reply; but by a large Confession of his Faith clears himself from all
imputation of Heresy, and with all most iudiciously sets down the reasons
of his opinion, why he cannot but conceive the Bishop of Rome to be Antichrist:
To this the Cardinal again reioyneth, somewhat more manerly in show, but
indeed no whit less saucily then in his former discourse, and how many
Christanouic Pacenius Becan Parsons Coqueus Eudamon Schoppius Reboule Coffeteau
Peletier Gretser Suarez Beaumanoir
Hell Hounds have followed upon the same sent, the world to well knows,
besides it is not unknown how some of the plotters, or at leastwise abettors
in that intended Tragedy, have their Apologies published from Rome, and others
their protection in Rome; nay, the doctrine which gave life to that, and gives
way to the like attempt, is as violently maintained by the Romish Doctors, as
ever, beside infinite other writers, witness Beaumanoirs expostulatory defense
of Suarez against Seruius expository complaint, as also Cardinal Perrons, and
his fellow Prelates late proceedings in France, together with his Holiness
benedictio^ for that special piece of service, both the Cardinal in his
oration, and the Pope in his Letter, laboring to disgace our Church and State:
with what assurance then can this Majesty join hands with Rome? since though
the Powder be removed from under the Parliament house, yet they still prepare
new matter for the like Blow, and no doubt but Paulus V. would be as ready to
make his Oration in Conclaue, in commendation of it being once acted, as Sixtus
Quintus was in commending that mortal blow given Henry the third of France by
a Friar Iacobin; which that it may the rather appear, I will hereunto annexe
the Translation of his Letter to Cardinal Perron, and the other French
Prelates assembled in Parliament, the Original it self is but a barbarous
Papal style, and therefore it cannot be expected, but the Translation should
be suitable, the Letter was written upon occasion of a Bill passed in the
Lower House, crossing the Popes pretended Power, in Deposing and Murdering
Princes, and crossed by the Clergy.

Pope Paul the fifth.
VEnerable Brother, and our beloved Son, and likewise Venerable Brethren, and
beloved Sons, greeting and Apostolical benediction. The excess of
boldness, whereby some, as we have heard in the general assembly, there held
in the 2. of Ian. have endeavored to violate the sacred authority of the
Apostolic See, has so troubled our mind, that were we not comforted by the
firm confidence we have in the singular piety and prudence of our dearest
children, King Lewis and Queen Mary his mother, whom we understand to have
been careful to repress so unadvised an attempt, and in the admirable zeal
wherewith you being kindled, have no less constantly and courageously, then
wisely and religiously withstood so great rashness, we had been utterly
overwhelmed with intolerable grief; and indeed this had been a fearful
token, seeing we may not without cause suspect, lest into France have flowen
sparks of the lamentable fire of England, to the consuming and destruction of
all true Piety and Religion in that most Christian Kingdom, which we trust,
relying on Gods help, shall always more and more increase under the patronage
of so godly a King, trained up with so great vigilancie to this end,
principally by a most religious, and truly most Christian mother, you
thereunto diligently yielding your help, as you always commendably have done:
but although such hopes do not a little comfort us, yet are we not for all
this free, and void of all affliction and trouble: yea, we are vehemently
anguished, considering with our selves, in how cross and stormy a time, we,
by the secret dispensation of God, undertook the guiding of S. Peter's Bark,
standing doubtful and perplexed, lest happily through our negligence the sink
of vices increase, and consequently the navigations grow more dangerous and
difficult: for this cause we daily fly unto him, and implore his help, who
as without any merit of ours, so also when we thought nothing less, was
pleased we should sit at the stern, and guide the helm: whom we pray, that
while the waves rush against the Prow, and heaps of foming Sea swell on each
side, and tempest follow in the Stern, he not suffer any wrack,
notwithstanding so violent shaking of the ship; mean while we give the
greatest thanks to his infinite goodness, that in the greatest danger which
hitherto happily we have been in, he has relieved us with most seasonable
succors; to wit, by your singular virtue, and provided for the safety of the
Kingdom of France, by the counsel, industry, and religious fortitude of the
Ecclesiastical order of that Kingdom; and on the other side we gratulate you
much, and withal greatly praise you, that your France now beholds
flourishing again in you the zeal, piety, learning, and magnanimity of her
holy Fathers, Denis, Hilary, Martin, Bernard, and the rest, whose memory is
blessed for their care of Gods honor, and the Churches dignity; yea, and all
the holy Church of God may acknowledge of your company, Cardinals of such
eminence, as become so worthy members of the holy Apostolic Sea, and Bishops,
and Prelates, and Pastors, who are good servants, and faithful, and truly
worthy of their Master, having really showed, that they love his glory more
then themselves; true Pastors of the sheep of Christ, who for the salvation
of their flock have not doubted to lay down their own life, while by
shedding of their own blood, they have with so great feruencie of mind showed
themselves ready to maintain the fences of the Lords fold, that is the
Churches Rights: Highly therefore do we praise you and gratulate you again;
for what is more laudable? what more glorious? then for the Priests of God,
setting aside respect of all humane commodity, constantly to have defended the
dignity of holy Church, and through zeal of maintaining the Catholic truth,
to neglect their own life: As also it is to be ascribed to the greatest
happiness that it so fell out, this noble trial of your Priestly virtue
should be made the Piety and Religion of holy King Lewis his Progenitour, no
less reigning in your King, then the memory of his glorious name reuiues in
him: wherefore we do the more exhort you, that you always more earnestly
persist in your most laudable enterprise; God verily will perfect the work he
has begun in you; acknowledge his hand wonderfully moving the hearts of Kings
which he holds, and with one accord bear up against the violence of the
raging Sea, stirred with the storm of humane pride, and the whirlewind of
secular wisdom, severed from the fear of God; doubtless the tempests that are
risen, he will allay, who failed not his wavering disciples; indeed he
suffers us to be tempted, but gives an issue with the temptation; therefore
be of good courage, knowing that the Judge stands above and beholds the
combat of his servants, to give unto every one a reward worthy of his labor;
and he that fights valiantly, shall be worthily rewarded. Now we, whose
charity has been always great toward you in the Lord, vehemently loving you,
and highly esteeming your excellent virtue, do most willingly promise to
afford you whatsoever help or Comfort in the Lord upon this occasion we can
yield, being exceedingly bound to you for your so glorious and admirable
exploit, not ceasing in the mean time daily to pray unto God the Father of
mercies, that by the increase of his holy grace, he would vouchsafe always to
keep and strengthen you in his holy service, and because we cannot
sufficiently, according to our desire manifest unto you by writing this most
loving affection of our heart unto you, we have given in charge to our
Venerable Brother, Robert Bishop of Montpellier our Apostolic Nounce, that
what he has received in Commission, touching this business, more at large
from us, he carefully by word of mouth impart unto you, who will also further
declare unto you, what we think fitting for the full perfecting of the
business: To him therefore shall ye give altogether the same credence, which
ye would to our selves, speaking unto you. God confirm you in every good
work, and direct always your Counsels and endeavors according to his holy
pleasure, and we from the inmost bowels of our charity bestow upon you our
Apostolic benediction. Yeuen at Rome at S. Mary the greater, under the Signet
of the Fisherman, the last of January: 1615. the 15th. year of our Popedom.

Petrus Strozza.


Now as long as such grief, such joy, such hope, such fear, such love, such
jealousy, is so passionately expressed in the main business, about which his
Majesty's personal and public quarrel with Rome first began, what
likelihood is there of persuading his Majesty, that no Roman Catholic in the
world can be his enemy, except first he be persuaded that the Pope of Rome
is no Roman Catholic, yet, how far he was moved to anger, upon occasion of
the Powder Treason against the body of that profession, his own words
delivered in the next session of Parliament, after the discovery of that bloody
design shall testify, [ as for mine own part (says he) I would wish with
those ancient Philosophers, that there were a Crystal window in my breast,
wherein all my people might see the secretest thoughts of my heart: for then
might you all see no alteration in my mind for this accident, further then in
these two points. The first, caution and wariness in government, to discover
and search out the mysteries of this wickedness, as far as may be^ The other
after due trial, severity of punishment upon those that shall be found guilty
of so detestable and unheard of a villenie.] This was the height of his anger,
any more then this he declared not, and less then this well he could not. But,
before this (you say in the entrance of this Section, still harping upon your
old string.) He was indifferent, whereas your great Cardinal (a man of no mean
intelligence) in his Tortus, makes his Majesty to have been a Puritan whiles
he was in Scotland, and again confirms the same in his Apology, for that in
the first book of his Ba^ilicon Doron, he affirms that the religion there
professed, was grounded upon the plain words of the Scripture, and again (in
his second book) that the re^ormation of religion in Scotland was
extraordinarily wrought by God: And before the Powder treason, he makes him so
far from indifferency, as he faines the severity of his laws against Roman
Catholics, to have given occasion to that foul conspiracy, and to the
conspirators (being then without all hope) of entering into so desperate a
course. And sure it seems the Powder-traytours themselves held him not
indifferent; for they discovered greater anger toward him in the proiecting of
that bloody treason, then he toward them or their associates, after the
discovery of it, which notwithstanding it seems by Watsons confession (not
long before his execution) the Jesuits were hatching before his (undertaken
for religion too) was detected; not full three months after his Majesty's
right to the Crown before it was settled, or so much as set on his head: nay
Garnet himself, their Archpriest being solicited, not long before the
Queens death, by a gentleman of a noble family (but Popishly affected) that
when time served he would set forward the kings title among Catholics,
returned this answer [that he had nothing to do with the kings right, or the
promoting it, in as much, as he was so hardened in a religion contrary to his,
that now there was no hope of his conversion left.]

Thus we see that neither the Powder-traitours themselves, nor Watson and
Clerk Priests, nor the Jesuits, nor the Archpriest, nor the Cardinal held
him indifferent before the Powder Treason, yet Mr. Doctor is of a contrary
opinion to them all, persuaded (it may be) by his Majesty's Letters, pretended
to be addressed before his entrance into this kingdom, in the year 1598. to
Pope Clement the VIII, Cardinal Aldobrandin, and Cardinal Bellarmine, that
some one of the Scottish nation might be created Cardinal, by whose
intercourse he might more freely and safely negotiate with the Pope: this
reason indeed I have heard some Roman Catholics much stand upon; and except
this be it, I cannot conceive what should move Mr. Doctor thus boldly and
frequently, to vpbraid his Majesty with indifferency, which was the fault of
the Angel of the Church of the R^^. 3. 15.
Laodicea^s. And surely he that writing to his Majesty so grossly, erreth about
his Majesty's writings; I may (I hope without breach of charity) suppose that
he never so much as read or saw the full Ad M. Torti lib. Resp. page 191
answer to this objection, long since published to the view of the world,
standing partly upon his Majesty's peremptory denial, of ever yielding his
consent to the sending of such letters, and giving the Pope to understand by
messages delivered by word of mouth, that if he ha^ received any letters at
all, as written from him, he should esteem them none otherwise, but as
counterfeit, or gotten by stealth; partly upon the confession of the L. of
Balmerinoch then his Majesty's Secretary.
party himself before his Majesty, and the Lords of his Counsel, who, (out of
an ambitious desire of advancing his near kinsman to the dignity of a
Cardinal,) being then the Secretary of State, shufled in those letters among
others, when his Majesty was ready to take horse, and so by cunning got them to
be subscribed; and partly upon the Popes proceedings after the receipt of them,
which was the showing of them to such as came thither of the Scottish nation,
and demanding whether they thought the subscription to be his Majesty's own
hand, and suffering some to take copies of them; besides he neither answered
the Letters, nor granted the suite contained in them, and some years after
writing to his Majesty by Sr. James Lindsey, he neither mentioned those
letters, nor blessed his Majesty with Apostolic benediction; and after all
this, sent his two Breues to the Roman Catholics here in England, for the
excluding of him from the Crown. And thus have we now not only the traitors,
the secular Priests, the Jesuits, the Archpriest, the Cardinal, but the Pope
himself, making against this vain supposition of his Majesty's indifferency
before the Powder Treason.

To conclude this Section then, and therewithal my reply to such pretended
motives, as might incline his Majesty to reconcilement with the Church of
Rome, or toleration of Roman Catholics, if his Majesty have as great reason
to continue separation with the Church of Rome, as Henry had to make it, and
Queen Elizabeth to maintain it, and that it does increase his lawful
authority, both over more persons, and in more causes, if it may serve for the
better enriching of his coffers, an union with that Church, can not but bring
both his honor and wisdom into question, being so far provoked without
just occasion given, or any satisfaction hitherto made; and having so deeply
engaged himself in the quarrel, if thereby he shall deprive himself of that
blessing, which otherwise he might expect, and hitherto has felt from Christ
his Savior, whose cause he pleads from his Christian and truly Catholic
neighbor Princes states and Subjects; and lastly, from the Church of CHRIST,
in whose communion is the greatest comfort both in life and death, then
whatsoever some discontented fugitive, or hired advocate of Rome, may say to
the contrary, I do verily believe they do but speak for themselves, and that
there is no true reason that may concern his Majesty's good, but rather danger
and harm, why he should admit a public toleration of Papists and Popish
Religion, who stop their ears at home against the charmer, charm he never
so wisely, and abroad with great eagerness pursue the ruin of their native
country, among whom I profess I must hold Mr. Doctor to have been one, till I
be better informed to the contrary.

B. C.
38.
But although your Majesty sit at the Stern and command all, yet are you
carried in the same ^hippe, and it is not possible to weild so great a vessel
against wind and tide, and therefore though it do not concern your Majesty
in your own estate, yet if your Lords and your Commons and your Clergy do
reap any great benefit by the Schism; it will be very hard for your Majesty
to ^ffect unity, but if upon due examination there be no such matter, then is
it but the cry of the passengers, who for want of Many of those passengers who
justly fear danger, have greater experience in the guiding of this ship then
your self could have.
experience are afraid, where there is no danger, and that can be no hinderance
to any course your Majesty shall think to be best for the attaining of the
The attaining of your Haven, we take not to be the way to Heaven.
haven.

G. H.
38.
From his Majesty that sits at the Stern, and commands all, you come to the
Subject, but if it were in the power of Romanists, I doubt much, whether he
should long sit there, and how he commands all, well appears by their
refusal to take those lawful Oaths, which he imposes. Now for the Subject,
you begin first with the Lords, and so descend to the Commons, Concluding
lastly with the Clergy, and sing them severally a Sirens song, that so being
lulled asleep the common ship they are carried in, may dash upon the Rock of
Rome.

B. C.
39.
For mine own part, for the discharge of my duty and conscience, I have
considered of all there States, and can resolve my self that I have not
prejudiced the State of any good Subject of yours, but mine own, in coming to
the Catholic Church. And first, for your Lords and Nobles, it is true, that
many of their an^estors were allowed a very good share in the division of the
Church, when the Shisme began, and therefore it concerned them (in reason of
State) to maintain the doctrine of division, but I think there are very few
in England, either Lords or other, now possessed of Abbey lands, which have not
paid well for them, and might as well possess them in the unity of the Church
as in the Schism, and there was a declaration made by the Pope to that purpose
in Queen Mary's days, so that now there is no need at all to preach against
the merits of good works, nor the virtue of the Sacraments, nor the invocation
of Saints, nor the rest of Popery that built Churches, unless it be to help
the Hugonotes of France to pull them down.

G. H.
39.
Having entered into a deep study, and serious consideration of all States, at
length you resolve (as from the oracle) that you have prejudiced none, in
playing the turnecoate, but your self, and sure I am of the same opinion,
there being none, as I hope, so unwise as to be turned by you. Now in taking
this survey, you begin with the Lords, who were allowed a very good share (you
would say a great) in the division of the Church, yet if they will be so good
as to side with the Pope, they shall both enjoy their Religion, and keep their
possessions, as now (in this Religion) they do, so we see you would iuggle at
fast and loose, play at small game rather then sit out, and became all unto
all, that you might win some, though in another sense, then S. Paul both
meant and practiced it. And whereas you would salve the matter by their paying
for those possessions, that shift will not serve the turn for Queen Mary's
days, when the greatest part of them were both unsold and unbought, otherwise
then in the first sharing. By your opinion, that Abbey lands may be as well
possessed in the unity of the Church, as in the Schism, (as you are pleased
to call it) it seems you have seen the motives persuading to a dispensation
in that behalf, collected and reduced into writing in the second year of
Queen Mary's reign, the original of which (amongst other authentike
remembrances of that time) is preserved in the Office of his Majesty's Papers;
which, because I verily think it was the ground of that Declaration made by
the Pope in Queen Mary's time, which you speak of, and a prin^ipal inducement
of the Statute made the same year, in confirmation thereof, and for that also
I suppose it is not any where publicly to be found, I will here insert.

ANNO DOM. 1554.

QVod omnes qui iusto titulo iuxta leges huius regni pro tempore existentes,
habent aliquas possessiones, terras, sieve tenementa Monasteriorum, Prioratuum,
Episcopatuum, Collegiorum, Cantariarum, Obituum, etc. sieve eadem pecunijs suis
perquisiuerunt, sieve per donationem, vel per mutationem, sieve alio modo
legitimo quocunque, in sua possessione huiusmodi remanere possint and valiant,
and easdem suas possessiones ratas and confirmatas sibi habere ex
confirmatione, and dispensatione Sedis Apostolicae.

Causae and rations quare huiusmodi dispensationes cum honor and conscientia
recte concedi possint.

1 Status Coronae huius Regni been sustineri non potest, vt cum honor regat
and gubernet, si huiusmodi possessiones ab illa separentur, quod hodie maxima
pars possessionum Coronae sit ex huiusmodi terris and possessionibus.

2 Complurimi homines pecuniis suis acquisiuerunt ingentes huiusmodi terrarum
portiones, a serenissimis Regibus Henrico VIII. and Edwardo VI. qui per suas
Litteras Patentes, easdem terras warrantizauerunt quibus terris and
poss^ssionibus, sipossessores huiusmodi nunc priuarentur, Rex teneretur
rependere pecunias omnes in hac part^ expositas, quae in tantarum summarum vim
and mol^m sese extenderent, vt d Corona difficillime restitui possent.

3 Magnates and nobiles huius regni, quorum plerique vendiderunt, and
alianauerunt antiquas suas haereditarias possessiones, vt has nouas obtinerent,
and in suo statu viuere non possunt, si huiusmodi possessiones ab illis
auferantur.

4 Acquisitores vel possessores huiusmodi terrarum and possessionum, propterea
quod easdem habuerunt ex iusto titulo, iuxta ordinem Regum huius regni,
habebant, and etiamnum habent bonam fidem in illis obtinendis.

5 Possessio huiusmodi terrarum adeo est communis cuique statui, and ordini
hominum, Ciuitatibusque, Collegiis, and Incorporationibus, vt si ab illis
tollantur and auferantur, subitam quandam metamorphosin singulorum statuum and
magnam omnis ordinis confusionem in vniuerso regno hinc indesequi necesse sit.

6 Cum bona, and possessiones Ecclesiae ex authoritate Canonum, pro redemptione
captiuorum alienari possint, Idque per illam Ecclesiam solam ad quam illae
possessiones pertinebant, aequum est dispensari pro continuatione possessionis
iam acquisitae, propter tantum bonum publicae concordiae and vnitatis
Ecclesiae, ac praeseruatione istius Status, tam in corpore quam in anima.

THat all such as by just title according to the Laws or Statutes of this
Realm for the time being, have any possessions, lands, or tenements lately
belonging to Monasteries; Priories, Bishoprics, Colleges, Chanteries,
Obites, etc. Whether they have purchased the^ for their money, or are come to
possess them by gift, grant, exchange, or by any other legal means
whatsoever, may retain and keep the same in their possessions, and have the
same ratified and established unto them by the confirmation and dispensation of
the Sea Apostolic.

Causes and reasons why such dispensations may be justly granted with honor
and conscience.

1 The state of the Crown of this kingdom cannot be well sustained to govern
and rule with honor, if such possessions be taken from it: for at this day the
greatest part of the possessions of the Crown consists of such lands and
possessions.

2 Very many men have with their moneys bought and purchased great portions of
those lands from the most Excellent Kings, Henry the VIII. and Edward the VI.
who by their Letters Patents have warranted the same, of which lands and
possessions, if the owners should now be dispossessed, the King should be bound
to repay unto them all their money, which would arise to such a huge mass,
that it would be a hard matter for the Crown to restore it.

3 The Nobles and Gentry of this realm, most of whom have sold and aliened
their ancient inheritances, to buy these new, cannot live according to their
degrees, if these possessions should be taken from them.

4 The purchasers or owners of such lands and possessions, in as much as they
came to them by just title, according to the ordinance of the Kings of this
kingdom, have held and do still hold a good and iustifyable course in
obteining them.

5 The enjoying of such lands and possessions is so common unto every State
and condition of men, Cities, Colleges, and Incorporations, that if the same
be taken from them, there will necessarily follow thereupon throughout the
whole Kingdom a sudden change and confusion of all Orders and Degrees.

6 Seeing that the goods and possessions of the Church, even by the authority
of the Cannons, may be aliened for the redemption of captives, and that the
same may be done by that Church only, to whom such possessions do belong: It
is fit and reasonable that such dispensations should be granted for continuing
of possession already gotten, for so great a good of public concord and unity
of the Church, and preservation of this State, as well in body as in soul.

Those possessions indeed in many places (I speak specially of Tenths) which
by reason of Popish dispensations were first carried from the Church, are as the
flesh which the Eagle stole from the Altar, carrying a coal of fire with it, to
the burning down and quite consuming of the nests of many of them that held
them; and in this respect Mr. Doctor may well say, that the most part of them
who now enjoy them, have paid well for them; in as much as the first owners
were enforced, or their posterity within a generation or two, to sell that
which others purchased. Now this curse of God I can impute to none other thing
then to the alienation of Tenths from their proper use, to which they were, and
still should be ordained, or at leastwise the bare and scant allowance which is
made to the Minister of the greatest part of the fattest Impropriations; so
that commonly no Parishes are worse provided for, then those that pay most, the
redress whereof, if it should please God to put into his Majesty's heart, and
the assembly of the Estates in parliament, it would be a work no doubt
honorable in it self, acceptable to CHRIST, and beneficial to his Church,
for which he would the rather bless their other proceedings: I speak not for
the restoring of Impropriations, (though that were rather to be wished then
hoped, their value being little or nothing inferior to the Benefices) but the
making of a co^petent allowance out of them, for the maintenance of a preaching
Minister, and I am sorry to hear that some of them should be so backward in the
former, who most urge the later, the rather for that I would not have it
thought our Religion cannot stand, but by the spoil of the Church livings,
though the Pope (as it seems by Mr. Doctor) cares not who loses so that
himself may win.

The virtue of the Sacraments expressed in holy Scripture we preach not
against, but as for merit of works, and invocation of Saints they were
preached against, and that in England long before the lands were taken from the
Abbeys; and though they are still preached against, yet with us are the Saints
reverenced with the honor due unto them, by our observation of the days
consecrated to the memorials of their glorious and precious deaths: And some
Churches are built among us as occasion serves, and necessity requires; but
more Hospitals, Schools, almeshouses, Colleges, Libraries, and the like
charitable works, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign to this
present time, then in the space of any three score years successively taken
since the Conquest, which I speak not to boast of the fruits of our Religion,
but to give God the honor; and as for the Hugonotes of France (as you are
pleased to term them) if they be guilty of pulling down Churches, we
neither encourage them to it, nor defend them in it, as neither do we the
Papists in their barbarous massacres, but only say of them as the parents of
the blind man, they are of sufficient age, let them answer for themselves.

Lastly, because you address your discourse in particular to the Nobles in
this Section, I crave leave to put them in mind of a piece of a letter written
by their predecessors to the Bishop of Rome, during the reig^e of Henry the
III. I will recite it in the words of Matthew Parris translated. [The great
ones (says he) by writing to the Pope, complained of the scandals bred out of
the rapine and avarice of Rome, and spread not only in England, but through
the Christian world, that themselves would not endure that their country from
thencefoorth should be so rudely handled, no though the King himself should
wink at it, and unless (say they) these matters be speedily redressed by
you, let your Holiness know for certain, that it may not unjustly be feared
that such a danger is likely thereby to ensue, both to the Church of Rome, and
to our Lord the King, that no remedy will easily be found for it.] My hope
then is, that our Nobles being now farther enlightened by the beams of the
Gospel, and the clear discovery of the truth in the writings of learned men,
then their predecessors, who lived in those times of darkness, will, like
the Noble Theophilus, (to whom S. Luke dedicates his Gospel, and The Acts of
the Apostles) and those noble Bereans, ( Acts 17. 10.
who the more noble they were, received the word with the greater readiness)
hold fast the profession which they have vowed themselves unto, by resisting
the usurpation and tyranny of that man of sin, and maintaining the liberty
and freedom of their country.

In the first Parliament held by Queen Mary after her Coming to the Crown,
the Nobility of England, though they gave way to the administration of the
Sacraments, and other doctrinall points, as they were used and held in her
Father Kings Henry's time, yet could they hardly be induced, either by her
importunity (whom it most concerned, in regard of her birthright, made good by
the Popes dispensation) or by the persuasions of Cardinal Poole her Cousin, and
by her made Archbishop of Canterbury, who had been for many years maintained,
(for the most part) at the Popes charge, to yield that the Queen should
surrender her title of Supreme head of the Church of England, or that the Pope
should be suffered to exercise his wonted jurisdiction within her dominions,
how much more then at this time should they pluck up their spirits to the
abandoning of that unjust challenge, having now a Sovereign who in his Defense
du Droit des Rois, page 111. and 112.
writings last published to the world bearing the date of this year
[Consecrates his Scepter, his Sword, his pen, his endeavors, unto God, in a
thankful acknowledgment of the grace bestowed on him, in freeing him from the
error of this age, and his kingdom from the Popes yoke which kept it in
thraldom, in which God is now sincerely served, and called upon in a language
under stood of all, in which the people may read the Scriptures without any
special privilege, and with the same freedom, as the people of Ephesus, of
Rome, of Corinth, read the Epistles written by S. Paul; in which they pay no
more tribute by the Polle, thereby to obtain the remission of there sins, as
they did scarce one hundredth years yet past, neither are they enforced to
seek their pardons beyond the Seas, and the mountains, God himself
presenting them to my Subjects (says he) in there own Country, by the
doctrine of the Gospel; and if in this regard it be, that the Cardinal terms
the Churches of my Kingdom miserable, for mine own part 1 esteem our misery
above his happiness,] since then we have (by Gods providence) such a
Sovereign, let that aspersion never be fastened upon our Nobility, which his
Majesty justly casts upon the French, that [in as much as they gave way to
the acknowledging of their King to be deposable by the Pope, it were fit that
withal they should diuest themselves of their titles, and resign them to the
third estate, who were the only men that could neither be so drawn by
promises, nor affrighted by threats, but that they ever held them fast to the
maintenance of their Kings honor, and the surety of his person.

B. C.
40.
But perhaps the Commons of England, do gain so much by the Schism, as they
cannot abide to hear of unity; Indeed when the Puritan Preacher has called
his flock about him, and described the Church of Rome to be so ignorant, so
Idolatrous, and so wicked, as he has made himself believe she is, then is
he wont to Congratulate his poor deceived audience, that they by the means
of such good men as himself is, are delivered from the darkness and
Idolatry, and wickedness of Popery, and there is no man dare say a word or
once mutter to the contrary: But the people have heard these Whether your
Preachers, or your Friars, and ^esuites abuse the people more with lies in
their Sermons let them judge who have heard both.
lies so long, as most of them begin to be weary, and the wisest of them
cannot but wonder how these Puritan Preachers should become more For moral and
civil honesty there were among the ancient Romans and more learned then they.
learned and more honest then all the rest that lived in ancient times, or that
live still in Catholic Countries, or then those in England, Belike they
condemned you for one among the rest, and were not much mistaken.
whom these men are wont to Condemn for Papists. Nevertheless I confess
there be many It is well you hold some honest men amongst them. least your
self should be accounted none.
honest men and women amongst them, that being carried away with prejudice, or
The Romish Church, for many chief points, has not so much as pretext of
Scripture.
pretext of Scriptures, do follow these Preachers, more of zeal and devotion
to the Church, as my self did, until I knew it was but Counterfeite, and
these good people if they might be so We might say the like of some of your
followers, and more truly, in as much as we bear them record that they* have
zeal, but not according to knowledge.
happy as to hear Catholics answer for themselves, and tell them the truth,
would be the most devout Catholics of all other: But the What makes you to
cry out so against Puritan Preachers, but that most of the people are led by
Sermons?
most of the people were never lead by Sermons, if they were the Catholic
Church is both able and willing to supply them far better then the Schism: I
have said it before, and I will be bold upon this occasion given, to report it
again, not to boast of it, but to praise God for it, that his Majesty's
Dominions afford as many sufficient and learned Preachers, and that in a more
substantial and conscionable fashion, then the Popes Hierarchy, and that
London alone affords more then Rome it self: and their readiness to supply
Sermons, is not so much out of any good will they bear that exercise, as out
of ill will they bear us.
but it was an opinion of wealth and liberty made them break at first, and if
they do duly consider of it, they are never the better for either of both,
but much the worse.

G. H.
40.
From the Nobles you descend to the Commons, entering your discourse with the
like imaginary Sermon of a Puritan Preacher, as before you brought upon the
Stage in the 16th. Section of this Chapter: you paint him forth describing the
Ignorance, Idolatry, and Wickedn^sse of the Church of Rome; and surely if this
make a Puritan, Dantes, and Boccace, and Petrarch, and Mantuan must be Puritan
Poets too, and Guicciardin a Puritan historian, and Sauanorola a Puritan
Preacher (though all Italians and most of them well acquainted with the Court
of Rome) which is now come (in a manner) to be all one with the Church of Rome.
The Ignorance of the people is such, that they adore it as the mother of
devotion, contenting themselves to believe as the Church believes: Of their
ordinary Priests, that my self meeting some of them in the streets, and
inquiring the way in Latin, they have replied they understood not my Dutch; Of
their Friars, that they have a Company termed the Fraternity of Ignorance: of
their Bishops and Cardinals, that in the Tridentine Council scarce twenty of
two hundredth durst adventure to speak publicly, but served only as ciphers
to fill up the rooms, and make up the number of voices: Nay of their Popes
themselves, that some have passed their grants with Fiatur, in stead of Fiat,
others have excommunicated them who held the Antipodes, as Zachary at the
instance of Boniface, John. Aduen^. lib. 30. Anal. Boio.
Archbishop of Mentz, did Vergilius the famous Mathematician: And lastly, some
have condemned them for heretics, who studied the more refined kind of
learning, or any way smelt of the university, as Platina reports it of Paulus
Secundus, in whose time he lived, and with the description of his life ended
his own.

Touching their Idolatry, when I shall see Doctor Raynolds his book De
Idololatria Romana soundly and fully answered, I will in my Judgment free them
from that imputation, before then I must take leave to suspend it.

Lastly, concerning their wickedness I marvel the Doctor would give occasion
to rub afresh upon that sore, which if I should thoroughly open would prove so
noisome, and unsavory: Now if this make a Puritan Preacher to inform his
auditory of these corruptions in that Church, and to thank God for our
deliverance from them, if not in whole, yet by Gods grace in some good measure,
I confess my self to be a Puritan Preacher, and think no honest minded
Minister in England will refuse that title tendered under those conditions: and
if the people do not acknowledge this inestimable blessing with hearty
thankfulness to God for it, it is to be feared he will remove their
Candlestick, and in his judgment suffer them to relapse again into their
former disease.

B. C.
41.
For wealth the Puritan unthrift that looks for the overthrow of Bishops and
Churches Cathedral, hopes to have his share in them if they would fallonce,
and therefore he cannot choose but desire to increase the Schism, that he may
gain by it: but the So that in Mr. Doctors Logic an honest Protestant may
thus be defined: One that can endure the State of England as it is, and could
be content it were as it was, that he might receive more benefit.
honest Protestant that can endure the State of England as it is, could be
content it were as it was, for he should receive more benefit by it every way.
The poor Gentleman and Yeoman that are burdened with many children, may
remember, that in Catholic times the Church would have received, and provided
for many of their sons and daughters, so as themselves might have lived and
died in the service of God without posterity, and have helped to maintain the
rest of their families; which was so great a benefit to the Commonwealth, both
for the exoneration and provision thereof, as no You tell us before that all
false religions in the world are but humane policies, and we as truly return
it upon you, that this humane policy favors of a false religion.
humane policy can procure the like. The Farmer and Husbandman (who labors
to discharge his payments, and has little or nothing left at theyeres end to
lay up for his children, that increase and grow upon him) may remember, that in
Catholic times there were better penny-worths to be had, when the Clergy had
a great part of the Land in their hands, who had no need to raise the Rents
themselves, and did what they could to make other Lords let at a reasonable
rate, which was also an inestimable benefit to the Commons so that whereas
ignorant men carried with envy against the Clergy, are wont to object the
multitude of them, and the greatness of their provisions, they speak therein
as much against themselves as is possible; for the greater the number is of
such men, as be Many of them though they professed themselves dead to ye world
yet were they alive to the flesh.
mundo mortui, the more is the exoneration of the Commons, and the more the
land is of such as can have no propriety in them, the better is the provision
of the Commons; for themselves can have no more then their food, and their
regular apparel, all the rest either remains in the hands of the Tenants, or
returns in hospitality and relief to their neighbors, or is kept in a
living Exchequer for the service of the Prince and Country in time of
necessity; so that the Commons do gain no wealth at all, but rather do lose
much by the Schism.

G. H.
41.
You proceed, and assure the Commons, that our separation from Rome, makes
much against their wealth and liberty, for proof whereof you begin with the
Puritan unthrift, who looks for the overthrow of Bishops and Churches
Cathedral, hoping to have his share in them. Now I deny not, but some such
unthrifts there may be, shrouding themselves under the vizard of those whom
you call Puritans, but their power is not so great (God be thanked) as we
need fear them, nor I hope shall be whiles his Majesty and his posterity
sway the Scepter, who is so far from pulling them down, or giving any way
unto it, that he has not only to his immortal fame, bound his hands from
withdrawing any thing from them, but restored them in Scotland, and both often
and openly professed, [No Bishop, no King,] and as for them which look for
that overthrow, let their eyes drop out of their sockets, with looking, and the
young ravens devour them.

I have heard of a platform of our Church government devised by Parsons, if
the Pope should once again recover his footing amongst us, in which one
especial piece of his project is, the pulling down of the Bishoprics and
Churches Cathedral, that his Holiness and the Padres may be all in all, so
that the Jesuits may most properly be termed those Puritan unthrifts: And I
make no doubt, but if his Holiness could dispense with those who withhold the
Tenths of the Church, he might as well dispense with the pulling down of
Bishoprics and Cathedral Churches.

Now for those honest Protestants, who for matter of religion could be content
it were as it was, conditionally themselves might receive more benefit, their
heads may be in England, but sure their hearts are in Rome, deceiving
themselves as well in vndervalewing the benefit they have, as in expecting that
they have not, nor are ever like to have; the fair pretexts and promises made
them from Rome, being like the Apothecaries boxes, ha^^ng Catholicon set on
their front in capital letters, as if they contained a sovereign medicine for
all diseases, but within are full of deadly poison; or like the apples of
Sodom, which are to look to, beautiful, bu^ being touched only with the
finger, presently are turned into dust.

The first apple you present the Commons, if they yield to the reentertaining
of Popish religion, is increase of wealth: But before we go any farther in the
trial of this point, I shall desire all ingenuous Papists, rightly to inform
both themselves, and others, what the two Monks Matthew Paris, and Matthew of
Westminster have left upon record, touching the Bishop of Romes most
intolerable exactions in this kingdom, whiles his authority here prevailed;
and then to judge indifferently whether by submitting our necks to that yoke,
which our fathers were not able to bear, it be likely the wealth of our land
should be increased. That which one of the Popes pronounced touching our
Country, was doubtless the opinion of them all, I speak of latter times, [
Vere hortus noster deliciarum est Anglia, vere puteus inexhaustus est, and vbi
multa abundant, de multis multa possunt extorqueri England is our Paradise of
pleasure, a well never to be drawn dry, and where much abounds, much may be
taken.] It was the speech of Innocent the IV. reported by Ma^thew Paris, anno
1245. about which time S. Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury undertook a voyage
to Rome, to complain of the great vexations and extortions, offered the
Clergy and people, by Ca^dinall Otho his Legate, who hiding himself in the
tower of Ousnie Abbey, for fear of a tumult of the Scholars of Oxford, they
termed him Usurer, Simonist, rentracker, money-thirster, peruerter of the King,
subuerter of the kingdom, enriching strangers with the spoils of the English;
but Edmund returning home without success in his complaint, and weary of his
life in England, by reason that he could not redress the Popes oppressions,
made choice of a voluntary banishment at Pountney in France, where he died
with the honor and opinion of a Saint.

Not long after, his Holiness desirous to see England, caused his Cardinals to
write their letters to the King, that it would be a thing tending much to his
honor and safety, and to his kingdoms immortal glory, to enjoy the Lord
Popes presence, who did long to view the rarities of Westminster, and the
riches of London, but the Kings Counsel told him plainly [that the Roman
rapines and simonies had enough stained the English purity, though the Pope
himself came not personally to spoil and prey upon the wealth of this Church
and kingdom.] the like denial of entrance he had found both in France and
Arragon, it being said that [ the Pope was like a mouse in a sachell, or a
snake in ones bosom, who but ill repay their hosts for their lodging; and the
infamies of his Court deserved none other, whose filth says our Monk [sent
forth a steame and stench, as high as the very clouds.]

These and worse were the effects of the Bishop of Romes usurpation here in
England, by imposing continual taxes and tallages, being sometimes the tenth,
sometimes the fifteenth, sometimes the third, sometimes the moity of all the
goods, both of the Clergy and Laity, under color of maintaining the Popes
holy wars against the Emperor, and the Greek Church, who were then said to
be in rebellion against their Lady and Mistress the Church of Rome: Besides
for the speedy leuying and safe return of these moneys the Pope had his
Lumbards, and other Italian Bankers and usurers resident in London, and other
parts of the Realm, who offered to lend and disburse the moneys taxed, and
return the same by exchange to Rome, taking such penal bands (the form
whereof is set down in Matthew Paris) and such excessive usury, as the poor
religious houses were feign to sell or pawn their Chalices, and Copes, and the
rest of the Clergy and Laity had their backs bowed, and their estates broken
under the burden: besides the Pope took for perquisites and casualties, the
goods of all Clerks that died intestate, the goods of all usurers, and all
goods given to charitable uses. Moreover he had a swarm of Friars (the first
corrupters of religion in England) who persuaded the Nobility and Gentry to put
on the sign of the Cross, and to vow themselves to the holy wars, which
they had no sooner done, but they were again persuaded to receive
dispensations of their vows, and to give money for the same to the Church of
Rome. I omit diverse other policies then used by the Popes Collectours, to
exhaust the wealth of the Realm, which they affirmed they might take with as
good a conscience, as the Hebrews took the jewels of the Egyptians, and
should we now look for better measure at his hands? no, no, he will rather
be ready to demand the principal with the interest and arrerages, and to
bring us so low as we shall never be able to cast him again. Those verses
will ever be true, though made for those times, and suitable to their
barbarism.

Roma capit marcas, bursas exhaurit and arcas,
Vt tibi tuparcas, fuge Papas and Patriarchas.
It is obseruable which one has wittily noted, that the first letters of the
words in that sentence, Radix Omnium Malorum Auaritia, make up ROMA: And I
could wish that for the better satisfaction of the Commons, to whom this
section is directed, so much of Matthew Paris as concerns this business,
might be translated into English; he wrote of the times wherein he lived, and
was for his learned pains much honored by the king, being admitted often to
his table and chamber.

Now, as Mr. Doctors cunning may be observed, in setting down the benefits
that arise by Monasteries, and concealing the Popes extortions, so his
forgetfulness, in that before he cuts off the means of the Monasteries, by
assuring us of the Popes inclination to dispense with those, in whose hands
their revenues rest; so that this argument of increase of wealth, or
maintenance to the Commons can be of no force, till the owners of those
revenues be either forced by law, or persuaded by reason to restore them; or
others to confer new, which in reason will be found more difficult then the
former: beside this argument, if it make for the poor Gentleman and Yeoman, it
makes against the rich Gentleman and Nobleman, whose lands specially went to
the building and maintaining of those houses: yet the poor Gentleman and
Yeoman too, may remember that whiles the monasteries stood, they were not so
much eased by them of the burden of their children, as burdened with the
keeping of Concubines for the Monks and Abbots use, or else their wives served
the turn; so that whereas they were ^ased of one child by the Monastery, they
were oftener burdened with two or three from the Monastery, and for their
daughters, as by vailing them, and thrusting them into a Nunnery, they
disburdened their hands of them, so by the same means were they often burdened
to the shame and grief of their Parents, and dishonor of their profession;
and yet such bribes and pensions were there paid for their admission, as many
times they might have maintained them at home with less charge and more
honesty, or if their daughters escaped free, their sons (which was worse)
supplied their sisters rooms, against which grievous sin, an act was made
in the reign of Henry the first, Renulfus C^str. lib. 7.
but Anselme then Archbishop of Canterbury stopped the publication of it, so
that both for lack of marriage, it more increased, and for lack of publication
was it less punished.

Now for the Common wealth, as their exoneration might bring some benefit unto
it, so their exemption from the secular courts of justice, from the
jurisdiction of Bishops, and from all manner of public service in defense of
the State, as well in regard of their goods as their persons, could not be but
exceeding prejudicial: for by that means it must needs in time have come to
pass, that the richest and fattest, nay greatest part of the land, resting in
their hand, the rest of the body politic must have starued, but only by
their charity (which many times was but cold toward the laity) or the whole
have lain open and obnoxious to the invasion of the foreign enemy, but only
by their help, which was not always very ready.

Let the Farmer and Husband man remember, that, as better penny-worthes were to
be had in those days, so his vexations by Excommunications, Interdictions,
and Appeals to Rome were more insufferable, his restraints from labor,
whereby he maintained himself and his poor family by means of many blind
holy days, now stricken out of the Calender, more frequent; and lastly his
payments greater for Peterpence, for Jubilees, for oblations, for
dispensations, for obits, for touching of relics, for Agnus-deis, for
hallowing of beads and grains, for holy water, for masses, for trentals, for
dirges, for pardons, for indulgences, for crusadoes, and a thousand such petty
charges, serving only as fuel, as well to maintain the luxury of Monks and
Friars, as to keep in the fire of Purgatory, which if it were not by the
people conceived to be very hot, that in the Popes and Monks kitchen would
quickly be very cold: But to come near to the point, as better
penny-worthes, so in those times less money was also to be had, all things
being cheaper where is less money, and dearer where is more, so that if the
same Monasteries had stood and the same Abbots had lived in our days, I doubt
not but they would have raised there rents, as our Collegiate Societies have
been enforced to do, or else they must have pared away somewhat of the
superfluity of their dishes, which would have troubled their consciences more;
as well appeared by them who made a lamentable complaint to the King for want
of meat, when three dishes of thirteen were withdrawn, and of him who having
his belly full stuffed with eating after a great feast, cried out [ Quanta
patimur pro amore CHRISTI] And sure it is to me a wonder that those who both
can and often will tell the most merry jests of Monks, and Nuns, and
Friars, yet they of all others most earnestly desire the restitution of them.

^ Lastly the Commons cannot but remember, that though they were somewhat
helped by the rich Abbeys, yet were they as much burdened with the poor
Frieries, who had nothing to help them but the devotion of the people, it
being commonly said of their assisting at Funerals, Vbi cadauer, ib coruus.
But they were all (you say) Mundo mor^ui, using ^ more but for their food and
regular apparel, and turning the residu^ to pious, or charitable, or public
uses; but if it were so, how came it to pass that many times they enriched and
advanced there families as much as any Lay man, nay which is worse, vsua^ly
they spent the residue upon their gaming and luxury, and their living
Exchequer was rather for the service of the Pope and Court of Rome, then of
their Prince and Country, so that the multitude of such Clergy men and the
greatness of their provision may well be objected by wise men without envy,
as it was by the Venetians in the last quarrel between them and the Pope, if
their goods and persons be still (as they have been hitherto) exempt from
Secular jurisdiction and public service of the state, for the prevention of
which mischief, was the statute of Mortmaine for the lessening of these mundo
mortui, made by Edward the first, and confirmed by all his successors, so that
upon due and true examination, the Commons are found to loose nothing, but
rather gain much by the reformation of the Church, and separation from Rome,
and if they did not, yet were it a poor bargain for a man to win the whole
world and loose his own soul.

B. C.
42.
And as for liberty they are indeed freed from the possibility of going to
shrift, that is of confessing their sins to God in the ear of a Catholic
Priest and receiving comfort and counsel against their sins from God by the
mouth of the same priest, which duty is required of Catholic people, but only
once in the year, but performed by them with great comfort and edification
very often, so that a man may see and wonder to see, many Indeed by the form
of words yet extant in the mass book and used by the Priest, it is supposed
that a number should Communicate daily with him but it seldom is so.
hundred at one altar to Communicate every Sunday with great devotion, and
lightly no day pass but diverse do confess, are absolved, and receive the
blessed Sacrament. The poor commons in England are freed from this Comfort,
neither is it possible; unless their Ministers had the seal of secrecy, for
them to use it; and what is the liberty that they have in stead thereof? Surely
the servants have great liberty against their masters by this means, and the
children against their parents and the people against their prelates, and the
subjects against their King, and all against the Church of Christ, that is,
against their own good and the common salvation; for If we had no use of
confessors, yet might and ought inferiors be kept in awe of hell fire by their
Preachers, and superiors be told of their errors in state by their
Counselors, but you seem to assure his Majesty that if he will not be told
of his errors in confession, he shall in rebellion.
without the use of this Sacrament, neither can inferiors be kept in awe, but
by the gallows, which will not save them from hell, nor superiors be ever
told of their errors, but by rebellion which will not bring them to heaven:
These and such like be the liberties that both Prince and people do enjoy by
the want of confession and of Catholic religion.

G. H.
42.
We willingly acknowledge (with S. Paul) that 2. Cor. 5. 18.
to the Ministers of the Gospel is committed the Ministry of reconciliation,
and the k^ys of the Kingdom of heaven, to open and shut as they see cause: and
therefore in their ordination has our Church ordained the Bishop to use these
words, [Receiue the holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive they are
forgiven, and whose sins thou do retain they are retained,] and
consequently if the power of absolution be given in these words, then is it
given and received in the Church of England: and as for the people they stand
bound as often as they meet in their solemn assemblies, to a public and
general confession, howbeit they are indeed freed from the necessity of that
which we call auricular, though not from the possibility, as you falsely
pretend, for as we enforce none if they come not, (as knowing that force may
work upon the body but never upon the will) so we exclude none if they come
with a true penitent heart, or out of the Scruple of conscience, either to
seek Counsel, being ignorant of the quality and quantity of their sin; or
comfort against despair for sin known and acknowledged: In this case the
only imparting of a man's mind to a trusty Friend, like the opening of a
feastered sore, cannot but bring content to a soul so anguished and perplexed:
but much more if the ulcer be disclosed to a skillful and faithful Pastor of
the soul, who is no less able then willing, as well to understand the nature
of the disease, as by warrant of divine ordinance to apply the remedy: and
sure I see not but, the Minister standing in the place of God, as his
ambassador, and pronouncing absolution upon humble and hearty repentance as
from God, it should prove a marvelous great ease and settlement to a poor
distracted and distressed conscience; in which regard our Church has well
ordained in one of the exhortations before the Communion, that [if any of the
Congregation be troubled with the burden of sin, so that he cannot quiet his
conscience, but requires further comfort and counsel, that he repair either
to the Pastor of his own Parish, or some other discreet and learned Minister
of the word, and open his grief, that he may receive such Ghostly counsel,
advice and comfort, as his conscience may be releiued, and that by the
Ministry of Gods word he may receive comfort, and the benefit of absolution,
to the quieting of his conscience and avoiding of all scruple and
doubtfulnesse,] and in the visitation of the sick, [if he feel his conscience
troubled with any weighty matter, he is willed to make a special confession,
and the Minister thereupon to absolve him, In the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost,] which is an absolution only Declaratorie,
Conditional, and Ministerial: but the Church of Rome not content herewith,
challenges to her self herein a power Bell: de pe^^t. lib. 3. Cap. 2.
judicial, which is in truth indiuidually annexed to the person and office of
him, who is Judge both of quick and dead.

This I take to be the doctrine of the Church of England and the Primitive
writers touching this point, and I cannot but wonder that Mr. Doctor, so long a
Church man of such eminent place amongst us, should be so ignorant thereof, as
to affirm that the people with us are freed from the possibility of
confessing themselves, whereas Epist: ad Front page 129.
Mr. Casaubon a stranger in comparison, could inform him, that the rigorous
necessity of Confession enjoined and practiced in the Church of Rome, the
Church of England thought fit, upon just reason to moderate and qualify; but
for the thing it self she never did wholly annull it, nor now does simply
condemn it.

And for the practice of it in foreign countries (which Mr. Doctor so much
boasts of) we are not all such strangers in those parts, but some others
have as well been acquainted with their great devotion in their ordinary
confessing and communicating, as Mr. Doctor, it being rightly ob^erued by a
worthy gentleman, who confesses that he brought with him into those parts
this persuasion, that surely in this there must needs be a very great
restraint to wickedness, a great means to bring men to integrity and
perfection, when a man shall often survey his actions, with diligence censure
them, with grief and shame confess them, with punishment e^piate and
extinguish them, (with firm intent never to return to the like again)
whatsoever had defiled or stained the soul; notwithstanding (says he) having
searched into the meaning thereof in those parts, I find that as all things
whereof humane weakness has the custody and gouern^ment, fall away, decaying
by insensible degrees from their first perfection and purity, and gather much
soil and dross in using, so this as much as anything; for this point of their
religion which in outward show carries a face of seue^ity and discipline, is
become of all others the most remiss and pleasant, and of the great^st content
to the dissolutest minds, the matter being grown with the common sort to this
open reckoning; what need we refrain so fearfully from sin, God having
provided so ready a means to be rid of it, when we list? yea and the worser
sort will say, when we have sinned we must confess, and when we have
confessed, we must sin again, that we may also confess again, and withal
make work for new Indulgences, and Iubilies, making account of Confession as
drunkards do of vomi^ing, who drink till they vomit, and vomit that they
may drink again: yea, I have known of those that carried show of very devout
persons, who by their own report, to excuse their acquaintance in matters
criminal, have wilfully perjured themselves in judgment, only presuming of
this present and easy remedy in Confession; and others of more ordinary note
amongst them, when the time of confessing was at hand, would then venture upon
those actions which before they trembled at, as presuming to surfeit and
surcharge their stomachs by reason of the neighborhood of the physician, which
physician also himself is perhaps more apparently infected with the noisome
disease his patient discloseth, then the patient, who is not any way bettered
by the counsel which the Physician gives: but this must be granted to be the
fault of the people, yet a general fault it is, and current without
controllement, howbeit the Priests are no more excusable on their parts, then
the people, telling the penitent that God is merciful, and whatsoever sins
he commits, so long as he does penance, and is no Lutherane, there is good
remedy for him, and for their penance, it consists ordinarily but in Aue
Mary's and Pater nosters, with Alms deeds, by those that are able, and
fastings by them that are willing; yea, I have known when the penance for
horrible and open blasphemy, besides much other lewdness, has been none other
then saying of their Beads thrice over, a matter of some hours muttering, and
which in Italy they dispatch also as they go in the streets, or ride on the
way, or do their business at home, making none other of it, then as it is
indeed, two lips and one fingers work; but were the penance by the Priests
enjoined, never so hard and sharp, the Popes plenary pardons sweep all away
at a blow.

Now whether servants be not with them unfaithful to their masters, children
disobedient to their parents, people undutiful to their Prelates, Subjects
disloyal to their Sovereigns, as well as with us, I leave it to them to judge,
who have had experience of both. Did not Clement and Rauilliac, and the
Powder-traytours use Confession? and those villains who assaulted the Prince
of Aurange, the one sorely wounding, and the other murdering him? and did not
their confessions serve to harden them in their damnable resolutions?

Lastly, for the seal of Confession, without which (you say) it is impossible
to use the thing it self, we hold it being rightly limited, a lawful, yet an
humane constitution, as neither in truth is particular confession it self to
men any other; and he that will not forbear in conscience and common honesty
to disclose a secret revealed in such manner, will hardly forbear for fear of
punishment; and sure I am of opinion, better no seal to at all, then such a
concealment imposed, as is by the factours of the Romish Church maintained,
and was not only preached by Garnet, but in him commended by Eudaemon and
Bellarmine, and in others by his example, be the issue thereof never so
deuilish, or toward the king and kingdom never so dangerous: and although it
be true (as his Premon. 125
Majesty truly observes) that [when the Schoolmen came to be Doctors in
the Church, and to mar the old grounds in Divinity, by sowing in amongst them
their Philosophical distinctions, though they I say maintained, that
whatsoever thing is told a Confessor under the veil of Confession, how
dangerous soever the matter be, yet is he bound to conceal the parties name;
yet do none of them (specially of the old See novel doct. in the end of the
Premon. the 3.
Schoolmen) deny that if a matter be revealed unto them, the concealing
whereof may breed a great and public danger, but that in that case the
confessor may disclose the matter, though not the person, and by some indirect
means make it come to light, that the danger thereof may be preuen^ed: But no
treason or deuilish plot, though it should tend to the ruin or exterminion of
a kingdom, (I use his Majesty's own word) must be revealed, if it be told
under Confession, no not the matter so far indirectly disclosed, as may give
occasion for preventing the danger thereof, though it agree with the conceit of
some 3. or 4. new Iesuited Doctors, yet is it such a new and dangerous head of
doctrine, as no king or State can live in security where that position is
maintained.] And here it shall not be amiss to remember that unto ward answer
which Binet the Jesuit shaped to Epist. ad Front. p^g. 140.
Casaubon in the kings library in Paris, two or three months before the death
of Henry the great, as they talked of Garnets execution, which the Jesuit
termed martyrdom [It were better (quoth he) that all kings should perish, then
that the seal of confession should once be broken up.] adding withal this
reason, that [the government of kings was but an humane constitution, whereas
confession was a divine ordinance:] which when I heard, says Casaubon,
Obstupui steteruntque comae, and vox faucibus haesit. But afterward reading
the books written by men of the same metal and society, and perceiui^g he
had said nothing which they taught not in effect, though not in the same
words, I left wondering (says he) and censured mine own folly.
Notwithstanding all this the same Mr. Casaubon confesses, and not only for
himself but for us, speaking in the plural number in the Page immediately
going before, that it was [an ancient decree of the Church, full of piety and
wisdom, that it should not be lawful to the Confessor, to publish that
which he heard in confession, but none (says he) of those holy Fathers, ever
decreed that constitution of Ecclesiastical discipline, with such strictness,
as thereby to make the Law of God of none effect: They knew well enough that if
the case so stood, as the Law of the Church enjoined silence, and the law of
God utterance, we should rather obey God, then man: They knew well enough that
David is commended of the Son of God, to whom properly belongs the
interpretation of the law, himself being the author of it, for the eating of
the Shewbread, which otherwise was not lawful, says Christ, for him to eat,
rather then he would suffer himself to starve with hunger.] To like effect is
that which my Lord of Ely has in his last book against Bellarmine, [ Page 326.
Let that reverence which is due to that seal, be preserved inuiolate, but
toward penitents, not wilful proceeders in their mischievous plots, neither
is that (says he) the seal of God and CHRIST, but of Satan and Antichrist,
with which so horrible villainies are masked. But will Mr. Doctor say these are
but the opinions of private men? I demand the authority of your Church, for
the seal of secrecy: but if he had ^in as skilful in the decrees and Canons
of our Church, as he would bear us in hand he was, he would surely have
forborne that demand, the 113. Can. of those which were agreed upon in
Convocation, anno 160^. and ratified by his Majesty's royal assent, concluding
thus: [Prouided always, that if any man confess his secret and hidden sins to
the Minister for the vnburthening of his conscience, and to receive spiritual
consolation and ease of mind from him we do not any way That is, they do not
bind him to present the party confessing, as appears both in the body, and
title of the Canon.
bind the said Minister by this our Constitution, but do straightly charge
and admonish him that he do not at any time reveal, and make known to any
person whatsoever, any crime or offense so committed to his trust and secrecy,
except they be such crimes as by the Laws of this Realm, his own life may be
called into question, for concealing them, under pain of irregularitie.] So
that neither is Mr. Doctors Assertion true, that the people with us are freed
from the possi^ility of Confessing, though they are from the necessity, nor
his reason, because we have taken away the seal of secrecy, the abuse being
only by us remou^d, but the use as well by public authority as private
opinions retained, and maintained: But to conclude this point, the liberty
which the people have gained by separation from Rome, stands not so much in
forbearance of Confession rightly used, as in that liberty wherewith CHRIST
has made them free, ( Gal. 5. 1.
for if the son have made them free, then are they free indeed) if they
entangle not themselves again with the yoke of bondage: and my counsel is
that which the Apostle there advises, Stand fast, and to like effect, though
in another place and case, Art thou free? seek not to be bound: and, as many
as walk according to this rule, peace shall be vponthem, and mercy, and upon
the Israel of God.

B. C.
43.
As for the liberty of making Laws in Church Matters the common Lawyer may
perhaps make an advantage of it, and threfore greatly stand upon it, but to the
Common people it is no pleasure at all, but rather a great burden, for the
great If in those middle times when all things ran in a current course, there
were not so many Statutes made in Church matters, it must be imputed rather to
the want of occasion, then of power, the plantation or reformation of the
Church, chiefly giving occasion to the making of laws in Church matters.
multitude of Statutes (which have been made since the Schism, which are more
then five times so many that ever were made before, since the When the name of
a Parliament began in England, is uncertain: See my L. Coke in his Preface to
the ninth part of his reports.
name of Parliament was in England) has caused also an infinite number of
Lawyers, all which must live by the Commons, and I take the raising of new
houses to be no hinderance to the Common-we^lth the Lawyers themselves being a
part of the Commons.
raise new families, which cannot be done without the decay of the old, and if
the Canon of the Church, and Courts of Confession, were in requ^st, the Lawyers
market would soon be marred; and therefore most of your Lawyers in this point
are Puritans, and do still furnish the Parliament with grieuances against the
Clergy, as knowing very well that their own glory came at the first from the
Court As (...) the Civil Law came not from the Roman Infidels, which
notwithstand^ng stand well enough with the authority of the Ecclesiastical
Courts.
Infidel, and therefore cannot stand with the authority of the Church, which
came at the first from the Court Christian: I speak not against the anci^nt
laws of England, which since King Ethelberts time were all What you call
Catholic I know not but sure I am, that since King Eth. time many Statutes
have been made for the restra^ning of the Bishop of Romes vniu^t usurpation,
neither do^ find that he ^^^tered any thing in the laws of the kingdom,
save only by comma^ding them to be turned into his mother tongue.
Catholic, nor against the honest Lawyers of England: I know many, and honor
all good men among them, and do look for I^ by better times you mean the
restitution of the Romish Religion, or the reco^ciliation of our Church to
Rome, you had certainly* very little reason to expect them from the learning,
wisdom, and moderation of those that are now the chiefest in that profession,
the chiefest of all, having both f^equently, and full^ declared himself to the
contrary, and suffered for it by the slanderous tongues and pens of malicious
Romanists, and namely, Eudaemon and Parsons.
better times by the learning, wisdom, and moderation of the chiefest: But I
am verily persuaded that the pretended liberties of the Commons to make Laws
in matter of Religion does burden the Commonwealth, and does trouble and
prejudice your Majesty, and pleasure none at all but the Puritan, and
petti-fogging Lawyer, that would feign fetch the antiquity of his Common Law,
from the Saxons that were before King Ethelbert: So that whether we respect
the spiritual instruction and comfort, or the temporal wealth and liberty of
the Commons of England, if the Puritan Preacher, and the Puritan Lawyer, who
both seek the overthrow of the Church, and deceive and consume the people,
would let them alone, there would quickly appear no reason of their state at
all why they should hate the Catholic Church that is so comfortable and
beneficial unto them* or maintain the Schism, that with sugared speeches, and
counterfeit faces, does so much abuse them.

G. H.
4^.
The next privilege which you pretend to the Commons, is the liberty of making
Laws in Church Matters, as if they could make laws without the consent of the
Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, or they all without the royal assent of
his Majesty; and for the multitude of Statutes, which you speak of, the
multitude of erroneous opinions, and deuilish practices from Rome, have caused
a great part of them, and the malice both of the devil (as knowing his time to
be but short) and of men in this last and worst age of the world generally
increasing, must needs give occasion to more laws: He that shall look into
the body of the civil law, may find that those laws multiplied faster from
Constantines time, to the end of Justinians, which was about 200. year, then
in four (nay in five) hundred years before, though the one were under a
Christian government, and the other under an heathenish, wh^ took their
beginnings, as we know, only from the laws of the twelve tables, which were
brought out of Greece. Did not God himself, besides those twelve precepts
(grounded upon the law of nature) add many laws thereunto for the government
of his Church? and that which he did by the Ministry of Moses, unto that
special people, the same power has he left to the governors of particular
Churches, conditionally all their laws be conformable, or at leastwise not
repugnant unto his law, the rule and square of all humane laws: how has the
Canon law it self (to which Mr. Doctors drift is wholly to resubmit us in
Church government) grown up to a great bulk and massy body? and how has
their multitude entangled the Christian world? yet must no man dare open his
mouth to complain of that. We read of Luther, that when he heard his books by
public order were burnt in Rome, he as solemnly burnt the Canon law at
Wittenberge: We have not proceeded, neither think we it fit to proceed so
far, but have rather chosen out of that dunghill to seek for a pearl, which
having found, we are content to keep, and as occasion serves to make use of:
We have not wholly abrogated the Canon law, but we retain it in part, though
not as receiving strength from the Popes authority, (who for any thing I know,
has no more right of making laws for us, then we have for him) but from the
governors of our own Church: Neither did the Bod in lib. 1. de ^epub. cap. 8.
Kings of France in the erection of their Universities receive it any
otherwise, then to use at their own discretion, not to oblige them as a law, or
if it did, the power of it was derived from their own approbation, not from
Romes imposition; and therefore have they expressly, and by name forbidden the Sea Mons^ir Seruius, the Kings Attorney generals speech in the end of the
reformation of the Vniue^sitie of Paris.
6th. Book of the Decretals to be read in their Universities, as law, as
being expressly against the laws and liberties of the Gallican Church.

Now if they refuse one part, they might (in my judgment) by the same reason
(if they found it inconvenient or disagreeable) reject the whole, and I think
they would not stand much, if occasion served upon the casting off of the Canon
law, who could by no means yet be induced to the receiving of the Canons of
the Council of Trent. A notable instance hereof we have, even in the depth of
Popery, in our own Country: At the Parliament of Merton, it was proposed,
that children borne before marriage, might be adjudged legitimate, according
to the rule and practice of the Canon law: They all made answer with one
voice, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari, we will not yield to the change of the
laws of England, by which it appears that they received not in those very
times all the Popes Canons as laws, and those which they received, they had
not the force of laws, because the Pope imposed the^, but because themselves
entertained them in that nature, and to that purpose ratified them. Mr. Doctor
need not marvel then if our Parliament now make laws to the same purpose;
and by the same authority, as they ratified those: The Summons of Parliament
ever since the time of King Henry the V. (and how long before I know not) have
in one constant form and tenor made mention, that the Parliament is summoned
to consult [ de negotijs statum, and defensionem Regni Angliae, and Ecclesiae
Anglicanae contigentibus, of businesses concerning the State and defense of the
Realm, and Church of England.] Among other Kings S. Edward begins his laws
with this protestation that it was his Princely care, [ Vt populum Dei, and
super omnia, Sanctam Ecclesiam, regat and gubernet, To rule and govern Gods
people, and above all the Church of God] And before him Sp^culum Just. anno 712.
Ina, king of the West Saxons, professes, that he called a Council of his
Bishops and Senators, that they might consult of matters, [ De salute animarum,
and Statu regni: touching the salvation of their souls, and the State of the
kingdom:] And therefore does our chief Antiquarie rightly distinguish our
Courts into Ecclesiastical, Civil, and mixed, which he makes the Parliament,
as being compounded of both, and consequently capable to determine of matters
of both natures, though I must needs say, the case is somewhat altered from
^ormer times, when not only the Arch-bish^ps, the Bishops, the Abbots, and
Priors (whose number was double to that which now it is, and little inferior to
the ^e^porall Lords) sat in thhe igher House of Pa^liament, and had con^luding
vo^ces, but the body of the Clergy, and Cathedral ^hurches, had their
Proctours amongst the Commons, as may be c^llected by diverse of our Statut. 21.
R^^. 2. cap. 11.
Statutes in print: but no^ that the number of the Lords Spiritual in the
higher House, is ^essened, and the others are clean excluded the lower House,
me thinks it should stand with reason and equity, that the li^ertie of
making of laws or Canons in Church Matters, should be referred and reserved
(by his Majesty's gracious favor, and with his Royal assent) to Churchmen,
assembled in their Convocation, who are presumed to be most able and willing to
establish good and wholesome Constitutions, and to reform what is amiss. Thus
in the year 1603, at his Majesty's first entrance into this kingdom, by
virtue of hi^ Prerogative Royal, and Supreme authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, did he grant lic^nce and free power unto them, to treat and
agree upon such Ordinances, as they should think necessary and convenient for
the honor and service of Almighty God, and the good and quiet of the Church,
and afterward being by them agreed upon, and thoroughly considered by his
Ma^estie, out of his princely inclination, to maintain the present estate and
government of the Church of England, he not only confirmed them by his Royal
Assent, but by the same authority commanded the entertainment and execution
of them through the Realm.

Another matter you fling at, is the multitude of Lawyers at this day, as i^
they were exceedingly increased, but if you had read, and well obse^ued
Foretescues observation in this behalf, Comment. cap. 49.
who wrote about 200. years since, being then Chief Justice of England, and
had compared this time to that, you would have found, that the number of that
Pro^ession in those days, was little less then at this day: certainly their
colleges were then more then now: His words are [ Sunt namque in eo december
hospitia minora, et quand^que vero plura, quae nominantur hospitia
Cancellariae, ad quorum quodlibet pertinent centum students ad minus, et ad
aliqua eorum mayor in multo numerus, licet non omnes in eis semper conueniant:
Maioru^ quatuor sunt, and ad minimu^ eorum pertinent in forma praenot at a
ducenti students, aut prope. They have ten lesser houses, which they call
Innes of Chancerie, to every of which belong one hundred students at least, and
to some many more, though they be not all continually resident in them: of the
bigger houses, they have ^oure, and to each of them in like manner belong two
hundred students, or thereabout] Whereras at this present in some of the Innes
of Court, there are not 260. and in the greatest little above 300. in commons
at one time; and for the ^nnes of Chancerie they are but eight in number, and
in most of them not above 50. in commons together: But if they are increased it
may well be imputed, not so much to our multitude of statuts, as to our long
peace, the nurse of homebred quarrels, or to the dissolution of our
Monestaries, and that as I conceive for four reasons, First for that whereas
in those days when the Monasteries stood* many younger brothers did betake
themselves to Mon^sticall liu^s, they do now apply themselves to the study of
the Law, Secondly for that the possessions of the Monasteries being then in
Mortmaine could not be aliened, whereas now being in the hands of Laymen, they
are daily b^ught and sold, which settet^ the Lawyer doubly aworke: first in
(...) co^ueyances for them, and then in alter^tion about them: Thirdly the
Abbots and Priors foreseeing their ruin, Set many leases under hand, which
could not but breed a great intanglement in their possessions: Fourthly, and
lastly, the dispersing of them into the hands of so many particular men,
resting before in the possessions of Corporations, cannot but prove the cause
of much strife, and consequently of many suites and controversies; no marvel
then if by our increase of people (other trades and professions increasing)
Lawyers should do the like.

But if the Canons of the Church and the Courts of Confession, were (you say)
in request, the Lawyers market would soon be marred, what say you then to
those Countries, where both these are in request, and yet do their Lawyers
both increase and flourish more then ours? And when both these were in request
among us, their number (as I showed before) was little less, if not as great,
or more then now it is, if ^ understand the words of that reverend Judge
aright. And if most of our Lawyers be in this point Puritans, that is in
refusing the rescripts of the Popes, as the Canons of the Church, and your
seal of Confession as a divine ordinance, for my part I blame them not; but
for the Canons of our own Church, collected by William Linwood in the reign
of King Henry the 5th. and afterward by 32. selected persons, Bishops,
inferior Divines, and Cannonists, deputed to that work by King Henry the
eight, and after his death by his Son King Edward the sixth, as also our
present Canons now in force, I have known some of our Lawyers much esteem:
But if they furnish the Parliament with unjust and unnecessary grieuances, I
defend them not, but leave them to make their own apology, only thus much I
say, that the whole body of a profession is not to be charged with the fault
of some few, specially being imputed by those who desire most to fish in our
troubled waters, to warm their hands at the fire of our contentions, and to
rippe up our wounds (if we have any) with smiling countenances.

Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. Now if the one incroach upon
the other, farther then their proper and limited bounds permit, I excuse them
not, but leave them to the censure of his wisdom, and restraint by his power,
upon whom they A God contains the Sea within his own bounds and marches, so
is it my office to make every Court contain it self within its own limits,
see his Ma^^sties Speech in Parliament, 1609.
depend both, and from whom they both receive their limits and being.

Lastly, whereas you make him a Petty-fogging Lawyer, that would fetch the
antiquity of the Law from the Saxons, that were before King Ethelbert, herein
you make that famous Judge before named, whom in his time they esteemed a
Father of the Law, and a learned antiquarie, a Petty-fogging Lawyer, in as much
as in his Book above mentioned, he thus speaks: [ Cap. 17.
The realm of England was first inhabited by the Britanes; next after them the
Romans had the rule of the land; and then again the Britanes possessed it;
after whom the Saxons invaded it, and changing the name thereof, did for
Britain call it England; after them for a certain time the Danes had the
dominion of the realm, and then the Saxons again; but last of all the Normans
subdued it, whose descent continues in the government of the Kingdom at this
present; and in all the times of these several Nations and of their Kings, this
realm was still ruled with the self same customs that now it is, which if
they had not been right good, some of those Kings, moved either with pride, or
with reason, or affection, would have changed them, or altogether abolished
them, and specially the Romans who did judge all the rest of the world by their
own Laws; likewise would other of the foresayed Kings have done, who by the
sword only possessing the realm of England, might with the same power have
extinguished the Laws thereof; and touching the antiquity of the same, neither
are the Roman civil Laws, by so long continuance of ancient times confirmed,
nor yet the Laws of the Venetians, which above all other are reported to be of
most antiquity, for as much as there Island in the beginning of the Britanes
was not then inhabited, as Rome it self was then also vnbuilded; neither are
the Laws of any which worshipped God so ancient; wherefore the contrary is not
to be said nor thought, but that the English Customs are very good, yea of
all other the very best] neither can I conceive any other reason Mr. Doctor
has, thus bitterly to envy against our Laws, as if they came from the Court
infidel, and were a burden to the Common wealth, but because some of them are
bent against the Popes usurpation, and the admission on of his emissaries from
Rome, and as the Canon Law carries up the Arc of the Church (that is the Pope)
fifteen cubits above the highest mountaine^ of Sovereignty, so is the Common
Law so favorable and aduantageous in extending the Prerogative of the King, as
his Majesty professes, [For a King of England to despise the Common law, is
to neglect his own Crown:] and a little after protests, that [if it were in
his hand to choose a new law for this Kingdom, he would not only prefer it
before any other national law, but even before the very judicial law of
Moses.]

So that whether we expect Spiritual instruction and comfort, or the
semporall wealth and liberty of the Commons of England, (if the Jesuit and
Seminary Priest who both seek the overthrow of our Church, and deceive and
consume the people, would let them alone) there would quickly appear no reason
of State at all, why they should desire reconciliation to Rome, (which with
sugared speeches, and counterfeit faces, does so much abuse them) or loathe the
reformation which is every way so comfortable and beneficial unto them.

B. C.
44.
I am therefore in very assured hope, that by my coming to the Catholic
Church, beside the satisfying, and saving of mine own soul, I shall do no
ill service to your Majesty, neither in respect of your self nor your
children, nor in respect of your Lords and Commons, and that there is no reason
concerning the state of any of these, that is sufficient to dissuade unity.
There is only the Clergy left, which if Caluinisme may go on, and prevail
as it does, shall not in the next age be left to be satisfied; and there is
little reason that any man that loves the Clergy, shall desire to satisfy
such What tho^^ Clergy men are, we desire to know, and who in your sense are
Caluinists.
Clergymen, as do underhand favor Caluinists, and maintain such What those
points of doctrine are, we shall see in the next Section.
points of doctrine, That his Majesty's favor to the Clergy is such, as not
to give way to their overthrow, and in stead of them to set up a few stipendary
Preachers, we have had good trial, and are bound to bless God for it: but
sore against the will of all Roman Catholics, it is that his Majesty should
favor them so much.
as if your Majesty's favor were not, would out of hand overthrow the Clergy,
and in stead of them, set up a few stipendary Preachers.

G. H.
44.
And we are on the other side as confident, that in going to the Church of
Rome, and forsaking your own, in which you were bred and baptized, besides the
indangering of your own soul, you have done no good service to his Majesty,
neither in respect of himself, nor his children, neither of his Lords, nor
Commons in persuading unity with the* Church of Rome, unless first she could
be persuaded to the embracing of the same verity in Religion with us. There
is only the Clergy left, which if Popery should go on, and prevail, as you
desire it should, shall not in the next age be left to be satisfied, or to
give satisfaction; but there is little reason, that any man that loves the
Clergy, should desire to satisfy such Clergymen as your self, while you
were among us, who under hand favor Papists, and maintain such points of
doctrine, as if his Majesty's authority were not, would out of hand overthrow
the doctrine established, and in stead thereof, reestablish the Papacy.

B. C.
45.
There never was, is, nor shall be, any wellsetled State in the world, either
Christian or heathen, but the Clergy and Priesthood was, is, and must be a
principal part of the government, depending upon none but him only, whom they
suppose to be their God; but where Caluinisme prevails, three or four
stipendary Ministers that must preach, as it shall please Mr. How Calvin
himself though he were a stipendary Minister, pleased Master Mayor and his
brethren, let his banishment more then once for his free preaching testify.
Mayor and his brethren, may serve for a whole city; and indeed if their
opinions be true, it is but folly for any State to maintain more: For if God
have predestined a certain number to be saved without any condition at all,
of their being in the visible Church by Faith, or their perseuering therein by
good works: If God has reprobated the greatest part of the world without any
respect at all of their infidelity, heresy, or wicked life: if the faith of
CHRIST be nothing else but the assured persuasion of a man's own predestination
to glory by him: if the Sacraments of the Church be nothing but signs and
badges of that grace which a man has before, by the carnal covenant of his
parents faith: if Priesthood can do nothing but preach the word, as they call
it, which lay Laymen must judge of, and may preach to, if they will, where
occasion serves: If the study and knowledge of antiquity, universality, and
consent be not necessary, but every man may expound Scripture as his own
spirit shall move him: If, I say, these and such like opinions be as true, as
they are among the Caluinists in the world common, and in England too much
favored and maintained, there will certainly appear no reason at all unto
your Parliament, whenever We are assured that both his Majesty, and his heir
apparent, are so well resolved in this point, as they will never put it to the
question.
your Majesty or your successors shall please to ask them, why they should
be at so great a charge as they are, to maintain so needless a party, as
these opinions do make the Clergy to be: They can have a great many more Our
Sermons are not so cheap as your Masses, which notwithstanding are in a manner
the very life and soul of your Priesthood.
sermons a great deal better cheap; and in the opinion of Caluinisme the
Clergy do The untruth of this assertion appears in mine answer.
no other service: they that do in England favor and maintain those
opinions, and suppress and disgrace those that do confute them; they although
themselves can be content to be As if all those who are called Lords, and go
in Rochets, were not by their place conformable to the discipline, and had
often before they come to that place, subscribed to the doctrine established by
Law.
lords, and to go in Rochets, are indeed the greatest enemies of the Clergy:
and it were no great matter for the Clergy; they might easily turn They may
more easily turn Lay with you, where Lay men are admitted to the
administration of the Sacrament.
lay, and live as well as they do for the most part: but it is a thing full of
compassion and commiseration to see, that by these false and wicked opinions,
the devil, the father of these and all other lies, does daily take possession
of the souls of your Subjects, both of Clergy and laity. These kind of
Clergy men desire no satisfaction from you, but wish you had bin as careful
to maintain that truth which once you professed, as to confute their
pretended errors, which confutation notwithstanding you speak much of, but no
where perform, nor so much as undertake.
These kind of Clergy men I confess I do not desire to satisfy any other
way, then as I have always done, that is, by the most friendly and plain
confutation of their errors to show them the truth; as for other Clergy men
that are conformable to the religion established by Law, as well for their
doctrine, as for their discipline, if they be good Scholars and You may rather
call them temporizing, then temperate.
temperate men (as I It were well that others knew them too, (if any such there
be, who in judgment approve the truth of that religion which you call Cath.)
and yet pro^^sse themselves not only members, but Ministers of our Church: but
our hope is that their number is not such as you vaunt of; it being impossible
that honest men and good Scholars should take the oath of Supremacy, and
subscribe to our articles of religion, and yet in judgment approve the
authority of the B. of Rome, which is in a manner the substance of that religion.
know many of them are) they cannot but in their judgments approve the truth
of Catholic religion, and if it were not for fear of loss or disgrace to
their wives and children, they would be as glad as my self, that a more Had
ours had the like temperate course held with them, or the like liberty afforded
in Queen Mary's days, they would have thought themselves happy.
temperate course might be held, and more liberty afforded to Catholics and
Catholic Religion in England: These Clergy men, I am and ever shall be
desirous to satisfy, not only in respect of themselves, but also in respect
of their Their wives and children are bound to pray for you, in regard of your
fatherly care of them.
wives and children, whom I am so far from condemning or misliking, as that I
do account my self It is well that you account your self one of the honest
men and good Scholars, but they are so far I hope from accounting you one of
them, as they utterly condemn and mislike your courses.
one of them; and I desire nothing more in this world, then in the toleration
of Catholic religion to live and But it pleased God you should die among
strangers, and not live to see that toleration you desired: neither shall any
of them we hope, that yet live and desire to see it.
die among them; and therefore I have had so great care in this point, as
before I did As if the whole fortune of Greece depended upon your submission to
that Church.
submit my self to the Catholic Church, I received What assurance can there
be on our parts from them, who hold y^ faith is not to be held with heretics:
but you forgot your promise made to my Lords Grace of Cant. in your Letter
dated from Colin the 17 of August 1613. that you neither were, nor ever would
be wholly reconciled to the Church of Rome.
assurance from some of the greatest, that if his Majesty would admit the
ancient subordination of the Church of Canterbury unto that mother, By Pope
Gregory's letter to Austin the Monk, it appears that the other Churches were
by him subordinated to York and London, but by king Ethelbert to Canterbury,
so that the L. Archbishop holds his jurisdiction by the Kings authority, and
not by the Popes.
by whose authority all other Churches in England at the first were, and still
are subordinate unto Canterbury, and the first free use of that Sacrament, for
which How then will you make good our Saviors words, M^ne house shall be called
the house of prayer? or of S. Paul, that he was sent to preach, and not to
baptize* that is as I take it chiefly to preach?
especially all the Churches in Christendom were first founded, the Pope for
his part would How can he confirm them in Ecclesiastical livings, who are no
better then Lay men, having no lawful orders as is the current opinion of Rome.
confirm the interest of all those, that have present possession in any
Ecclesiastical living in England, and would also permit the free use of the
Common Prayer book in English, for Morning and Evening Prayer, with very
little or no alteration, and for the contentment and security of your Majesty,
he would give you not only any satisfaction, but all the honor, that with the
unity of the Church, and the safety of Catholic Religion, may be required:
which seemed to me so reasonable, as being before satisfied for the truth of
Catholic Religion, I could ask So that looking through the spectacles of that
religion, all seemed gold to you that glistered, but you might as well have
for borne the asking of that, as ought else.
no more; so that I am verily persuaded that by yielding to that truth which I
could not deny, I have neither neglected my duty and service to your Majesty
and your children, nor my respect and honor to your Lords and Commons, nor my
love and kindness to my That is such, if any such there be, who in judgment
approve the truth of Catholic doctrine in your sense, for others you renounce
as the greatest enemies to the Clergy, that is, your self and your supposed
brethren.
honest friends and brethren of the Clergy; but rather that my example and my
prayers shall do good unto all.

G. H.
45.
That the Clergy should be a Principal member of the body popolitike we
grant, but that they should depend on none but him only, whom they suppose to
be their god, we deny; Indeed where the authority of the Bishop of Rome
swayes, look how many Clergy men there are, so many subjects are exempt from
the Jurisdiction of the secular power, and wholly depend upon his Holiness, who
is to them in regard of the universality of his command, and the
infallibility of his judgment, in stead of their God, but for us [ Non
habemus talem consuetudinem, neque Ecclesia Dei: we depend first on God, and
then on the Sovereign Magistrate, his anointed and vicegerent on earth:] In
regard of external coactiue jurisdiction, with Saint Augustine we distinguish
between the eternal God, and the temporal Lord, yet we obey the temporal
Lord for his sake that is the eternal God: But where Caluinisme prevails,
three or four stipendary Ministers (you say) that must preach, as it shall
please Mr. Mayor and his brethren may serve for a whole City, where, by
Caluinisme you understand not the discipline or form of Church government,
conceived by Calvin, but Doctrinall points maintained by him, or at leastwise,
by you imposed on him; I say imposed on him, in as much as the greatest part of
those positions, is certainly no part of his Doctrine; and for the rest (malice
and prejudice set aside) they might suffer, as favorable a construction in
Calvin, as in Saint Augustine, or in Bellarmine, and other Jesuits and
schoolmen, neither is all that Calvin has written, without exception
maintained, by those in England, who otherwise embrace and reverence his
pains, as of a chief Captain in the Lords battles: your positions I will
examine as they lie in order, whereof the first is.

[That God has predestined a certain number to be saved, without any
condition at all of their being in the visible Church by faith, or their
perseuering therein by good works.] To which I answer, that if we consider
Predestination before the fall, it can have no reference, to Faith or good
works, flowing from thence, in as much as if Adam had stood in his original
integrity, we should not have needed the coming of CHRIST for our salvation,
and consequently, neither faith in him, nor those works which are the
necessary fruits and effects of that faith; but if after the fall, then are
they both required, not as impulsive and meritorious causes, but as marks and
effects infallible of our Predestination, and withal, as the ordinary
conditions, and means of our salvation: This I take to be Caluins opinion, in
the third book and 22. chap. of his Institutions, and not Caluins only, but
Martyrs in his Commentary on the 8th. to the Romans, and Zanchies in his 5.
book of the nature of God, and second chapter, and Bezaes, in the acts of the
conference at Montpelgard, and generally of our own Writers that have touched
this point, and if we err herein, we err with St. Augustine, who in his 87.
tract upon John, thus speaks* [ Hic certe vacillat eoru^ ratiocinatio, qui
praescientiam Dei defendunt contra gratia^ Dei* and ideo dicunt nos electos
ante mundi constitutionem, quia praesciuit nos Deus futuros bonos, non seipsum
nos facturu^ bonos: Non hoc dicit qui dicit, non vos me elegistis, quoniam si
propterea nos elegisset, quia bonos futuros ^sse nos praesciuerat, simul etiam
praescisset quod eum nos fuissemus prius electuri. Here falls to the ground,
their vain manner of reasoning, who defend the foresight of God, against the
grace of God, affirming that we were therefore chosen before the foundation of
the world, because God foresaw we would be good, not that himself would make
us good: But he says not so, who says [you have not chosen mee] for had he
chosen us, because he foresaw we would be good, he should also have
foreseen, that we would first have chosen him] To the same purpose does he
speak, in the 98. Chapter of his Manuel to Laurence, and in his 105. Epistle;
neither does the Master of sentences dis^ent from him herein, in his first
Book and 41. distinction: Opinati sunt quidam (says he) Deum ideo elegisse
Jacob, quia talem futurum praesciuit qui in eum crederet, and ei seruiret: Some
(says he) have been of opinion, that God chose Jacob, because he knew he
would believe on him and serve him, which Saint Augustine in his Retractions
confesses, that himself sometimes held, where he plainly proves, that
[had he bin chosen for any merit to come, that election had not proceeded from
grace] The same is also the opinion of 1. di^t. 4. qu^ ^nic.. potestaliter.
Scotus, of P. 1. q. 23. a. 5. ad 3.
Aquinas, and De gratia and lib. arbitrio. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Bellarmin himself, so that to say, God has predestined a certain number,
without any condition of faith or works, as the impulsive or meritorious cause
of our predestination, is not Caluins opinion alone, neither was he the first
broacher of it; And to say that he predestined a certain number, without
any condition of Faith and works, as the marks and effects of our
Predestination, and the means of our salvation, is not Caluins opinion at all,
but thrust upon him by Mr. Doctor. Ephesians. 1. 4.
He has chosen us (says the Apostle) before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy, making holiness the final, but not the efficient
cause, with which distinction does Sixtus Senensis shut up the matter in the
sixth Annot. 251.
Book of his Library, where having at large alleged the sayings of Origin,
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierome, etc. who seem to hold, that the Prescience of
works is the cause of divine Predestination, [quae quidem sententia (says
he) in Pelagio damnata est, which opinion was condemned in Pelagius] he adds
that Augustine, having sometime held the same, upon better advice, retracted it
almost in innumerable places, and at length concluds, [Ne^ dubium est, etc.
Neither is there any doubt to be made, but that some of those foresaid
Fathers, in pronouncing our works foreseen to be the cause of Gods
Predestination, understood it of the final cause, and not of the meritorious.]

The second point which you call Caluini^me, is* that [God has Reprobated the
greatest part of the world without any respect at all of their infidelity,
heresy, or wicked life;] to which I answer, that this point of Doctrine being
rightly understood, is not Caluins alone* but Martyrs, Zanchies, Bezaes, in the
places before alleged, and generally of our own divines; nay of Sa^nt
Augustine, of Lombard, of Scotus, of Thomas, and of Bellarmine himself, who in
the place above quoted, distinguishes Reprobation into a negative and a
positive act; the negative is Gods will of not saving men, the positive his
will of damning men. [of the former of these (says he) no cause can be
assigned, in regard of us, as neither of our Predestination, but of the
lattter, the cause is the foresight of sinne] Now the former of these two acts
is that, by which men are properly said to be reprobated, as by the latter to
be damned, so that to say, God has reprobated the greatest part of the world,
without respect of any thing in themselves, is no more Caluinisme, then
Be^^arminisme: Catherinus indeed enueighs bitterly against those, who affirm,
that God reprobats some, not because he foresees their wicked life; but
because his pleasure is to exclude them from Eternal life; and this opinion
he ascribes to Luther, calling it impious and intolerable, but Dis^n Romans 9.
Number. 91.
Pererius, somewhat sharper sighted, takes up the blundring old man for it,
putting him in mind, that it was ipsissima B. Augustini sententia, the very
self same doctrine, which Saint Augustine teaches.

The third point which you call Caluinisme is, that [faith is nothing else, but
the assured persuasion of a man's own Predestination to glory by Christ] which
differs not much in words, and in sense very little, or not at all, (as I
conce^ue) from his Bas^l* dor: page 1^.
Majesty's definition, where he calls it a sure p^rswasion, and apprehension
of the promises of God, applying them to your soul, and therefore may it
justly be termed(says he) the Golden chain that linketh the faithful soul
to CHRIST: But I wonder what Mr. Doctor meant, in saying, that Calvin makes it
nothing else, whereas the Church of Rome makes it not by many degrees so much;
it being in their doctrine a naked and bare apprehension of, and assent unto
supernatural trueths, in which the devil himself may go as far as any,
nay, does go farther then many of them; for in that sort he both Iam. 2. 19.
believes and trembles, and by this faith, impossible it is that we should
either Ephesians. 6. 16.
quench the fiery darts of the wicked, as S. Paul speaks, or 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
overcome the world as S. John: Faith (says the author to the Hebrews) Ch^^.
11. 1.
is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the evidence of things which
are not seen: now what is that grounded evidence, but an assured persuasion?
and what are those things hoped for, and not seen, but chiefly the glory to
which through CHRIST we are predestinate? so that you may as well put a
nothing else upon S. Paul's definition, as upon Caluins, and yet is Inst it.
^ib. 3. cap. 2. ^ 7.
Caluins somewhat more then you make it, in as much as thereby the favor of
God is not only apprehended, but sealed unto the heart; whereas your faith is
of that nature, as it neither has any sound foundation to build upon, neither
is a man certain when he has it; neither if he have it, how long he shall
keep it; neither if he keep it, whether at last it will serve for his
justification in the sight of God; So that a nothing else may rather be pind
upon the sleeue of that faith which the Church of Rome teaches, then that which
Calvin defines.

The fourth point which you call Caluinisme is, that [ the Sacraments of the
Church, are nothing but signs and badges of that grace, which a man has
before by the carnal covenant of his parents faith] whereas See the 4. book
14. chap. of his Institut.
Calvin in many places, and express terms, directly denies, the Sacraments
to be nothing else but bare signs, they being in his doctrine, not only
signs to represent that which they are ordained to signify, but seals to
confirm that which they represent, and withal, pipes to convey, or
instruments to present that to the soul of the worthy receiver, which they
represent to the sense: much less then do either he or we make the
Sacraments signs only of that grace which the receiver has by covenant of
his parents faith, as Mr. Doctor would have it, for then would it follow* that
they should not at all be Sacraments unto them* whose parents either are, or
died Infidels, though themselves be converted to Christian Religion; and
whereas he calls that a carnal Covenant, which God made with Abraham and his
seed, it argues a carnal minded man, sauou^ing those things which are of the
Flesh, and not of the Spirit.

The fifth point which Mr. Doctor calls Caluinisme is, that [Priesthood can do
nothing but preach the word, (as they call it) which Laymen must judge of, and
may preach too, if they will, where occasion serues] as if he were ignorant,
that both by Calvin, and by us, p^blike prayer, in the name, and for the good
of the people, is specially committed to the Priesthood, and to it only is the
power of binding and loosing, and of administering the Sacraments annexed,
whereas in their doctrine, it is permitted not only to Laymen, but to women,
in some cases: But with us (you say) Laymen must judge of that which is
preached, and may themselves preach too; whereas the truth is, that we allow
them a judgment, of examination only, or trial, which 1. Cor. 11. 13, 28.
S. Paul allowed his auditors, and 1. John 4. 1.
S. John his, not of decision or determination, which you seem to implie; and
for their preaching, both our, and Caluins rule is, that no man with us takes,
or should take this honor to himself, but he which is called, as was H^b. 5.
4.
Aaron, inwardly by the Spirit of God, fitting him with gifts, and a
disposition thereunto; and outwardly by the Constitutions and ordinances of the
Church.

The sixth and last point which Mr. Doctor calls Caluinisme is, that [the
study, and knowledge of antiquity, universality, and consent, is not
necessary, but every man may expound Scripture as his own spirit shall move
him] where first I cannot but wonder, that Mr. Dr*, who urges neither
antiquity, universality, nor consent through his whole discourse, should here
at last cast, stand so much upon them, yet I am persuaded, it was rather to
bear us in hand, that himself was deeply studied in them, then that he
thought they could much advantage his cause; neither is the study and
knowledge of them so neglected, by those whom Master Doctor, (if he were
living) would call Caluinists, that they fear, even by that trial, to
encounter the stoutest Champions of the Church of Rome: For leaving Caluins
frequent quotation of the ancient Councils and Fathers, let the works of
Martyr, of Bucer, of Zanchius, of Iunius, of Sadeel, of Chamier, of the Noble
Du Plessis, and D^ Moulin testify, what account they make of the universal
consent, and of Antiquity: And for our own here at home, he that shall look
into the writings of Bishop Jewel, of Raynolds, of Whitakers, of Fulke, of
Humphreys, of Perkins, (I spare to name the living, nothing inferior herein to
the dead) may easily find, if he shut not his eyes against the light, that
they spared neither cost nor pains in this kind. To what ^^^pose has
Tossanus written his Synopsis Patrum, and Scultetus his Medulla Patrum? To what
end did that noble and worthy Gentleman, Sir Thomas Bodley, with so much charge
and tra^ell, found and furnish our University Library at Oxford; and private
Colleges, by his example, enlarge their own? or why should Sir Henry Sauill,
with so much expense and care, set f^orth Chrysostomes works, in so exact and
exquisite a manner, i^ we made that slight reckoning of the study and
knowledge of Antiquity, as Mr. Doctor would make the world believe? indeed we
cannot but acknowledge that to be true, (which truth it self has delivered)
onething is necessary, and that many care, and are cumbred about other things
more then about this, yet withal we as freely confess that many things are
requisite, some in one degree, and some in another, to the better compassing of
that one, which is only and absolutely necessary in it self.

But every man, you say, with us, may expound Scripture, as his own spirit
shall move him, whereas we every where teach with S. Peter, that as [ 2. P^^.
1. 20.
noe prophecie-in the Scripture is of private motion.] so neither is it of
private interpretation; the original word signifies both: We cannot take from
any Christian man, in expou^ding of Scripture, a judgment of discretion, in
weighing the drift of the Text, and conferring it with other passages of like
nature, though to the guides of the Church and Pastors of men's souls, we
reserve the judgment of direction; but the judgment of jurisdiction to the
representative Church it self, assembled in Synod: for as the spirits of the
people are in this case subject to the Prophets, who sit in Moses chair, so 1
Cor. 14. 32, 33.
the spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the Prophets, if not to convince
the conscience, at leastwise to impose silence; for God is not the author of
confusion, but of peace; and they which think otherwise, for mine own part, I
think of them, that [the way of peace they have not known.]

I will conclude this point with his Majesty's most grave and godly advice, [
Basil. D^r. lib. 1. page 10.
When ye read the Scripture, read it with a sanctified and chaste heart,
admire reverently such obscure plases as ye understand not, blaming only your
own capacity; read with delight the plain places, and study carefully to
understand those that are somewhat difficile; press to be a good Textuary;
for the Scripture is ^euer the best interpreter of it self; but press not
curiously to seek out farther then is contained therein, for that were over
unmannerly a presumption, to strive to be further upon Gods secrets, then he
has will be; for what he thought needful for us to know, that has he
revealed there; and delight most in reading such parts of the Scripture, as may
best serve for your instruction in your calling, Ta. 3. ^.
rejecting foolish curiosities upon Genealogies, and contentions which are but
vain and profit not, as Paul says.]

If these then be the opinions of the Church of England (which you call
Caluinisme) maintained as well by the pens, as the tongues of those Churchmen,
who sit at the Stern, and in the most eminent places of the Church, there will
easily appear, a reason to the Parliament, if it be demanded, why so necessary
a party as the Clergy should, at leastwise peaceably enjoy that allowance
which they have allotted, by Gods ordinance, the piety of devout minds, and
the ancient constitutions of the Realm; and sure we are, that a great deal
less reason there is of maintaining so chargeable a Clergy in the Roman
Hierarchy, where the Popes plenary Indulgence may in a trice effectuate that,
about which they make so much a do.

But at length the Asses ears appear through the Lions skin: before he have
told us in general that those opinions (forged for the most part out of his
own brain,) were too much fa^ored, and maintained by Clergy men themselves;
here he comes at length to open his spleen, and tells us in plain terms, that
the Clergy men he means, are such who can be content to be Lords and to go in
Rochets, being indeed the greatest enemies of the Clergy: now had the same men
(who long since did smell his hypocrisy, and inclination toward Rome) favored
Dr. Cariers Popish doctrine, and designs, or endeavored to have put him in a
Rochet, and to have made him a Lord, (whereof he thought himself worthy,
though no man else did,) they had doubtless been in his account the Clergies
best friends: but for that they discovered and discountenanced his sly
purposes and practices, they are now become the greatest enemies the Clergy
has; they are therefore become enemies, because they tell the truth; yet
whatsoever they are to the Clergy, whom they love and tender as their
brethren, sure I am they have proved themselves more loyal to his Majesty,
and more faithful to the State, more diligent in their calling, and more
unblameable in their ways, then the accuser, it being a thing full of
commiseration and compassion to see, that by these false and wicked suggestions
of mutinous and discontented persons, the devil, the father of these and all
other lies, does daily take possession of the souls of some of his Majesty's
subjects, both of the Nobles and Commons.

But another sort of Clergy men (you say) there are, good scholars and
temperate men, who cannot but in their judgment approve the truth of the
Catholic religion: These, that you may the better satisfy, you desire two
things, and by way of counterchange or retribution promise three; having
assurance as you pretend from some of the greatest.

The first thing you desire, is no less then the Bishop of Rom^s Supremacy in
England, which you veil under the title of the subordination of the Church of
Canterbury, unto that Church, by whose authority all other Churches in England
at first were, and still are subordinate unto Canterbury. Whe^ther Rome may
properly be called the mother Church of England, I have already in another
place considered, but undoubtedly as the case now stands, she being become unto
us worse then a stepmother, we cannot in common reason entertain vn^on with
her, much less acknowledge subi^ction unto her; for shall we think that the
head of the Papacy being in, the body of Popery will be long behind? no, no
if that one po^nt were once yielded unto, all the rest controuersed between us
and them, would quickly follow after, as a necessary train. The Friar in
Chaucer would have nothing be killed for his sake, only he desired the liver of
the capon, and the brain of the pig: So the Pope would be contented there
should be no innovation in England, upon condition his Supremacy and the
Masse^ (the second thing you desire) were readmitted, upon which two in a
manner, the whole frame of Popery is built, and therefore in the reformed
Churches of France (not without good reason in my judgment) such as forsake the
fellowship of the Church of Rome, and betake themselves to their profession,
are bound before they be admitted into their society publicly in the
Congregation, as to renounce the errors of that Church in general, so in
special, and by name to abjure these two, The usurped authority of the Bishop
of Rome, and the ^dolatry of the Mass, as may appear in the late declaration
of the admittance of the Earl of Candale into their Church, in January last,
he being son and heir to the Duke d'Espernon, a chief Patron of the Jesuits
and their faction, and the Lord himself (as he is styled in the declaration
printed at Rochel 1616) Prince of Busch, Duke and Peer of France, governor
and Lieutenant general for the king in the Provinces of Xaintong^ A^goulmois,
high and low Limosin, principal gentleman of the kings chamber: in this
declaration he also protests before God, the searcher of hearts, and judge of
souls, that his change proceeded not from the motions of flesh and blood, o^
from worldly respects, but from the mere senc^ of cons^ience.

But to retur^e to our purpose, the latter of those two things which M. Doctor
craves to be yielded unto, he shrowds under the cloak of the first use of the
Sacrament, whereas his Majesty rightly terms the present doctrine and
practice of the Church of Rome therein, [new coined articles, never heard of in
the first 200. years of which you cannot except against for freedom, if that
be your meaning.
500. years.] Such as are the cutting off of one half of the Sacrament from
the people, private Masses, where the Priest plays the part, both of the
Priest and of the people, their Transubstantiation, Elevation for adoration,
reservation in boxes, and circu^gestation in Processions; besides an infinite
number of ridiculous and apish toys in the celebration of it: Notwithstanding
you make no bones to demand the free use hereof, that is as I conceive in
effect, the public toleration and liberty of Romish religion, a matter most
unreasonable to be expected from his Pref. to his ^^sil. dor. fol. 6.
Majesty, of any king living, who therefore specially seems to mislike the
bitterness of some busy Ministers, who (God be blessed) grow both fewer in
number, and more calm in their courses, because they trouble the peace of the
Church, thereby giving advantage to the entry of Papists by the division
thereof: how then can you conce^ue any hope of a Toleration of your pretended
Catholic religion it self? But if you consider that which his Majesty writes
against the Page 78. 79.
marriage of his son to o^e of a different religion, your hope will be much
less. Solomon from the toleration of a strange worship within his dominions,
fell at last, as we know, to the embracing of it himself; And it is observed
by Divines, both Jewish and Christian; that the diversity of religion,
tolerated by King Solomon in divine worship, was by God requited upon his
heir, and next successor, Iure talionis, by a retaliated division of an
unrecoverable rupture in the civil government: Your own Promp. Cath. f^. ^.
p^st (...).
Stapleton spares not to revile Bodi^ in particular, as an enemy to
Christianity for Bodin. lib. 3. cap. 7. pol.
maintaining that liberty; The In Ephesians. 4.
Rhemists conclude to like purpose in their anno^ations upon the new Testament;
and D^ (...) is cap. 18. 19.
Bellarmine spends two whole chapters in confuting their arguments, who plead
for this indifferency, infor^ing it from the example of the Jewish Church,
grounds of Scripture, practice of Emperors, judgment of Fathers, yea reason
and experience, to be pernicious in any Realm, both to the Ecclesiastical
and civil state, and dangerous even to themselves which use that liberty;
shall we imagine then that his Matie. a king, if any other in the world, so
desirous to serve God truly, without shrinking or wavering, settled in
conscience, resolved in judgment, confirming by practice, by word, by writing,
by oath, by laws, by advice, what he openly professes, would ever differ so
much from himself, as to admit, even of a partial Toleration of a religion
different from, if not contrary unto his own? a matter so contrary to Gods
will, so dishonorable to himself, so dangerous to the State? 1. T^^. 5. 22.
Be not partaker (says S. Paul to Timothy) of other men's sins; now I cannot
conceive, how in his case the Quin^n (...) cum p^ssit, i^b^t.
Magistrates permitting, when it is in his power to forbid, can well be
distinguished from pertaking.

From your demands, you come to your promises, whereof the first is, that the
Pope for his part would confir^e the interest of all those that have present
possession, in any ecclesisticall living in England: he must then confirm the
interest of all those, whom you call Puritans, and Caluinists, as well as
others, which I think he will be as unwilling to do, as they to take it
from him; nay I am persuaded, there is no Clergy man in England, worthy the
name and credit of a good Subject, or the profit of the living he holds, who
would think the possession of it any way the securer, for the Popes
confirmation: But to grant, that the right of those, who have the present
interest in them, might by that means be strengthened, what were like to
become of the fattest Benefices, and best dignities of our Church (the same
power continuing) in the next age, we may in part conjecture, by the
experience of former times, they being by the Popes authority conferred upon
his fauourits, Italians and strangers, who never came so much as to see them,
and yet notwithstanding, was the rest of the Clergy so harrowed, partly by the
cunning practice, and partly by the violent extortion of his Legates, and
Collectours, (as I have already showed) that it is surely a lamentable thing to
read it, much more to feel it.

The Second thing you promise is, the permitting the free v^e of the Common
prayer book in English, for Morning and Evening prayers, with v^ry little or
no alteration; belike then his Holiness has of late better studied that
Scripture of Saint Paul, the 1. to the Corinthians, and the 14. then which I
see not what can be more clearly spoken, not only for reading and expounding
the Scriptures, but specially for praying in a known language; and if his
Holiness judge it no offense to God, to permit the use of our Liturgy in
English, what reason can our Recusants pretend of their refusal to join with
our Congregation in the use of it, except his purpose be to permit it only for
an interim, as Charles the 5th. did to the Germans, until he can gain
further strength to work his own ends, or as he does the stews, to avoid a
greater conceived mischief; but (God be thanked) we have, and hope still to
have, the fre^^se of that book without his permission, and for his permission,
should think nothing the better, but rather the worse of it.

The third and last thing you offer is, that, for the contentm^nt and security
of his Majesty, his Holiness would give him not only any satisfaction but all
the honor, that with the unity of the Church, and safety of Catholic
religion, may be required, but how farr^ the unity of the Church, and the
safety of Catholic religion extends it self, is so doubtful a case, as none
can determine it but the Pope himself, so that except his Majesty can define,
or divine rather, what that means, he shall be as far to seek of his
security as ever: He has already declared by his Breues, that the taking of
the Oath of Allegiance, cannot stand with the safety of Catholic Religion, so
that if he will secure his Majesty, he must not only condemn those Authors,
and damn that Doctrine, which teaches his power in deposing Kings, and
disposing of Kingdoms, but he must either recall that declaration, made as
he pretends, upon long and weighty deliberation, (which it may be to ^erue
his turn, he would as willingly do, as absolve the Venetians, though they no
way submitted themselves in the point controuersed) or if he persist in the
maintenance thereof, as in greatest likelihood he w^^l, I see not which way
he can secure his Majesty, except he may be said to secure, who cuts off
all means of his security, an oath being among all Christians, and Heathens,
if they be but morally honest (as the Apostle speaks) an end of all strife.
It is the last resolution in the search of truth, and in the body politic,
the strongest sinew, next the bound of nature and conscience, whereby the
members are tied to the head, and the head again to the members, and the
members knit among themselves: for the Pope then to promise his Majesty
security, and yet by this means to withdraw the hearts of his Subjects from
their natural allegiance, is, as if a man should promise secure passage over a
River, and yet pull down the bridge, or take away the boats which serve for
that passage. His Majesty on the other side, has declared the Pope to be
Antichrist, in his opinion, and can he expect honor or security from
Antichrist, who has hitherto depended on none but CHRIST? he may also be
pleased to remember what security the two last Henry's of France received from
him: Lastly if the Powder Treason were undertaken without the Popes priuitie,
how can he secure his Majesty from the like? except he can diue into the
secrets of men's hearts, or have the art to foresee things to come, or to charm
the devils in hell: God defend us from such security, which has the face of a
man, but the teeth of a Lion, which first lulles us asleep, and then drives a
nail into our heads.

My conclusion of this point shall be, that common speech of the Italians
themselves, [Acibo bis cocto, a medico indocto, a vento percolato, and inimico
reconciliato, liberanos Domine] from such honor, as is expected from a Romish
reconciled enemy, Good Lord deliver us; so that we are verily persuaded, by
yielding your neck to the yoke of Rome, and persuading his Majesty and his
Subjects to do the like, you have disclosed your hypocrisy, violated your
oath, disgraced your nation, stained your profession, forsaken your duty to
your Sovereign, your respect to his Nobles, and love to his Commons and
Clergy; and not only so, but as well by your example as exhortations,
endeavored what in you lay, by wounding every particular member, utterly to
ruin the whole body both of Church and Commonwealth, from such Physicians,
Good Lord deliver us.

B. C.
46.
But that I must trust to, when all the rest will fail me, is the service of
God, and the saving of my soul in the unity of that Church, which was founded
by Christ himself, and shall continue until his Coming again, wherein all
the Saints of God have served him on earth, and do enjoy him in heaven:
without which Catholic Church, there is no Communion of Saints, no How then in
your Doctrine do children baptized with us, which die instantly after their
Baptism, go to heaven?
forgiveness of sins, no hope of resurrection unto life everlasting: I
beseech your Majesty let not Caluins Ecclesia Praedestinatorum deceive you; it
may serve a Turk as well as a Christian; it has no faith but opinion, no hope
but pres^mption, no charity but lust, no faith but a fancy, no God but an
Idol; for Deus est omnibus religionibus commune nomen Aug. Ep. All religions
in the world, begin the Creed with I believe in God; But homini extra
ecclesiam, Religio sua, est cultus phantasmatum suorum, and error suus, est
Deus suus, as Saint Augustine affirms.

G. H.
46.
It seems then, you trusted little to the effectuating of these idle
fantastical proiects, whereabout you have made so much ado, and so many
vain flourishes, and indeed your confidence could not be so little, as you
had little reason to be confident they should take effect. That Church which
was founded by Christ himself, and shall continue until his coming again,
wherinal the Saints of God have served him on earth, and do enjoy him in
heaven, without which there is no communion of Saints, no forgiveness of sins,
no hope of resurrection unto life everlasting, is indeed the true Catholic,
but not the Romans Church, it being founded by Christ before his Coming in the
flesh, and shall continue until his coming again, but not as tied to any
certain place: in it all the Saints of God served him on earth, as the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, who lived, some of them before the foundation of
Rome: without it there is no Communion of Saints, no forgiveness of sins, no
resurection unto life everlasting, which no doubt by Gods mercies, and Christ's
merits would still remain, though Rome were turned into ashes and the Pope
into nothing: howbeit as a late writer has well observed [ignorance is now
become generally so powerful a tyrant, as it has set true Philosoiphie,
Physic, and Divinity, in a pillorie, and witten over the first, Contra
negantem principia, over the second, virtusspecifica, and over the third,
Ecclesia Romana, making it the only market, or rather Monople, both for
devotion and salvation.]

That there is a visible Church, in which the Elect and Reprobate are blended
together, in the outward profession of supernatural verities, and the precious
means of salvation, nay in the illumination of the mind, and sundry inward
graces, Calvin denies not; but that none are true and lively members of the
mystical body of CHRIST, which he has ransomed with his blood, and does
quicken and formalize with his Spirit, and will finally crown with eternal
bliss, save the Congregation or Church of the first borne, whose names are
written in heaven, he truly affirms: And if Calvin deceive us herein, so
does S. Augustine too, who in his third book of Christian doctrine, and 32.
Chapter, disputing against Ticonius, who had called the mystical body of
CHRIST, (which is most properly, and principally the Church) a body bipartie,
as including both good and bad, uses these words, [ Non ita debuit appellari,
non enim reuera Domini corpus est, quod cum illo non erit in aeternum: It ought
not so to have been called, in as much as it is not truly the body of
CHRIST, which shall not everlastingly be with him] nay, not only Calvin and
Augustine deceive us, but S. Paul in the fourth to the Ephesians, the fifteenth
and sixteenth verses: and again in the fifth Chapter of the same Epistle, the
25. and 26. verses: but for the better clearing of this point, we must
conceive, that the Elect, or Predestinate of God, are of two sorts, some elect
only, and not yet called, some both elect and called: of the latter there is
no question, but they are the principal parts of the Church of God; and
touching the former, they are not actually in the Church, but only potentially
in Gods prescience and predestination, who has purposed that they shall be,
and knows that they will be: when we say then, that none but the Elect of
God are of the Church of God, we mean not, that others are not at all, nor in
any sort of the Church, but that they are not fully and finally of the special
number of them, who partake of the most perfect work, force, and virtue of
that saving grace, whereof that Church is the only dispenser.

Neither can this Church serve a Turks turn as well as a Christians, for whom
he did predestinate, them also he called; and whom he called, them also he
justified; and whom he justified, them also he glorified; since then he
neither calls, nor iustifies Turks, we are sure they cannot be of the company
of the predestinate: But his Majesty himself (I now remember) well concluded
this point, at the conference at Hampton Court, and therefore we need not
fear his being deceived in judgment; his determination is, that [wee should
judge of our Predestination, not so much descendendo, by prying into Gods
secret counsel, as ascendendo by searching our own hearts; the sincerity of
our own hearts, being as it were, the counterpane of Gods eternal decree,
locked up in the Cabinet of his counsel;] and therefore the Apostle in the 2.
to Tim. and the 2. ioynes them both together: The foundation of God (says he)
remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his: there is the
Instrument sealed on Gods part; the Counterpane on ours instantly follows: and
[let every one that calls on the Name of CHRIST, depart from iniquity.] So
that the way to assure our selves that we are in the number of those that are
sealed to life, is to call on the name of CHRIST, in our profession, and depart
from iniquity, in our conversation; the one is required in our life, and the
other in our belief.

Neither is the faith of such believers, an opinion, or fancy, but the ground
of things which are hoped for, and the evidence of things which are not seen,
and a shield to quench all such fiery and venomous darts; nor is their hope, a
presumption; but a sure anchor against despair, nor their charity, lust; but
the love of their neighbors, as of themselves; nor their God, an idol; but
that Lord, who has revealed himself unto us in his word; whereas on the other
side, we may justly say, that the Popes Ecclesia malignantium, may more easily
serve a Turk, her Religion being rebellion, and her practice, murdering of
souls and bodies, (as it acknowledged in the Appointed for the day of our
deliverance from the Powder treason.
public prayers of our Church,) her faith being but wavering, and full of
irresolution, her hope a balancing and estimation of her own merit, her
charity an ostentation of works, no God so powerful with her, and beneficial
unto her as the Pope and the Mass. We know that all religions begin their
Creed with I believe in God, but none have less reason then they, who believe
in him in general, without particular application; and for S. Augustines
testimonies, that to an heretic, the entertainment and embracing of his
fantasies is his religion, I demand which is more likely to build his religion
on fantasie^, either he who depends merely on the written word of God, or he
that equals his own inventions thereunto?

B. C.
47.
I have more things to write, but the haste of answering your Majesty's
commandment signified to me by Sir Thomas Lake his letters, have made me
commit many faults in writing this very suddenly, for which I crave pardon, and
cut of the rest: but for my returning into England, I can answer none
otherwise but thus; I have sent you my soul in this treatise, and if it may
find entertainment and passage, my body shall quickly follow after, and if
not, I pray God I send my M. Doctor being but a nouice in his religion, it
seems, had forgotten there was any such place as Purgatory.
soul to heaven, and my body to the grave as soon as may be: In the mean
time I will rejoice in nothing, but only in the Cross of CHRIST, which is the
glory of your Crown, and therefore I will triumph therein, not as being gone
from you to your adversary, but as being gone before you to your Mother, where
I desire, and hope for ever to continue.

Your MAJESTY'S True servant, and Belike Master Doctor had now gotten him a
knocking pair of beads, to keep him from sleeping, while he was at his
Oraisons.
Beadesman, Benjamin Carier.

G. H.
47.
S. John concludes his Epistle to Gaius, I have many things to write, and Mr.
Doctor his to his Majesty, I have more things to write, but S. John trusts to
come shortly after, and speak with him mouth to mouth, but Mr. Doctor will
not promise that, except he be first assured his Letter may find
entertainment, which as I hear was very slender, and no marvel then he
hasted not after. S. John craved not pardon for his faults, which we make the
mark of an 2. Mac. 15. 39.
Apocryphal writer, but M. Doctor does, and that very deservedly, in as much as
he chose rather with Maluit culpam d^pr^^ari, quam n^n committere.
Albinus to crave pardon for his faults committed, then not to commit them, and
whereas he imputes his faults to his sudden writing, in imitation belike of
Campian, therein he adds another fault to his former, in as much as a great
part of this was written long before his Majesty's command came to his hands,
partly in a Latin Epistle to Mr. Casaubon, and partly in an English letter to
an honorable person in Court, and yet for any great matter is in it, in my
judgment it needed no long deliberation; as it was suddenly written; (if it
were so) so may it somewhat move a man of a sudden apprehension, but surely
the grauer and wiser sort I think, it will little affect.

Lastly, for your return into England, you can make none other answer (you
say) then this, that you have sent your soul in this treatise, and if it may
find passage, your body shall follow after: while you were here, your body was
with us, but your soul with them, for, anima est non vbi animat, sed vbi amat,
and your self in your Common place book maintain, that a man may live among
heretics or Schismatikes, not yielding outward obedience to the Church, and
yet live in the State of grace, if his soul be united to the Church in the
understanding by faith, and by charity in the will, conditionally he withhold
himself from such outward obedience, not for private respects, but for the
M^d^ abstinent pr^pter c^m^une b^ number Ecclesi^, non propter bonum priuatum.
public advantage of the Church: As your soul then was with them, when your
body was with us, so your body being with them, your soul was then busy
working here with us, but for their purposes; and sure except you altered your
opinions set down in this treatise, (and I have cause to fear you entertained
worse, dying So Pelitier in his narration published of his death, witnesses.
among the Jesuits) better you should stay there, both in body and soul, or
send your soul out of your body, and your body to the grave, as in Gods
providence you have done, then to return to infect that Country and Church,
in which you were borne and bred, and baptized, which as you professed in your
last Sermon before his Majesty, and in writings which I have to show under your
own hand, might justly contend with any Church in the world, for purity of
doctrine.

But it seems you had forgotten (being but a nouice in that doctrine) you were
to pass by Purgatory before you came to heaven, except you supposed the Spaw
waters had sufficiently purged you, or else you presumed far upon the merit
of your profound demonstrations, as if thereby you needed not De profundis to
be sung, nor Mass to be said for your deliverance from thence, but that you
must presently iumpe into heaven: I durst warrant, the Jesuits, among whom you
died, did not esteem, you such a Saint. Indeed Castellanus who made the
funeral oration upon Francis the 1. the French King, was excepted against, and
accused by the Sorbonists for saying, That he doubted not, but the Kings soul
was in heaven; but his purgation was made by Mendoza, that he thought he called
by Purgatory in passing, but being as he was of a stirring disposition, he
made no stay there; but I think M. Doctor, who offers to undertake the
justifying of all Romish doctrine, was not of this opinion: We teach with S.
John, that [ (...). 14. 13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors.]
But M. Doctor should have remembered that the Church of Rome teaches with
Virgil, (whose authority Bellarmine solemnly quoteth to that purpose) That the
souls of the most just (except they die by Martyrdom, or presently after
Baptism, or do some notable Meritorious work (as for the purpose; the
killing of a King whom that Church shall judge a Tyrant) are all to be scoured
in the flames of Purgatory fire, before they enter into heaven.]

But in the mean time, you say, you will rejoice in nothing but only in the
Cross of Christ, which is the glory of his Majesty's Crown; where, Gal. 16. 4.
if by the Cross of Christ you understand, as S. Paul did, Christ Crucified,
you do well, he being indeed, not only the Glory of his Majesty's Crown, but
the Crown of his and our glory; but if the material Cross, or a painted or
carved Crucifix, this could bring but a shadow of joy to you, and of glory to
his Majesty's Crown.

Lastly, you conclude, that you are not gone from his Majesty to his
adversaries, but before him to his Mother: For the first of which I demand,
who his Majesty shall account for his adversaries, but those who condemn such
Roman Catholics, See Widdringt^ns Supplication to the Pope. 1616.
censuring their Books, and commanding them to purge themselves, who only
maintain his Civil power in Temporal affairs, and restrain his subjects
from taking the Oath of mere natural Allegiance, which in effect is all one
as if they absolved them from that Oath being taken, and consequently
encouraged them to rebellion? For the second part of your conclusion, we doubt
not but his Majesty's Mother might find mercy, knowing no better religion,
then that in which she was borne and bred, when such Apostates, as our of
discontent, or for temporal respects, forsake a known truth, which they have
preached, in which they were baptized, to which they have subscribed, shall
find heaven gates shut against them. But we 1. Cor. 4. 5.
judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will lighten things
that are in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest: and then
shall every man have praise of God: Who so confirm us, in that we are right,
and reform us, in that we are amiss, that passing through things temporal,
we may not finally lose eternal: Now praise and honor, and glory, and power,
be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamhe for evermore.

B. C.
Multum incola fuit anima mea cum his qui oderunt pacem; eram pacificus cum
loquebar illis, impugnabunt me gratis.

Psalm. 119. verse. 5, 6. G. H.
The words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his heart:
his words were softer then oil, yet were they drawn swords.

Psalm. 55. 21. AN ANSWER TO THE MATERIAL POINTS of a second Letter of Dr.
Cariers, written also from Liege, to his friends here in ENGLAND.
WHen I had almost finished my former answer to the Doctors Letter to his
Majesty, another Letter of his, dated also from Leig^, and directed to his
friends in England, came to mine hands; whereunto are added, certain
collections found in his Closet, made by him (as it is thought says the
Publisher) of the miserable ends of such as have impugned the Catholic
Church: to which is also annexed a brief exhortation to persevere constantly
in the said Catholic Church, what opposition soever may occur: and lastly, a
few examples of the admirable felicity of such as have defended the same
Church.

First then for the Letter, I must confess, I expected from Mr. Dr. some piece
of greater value, considering himself had promised us in the last Section of
his first chapter, particularly to justify and make plain from point to point
the Religion at this day practiced and prescribed by the Church of Rome; and
Pelitier for him, that having consigned his writings into the hands of one of
his friends, we should shortly have that happiness, as to see them published,
to the joy and comfort of Catholics, and the edification of those whom he had
forsaken: But at last we have received for payment, in full satisfaction of the
whole debt (as I conceive) this Letter, with the appertenances; which I would
have set down entire as I found it, (the very sight of it being confutation
sufficient;) but that I should have done the Printer injury in staying his
press, and withal have raised my book to a bulk, too far exceeding my
purpose; and it may be have deceived the reader too, in offering that to his
view, which he would have judged scarce worth the reprinting. In his entrance,
after his verbal flourishes, and the repetition of that which has already
been answered, more then once, if any way material; he settles at length upon
nine Propositions, the very marrow and pi^h of all his Letter, all tending to
draw what he might from the authority of Scriptures, and to cast it upon the
Church, that is in his language, the Romish Clergy, as afterward he
expresses himself; I will examine the propsitions as they lie in order.

B. C.
1.
That our Savior did leave nothing in writing, but taught his Religion to his
Apostles by word of mouth.

G. H.
1.
Doubtless our Savior was not of that Polish Cardinals mind, who thought it
had been better for the Church, had there been no Scripture extant at all:
for though himself left nothing in writing touching his Religion, yet by the
Scriptures alone he proves himself to be the Messiah in his conferences, his
Sermons, his disputations: with it he informs the ignorant, confirms the
weak, instructs his Disciples, confutes the Pharisees, puts the Sadduces to
silence, and the devil to fl^ght. Not a book of Moses, and scarce a Prophet
but he either quotes some passages from him, or at least alludes to some in
him, specially that of the Psalms and the Prophet Esaias. Nay, in the 24. of St.
Luke, it is said, he proved his passion and resurrection from Moses, and all
the Prophets. Though it were he that spoke to the Patriarchs, in dreams, and
visions, and Revelations, yet he mentions none of them for proof, and except
they were (...), much less traditions; but his ordinary questions and
exh^rtations, and reprehensions are: How read thou? and have ye not read?
and search the Scriptures, and ye err not knowing the Scriptures, and for
traditions he names them not but to reject them.

Secondly, it is acknowledged by the greatest Clerks, and chiefest pillars of
the Church of Rome, that the Evangelists in writing their Gospels, and the
Apostles their Epistles, were none other but the pens of a ready Writer, the
Secretaries of their Lord and Master: now that which the Secretary writes
according to the direction and inditing of his Lord, more commonly is, and more
justly ought to be called the writing of the Lord then the Secretary; it is
St. Augustines reason in the last Chapter of his first book of the consent of
the Evangelists. Cum Euangelistae (says he) and Apostoli scripserunt quae
Deus ostendit and dixit, nequaquam dicendum est quod ipse non scripserit;
quicquid enim ille de suis factis and dictis nos legere voluit, hoc scribendum
illis tanquam suis manibus imperauit. In as much as the Evangelists and
Apostles wrote that which God manifested and spoke, it cannot be said that
himself wrote not; for whatsoever his pleasure was we should read, touching
his works and words, that he gave them in charge to write, as it had been
with his own fingers.

Thirdly, it is reported by Eusebius, lib. 1. cap. 13. that our Savior left in
writing a letter to Abgarus King of Edessa, the copy whereof he there sets
down at large, affirming the original to have been kept among the public
Records of that City: but for mine own part I must needs say, that if it be
not fained, I can not conceive why it should not be received as canonical.

Fourthly and lastly, it may very well be, that our Savior wrote nothing
himself, in as much as those things which were to be written, were
testimonies concerning himself: for though it be true, in regard of his divine
authority, which he delivers in the eight of St. John's Gospel [Though I bear
record of my self, Verse. 14.
yet my Record is true] Yet in regard of the apprehension of flesh and blood,
it is as true which he has in the fifth of the same Gospel, V^rs^ 31.
If I should bear witness of my self, my witness were not true.

B. C.
2.
That our Savior commanded not his Apostles to write his Religion but to teach
it, Ite praedicate.

G. H.
2.
As if a man might not teach as well by his pen as his tongue, by writing as
speaking; nay, doctrine delivered by writing, as it is conveyed more purely and
certainly without mixture, arising from humane frailty and corruption; so it
spreads farther and lasts longer, and if it degenerate, is more easily
reformed. It is worthy to be marked, which St. Luke has in the Preface of his
Gospel to that noble Theophilus: He confesses, that he had been instructed
in the doctrine of Religion, yet he thought to write unto him from point to
point, that he might have the certainety of those things, so that though he
had indifferent good knowledge before, yet writing the story, was the means
to beget certainety: so says David, This shall be written for the generation
to come. Neither to my remembrance do I read of any that forbad their
followers to write, but only the Pythagoreans and the Druides: Once we are
sure that it pleased Almighty God to countenance the writing of holy Scripture
by his own practice, in as much as he wrote Exed. 31.
the Decalogue, once and again, in tables of stone: And as he led the way
himself, so in express terms he commanded his servants the Prophets to do
the like, Exodus 17. 14. ^sai. 8. 1. i^r. 30. 2 ^z^k. 37. 16. hab. 2. 2.
Moses, and Esaias, and Jeremy, and Ezekiel, and Habacuk. Before the Law was
written, what universal apostasies there were from the true worship of God,
the flood is a sufficient testimony; and after it was lost, though the
Priesthood continued, what general swaruings there were both of Prince and
people, as well in manners as religion, appears, 2. Chro. 34. What forbids us
then to think that our Savior in commanding his Apostles to teach all
nations, should not by virtue of that command, as well give them in charge to
publish their doctrine by writing, as to deliver it by word of mouth.

Besides, whiles we read in the first of the Revel. at the 11. verse, that he
who was dead, and is alive, commands John to write those things which he saw in
a book; and again at the 19. verse, Write the things which thou have seen,
and the things which are, and the things which shall come hereafter. And again
in the second and third Chapters, in particular to the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus write, to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna write, to the Angel of the
Church of Pergamus write, to the Angel of the Church of Thyatira write, to the
Angel of the Church of Sardis write, to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia
write, to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea write; while (I say) we find the
charge of writing so often given to John, and that by him who was dead and is
alive, I can never subscribe to the truth of that Proposition, that our
Savior commanded none of his Apostles to write, except I should deny S. John
to have been an Apostle, or our Savior to be understood by him, who was dead
and is alive.

B. C.
3.
That of the twelve Apostles, seven did leave nothing at all in writing, but
taught their Successors the Religion of Christ by word of mouth.

G. H.
3.
This Proposition supposes the number of the Apostles to have been but twelve;
whereas Matthias made the thirteenth, and Paul the fourteenth, who proclaims
it in the front of the greatest part of his fourteen several Epistles Paul an
Apostle: But it may be Mr. Doctor will not vouchsafe him that name, because he
wrote more then any of the Apostles.

Secondly, in the fifteenth of the Acts, we read, that the Apostles met
together in Council, wrote Letters, the very tenor whereof there appears;
neither can it be otherwise conceived, but that the whole number of them, or at
leastwise the greatest part was there assembled: So that to say, that seven of
them left nothing in writing, is both derogatorie from the authority of
Scripture, and in it self unjustifiable.

Thirdly it may very well be, that seven of them left nothing else but that
Letter in writing; not because they held it sufficient to teach only by word of
mouth (as Mr. Doctor would imply) but because six of them had written, which
how needful it was they should perform, appears as well by Saint Phil. 3. 1.
Paul, as Saint Verse 3.
Jude.

Fourthly and lastly, though nothing of their writing be come to our hands,
yet it is not certain whether they left nothing in writing; since it is
probable that Saint Paul wrote another Epistle to the 1. Cor. 5. 9.
Corinth. which is now no where extant.

B. C.
4.
That Saint Mark, Saint Luke, and Saint Paul, were not of Christ's company
whiles he was upon the earth, and therefore must needs learn their Religion of
the Church before they wrote it.

G. H.
4.
Here I must confess I could not but wonder what Mr. Dr. meant, if he had
read and believed Saint Paul's Epistle to the Galathians, in affirming that he
learned his Religion of the Church, whereas himself in the first and second
Chapter of that Epistle, inforceth the contrary, with so many and so invincible
arguments, that they can not but instantly stop the mouth of any, who would
offer to open it in defense of Mr. Doctors assertions. Now I certify you
brethren, (says he) that the Gospel which was preached of me, was not after
man, for neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it; but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ.

Secondly for Saint Mark and Saint Luke, though they learned their Religion of
the Church by hearing the Apostles, as the Apostles themselves did from Christ,
by hearing and seeing him: yet does it not follow but the former, as well as
the latter, wrote by the instinct and direction of the holy Ghost: nay
doubtless it were no less then impiety once to imagine the contrary: To
which purpose the words of Bellarmine are worthy observation. De C^^^il. auth.
lib. 2. ca^. 12.
Vt vere dicitur Epistola principis quae a principe dictatur, etiamsi is qui
eam scripsit antea sciebat quae scripturus erat: ita dicitur and immediatum Dei
verbum quod scriptum est ab Euangelistis Deo inspirante and dirigente, licet
scripserint ea quae viderant vel audierant: As that is truly said to be the
Letter of a Prince which he dictates, though he who wrote knew before what he
would write: So is it the immediate word of God which is written by the
Evangelists (God inspiring and directing them) though they saw and heard those
things before which they wrote.

Lastly for S. Luke, he learned not the acts of the Apostles which he wrote
from the Church, himself being an actour in a chief part of them, and whereas
Mr. Doctor affirms, that he was not of Christ's company whiles he was upon the
earth; S^ella a Writer of the Church of Rome in his Enarrations upon the 24. of
S. Lukes Gospel, and the 13. verse, assures us that grave Doctors (by whom I
take it he means the Fathers) were of opinion that S. Luke was one of those
two Disciples, whom our Savior instructed as they were iournying to Emmaus.

B. C.
5.
That diverse others did write the Religion of Christ, as they did apprehend it,
but their Gospels and Epistles were rejected by the Church, Luke 1. 1.

G. H.
5.
In the Primitive Church a great part of the believers, but specially their
guides, were miraculously endued, as with other gifts; so with a discerning
spirit, and that not only in differencing the sins and persons of men; but
judging of their writings: so that though they wrote a truth, touching the
Christian religion, yet were they able to discern whether that truth were
written, by special illumination and instinct of the same spirit, wherewith
themselves were inspired: whereupon we have good reason to accept what they
accepted as Canonical, and as Apocryphal to reject what they rejected: but
for the present Church, though it should ten thousand times reject the whole,
or any parcel of that written truth which they accepted; yea, though one from
the dead, or an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel: yet ought we
rather to accurse then believe him; notwithstanding the Church of Rome, as if
she were invested with equal or higher power, though indeed she reject no
book as Apocryphal, which that Church accepted as Canonical, yet does she
accept and impose diverse books as Canonical, which that rejected as
Apocryphal.

B. C.
6.
That at the day of judgment there will be no writing to try true Religion
from heresy; but only the eternal truth of Christ, in the souls of his
Saints.

G. H.
6.
But that Eternal truth of Christ in the souls of his Sain^s is the same and
none other, then which is contained in the holy Scriptures: now the Gentiles
indeed Romans 2. 12.
in as much as they have sinned without the Law, they shall also perish without
the Law, that is without the Law written, save only in the tables of their
hearts; but the Jews, in as much as they have sinned in the Law, shall be
judged by the Law (says Saint Paul,) and our Savior, John 5. 45*
There is one that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust: whereby none
other thing can be understood then the Law written by Moses.

B. C.
7.
That the Scriptures were written by men of the Church, admitted Canonical by
Councils of the Church, preserved from tyrants by the care of the Church, and
ever until late expounded by the consent of the Church.

G. H.
7.
That the Scriptures were written by men of the Church, we confess; yet so, as
withal it cannot be denied, but those holy men wrote as they were moved by
the holy Ghost: We also confess; that they were admitted Canonical, by the
Councils of the Church, that is declared, not made to be so: and likewise that
hitherto they have been preserved by the care of the Church, which therefore is
called, 1. Tim. 3. 15.
The pillar and ground of truth; neither ought they to be expounded, but by
the consent of the Church, if we speak of exposition to be publicly allowed
and received, touching fundamental points; otherwise both Caietane, and
Andradius, and Iansenius, and Maldonat, and diverse others of the Church of
Rome, in sundry places profess, that they rest not satisfied in any
interpretation given by the Fathers, but prefer either their own, or some
other found out in this age: So that if Mr. Doctor by the Church, understand
the Fathers, we have no reason to bar our selves of that liberty, which the
chief Doctors of the Church of Rome, both challenge as due, and practice as
needful; yet so, as we use that liberty with moderation and sobriety, the
people submitting their judgments to their Pastors, and the Pastors in
several to their body united, or represented: where no very clear and
manifest reason appears to the contrary.

B. C.
8.
How few men are able to read, and expound Scriptures any way, and whether it
be not easier to believe the Church, then to believe a few private men, that
say they can expound Scriptures better then the Church.

G. H.
8.
If we should follow the rules and practice of the Church of Rome, fewer would
be able either to expound or read the Scriptures then now are. Espencaeus, a
Dr. of the Sorbon, witnesses, that he was told by an Italian Bishop, that his
Countrymen were terrified from reading the Scriptures, lest they should become
herettikes; but the Doctor demanding what Art they then professed? why quoth
the Bishop, both the Laws, but specially the Canon: And Robert Stephens
demanding some of the Doctors of the Sorbon, in what place some passage of the
New Testament was written? they answered, that they had read it in Hierome, or
the decrees: but for the New Testament, they were ignorant what it was; nay one
of them was wont to swear by the light, that he wondered young men talked so
much of the New Testament, himself being fifty years old before he understood
so much as what it meant: and if such blind guides lead the blind, what
marvel if both fall into the ditch.

Now for believing private men, I would feign know how the common people in
their Church, come to know the exposition of the Church, or the Church it
self, but by the information of private men: And if any of ours prefer their
own judgment before the current opinion (which I suppose Mr. Doctor means by
the exposition of the Church) I have showed before upon what ground they do
it, and that therein they do no more then those very Romish Divines, who
complain most of them.

B. C.
9.
That all sorts of heretics have always boasted of the Scriptures, and
despised the Church.

G. H.
9.
Though the devil falsely alleged Scripture, yet our SAVIOVR thought it no
sufficient reason to forbear the alleging of it; and though the Pharisees
pretended the authority of the Church, yet he embraced not their corrupt
glosses, leaving us an example in both to follow his steps.

Upon these Propositions, Mr. Doctor infers, that the only way to find
the true religion of CHRIST, is to enquire which is the true Church of CHRIST;
now to know the Church (says he) our Savior did found, we must observe that
this word does signify diverse things, sometimes the House of Gods service,
sometimes the Congregation of all those that are Baptized, and sometimes the
Clergy or Spirituality; and in this sense alone our Savior founded a Church
when he did call and send his Apostles, and gave them the same power, which
himself as man had received of his Father. Then to know which is the true
Church (says he) we must inquire which is the Clergy that was founded by
CHRIST, and continues in the Unity of the Church by perpetual Succession
from the Apostles, and so from CHRIST himself: And for certain resolution
thereof, he refers us to three arguments, as he calls them infallible,
whereof the first is, The report of Chronicles and Histories; The second is,
The Universality, Antiquity, and consent of doctrine, taught in the true
Church, and The variety, novelty, and repugnancie taught in Schism: And
herein you may inquire (says he) of the most learned and most honest to
inform you: The third is, The testimony of Scriptures of the old and new
Testament.

For answer to this inference, I would willingly learn where Mr. Doctor
learned those acceptions of the Church; once I am sure he takes it otherwise
then it is taken in holy Scripture; and again in holy Scriptures it is taken
otherwise then he takes it: Neither are his two former means for the finding
out of the Church more justifiable, then his acceptions of the Church; whereof
the first is the report of Chronicles; but to grant that all Chronicles spoke
as the Pope would have them, yet were all this but humane testimony, a
sufficient inducement to move, but no sufficient ground for the conscience to
build upon. For the proof of his second reason he refers his reader to the
information of the most learned and most honest. But how if as learned and more
honest inform him, and that more truly to the contrary? Here needs a farther
inquiry; which Mr. Doctor foreseeing, at length sends us to the Scripture as
being forced with us, to confess that the last resolution, and only
infallible stay of the Christian soul in search both of the truth it self,
and consequently of the true Church, professing and publishing that truth, must
n^cessarily rest upon that and nothing else.

A brief Answer to the other collections annexed to the Doctors last Letter.
NOw for those other Collections which are added to his Letter, as the
Publisher makes a doubt, whether they were made by him or no, so I make no
doubt, if he had lived, he would never have suffered them to come to the
light in such sort, as now they are published: Notwithstanding, because they
appear in his name, I held it not amiss to make some answer unto them: First
then, for the miserable ends of such as have opposed the Catholic Church; he
brings the example of Judas, and Caiphas, and Annas, and the three Herod's, and
Pontius Pilate, and Nero, and Domitian, and Pharaoh, and Haman, and Iezebel,
and Antiochus, and Jeroboam, and a number of like stuff: After he comes to
Arch-heretikes, translating word for word what Bellarmine thereof has observed
in his 17. Chapter, of the notes of the Church: where he makes the 14. note to
be, Infaelix exitus seu finis eorum qui Ecclesiam oppugnant, The unhappy end
of such as have oppugned the Church, the greatest part of which (excepting
those last which Master Doctor is pleased to call the monsters of our age,) we
condemn as far forth as the Doctor did, or Bellarmin does. But for the
fabulous narration of their ends, we may truly say, that Bellarmine as
unjustly voucheth the authority of Cochlaeus, and Bolsecke, as the Doctor
suppresseth Bellarmines. For what law humane or divine, civil or natural,
admits a man's mortal and sworn enemy to be witness against him? Yet
such was Cochlaeus unto Luther, and Zuinglius, and Bolseck unto Calvin: who
both as they deadly hated them for their religion, (as the Samaritanes did the
Jews) so had Bolseck a particular grudge against Calvin, for that he opposed
himself so vehemently against his wicked errors, and seditious practices in
Geneua, as he procured his banishment from thence: which moved him to seek
this base kind of revenge upon him, the rather being Epist. ad Archiep. L^gd^n.
requested and solicited thereunto, (as he says himself) by very many his
Lords and friends; as hoping by the defamation of Calvin, to recover his lost
credit with them: And as being their malicious enemies, they would not report
the truth, so not being present at their ends, they could not have certain
knowledge thereof; at leastwise their testimony cannot with any reasonable or
indifferent minds counterpoise the evidence of those worthy men, who were
eyewitnesses, and present with them: For Pluris est oculatus testis vnus, quam
auriti december: One eyewitness is of more force then ten eare-witnesses: and,
it is great folly ( D^n^t. Eccl. c. 14.. sed r^sp^n^^amus.
says Bellarmine) to believe the reports of them that were not present, rather
then of them that were present: But let us particularly, and severally, but
briefly examine their slanders.

Luther (says the Doctor, out of the Cardinal, and the Cardinal himself out
of Cochlaeus) died suddenly: for having supped very delicately and pleasantly,
being in perfect health, and having delighted all his company with merry
conceits, the same night he died. But Desig. Eccl. lib. 23. c. 3.
Tho. Bozius, a Friar of the new Oratory order, reports otherwise, and that
upon the testimony of one that then was Luthers servant, but since (as he
says) became theirs in religion; namely, that he hanged himself, and that
forthwith an oath was taken of all that were present, not to publish it for
the honor (as they said) of the Gospel: Thus they agree not in their tales,
no more then the false witnesses did against Christ: Neither is it strange,
that Cochlaeus and Bozius devise such slanders against him since his death,
seeing even in his life time they spared not to publish in Print, Lonic^^.
Th^atr. p. 246.
that he was dead, and when he was laid into his grave, there was a terrible
noise heard, as if the foundations of the earth had been shaken, to the
affrightment of all, and the night after there was yet a more fearful noise
heard about his grave, which made the people run thither all amazed, but
opening it, they could find nor body, nor bones, nor clothes, only they smelt
a horrible stink of brimstone. This Luther himself read, and in detestation
of such blasphemy, publicly protested against it; as not long since Beza did,
being handled in like manner: But return we unto Cochlaeus: First, where he
says, that the supper before he died he was in perfect health, they who knew
him better, tell us, that before he came to Islib, (whither he was sent for by
the Earls of Mansfield, to compose a controversy between them) he was very
sickly, and that he had a long time been troubled with oppression of humors in
the orifice of his stomach. Secondly, where he says, that he supped
delicately and pleasantly, and delighted all his company with merry conceits;
surely they that were present testify, that his merry conceits were but holy
and religious discourses; for being demanded at supper time, Whether in that
eternal life we should know one another, he answered affirmatively, and
confirmed the same by testimony of Scripture: according as Lib. 2. 15 46.
Thuanus also, a Papist by profession, but of more authority then an hundred
Cochlaeusses, does relate. Lastly, where he says, that he died suddenly the
same night: neither died he the same night, but the next day betwixt 8. and 9.
of the clock, nor yet suddenly, for perceiving his sickness to grow upon him,
and feeling within him the summons of death, he gave many sweet and
comfortable exhortations to them that were about him, and commended himself
unto God in a most heavenly and effectual prayer, and so quietly, and by
little and little died. And these things are testified by Iustus Jonas, who
attended him even unto the last gasp, and by Melancthon, and others of his
best acquaintance: Whereunto I add out of Loco supra citato.
Thuanus, that as in his life time he was dearly beloved, so in his death
could they not be drawn from his love: For they of Mansfield were earnest,
that his body might be buried amongst them, in as much as there he was borne:
but Io. Frederick prevailed so far by his authority, that his body was
carried back to Wittenberg, and there honorably interred: So that though
Papists burst for spite and envy, it could not be without the finger of God,
that so mean a man as Luther, so boldly opposing himself against the Pope,
(whom Kings and Emperors at that time durst not without great danger resist)
yet lived so long, died so peaceably, and was buried so honorably.

The next is Zuinglius, who as the Doctor, out of the same Cochlaeus says, was
slain in war, which he made against the Catholics. Indeed that Zuinglius
was slain in the field, neither is, nor can be denied: but I would feign
learn why so to die should be counted an unhappy end, or why that, which as
seems to me, is an argument of his courage and magnanimity, should be
esteemed an argument of heresy. Apol. p. 3. c. 9.
If you say he was slain fighting against Catholics: so have many of your
Romish Catholics fighting against Protestants: And if Costers defense of
Sanders, who was slain in Ireland be sufficient, He, with other Priests aided
the army in those things which concern the conscience, Quid hic mali? What
evil is herein? The same Apology may I far more justly make for Zuinglius:
He according to the laudable custom of that country, went as a Preacher with
the army, Quid hic mali? What evil is herein? Only here lies the difference,
that Sanders like a traitor and rebel fighting against his Prince and
Country, perished miserably: but Zuinglius like a good Patriot, fighting in
defense of his Country, died valiantly: Of whose innocence therein, God
himself, as to me it seems, has given this testimony, that when his
enemies having found his body, threw it into the fire to burn it, yet his
heart could never be consumed, as Lib. 1. ann^. 1525.
Thuanus witnesses.

The third is Oecolampadius, of whom upon the same authority the Dr. says,
that going to bed in good health one night, he was found dead by his wife in
the morning. Unto this fiction of Cochlaeus, it shall suffice to oppose the true
report of De m^rt. O^col. praef^x. Annot. in proph.
Simo^ Grynaeus, who (with ten other at least, all of them very credible men)
was an eyewitness, and present at his death: He therefore reports that he
kept his bed sixteen days before his death: that in the mean season he
often exhorted them that were about him to prayer, and to die constantly for
the Name of CHRIST, professing that he went cheerfully to the Tribunal of
CHRIST. The last night of his life, demanding of a friend that came to visit
him, what news? and he answering, None, Then (quoth he) can I tell you news;
Shortly shall I be with the Lord JESUS: Soon after one asking whether the
light did not trouble him? Here, quoth he laying his hand on his breast, is
store of light: After this, as well as his tongue could utter it, he repeated
that excellent prayer of David for Remission of sins, and that entirely from
the beginning unto the end, fetching withal many deep groans from the bottom
of his heart: Then pawsing a while he said, CHRIST IESV save me, which was his
very last speech: And so he died with much peace and tranquillity of mind:
Thus far Grynaeus.

The fourth is Carolostadius, whom, says the Dr. the Ministers of Bazil write
to have been killed of a Devil, in their Epistle of the death of
Carolostadius. It cannot be denied but that Carolostadius was a man full of many
imperfections, and suspected to incline too much unto Anabaptisme: yet is this
report a mere fiction, and the Epistle out of which it is vouched, a very
counterfeit, as diverse have written, which Fr. Iunius says, he understood by
sufficient men, who were present at his death.

The last is John Calvin who (says the Dr.) was eaten and consumed with
worms, and dyed as did Antiochus, Hunery, Maximinus, etc. as witnesses
Hieron. Bolseck in his life; who also adds that he died blaspheming, cursing,
and inuocating devils. A fearful and unhappy end indeed, if it were true, and
worthy of an Ar^h-heretike; but if false (as I am persuaded, even to the
Doctors and Bellarmines conscience it was, when they so wrote) a most hellish
slander. Thuanus a man of their own side reiects it as a mere ^able; for he
Lib. 35. 1564.
reports, that having for the space of full seven years fought with diverse
diseases and griefs, yet was he therefore never a whit less diligent in his
function, nor absteined from continual writing, and at length died of the
disease called the difficulty of breathing. Nay Genebrard though far from the
ingenuitie of Thuanus, and one that raileth most impotently upon Calvin, yet
durst not charge him herewith, and was ashamed to defile his Chronicle with
such an impudent lie. Fr. Iunius says, that he was at Geneua then wen Calvin
dyed, yet neither saw nor heard, nor knew, nor perceived any such thing, nor so
much as ever dreamed of any such matter: In a word, he was visited in his
sickness by sundry excellent personages, by the Syndicks of the City, by
the Ministers, by others, all which are witnesses of the sickness whereof he
dyed. And In vita Call.
Theod. Beza, who faithfully wrote his life and death, whereof (as he says)
he had been a spectator sixteen years together, testifies that in him was
proposed unto all, a most excellent pattern of Christian both life and death,
which (says he) is as easy to calumniate, as it is hard to imitate. These
things considered, I refer me now unto the Readers indifferency, whether is
more worthy of credit, the whole City of Geneua, and so many notable men
present at his sickness and death, and testifying of his peaceable, holy, and
Christian departure: or one Hieron. Bolseck, a Knight of the post, twice
banished, thrice a runagate, who of a Carmelite, became a Physician, or rather
a Quacksaluer, a sworn enemy to Calvin, one that had been from Geneua more
then ten years together, and had sold his pen unto his Lords and friends to
defame Calvin. And thus much in defense of those men whom the Dr. terms the
Monsters of our age.

Now although the unhappy end of some particular men be no demonstratiue
proof, and scarce a coniecturall sign of the falsehood of that religion which
they profess, and that Church in which they make their last end: yet that it
may appear in requital of the Dr. or rather the Cardinal, how unhappily some
zealous persecutors of such, as have forsaken fellowship with the Church of
Rome, have ended their lives, I could refer the Reader to a large Discourse
touching that point toward the end of the second part of the Acts and
Monuments, and also in Hassenmullerus, in the conclusion of his book. Neither
can the like just exception be taken against their evidences, as against that
of Bolseck and Cochlaeus: But I will content my self with the testimony of
Thuanus, a professed member of that Church which Mr. Doctor calls Catholic; yet
such a one as besides his great pains and diligence in the search of truth,
had singular means for the finding of it out himself, being now President in
the Court Parliament of Paris, where his father had bin Premier President
before him: This man then Lib. 3. 1547.
testifies, first of the Cardinal of S. Andrews in Scotland, who condemned
George Wiseheart unto the fire, that standing at a window sumptuously set forth
with cushions and hangings of silk to behold his execution, and George being
exhorted when the fire began to burn to be of good courage: This flame indeed,
answered he, is painful to my body, but it does no whit dismay my mind;
but he that now from aloft looks down so proudly upon me, as arrogantly as
now he sits; so ignominiously, within these few days shall he lie along,
which soon after came to pass: for being miserably slain, his dead body was
in the open sight of all laid along in the same window, from whence he had so
joyfully beheld the burning of Wiseheart: And so the event (says Thuanus)
verified his Prophecy.

Lib. 6. 1550.
John Roman a Monk and cruel persecutor, invented a new kind of torment for
the persecuted; he would draw upon their legs, boots full of hot boiling
grease, and then setting spurs upon their heels iestingly, would demand of
them whether they were not sufficiently appointed for their journey: But
understanding that a summons was granted out against him by the Parliament of
Aix to answer for his cruelties, and that by the commandment of Francis the
I* he fled unto Auinion, where thinking himself safe from men, yet he
escaped not, (says Thuanus) the vengeance of God; For he was spoiled by his
own servants of all that he had, and brought to extreme poverty: his body
also was so full of loathsome ulcers, that oftentimes he wished for death, which
yet he could not obtain but after a long time, and horrible torments.

Ibid.
Oppeda another bloody persecutor, being called to answer for his more then
barbarous cruelties, in the Parliament of Paris, by the appointment of the said
King Francis, escaped indeed that danger by the commendation of the Guise, and
together with his Colleagues was restored unto his former dignity;
nevertheless, soon after he was stricken with horrible pains in his
entrails, wherewith he was a long time tormented, and at length in the mids of
most cruel torments breathed forth his cruel soul, God (says Thuanus)
inflicting on him that just punishment which the judges exacted not, which
though it were long in coming, yet fell the more heavily when it came.

Li^. 25. 1^60.
Albaspineus when Protestants were brought forth to execution, advised to stop
their mouths that they might not speak unto the people: Not long after
falling deeply in love with a certain woman, he fell withal out of his wits,
and being strike^ also with the lowzie disease, he died in most grievous
torments, his friends putting a bridle into his mouth to force him to receive
some sustenance, which yet he frantikely refused, having decreed to famish
himself because of the vnsufferablenesse of his pains.

Ibid.
Ponsenatius another butcher, being fallen into great debt, having riotously
wasted, both his own patrimony, and his wives dowry, upon conscience of his
wicked life, fell likewise mad; whereupon despairing of his salvation, and
being chained up by his friends, with lamentable shrikings, and rending of
himself, he finished his life in extreme poverty.

Finally, Cardinal Lib. 9. 1552.
Crescentius the Popes Agent in the Council of Trent, having spent much of the
night in writing letters to the Pope, and at length rising from his chair, he
seemed to see a dog, which with huge jaws, fiery eyes, and ears hanging down
to the ground, furiously came toward him, and by and by couched under the
table; then calling his servants, and light being brought, when he saw the dog
no where appear, he was astonished at it, and thereupon fell into many sad
cogitations, and so into sickness, which he no sooner felt, but presently he
despaired of life, although his Physicians and friends gave him good hope of
recovery: At last being carried from thence to Verona, and even at deaths door,
he would often call upon them that attended him, to take heed of the dog, and
to keep him from coming upon his bed: Thus far out of Thuanus.

To these may be added the miserable end of P. Mat^h. hist. de Fr^n. lib. 1.
nar. 4.
Philip the II. King of Spain, who though he had been a chief pillar of the
Romish Church, and a great enemy of the Protestants and their religion, yet
died he of the same disease which the Doctor out of Bellarmin; and Bellarmine
out of Cochaeus imputes to Calvin: As also the unhappy ends of all those who
were the chief plotters in the Massacre of France, Charles the IX. then King,
the Queen Mother, Henry the third, then Duke of Aniou the Kings brother, and
the Duke of Guise; of which, Charles died wallowing in his own blood, issuing
out of all the conduits of his body: the Duke of Guise was suddenly slain at
Blois by Henry's command, for grief whereof the Queen Mother died within a
few days, and in revenge of the Guises death, not long after Henry himself
was murdered by a Friar. Lastly to cry quittance also with the Dr. in regard
of the ends of Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius and Calvin, whom he counts
Arch-heretikes, and terms Monsters: it may please him to remember, that
sundry of the Bishops of Rome who have been very Antichrists, and by his own
Platina and In B^ned. 4.
Genebrard, are called Monsters of men, have had most fearful and wretched
ends: For some have been poisoned, some murdered by Anti-Popes, Cron. l. 4.
some have died in prison. John the XII. even in the very act of adultery, was
suddenly stricken by the devil (says Sum. de Eccl. l. 2. c. 103.
Turrecremata,) and died without repentance, others that have compacted with
the devil, have been carried away by him, and, not to reckon up all that thus
have perished, seeing it would be too tedious, fifty Popes arow, being rather
Apostatical then Apostolical, and monsters of men, It is no marvel (says
Genebrard,) if they were so many in few years, and died quickly.

His last argument is the temporal prosperity of them which have defended the
Church: His examples are likewise a mere translation of Bellarmines 18th.
Chapter of the notes of the Church: So that for answer thereunto, I might
justly refer the Reader to them who have answered him, as also to my Reply
to the fourth Section of M. Doctors second chapter of his Letter to his
Majesty: But I choose rather to close up the whole with his Majesty's words, in
the latter end of his answer to Cardinal Perrons oration: History; says his
Majesty, and experience teach us, that disunion with the Pope has no whit
impeached the prosperity of kingdoms. Philip the fair reigned in peace and
prosperity, notwithstanding his attempts upon the Papal Sea. King Lewis the
twelfth defeated in battle the troops of Pope July the second, and his alies,
declared him fallen from the Papacy, and caused Crowns to be stamped, wherein
Rome is called Babylon; yet nevertheless was loved and honored of his
subjects, who gave him the title of Father of the people. Never did Great
Britain ever receive so great blessings of God, nor enjoyed so much peace and
plenty, as since the time that Popes have no more but the looking on and sent
no more their Legates to gather the tribute of S. Peter, and that the Kings of
England do no longer homage unto the Pope for their Crown, and are no more
lashed by Monks. What was Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland, before that God
lighted among them the torch of the Gospel, in comparison of the riches, and
prosperity wherein God has advanced them? The Common wealth of Venice, does
it enjoy less peace and prosperity then before, since they have taken from the
Pope one of his swords, and have shaken off his temporal power? On the
contrary side, the Kings of France, after they had given unto the Popes all
what they held in Italy, and the County of Auinion, have again received of
them but course entertainme^t. Popes have forged a donation of Constantine, to
the end to deface the memory of the donation of Pepin, and Charlemaine: They
have troubled the State, banding themselves for the sons of Lewis the
Courteous, against their own father, whose life was an example of innocence:
They have skimmed the Realm of Money by infinite pillages, wherewith the Kings
of France have endeavored to meet, by their pragmaticall sanction: They have
oftentimes interdicted the Realm, degraded their Kings, solicited their
neighbors to invade the kingdom, stirred up the people against the King,
whence many troubles and parricides have ensued. Rauilliac rendered this reason
of his attempt, because, said he, the King would make war against God,
inasmuch as he would make war against the Pope, and that the Pope was God:
Which makes me to marvel how the Cardinal could allege for example the
late trou^l^s, during which France fell foul with the Pope, seeing that the
Pope himself raised up those troubles. If the Kings or people of France,
having offended the Pope, God had otherwise sent among them some pestilence or
famine, this might with some probability have been taken for a revenge of the
injury done unto his Vicar; but seeing the Pope himself has caused these
evils, it is not God who punishes the injuries done unto the Pope, but the
Pope who reuengeth himself, and which is worse, without receiving any wrong:
Whence it app^areth, that to exhort the Kingdom to maintain union with the
Pope, by the remembrance of the calamities past, is not to exhort them to love
the Pope, but to call to mind the evils which he has caused, and to tremble
at his thundrings, and conspiracies, which hurt those only that fear them,
and which have drawn upon my kingdom many blessings. Now if France have had
any prosperity during the time that it well accorded with the Pope, this has
been because the Pope seeks the amity of those Princes that are in
prosperity, and which have means to annoy him: Kings are not therefore in
prosperity because the Pope is united with them, but the Pope is united with
them because they are in prosperity: Even as swallows arrive in the spring,
but make not the spring, so the Pope joins himself to the prosperity of
kingdoms, but makes not their prosperity. But if there happen any disaster
in a Kingdom, or any civil war, which puts an Estate in danger, the Pope
under a shadow of having care of the salvation of souls, thrusts himself
into the quarrel, and runs unto the wrack to reap his profit thereby: And
if a State change its Master, he will that the new possessour, unto whom he
has given aid, hold the kingdom of his liberality; but if the ancient
possessour conquer his enemies, notwithstanding the Popes thundrings, then his
Holiness offers him all sorts of Indulgences, and out of his compassion
receives him again, whom he was not able to destroy. Hitherto his Majesty,
then which nothing can be spoken more fully and effectually to this purpose.

For surely (not to speak of the prosperity of foreign countries, who have
broken off communion with the Roman Synagogue) he is more then blind that
cannot see, and too too envious, that seeing will not acknowledge, how
extraordinarily God has blessed this our Realm with all kind of benedictions
more then in former times, since it held the Pope to be Antichrist, and Rome
Babylon, and departed from them. Camb. (...).
When the late Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory undertook the protection of
the Low Countries against so mighty a Prince as the King Catholic, all the
world wondered at the greatness of her spirit, and the King of Sweden said,
that so doing she had pulled the Crown from her own head: yet so prosperous was
she in all that she took in hand, so victorious in her w^rres, so beloved at
home, so feared abroad, and in a word blessed with so continual a course of
happy success in all things, even to her lives end, that it has forced even
from those, who almost hold it a sin to give the least commendation of
Protestant Princes, an ingenuous and free acknowledgment thereof. [ A man may
truly say of this Princess (says Lib. Hist. 6. cap. 10.
Florimond Raemond, otherwise a bitter enemy to these of our Religion,) that
excepting the matter of Religion, and for the world, she had as great glory in
her kingdom, continuing in all her affairs so well authorized, and carried
matters with as great wisdom* as any Prince that has lived these many
years.]

But suppose we (though we have sufficiently proved it to be otherwise) that
the defenders of the Roman Sea have had temporal prosperity and felicity,
and that we have seldom thriued and prospered against them; what would your
Doctor hereupon infer? That therefore we should forsake the Church whereof we
are members, and with him retire our selves into the bosom of the Romish
Church, where temporal prosperity and felicity is to be found? Indeed it
may be that this was the Doctors chiefest motive unto his Apostacy, and that
perceiving his ambitious hopes to quail at home, he would try his fortunes
there, where Abbeyes, and Bishoprics, and perhaps also Cardinalshippes are
promised to such, as with more diligence then others, negotiate for the Pope.
But I would fa^e know of him how this agrees with that which he says
elsewhere, that the Cross is the most precious jewel of our Savior Christ,
and that of this jewel he always gives the greatest portion to his dearest
friends: For if the dearest friends of Christ be those of whom the Church
consists, and they have the greatest portion of his Cross, then is not
temporal prosperity and felicity a note of your Church: and if it be, then
is not the Cross the portion thereof. But to conclude all, although 1. Tim. 4.
Piety have the promise even of this life, and the Church of God sometime
abound in these worldly blessings, yet is it with condition of the Cross, as
God shall in his deep wisdom think it fittest, and ^uch a blessing as even
the Church of the malignant may be, and ever has been partaker of. For the
Mat. 5. 45.
Sun rises, and the rain falls indifferently upon both: B^^lus. 9. 1.
And no man knows either love or hatred by all that is before him. Yea even
the Jesuits of Rhemes on the place of Matthew before alleged confess as much:
We see (say they) that temporal prosperity of persons and countries, is no
sign of better men, or truer Religion; but as D^ Ciui^. Dei. Lib. 1. cap. 8.
S. Austin says, Temporal goods and evils are common both to the just and
wicked: which God therefore dispenses in this sort, that neither we too
greedily covet those goods which we see the wicked have, nor basely avoid
those evils which light upon the good. Wherefore all this discourse of the Dr.
is impertinent and frivolous.

As touching the Story of Burden and his associates (with which he concludes
his unsavory collections) how they went in Procession from Dover to Canterbury
in dirision of Catholics, and how grievously God punished it upon them, I hold
it for no better then a mere Canterbury tale, or to speak in the Romish
dialect, a godly fraud, or lie devised for the advantage of his holy Mother,
such as is the baiting of Catholics sewed up in Beare-skins with Mastiues in
Dover. And further answer then this I vouchsafe it not.

Soli Deo immortali sit gloria. FINIS.
Errata.
THe Author being farr^ from the Press whiles the Book was in it; the more
faults in printing must needs escape, whereof the chief observed are these:

Page 22 and 23. the letters of reference in the Doctors text are mistaken.
Page 47. lin. 6. marg. for, Chapt. 2 45. read Chap. 1. Sect. 19. Page 59. lin.
27. for, Pa^ilian, read^ Petilian. Page 72. lin. 17. for estate from, read^
estate in her conceit from. Page 73. lin. 6. for was not more, read was more.
Page 99. the quotations are disorderly placed. Page 100. lin. 11. for of his
book, read of his 5. book. Page 109. lin. 17. for more that, read more but
that. Page 164. the marginall note to be set against the 27. line. Page 191.
lin. 33. for Stanley, read Stucley. Page 197. lin. 32. f^r his own, read his
own niece. Page 219. lin. 12. marg. for is not, read is. Page 235. marg.
wants distance betwixt Suarez, and Beaumanoir. Page 256. lin. 2. marg. for your
Preachers, read^ our Preachers. Page 275. lin. 4. marg. for Monsieur Seruius,
read Monsieur Seruins. Page 277. lin. vl^. for alteration, read Altercation.
Page 279. lin. 35. for envy, read inueigh.


