AN APOLOGY OF THE POWER AND PROVIDENCE OF GOD IN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE WORLD.

OR AN EXAMINATION AND CENSVRE OF THE COMMON ERROVR TOUCHING NATVRES PERPETVALL
AND UNIVERSAL DECAY, DIVIDED INTO FOUR BOOKS: WHEREOF The first treates of
this pretended decay in general, together with some preparatiues thereunto.
The second of the pretended decay of the Heavens and Elements, together with
that of the Elementary bodies, man only excepted. The third of the pretended
decay of mankind in regard of age and duration, of strength and stature, of
arts and wits. The fourth of this pretended decay in matter of manners,
together with a large proof of the future consummation of the World from the
testimony of the Gentiles, and the uses which we are to draw from the
consideration thereof.


By G. H. D. D.

ECCLESTASTES 7. 10. Say not thou, what is the cause that the former days were
better then these, for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this. OXFORD,
Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and WILLIAM TVRNER, Printers to the famous
University. Anno Dom. 1627.

TO MY VENERABLE MOTHER THE FAMOVS AND FLOVRISHING UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.
WERE I destitute of all other arguments to demonstrate the providence of God
in the preservation of the World, and to prove that it does not universally and
perpetually decline, this one mightfully suffice for all, that thou, my
Venerable Mother, though thou wax old in regard of years, yet in this latter
age in regard of strength and beauty, waxest young again. Within the compass
of this last Centenarie and less, thou have brought forth such a number of
worthy Sons for piety, for learning, for wisdom; and for buildings have bin
so enlarged and enriched, that he who shall compare thee with thy self, will
easily find, that though thou be truly accounted one of the most ancient
Universities in the World yet so far art thou from withering and wrinkles,
that thou art rather become fairer and fresher, and in thine issue no less
happy then heretofore.

The three last Cardinals that this Nation had were thine, if that can add any
thing to thine honor. Those thine unnatural Sons, who of late days
forsook thee, and fled to thine Enemies camp, Harding, Stapleton, Saunders,
Raynolds, Martyn, Bristow, Campian, Parsons, even in their fighting against
thee, showed the fruitfulnes of thy womb, and the efficacy of that milk
which they drew from thy breasts. What one College ever yielded at one time
and from one Country three such Divines as Jewel, Raynolds, and Hooker, or
two such great wits and Heroical spirits as Sir Thomas Bodley, and Sir Henry
Sauill. How renowned in foreign parts are thy Moore, thy Sidney, thy Cambden?
what rare Lights in the Church were Humfreyes, Fox, Bilson, Field, Abbot? What
pillars those five sons of thine who at one time lately possessed the five
principal Sees in the Kingdom? So as if I should in this point, touching the
Worlds pretended decay be cast by the votes of others, yet my hope is that by
reflecting upon thy self, I shall be cleared and acquitted by thine.

And in confidence hereof I have to thy censu^ submitted this ensuing
Apology, which perchance to the Vulgar may seem somewhat strange, because
their ears have bin so long inured unto, and consequently their fancies
fore-stalled with the contrary opinion. But to thee I trust, who judge not
upon report, but upon trial, neither art swayed by number and lowdnes of
voices, but by weight of argument, it will appear not only just and
reasonable in that it vindicates the glory of the Creator, and a truth as
large and wide as the world it self, but profitable and useful for the
raising up of men's minds to an endeavor of equalling, yea and surpassing
their noble and worthy Predecessors in knowledge and virtue; it being certain
that the best Patterns which we have in them both, either extant at this
present, or recorded in monuments of auncienter times, had never been, had
they conceived that there was always an inevitable declination as well in the
Arts as matter of Manners, and that it was impossible to surmount those that
went before them.

I do not believe that all Regions of the World, or all ages in the same
Region afford wits always alike: but this I think, neither is it my opinion
alone, but of Scaliger, Vives, Budaeus, Bodine, and other great Clearkes, that
the wits of these latter ages being manured by industry, directed by precepts,
regulated by method, tempered by diet, refreshed by exercise, and encouraged
by rewards, may be as capable of deep speculations, and produce as masculine
and lasting birthes, as any of the ancienter times have done. But if we
conceive the^ to be Giants, and our selves Dwarfes, if we imagine all Sciences
already to have received their utmost perfection, so as we need not but
translate and comment upon that which they have done, if we so admire and dote
upon Antiquity as we emulate and envy, nay scorn and trample under foot
whatsoever the present age affords, if we spend our best time and thoughts in
clyming to honor, in gathering of riches, in following our pleasures, and in
turning the edge of our wits one against another, surely there is little hope
that we shall ever come near them, much less match them. The first step to
enable a man to the atchieuing of great designs is to be persuaded that by
endeavor he is able to atchieue it, the next not to be persuaded that
whatsoever has not yet been done, cannot therefore be done. Not any one man,
or nation, or age, but rather mankind is it which in latitude of capacity
answers to the universality of things to be known. And truly had our Fathers
thought so reverently of their predecessors, and withal of themselves so
basely, that neither any thing of moment was left for them to be done, nor in
case there had been, were they qualified for the doing thereof; we had wanted
many helps in learning, which by their travel we now enjoy. By means
whereof I see not but we might also advaunce, improve and enlarge our
patrimony, as they left it enlarged to us: And thereunto the Arts of Printing
and Navigation, the frequency of goodly Libraries, and liberality of
Benefactours, are such inducements and furtherances, that if we excel not all
ages that have gone before us, it is only because we are wanting to our selves.

And as our helps are more and greater for knowledge and learning, so likewise
for goodness and virtue, I mean, since the beams of Christian Religion
displayed themselves to the World, which for the rooting out of vice and
planting of virtue no Christian, I hope, will deny to be incomparably more
effectual then any other Religion that ever yet was heard of in the World: Or
if others should chance to make a doubt of the certainty of this truth, yet
cannot you who preach it, and publish it to others. Doubtless being rightly
applied without apish superstition on the one side, or peevish singularity on
the other, it works upon the Conscience more forceably, and consequently has
a greater power of making men not outwardly and formally, but really and
inwardly virtuous. And if we should look back into Histories, and compare time
with time, we shall easily find that where this Profession spread it self, men
have generally been more accomplished in all kind of moral and civil virtues
then before it took place.

It is true indeed that in process of time, through the ambition, covetousnes,
luxury, idleness, and ignorance of them who should have bin lights in the
Church, it too much degenerated from its Original purity, and thereupon
manners (being formed by it) were generally tainted, this corruption like a
leprosy diffusing it self from the head into all the body: But together with
the reviving of the Arts and Languages, which for sundry ages lay buried in
barbarism, the rust of superstition was likewise in many places scowred off
from Religion, which by degrees had crept upon it, and fretted deep into the
face of it, and the Arts being thus refined, and Religion restored to its
primitive brightness, manners were likewise reformed even among them, at least
in part and in show, who as yet admit not a full reformation in matter of
Religion. A foul shame then it were for us who profess a through reformation
in matter of doctrine, to be thought to grow worse in matter of manners, GOD
forbid it should be so, I hope it is not so, I am sure it should not be so:
That grace of God which has appeared more clearly to us then to our
forefathers, teaching us to adorn our profession with a gracious and virtuous
conversation, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world: soberly in regard of our selves,
righteously in regard of others, and godly in regard of religious exercises.

If then we come short of our Ancestors in knowledge, let us not cast it upon
the deficiencie of our wits in regard of the Worlds decay, but upon our own
sloth; if we come short of them in virtue, let us not impute it to the
declination of the World, but to the malice and faintness of our own wills;
if we feel the scourges of God upon our Land by mortality, famine,
unseasonable weather, or the like, let us not teach the people that they are
occasioned by the Worlds old age, and thereby call into question the
providence, or power, or wisdom, or justice, or goodness of the Maker thereof;
but by their and our sins, which is doubtless both the truer and more profitable
doctrine, and withal more consonant to the Sermons of Christ and his Apostles,
and the Prophets of God in like cases. And withal let us freely acknowledge
that Almighty God has bestowed many blessings upon these latter ages, which to
the former he denied, as in sending us virtuous and gracious Princes, and by
them the maintenance of piety, and peace, and plenty, and the like. Lest through
our ingratitude he withdraw them from us, and make us know their worth by
wanting them, which by enjoying them we understood not.

But I will not presume to advise where I should learn, only I will unfeignedly
wish and heartily pray, that at leastwise your practice may still make good
mine opinion, maintained in this Book, and refute the contrary and common
error opposed therein, that you may still grow in knowledge and grace, and
that your virtues may always rise and increase together with your buildings.
These latter without the former, being but as a body without a soul.

Yours to do you service to the utmost of his poor ability

G. H.

THE PREFACE.
TRuth it is, that this ensuing Treatise was long since in my younger years
begun by me for mine own private exercise and satisfaction, but afterward
considering not only the rarity of the subject, and variety of the matter, but
withal that it made for the redeeming of a captivated truth, the vindicating
of Gods glory, the advancement of learning, and the honor of the Christian and
reformed Religion, by the advice and with the approbation and encouragement of
such special friends, whose piety, learning, and wisdom I well know, and
much reverence, I resolved (permissu superiorum and none otherwise) to make it
public for the public good, and the encountering of a public error, which
may in some sort be equalled, if not preferred before the quelling of some
great monster. Neither do I take it to lie out of my profession, the
principal mark which I aim at throughout the whole body of the Discourse,
being an Apologeticall defense of the power and providence of God, his
wisdom, his truth, his justice, his goodness and mercy, and besides, a great
part of the book it self is spent in pressing Theological reasons, in
clearing doubts arising from thence, in producing frequent testimonies from
Scriptures, Fathers, Schoolmen, and modern Divines, in proving that
Antichrist is already come from the writings of the Romanists themselves, in
confirming the article of our faith touching the Worlds future and total
consummation by fire, and a day of final judgment from discourse of reason
and the writings of the Gentiles, and lastly by concluding the whole work with
a pious meditation touching the uses which we may and should make of the
consideration thereof, serving for a terror to some, for comfort to others,
for admonition to all And how other men may stand affected in reading, I know
not, sure I am that in writing, it often lifted up my soul in admiring and
praising the infinite wisdom and bounty of the Crator in maintaining and
managing his own work, in the government and preservation of the Universe,
which in truth is nothing else but (as the Schools speak) continuata
productio, a continuated production: and often did it call to my mind those
holy raptures of the Psalmist; O Lord our governor, how excellent is thy Name
in all the world? Thou Lord have made me glad through thy works, and I will
rejoice Psalm. 8. 1. Psalm. 92. 4. 5. 6.
in giving praise for the operations of thy hands, O Lord, how glorious are thy
works, and thy thoughts are very deep. An unwise man does not well consider
this, and a fool does not well understand it. And again, The 111. 2. 3.
works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein, His work is worthy to be praised and had in honor, and his
righteousness endures for ever.

And though whiles I have labored to free the world from old age, I feel it
creeping upon my self, yet if it shall so please the same great and gracious
Lord, I intend by his assistance spating me life and health hereafter to write
Another Apology of his power and providence in the government of his Church,
which perchance by some may be thought both more proper for me, and for these
times more necessary, though he that shall narrowly observe the prints of the
Almighties footsteppes, traced throughout this ensuing discourse, may not
unjustly from thence collect, both comfort and assurance, that as the Heavens
remain unchangeable, so does the Church triumphant in Heaven, and as all
things under the cope of heaven vary and change, so does the militant here on
earth; it has its times and turns, sometimes flowing and again ebbing with
the sea, sometimes waxing, and again waning with the Moon, which great light,
it seems, the Almighty therefore set the lowest in the heavens, and nearest
the Earth, that it might daily put us in mind of the constancy of the one, and
inconstancy of the other, her self in some sort partaking of both, though in a
different manner; of the one in her substance, of the other in her visage.

And if the Moon thus change, and all things under the Moon, why should we
wonder at the change of Monarchies and Kingdoms? much less petty states and
private families: they rise, and fall, and rise again, and fall again, that no
man might either too confidently presume, because they are subject to
continual alteration, or cast away all hope, and fall to despair, because
they have their seasons and appointed times of returning again.

Nemo confidat nimium secundis, Sen.

Nemo desperet meliora, lapsus:
Miscet haec illis, prohibetque Clotho
Stare fortunam.
Let him that stands take heed lest that he fall,
Let him that is fallen hope he may rise again;
The providence divine that mixeth all,
Chains joy to grief by turns, and loss to gain.
I must confess that sometimes looking steadfastly upon the present face of
things both at home and abroad, I have been often put to a stand, and
staggered in mine opinion, whither I were in the right or no; and perchance
the state of my body, and present condition, in regard of those fair hopes I
sometimes had, served as false perspectiue glasses to look through, but when
again I abstracted and raised my thoughts to an higher pitch, and as from a
vantage ground took a larger view, comparing time with time, and thing with
thing, and place with place, and considered my self as a member of the
Universe, and a Citizen of the World, I found that what was lost to one part,
was gained to another; and what was lost in one time, was to the same part
recovered in another; and so the balance by the divine providence overruling
all, kept upright. But commonly it fares with men in this case, as with one who
looks only upon some libbet, or end of a piece of Arras, he happily conceiues
an hand or head which he sees, to be very vnartificially made; but unfolding
the whole, soon finds that it carries a due and just proportion to the body;
so, qui de pauca resp^cit, de facili pronuntiat (says Aristotle) he that is so
narrow eyed as he locks only to his own person or family to his own
corporation or nation, or the age wherein himself lives, will peradventure
quickly conceive, and as some pronounce, that all things decay and go
backward, which makes men murmr and repine against Ged, under the names of
Fortune and Destiny, whereas he that as a part of mankind in general, takes
a view of the universal, compares person with person, family with family,
corporation with corporation, nation with nation, age with age; suspends his
judgment, and upon examination clearly finds, that all things work together
Romans 8. 28.
for the best to them that love God: and that though some members suffer, yet
the whole is no way thereby indammaged at any time; and at other times those
same members are again relieved, as the Sun when it sets to us, it rises to
our Antipodes, and when it remooues from the Northern parts of the world, it
cherishes the Southern, yet stays not there, but returns again with his
comfortable beams to those very parts which for a time it seemed to have
forsaken: O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and
declare the wonders that he has done for the children of men! or at leastwise
cry out in admiration with the Apostle, O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge Romans 11. 33.
of our God, how unsearchable are his paths, and his ways past finding out!

Yet the next way, in some measure to find them out, (so far as is possible
for us poor worms here crawling in a mist upon the face of the Earth) is,
next the sacred Oracles of supernatutall and revealed Truth; to study the great
Volume of the Creature, and the Histories not only of our own, but of
foreign Countries, and those not only of the present, but more ancient
times. Enquire I pray thee of the former age, and prepare thy self to the
search of their Fathers, for we Job. 8. 8
are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth are but a
shadow. If then to make my party good, and to wait upon Divinity, I have
called in subsidiary aids, from Philosophers, Historiographers,
Mathematitians, Grammarians, Logicians, Poets, Orators, Soldiers, Travelers,
Lawyers, Physicians, and if I have in imitation of Tertullian, Cyprian,
Eusebius, Augustine, Lactantius, Arnobius, Minutius, endeavored to cut the
throats of the Paynims with their own swords, and pierced them with their
own quills, I hope no learned man, or lover of Learning will censure me for
this. Philosophy and the Arts I must account a part of mine own profession;
and for Physic and the Laws, I have therein consulted the chief, as well in
this University, as out of it, of mine own acquaintance; nay in History, the
Mathematiques and Divinity it self, I have not only had the approbation of
the public professors therein; for the maine points in my book, which
concern their several professions, but some pieces I must acknowledge as
received from them, which I have made bold to insert into the body of my
discourse; let no man think then that I maintain a paradoxe for ostentation of
wit, or have written out of spleen, to gall any man in particular, nor yet to
humor the present times; the times themselves, mine indisposition that way,
and resolution to sit down content with my present fortunes; if they serve not
to give others satisfaction therein, yet do they fully to clear me to my
self, from any such aspersion: yet thus much, I hope, I safely may say without
suspicion of flattery, that by the goodness of GOD, and our gracious
Sovereign under GOD, we yet enjoy many great blessings which former ages did
not, and were we thankful for these as we ought, and truly penitent for our
excess in all kind of monstrous sins (which above all, threatens our ruin)
I nothing doubt but upon our return to our God by humiliation and newness of
life, he would soon dissolve the cloud which hangs over us, and return unto
us with the comfortable beams of his favor, and make us to return each to
other with mutual imbracements of affection and duty, and our Armies and
Fleetes to return with spoil and victory, and reduce again as golden and
happy times, as ever we or our forefathers saw: but if we still go on with
an high hand, and a stiff neck in our profaneness, our pride, our luxury, our
uncharitableness, our unnatural divisions in Church and Commonwealth, there
needs no prophetical spirit to divine what will shortly become of us; Turn
us; O turn us again O Lord God of hosts, show the light of thy Countenance
and we shall be whole; show the light of thy Countenance and we shall be
provident in counsel, successful in war, sober in peace, a terror to our
enemies, and a comfort to our allies and confederates. Turn thee again thou
God of hosts, look down from heaven, behold and visit this vine and the
place of the vineyard that thy right hand has planted: and the branch that
thon made so strong for thy self.

We need go no farther then the nation of the Jews for a notable instance in
this kind; who at times more zealous then they in the worship of God and the
exercises of Religion? and who again at other times more rebellious? It is
said of them in the Psalm, then believed they his words; but presently it
follows in the very next verse, they soon forgot his works: and according to
their obedience or rebellion, so were they either prosperous or unfortunate in
the course of their affairs; during their faith and fidelity toward God,
every man of them was in war as a thousand strong, and as much as a great
Senate for counsel in peaceable deliberations; contrariwise, if they swerued
(as often they did) their wonted courage and magnanimity forsook them utterly;
their soldiers and military men trembled at the sight of the naked sword; when
they entered into mutual conference, and sat in counsel for their own good;
that which children might have seen, their gravest Senatou^s could not
discern, their Prophets saw darkness in steed of visions, and the wise and
prudent were as men bewitched.

If then we come short of that courage and valor, which made our Ancestors
so renowned by sea and land, not only in France, and Spain, and the
Netherlands, but in Palaestina it self; sure it is not, because the World
declines, but because our luxury increases, the most evident symptom of a
declining state; for as all Empires have risen to their greatness by virtue,
and specially by sobriety and frugalitie; so is it clear that by vice, and
specially by luxury, which of necessity draws on softnes and cowardice) they
have all again declined and come to nothing; and out of their ashes have
others sprung up, which likewise within a while (such a circulation there is in
all things) have bin turned into ashes again.

As when the wind the angry Ocean moves, Bartas in his Colonies.

Wave hunteth wave, and billow billow shoves:
So do all Nations justle each the other,
And so one people does pursue another,
And scarce a second has the first vnhoused,
Before a third him thence again has rowsed.
-- Sic Medus ademit Claudian l. 3. in laud^ S^ilicouis

Assyrio, Medoque tulit moderamina Perses,
Subjecit Persen Macedo, cessurus and ipse
Romany.
Thus did the Medes root out the Assyrian race,
The Persian quickly foiled the Medes, in place
Of him subdued, up starts the Macedo,
Who eftsoons yeeldes unto the Roman foe.
And lastly the Romans themselves as by virtue and piety, in their
superstitious way they wanne, and mightily enlarged their Empire, so being come
to the top, they lost it again by vice and irreligion: so true is that of the
Comicall Poet.

Haec nisi vrbe aberunt, centuplex Plau^ut i^ Persa.

Murus rebus servandis parum est.
Unless these vices banished be,
What ever forts you have,
An hundred walls together put,
Will not have power to save.
With whom accords the Tragical

-- Vbi non est pudor, Seneca in Thyeste.

Nec cura juris, sanctitas, pietas, fides,
Instabile regnum est.
Where is no modesty, nor equity,
Nor sanctity, nor piety,
No nor fidelity,
In such a Kingdom certainly
There can be no stability.
Who so is wise then will ponder these things, and they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

Again, for matter of learning and knowledge if we come short of the Ancients;
we need not impute it to natures decay; our own riot, our idleness and
negligence in regard of them, will sufficiently discharge nature, and justly
cast back the blame upon our selves. Falsa est enim atque inepta illa
quorundam similitudo, quam multi tanquam acutissimam atque appositissimam
excipiunt, nos ad priores collatos, esse vt nanos L. Vives de (...). corrupt.
(...). lib: 1.
in humeris gigantum: non est ita, nec nos sumus nani, nec illi homines
gigantes, sed omnes ejusdem staturae, and quidem nos altius evecti eorum
beneficio: maeneat modo in nobis, quod in illis, studium, attentio animi,
vigilantia, and amor very: quae si absint, jam non nani sumus, nec in gigantum
humeris sedemus, sed homines iustae magnitudinis humi prostrati. For a false
and fond similitude it is of some, which they take up as a most witty and
proper one, that we being compared to the Ancients, are as Dwarfes upon the
shoulders of Giants: it is not so, neither are we Dwarfes, nor they Giants, but
we are all of one stature, save that we are lifted up somewhat higher by
their means, conditionally there be found in us the same studiousnesse,
watchfulness and love of truth, as was in the^: which if they be wanting,
then are we not dwarfs, nor set on the shoulders of giants, but men of a
co^petent stature groueling on the earth.

We wonder (as well we may) at Aristotle's wit expressed in his voluminous
works, but his indefatigable pains in study, we consider not, holding in his
hand when he laid him down to rest, a ball of brass, which as soon as
sleep overtooke him, fell into a basin of brass, purposely set under, that so
being awakened with the noise thereof, he might again return to his book*
and though he were, as witnesses Censorinus, of so crasie a body, (that it is
more strange he should live to his Climactericall year, then that he then
died) yet by the invincible strength of his mind, did he wade through a world
of difficulties, and has thereby left such fruits thereof to the world, as
has deservedly won him immortal honor. Seneca a man of an admirable
vivacity of spirit, writes of himself, that one day he heard Epist. 108.
Attalus the Philosopher in his public Lectures, commend a bed which
yielded not to the body, and thereupon adds, tali vtor etiam senex, in qua
vestigium apparere non possit; such a one do I now use, though well stricken
in years, in which my body leaves no print behind it: he likewise by the
persuasion of the same Attalus abstained from Oisters, from wine, from
bathings, he fed sometimes upon a crust of dry bread, sometimes upon wild
fruit, taken from the hedge, and quenched his thirst with fair running water,
and this he did for love of knowledge, in a most luxurious age, living in the
court it self, abounding in riches and honor, and having all kinds of
pleasures at command. The like does Plinius Caec^us in his Epistle to Marcus,
write of his uncle Tutour to the Emperor Vespasian, as was Seneca to Nero: to
his rare natural endowments, he added incessant watchfulness, and labor in
reading and writing, his diet was sparing and thin, his sleep short and
little, in so much that his Nephew Caecilius freely confesses of himself:
soleo ridere cum me quidam studiosum vocant, qui, si comparer illi, sum
desidiosissimus: I am wont to smile when they term me a hard student who
being compared with him, am in truth a very truant. But to come nearer home,
King Alfred thought to be founder or restorer of the University of Oxford is
reported to have cast the natural day, consisting of 24 hours, into three
parts; whereof the one he spent in affairs of state, a second in the service
of his body, and the residue in prayer, study, and writing, which spaces of
time, having then none other engine for that purpose, he measured by a great
wax light divided into so many parts, receiving notice by the keeper thereof,
as the several hours passed in burning.

Such examples as these of the Ancients we admire, we commend, we willingly
read and recite, but follow the fashion of our own times.

Laudamus veteres sed nostris vtimur annis.
The common complaint is, that we want time, but the truth is, Non parum
habemus temporis, sed multum perdimus, we do not so much want Seneca. Idem.
as waste it, either male agendo, or nihil agendo, or aliud agendo, either in
doing naughtines, or nothing, or impertinencies; we do bonas horas male
collocare, trifle out our precious hours in eating and drinking, and sleeping,
and sporting, and gaming, and dressing our bodies, and then give out and
persuade our selves, that Nature forsooth is decayed, that our bodies cannot
endure that study which our Predecessors did: and truly I think many justly
complain of weak and crasie bodies, but withal that more have made them so,
by intemperance then study, or found them so by nature; let us then lay the
fault where it is, and accuse our selves, not Nature, or rather God under that
name. And yet what the bodies of men even in these latter ages being thoroughly
put to it, are able to endure, the extant works of Tostatus, Erasmus, Gesner,
Calvin, Luther, Baronius, Bellarmine, and others sufficiently testify; it is
to this effect a true speech of Arnoldus Clapmarus in his nobile triennium,
incredibile est quantum brevissimo tempore humana possit assequi industria, it
is incredible what the industry of man in a very short time may attain unto.
Master Fox in his Latin Epistle to the Reader, prefixed before his Acts and
Monuments, reports of himself, that having but a sickly body, in less then
eighteen months space he read authors, conferred copies, searched records,
gathered matters, digested it into order, revised it, etc. for that great
work, and this to be true, says he, noverunt ij qui testes adfuerunt and
temporis conscij, and laboris socij, they know full well who were present as
witnesses, being both privy to my time, and companions of my labo^* And Joseph
Scaliger in the life of his father Julius tells us likewise of himself, that
when he began first with the Greek tongue in one and twenty days he learned
over all Homer with the comment, and within four months (to use his own
words) he devoured all the rest of the Greek Poets They were doubtless great
matters, which Peter Ramus went through in a short time, as appears in his
life; yet not so much by the quickenesse and strength of wit (though therein he
excelled) as by his assiduity and temperance, which was such that he would
drink no wine, till by his Physicians he was enjoined so to do; and from his
youth to his dying day never used by his good will any other bedding then
straw, and in his studies so watchful he was, that if he heard in the morning
the smiths or carpenters, or other artisans at work before he were stirring,
he would blame himself of negligence and sloathfulnes, that they should
prevent him, and be more diligent in their mechanical trades, then he in the
study of the liberal sciences: And (to add one more) of our rare Jewel,
Doctor Humphreyes testifies, that he was, and studiosorum calcar, et studiorum
norma, et indefessae diligentiae singular specimen, a spur to students, a rule
of studies, and a singular president of unwearied studiousnesse; and again,
victus nimis scholasticus et simplex fuit, corpus macilentum et perimbecillum,
vt mireris tot laboribus exhauriendis potuisse sufficere: his diet was very
sparing, and somewhat too scholer-like, his body thin and very weak, so as
a man might justly wonder, how it could endure and bring about such and so many
labors.

And certain it is (what ever our wits pretend to the contrary) that never
any became excellent in any profession, or was famous for any notable work,
who was not abstemious or industrious.

Multa tulit fecitque puer, sudavit et alsit.
He did both do and suffer many things.
Both heat and cold: etc.
And I verily think did the students in our Universities, carefully and
constantly observe those hours for prayer (especially in the morning) which
our wise and godly founders by their local statutes require in our several
Colleges, we should soon by Gods blessing find a change both in manners and
learning; and thereby stop the mouths of such both at home and abroad, as cry
out that we have lost our ancient reputation, and that the Jesuits by the
strictnes of their discipline have gotten the start of us, and won the
spurs from us. Antiquitus strictissime Pi^seus Relat. Hist. tom. 1 c. 9 de
Acad. Oxon.
fuit observatum vt exceptis graduatis, nemo animi, vel etiam negotij cujusquam
sui causa e Collegio suo sine superioris perita et obtenta licentia, (socio
etiam assignato) egredi posset; ingredi civium domos, prandium aut coenam apud
eos sumere, non nisi maxima vrgente causa, and quasi ex speciali indulto,
cuiquam licuit: popinas autem intrare, and in hospitijs publicis convivari, vel
in aedibus alicujus civis pernoctare piaculum erat, nam in his si quis
deliquisset, ex Academia nisi magna aliqua ratio subfuisset cum dedecore
eijciebatur. I need not English it, but wish it practiced. And conclude this
point with that of Quintilian, Orat. 2. 5.
which cannot too often be remembered; Non enim nos tarditatis natura damnavit,
sed vltra nobis quod oportebat indulsimus, ita non tam ingenio nos illi
superarunt, quam proposito. Nature has not made us more incapable then our
Ancestors, but we have been too indulgent to our selves, by which means it
comes to pass that they surmount us not so much by the goodness of wits, as
studiousnesse and endeavor.

Now for the work it self I am well assured (as all other Books and actions)
it will be diversely censu^d as men stand diversely affected: if but three guests
meet at a feast, they will hardly accord in one dish; and truly I think that
as men's fancies (could they be seen) would be found to differ more then their
faces; so are their judgments more different then their tastes: but this common
courtesy (due by the Laws of civility and humanity) I shall crave (which I
hope no ingenuous mind will deny me) that I be not condemned before I be
understood.

Ne mea dona tibi studio disposta fideli, Lucret. lib. 1.

Intellecta prius quam sint, contemptarelinquas.
Do not cast off with surly scorn
What here I offer thee,
Before thou understand aright
What here is said by me.
Legant and postea despiciant, ne videantur non ex judicio, sed ex odij
praesumptione Hieronymus
ignorata damnare: first read, and then despise lest thou seem to condemn
that which thou know not, rather out of malicious prejudice, then advised
judgment, and if upon a serious perusal and ballancing of mine arguments any
shall yet vary from me, I quarrel him not, but hope we may both enjoy our
opinions without any breach of faith or charity; only I say that the question
is surely noble, and worthy to be discussed by a more learned pen, as being a
disquisition touching the ship wherein we all sail whether it be staunch
or no, and herein will be the trial, Opinionum commenta dies delet, naturae
iudicia confirmat; time wears out dreams of fancy, but strengthens the
dictates of Nature and Truth; as the Sun beams being imp^isoned, as it
were, for a time, work thorough a thick mist, though with some difficulty,
but being once broken through, and the mist dispelled, they shine out and
continue clear.

I have walked (I confess) in an untrodden path, neither can I trace the prints
of any footsteppes that have gone before me, but only as it led them to some
other way, thwarting, and upon the by, not directly: some parts belonging to
this discourse, some have slightly handled, none thoroughly considered of the
whole: which I speak not to derogate from their worth (it being puerilis
jactantiae accusando Hieronymus.
illustres viros suo nomini famam quaerere; a childish kind of bragging to
hunt after applause by contradicting famous men) but only to show that whiles
they intended another thing, they might happily in this be carried away with
the common stream: for surely such a sweet harmony there is between all the
members of this body, such a cohaerence and mutual dependence betwixt all the
linkes of this chain, that he who takes a view of the whole, will easily
grant that he might be deceived by looking upon some parts thereof.

Yet some perchance will conceive, I might have delivered my mind with less
expense of w^des and time, and truly I must acknowledge that in multiloquio
non deerit peccatum; it cannot be but in speaking so much, somewhat should be
spoken amiss. Yet withal it must be remembered, that being to grapple with
such a Giantlike monster, I could not think him dead till I had his head off:
and that which to some may seem superfluous or impertinent, will happ^ly by
others be thought not unprofitable or unpleasant, the pains is mine, and if
it be over-done, done I am sure it is; if I have said more then enough,
enough is said to serve the turn.

And if any shall have a mind to publish any thing against that I have
written, I shall desire it may be done fairly, not by sucking of the soars,
and flying over the sound parts, nor by nibbling upon the twigges, and utmost
branches, but by striking at the root or body of the tree, or at leastwise
some of the principal limbs thereof; and in the mean season, I say with
Saint Augustine, Quisquis haec legit vbi pariter certus est, pergat mecum; vbi
pariter haesitat quaerat mecum; Lib. 1. decri. c. 3
vbi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me; vbi meum, revocet me: whosoever thou
art that reads this discourse, where thou art assured go on with me, where thou
art in doubt, search with me; where thou do acknowledge thine error, return
to me; where thou find mine, recall me; and conclude with Lactantius:
Etiamsi nulli alij, nobis certe proderit, delectabit) se conscientia,
gaudebitque men's in veritatis se luce versari, quod est animae pabulum
incredibili quadam jucunditate perfusum: if this Treatise profit none else,
yet shall it me, my conscience shall comfort it self, and my mind be
refreshed in the light of Truth, which is the food of the soul, mixed with
delight incredible.

Rode caper vites, tamen hic, cum stabis ad aras,
Jn tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit.
ERRATA.
Page 5. lin. 13. read Psammeticus, p. 18. l. 16. r. thought. p. 26. l. 27. r.
miror. p. 27. l. 3. r. words. p 31. l. 5. r. in antiquity. p. 45. l. 13. r.
almost half a pound. p. 62. l 40. r. are. p. 73. l. 17. r. commenteth. p. 80.
l. 42. r. mentitus. p. 81. l. 17. r. be diminished. p. 84. l. 15. r aestate p.
90. l. 41. r. speaks p. 95. l. 2. r. about. p. 100. l. 34. r. religion. p.
101. l. 31. r. incommoda. p. 104. l. 5. r. Ex. ibid. l. 12. r. milk. p. 112.
l. 10. r. drought. p. 118. l. 40. r. better. p. 124. l. 7. r. naturalis. p.
129. l. 27. r. Blancanus. p. 133. l. 37. r. Sylvine. p. 136. l. 19. r. better
cheap. with. ibid. l. vlt. r. his. p. 144. l. 26. r. touching. p. 145 l. 4. r.
reason. ibid. l. 26. r. mortal, that if he sinned not, he could not. p. 153.
l. 4. r. Archepius. p, 163. l. vlt. r. nineteen. p. 1. 7. l. 42. r. namely. p.
176. l.. 10. r. the. ibid. l. 11. r, that. p. 191. l. 21. r. regum. p. 210. l.
12. r. Yolland. p. 234. l. 41. r. Fuchsius. p. 241. l. 44. r. Polyaenus. p.
269. l. 24. r. innumerabiles. p. 277. l. 37. r. (...). p. 285. l. 8. r.
lawmaker. p. 338. l. 10. in marg. r. c. 22. p. 385. l. 19. r. immundis. p. 403.
l. 47. r. daughter. p. 413. l. 4. r. before. p. 415. l. 16. r. venturous. p.
418. l, penult. r. by the Romans. p. 419. l. 21: r: except: p: 443: l: 31: r:
terras: ibid l: 39: r: naught: p: 448: l: 35: r: infinitely in their: p: 401:
l: 29: r: of.

These are the greatest I have met with, not doubting but some of consequence
have escaped me, and for those of lesser note I have passed them over, desiring
the reader if he will not take the pains to amend al, yet he would be pleased
to set these four or five right: p: 45: lin: 13: p: 104: l: 12: p: 136: l: 19:
p: 145: l: 26: p: 163: l: vlt:

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL BOOKS, CHAPTERS, AND SECTIONS.
LIB. 1. Of this pretended decay in general, together with some preparatiues
hereunto.
CAP. 1. Of diverse other opinions, justly suspected, if not rejected, though
commonly received.
Sect. 1 In Divinity. page 1. Sect 2 In Philosophy. p. 4. Sect. 3 In History
Ecclesiastical. p. 5. Sect. 4 In History Civil or National. p. 7. Sect. 5
In Natural History. p. 8. Sect. 6 With an application thereof to the present
purpose. p. 11.
CAP. 2. Of the Reasons inducing the Author to the writing and publishing of
this discourse.
Sect. 1 Whereof the first is the redeeming of a captivated truth. page 12.
Sect. 2 The second is the vindicating of the Creators honor. p. 14. Sect. 3
The third is, for that the contrary opinion quails the hopes and blunts the
edge of virtuous endeavors. p. 15. Sect. 4 The fourth is, for that it makes
men more careless, both in regard of their present fortunes, and in providing
for posterity. p. 19. Sect. 5 The fifth and last, is the weak grounds which
the contrary opinion is founded upon, as the fictions of Poets, the morosity of
old men, the overvaluing of Antiquity, and disesteeming of the present times.
p. 22.
CAP. 3. The Controversy touching the worlds decay stated, and the Method
held through this ensuing treatise proposed.
Sect. 1 Touching the pretended decay of the mixed bodies. page 27. Sect. 2 Of
the Elements in regard of their quantity and dimensions. p. 28. Sect. 3 In
regard of their qualities. p. 31. Sect. 4 Of mankind in regard of Manners and
the Arts. p. 32. Sect. 5 In regard of the duration of their lives, their
strength, and stature. p. 35. Sect. 6. The precedents of the Chapter summarily
recollected, and the Method observed in the ensuing Treatise proposed. p. 37.
CAP. 4. Touching the worlds decay in general.
Sect. 1 The first general Reason that it decays not, is drawn from the
power of that Spirit that quickens and supports it; the second and third, from
the consideration of the several parts whereof it consists. page 38. Sect. 2
The fourth, for that such a decay as is suppposed, would in time point out the
very date of the worlds expiration, and consequently of the second coming of
Christ. p. 42. Sect. 3 The fifth, for that upon the supposition of such a decay
as is pretended, the vigor and strength of the parts thereof must of necessity
long since have bin utterly exhausted and worn out. p. 44. Sect. 4 The sixth
argument is drawn from the Authority of Solomon, and his reason taken from the
Circulation and running about of all things as it were in a ring. p. 45.
CAP. 5. General arguments made for the worlds decay, refuted.
Sect. 1 The first general objection drawn from reason, answered, which is,
that the Creature the nearer it approaches to the first mould, the more perfect
it is, and according to the degrees of its remoueall and distance from thence,
it incurres the more imperfection and weakness p. 47. Sect. 2 The second
answered, which is, that the several parts of the world decay, which should
argue a lingering consumption in the whole. p. 50 Sect. 3 The third answered,
which is taken from the authority of Saint Cyprian. p. 50. Sec. 4 The same
authority of Saint Cyprian farther answered, by opposing against it the
authority of Arnobius, supported with ponderous and pressing reasons. p. 55.
Sec. 5. The fourth answered, which is borrowed from the authority of Esdras. p.
60. Sec. 6 The rest answered, pretended to be taken from authority of holy
Scriptures. p. 62.
LIB. 2. Of the pretended decay in the Heavens and Elements, together with that
of the Elementary bodies, man only excepted.
CAP. 1. Touching the pretended decay of the heavenly bodies in regard of their
substance.
Sect. 1 Of their working upon this inferior world, and the dependence of it
upon them. page 64. Sec. 2 Their pretended decay in their substance refuted by
reason. p. 67. Sec. 3 An objection drawn from Job, answered. p. 69. Sec. 4
Another taken from Psalm. 102. answered. p. 71. Sec. 5 A third taken from the
apparition of New stars, answered. p. 74. Sec. 6 The last drawn from the
Eclypses of the Sun and Moon, answered. p. 75.
CAP. 2 Touching the pretended decay of the heavenly bodies in regard of their
motions.
Sec. 1 The first reason drawn from the causes of that Motion. p. 78. Sec. 2
The second, from the certainety of demonstrations upon the Celestial Globe:
The third, from a particular view of the proper motions of the Planets, which
are observed to be the same at this day as in former ages, without any
variation: The fourth, from the infallible and exact prediction of their
Oppositions, Conjunctions, and Eclypses for many ages to come: The fifth from
the testimony of sundry grave Authors, averring the perpetual constancy and
immutability of their motions. p. 80. Sec. 3 The same truth farther proved from
the testimony of Lactantius and Plutarch. p. 84. Sec. 4 An objection of du
Moulins, touching the motion of the polar star, answered. p. 85.
CAP. 3. Touching the pretended decay in the light of the heavenly bodies.
Sect. 1 The first reason taken from the nature of the heavenly light, and
those things whereunto it is resembled, p. 86. Sec. 2 The second, for that it
ha^h nothing contrary unto it, and here Pareus and Mollerus are censured for
holding that the light of heaven (...) impaired. p. 87. Sec. 3 Hereunto other
Reasons are added, and the testimony of Eugubinus vouched. p. 88.
CAP. 4. Touching the pretended decay in the warmth of the heavenly bodies.
Sect. 1 That the stars are not of a fiery nature or hot in themselves. p.
90. Sec. 2 That the heat they breed springs from their light, and consequently
their light being not decayed, neither is the warmth arising therefro^, p. 91.
Sec. 3 Two objections answered, the one drawn from the present habitablenes of
the torride Zone, the other from a supposed approach of the Sun nearer the
earth ^hen in former ages. p. 93. Sec. 4 A third objection answered, taken from
a supposed remoueall of the Sun more Southerly from us then in former ages.
p. 94.
CAP. 5. Touching the pretended decay of the heavenly bodies in regard of their
influences.
Sect. 1. Of the first kind of influence from the highest immovable heaven,
called by Divines, Coelum Empyreum. p. 97. Sec. 2 Of the second kind, derived
from the Planets and fixed stars. p. 98. Sec. 3 That the efficacy of these
influences cannot be fully comprehended by us. p. 99. Sec. 4 That neither of
them is decayed in their benign and favorable effects, but that curious
inquisition into them is to be forborne. p. 100.
CAP. 6. Touching the pretended decay of the Elements in general.
Sect. 1 That the Elements are still in number four. p. 102. Sec. 2 That the
Elements still retain the same properties that anciently they did, and by
mutual interchange and compensation the same bounds and dimentions. p. 106.
Sec. 3 An objection drawn from the continual mixture of the Elements each
with other, answered. p. 109.
CAP. 7. Touching the pretended decay of t^ Air in regard of the temper
thereof.
Sect. 1 Of excessive drouth and cold in former ages, and that in foreign
Countries. page 110. Sect. 2 Of excessive cold and rain in former ages here
a^tome, and of the common complaint of unseasonable weather in all ages,
together with the reason thereof. p. 112. Sect. 3 Of contagious diseases, and
specially the plague, both here at home (...) abroad, in former ages. p. 113.
Sect. 4 Of Earthquakes in former ages, and their terrible effects, elegantly
described by Seneca. p. 116. Sect. 5 Of dreadful burnings in the bowels of
Aetna and Vesuvius, and the rising of a new Island out of the Sea with hideous
roaring near Putzol in Italy. p. 117. Sect. 6. Of the nature of Comets and the
uncertainty of predictions from them, as also that the number of those which
have appeared of late years is less then has usually been observed in
former ages, and of other fiery and watery meteors. p. 119. Sect. 7 Of strange
and impetuous winds and lightnings in former ages above those of the present.
p. 121.
CAP. 8. Touching the pretended decay of the waters and the fish the inhabiters
thereof.
Sect. 1 That the Sea, and Rivers, and Bathes are the same at this present as
they were for many ages past, or what they lose in one place and time, they
recover in another, by the testimony of Strabo, Ovid, and Pontanus. p. 123.
Sect. 2 That fishes are not decayed in regard of their store, dimensions, or
duration. p. 125.
CAP. 9. Touching the pretended decay of the earth, together with the plants,
and beasts, and minerals.
Sect. 1 The divine meditation of Seneca and Pliny upon the globe of the earth.
An objection out of Aelian touching the decrease of mountains, answered. That
all things which spring from the earth return thither again, and consequently
it cannot decay in regard of the fruitfulnes in the whole: Other objections of
less consequence, answered. p. 128. Sect. 2 Another objection touching the
decay of the fruitfulnes of the holy Land, fully answered. p. 131, Sect 3 The
testimonies of Columella and Pliny produced that the earth in it self is as
fruitful as in former ages, if it be well made and manured: together with the
reason why so good and so great store of wine, is not now made in this kingdom
as formerly has bin. p. 133. Sect. 4 An argument drawn from the present state
of husbandmen, and another from the many and miserable dearths in former ages,
together with an objection taken from the inhauncing of the prizes of victuals
in latter times, answered. p. 136. Sect. 5 That there is no decrease in the
fruitfulness, the quantities, or virtues of plants and simp^* nor in the store
and goodness of metals and mineralls, as neither in the bigness or life of
beasts, together with an objection touching the Elephant mentioned in the first
of Macchabes, answered. p. 139. Sect. 6 A^ection taken from the Eclypses of the
planets answered. p. 142.
LIB 3. Of the pretended decay of mankind in regard of age and duration, of
strength and stature, of arts and wits.
CAP. 1. Touching the pretended decay of Men in regard of their age, and first
by way of comparison between the ages of the Ancients, and those of latter
times.
Sect. 1 Of the short life of man in regard of the duration of many other
Creatures, and that he was created mortal, but had he not fallen, should have
been preserved to immortality. page 144. Sect. 2 Of the long lives of the
Patriarchs, and of the manner of computing their years, and that Almighty God
drew out the lines of their lives to that length for reasons proper to those
first times. p. 145. Sect. 3 That since Moses his time, the length of man's age
is nothing abated, as appears by the testimony of Moses himself, and other
grave Authors, compared with the experience of these times. p. 147. Sect. 4
The same confirmed by the testimony of other ancient and learned writers. p.
149. Sect. 5 That in all times and nations some have been found, who have
exceeded that number of years which the wisest of the ancients accounted the
utmost period of man's life, and that often those of latter ages have exceeded
the former in number of years, as is made to appear as well from sacred as
profane story. p. 150. Sect. 6 The same assertion farther proved and enlarged
by many instances both at home and abroad, specially in the Indyes. p. 153.
Sect. 7 That if our lives be shortened in regard of our Ancestors, we should
rather lay the burden of the fault upon our selves and our own intemperance,
then upon a decay in nature. p. 156.
CAP. 2. Farther Reasons alleged, that the age of man for these last thousand
or two thousand of years, is little or nothing abated.
Sect. 1 The first reason taken from the several stops and pawses of nature in
the course of man's life, as the time of birth after our conception, our
infancy, childhood, youth, man's estate, and old age, being assigned to the
same compass of years as they were by the Ancients; which could not
possiblely be, were there an universal decay in mankind in regard of age; and
the like reason there is in making the same Clymactericall years, and the same
danger in them. p. 159. Sect. 2 The second is drawn from the age of Matrim any
and generation, which among the Ancients was as forward as ours now is, if not
more timely. p. 163. Sect. 3 The third is borrowed from the age which the
Ancients assigned for charge and employment in public affairs,
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, they were thereunto both sooner
admitted, and therefrom sooner discharged, then men now a days usually are:
which should in reason argue, that they likewise usually finished the course of
their life sooner. p. 167.
CAP. 3. Containing a comparison betwixt the Giants mentioned in Scripture,
both among themselves and with those of latter ages.
Sect. 1 Of the admirable composition of man's body, and that it cannot be
sufficiently proved that Adam as he was the first, so he was likewise the
tallest of men, which in reason should be, were there in truth any such
perpetual decrease in man's stature as is pretended. p. 171. Sect. 2 What those
Giants were which are mentioned in the sixth of Genesis, and that succeeding
ages until David's time afforded the like. p. 173. Sect. 3 That latter times
have also afforded the like, both at home and abroad, specially in the Indies
where they live more according to nature. p. 175.
CAP. 4. More pressing Reasons to prove, that for these last two or three
thousand years, the stature of the Ancie^ts was little or nothing different
from that of the present times.
Sect. 1 The first reason taken from the measures of the Ancients, which were
proportioned to the parts of man's body, and in the view of them we are first
to know that they were standards, that is, for public contracts certain and
constant, and consequently, if the grains of our barley corn, the first
principle of measure, be the same with theirs, as has already bin proved, it
cannot be but our ordinary measures should be the same with theirs, and so
likewise our statures. p. 177. Sect. 2 That in particular the ordinary Hebrew,
Grecian, and Roman measures were the same with ours or very little different.
p. 179. Sect. 3 The second reason taken from the ordinary allowance of diet to
soldiers and servants, which appears to be of like quantity with us, as was
that among the ancient Grecians and Romans, together with a doubt touching Gods
allowance to the Israelites, answered. p, 184. Sect 4 Diverse other Reasons
drawn from experience added, as from the bedsteeds, the seats, the doors,
the pulpits, the altars of the ancients, and other doubts cleared. p. 186.
Sect. 5 The same farther proved, first for that the son often proves taller
then the father. Secondly, for that age and stature holding for the most part
correspondence, it being already proved that the age of mankind is not
decreased, from thence it follows, that neither is their stature. Thirdly, for
that if mankind decreased in stature by the course of nature, so must of
necessity all other Creatures, they being all alike subject to the same law of
nature. Fourthly, for that if men had still declined since the Creation, by
this time they could have been no bigger then rats or mice, if they had at all
bin. p. 188.
CAP. 5. Wherein the principal objections, drawn as well from Reason as from
authority and experience, are fully answered.
Sect. 1 Of sundry fabulous narrations of the bones of Gyant-like bodies,
dug up, or found in Caves. p. 190. Sect. 2 Diverse reasons alleged, why
such bones might be found in former ages, and not now, and yet the ordinary
stature of mankind remain the same. p. 193. Sect. 3 An answer to the
argument, drawn from the testimonies commonly produced on behalf of the
adverse opinion. p 196. Sect. 4 Of the wonderful strength of diverse in latter
ages, not inferior to those of former times. p. 201. Sect. 5 Two doubts
cleared; the first touching the strong physic which the Ancients used; the
second touching the great quantity of blood which they are said usually to have
drawn at the opening of a vain. p. 203. Sect. 6 The third doubt cleared,
touching the length of the duodenum, or first gut; as also of the several
opinions of Iacobus Capellus and Ioha^nes Temporarius touching the decrease of
humane strength and stature. p. 206. Sect. 7 Another rub removed, taken from
the impuritie of the seed contracted by the succession of propagation, as also
touching some late memorable examples of Parents, famously fertile in the
linnage issuing from their bodies, beyond any examples in that kind of former
ages. p. 209.
CAP. 6. Containing a discourse in general, that there is no such Universal
and perpetual decay in the powers of the mind, or in the Arts and Sciences as
is pretended.
Sect. 1 The excellency of the Ancients in the powers of the mind, compared
with those of the present; as also their helps and hindrances in matter of
learning, balanced. p. 211. Sect. 2 That there is both in Wits and Arts, as in
all things besides a kind of circular progress, as well in regard of places as
times. p. 216.
CAP. 7. Touching the three principal professions, Divinity, Law, and Physic.
Sect. 1 The strange ignorance of the Ancients in many things in matters of
divinity. p. 218. Sect. 2 Of the palpable darkness of some ages before this
last, and specially of the ninth Centurie, as also Gods special blessing upon
these latter ages in reviving the Arts and languages. p. 224. Sect. 3 The
Lawyers of this last age preferred before those of former times. p. 226. Sect.
4 Ancient and modern Physicians compared, specially in the knowledge of
Anatomy and Herbarie, the two legs of that science. p. 230. Sect. 5 Of the
profitable use of extractions, and the Paracelsian Physic, either wholely
unknown to the Ancients, or little practiced by the^. p. 230.
CAP. 8. Touching History Poetry, and the Art Military.
Sect. 1 That the Moderns have far exceeded the Ancients in Chronology and
Cosmography, the two eyes of History. p. 232. Sect. 2 The defect of the
Ancients in natural and Ecclesiastical history justly corrected by the
Modernes; and in civil History: the moderns are matched with the ancients: And
of the knowledge of weights, and measures, andthe true valuation of coins
recovered and restored by latter writers, which through the neglect of former
ages had well nigh perished. p. 234. Sect. 3 A comparison between the Greek
and Latin, as also between the Ancienter and latter Latin Poets, and that
Poetry, as other Arts has fallen and risen again in this latter age. p. 236.
Sect. 4 In Military matters the Romans excelled the Grecians, and have
themselves bin matched, if not surpassed in latter ages, in weapons, in
fortifications, in stratagems, but specially in sea fights. p. 240.
CAP. 9. Touching Grammar, Rhetorique, Logic, the Mathematiques, Philosophy,
Architecture, the Arts of painting and Navigation.
Sect. 1 Touching Grammar, Rhetorique, and Logic. p. 243. Sect. 2 Touching
Astronomy and Geometry, as also the Physics and Metaphysics. page 244. Sect.
3 Of the Arts of painting and Architecture revived in this latter age. p. 247.
Sect. 4 Of the Art of Navigation brought to perfection in this latter age. p.
250.
CAP. 10. Touching diverse Artificial works and useful inventions, at
leastwise matchable with those of the Ancients, namely and chiefly, the
invention of Printing, Gunnes, and the Sea-card or Mariners Compass.
Sect. 1 Of some rare inventions and artificial works of this latter age,
comparable both for use and skill to the best of the Ancients. p. 254. Sect. 2
Of the benefits and the Inventor of the most useful art of Printing. p. 256.
Sect. 3 Of the use and invention of Gunnes. p. 260. Sect. 4 Of the use and
invention of the Mariners compass or Sea-card, as also of another excellent
invention said to be lately sound out upon the Lodestone, together with a
conclusion of this comparison touching Arts and wits, with a saying of Bodins,
and another very notable one of Lactantius. p. 363.
LIB 4. Of this pretended decay in matter of manners, together with a large
proof of the future consummation of the world, from the testimonies of the
Gentiles, and the uses which we are to draw from the consideration thereof.
CAP. 1. That there is no such universal and perpetual decay in the manners
of men as is pretended, which is first proved in general, and then from
Religion the ground of manners.
Sect. 1 That there is a vicissitude and revolution in virtues and in vices, as
there is in Arts and Sciences. p. 270. Sect. 2 The extreme folly of the
Ancients in adoring and invocating images. p. 273. Sect. 3 Their gross and
ridiculous blockishnesse in the infinite multitude of their Gods. p. 276. Sect.
4 The most shameful and base condition of their Gods. p. 277. Sect. 5 Their
barbarous and most unnatural cruelty in sacrificing their children to their
Gods. p. 279. Sect. 6 Their monstrous beastliness in the worship of Priapus
and Berecynthia, as also of their doting folly in their divinations; together
with a touch upon the childish fables of the Jewish Rabbis, the absurd
opinions and horrible practices of ancient Heretics in the primitive
Christian Church, and the incredible ignorance and superstition of the Romish.
p. 282.
CAP. 2. Touching the Laws of the ancient Graecians and Saxons, whereof some
were wicked and impious others most absurd and ridiculous.
Sect. 1 The unjust and absurd Laws of Solon the Athenian Lawgiver. p. 285.
Sect. 2 The unreasonable and irreligious Laws of Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian
Lawgiver. p. 286. Sect. 3 The impious and dishonest Laws of Plato. p 288.
Sect. 4 The Unnatural and unchaste Laws of Aristotle. p. 290. Sect. 5 The
barbarous and uncivil laws of the Gauls and the Saxons our Predecessors. p.
292.
CAP. 3. Touching the insufficiency of the precepts of the ancient
Philosophers for the planting of virtue, or the rooting out of vice; as also of
the common error touching the golden age.
Sect. 1 Touching the insufficiency of the precepts of the ancient
Philosophers, for the planting of virtue, and the rooting out of vice; as also
of the manners of the Ancients observed by Caelius Secundus Curio out of
Iuvenall and Tacitus. p. 294. Sect. 2 Touching that idle tale of the golden age
forged by the Poets, and taken up by some Historians. p. 297.
CAP. 4. Of the excessive cruelty of the Romans toward the Jews, the
Christians, other Nations, one another, and upon themselves.
Sect. 1 Of the Roman cruelty toward the Jews. p. 301. Sect. 2 Their cruelty
toward the Christians, first in regard of the insatiable malice of their
Persecutors. p. 302. Sect. 3 Secondly, in regard of the incredible number of
those that suffered. p. 304. Sect. 4 Thirdly, in regard of the various and
divelish means and instruments which they devised and practiced for the
execution or torture of the poor Christians. p. 305 Sect. 5 Of their extreme
cruelty toward others, their very religion leading them thereunto, as
witnesses Lactantius. p. 306. Sect. 6 Of their cruelty one toward another by
the testimony of Tacitus and Seneca, and first in their civillwarres. p. 309.
Sect. 7 Secondly, of the cruelty of their Emperors toward their subjects,
their Captains toward their soldiers, their Masters toward their slaves,
and generally of their whole Nation. p. 313. Sect. 8 Thirdly, of their cruelty
one toward another in their sword fights: In which first is considered the
original and increase of those games, as well in regard of their frequencie, as
both the number and quality of the Fighters. p. 316. Sect. 9 Secondly, of the
fervent and eager affection of the people to these games, as also that they
were in use in the Provinces, and namely among the Jews, but refused by the
Graecians, and why? p. 318. Sect. 10 Thirdly, these bloody spectacles were
cried out against by the tongues and pens of Christians Divines, and then cried
down by the laws and power of Christian Emperors. p. 321. Sect. 11 The
Romans being thus cruel toward others, likewise turned the edge of their
cruelty upon themselves, partly by a voluntary exposing themselves to present
death in those public shows, either for money or upon a bravery, or by
laying violent hands upon themselves, which by their gravest writers was held
not only lawful and commendable, but in some cases honorable. p. 322.
CAP. 5. Of the excessive covetousness of the Romans, and their insatiable
thirst of having more, though by most unjust and indirect means.
Sect. 1 Of the excessive covetousnes of the Romans in general by the
testimonies of Petronius Arbiter, Iuvenal, Galgacus, and Hannibal, and in
particular Caecilius Claudius, Marcus Crassus, and specially Seneca the
Philosopher are taxed for this vice. p. 325. Sect. 2 Of their wonderful
greediness of gold, manifested by their great toil and danger in working
their mines, fully and lively described by Pliny. p. 327. Sect. 3 Their
unmerciful pilling and poling, robbing and spoiling the Provinces, not sparing
the very temples and things sacred. p. 328. Sect. 4 Of the base and most
unconscionable practices of Tiberius and Caligula, nay even of Vespasian
himself for the heaping up of treasure. p. 330. Sect. 5 That the whole nation
was deeply infected with the same vice. p. 33^
CAP. 6. Of the Roman luxury in matter of incontinencie and drunkenness.
Sect. 1 A touch upon the Roman luxury in the sins of the flesh. p. 334. Sect.
2 Of their excess in drinking p. 336. Sect. 3 The same amply confirmed by the
testimony of Pliny. p. 338. Sect. 4 In particular, this excess of the Romans
in drinking is confirmed by the practice of Anthony, specially at his being
with Cleopatra, as also by the practice of Clodius son to Esope the
Tragaedian in drinking of dissolved pearl. p. 341. Sec. 5 Of excessive
drinkers among the Romans in regard of the quantity of the liquor, and how both
their Princes and people were all generally tainted with this vice. p 344.
Sect. 6 Of the costlinesse and curious workemanshippe of the vessels out of
which they drank, which was likewise a means to draw them on to excessive
drinking. p. 345.
CAP. 7 Of the excessive gluttony of the Romans.
Sect. 1 Of their costly tables, their huge platters, the quality, order, and
number of their waiters, as also of their art and schools of Carving p. 347.
Sect. 2 That after ages sometimes reformed the abuse of former times: Of the
great number and chargeable hire of their Cooks: Of Apicius his wastfulnesse
in belli-cheere, that such wastfulnes was common among them. p. 350. Sect. 3 Of
their long and often sitting and usual practice of vomiting even among their
women, as also of the number of their courses at a sitting, together with the
rarity and costlinesse of their several services. p. 352. Sec. 4 Of the
sumptuous provision of two platters furnished out, the one by Vitellius, the
other by Esope the Tragaedian, as also of the horrible excess of Caligula and
Heliogabalus. p. 354. Sec. 5 Of the excessive luxury of more ancient times. p.
355. Sec. 6 Of their wonderful nicenes in the strangeness, weight, and newnes
of their fish^s, as also of diverse other their strange curiosities about them,
and of the vastnes of their fish ponds, and great store of fishes in the^. 358.
Sec. 7 Of their excessive gluttoni^ in foul as well as in fish, together with
their luxurious appurtenances to their solemn feasts, as also that their
gluttony rose with their Empire, and again fell with it. p. 361. Sec. 8 That
their riot did not only show it self in the delicious choice of their fare,
but in their voracitie and gurmandizing in regard of the quantity some of them
devoured at a meal. p. 364.
CAP. 8 Of the Romans excessive luxury in building.
Sec. 1 Of their excess in the great variety of their far fetched and dear
bought marble. p. 365. Sec. 2 Of their excessive sumptuousnes in their
temporary or tra^seunt buildings, made only for pastime to last but for a short
time. p. 366. Sect. 3 Of their infinite expense in their permanent
Amphitheaters, and the appurtenances belonging thereunto, namely their
Courtaines and Arena. p. 368. Sect. 4 Of their incredible expense in the
hiring, and arming, and dieting of their sword-players, in the hunting,
bringing home, feeding and keeping of their wild beasts in other admirable
shows to the astonishment of the beholders; in refreshing the Spectatours with
precious and pleasant perfumes and the like; and lastly, in casting their
largess among the people; neitheir was this the practice of the Emperors
only, but of private men. p. 370. Sect. 5 Of their superfluous expense as in
the number and largeness, so likewise in the beauty and ornament of Bathes,
which were likewise of little other use then for pleasure. p. 372. Sect. 6 Of
the endless masses of treasure which they powered out in the erecting and
adorning of temples for the worship of those Idols which they forged to
themselves, or at leastwise knew well enough were no gods. p. 373 Sect. 7 Of
their wonderful vanity in erecting infinite numbers of statues, and those
very chargeable and that to themselves. p. 376. Sec. 8 Their prodigal
sumptuousnes in their private buildings in regard of the largeness and height
of their houses, as also in regard of their marble pillars, walls, roofes,
beams, and pauement full, of art and cost. p. 377. Sect. 9 The profuse
expenses of Domitian and Nero in their buildings, as also of Caligula in his
mad works. p. 381. Sec. 10 That the Romans luxurious excess in their
household stuff and the ornaments of their houses was suitable to that of their
buildings p. 382
CAP. 9. Of the Romans excessive luxury in their dressing and apparel.
Sec. 1 How effeminate they were in regard of their bodies, specially about
their hair. p. 385. Sec. 2 Of the pressing, plaiting, store, die, and prize of
their garments, as also of their rings and jewels of inestimable value. p.
386. Sect. 3 The great excess and immodesty of their women in the same kind.
p. 389. Sec. 4 More of the excessive niceness of their women, as also of
Caligula his monstrous phantasticalnesse in his apparel, together with their
extreme vanity in the multitude of their servants and slaves waiting on them.
p. 391. Sec. 5 Of their prodigal, or rather prodigious gifts of their
Emperors, and the extreme unthriftiness of private men. p. 395.
CAP. 10. Of the Romans extreme arrogancy and confidence in admiring and
commending themselves, together with their gross and base flattery specially
to their Emperors; and lastly, their impudent, nay impious vainglory and
boasting of their Nation and City.
Sect. 1 Of their extreme arrogance in admiring and commending, and ^ven
deifying themselves. page 398 Sect. 2 Of their gross and base flattery,
specially toward their Emperors both living and dead. page 400. Sect. 3 Of
their impudent, nay impious vainglory and boasting of their own Nation and
City. p. 404.
CAP. 11. Wherein the objections brought in behalf of the Romans touching
their pretended justice, prudence, and fortitude are examined and fully
answered.
Sect 1 The first objection touching the pretended justice of the Romans,
answered out of Lactantius. p. 406. Sec. 2 The same answer farther confirmed
by the testimony of Saint Augustine. p. 410. Sect. 3 Another answer, that none
can be truly just which are not truly religious, nor any truly religious which
profess not the Christian Religion. p. 412. Sect. 4 The second objection
touching the pretended wisdom of the Romans, answered, by taking a brief
view of their courses, but specially by the testimony of Pliny. p. 413. Sec. 5
The third objection touching the pretended fortitude of the Romans answered, in
as much as their Empire is by their own writers in great part ascribed to
Fortune, and by Christians may be referred to Gods special providence for the
effecting of his own purposes rather then to any extraordinary worth in them.
p. 416. Sec. 6 Secondly, the Romans having no right or little just to the
Nations they subdued, we cannot rightly term their strength in conquering
them fortditue. 418. Sec. 7 Thirdly, that the Christians in suffering for
Religion surpassed the Roman fortitude, and equalled it in suffering for their
country. p. 420. Sec. 8 That as the Christians have surpassed the Romans in
the passive part of fortitude, so have they matched them in the active; and
that the partial overvaluing of the Roman manhood by their own Historians, is
it chiefly which has made the world to think it unmatchable. p. 423. Sect. 9
The English not inferior to the Roman in valor and magnanimity by the
judgment of Sir Walter Rawleigh. p 426.
CAP. 12. Wherein the general objections touching the worlds decay in matter
of Manners, are answered at large.
Sect. 1 Two objections drawn from reason, and both answered: The one, that
since the first plantation of Christian Religion, men have from time to time
degenerated: The other, that the multitude of Laws, and Lawyers, and
Law-suites, and the multiplicity of words in writings and convaiances, argue
the great sickness and malice of the present times in regard of the former.
p. 431. Sect. 2 Another objection answered, taken from the Scriptures, which in
diverse places seem to say, that the last times shall be the worst. p. 433.
Sect. 3 The passages of Scripture alleged to that purpose, particularly and
distinctly answered. p. 436. Sec. 4 The last doubt touching the coming of
Antichrist, answered. p 437 Sec. 5 The argument of greatest weight to prove
that Antichrist is already come. p. 438.
CAP. 13. That the world shall have an end by Fire, and by it be entirely
consumed.
Sec. 1 That the world shall have an end, is a point so clear in Christian
religion, that it needs not to be proved from the principles thereof, neither
is he worthy the name of a Christian who makes any doubt of it. p. 441. Sect. 2
That the world shall have an end by the testimony of the Gentiles. p. 442.
Sect. 3 That the world shall have an end by fire, proved likewise by the
testimony of the Gentiles. p. 444. Sect. 4 That the world shall be by fire
totally and finally dissolved and annihilated, proved by Scripture. p. 446.
Sect. 5 The same farther proved by reason. p. 447. Sect. 6 The arguments
commonly alleged from the Scripture for the Renovation of the world,
answered. p. 450.
CAP. 14. Of the uses we are to make of the consummation of the world, and of
the day of judgment.
Sec. 1 That the day of the worlds end shall likewise be the day of the
general judgment thereof, and that then there shall be such a judgment is
proved as well by reason as the testimony of the Gentiles. p. 454. Sect. 2 The
consideration of this day may first serve for terror to the wicked, whether
they regard the dreadfulnes of the day it self, or the quality of the Judge,
by whom they are to be tried. p. 456. Sect. 3 Or the nature and number of their
accusers. p. 459. Sect. 4 Or lastly, the dreadfulnes of the sentence which
shall then be pronounced upon them. p. 461. Sect. 5 Secondly, the consideration
of this day may serve for a special comfort to the godly, whether they
meditate upon the name and nature of t'c day it self in regard of them, or the
assurance of Gods love and favor toward them, and the gracious promises made
unto them. p. 464. Sect. 6 Or the quality and condition of the Judge in respect
of them by whom they are to be tried, or lastly the sweetness of the sentence
which shall then be pronounced on their behalf. p. 467. Sect. 7 Thirdly, the
consideration of this day may serve for admonition to all. p. 470. Sect. 8 As
likewise for instruction. p. 471
OF THE VALVE OF THE ROMAN SESTERCE, Compared with our English coin now in use.
BEcause in the fourth and last book of this ensuing treatise in discovering
of the Roman luxu^ie, frequent mention is made of their excessive expenses,
and the ordinary computation of their Authors, whose testimonies I use, is by
Sesterces. I held it requisite for the better understanding of those sums by
such who are not acquainted with the Roman coins, in this table to express
the value of the Sesterce, and withal to reduce some of their most noted
sums to our sterling that so the Reader desirous to know any particular
sum, may either find it expressed in this Table, or easily find it out by
proportioning the sum he desires to know with the nearest unto it either
above or under.

The Sestertius was among the Romans a coin so common, that nummus and
Sestertius came at length to be used promiscuously the one for the other; so
called it was quasi Semistertius, because of three asses it wanted half a one,
and is thus commonly expressed ^S, or thus HS, by which is understood two asses
and an half. For the value os it, ten asses make a denarius or Roman penny,
so termed because it contained denaaera, which were the same with their asses;
so as the Sesterce containing two asses and an half, must o^ necessity be
foun^ in the denarius four times; now the denarius being the eigh^ part of an
ounce, and an ounce of silver being now with us valued at five shillings; it
follows from thence that the value of the denarius is seven pence halfepenny;
and consequently of the Sesterce being the fourth part thereof, penny half
penny farthing half farthing. Touching their manner of counting by Sesterces,
a controversy there is betwixt Budaeus and Agricola, whether Sestertius in the
masculine and Sestertium in the neuter be to be valued alike, which Agricola
affirms, Budaeus, upon better reason in my judgment, denies, and to him I
incline, holding with him that Sestertium in the neuter contains a thousand
Sestertios: But here two things are specially to be noted; first, that if the
numerall, or word that denotes the number being an adictin^ and of a different
ca^e, be joined with Sestertium (by an abbreviatio^ put for Sestertiorum) in
the genitive case plural, then does it note so many thousand Sesterty; for
example, december Sestertium signifies december millia ten thousand Sesterces:
Secondly, if the numerall joined with Sestertium be an adverb, then it
designeth so many hundred thousand, ex: gr^: decies Sestertium signifies decies
contena millia, ten hundred thousand or a million of Sesterces; and sometimes
the substantive Sestertium is omitted but necessarily understood; the adjectiue
then or adverbe set alone being of the same value as if the substantive were
expressed, as thu^, december standing by it self is fully as much as december
Sestertium, and decies in like case, as if it were decies Sestertium, which I
have premised that the reason of my rendering the Latin sums might the better
be conceived, now to the table.

Sesterces Are worth In English moneys. Twenty 0l-3s-1d-0b A hundred 0-15-7-0b.
Five hundred, 3-18-1-0b. A thousand, 7-16-3-0. Five thousand, 39-1-3-0. Ten
thousand, 78 2 6-0. Twenty thousand, 156-5-0-0 Fifty thousand, 390-12-6-0. A
hundred thousand, 781-5-0-0. Five hundred thousand, 3906-5-0-0. A Million,
7812-10. 0-0 Five Millions, 39062-10-0-0. Ten Millions. 78125-0-0-0. Twenty
Millions, 156250-0-0-0. Fifty Millions, 390625-0-0-0. A hundred Millions,
781250-0-0-0. Two hundred Millions 1562500-0-0-0. Five hundred Millions,
3906250-0-0-0. A thousand Millions, 7812500-0-0-0.

A Talent is 750 ounces of silver, which after five shillings the ounce, is 187
pounds.

Boethius Lib. 3. Metro. 9.
O Qui perpetua mund^m ratione gubernas,
Terrarum Coelique Sator qui tempus ab aevo
Ire jubes: stabilisque manens das cuncta moveri;
Da Pater augustam menti conscendere sedem,
Da fontem lustrare boni, da luce reperta
In te conspicuos animae defigere visus.
Disijce terrenae nebulas and pondera molis,
Atque tuo splendore mica. Ta namque serenum,
Tu requies tranquilla pijs, Te cernere, finis,
Principium, vector, dux, semita, terminus, idem.
THou that made heaven and earth, whose wisdom still does guide
The world, by whose command time evermore does slide:
Thou that vnmov'd thy self, causest all things to move:
Grant, Father, I may climb these sacred seats above,
Grant, I of good may view the spring, that finding light,
My mind perpetually on thee may fix her sight.
Dispell these clouds, discharge this load of lumpish clay,
And spread thy beams: for thou to Saints the clearest day,
The calmest quiet art, and thee to comtemplate
Port, passage, leader, way, beginning is and date.
AN APOLOGY OF THE POWER AND PROVIDENCE OF GOD IN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE WORLD:
OR, An Examination and Censure of the common error touching Natures perpetual
and universal decay.
LIB. I. Which treates of this pretended decay in general, together with some
preparatiues thereunto.
CAP. I. Of diverse other opinions justly suspected, if not rejected, though
commonly received.
SECT. I. In Divinity.
THE opinion of the Worlds decay is so generally received, not only among the
Vulgar, but of the Learned both Divines and others, that the very commonnes of
it, makes it current with many, without any further examination: That which is
held, not only by the multitude, but by the Learned, passing smoothly for the
most part without any check or control. Nec alius pronior fidei lapsus, quam
ubi rei falsae gravis author extitit, says Pliny, Men do not any-where more
easily err, then where they follow a guide, whom they presume they may safely
trust: They cannot quickly be persuaded, that he who is in reputation for
knowledge and wisdom, and whose doctrine is admired in weighty matters, should
mistake in points of laesser consequence; and the greatest part of the World,
is rather led with the names of their Masters, and with the reverend respect
they bear their persons or memories, then with the soundness and truth of the
things they teach. Wherein that of Vadianus in his Epistle of Paradise, is, and
ever will be verified. Magnos errores magnorum virorum authoritate persuasi
transmittimus: We deliver over as it were by tradition from hand to hand, great
errors being thereunto induced by the authority of great men. Whiles we are
young, our judgment is raw and green, and when we are old, it is forestalled,
by which means it comes often to pass that inter iuvenile iudicium and senile
preiudicium veritas corrumpitur; between the precipitancie and rashness of
youth to take whatsoever is offered, and the obstinate stiffenes of age in
refusing what it has not formerly been acquainted with, truth is lost. The
evidencing of which assertion, is the proper subject of this Chapter, wherein I
hope I shall make it appear that many opinions are commonly received, both in
ordinary speech, and in the writings of learned men, which notwithstanding are
by others either manifestly convinced, or at leastwise justly suspected of
falsehood and error, and this as well in Divinity as in Philosophy and History.

First then in Divinity (not to meddle with doctrinall points in controversy
Iu^as among the other Apostles received the blessed Sacrament at our Lords
hands, of which notwithstanding, says the learned Zanchius, Etsi multi In
quartum praec^ptum.
magni viri hoc docuerint and scripserint, ego tamen nullo modo concedo, aut
concedere possum, quia aperte pugnat cum historia Iohannis Evangelistae: Though
many great Clarks have taught and written it, yet my self neither do nor can
by any means grant it, in as much as it plainly contradicts the History of
John the Evangelist. Cap. 13. 30.


That Melchizedek spoken of in the Epistle to the Hebrews, was Sem Noah: Yet
Pererius in his Commentary on the 14 of Genesis, endeauours to overthrow it by
many weighty reasons drawn from the Text.

That our first Parents stood but one day in Paradise, of which opinion
Pervulgata est, eademque ut m^ltorum sic Comment. in Genesis cap. 3.
imprimis nobilium and illustrium Authorum firmata consensu; it is commonly
received and strengthened by the consent of many worthy and famous Authors: yet
labors he to disprove it, in as much as so many, and so different acts are by
Moses recorded to have passed between their Creation and Ejection, as could
not well be dispatched within the compass of one day. And Tostatus, though he
were first of the common opinion, yet afterward upon better advice he changed
it.

That the Prophecy of old Jacob, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah Genesis
49. 10.
until Shiloh come., was fulfilled in Herod's reign at the birth of CHRIST by
the continuance of the government in the Tribe of Judah till the reign of
Herod, reputed the first stranger that took upon him the Kingly Exercit. 1. ad
apparat. Annal. (...). 2.
office among the Jews: but Causabon in his Exercitations proves that neither
the kingly government was continued in that Tribe, in as much as it was often
interrupted, and at length ended in Zedechiah, nor that Herod was a stranger,
in as much as himself, his father and his Grandfather were all circumcised,
and yet he confesses of the common opinion, haec sententia ab insignibus
pietate and doctrina viris profecta, vbi semel est admissa sine vlla
controversia aut examine apud omnium aetatum eruditos praeter admodum paucos
semper deinceps obtinuit; this opinion first set on foot by men of singular
piety and learning, and being once generally embraced without any question or
examination of it, afterward prevailed with the learned of all ages, some few
only excepted.

That Iephtah flew his daughter, and sacrificed her to the Lord, but Iunius in
his annotations on that place thinks he only consecrated Iud. 11. 38. Hebr.
11. 32. Deuteronomy. 12 31.
of the original word, and the contrary cannot well stand either with
Iephtahs faith or Gods acceptance.

That the Ark rested upon the hills of Armenia; whereas Sir Walter Rawleigh is
co^fide^t that therein most writers were utterly mistaken. Neither History of
the world* part. 1a. lib. (...). cap. 70.
was he led so to think (as he professes) out of humor or singularity, but
therein groundeth himself upon the original, and first truth, which is the
word of God, and after upon reason and the most probable circumstances thereupon
depending. And in truth, he that shall consider that the sons of Noah coming
out of the Arc, traveled from the East into the land of Shinar (where they
built the tower of Babell,) and that Armenia lies to the Northwest of that
plain, will easily Genesis 11. (...).
conceive that it could not well be, that the Arc should rest upon those
hills; but the chief occasion of the mistake seems to be in the vulgar
translation, which has rendered Armenia instead of Ararat.

That of the three sons of Noah, Sem, Cham and Iaphet, Sem was Cham the
second, and Iaphet the youngest, whereas Iunius is of opinion that Iaphet was
the eldest, grounding himself upon the text, Genesis 10. 21. Cham the
youngest, which he proves from Genesis 9. 24. and that Iaphet was the eldest is
not his opinion alone, but of Lyranus, Tostatus, Genebrard and the Hebrew
doctors.

That the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, was an Genesis 3. 6.
more pleasant both to the taste and sight.

That the waters of the red sea were of color red: whereas travelers Vide
Agatharchidem de rub^ mari. Dec. 2a. lib. 80. cap. 1.
that name from the red banks and clifts about it, as both Castro and Barros
are of opinion; or from the Coasts of Idumaea by which it passes, as Scaliger
first observed and after him Fuller.

To these may be added that it is commonly believed that Moses had horns when
he came down from the mountain, because they Ignorabat quod cornuta esset
facies sua: He Ex od. 34. 29.
knew not that his face was horned; whereas the sense is, he knew not that his
face shined, the same word in the Hebrew signifying both an horn and a shining
beam

That our Savior wore his hair long, because we read he was a Nazarite;
whereas the truth is, that he was a Nazarite, or rather a Nazarene, as with
Beza our last translatours read it, by education, not by profession Math. 2. 23.
and institution, in regard of the place in which he was nursed and conuersed,
not any vow whereunto he was bound.

And lastly that Absolon was hung by the hair of the head, whereas his head
caught hold of the oak: in 2 Samuel 18. 9.
like manner (it seems) as Henry Grandchild to the Conqueror is said to have
ended his days in the new forest, Cambden in Hams^.


SECTIO 2. In Philosophy.
SEcondly in Philosophy it is commonly received that the heart Hippocrates and
Galen have made it evident by experimental proofs, that those divine powers
of reasoning and discourse are seated in the brain, in as much as they are not
hindered by the distemper of the heart, but of the brain, nor recovered being
lost by medicaments applied to the heart, but to the brain.

That the three principal faculties of the soul, the understanding, the
imagination and memory are distinguished by three several Cells Laurentius
confutes, and Fernelius derides, making them all to be dispersed through all
the Hist. Anot. lib. 10. q. 2^.
receptacles of the brain, in as much as sometime when the whole brain is
disaffected, the operation but of one of those faculties is hurt; and sometimes
again when but one ventricle is hurt, the operation of all the three faculties
are hindered. Neither ought it to seem more strange that the same ventricle in
the brain should be capable of all these three functions, then that the same
bone or sinew and every part and particle thereof should have in it (in regard
of the nourishment it receives, and the excrement it drives forth,) an
attractiue, a retentiue, an assimulatiue and an expulsive virtue.

That one hand by nature is more useful and more properly made for action then
the other: whereas we find no such difference betwixt the Plato have the
Citizens of his commonwealth to be, and such do I take those seven hundred
Beniamites to have been mentioned in the 20th of Judges and if either hand
should in nature be preferred before other, me thinks in reason it should be
that which is nearest the heart the fountain of life and activitie.

That in nature there is an East and a West, which as to me it seems
Antipodes, and that which is East to them, is West to us.

That the radical moisture, and primogeniall heat naturally ingrafted

That a man has a natural speech of his own as he is a man, (some think
Hebrew) which language he would speak by nature if he were Psamm^ticus a king
of (...). lib. 2.
Egypt, who desireing to understand which was man's most ancient and natural
language, caused two children to be sequestered from all society of men, and to
be nourished by two she goats, forbidding all speech unto them: which children
continuing for a long time dumb, at last uttered Bec Bec: the King being
informed that in the Phrygian language Bec signified Bread, imagined that the
children called then for bread, and from thence collected that because they
spoke that language which no man had taught them, therefore the Phrigian
language was the natural speech of man. A weak proof and seely conceit. For
the childre^s Bec (as is probablely collected) was only that language which
they learned of their Goate-Nurces when they came to suck their tetts, who
receiueing from them some ease by their sucking, saluted them with Bec, the
best language they had, from whom the children learned it, and so much as they
heard, so much just they uttered, and no more: and if they had not heard it,
they could never have pronounced it, as we may evidently see in men that are
borne deaf; and by another experiment tried upon other infants, (which is our
second instance) by Melabdim E^hebar, whom they call the Great Magore or
Mogul. He likewise Purcas Pilgr. (...). 1. cap. 8.
upon the forenamed error, that man has a certain proper language by nature,
caused thirty children to be brought up in dumb silence, to find out the
experience, whether all of them would speak one and the same language, having
inwardly a purpose to frame his religion conformable to that nation whose
language should be spoken, as being that religion which is purely natural unto
man. But the children proved all dumb, though they were so many of them, and
therefore they could not speak, because they were not taught: whereby it
appears that the speaking of any language is not in man by nature; The first
man had it by divine Infusion, but all his posterity only by Imitation.

SECT. 3ia. In history Ecclesiastical.
THirdly in History, which is Ecclesiastical, Civil or natural. In History
Ecclesiastical it is commonly received that Simon Peter encountered Simon
Magus, and that the Magitian undertaking to fly up the air, the Apostle so
wrought by prayer and fasting that he came tumbling down and brake his neck:
but of this story says St. Augustine, Est quidem and haec opinio plurimorum,
quamvis eam perhibeant esse falsam plerique Romani: many are of this opinion,
yet most of the Roman Epist. 86. Casulano.
writers hold it but as a tale. And in another place he calls it Graecam
fabulam, an invention of the Graecians who were so fruitful in these kind of
fables, that Pliny himself could say of them, mirum est quo procedat Graeca
credulitas, nullum tam impudens mendacium est vt test careat; it is a Hist.
Natu. lib. 8. 22.
wonder to see whither the credulity of the Greeks carry them, there being no
lie so shameful, but it finds a patron among them: Nay, the very Latin Poet
took notice of their immoderate liberty this way.

-- Et quicquid Graecia mendax
Audet in historia. Iuven. Sat. 10.

What dares not lying Greece
Insert in histories.
That the Sybils clearly foretold many things touching the name, Christ, the
coming of Antichrist, the overthrow of Rome, and the co^su^matio^ of the
world, which notwithstanding, Exer. 1^. ad ap. annal. cap. 10. Ephesians. 3. 9.
Colos^. 1. 26. Romans 16. 25.
(as Causabon has learnedly observed) seems to be contrary to the word of
God, that so profound mysteries should be revealed to the Gentiles, so long
before the incarnation of Christ; specially since they write more plainly and
particularly of those matters, then the Prophets of God themselves among the
Jews; and the greatest Clerks among the Gentiles Plato, Aristotle,
Theophrastus, and others, curious searchers into all kinds of learning, never
so much as once mention either their names or their writings, nor any of these
mysteries. While the Church of Christ was yet in her infancy many such kind of
books were forged thereby to make the doctrine of the Gospel more passible
among the Gentiles; and no marvel then that these of the Sybils passed for
current among the rest.

That Saint George was a holy Martyr, and that he conquered the Reynolds proves
him to have been both a wicked De Eccl. Romans Idol. l. 10. cap. 50.
man and an Arrian by the testimony of Epiphanius, Athanasius and Gregory
Nazianzen. And Baronius himself in plain terms affirms, apparet totam
illam de actis Georgij fabulam fuisse commentum Arrianorum, It appears that
the whole story of George is nothing else but a forgery of the Arrians; yet was
he received (as we know) as a Canonized Saint through Christendom, and to be
the Patron both of our nation and of the most honorable order of Knighthood in
the world.

That the wise men which came out of the East to worship our Savior, were
Kings and from hence (their bodies being translated to Cullen,) Cullen, and the
day consecrated to their memory is by the French termed Le jour de trois Rois,
the day of the three Kings. yet Mantuan a Munke fears not to declare his
opinion to the contrary, and gives his reason for it.

Nec reges vt opinor erant, neque enim tacuissent
Historiae sacrae Authors Genus illud honoris,
Inter mortales quo non sublimius ullum,
Add quod Herodes ut magnificentia Regum
Postulat, hospitibus tantis regale dedisset
Hospitium, secumque lares duxisset in amplos.
Had they been Kings nor holy History,
Would have concealed their so great Majesty,
Higher then which on Earth none can be named;
Herod's magnificence would eke have framed
Some entertainment fitting their estates,
And harbored them within his Royal gates.
SECT. 4. In History Civil.
IN History Civil or National, it is commonly received, that there were
four, and but four Monarchies succeeding one the other; the Assyrian, the
Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman; Yet John Bodin a man of singular learning,
specially in matter of History, dares thus to begin the seventh Chapter of his
Method. Inveteratus error de quatuor Imperijs, ac magnorum Virorum opinione
pervulgatus tam alte radices egit, ut vix evelli posse videatur; that
inveterate error of four Empires made famous through the opinion of great men,
has now taken such deep roots, as it seems it can hardly be plucked up; and
through a great part of that Chapter labors he the Confutation of those who
maintain that opinion.

That the Saxons called the Remainder of the Britains, Welsh, as being
strangers unto them: whereas that word signifies not a strangers either in the
high or low Dutch, as Verstigan a man skillful in those Languages Cap. 5.
has observed; and that the Saxons gave them the name of Welsh, after
themselves came into Britain, is altogether unlikely. For that inhabiting so
near them as they did, to wit, but over against them on the other side of the
Sea, they could not want a more particular and proper name for them, then to
call them strangers. It seems then more likely that the Britains being
originally descended from the Gauls, the Saxons according to their manner of
speech, by turning the G into W, instead of Gallish termed them Wallish, and by
abbreviation Walch or Welsh, as the French at this day call the Prince of
Wales, Prince de Galls.

That Brute a Trojan by Nation, and great grandchild to Aeneas, arrived in
this Island, gave it the name of Britain from himself, here England to
Loegrius, Scotland to Albanak, and Wales to Camber: Yet our great Antiquary
beating (as he professes) his brains and bending Cambden: Britan* de primis
Incolis.
the force of his wits to maintain that opinion, he found no warrantable
ground for it. Nay by forcible arguments (produced as in the person of others
disputing against himself) he strongly proves it (in my judgment) altogether
unsound and unwarrantable, Boccace, Vives, Adryanus Iunius, Polydorus,
Buchanan, Vignier, Genebrard, Molinaeus, Bodine, and other. Writers of great
account, are all of opinion, there was no such man as this supposed Brute: And
among our own ancient Chronicles, John of Wethamsted, Abbot of S. Albon
holds the whole narration of In granario. A^o 1440.
Brute to have been rather Poetical, then Historical, which me thinks is
agreeable to reason, since Caesar, Tacitus, Gildas, Ninius, Bid, William of
Malmesbery; and as many others as have written any thing touching our Country
before the year 1160, make no mention at all of him, nor seem ever so much as
to have heard of him. The first that ever broached it was Geffry of Monmoth
about four hundred years ago, during the reign of Henry the second, who
publishing the British story in Latin, pretended to have taken it out of
ancient monuments written in the British tongue: but this Book as soon as it
peeped forth into the light, was sharply censured both by Giraldus Cambrensis,
and William of Newberry who lived at the same time; the former tearming it no
better then Fabulosam historiam, a fabulous history, and the latter, ridicula
figmenta, ridiculous fictions, and it now stands branded with a black cole
among the books prohibited by the Church of Rome.

That the Pigmies are a Nation of people not above two or three foot Cranes
their greatest enemies: of these notwithstanding witnesses Cassanion, Fabulosa
illa omnia sunt quae de illis vel Poetae, vel alij Scriptores De Gygantibus
Cap. ultimo.
tradiderunt: all those things are fabulous, which touching them either the
Poets or other writers have delivered. And with him fully accords Cardan in
his eight Book De rerum varietate: Apparet ergo Cap. 4.
Pigmeiorum historiam esse fabulosam, quod and Strabo sentit, and nostra aetas,
cum omnia nunc firm orbis mirabilia innotuerint, declarat. It appears then
that the History of the Pigmies is but a fiction, as both Strabo thought, and
our age, which has now discovered all the wonders of the world, fully
declares. Gellius also, and Rhodogin refer these Pigmies (if any such 9. 4.
there be) to a kind of Apes. 4. 3.


SECT. 5. In History Natural.
IN Natural History, it is commonly received, that the Phaenix lives Phaenix:
Neither am I ignorant that sundry of the Fathers have brought this narration to
confirm the doctrine of the Resurrection: but rather as I believe, to fight
against the Gentiles with their own weapons, and to pierce them with their
own quils, or from thence to borrow an illustration, then as giving credit to
the truth of the story, which was originally coined in Egppt as fruitful in
fables, as Africa in monsters, and from thence derived to the Grecians and
Romans; one of them is said to have been brought to Rome by the command of
Claudius Caesar, and exposed to public view, as appears upon record, Sed
quem falsum esse nemo dubitaret, says Pliny, no man need make any doubt of it
but that he was counterfeit, and in the ^at. bist. 10. 2.
same Chapter, haud scio an fabulose unum in toto orb nec visum magnopere, I
doubt it is but a fiction, that there is but one of the kind, in the whole
World, and that so seldom seen. With whom accord Tacitus, and Cardan, Lib. 6.
Annal. cap. 7. Lib. 10. de sub-Exercit. 233.
and Scaliger, and reason it self drawn both from Divinity and Philosophy,
from Divinity, in as much as two at least of every kind came into the Arc,
male and female, as they at first were created: from Philosophy: in as much as
without more individuals then one the whole kind by a thousand casualties must
needs be in danger of utter extinguishment, and therefore where we find but
one of a kind, as the Sun and the Moon, God and Nature have set them out of
gunshot, far enough from any reach of malice or fear of danger.

That the whelps of Bears are at first littering without all form or
Ioachimus Rheticus, and others, Gesnerus.
it has been proved. And herein as in many other fabulous narrations of this
nature, (in which experience checkes report) may we justly take up that of
Lucretius,

-- Quid nobis certius ipsis
Sensibus esse potest, quo vera and falsa notemus.
What can more certain be then sense,
Discerning truth from false pretense.
That the Bever being hunted and in danger to be taken, biteth off his stones,
knowing that for them only his life is sought, and so often escapes; hence
some have derived his name, Castor a castrando seipsum, from gelding himself,
and upon this supposition, the Egyptians in their Hi^rogliphicks, when they
will signify a man that hurts himself, they picture a Bever biting off his
own stones, though Alciat in his Emblemes turn it to a contrary purpose,
teaching us by that example to give away our purse to thieves rather then our
lives, and by our wealth to redeem our danger: but this relation touching the
Bever is undoubtedly false, as both by sense and experience, and the testimony
of Dioscorides it is manifested. First, because their stones are very small,
and so placed Lib. 3. cap. 23.
in their body as are a Bores, and therefore impossible for the Beuer himself,
to touch or come by them, and secondly, they cleave so fast unto their back,
that they cannot be taken away, but the beast must of necessity loose his life;
and consequently most ridiculous is their narration, who likewise affirm, that
when he is hunted, having formerly bitten off his stones, he stands upright,
and shows the hunters that he has none for them, and therefore his death
cannot profit them, by means whereof they are averted and seek for another.

That Swans a little before their death sing most sweetly, of which Nature.
bist. 10. 23.
notwithstanding Pliny thus speaks, Olorum morte narratur flebilis cantus,
falso ut arbitror aliquot experimentis. Swans are said to sing sweetly before
their death, but falsely, as I take it, being led so to think by some
experiments. And Scaliger to like purpose, de signi vero cantu suavissimo quem
cum mendaciorum parente Graecia iactare ausus es ad Luciani tribunal Exercit.
232.
apud quem aliquid novi dicas (...). Touching the sweet singing of the Swan,
which with Greece the mother of lies you dare to publish, I cite you to Lucians
tribunal, there to set abroach some new stuff. And Aelian cantandi studiosos
esse iam communi sermon pervulgatum est: ego vero cignum Lib. 10. c. 14.
nunquan audivi canere fortasse neque alius, that Swans are skillful in singing
is now rife in every man's mouth, but for myself I never heard them sing, and
perchance no man else.

That the Salamander lives in the fire, yet both Galen and Dioscorides
Mathiolus in his commentaries upon Dioscorides De Temp. lib. 3. lib. 2. cap.
56. Des erreurs Populaires.
affirms that by casting many Salamanders into the fire for trial, he found
it false. The same experiment is likewise avouched by Ioubertus.

That the Mandrakes represent the shape and parts of a man, yet the Mathiolus,
a very famous Physician affirms of them, Radi^es porro In comment: in
Dioscoridem.
Mandragorae humanam effigiem representare vt vulgo creditur fabulosum est,
that the roots of the Mandrake represent the shape of a man as it is commonly
believed is fabulous, calling them cheating knaves and quacksalvers that carry
them about to be sold, therewith to deceive barren weeman.

That Vipers in their birth kill their mother of whom they are bred; Scaliger
out of his own experience assures us the contrary, Viperas says Exercit. 201.
he, ab impatientibus morae foetibus numerosissimis, atque id^irco
erumpentibus rumpi atque interire falsum esse scimus, qui in Vincentij Camerini
ligneatheca vidimus enatas Viperillas parente salva, that Uipers are rent and
slain by the number of their young ones impatient of delay and striving to get
forth, we know to be false, who in a wooden box belonging to Vincentius
Camerinus have seen the young newly brought forth, together with the old one,
safe and sound. True indeed it is that the Vide Angelum Abbatium de Viper^
natura and Bustamentitinum de animaentibus. S. S.
Viper bringing sometime twenty or more, and being delivered but of one a day
the hindermost impatient of so long delay sometimes gnaw^s through the tunicle or
shell of the egg in which they are enclosed, and so come forth with part of it
upon them; which Aristotle truly affirming thereupon it seems has grown the
mistake that they gnaw through the belly of the damme which is undoubtedly false.
The derivaton then of the word Vipera quasi vi pariens, is but a trick of wit,
grounded upon an erroneous supposition; it being rather (as I conceive) from
vi^um pariens, there being no other kind of serpent which brings forth her young
hatched out of the egg, but only the Viper.

That the Hare is one year a male and another a female: whereas Rondeletius
female, but certain little bladders filled with matter, such as are upon the
belly of a Bever, wherein also the vulgar is deceived, taking those bunches for
stones, as they do these bladders. Now the use of these parts both in Bevers
and Hares is this, that against rain both the one and the other sex suck
there out a certain humor and anoint their bodies all over therewith, which
serves them for a defense against rain.

That a Woolfe if he see a man first suddenly strikes him dumb, whence Lupus
est in fabula: and that of the Poet,

Lupi Moerim videre priores,
The Wolves saw Moeris first.
Yet Phillip Camerarius professes, fabulosum esse quod vulgo creditur, hominem
Medita^: Histor. cap. 23.
a lupo praeuisum subito consternari and vocem amittere, That it is fabulous
which is commonly believed that a man being first seen by the Woolfe is
thereupon astonished and loses his voice; And that himself has found it by
experience to be a vain opinion. which Scaliger Exercitat. 344.
likewise affirms upon the same ground. Vtinam tot ferulis castigarentur
mendaciorum assertores isti quot a Lupis visi sumus sine jactura vocis. I wish
those Patrons of lies were chastised with so many blows as at sundry times I
have been seen of woolues without any loss of my voice.

That men are sometimes transformed into Woolues, and again from Pliny himself
is thus Not. hist. liber 8. cap. 22.
confident, homines in Lupos verti rursumque restitui sibi, falsum esse
confidenter existimare debemus, aut credere omnia quae fabulosa tot saeculis
comperimus: that men are changed into Wolves and again restored to themselves,
that is to the shape of men, we ought assuredly believe to be false, or to
give credit to whatsoever we have found fabulous in the course of so many
ages. Now that which has given occasion to this opinion might be as I suppose
either an illusion of Satan in regard of the beholders, or a strong melancholy
imagination in the patients, or the education of men among Wolves from their
very infancy. For that the Devil can at his pleasure transubstantiate or
transform one substance into another I hold it no sound divinity.

That the Pelican turns her beak against her breast therewith Pelican has
a beak broad and flat, much like the slice of Apothecaries and Surgions with
which they spread their plasters, no way fit to pierce, as Laurentius
Ioubertus Counselor and Physician to Henry the fourth of France in his book
of Popular errors has observed.

Lastly that the Mole has no eyes, nor the Elephant knees; both which
notwithstanding by daily and manifest experience are found untrue.

SECTIO 6. An Application of what has been said to the present purpose.
MAny more instances might be given both in Divinity, Philosophy and History,
to show that it is a thing neither new nor vnjustifiable by the practice of wise
men to examine and impugn received opinions, if they be found erroneous, such
as I take this to be of Natures universal decay. So that I hope it shall
neither seem unpleasing nor unprofitable nor yet impertinent that I have dwelt
so long upon this point. I know that of Chrysostom to be most true: The
hardest lesson is to unlearn, and therefore have I harped so long upon this
string to make it clear that men may err, specially where that falls out
which Justin in his dialogue with Tryphon has observed, that posteriores
sequntur priores securi examinis, that the latter follow the former without
examination, Custom with most men preuailes more then Truth: though Christ
has said, as Tertullian rightly notes, I am Truth and not Custom: yea such
is the force thereof, that according to the inbred notions and praeconceptions,
which it has formed and imprinted in our minds for the most part we shape the
discourse of Reason it self. Thus Pythagoras by bringing up his Scholars in
the speculatiue knowledge of numbers, made their conceits so strong, that when
they came to the contemplation of things natural, they imagined that in every
particular thing they even beheld as it were with their eyes how the element of
number gave essence and being to the works of Nature. A thing in reason
impossible, which notwithstanding through their misfashioned praeconceite,
appeared unto them no less certain then if Nature had written it in the very
foreheads of all the Creatures of God.

Divine is that speech of Aristotle in his Metaphysics; Quantam autem vim
habeat consuetudo leges declarant, in quibus fabulosae and pueriles narrationes
plus valent cognitione vera earum rerum propter consuetudinem. What is the
strange force of Custom, the Laws themselves declare; in which childish and
fabulous narrations are preferred before the true knowledge of the same things,
and that only through custom. From whence (to draw nearer to our present
purpose) the great Lawyer Panormitan wishes that the severity of the ancient
Canons be not too far Duarenus de Beneficijs, 8. 6.
pressed upon delinquents, because men of latter ages (says he) are no w^y
matchable with the Ancients, as not in strength nor stature, so neither in wit
nor manners. But I much marvel that so great a Clearke should be so easily
carried away with so vain a show, and by making men believe that they were not
able to observe the Canons, make them unable indeed: which together with the
greedy desire of gain, has been no doubt the ground, or at least the
pretense of such a multiplicity of dispensations in latter ages; men choosing
rather to stretch their pursestrings, and to buy out a dispensation for their
money then to improve their endeavors for the doing of that which the Canon
requires. And hence the Lenten fast duly kept with much ease by our
Predecessors, is with most men now adays made so impossible, notwithstanding
the observation thereof conduce so much to the public good.

CAP. 2. Of the Reasons inducing the Author to the writing and publishing of
this Discourse.
SECT. 1. Whereof the first is the redeeming of a captivated truth.
SVch is the admirable beauty and sovereignty of Truth in it self, and such
infinite content does it yield the Soul being found and embraced, that had I
proposed no other End to my self in this ensuing Treatise then the discovery
and unfolding thereof, I should hold it alone a very ample recompense, and
sufficient reward of my labor. The Greeks call it (...), which by an easy
and vnstrained derivation implies the breath of God: so that as Minerva, by
which is meant the Arts, is fained to have sprung from the head of Jupiter: so
Truth undoubtedly flows from the mouth of the Creator, not only that
supernatural and revealed Truth, which concerns our spiritual and
supernatural good, but that likewise which concerns our good either moral or
natural. For as every good thing, so far as it is good, is from Iam. 1. 17.
God, the Author and original cause of all goodness: so every Truth is from the
same God, the Fountain of all Truth: Howbeit he impart the diverse kinds
thereof after a different manner; the Truth of Experience by sense, of Reason
by discourse of the intellectual power, of Religion by faith. These are as
several lines drawn from the same Center, or several beams from the same
Sun: All which notwithstanding in their several ranks and degrees carry in
them, or rather have stamped and printed upon them some character or
resemblance of the Divine Excellency.

And as Truth is the breath of God, so is the Soul of man too, which Gen, 2. 7.
may well be thought to be in part the cause that the Soul is so wonderfully
taken and affected with the love and liking of it. All the Kingdoms in the
World, and the glittering pomp of them cannot so much refresh and delight a
studious mind, as this one inestimable Jewel of Truth, which Lucretius has
lively described:

Suave mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis, etc.
It is a view of delight, says he, to stand or walk upon the shore side, and
Lib. 2. (...).
to see a ship tossed with tempests upon the Sea; or to be in a fortified
tower, and to see two Armies join battle upon a plain: but it is a pleasure
incomparable for the mind of man to be settled, landed, and fortified in the
certainty of Truth, and from thence to descry and behold the errors,
perturbations, labors and wanderings up and down of other men. We see in all
other pleasures there is satiety, and after they be used their verdure
departs, which shows well they be but deceits of pleasure, and not
pleasures, and that it was the novelty that pleased, and not the quality. But
of the Contemplation of Truth there is no satiety, but satisfaction and
appetite are perpetually interchangeable; and certainly the more contentment
and comfort do we reap therein, For that the apprehension of Truth helps to
repair that Image of God which by the fall of man was in that very part sorely
battered and bruised, I mean in regard of the knowledge of natural Truths,
but in regard of supernatural utterly defaced.

Now such being the condition of Truth, both in regard of God, it self, and
us, we may not part with it upon any terms, nor can we purchase it at too
dear a rate; Buy the truth, but sell it not. Some perchance in this very point
may suppose, that the opinion maintaining Natures Prove. 23. 23.
decay argues in the maintainers more modesty and humility, and is apter to
breed in men a religious fear and devotion, being persuaded as well by sense
and reason, as by Scripture and faith, that the World must have an end, and
that in appearance the end thereof cannot be far off. Which though it were so,
yet may it not be vpheld with an untruth, Recte placet laudem humilitatis in
part non ponere falsitatis, ne humilitas conconstituta in part falsitatis
perdat praemium veritatis, says S. Augustine. Lib de Not. and Gratia c. 36.
We desire not to settle the praise of humility upon false grounds, lest being
built upon falsehood, it loose the reward of Truth. If evil be in no case to be
done that good may come thereof, no, not the least evil for the greatest good,
if a lie may not be made for the winning of a man's Soul, no, nor for the
gaining of a world of Infidels to the faith, as Divines truly teach, then may
not the defense of any untruth be undertaken, what fair pretense soever of
piety, or charity, or humility it may put on. For as we are to speak veritatem
in charitate, the truth in love, so are we to follow charitatem in veritate,
love grounded upon Ephesians. 4. 15.
truth. It being one of the properties of true charity to rejoice in truth. 1
Cor. 13. 6.
Truth then and true piety, Truth and true charity, Truth and true humility,
being inseparable companions, let none presume to put them asunder, whom God
has thus linked and joined together. Will ye talk deceitfully for Gods
cause, says Job, will ye make a lie for him? if we may not utter an untruth
Job 13. 7.
for Gods cause and the advancement of his glory, much less for the best good
of man, the glory of God being as much and more to be preferred before the
best spiritual good of man, as man's spiritual good before his temporal.
Absit a me vt veritatem per mendacium v^lim iri confirmatam, says Chrysostom,
far be it from me to attempt the In Matt^um.
strengthening of truth by falsehood. The reason hereof is well yielded by S.
Augustine, fracta velleviter imminuta authoritate veritatis omnia De Mendacio
ad Consen^m.
dubia remanebunt, the credit and sovereignty of Truth being never so little
cracked, or the practice of lying never so little countenanced, a man can build
upon nothing, but all things willbe full of doubt and distrust. And again,
nunquam errari tutius existimo, quam cum in amore nimio veritatis, and
reiectione nimia falsitatis erratur, a man cannot lightly err more safely then
in too much love of Truth and hatred of lies, when there they arise from error
and mistake, or malice and forgerie, whether they consist in the disagreement
and disconformitie betwixt the speech and the conceptions of the mind, or the
conceptions of the mind and the things themselves, or the speech and the
things.

SECT. 2. The second is the vindicating of the Creators honor.
AS my first Reason for the writing and publishing this Discourse was for the
redeeming of a captivated truth: so my second is for the vindicating of the
Creators honor, the reputation of his wisdom, his justice, his goodness, and
his power; being all of them in my judgment by the opinion of Natures decay not
a little impeached and blemished. His wisdom, for that intending (as by the
sacred Oracles of his word he has in sundry passages clearly manifested it)
to put an end to the World by fire, it cannot, I think be well conceived why
he should ordain or admit such a daily universal and irrecouerable
consumption in all the parts of Nature which without fire, or any other outward
means would undoubtedly bring it to that final period.

His justice, for that withdrawing from latter ages that strength and ability
of performing religious duties, and practicing moral virtues, which to the
former he granted, yet to demand and expect no less from the latter then he
did from the former, what is it but to reap where he sowed not, to require as
much of him that had but five talents, as of him that had ten, or to deal as
Pharaoh did with the Israelites, still to exact Ex. 5. 7. 8.
the same task of brick, and yet to withhold the wonted allowance of straw.
Neither can we with that confidence reprehend the reigning vices of the times
if we cast the reason thereof not so much upon the voluntary malice and
depravation of men's wills, as upon the necessity of the times praeordained by
God, which upon the matter, what is it but to lay the burden upon God, and to
accuse him, that so we may free and excuse our selves?

His Bounty and Goodness, as if out of a niggardly and sparing disposition he
envied the succeeding generations of the World that happiness which upon the
preceding he freely and richly conferred; whereas I am rather of opinion, that
as in holy Scripture, for the most part, he accepted and preferred the younger
brother before the elder, and as Christ our Savior turned the water into wine
toward the end of the feast, which far excelled that in the beginning: so the
gifts and graces of Ioh. 2. 10.
God, have been more plentifully powered out upon mankind in this latter age
of the World, then ever since the first Creation thereof. As was foretold by
the Prophet in the old Testament, and remembered by the Joel 2. 18. Act. 2. 17
Apostle in the New; And it shall come to pass in the last days (says God) I
will power out of my Spirit upon all flesh.

Lastly, the reputation of his Power, is thereby most of all stained and
wounded, as if his treasury could at any time be emptied and drawn dry, as if
he had but one blessing in store, or were forced to say with old Isaak when he
had blessed Jacob with corn and wine have I blessed him, and what shall I do
now to thee my son? No no, his arm is not shortened neither is his mighty power
any way abated; yet they who thus complain Genesis 27. 38.
of natures decay, what do they else but implicitly impeach and accuse his
Power, which in truth is nothing else but Natura Naturans (as the Schools
phrase it) Active Nature, and the creature the workmanship thereof, Natura
Naturata, Nature Passive; That which the Samaritans ignorantly and
blasphemously spoke of Simon Magus, may properly and truly be spoken of
Nature, that it is the Great power of God, or the power of the Great God, as is
divinely observed by the witty Scaliger against Cardan in that exercitation
which in its front bears this inscription, opposed to Cardanes assertion: Non
ex fatigatione mundum solutum iri, that the world shall not desolue by being
tired, quasi natura Exercit. 77.
(says he) sit asinus ad molas, non autem Dei Opt. Max. potestas, quae eodem
nutu gubernat infinito quo creavit, we may not conceive that Nature, is as an
ass wasted and wearied out, at the mill; but the power of the Mighty God which
governes all things with the same infinite command, wherewith they were
created. And with him accords Valesius discoursing of the Worlds end toward
the end of his book de Sacra Philosophia, Quae a Deo ipso per se ac sine causa
secunda compacta sunt, non possunt ab alia causa solui, sed solum ab eo ipso a
quo sunt coagmentata: Those things which are made of God himself immediately
by himself without the concurrence of second causes, cannot be unmade by any
inferior cause, but by him alone by whom they were first made. And again,
Certe ita est, virtutem divinam apponi necesse est, vt deleatur quod Deus ipse
fecit; there needs no less then a divine power for the abolishing of that
which the Diety it self has wrought, which he seems to have borrowed from
Plato in Timoeo where he thus speaks of the world Ita apt cohaeret vt
dissolvi nullo modo queat, nisi ab eodem a quo est colligatus, so
proportionably does each part answer other, that it is indissoluble, but only
from his hand who first framed it. As then Allmighty God created all things of
nothing by the power of his word. So does he still uphold them and will till
the dissolution of all things in their essenses, faculties, and operations by
the Word of his Power, reaching from one end to the other mightily, and
disposing all things sweetly. Indeed with the Heb. 1. 3. Wisdom. 8. 1.
works of man it is not so, when he has employed about them all the cunning,
and cost, and care that may be, he can neither preserve them nor himself, both
they and he moulder away and return to their dust, but I know says the
Preacher that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever, nothing Eccles. 3. 14.
can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it. Add the son of Sirach. He
garnished his works for ever and in his hand are the chief of them unto all
generations, they neither labor nor are weary, nor cease from their works,
none 16. cap. 27, 28, yer.
of them hinders another, and they shall never disobey his word.

SECTIO 3. The third is for that the contrary opinion, quails the hopes, and
blunts the edge of virtuous endeavors.
MY third reason for the penning and publishing of this discourse is that the
contrary opinion thereunto seems not a little to rebate and blunt the edge of
men's virtuous endeavors. For being once thoroughly persuaded in themselves,
that by a fatal kind of necessity and course of times, they are cast into
those straites, that notwithstanding all their striving and industry, it is
impossible they should rise to the pitch of their noble and renowned
predecessors, they begin to yield to the times and to necessity, being re
solued that their endeavors are all in vain, and that they strive against the
stream; nay the Master himself of Morallitie, the great Patriarch of
Philosophers, has told us, that circa impossibilia non est deliberandum, it is
no point of wisdom for a man to beat his brains, and spend his spirits about
things merely impossible to be atchiued, and which are altogether out of our
reach. The way then to excite men to the imitation of the virtue, and the
exploits of their famous Ancestors is not (as I conceive) to beat down their
hopes of parallelling them, and so to clip the wings of their aspiring desires:
but rather to teach them that there wants nothing thereunto but their own
endeavor, and that if they fall short, the fault is not in the age, but in
themselves. The spies that were sent by Moses to discover the land of Canaan,
at their return told the people, that the inhabitants Numb. 13. 28. 33.
the of were much stronger then themselves, that they were Giants the sonn^s of
Anak, and themselves but as Grasshoppers in comparison of them, by means of
which report, the hearts of the people melted within them, and they were utterly
discouraged from marching forward, though the discouerers reported withal,
that the land from whence they came flowed with milk and honey, and the
pomegrannats, the figgs, the wonderful clusters of grapes brought from thence,
for a taste and evidence of the goodness of the soil pleased them exceeding
well. Thus when our Ancestors are painted forth as Giants, not only in stature
and strength, but in wit and virtue, though the acts we find recorded of them,
please us marveilous well, yet we durst not venture, or so much as once think
upon the matching of them, because we are taught and made to believe, that we
forsooth are but as pigmies, and dwarfes in regard of them; and that it were as
possible to fit a child's shoe to Hercules foot, as for us any way to come
near them, or to trace their stepps, Possunt, quia posse videntur. They can
because they seem they can.

Certainly the force of imagination is wonderful, either to beget in us an
ability for the doing of that which we apprehe^d we ca^ do, or a disability
for the not doing of that which we conceive we cannot do: which was the reason
that the Wisards and Oracles of the Gentiles being co^sulted, they ever
returned either an hopeful answer, or an ambiguous, such as by a favorable
co^structio^, might either include or at leastwise not utterly exclude hope.
Agesilaus (as I remember) clapping his hands upon the Al, tar, and taking it
off again, by a cunning divice showed to his soldiers, victory, sta^ped upon
it, whereby they were so encouraged, and grew so confident, that beyong all
expectation, they indeed effected that whereof by this slight, they were
formerly assured. Prognostications and Prophesies often help to further that
which they foretell, and to make men such as they bear the^ in hand they shall
be; nay by an unavoidable destiny must be. Francis Marquess of Saluzze
yeeldes us a memorable example in this kind, who being Lieuetenant General to
Francis the first Guicciardin.
King of France over all his forces which he then had beyond the mountains in
Italy, a man highly favored in all the Court, and infinitely obliged to the
King for his Marquesite which his brother had forfeited, suffered himself to
be so far afrighted and deluded, as it has since been manifestly proved, by
Prognostications, (which then throughout all Europe were given out to the
advantage of the Emperor Charles the fifth and to the prejudice of the
French,) that having no occasion offered, yea his own affections contradicting
the same, he first began in secret to complain to his private friends of the
inevitable miseries which he foresaw prepared by the Fates against the Crown
of France. And within a while after (this impression still working into him) he
most unkindly revolted from his Master, and became a turne-coate to the
Emperors side, to the astonishment of all men, his own great disgrace, and
the no less disadva^tage to the French enterprise on the other side I doubt
not but that the prophesies of Sauanarola, as much assisted Charles the eight
Idem.
to the conquest of Naples, which he performed so speedily and happily, as he
seemed rather with chalk to mark out his lodgings, then with his sword to
win them.

To like purpose was that Custom among the Heathen of deriving the pedigree of
valiant men from the Gods, as Varro the most learned Augustine. de Civit. Dei
lib. 3. c. 4.
of the Romans has well observed. Ego huiusmodi a Dis repetitas origines
vtiles esse lubens agnosco, vt viri fortes etiamsi falsum sit, se ex Dis
genitos credant, vt eo modo animus humanus veluti diuinae stirpis fiduciam
gerens, res magnas aggrediendas presumat audacius, agat vehementiu:, and ob
haec impleat ipsa securitate foelicius. I for my part (says he) judge those
pedegrees drawn from the Gods not to be unprofitable, that valiant men (though
in truth it be not so) believing themselves to be extracted from divine races,
might upon the confidence thereof undertake high attemps the more boldly,
intend them the more earnestly and accomplish them the more securely and
successively. And of the Druides Caesar has noted, that among other doctrines
they taught the souls immortality De bello Gallico, lib. 6.
by propagation, because they taught, hoc maxim ad virtutem excitari homines
metu mortis neglecto, that by means of this apprehension men were notablely
spurred forward and whetted on to the adventuring and enterprising of
commendable actions, through the contempt of death: Which same thing Lucan has
likewise remarked. Lib. 1.


-- Vobis authoribus vmbrae
Non tacitas Erebi seeds, ditisque profundi
Pallida regna petunt; regit idem spiritus artus
Orb alio: longae, (conitis si cognita) vitae
Mors media est; certe populi, quos despicit Arctos,
foelices errore suo, quos ille timorum
Maximus, haud vrget Lethi metus; inde ruendi
In ferrum men's prona viris, animaeque capaces
Mortis, et ignavum est rediturae parcere vitae.
-- Your doctrine is
Our ghost's go not to those pale realms of Stygian Dis,
And silent Erebus: the self same souls does sway
Bodies elsewhere, and death (if certain truth you say)
Is but the midst of life. Thrice happy in your error
Ye Northern wights whom Death the greatest Prince of terror
Nothing affrights. Hence are your Martial hearts inclind
To rush on point of sword, hence that undaunted mind
So capable of Death, hence seems it base and vain
To spare that life which will eft soones return again.
By all which we see the admirable efficacy of the imagination, either for the
elevating or depressing of the mind, for the making of it more abject and base,
or more active and generous, and from thence infer that the doctrine of Natures
necessary decay rather tends to make men worse then better, rather cowardly
then courageous, rather to draw them down to that they must be, then to lift
them up to that they should and may be, rather to breed sloth then to quicken
industry. I will give one instance for all, and that home-bredde, the reason
why we have at this day, no Vineyards planted, nor wine grown in England as
heretofore, is commonly ascribed to the decay of Nature, either in regard of
the heavens or Earth or both, and men possessed with this opinion sit down and
try not what may be done; whereas our great Antiquary imputes it to the Lazines
of the Inhabitants rather then to any defect or distemper in the Climat, and
withal professes that Camden in Glocestershire.
he is no way of the mind of those grudging sloathfull husbandmen, (whom
Columella censures) who think that the earth is grown weary and barren with
the excessive plenty of former ages. I have somewhere read of a people so
brutish and barbarous that they must first be taught and persuaded that they
were not beasts but men, and capable of reason before any serviceable or
profitable use could be made of them. And surely there is no hope, that ever
we shall attain the height of the worthy acts and exploits of our
Predecessors, except first we be resolved that Gods Grace and our own
endeavors concurring there is a possibility we should rise to the same degree
of worth. Si hanc cogitationem homines habuissent vt nemo se meliorem fore eo
qui optimus fuisset arbitraretur, ij ipsi qui sunt optimi non fuissent, if men
had always thus conceaved with themselves that no man could be better then he
that then was best, those that now are esteemed best, had not so been. They be
the words of Quintilian, and thereupon he inferres, as does the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 12. at the last verse, Nitamur semper ad optima, quod facientes, aut
evademus in summum, aut certe multos Orat. 12. 10.
infra nos videbimus, Let us covet earnestly the best gifts, and propose to our
selves the matching at least, if not the passing of the most excellent
patterns, by which means we shall either gain the top, or see many beneath
us. Non enim nos tarditatis natura damnavit, sed vltra nobis quam oportebat
indulsimus, ita non tam ingenio illi nos superarunt quam proposito, says the^
same Author in another place. Nature has not made us more incapable the our
Ancestors, but we have been too indulgent Libr: 2. c. 5.
to our selves, by which means it comes to pass that they surmount us not so
much in wit as in endeavor.

SECT. 4. The fourth is that it makes men more careless as in matter of
repentance, so likewise both in regard of their present fortunes, and in
providing for posterity.
AS the opinion of the worlds universal decay quails the hopes and blunts the
edge of men's endeavors, so does it likewise of our exhortations and
threatenings, when men are persuaded that famines and pestilences, and
unseasonable weather, and the like, are not the scourges of God for sin, but
rather the diseases of wasted and decrepit Nature, not procured so much by the
vices and wickedness of men, as by the old age and weakness of the world.
And this opinion being once thoroughly rooted and settled in them, they neither
care much for repentance, nor call upon God for grace, thereby either to
prevent these heavy judgments, hanging over their heads, or to remove them
having seized upon them, but the Prophets of God (I am sure) took another
course, they told not the people* that these plagues were the symptoms and
characters of the worlds declining and decreasing, but the marks and rods of
Gods vengeance for their transgressions and rebellions, and that the only way
both to prevent and remove them, was to remove their heinous and grievous
sins out of Gods sight, the only means to turn them from themselves, was
for themselves to return and be reconciled to their God. besides the same
opinion serves to make men more careless both in regard of their present
fortunes, and in providing for posterity. For when they consider how many
thousand years nature has now been as it were in a fever Hectique, daily
consuming and wasting away by degrees; they infer that in reason she cannot
hold out long, and therefore it were to as little purpose to plant trees, or to
erect lasting buildings, either for Civil, Charitable, or Pious uses, as to
provide new apparel for a sick man, that lies at deaths door, and has
already one foot in the grave: I beseech you brethren says the Apostle by the
coming of the Lord Jesus, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be
not soon shaken in mind or be troubled, 2. These. 2. 1.
neither by spirit nor by word nor by letters as from us, as though the day of
Christ were at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means. What a solemn
preface does he make unto it? and with how serious a conclusion does he seal
it up? Now among other reasons yielded by Divines for this his earnestnes
herein, one special one is, that men might not lavish out, and scatter their
estates, upon a vain supposition of the approach of that day. As Phillip
Camerarius a learned man, and counselor to the state of Norinberg, reports
upon his own knowledge, Medit. Hist. cap. 41.
that a Parish Priest in those parts skillful in Arithmetique presumed so far
upon his Calculations and the numerall letters of that prediction in the
Gospel, Videbunt in quem pupugerunt, they shall look 1562.
upon him whom they pierced, that he confidently assured his parishoners, not
only of the year, but the very day and hour of the worlds end, and our
Saviors coming to judgment. Whereupon such as gave credit to him carelessely
wasted their means, persuading themselves that they should now have no further
use of them. At the day and hour prefixed they all met in a Chapel to hear
their Prophet preaching and praying, during which time there arose a great
tempest with fearful thunder and lightning, in so much as all present looked
out every minute, for the fulfilling of the prophecy: but a while after the
storm clearing up, and the day appearing fair, the silly people finding
themselves to be thus abused, for very indignation they rush upon their false
prophet, and would have slain him or used him shamefully as he deserved, had
he not slipped out of their fingers, and the fury of the enraged multitude
been appeased by some of the wiser sort. The like is reported by Espencaeus
out of Bullinger of the Hutites a branch of the sect of Anabaptists, in his
Commentaries on the third chapter of the second epistle to Timothy: so
dangerous a thing it is to predetermine the last day, or to set a period to
the course of nature. It is most certain that we are by many hundreths of
years nearer the worlds end, then was the Apostle when he wrote that
exhortation to the Thessal: and yet when that end shall be, is still as
uncertain to us, as it was to them. Upon which point St. Augustine I remember
has an excellent meditation, comparing the several ages of the world to the
ages of man; not so much as I conceive in regard of growth or declination, as
in regard of progression, making the infancy thereof from Adam to Noah, the
Childhood from Noah to Abraham, the Youth from Abraham to David, the man's
estate from David to Christ, the old age from Christ to the end of it. And as
the duration in all the other ages of man is certain, but the lasting of old
age uncertain: so is it in the World. And as Chrysostom well notes, we call
not the end of the year the last hour, or day or week thereof, but the last
month or quarter: so we call this last age of the World the End thereof. But
how long this age shall last, it is still doubtful, it being one of those
secrets which the Almighty has locked up in the cabinet of his own counsel, a
secret which is neither possible neither profitable for us to know, as being
not by God revealed unto us in his Word, much less then in the book of Nature.

It is agreed upon on all sides by Divines that at least two signs forerunning
the Worlds end, remain vnaccomplisht; the Subversion of Rome, and the
Conversion of the Jews. And when they shall be accomplished God only knows,
as yet in man's judgment there being little appearance of the one or the other.
It is not for vt to know the times and seasons Act. 1. 7.
which the Father has put in his own power: In his own power they are, they
depend not upon the law of Nature, or chain of second Causes, but upon his
will and pleasure, who as he made the World by his word, so by his beck can and
will unmake it again. Sola religione mihi persuadetur mundum caepisse, atque
finem incendio habiturum, says Scaliger: it is only Exercit. 62.
faith and religion that assures man that as the World had a beginning, so it
shall have an end; And Divine Bartas, Sept. (...). 1.


L'immuable decret de la bouche divine,
Qui Causera sa fin, Causa son origin.
Th'immutable divine decree, which shall
Cause the Worlds end, caused his original.
Let not then the vain shadows of the Worlds fatal decay keep use ither
from looking backward to the imitation of our noble Predecessors, or forward
inproviding for posterity, but as our predecessors worthily provided for us, so
let our posterity bless us in providing for them, it being still as uncertain
to us what generations are yet to ensue, as it was to our predecessors in their
ages. I will shut up this reason with a witty Epigram made upon one who in his
writings undertook to foretell the very year of the Worlds consummation. Owen
upon Nap^ir.


Nonaginta duos durabit mundus in annos,
Mundus ad arbitrium sistat obitque tuum.
Cur mundi sinem propiorem non facis, vt ne
Ante obitum mendax arguerere? sapis.
Ninety two years the World as yet shall stand,
If it do stand or fall at your command.
But say, why placed you not the Worlds end nigher?
Lest ere you died you might be proved a liar.
SECT. 5. The fifth and last reason is the weak grounds which the contrary
opinion is founded upon.
THE fifth and last reason which moved me to the undertaking of this Treatise
was the weak grounds which the contrary opinion of the Worlds decay is founded
upon. I am persuaded that the fictions of Poets was it which first gave life
unto it. Homer has touched upon this string, with whom Virgill accords, and
they are both seconded by Iuvenal and Horace: But above all, that pretty
invention of the four Ages of the World, compared to four metals, Gold,
Silver, Brass, and Iron, has wrought such an impression in men's minds, that
it can hardly be rooted out. For ancient Philosophers and Divines, I find not
any, that are so much as alleged in defense of it, but Pliny and Cyprian, to
whom some have added Gellius and Augustine: but how truly it shall appear
Godwilling when we come to speak of their testimonies in their proper places.
And for Scripture proof, it is both very sparing and wrested.

That which above all (as I conceive) has made way for this opinion is the
morosity and crooked disposition of old men, always complaining of the
hardness of the present times, together with an excessive admiration of
Antiquity, which is in a manner natural and inbred in us, vetera extollimus,
recentium incuriosi, The ancient we extol beingcarelesse Tacitus Ann. lib. 2.
verbis ultimis.
of our own times. For the former of these, old men for the most part being
much changed from that they were in their youth in complexion and temperature,
they are filled with sad melancholy thoughts, which makes them think the World
is changed, whereas in truth the change is in themselves. It fares with them in
this case as with those whose taste is distempered, or are troubled with the
Iaundise, or whose eyes are bloodshot, the one imagining all things bitter or
sour which they taste, and the other red or yellow which they see.

-- Terraeque Vrbesque recedunt. Virg. Aen. 3.

Themselves being launched out into the deep, the trees and houses seem to
go backward; whereas in truth the motion is in themselves, the houses and
trees still standing where they were. Seneca tells us a pleasant tale of
Harpaste his wives fool, who being become suddenly blind, Epist. 50.
she deemed the room in which she was to be dark; but could by no means be
persuaded of her own blindness. Such for the most part is the case of old
men, themselves being altered both in disposition of body, and condition of
mind, they make wonderful narrations of the change of times since they
remember: which because they cannot be controlled, pass for current.

The other pioner, as I may so call it, which by secret undermining makes way
for this opinion of the Worlds decay, is an excessive admiration of Antiquity,
together with a base and envious conceit of whatsoever the present age affords,
or possibly can afford in comparison thereof. Vetulam praeferunt immortalitati,
they prefer the wrinkles of (...) of Ulysses.
Antiquity before the rarest beauty of the present times, the common voice
every where is, and ever has been, and will be to the Worlds end

Faelix nimium prior aetas Boethius lib. 2. metro 5.

Contenta fidelibus arvis --
-Vtinam quoque nostra redirent
In mores tempora priscos.
Thrice, happy former ages and blessed
With faithful fields content and pleased. --
Would our times also had the grace
Again old manners to embrace.
yet if we will speak properly and punctually, Antiquity rather consists in
the old age, then infancy, or youth of the World. But take it as commonly
understood, I think it will not be denied by any that understand the course of
times, but that in latter ages many abuses have been reformed, many Arts
perfected, many profitable Inventions discovered, many noble and notable acts
achieved,

Multa dies variusque labor mutabilis aevi
Rettulit in melius.
Time and much toil of this vnsteddie World
Has bettered many things.
As truly Virgil, and elegantly Claudian,

-- Rerumque remotas De raptu Proserp. lib. 3.

Ingeniosa vias paulatim explorat egestas.
Witty necessity by degrees traceth out
Of things the prints and windings most remote.
But let us hear what the wisest man that ever lived of a mere man has
determined in this point. Say not thou what is the cause that the former
Eccles. 7. 10.
days were better then these: for thou do not enquire wisely concerning
this. Upon which words says Isidorus Clarius, Quia manifestum est habuisse
priora tempora, sicut and haec nostra habent incommoda sua, because it is
evident that former times had their mischiefs and miseries waiting upon them
as well as ours. Yet because for the most part, the best of former times is
recorded, and the worst concealed from us, as the Sieue lets go the finest
flower, but retains the bran; or because we are generally more sensible of
the crosses, then the blessings of our own times; or lastly because the sight
and presence of things diminishes that reputation which we Minuit praesentia
(...). Lib. de Oratoribus.
conceived of them. Such is the disease and malignity of our nature, Vitium
malignitatis humanae, as Tacitus calls it, vt vetera semper in laud, praesentia
sint in fastidio.

-- Et nisi quae terris semota suisque
Temporibus defuncta videt, fastidit and odit.
Sed redit ad fastos and virtutem imputat annis, Horace lib. 2. op. 1.

Miraturque nihil nisi quod Libitina sacravit.
Save what removed is by place, nor lacks
Antiquity to warrant it, he lothes and hates:
Virtue he counts by years and Almanacks,
Wonders at naught but what death consecrates.
But as the same Poet wittily speaks comparing the Graecians with the Romans,
the same may we demand comparing our selves and ^atter ages generally with
the ancients.

Quod si tam antiquis novitas invisa fuisset
Quam nobis, quid nunc esset vetus, aut quid haberet
Quod legeret tereretque viritim publicus vsus?
If ancients had envied as much as we
Things that are new, what now would ancient be,
Or could be read and used publicly?
It was the cunning of Michael Montaigne as himself witnesses to use a
similitude of Plutarches or a sentence of Senecaes as his own Essays* l 2. c.
10
that so it might appear how men censured that in him, which in those ancient
Authors they highly applauded: but very witty was the device of Michael Angelo
a most famous modern painter, who drawing a table after the Antique manner hid
it in a corner of a friends house where he thought it would soon be
discovered, and withal set his own name in a corner of it, but in letters
scarce discernable. The table being found he was quickly sent for, showed him
it was by the master of the house and commended for an exquisite piece far
beyond any of the present age; but when the Author of it challenged it to be
his own, and for proof thereof showed him his name in it, he craved pardon
of him and acknowledged his error. Such is the advantage which antiquity has
against the present times, that if we meet with any thing which excells, we
think it must be ancient, or if with any thing that is ancient, it cannot but
excel: Nay therefore we think it excells because we think it ancient though
it be not so.

Vt quidam artifices nostro faciunt saeculo,
Qui pretium operibus maius inveniunt, novo Phaedrus l. (...). Fabul. in
prologo.

Si marmori adscripserunt Praxitelen, suo
Detrito, Myronem argento.
As some artificers in these our days
Who sell their works at a far dearer rate,
If on new marble they Praxiteles,
Or Myron write, upon their battered plate.
I have seen, says Ludouicus Viues, the verses of a man then living, which
because they were found in a very ancient Library, covered De Causis Corrupt.
Ar^. lib. 7.
with dust and eaten with mothes, he that took them up, in a manner adored
them bare-headed, as being Virgills, or some one of that age, And another with
disdain cast away an epistle of Tullies, before which there was of purpose
prefixed a french name: Addito etiam convitio barbariei Transalpinae: adding
this scoff withal that it savoured of transalpine barbarism. Which perverse
and partial judgment I conceive not to spring so much from a due respect to
the ancient Authors, as an envious disesteeming of the present To the best and
wisest while they live, the world is continually a froward opposite, a curious
observer of their defects, and imperfections, their virtues it afterward as
much admireth. Hooker 5 7


Virtutem incolumem odimus, Hor. l. 3. od. 24.

Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi.
Virtue growing in our sight w'envy
Removed from hence we straight ways deifie
When Hercules had vanquished so many fierce monsters

Comperit invidiam supremo fine domandam. idem l. 2. Epist. 1

He grapled last with envy as the worst.
Esse quid hoc dicam viuis quod fama negatur
Et sua quod rarus tempor a lector amat.
Hi sunt invidi^ nimirum (Regule) mores Mar^ialis, l. 5. epig. 10.

Praeferat antiquos semper vt illa novis.
Whence is it that Poets living are misprized,
And few do like the works of their own times?
Through Envy (Regulus) are they despised,
Which still to new preferres the elder rimes.
Men read the Authors of their own times either as inferiors o^ punies to
themselves with a kind of scorn to learn of them.

-- Quia turpe putant parere minoribus, and quae
Imberbes didicere, senes perdenda fateri.
To younger then themselves to yield great shame they hold, Horat. l. 2. ep.
(...).

And what they learned in youth t'vnlearne when they are old.
Or as their Equals, in whose persons or manners because happily they espy
some imperfections, they judge accordingly of their works. For as dead flies
cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stin^king Eccles. 10. 1.
savor: so does a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom. Which
was in a manner the Apostles case, his letters (say they) are weighty and
powerful: but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible. And
no doubt but to those who thus conceived of him, his very 2. Cor. 10. 10.
letters were not so powerful and weighty, as otherwise they would have been;
And as now they are to us, who know not what his person or speech was. Or if no
exception be to be taken to them, yet we hold it a kind of disreputation or
disparagement unto us, by yielding them their due (though worthily and justly
merited,) to praeferre them before ourselves, which is the only reason, that
the same men, being while they ^iue mightily maligned and impugned, they are
after their death, and that many times by the same corrivals, as highly
honored and commended.

Vrit enim fulgore suo, qui praegravat arts
Infra se positas, extinctus amabitur idem. Horat. l. 2. ep. (...)

Who others does in acts and skill surmount,
With brighter beams inferior spirits does vex,
But being dead is held of great account.
Which Martial verifies in the practice of Vacerra.

Miraris veteres Vacerra solos,
Nec laudas nisi mortuos Poetas,
Ignoscas petimus Vacerra, tanti Lib. 8. epig 6^.

Non est vt placeam Tibi perire,
Old Poets only thou do praise,
And none but dead ones magnify:
Pardon Vacerra, thee to please
I am not yet in mind to die.
He is a happy man says the great Scaliger, (and that not so much out of his
reading as his own sense and feeling,) who while he lives is made partaker of
those deserved praises. In sine (...). Elementor^m.


Quas vita non dat, funus ac cinis dabunt.
What life graunts not, death and the grave will give.
Even Tully himself, the pattern of eloquence to all succeeding ages, and one
of the most absolute, and eminent in his profession, that ever the world
yielded, was notwithstanding sharply censured, and taunted at, by his
coevalls, vt tumidiorem et Asianum et redundantem, et Quintie Orat. 12. 10.
in repetitionibus nimium, et in salibus aliquando frigidum, et in compositione
fractum, exultantem ac pene quod procul absit, viro molliorem: as swelling
after the Asiatique manner, too redundant and frequent in repetitions, in jests
sometime too cold, and in the composure of his matter broken and effeminate. And
to like purpose Velleius Paterculus speaking of a notable exploit of Sextius
Saturninus, observes the same humorous disposition Lib. 2. c 92.
in those of his time, Quod ego factum, says he, cuilibet veterum Consulum
gloriae comparandum reor, nisi quod naturaliter audita visis laudamus
libentius, and presentia invidia, preterita veneratione persequimur, et his nos
obrui, illis instrui credimus, which noble exploit of his I could justly
compare with the most famous and glorious acts of the ancient Consulls; but
that out of a natural inclination we more willingly commend things we
receive by hearsay then by sight, prosecuting things present with envy, but
being past with veneration; as being persuaded that we are affronted by the
one, but instructed by the other.

For my self I profess with Pliny the younger, Sum ex ijs qui minor antiquos,
non tamen vt quidam, temporum nostrorum ingenia despicio, neque enim Lib. 6.
Ep. 21.
quasi lassa aut effaeta natura, vt nihil jam laudabile pariat: I am one of the
number of those who admire the ancients, yet not as some, do I despise the
wits of our times, as if Nature were tired and barren and brought forth nothing
now that were praiseworthy. To which passage of Pliny Viues seems to allude,
male de natura censet quicunque vno illam aut altero partu effaetam arbitratur,
he that so thinks or says, is doubtless injurious and ungrateful both to God
and nature, And qui non est gratus datis, non est dignus dandis, he that does
not acknowledge the peculiar and singular blessings of God bestowed upon this
present age in some things beyond the former, is so far from meriting the
increase of more, as he deserves not to enjoy these. And commonly it falls out
that there the course and descent of the graces of God ceases, and the spring
is dried up, where there is not a corespondent recourse and tide of our
thankfullnes. Let then men suspend their rash judgoments. nec perseverent
suspicere preteritos, despicere presents, only to admire the ancients and
despise those of the present times. Let them rather Sydonius, l. 3. ep. 3.
imitate Lampridius the Orator, of whom witnesses the same Sydonius that he
read good Authors of all kinds, cum reverentia antiquos, Lib. 8. ep. 31.
sine invidia recentes, the old with reverence, the new without envy. I will
conclude this point and this chapter with that of Solomon, He Eccles. 3. 11.
has made every thing beautiful in his time: answereable whereunto is that of
the son of Syrach (which may well serve as a Commentary upon those works of
Solomon) All the works of the Lord are good, and he will give every needful
thing in due season: so that a man cannot say, this is Ecclesiasticus, 39. 33.
34. 35.
worse then that, therefore praise ye^ the Lord with the whole heart and mouth,
and bless the name of the Lord.

CAP. 3. The Controversy touching the worlds decay stated, and the method held
through this ensuing Treatise proposed.
SECT. 1. Touching the pretended decay of the mixed bodies.
LEast I should seem on the one side, to sight with shadows, and men of
straw made by my self, or on the other to maintain paradoxes, which daily
experience refutes, it shall not be amiss in this Chapter, to vnbowell the
state of the question, touching the Worlds decay, and therewithal to unfold
and lay open the several knots, and joints thereof, that so it may appear
wherein the adverse party agrees, and wherein the point controverted consists,
where they join issue, and where the difference rests. It is then agreed on
all hands, that all subcoelestiall bodies, indiuidualls, I mean, under the
circle of the moon, are subject not only to alteration, but to diminution and
decay, some I confess last long, as the Eagle and Raven among birds, the
Elephant and Stagge among beasts, the Oak among Vegetables, stones and
mettalls among those treasures which Nature has laid up in the bosom of the
earth: yet they all have a time of grows and increase, of ripeness and
perfection, and then of declination and decrease, which brings them at last to
a final and total dissolution. Beasts are subject to diseases, or at least to
the spending of those natural spirits wherewith their life and being as the
Lamp with oil is mainetai ned. Vegetables to rottenness, stones to
mouldering, and mettalls to rust and canker, though I doubt not but some have
layen in the bowels of the earth untainted since the worlds Creation, and may
continue in the same case till the Consummation thereof: Which need not seem
strange, since some of the Egyptian Pyramides (stones drawn from their
natural beds and fortresses and exposed to the invasion of the air and
violence of the weather) have stood already well nigh three thousand years,
and might for ought we know stand yet as long again And I make no question
but glass and gold and crystal and pearl and precious stones might so be
used that they should last many thousand years if the world should last so
long. For that which Poets feign of time that it eats out and devoures all
things, is in truth but a poetical fiction, since time is a branch of
Quantity, it being the measure of motion, and Quantity in it self isno way
active, but merely passive, as being an accident flowing from the matter. It
is then either some inward conflict, or outward assault which is wrought in
time that eats them out. Time it self without these is toothlesse, and can
never do it. Nay even among Vegetables it is reported by M. Camden that whole
trees lying under the Earth have been and daily are dug up in Cheshire,
Lancheshire, and Cumberland, which are thought to have layen there since Noah's
flood, And Verstigan reports the like of finre trees dug up in the
Netherlands, which are not known to grow any where in Cap. 4.
that Country, neither is the soil apt by nature to produce them, they
growing in cold hilly places, or upon high mountains, so that it is most
likely, they might from those places during the deluge by the rage of the
waters be driven thither. Yet all these consisting of the Elements, as they
do, I make no doubt, but without any outward violence in the course of nature
by the very inward conflict of their principles whereof they are bred, would by
degrees, though perchance for a long time insensibly, yet at last feel
corruption. For a Body so equally tempered, or euenly balanced by the
Elements, that there should be no praedominancie, no struggling or wrestling in
it, may be imagined, but surely I think was never really subsisting in Nature,
nor well can be.

SECT. 2. Touching the pretended decay of the Elements in regard of their
quantity and dimensions.
I Come then in the next place from the mixed Bodies to the Elements themselves
wbereof they are mixed. Of these it is certain that they decay in their parts,
but so as by a reciprocal compensation they both loose and gain, sometime
loosing what they had gotten, and then again getting what they had formerly
lost, Egregia quaedam est in elementis quaternarum virium compensatio,
aequalibus iustisque regulis ac terminis vices suas dispensantium, says Philo
in his book de Mundi incorruptibilitate, there is in the Elements a singular
retribution of that fourfold force that is in them; dispensing it self by
even bounds and just rules. The Element of the fire, I make no doubt, but by
condensation it sometimes looses to the air, and the air again by
rarefaction to it. Again the air by condensation looses to the water, and the
water by rarefaction to it. The earth by secret conveyances sucks in and
steals away the waters of the Sea, but returns them again with full mouth.
And these two incroach likewise and make inrodes interchangeably each upon
other. The ordinary depth of the sea is commonly answerable to the ordinary
hight of the main land above the water: and the whirlepooles and extraordinary
depths answerable to the hight of mountains above the ordinary hight of the
Earth. The Promontories and necklands which butt into the Sea, what are they
but solid creekes, and the creekes which thrust forth their arms into the
Land, but fleeting promontories. The Islands what are they but solid lakes, and
the lakes again but fleeting Islands. Nay, Islands sometimes are swallowed up by
the Sea, sometimes new rise out of the Sea. Sometimes parts of the Continent
are recovered out of the Sea, as was a place in Egypt called Delta, Ammania
regio, and others, nay the greatest part of the Netherlands Aristoteles (...)
Meteor.
was so recovered, as appears by their finding innumerable shells of seafish
almost in every place where they dig, and other parts again irrecoverably lost
by the inundation thereof as it fell out in the same Countries about four
hundred years since in the reign of our King Henry the first, the steeples
and towers which yet appear above the water showing to Passengers the revenge
of that unmerciful Element upon a part for the loss of the whole land. Helice
likewise and Bura cities of Greece were drowned (as it seems) in Ogyges
sloud, of which the Poet Ovid. Met. 15.


Siquaeras Helicen and Buram Achaidos Vrbes
Invenies sub aquis.
Bura and Helice on Achayan ground,
Are sought in vain, but under water found.
And Seneca in the sixth boo^e of his Natural questions thus speaks of Cap.
32.
these two Cities, Helicen, Burimque totas mare accepit, supra oppida duo
navigatur, duo autem quae novimus, quae in nostram no^iam memoria literis
servata perduxit, quam multa alia alys locis mersa sunt? Helice and Buris the
Sea has wholly swallowed up, so that now we sail over two Towns, two I say
which are come to our knowledge by the memory of ancient records, but how many
other trow we may be swallowed up in diverse other places, which we never
heard of? Inter insulas nulla iam Delos, says Tertullian in his book de
Pallio, among the Islands there is now no such thing to be found as Delos: and
again Acon in Atlantico Lybiam aut Asiam adequans quaeritur nun^. Acon in the
Atlanticke Sea equalling Afric or Asia is now found wanting. The story of K.
Arthur, and the Knights of the round table is but an idle Book, yet it was not
(it seems) without cause that he calls the Cornish Tristram, Sir Tristram de
Lioness, inasmuch as Master Carew of Antony in his Survay of Surv. lib. 1.
Cornwall witnesses, that the Sea has ravened from that shire that whole
Country of Lioness, and that such a Country of Lioness there was, he very
sufficiently proves by many strong reasons. Sometimes dry Towns become
Havens, and sometimes again Hauen-townes have become dry, as Hubert Thomas a
man of very good parts, chief Secretary to Frederi^k the third Count Palatine
of Rhene, and Prince Elector, in his description of the Country of Liege
affirms that the Sea has in time come up to the walls of Tongres now well
nigh an hundredth English miles from the Sea; which among other reasons he
proves by the great iron rings there yet to be seen, unto which the ships that
there sometimes arrived were fastened. Also Forum Iulium, a Town seated in
littore Narbonensi, the present estate whereof is described very well (as all
other things) by that excellent Chancellor of France, Michael Hospitalis.
Epist. lib. 5.


Apparet moles antiqui diruta portus,
Atque vbi portus erat siccum nunc littus and horti
The ruins of an ancient haven appears to be,
But where the haven was, now gardens may you see.
In like manner the river Arno now falls into the sea six miles from Pisa,
whereby it appears that the Land has there gotten much upon Survay of
Tuscany.
the Sea in this coast, for that Strabo in his time reports it was but 20
furlongs (which is two miles and an half) distant from the Sea. Lastly,
sometimes Islands have been annexed to the Continent, as Samos which (as
witnesses Tertullian) is become sand, and Pharos which in Homers time was an
Island, but in Plinyes annexed to the Continent by the slime of Nilus, and
sometimes again pieces have been cut off from the Continent, and made Islands,
as Sicily which was separated from the maine of Italy.

Haec loca vi quondam and vasta comvulsa ruina, Virg, Aen, lib. 3.

(Tantum aevi longinqua valet mutare vetust as)
Dissiluisse ferunt, cum protinus utraque tellus
Vna foret, venit medio vi pontus and vndis
Hesperium Si^ulo latus abs^idit, arvaque and urbes
Littore diductas, angusto interluit aestu.
These places by huge force with ruin violent,
(So great a change in things long tract of time can make)
Sundred they say, which erst were both one Continent
Till in between the Sea with force impetuous brake,
And with his mighty waves th'Hesperian did divide
From the Sicilian shore, and now twixt towns and fields
Thus rent asunder ebbes and flows a narrow tide.
Sic and Hispanias a contextu Africae mare eripuit, says Seneca. Thus did the
Not. quaest. lib. 6 c. 29. Camden. Twine. Verstigan.
Sea snatch away Spain from the Continent of Africa. And this (...)* as many
imagine, was likewise broken off from the Continent of (...)* grounding
themselves partly upon their private reasons, and part (...)pon the authorities
of Antonius Volscus, Dominicus Marius Niger, (...) Servius Honoratus, who
seeks to prove it from that of Virgil

Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos.
And Britains wholly from the World divided. Eciog. 1.

And of Claudian in imitation of Virgil,

-- Nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
Britain from our World seuer'd.
Of both these as well Islands annexed to the Continent, as pieces of the
Continent broken off from it by force of the Sea and made Islands, Pliny has
written at large in the second Book of his Natural History, cap. 85. 86. 87.
And Ovid in the 15 of Met. touches them both.

Fluctibus ambitae fuerant Antissa, Pharosque,
Et Phaenissa Tyros, quarum nunc Insula nulla est.
Antissa, Pharos and Phaenissian Tire,
Now are not, but with Seas surrounded were.
And on the other side,

Leucada continuam veteres habuere coloni
Nunc freta circumeunt, Zancle quoque iuncta fuisse
Dicitur Italiae: donec confinia pontus
Abstulit, and media tellurem repulit unda
The old inhabitants of Leucadian Isles
Conjoined to the Continent them found.
And Zancle joined was to Italy,
Which now cut off by Sea the waves surround.
By reason of which mutual traffic and interchange, the Elements may truly
be said to remain always the same in regard of their entire bodies, as
Theseus his ship so renowned antiquity was held by the scholars of Athens to
be the same, though it were renewed in every part thereof, and not a planke or
pin remained of the first building. Or as a river may properly be said to be
the same, though it vary from it self by the access of fresh supplies every
moment.

Rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis, at iste Horat. lib. (...). ep. 2.

Labitur and labetur in omne volubilis aevum.
The Clown waits till the foord be slidden all away,
But still it slides, and will for ever and a day.
SECT. 3. Touching the pretended decay of the Elements in regard of their
qualities.
THere is no fear then of the natural decay of the Elements in regard of
their quantity and dimensions; all the controversy is in regard of their
quality, whether the air and water be so pure and wholesome, and the earth so
fertile and fruitful as it was some hundreths or thousands of years since.
Touching the former, I think I shall make it appear that the World in former
ages has been plagued with more droughts, excessive raines, winds, frosts,
snowes, hailes, famines, earthquakes, pestilences, and other contagious
diseases, then in latter times: all which should argue a greater distemper in
the Elements; and for the fruitfulness of the earth I will not compare the
present with that before the fall or before the flood: I know and believe that
the one drew on a curse upon it, (though some great Divines hold that curse was
rather in regard of man's ensuing labor in dressing it, then of the Earths
ensuing barrenness) Gen 3. 17. 18. Pererius in locum.
and the other by washing away the surface and fatness thereof, and by
incorporating the salt waters into it, much abated the native and original
fertility thereof, and consequently the vigor and virtue of plants as well in
regard of nourishment as medicine. Upon which occasion it seems after the
Flood man had leave given him to feed upon Genesis 9. 3.
the flesh of beasts and fowls and fishes, which before the flood was not
lawful. Neither can it be denied that Gods extraordinary favor or curse upon
a land (beside the course of Nature) makes it either fruitful or barren, A
fruitful land makes he barren, says the Psalmist, for the wickedness of
them that dwell therein; And on the other side, he turns the Psalm. 107 34 35.
wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into water springs. And for
grounds which are continually rent and wounded with the plowshare, worn and
wasted with tillage, it is not to be wondered if they answer not the fertility
of former ages: But for such as have time and rest given to recover their
strength, and renew their decayed forces, or such as yet retain their
virginity without any force offered unto them, I doubt not but experience and
trial will make it good that they have lost nothing of their primitive
goodness, at leastwise since the flood, and consequently, that there is in the
earth it self by long-lasting no such perpetual and universal decay in
regard of the fruitfullnesse thereof, as is commonly imagined.

And if not in the earth it self, then surely not in the trees and herbs, and
plants and flowers which suck their nourishment from thence as so many infants
from their mothers breast: Let any one kind of them that ever was in any part
of the world since the Creation be named that is utterly lost; no, God and
Nature have so well provided against this that one seed sometimes multiplies
in one year many thousands of the same kind. Let it be proved by comparing
their present qualities with those which are recorded in ancient writers, that
in the revolution of so many ages, they have lost any thing of their wonted
color, their smell, their taste, their virtue, their proportion, their
duration. And if there be no such decay as is supposed to be found in the
several kinds of vegetables, what reason have we to believe it in beasts,
specially those that make vegetables their food. If Aristotle were now alive,
should he need to compose some new treatise De historia Animalium? in those
things where he wrote upon certain grounds and experimental observations?
have the beasts of which he wrote any thing altered their dispositions? Are the
wild become tame, or the strong feeble? no certainly. It was true in all ages
both before and since which the Poet has

Fortes creantur fortibus, and bonis,
Est in juvencis, est in equis patrum Horrat. Lib. 4. Od. 4.

Virtus, nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae Columbam.
From nobles noble spirits proceed,
Steeres, Horses like their Sires do prove,
The Eagle feirce does never breed
A timorous and fearful Dove.
Has the Lion forgotten his Majesty, or the Elephant his sagacity, or the
Tiger his fierceness, or the Stagge his swiftness, or the Dog his
fidelity, or the Fox his wiliness? were the Oxen then of the same Country
stronger for labor, the horses better featured or more serviceable then now?
doubtless these lessons as their Mistress cannot but teach them, so these
scholars cannot but learn them, neither is it in their power to forget them.

SECT. 4. Touching the pretended decay of mankind, in regard of manners and the
arts.
WIth man it is otherwise: for he having a free will, (at leastwise in moral
and natural actions) by reason of that liberty varieth both from his kind and
from himself, more then any other creature besides: And hence is it (other
circumstances concurring) that in the same country men are sometimes generally
addicted to virtue, sometimes to vice, sometimes to one vice, sometimes to
another, sometimes to civillity, sometimes to barbarism, sometimes to
studiousnesse and learning, sometimes to ease and ignorance, sometimes they are
taller of stature, sometimes lower, and lastly, sometimes longer, sometimes
shorter lived, ct this I say arises partly from the Liberty of man's will, and
partly from Gods providence ouerruling and disposing all things according to
the secret counsel of his own unsearchable wisdom.

Signat tempora proprijs
Aptans officijs Deus, Boeth. de Consol. Lib. 1. Met. 6.

Nec quas ipse coercuit
Misceri patitur vices.
To proper offices
God has each season bounded*
And will not that the courses
He sets them be confounded.
Haec omnia mutantur says S. Augustine, nec mutatur divinae providentiae
ratio, qua fit Vt ista mutentur. All these things are changed, and yet the
reason of the Divine Providence, by which they are changed, changes not. To
affirm then that humane affairs remain allwaies in the same estate,
continually drawn out as by an even thread, without variation, is untrue: and
on the other side to say that they always degenerate and grow worse and
worse, is as unsound. For surely had it been so, since the Creation or the
fall of man, civil society, nay the world itself could not have subsisted, but
would long since have been brought to utter ruin and desolation. Omne in
praecipiti vitium stetit, vice was at highest, and near its downfall stood.
And as Bodin has Iuvenal. Salyr. 1.
both rightly observed and learnedly expressed. Quod si res humanae in Method.
Hist. Cap. 7.
deterius prolaberentur, jampridem in extremo vitiorum ac improbitatis gradu
constitissemus, quo quidem antea peruentum esse opinor. Sed cum flagitiosi
homines nec vlterius progredi nec eodem loco stare diutius possent, sensim
regredi necesse habuerunt, vel cogente pudore qui hominibus inest anatura, vel
necessitate, quoth in tantis sceleribus societas nullo modo coli poter at, vel
etiam quoth verius est, impellente Dei bonitate. If men should allwaies grow worse
and worse, we had long since arrived to the utmost point and highest pitch of
villainy, to which it may be men have already attained, but when they could
neither make a farther progress, nor longer abode in the same state they must
needs by degrees return again, either very shame co^straining the^, which is
impla^ted in man by nature, or mere necessity in as much as humane society
could not stand with such an higth of wickedness, or else which I rather
believe, the Grace and Goodness of God moving and leading them thereunto.

Vice sometimes aboundes in one nation, and sometimes in another, and in the
same nation the same vice does not allwaies equally abound: but it either
rises or falls, reigns or vanishes according to the disposition of Rulers
and execution of laws: As is well and wisely noted by a late Historiographer
of our own in the the very entrance of his History of England, we shall find
(says he) the same correspondencies to hold in (...). D.
the actions of men, virtues and vices the same, though rising and falling
according to the worth or weakness of Governors; the causes of the ruins
and mutations of states to be alike, and the train of affairs carried by
president in a course of succession under the like colors; and that which he
observes in the history of this nation is no doubt true in all. We need go no
farther then that of the Jews for a notable instance in this kind: who at
times, more zealous then they in the worship of God, and the exercises of
religion? and who again, at other times more rebellious? It is said of them in
the psalm, Then believed they his words, but presently it follows Psalm. 106.
12. V. 13. 14.
in the very next verse, They soon forgot his works: and according to their
obedience or rebellion so were they either prosperous or unfortunate in the
course of their affairs: during their faith and fidelity toward God, every
man of the^ was in war as a thousand strong, and as much as a great Senate
for counsel in peacable deliberations: contrariwise if they swerved, (as they
often did) their wonted courage and magnanimity forsook them utterly, their
soldiers and military men tre^bled at the sight of the naked sword, when they
entered into mutual conference and sat in council for their own good, that
which children might have seen, their gravest Senators could not discern,
their Prophets saw darkness in steed of Visions, and the wise and prudent
were asmen bewitched.

Now that which is spoken touching the revolutions and returns of virtues and
vices, is likewise true in Arts and sciences. Hinc factum est, (says
Contarenus,) vt quibusdam aetatibus acerrima hominum ingenia vigere, alijs
tanqua^ flaccesscere videantur. Hence it is that in some ages the wits De
perfectione Re^an Lib. 2. Cap. 4.
of men seem wonderful sharp, and again in others flat and blunt. And it is
a true observation which Ramus to this purpose has, commigrationes gentium
variae cemmemorantur, commigrationes literarum and disciplinarum commemorari
possent, non minores. we read of diverse commigrations or remoualls of
Nations, and surely no less of Arts and Sciences might be observed. Whereupon
Aristotle who held the Arts Eternal, as he did the world, yet tells us there
was always a rising and a 1. de Coelo. and 1. Meteor.
falling of them as of the stars: so as sometimes they flourished in one
place and age, and sometimes in another: as the stars sometime shine in our
Hemisphere, sometimes in the other. Where was there ever more learning and
science then in Greece, and where is there now in the world more barbarisine?
what most exellently learned men, pillars and lights of the Church of Christ
has Africa brought forth as Tertullian, Minutius, Optatus, Lactantius,
Arnobius, his Master Fulgentius, St. Cyprian, and St. Augustine? and with what
learned men is Africa in our time acquainted? Contrariwise in the flourishing
days of the Romans how utterly without all knowledge of letters were the
Germans and Netherlanders, and how do they now a days flourish in all kind of
learning and cunning? While the Arts through the Christian world lay in a
manner buried in negligence and obscurity, then did their luster shine forth
most clearly in Ireland, thither did our English Saxons repair as to a Fair
or Market of good letters: Whence of the holy men of those times we often read
in our Ancient writers. Amandatus est ad disciplinam in Hiberniam. He was sent
into Ireland to study there. And in the life of Sulgen, who Camden in Hibernia.
lived about six hundred year ago.

Exemplo Patrum commotus amore legend^
Iuit ad Hybernos sophia mirabile claros: J^cobus Curio^. 2. K^: Chron.

And for to skill and learning he aspired
Treading the steps of Ancestors he sailed
To Ireland, then for wisdom much admired.
And it may seem that the English Saxons borrowed from them the manner of
forming their letters, since they used the same character which the Irish use
at this day, yet now when learning is as it were revived again from the grave,
through all Christendom, only this part of it (which was then as another
Goshen in Egypt) remains for the most part vnlightned, in the darkness of
ignorance, incivility, and superstition. Thus Almighty God in sundry ages and
in several places casts abroad the seeds of learning and knowledge, which in
their due time grow up and spread abroad to the glory of his own name and the
behoof of mankind. Neither can I here let pass the words of Bodin to like
effect touching the Arts and inventions of wit as were those before alleged
touching virtue and vice; Haec illa est, (says he) rerum omnium tam certa
conversio vt dubitare nemo debeat quin idem in hominum ingenijs, quod in agris
eueniat qui maiori vbertate gratiam quietis refer solent. This is that
certain wheeling about of all things, so that no man need doubt but the same
befalls men's wits that does their grounds which are wont to recompense the
favor of their rest with the more plenteous croppe.

SECT 5. Touching this pretended decay in regard of the duration of men's lives
their strength and stature.
THe same vicissitude and revolution as is in Arts and wits is likewise to be
found in the ages of men, and the duration of their lives; as my Lord of S.
Alban has truly noted, decursus saeculorum and successio propaginis nihil
videntur omnino demere de diuturnitate vit^. The course of times and succession
of progenies seem to abate nothing Historia vitae and Mortis, page 156.
from the lasting of men's lives. Certain times there are in all Regions in
which the thread of men's lives is either drawn out longer or contracted to a
shorter scantling: For the most part they live longer when the times are more
barbarous, their diet more simple, and the exercise of men's bodies more in use:
but shorter when the times are more Civil and men more given to luxury and
ease, which pass and return by turns, Succession it self effects nothing
therein, alone. in case it did, the first man in reason should have lived
longest, and the son should still come short of his fathers age: so that
whereas Moses tells us that the days of man's age in his time were threescore
years and ten, by this reckoning Ps. 90. 1^.
they might well enough by this time be brought to ten, or twenty, or thirty
at most. It cannot be denied but that in the first ages of the world both
before and after the flood men usually lived longer then we find they have
done in latter ages: But that I should rather choose to ascribe to some
extraordinary privilege then to the ordinary course of nature. The world was
then to be replenished with inhabitants, which could not so speedily be done
but by an extraordinary multiplication of mankind: neither could that be done,
but by the long lives of men. And again Arts and sciences were then to be
planted, for the better effecting whereof, it was requisite, that the same men
should have the experience and observation of many ages. For as many Aristotle.
Sensations breed an experiment, so do many experiments a Science.

Per varios vsus artem experimentia fecit
Exemplo monstrante viam.
Through much experience Arts invented were Manilius, l. 1.

Example showing way.
Specially it was requisite men should live long for the perfecting of
Astronomy, and the finding out of the several motions of the heavenly bodies,
whereof some are so slow, that they ask a long time precisely to observe their
periods and reuolutions. It was the complaint of Hippocrates, Ars longa vita
brevis. And therefore Almighty God in his wisdom then proportioned men's lives
to the length of Arts; and as God gave them this special privilege to live
long: so in likelihood he gave them withal a temper and constitution of body
answereable thereunto. As also the food wherewith they were nourished,
specially before the flood, may well be thought to have been more wholesome
and nutritive, and the plants more medicinal: And happily the influence of the
heavens was at that time, in that clymate where the Patriarchs lived, more
favorable and gracious. Now such a revolution as there is in the manners,
wits, and ages of men, the like may well be presumed in their strength and
stature. Videtur similis esse ratio in magnitudine corporum sieve statura quae
nec ipsa per successionem propaginis defluit. There seems Hist. vit. et
moris. page 158.
to be the like reason in the grows and bigness of men's bodies, which
decreaseth not by succession of offspring; but men are sometimes in the same
nation taller, sometimes of a shorter stature, sometimes stronger, and
sometimes weaker, as the times wherein they live, are more temperate or
luxurious, more given to labor or exercise, or to ease and idleness. And for
those narrations which are made of the Gyantlike statures of men in former
ages, many of them were doubtless merely poetical and fabulous. I deny not but
such men have been, who for their strength and stature have been the miracles
of nature, the worlds wonders, whom God would therefore have to be, (says S.
Austine) that he might show, that as well the bigness as the beauty of the
body, are not to be ranged in the number of things good in themselves, as being
common both to good and badde. Yet may we justly suspect that which Suetonius
has not spared to write, that the bones of huge beasts, or sea monsters, both
have and still do, pass current for the bones of Giants. A very notable story
to In Augusto, cap. 72.
this purpose, have we recorded by Camerarius who reports that Francis Medit.
Hist. cap. 82.
the first, king of France, who reigned about an hundred years since, being
desirous to know the truth of those things, which were commonly spread,
touching the strength and stature of Rou'land, nephew to Charlelamaine, caused
his sepulcher to be opened, wherein his bones and bow were found rotten, but
his armor sound, though covered with rust, which the king commanding to be
scoured off, and putting it upon his own body, found it so fit for him, as
thereby it appeared that Rouland exceeded him little in bigness and stature of
body, though himself were not excessive tall or big.

SECT. 6. The precedents of this chapt: summarily recollected, and the method
observed in the ensuing treatise proposed
NOw briefly and summarily to recollect and as it were to wind up into one
clue or bottom what has more largely been discoursed through this chapter, I
hold first that the heavenly bodies are not at all, either in regard of their
substance, motion, light, warmth or influence in the course of nature at all
impaired, or subject to any impairing or decay: Secondly, that all individuals
(under the Cope of heaven) mixed of the elements are subject to a natural
declination and dissolution: Thirdly, that the quantity of the Elements
themselves is subject to impairing in regard of their parts, though not of
their entire bodies: Fourthly, that the air and earth and water and diverse
seasons diversely affected sometime for the better, sometime for the worse, and
that either by some special favor or judgment of God, or by some cause in
nature, secret or apparent: Fifthly, that the several kinds of beasts, of
plants, of fishes, of birds, of stones, of mettalls, are as many in number, as
at the Creation, and every way in Nature as vigorous, as at any time since the
flood: Sixthly, and lastly that the manners, the wits, the health, the age, the
strength, and stature of men daily vary, but so as by a vicissitude and
revolution they return again to their former points from which they declined
and again decline, and again return, by alternatiue and interchangeable
courses, Erit hic rerum in se remeantium orbis, quamdiu erit ipse orbis, This
Lipsuis de constant. 1. 16.
circle and ring of things returning always to their principles will never
cease as long as the world lasts.

Repetunt proprios cuncta recursus Boethius l. 3. Met. 2.

Redituque suo singula gaudent
Nec manet vlli traditus ordo
Nisi quod fini iunxerit ortum
Stabilemque sui fecerit orbem.
To their first spring all things are backward bound
And every thing in its return delights
The Order once settled can in naught be found
But what the end unto the birth unites
And of its self does make a constant round.
And consequently there is no such universal and perpetual decay in the frame
of the Creatures as is commonly imagined, and by some strongly maintained.

The method which I propose is first to treat hereof in general that so a
cleerer way, and easier passage may be opened to the particulars; then of the
Heavens as being the highest in situation, and the noblest in outward glory and
duration, as also in their efficacy, and universality of operation, and
therefore does the Prophet rightly place them next God himself, in the order
of Causes, it shall come to pass in that day, says the H^sca, 2, 21.
Lord, that I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the
earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear
Israel. From that we may descend to the four Elements, which as a musical
instrument of four strings, is both tuned and touched by the hand of heaven:
And in the next place those bodies, which are mixed and tempered of these
Elements, offer themselves to our consideration, whether they be without life,
as stones and mettalls, or have the life of vegetation only, as Plants; or both
of vegetation and sense, as beasts and birds and fishes; and in the last place,
man presents himself upon this Theater, as being created last, though first
intended, the master of the whole family, and chief Commander in this great
house, nay the masterpiece, the abridgment, the map and model of the
Universe. And in him we will examine this pretended decay, first in regard of
age and length of years, secondly in regard of strength and stature, thirdly
in regard of wits, and Arts, and fourthly and lastly in regard of manners and
conditions, to which all that is in man is or should be finally referred, as
all that is in the world is, under God, finally referred to man. And because it
is not sufficient to possess our own fort, without the dismantling and
demolishing of our enemies, a principal care shall be had throughout the
whole work, to answer, if not all, at least the principal of those
objections which I have found, to weigh most with the adverse part. And in the
last place, least I should any way be suspected to shake or undermine the
ground of our Christian religion, or to weaken the article of our belief
touching the consummation of the world, by teaching that it decays not, to
wipe off that aspertion, I will endeavor to prove the certainety thereof, not
so much by Scripture, which no Christian can be ignorant of, as by force of
Reason and the testimony of Heathen writers; and finally I will conclude with
an exhortation grounded thereupon for the stirring of men up, to a preparation
of themselves against that day, which shall not only end the world, but judge
their actions, and dispose of the everlasting estate of their persons.

CAP. 4. Touching the worlds decay in general.
SECT. 1. The three first general reasons that it decays not.
THe same Almighty hand which created the worlds massy The first reason drawn
from the power of that Spirit which quickens and supports it.
frame and gave it a being out of nothing, does still support and maintain it,
in that being, which at first it gave, and should it with draw himself but for
a moment, the whole frame would instantly return into that nothing, which
before the Creation it was, as Gregory has righly observed, Deus suo
presentiali esse, dat omnibus rebus esse ita quod si se rebus subtraheret,
sicut de nihilo facta sunt omnia, sic in nihilum diffluerent vniversa. God by
his presentiall Essence gives unto all things an Essence, so that if he should
withdraw himself from them, as out of nothing they were first made, so into
nothing they would be again resolved. In the preservation then of the
Creature, we are not so much to consider the impotencie, and weakness
thereof, as the goodness, wisdom, and power of the Creator, in whom, and by
whom, and for whom, they live and move and have their being. The spirit of the
Lord fills the world, (says the Author of the wisdom of Solomon, and the
secret working Cap. 1. 7.
of the spirit, which thus pierces through all things, has the Poet
excellently expressed,

Principio caelum ac terr as camposque liquentes Aeneid 6.

Lucentemque globum Lunae, Titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem and magno se corpore miscet.
The heaven, the earth, and all the liquide maine,
The Moons bright globe, and stars Titanian
A spirit within maintains, and their whole mass,
A mind which through each part infused does pass,
Fashions and works and wholly does transpierce
All this great Body of the Universe.
This Spirit the Platonists call the Soul of the World, by it, it is in some
sort quickened and formaliz'd, as the body of man is by its reasonable Soul.
There is no question then, but this Soul of the World, (if we may so speak)
being in truth none other then the immortal Spirit of the Creator, is able to
make the body of the World immortal, and to preserve it from disolution, as he
does the Angels, and the spirits of men: and were it not that he had
determined, to dissolve it by the same supernatural and extraordinary power,
which at first gave it existence, I see not but by the ordinary concurrence of
this spirit, it might everlastingly endure: and that consequently (to drive it
home to our present purpose) there is no such universal and perpetual decay
in the course of Nature; as is imagined, and this I take to be the meaning of
Philo, in that book which he has composed De Mundi incorruptibilitate, of the
Worlds incorruptibility; there being some who have made the World eternal
without any beginning or ending, as Aristotle, and the Peripateticks, others
give it a beginning, but without ending, as Plato and the Academicks, whom
Philo seems to follow; and lastly others both beginning and ending, as
Christians and other Sects of Philosophers, whom Aristotle therefore flouts at,
saying that he formerly feared his house might fall down about his ears, but
that now he had a greater matter to fear, which was the dissolution of the
world. But had this pretended universal and perpetual decay of the World
been so apparent as some would make it, his flout had easily been returned
upon himself, and his opinion by daily and sensible experience as easily
confuted, which we may well wonder none of those Philosophers who disputed
against him, (if they acknowledged and believed the truth thereof) should any
where press in defense of their own opinions, it being indeed the most
unanswerable and binding argument that possibly could be enforced against him,
were there that evident certainty in it as is commonly imagined, whereas he in
the sharpness of his wit seeing the weakness thereof, would not so much as
vouchsafe it a serious answer, but puts it off with a jest. For mine own
part I constantly believe that it had a beginning, and shall have an ending,
and hold him not worthy the name of a Christian who holds not as much: yet so
as I believe both, to be matter of faith; through faith we understand that the
Worlds were framed by the word of God; and through the same faith we likewise
understand that Heb. 11. 3.
they shall be again vnframed by the same word. Reason may grope at this truth
in the dark, howbeit it can never clearly apprehend it; but enlightened by the
beam of faith. I deny not but probable, though not demonstratiue and
convincing arguments, may be drawn from discourse of reason to prove either the
one or the other, and among the rest that taken from the Worlds decay, to prove
the final consummation thereof, I take to be most unsound, in as much as it
beggs a principle, which is not to be granted, and supposes such a decay,
which in my judgment to the worlds end and the day of Judgment will never be
soundly and sufficiently proved.

I remember the Philosophers propose a question, Vtrum Mundus solo generali
concursu Dei perpetuo durare possit? Whether the World by the ordinary and
general cooperation of Gods power and providence Ruvio de caelo and mundo lib.
1. cap. 12.
could still last or no? and for the most part they conclude it affirmatively,
even such as professed the Christian Religion, and for proof of their
assertion they bring in effect this reason. The Heavens, say they 2. reason
from the consideration of the several parts of the World.
are of a nature which is not capable in it self of corruption, the loss of
Elements is recovered by compensation, of mixed Bodies without life by
accretion, of living Bodies by succession, the fall of one being the rising of
the other, as Rome triumphed in the ruins of Alba, and the depression of one
Scale is the elevation of another, according to that of Solomon, One generation
passes away, and another generation comes, but the earth abides Eccles. 1.
4.
for ever.

-- Mutantur in aevum
Singula, and incoeptum alternat natura tenorem,
Quodque dies antiqua tulit, post auferet ipsa. Pontanus cap. 48 meteor.

Each thing in every age does vary
And Nature changes still the course she has begun,
And will eftsoons undo what she erewhile had done.
Again, all subcoelestiall bodies (as is evident) consist of matter and 3
Reason from the like consideration.
form; Now the first matter having nothing contrary unto it, cannot by the
force of nature be destroyed, and being created immediately by God, it cannot be
abolished by any inferior agent. And as for the forms of natural bodies, no
sooner does any one abandon the matter it informed but another instantly steps
into the place thereof, no sooner has one acted his part and is retired, but
another presently comes forth upon the stage, though it may be in a different
shape, and to act a different part, so that no portion of the matter is, or at
any time can be altogether void and empty, but like Vertumnus or Proteus it
turns it self into a thousand shapes, and is always supplied and furnished
with one form or other.

Nec sic interimit mors res, ut materiai Lucret. lib. 2.

Corpora consiciat, sed coetum dissipat ollis:
Inde alijs aliud coniungit. and efficit, omnes
Res vt convertant formas, mutentque colores
Et capiant sensus, and puncto tempore reddant:
Vt nos^as refer, eadem primordia rerum.
Death does not so destroy things
As it the matter to naught brings.
It only does dissolve the frame,
And so it leaves to be the same,
And joining other things it changes
Their shape, form, color, and so rangeth
Their being at times, that you may know
They all from like principles do flow.
Neither in truth in the course of Nature can it possibly be otherwise; since
it intends not the abolition of any thing, as being a defect, and contrary to
it is own good, but for the succession and generation of some other thing in
the room thereof. As Nature then cannot create by making something out of
nothing: so neither can it annihilate by turning something into nothing. Whence
it consequently follows as there is no access, so there is no diminution in
the universal, no more then there is in the Alphabet by the infinite
co^bination and transposition of letters, or in the wax by the alteration of
the seal stamped upon it. If a man should take but one drop of water in the
whole year from the Ocean, or but one sand from the sea shore, or but one
grass from the earth without any new supply, nay without a supply
proportionable, that the addition may fully countervaile and repair the
subtractio^, their store must in continuance of time of necessity be emptied
and utterly exhausted; and in like manner the World being finite, and there
being no access to the whole, if there should be any such perpetual and
universal decay and decrease in all the parts thereof, as is pretended, it
must needs at last by degrees be annihilated and brought to nothing, which is
both in reason, and by the consent of all Divines, as incommunicably the effect
of a power divine and above nature, as is the work of the Creation it self,
so as whatsoever is taken from one, must of necessity be given to another.

Ne res ad nihilum redigantur protinus omnes.
Lest things ere long to nothing should be brought. Luc^. lib. (...).

Put the case then that some principal part of the World should still
decrease, surely some others must thereupon continually increase, or there
would follow some diminution, and consequently some annihilation in respect of
the whole, and if upon the continual decrease of some, others should still
increase, there would likewise thereupon follow such a disproportion, and
jarring as they could never well accord, and in the end the whole would be
turned into those which gained by the loss, and grew great by the fall of
others, and consequently they would prove the ruin both of others and
themselves, as the spleen growing and swelling to an immoderate bigness upon the
pining of the other parts, in the end ruins both it self and them, as then a
due proportion is held betwixt the parts as well in the natural body of man as
the body politic of the state for the upholding of the whole, so is there
likewise by the divine providence in this vast body of the World, not that any
of the limbs or members thereof (the heavens only excepted) remain without
their alteration or diminution, but because they mutually by tur^es and
exchanges both take one from another, and again repay one to another what they
formerly took, by which means neither is any thing lost in the whole, nor any
one part so either infeebled by decrease, or by increase over strengthened as
they loose that proportion which makes the music of the whole, or that use
and service which to the whole they all stand obliged to perform, and to this
purpose it is surely as a divine oracle, for the wisdom and truth thereof,
which the Poet has put into the mouth of Pythagoras.

Nec species sua cuique manet: rerumque novatrix Ovid. Met... 15.

Ex alijs alias reparat natura figuras.
Nec perit in tanto quidquam (mihi credit) mundo:
Sed variat, faciemque novat: nascique vocatur
Incipere esse aliud, quam quod fuit ante: morique
Desinere illud idem: cum sint huc forsitan illa,
Haec translata illuc, summa tamen omnia constant.
They hold not long their shapes, but soon Dame Nature.
Of one shape lost brings forth another feature;
Believe it, in so great and huge a mass
Nothing does perish, but change and vary face;
We say a thing newborn is, when as
It does become another then it was:
And so we say, a thing does suffer death.
When it the form forsakes, as men their breath,
And though the counters be placed lower or higher,
Yet still the total sum does stand entire,
SECT. 2. Fourth reason for that such a decay as is supposed would in time
point out the very day of the worlds expiration, and consequently of the second
coming of Christ.
ANother special reason moving me to believe that the Worlds supposed decay is
but imaginary, is that it would in time point out the very date of its
expiration, so that men should be able from the extremity of the disorder and
confusion (into which it would by degrees degenerate) by the rule of
proportion, as it were by the even decrease of sand or water in an houre-glasse
prognosticate the instant beyond which it could no longer subsist; whereas
before the Universal Deluge which swept away every living soul breathing upon
the face of the Earth, (except Noah and his Family, and the beasts which lodged
with him under the roof of the same Arc) we read of no such fore-running
declination which was the reason that men took no notice of it till it over
took them, and as it was then, so shall it be at the sudden, and unexpected
coming of the second deluge of fire. For as in the d^es which were before
Math. 24 38.
the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage
until the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and knew not until the flood
came and swept them all away: So shall also the coming of the son of man
be: it 2. Peter. 3. 10.
shall be like the coming of the thief in the night, when men shall say,
Peace 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
and safety, then sudden destruction shall come upon them.

The more I wonder what should make the Author of the Scholasticall In Libr.
Genesis Cap. 35.
history thus to write, Tradunt Sancti quod quadraginta annis ante judicium non
videbitur arcus coelestis, id quod etiam naturaliter ostendet desiccationem
aeris. Holy men affirm that forty years before the day of ludgment no
rainebow shall appear, which shall serve as a natural sign of the drought in
the air already begun. Those Holy men he names not, neither can I so much as
conjecture who they should be, since no such opinion, nor any mention thereof
(as I presume) is to be found in the writings of any of the Ancient Fathers now
extant, neither in truth is it any way grounded, either upon Scripture or show
of reason drawn from thence. And besides it assumes that as yielded, which is
not only uncertain, but certainly false, that the conflagration of the world
shall be wrought, or at leastwise prepared by second and natural causes,
whereas it shall doubtless be the supernatural work of Gods omnipotency, as
was likewise the drowning of it. Howbeit Henricus Mecliniensis scholar to
Albertus Magnus in his Comentaries upon the great Conjunctions of Albumazar,
seems to refer it to the watery constellations then reigning, as some others
do, the future general conbustion to the predominance of fiery constellations:
whereas notwithstanding they ascribe the universal declination and dotage of
nature to the want of that warmth which former ages enjoyed: So that according
to their grounds following the course of nature the world should rather have
been burned in Noah's time, it being then in the prime and strength of natural
heat, and reserved for a flood at the last day, it being now accordig to their
opinion seized upon, with cold and waterish humors, or at least their feined
fiery constellations would better have suited with those times, and the waterish
with ours. But thus we see how curiosity intangleth, and error ever crosses
and contradicts it self. Haec est mendaciorum natura vt cohaerere non
possint (says Lactantius) Such is the property of 5. 3.
falsehoods that they can never hang together.

At nulla est discordia veris, Boethius Lib. 5. Metr. 3.

Semper que sibi certa cohaerent.
In true things discord is there none,
They friendly still agree in one.
SECT. 3. Fifth reason that upon the supposition of such a decay, the vigor of
the world must needs long since have been exhausted and worn out.
A fifth reason which makes me think that Nature neither has nor does
degenerate and pine away in the several kinds of Creatures in regard of their
number, dimensions, faculties or operations, is that in the course of so many
ages already past, the vigor and strength of it must needs have been
utterly exausted and worn out. If in every Centenary of years from the
Creation or since the flood some small abatement only should have been made,
(which notwithstanding the Patrons of the adverse opinion hold to be great, as
will appear when we come to the examination of the particulers,) and if we
should question a man of an hundred years of age about this point, what a
wonderful change will he tell you of, since his remembrance: so that if we
should go backward and proportionablely allow the like change within the like
compass of years, since the beginning of the world, it could not possiblely
subsist at this day. But put the case, as I say, that not so great as is
imagined, but some small abatement should be made for every Centenary, surely
eve^ in that proportion nothing else could now be left unto us but the very
refuse and bran, the dross and dregs of nature. and as heavy things sink in
rivers, but strawes and sticks are carried down the stream, so in this long
current of time, the kernel and pith of Nature must needs have been spent
and wasted, only the rind and shells should have been left to us. The
Heavens could not by their warmth and influence have been able sufficiently to
cherish the earth, nor the earth to keep the plants from staruing at her
breasts, nor the plants to nourish the beasts, nor could the beasts have
been serviceable for the use of man, nor man himself of ability to exercise
the right of his dominion over the beasts and other Creatures. The Sun by
this time would have been no brighter then the Moon or Stars, Cedars would
have been no taller then shrubs, Horses no bigger then Dogs, Elephants then
Oxen, Oxen then Sheep, Eagles then Pigeons, Pigeons then Sparrowes, and then
whole race of mankind must have become Pigmies, and mustered themselves to
encounter with Cranes.

If we should allow but one inch of decrease in the growth of men for every
Centenary, (and less cannot well be imagined) there would at this present be
abated almost five foot in their ordinary stature, which notwithstanding was
held the competent height of a man, above sixteen hundred yearers since, and
so still continues, so that the ordinary stature of the men of the first age
should by this rule have been about ten foot, which exceeds that of Goliath
by some inches. Sir Walter Rauleigh who in sundry places positiuely defendes
natures universal decay, (which I must confess I somewhat marvel at, in a
man of that peirceing wit and clear judgment, but that as others he took it
up upon trust, without bringing History of the world. (...). 1 Lib. 1. cap. 5.
it to the touchstone) to prove men to be but reeds now a days, as he
terms them, in comparison of the Cedars of former ages, gives us an instance,
drawn from the times and practice of Galen in comparison of ours, telling us
that Galen did ordinarily let blood, six pound weight, whereas we (says he)
for the most part stop at six ounces. The truth of his allegation touching
Galens practice, I shall hereafter have ^itter occasion to examine, in the
chapter purposely dedicated to the consideration of men's decay in strength; at
this time I will only touch the matter of proportion. There is some doubt among
Chronologers, of the precise time wherein Galen lived, as appears by Gesner in
his life; but in this they all agree, that he practiced at least two hundred
years since Christ, so that taking our level from thence, we may safely
affirm that he flourished about fourteen hundred years since, in the
compass of which time, men have lost by that account about a pound of blood
for every Centenary, which proportion of loss, if we should observe in the
like distances of time before Galen from the Creation, it were not possible
that so much as a drop of blood should be left in any man's body at this day.
From these particulars we may guess at the rest, as retaylers do of the
whole piece, by taking a view of the ends thereof, or as Pythagoras drew out
the measure of Hercules whole body from the S^antling of his foot.

SECT. 4. Sixth argument taken from the authority of Solomon and his reason
drawn from the Circulation of all things as it were in a ring.
TO these reasons may be added the weighty authority of the wisest man that
ever lived, of a mere man; how often does he beat upon the circulation and
running round of all things as it were in a ring: how earnestly and eloquently
does he press it, and express it as it were in lively colors in that most
divine book of the Preacher. The Sun (says he) arises, and the Sun
goes down, and hastes to the Cap. 1 and cap. 5. 6. 7.
place where he arose. Which Boethius discoursing upon the same Theme has
elegantly set forth.

Cadit Hesperias Phoebus in vndas
Sed secreto tramite rursus Lib. 3. Met. 2.

Cursum solitos vertit ad ortus.
The sun does set in Western maine,
But yet returns by secret ways.
Unto his wonted rise again.
But the Preacher stays not there. The wind goes toward the South and
turns about toward the North, it whirleth about continually and returns
again according to his circuites. All the rivers run into the Sea, yet the
sea is not full. Unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they
return again. Whereupon he inferres, the thing that has been, it is that
that shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be done, and there
is no new v. 9. 10.
thing under the sun. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, behold this
is new? it has been already of old time before us; and again, that which
has been is now, and that which is to be has already been, and God
requires Cap. 3. 15.
that which is past. Now this wheeling about of all things in their seasons and
courses, and their supposed perpetual decrease, are in my understanding
incompatible, they cannot possiblely stand together, nor be truly affirmed of
the same subject. For if they return again to their times and turns, to the
state from which they declined, as Boethius speaks of a bowed twigge. Lib de
Con. Phil. 3. Met. 2.


Validis quondam viribus acta
Pronum flectit virga cacumen
Hanc si curuans dextra remisit
Recto spectat vertice coelum.
The tender plant by force and might
Constran'd its top does downward bend:
Romoue the hand which bowed it
And straight to heaven-wards will it tend.
If I say they thus return to their former condition, as has bin more at
large proved by Lodovicus Regius, a French man in a book which Louys Le Roy.
he purposely intitles, De La Vicissitude des chooses, and dedicates it to
Henry the third King of France, then can it not be they should always grow
worse and worse, as on the other side if they always degenerate and grow worse
and worse, it cannot be they should have such returns as Solomon speaks of,
wise and learned men in all ages have observed, and experience daily confirms.
The Poets feign that Saturn was wont to devou^e his sons and then to vomit
them up again, which fiction of theirs (says Rodogin) the wiser sort
understand to be referred to time shadowed under the name of Saturn, a quo
vicibus cuncta gignantur and Lib. 7. c. 4^.
absumantur quae renascantur denuo, because as all things spring from time and
by it are consumed, so in it they are renewed and restored again. And by this
means the world for the entire, is still preserved safe and sound.

Exutae variant faciem per secula gentes,
At manet incolumis mundus, suaque omnia servat Mani^us, l. 1.

Quae nec long a dies auget, minuitve senectus:
Nec motus puncto currit, cursuve fatigat.
Idem semper erit quoniam semper fuit idem,
Non alium videre patres aliumve nepotes
Aspicient.
The people changed, at times the face does vary,
The world stands sound, and always holds its own,
Nor by long days increased, nor age less grown,
Runs round, yet moves not, nor by running's weary,
Was still the same and still the same shall be
That which our gransirs saw our sons shall see.
CAP. 5. General arguments making for the worlds decay refuted.
SECT. 1. The first general objection drawn from reason answered.
HOwbeit, as the great Patriarch of Philosophers has taught us that Verum est
index sui and obliqui, Truth may serve as a square or rule both for it self
and falsehood, as a right line discovers the obliquity of a crooked, yet because

Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera, Sen. Med^. Act. 2.

Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit:
Who but one party hears yet does decree,
Just is he not, though just his sentence be.
Let us see what the Adverse part can say for themselves. Their general
arguments then for the worlds decay are drawn, partly from reason, and partly
from authority. The maine argument drawn from reason, upon which all the rest,
in a manner depend, so as I may call it, the Pole-deede of their evidence, is
this, That the Creature the nearer it approaches to the first mould, the more
perfect it is, and according to the degrees of its remouall and distance from
thence, it incurres the more imperfection and weakness, as streams of a
fountain the farther they run through unclean passages, the more they
contract corruption. For the loosing of which knot, I shall crave pardon if I
enlarge myself and make a full answer thereunto, considering that in the
striking off, of this head, the body of the opposite reasons fall to the
ground, and at the shaking of this foundation, the whole building totters.
First then I will examine the truth of this proposition, whether every thing
the farther it departs from its original, the more it looses of its
perfection, because upon it the weight of the argument is grounded; and
secondly I will consider how justly it is applied to this present purpose. For
the first whether we behold the works of Art or Nature or Grace, we shall
find that they all proceed by certain steps from a more imperfect and
unpolished being to that which is more absolute and perfect. To begin with the
works of Grace: in the course of Christianity we grow both in knowledge and
virtue, in illumination and sanctification, as the blind man in the Gospel
having recovered his sight, first saw men walking like trees confusedly and
indistinctly, but afterward more clearly: in knowledge we grow by leaving
the principles of the doctrine of Christ, and going on unto perfection, by
leaving milk fit for Hebr. 6. 1.
babes, and using stronger meat belonging to them that are of full age, who by
Hebr. 5. 13. 14.
reason of an habit have their senses exercised to discern both good and
evil. In virtue we grow, not only by adding virtue to virtue, as it were
link to link, but by increasing in those virtues as it were by enlarging the
2. Pet. 1. 5.
links, that the man of God may be made perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every
2. Tim. 3. 17.
good work. For the works of Arts we see the Limmer to begin with a rude
draught, and the Painter to lay his grounds with shadows and darksome
colors, the weauer out of a small thread, makes a rich and fair piece, and
the Architect upon rubbish lays a goodly pile of building, which at first
consists of naked walls, but at last is furnished with variety of household
stuff, and garnished with hangings and pictures. Lastly for the works of
Nature out of what a confused Chaos was the goodly frame of this world raised?
out of what unworthy little seeds spring the tallest trees, and most
beautiful flowers, nay what a base beginning at the first Creation had and
still has man himself the Lord of the Creatures so as himself even blushes
to mention it, how impotent and unable to help himself is he brought into the
world? how slowly does he come forward to the use of his senses, his strength,
his reason? yet at length by degrees if he live and be of a sound
constitution, he arriues unto it. By which it appears that at leastwise
individuals, in the several works both of Grace and Art and Nature, the
farther they proceed from their original, the more perfect they are, till they
arrive to their state of perfection, though herein they differ, that Art and
Nature then decline, but Grace is turned into Glory.

And for the species or kinds of things, which is it that specially concerns
our present question, as I cannot affirm that by degrees they grow on still to
greater perfection, so neither can I find that they daily grow more imperfect.
For Grace we know, it was more abundantly powered out by the incarnation and
passion of the Son of God in this latter age of the world, then at any time
before since the first creation thereof. And of Art it is commonly thought that
near about the same time the Roman empire was at the highest and Soldiers,
Poets, Orators, Philosophers, Historians, Politicians, never more excellent,
which withal should argue that Nature was at that time rather strengthened then
enfeebled, in as much as both Art and Grace are built upon Nature, I mean the
natural faculties of the soul, which commonly follow the temper of the body,
and the more vigorous they are, the more happily are both Art and Grace
exercised by them.

Now for the application of the proposition to the present purpose touching the
worlds decay, it is evident, that if it were indeed of that force as is
pretended, it would thereupon follow that in the course of Nature Adam should
have been the tallest and longest-liu'd man that ever breathed upon the face
of the earth; whereas notwithstanding we read not of any Giants till a little
before the flood; and Noah who lived after the flood saw twenty years more
then Adam himself did, the latter being nine hundred and fifty and the former
but nine hundred and thirty years old when he died. Nay Methusaleth the eight
from Adam out stripped him by forty years wanting but one, and we see by
daily experience that a weak or foolish father often begets a strong and a
wise son, and that the grandchild sometimes equals the age of the father and
grandfather both together. If a thousand candles or torches should be
successively lighted one from another, it cannot be discerned by their dull or
bright burning which was first or last lighted, nay the last sometimes yields a
brighter light then the first, if it meet with matter accordingly prepared.
The water which runs a thousand miles through clean passages, is every whit
as wholesome and sweet at its journeys end, as when it first issued from the
fountain. The seed that is cast into the earth seldom fails to bring forth
as good as it self and sometimes better, and if at any time it prove worse, it
is not because it is further distant from its original, (which is the very
point in controversy) but because it meets with a worse soil, or a worse
season, and the soil and season are worse perchance then in former times, nor
by reason of the revolution of so many ages since the Creation, but either by
reason of Gods Curse upon sin, or some other accidental cause, which being
removed, they return again to their native and wonted properties. For, did
they grow worse and worse only by a farther distance from their first being,
then would the Creatures have decayed in process of time, whether man had
sinned or no, and man himself should have been of less strength and stature
and continuance, though he had not failed in the tempera^ use of the creature,
or of any other means making for the preservation of his life and health,
(...) I suppose the Patrons of the adverse part, will not maintain, o^ce I am
sure that the common te^et of Div^es is, that whatsoever defect or swarning is
to be found, in the nature either of man himself, or the Creature made to
serve him, arises from the sin of man alone, as being the only caus^ of all
the jarre and disorder in the world: Now to impute it to sin and yet withal to
affirm that (...) is occasioned by ^he ^ll of the Creature from its (...)
ex^ce implies in my judgment a manifest and irreconciliable contradiction.

To conclude this answer, this axio^e, (...); quo magis elongatur a suo
principio, eo magis defi^it and langu^scit, Every thing the farther it is
removed from its original, the more faint and feeble it grows, in violent
motions is most true, As an arrow shot out of a bow or a dart flung upward from
the hand of a man, the higher they mount the slower they move; and so I
conceive it to have been m^nt by Aristotle: but in natural motions, as the
moving of a stone downward, and such is rather Natur^s motion in the course of
the world,) the contrary is undoubtedly tru^, Cres^ ^undo, the farther it moves
the more strength it gathers, and forti^ies it self in going Besides if the
strength of the hand could go along with the dart, or if the bow with the
arrow, as the hand and power of God leads and preserues Nature in her course,
keeping ^t a w^king as the spring does the wheels in a watch or Clock; th^e is
no question, but their motions would prove, as quick and forcible in the end
as at the beginning, and not cease at all before the strength of the hand or
bow which carry them forward were removed from them: Finally, if this axiom
were not to be limited, it should equally extend to the Angels and the souls
of men, and the first matter, and the heavens as well as to the sublunary mixed
bodies: but the same power which vpholds and maintains them, in their
original state, supports likewise the whole body of this inferior world
together withal the several spe^ies or kinds thereof, and did it not so do,
all the absurdities already touched, as impotency in that spirit which animates
the world, to support it, an^ihilation in the course of Nature, defect and
swarving in the Crea^ without the sin of man, foreknowledge of the worlds end,
and the end of it long before this time, would infalliblely follow thereupon.

SECT. 2. The second general objection answered, which is that the several
parts of the World decaying, it should argue a consumption in the whole.
ANother argument drawn from reason, for the worlds decay, is, that all the
parts of it decay, and by degrees grow to dissolution, which should likewise
argue a wasting and lingering consumption in the whole, since there seems to be
the same reason of the whole which is of all the parts, where of it consists.
But the answer hereunto will easily appear out of that which has already
been delivered, and by taking a review of the several parts of the
Universal. First then for the heavens, undoubtedly they feel no such decay
either in substance, quantity, motion, light, warmth or influence, as I hope I
shall make it manifest in the next Chapter, and for the Elements what they
loose in regard of their quantity, is again made up by equivalence or
compensation, and that in respect of their quality they decay not either by
being of less efficacy, or more malignant dispositions, then in former ages,
remains to be showed in their proper place; and lastly for the bodies mixed
and tempered of the Elements, though it be granted, that all individuals or
particulars in time decay or perish, yet does it not follow, that the same
condition should likewise be annexed to the species or kind, which is still
preserved by a new supply and successiue propagation of particulars, not
always inferior to their predecessors, which this argument presumes, but
sometimes excelling, and commonly equalling them in goodness, as has always
been touched in part, and shall hereafter by Gods help be more fully and
distinctly proved.

SECTIO 3. The third general objection answered, taken from the authority of
S. Cyprian.
THe arguments drawn from authority are either humane or divine testimonies.
Among humane that of S. Cyprian is most famous, as well in regard of his great
piety and learning, as his approach to the pure and primitive times of the
Church of Christ. This holy Martyr then and venerable Bishop greeuing that the
Christian Religion should be charged with these lamentable accidents wherewith
the World at that time was pressed and shaken, shapes this reply to Demetrianus
their accuser. Illud primo loco scire debes senuisse iam mundum; non illis
viribus stare quibus prius steterat, nec vigore and robore eo praevalere, quo
antea praevalebat, hoc enim nobis tacentibus, and nulla de Scripturis sanctis
praedicationibusque divinis documenta promentibus, mundus ipse iam loquitur,
and occasum sui rerum labentium probatione testatur. Non hyeme nutriendis
seminibus tanta imbrium copia est, non frugibus aestate torrendis solis tanta
flagrantia est, nec sic verna de temperie sua laeta sata sunt, nec adeo arbores
foetibus autumno foecundae sunt; minus de effossis and fatigatis montibus
eruuntur marmorum crustae, minus argenti and auri opes suggerunt, exhausta iam
metalla, and pauperes venae tenuantur in dies singulos and decrescunt, deficit
in agris agricola, in amicitijs concordia, in artibus peritia, in moribus
disciplina. Putasne tu posse tantam substantiam rei senescentis existere,
quantumprius potuit novella adhuc and vegeta iuventute pollere? Minuatur
necesse est quicquid fine iam proximo in occidua and extrema divergit; sic sol
in occasu suo radios minus claro and igneo splendore iaculatur, sic declinante
iam cursu exoletis cornubus Luna tenuatur, and arbor quae fuerat ante viridis
and fertilis, are scentibus ramis fit postmodum sterili senectute deformis, and
fons qui exundantibus prius venis largiter profluebat, vix modico sudore
distillat. Haec sententia mundo data est haec Dei lex est, ut omnia orta
occidant, and aucta senescant, and infirmentur fortia, and magna minuantur, and
cum infirmata and diminuta fuerint, fi^iantur. You ought first to have known
this, that the World is now waxen old, that it has not those forces which
formerly it had, neither is endued with that vigor and strength wherewith it
formerly was, and thus much though we held our peace, and brought no proof
thereof from holy Scripture and divine Oracles, the World it self proclaims
and testifies its declination by the experience of all things declining in it.
We have not now so great store of showers for the nourishing of our seeds in
Winter, nor in Summer so much warmth of the Sun for the ripening of our
corn. In the Spring our fields are not so fresh and pleasant, nor in Autumn
our trees so laden with fruits, less pieces of marble are hewed out of the
exhausted and tired mountains, and the emptied Mines yield less quantity of
gold and silver, theit veins daily diminishing and decreasing, The husbandman
is defective in manuring the Earth, concord fails in friendship, skill in
Arts, and discipline in manners. Can you imagine that the state of a thing
waxing old should be so firm and sound as when it flourished in its youth?
That must needs be weakened which (the final period of it approaching)
hastens to the last end. so the Sun when it is setting, darts not forth so
fiery and clear beams. So the Moon drawing toward the end of her race, draws
in her horns and grows less, and the tree which formerly was green and
fruitful, her boughs withering becomes deformed by barren old age, and the
wellspring which formerly flowed abundantly with full streams, being dried up
through age, hardly distills a drop of moisture. This sentence is passed upon
the World, this is the Law which God has set it, that all things that are
borne, should die; all that increase, should decrease, that strong things
should be weakened, and great lessened, and being thus weakened and lessened,
they should at last be utterly dissolved.

This discourse of Cyprian, and the excellent flowers of Rhetorique in it, show
him to have been both a sweet and powerful Orator, of a great wit, a flowing
eloquence: but whether in this he show himself so deep a Philosopher or sound
Divine, I leave that to the Reader to judge, and refer his judgment to the
future examination of the particulars: only by the way it shall not be amiss
to remember, that the Christians of those times (happily by reason as well of
the bloody persecutions which pressed them sore, as the frequent passages both
in the Gospel and Epistles, which speak of the second coming of Christ, as
if it had been then hard at hand? stood in continual allarums and expectation
of the day of Judgment and the end of the World, as evidently appears by the
very words of Cyprian himself in this discourse, and their thoughts still
running thereupon, all things seemed suitable thereunto, and to draw toward
that end. It cannot be denied, but those times wherein Cyprian lived were
indeed very bitter and miserable in regard of f^mine, and war, and mortality,
yet about forty years after, it pleased Almighty God to pacify those storms,
and dispell those clouds by the conversion of the renowned Constantine to the
Christian Religion, as it had been by the breaking forth of the Sun beams, so
as they who sowed in tears, reaped in joy, at which time had Cyprian lived, no
doubt he would have changed his note, his pen would have as much triumphed in
the tranquillity and flourishing estate of the Church under that noble
Emperor, as it deplored the torn state of the World in the time wherein
himself lived. The former famine, and war, and mortality, being then by Gods
gracious blessing happily turned into health, and peace, and plenty. He would
then have told you that whereas before, showers of their blood were powered out
for Christ's sake, now it pleased God to open the windows of Heaven for the
moistning and nourishing of their seeds, that as Christ the Son of
Righteousness was acknowledged as the Savior of the World, and the shining
beams of the Gospel displayed themselves: so the Sun in the firmament had
recovered its warmth and strength for the ripening of their corn; that as the
outward face of the Church was become beautiful and glorious, so the very
fields seemed to smile and to receive content therein by their fresh and
pleasant hue; that as men brought forth the fruits of Christianity in greater
abundance, so their trees were more plentifully laden with fruits; that as
the rich mines of Gods word were farther searched into, so new veins of marble
and gold and silver were discovered; that Christian religion having now gotten
the upper hand, had made the Husbandman and Artificer, more careful and
industrious in their callings, had opened the Schools for Professors, in all
kind of learning, had restored wholesome discipline in manners, and
faithfulness in friendship. Finally, he would have told you that the world
with the Eagle had now cast her worn bill and sick feathers, and upon the
entertainment of Christ, and his Gospel, was grown young again. Which I am
the rather induced to believe for that Cyprian himself in the same discourse
against Demetrianus in another place referres the disasters of those times to
the obstinacy of the world, in not receiving the truth of Christianity and
submitting itself to the yoke of Christ Jesus. A more likely and certain
cause doubtless then that other of the worlds imaginary old age and decay: His
words are these. Indignatur ecce Dominus and irascitur, and quod ad eum non
convertamini comminatur, and tu miraris et quereris in hac obstinatione, and
contemptu vestro si rara desuper pluvia descendat, si terra situ pulueris
Squalleat, si vix jejunas and pallidas herbas sterilis gleba producat etc.
Behold the Lord is angry and threatens because you turn not unto him, and do
thou wonder or complain, if in this your obstinacy and contempt, the rain
seldom fall the earth be deformed with dust, and the land bring forth hungry
and starved grass, if the hail falling do spill the vine, if the ouerturning
whirlewind do mar the Olive, if drought dry up the springes, if pestilent
dampes do corrupt the air, if diseases consume men, when all these things come
by sins provoking, and God is the more offended since such and so great
things do no good at all. And the same reason is upon the like occasion yielded
by Lactantius, Discite igitur si quid vobis reliquae mentis est, homines ideo
malos and iniustos esse quia dij coluntur: and ideo mala omnia 5. 8.
rebus humanis quotidie ingravescere quia Deus mundi hujus effector and
gubernator der^lictus est quia susceptae sunt contra quam fas est impiae
religiones: postremo quia ne vel a pau^is quidem coli deum sinitis. Learn thus
much then (if you have any understanding left) that men are therefore wicked
and unjust because such Gods are worshipped, and that such mischeefes daily
befall the^, because god the Creator and Governor of the world is forsaken by
them, because impious religions against all right are entertained of them,
finally because you will not permit the worship of the true God so much as to a
few. Here then was the true cause of their bloody wars that they shed the
innocent blood of Christians and tra^pled under foot the precious blood of
Christ; as their wars together with the unkindly season were the cause of
dearth and famine, and both famine and war of pestilence and mortality: how
frequently and fervently does the Scripture beat upon this cause, God every
where promising to reward the obedience of his people with plenty and peace and
kindly seasons, and their rebellion with scarcity and sickness, and the sword.
But that these scourges of the world were at any time caused by or imputed to
the old age or decay thereof, to my remembrance we no where read. As then the
referring of these plagues with Demetrianus and the Gentiles to the curse of
God upon Christian religion, was a blasphemous wrong to Gods truth: So with
Cyprian to refer them to the old age and natural decay of the world, (be it
spoken with all due reverence to so great a light in the church of God) is in
my judgment an aspersion upon the Power and providence and justice of God. And
Pammelius in his annotations to excuse Cyprian herein (conceiving beelike that
he was not in the right) tells us that therein he alludes to the opinion of the
ancient Philosophers and Poets: perchance thereby intending Lucretius the great
admirer and sectary of Epicurus, who of all the Poets I have met with, has
written the most fully in this argument.

I am que adeo effa ta est aetas, effoetaque tellus: Lucret. l. 2. versus finem.

Vix animalia parva creat, quae cuncta creavit
Soecla; deditque ferarum ingentia corpora partu.
Haud (vt opinor) enim mortalia soecla superne
Aurea de coelo demisit funis in arva:
Nec marc, nec fluctus plangentes saxa crearunt:
Sed genuit tellus eadem, quae nunc alit ex se.
Praeterea n^idas fruges, vinetaque laeta
Sponte sua primum mortalibus ipsa creavit:
Ipsa dedit dulces foetus, and pabula laeta.
Quae nunc vix nostro grandescunt aucta labor
Conterimusque boves, and vires agricolarum:
Conficimus ferrum vix arvis suppeditati:
Vsque adeo parcunt faetus, augentque labores.
Iamque caput quassans grandis suspirat arator
Crebrius in cassum magnum cecidisse laborem:
Et cum tempora temporibus praesentia confert
Praeteritis, laudat fortunas saepe parentis:
Et crepat, antiquum genus vt pietate repletum
Perfacile angnstis tolerarit finibus aevum,
Cum minor esset agri multo modus ante viritim:
Nec tenet, omnia paulatim tabescere, and ire
Adscopulum spa^io aetatis defessa vetusto.
The world with age is broke, the earth out worn,
And she of whom what ever lives was borne
And once brought forth huge bodied beasts, with pain
A small race now begets. No golden chain
These mortals down from heaven to earth did let,
As I suppose: nor sea, nor waves that beat
The rocks did they create, it was earth did breed
All of herself, which now all things does feed.
The cheerful vine she of her own accord,
She corn to mortal wights did first afford:
Sweet fruits beside and food did she bestow,
Which now with labor great great hardly grow:
The plough-swanes strength we spend, our oxen wear,
When we our feildes have sown no crop they bear,
So wax our toils, so waneth our relief,
The husband shakes his head, and sighs for grief,
That all his travels frustrate are at last.
And when times present he compares with past,
He his Sires fortune raises to the sky,
And much does talk of the ancient piety,
And how though every man less ground possessed,
Yet better lived with greater plenty blessed.
Nor marks how all things by degrees decay
And tired with age toward the rock make way.
But herein Lucretius likewise contradicted himself in other places of the
same book, and had the world been indeed so near its last breathing as it
were, and giueing up of the Ghost, as Cyprian would make it in his time, much
more as Lucretius in his: undoubtedly it could never have held out by the space
of almost fourteen hundred years since the one, and above sixtee ne hundred
since the other, and how long it is yet to last, he only knows, who has put
the times and seasons in his own power.

SECT. 4. The same authority of Cyprian farther answered by opposing against it
the authority of Arnobius supported with ponderous and pressing reasons.
NOw because this authority of Cyprian is it which prevails so much with so
many, it shall not be amiss to oppose thereunto that of Arnobius, not naked
and standing upon bare affirmation as does that of Cyprian, but backed with
weighty and forcible arguments, Adversus Gentes (...) procula principio.
a very renowned both Orator and Philosopher, he was the master of Lactantius
and diverse other very notable and famous men, and being pressed by the
Gentiles of his time with the same objection against Christian religion, as was
Cyprian by Demetrianus, he shapes unto it an answer clean contrary by
showing that all the fundamental and primordiall parts of the world, as the
heavens and elements remained still entire since the profession of Christian
religion, as before they were, and for other calamities of famine and wars
and pestilence and the like, the common scourges of the world, they had been
as great or greater in former ages, and that before the name of Christianity
was heard of in the world then at that time they were. His Latin, because the
allegation is long and in some places it savours of the Affrican harshnes, I
will spare, and only set down the English.

And first of all in fair and familiar speech this we demand of these men:
since the name of Christian religion began to be in the world, what uncouth,
what unusual things, what against the Laws instituted at the beginning has
Nature, as they term and call her either felt or suffered? Those first
Element, whereof it is agreed that all things are compounded, are they changed
into contrary qualities? Is the frame of this engine and fabric which
covers and incloseth us all in any part loosed or dissolved? Has this
wheeling about of Heaven swarving from the rule of its primitive motion either
begun to creep more slowly, or to be carried with headlong volubilitie? Do
the Stars begin to raise themselves up in the West, and the Signs to in^line
toward the East (...) The Prin^e of Stars the Sun whose light clotheth, and
heat quickneth all things, does he cease to be hot, is he waxen cooler, and
has he corrupted the temper of his wonted moderation into contrary Habits?
Has the Moon left off to repair her self, and by continual restoring of
new to transform herself into her old shapes? Are colds, are heats, are
temperate warmths between them both by confusion of unequal times gone? Does
Winter begin to have long days, and Summer nights to call back the slowest
lights? Have the winds breathed forth their spirits as having spent their
blasts? Is not the air straightened into clouds, and does not the field being
moistened with showers wax fruitful? Does the Earth refuse to receive the seeds
cast into her? Will not trees budde forth? Have fruits appointed for food by
the burning up of their moisture changed their taste? Do they press gore blood
out of olives? Are lights quenched for want of supply? The Creatures enured to
the land, and that live in waters, do they not gender and conceive? The young
ones conceived in their wombs do they not after their own manner and order
conserve? To conclude, Men themselves whom their first and beginning nativitie
dispersed through the uninhabited coasts of the Earth, do they not with solemn
nuptial rights couple themselves in wedlock? Do they not beget most sweet
ofsprings of children? Do they not manage public, private, and domestical
businesses? Do they not every one as he pleases by diverse sorts of arts and
disciplines direct their wits, and studiously repay the use of their
nativitie? Do they not reign, do they not command to whom it is allotted?
Do they not every day more increase in the like dignities and power? Do they
not sit in judgment to hear causes? Do they not interpret laws and statutes?
Do they not publickely use all other ways whereby the life of man is held in
and kept in compass, all according to the orders and customs of the country
in their several nations? These things therefore being so, and that no
noveltie has broken in to interrupt the perpetual tenor of things by severing
and discontinuing them: What is it that they say, Confusion is brought upon the
world since Christian religion entered into it, and discovered the mysteries of
hidden verity? But the Gods, say they, exasperated with your injuries and
offenses bring upon us pestilen^es, droughts, scarcity of corn, lo^usts, mice,
hail, and other hurtful things assaulting the affairs of men. Were it not
folly longer to insist upon things evident and needing no defense, I would
soon by unfolding former times demonstrate that the evils ye speak of are
neither unknown nor sudden, nor that these confusions brake in, nor that
mortal businesses began to be infested with such variety of dangers, since
our Society obtained the happiness of this name to be bestowed upon them. For
if we be the cause, and for our demerits these p^gues were invented, whence
knew antiquity these names of miseries, whence gave it signification to wars?
With what knowledge could it name the Pestilence and Hail? or assume them into
the number of thosewords wherewith they uttered their speech? For if these
evils be new, and draw their causes from late offenses, how could it be that
it should form words to those things whereof it self neither had experience,
nor had learnt that they were in any time done? Scarcity of corn and extreme
dearth distresseth us. What? were the ancient and eldest ages at any time free
from the like necessity? Do not the v^ry names by which th^se evils are
called testify and cry that never any mortal man was privileged from it?
Which were it a matter so hard to believe, I could produce the testimonies of
Authors, what n^tions, how great, how often have felt horrible famine, and
have been destroted with a great desolation. But storms of Hail fall very
often, and light on all things. And do we not see it registered and recorded
in ancient writings that countries have osten been battered with showers of
stones? Want of rain kills up the corn, and makes the earth unfruitful; And
was antiquity free from these evils, especially seeing we know that huge
rivers have been dried up to the very bottom? The contagion of Pestilence
vexes Mankind; Run over the Annals written in several tongues, and ye
shall learn that whole countries have oftentimes been made desolate, and
emptied of inhabitants. All kind of grains are destroyed and devoured by
locusts, by mice, Pass through foreign histories, and they will inform you
how often former times have bin troubled with these plagues, and brought to the
miseries of poverty, Cities shaken with mighty earthquakes totter even unto
ruin. What? Have not former times seen Cities together with the Inhabitants
swallowed up in huge gaping clefts of the earth? Or have they had their e^ate
free from these casualties? when was mankind destroyed with deluges of waters?
not before us? when was the world burnt and dissolved into embers and ashes?
not before us? when were mighty cities overwhelmed by the seas inundation? not
before us? when did they make war with wild beasts, and encounter with Lions?
not before us? when were people plagued with ven^mous serpents? not before us?
For that ye use to object unto us the causes os so often wars, the laying
wast of Cities, the irruption of Germans and Scythians I will by your good
leave and patience be bold to say, that ye are so transported with desire to
slander, that ye know not what it is ye say. That upward of tenthousand
years ago a huge swarm of men should break out of that Island of Neptune,
which is called Atlantic, as Plato declares, and utterly destroy and consume
innumerable nations, were we the cause? That the Assyrians and Bactrians
sometimes under the leading of Ninus and Zoroastres should war one against
the other, not only with sword and strength, but also by the hidden arts of
Magic, and the Chaldeans, was it our envy? That Helena by the direction and
impulsion of the Gods was ravished, and became a fatal calamity both to her
own and future times, was it attributed to the crime of our religion? That the
great and mighty Xerxes brought in the sea upon the land, and past over the
seas on foot, was it done through the injury of our name? That a young man,
rising out of the borders of Macedon, brought the kingdom and people of the
East under the yoke of captivity and bondage, did we procure and cause it?
That now the Romans should like a violent stream drown and overwhelme all
nations, did we forsooth thrust the Gods into the fury? Now if no man dare to
impute to our times the things that were done long since: how can we be the
causes of the present miseries, seeing there is no new thing fallen out, but all
are ancient, and not unheard of in any antiquity? although it be not hard to
prove that the wars which ye say are raised through the envy of our
religion, are not only not increased since Christ was heard off in the world,
but also for the greater part (by repressing man's furiousness) lessened. For
seeing we so great a multitude of men have learned by his instructions and
laws, that we are not to requite evil for evil, that it is far better to
suffer then to do wrong, rather to shed a man's own then to pollute his hands
and conscience with the blood of another: the vngratesull world has ere while
received this benefit from Christ, by whom the fierceness and wildness of
nature is tamed, and they have begun to refra^ne their hostile hands from the
blood of the creature Kin unto the^. Certainly if all who know, that to be
men stands not in the shape of bodies, but in the power of reason, would listen
a while unto his wholesome and peaceable decrees and not puffed up with
arrogance and selfeconceit, rather believe their own opinions then his
admonitions: the whole world long ago (turning the use of iron unto milder
works) should have lived in most qu^et tranquillity, and have met together in
a firm and indissoluble league of most safe concord. But if, say they, through
you the state of man suffers no disadvantage, whence are t^ese evils
wherewith now a long time miserable mortality is afflicted and oppressed? You
ask my opinion in a matter not necessary to this business. For the present
disputation now in hand was not undertaken by me to this end, to show or prove
upon what causes or reasons each thing was done, but to manifest that the
reproach of so great a crime as we are charged with, is far from us, which if
I perform, and by deeds and evident remonstrances unfold the truth of the
matter, whence these evils are, or out of what fountains or principles they
proceed, I care not. For what if the first matter, digested into the four
elements of all things, contain wrapped up in its rotations the causes of all
miseries? what if the motions of the stars by certain signs, parts, times,
lines produce these evils, and bring upon things subject unto them necessities
of diverse sorts? what if inset times the vicissitude of things fall out, and
as it is in the motions of the sea, sometime there is a flow of prosperity,
sometime it ebbeth back again, and evils return in the room thereof? What if
the dregs of this matter which we tread under our feet have this law given
unto it, to breath forth most noisome vapors, wherewith this air being
corrupted should both infect the bodies and disable the endeavors of men? what
if (which indeed is nearest unto truth) whatsoever seems cross unto us, is
not evil to the world it self: and that we persuading ourselves that all
things are done for our benefits, do by reason of our wicked opinions wrongful
accuse the event of nature? Plato the highest top and chiefest pillar of
Philosophers, maintains in his commentaries, that those fearful inundations
and conflagrations of the world, are the purging of the earth: neither was that
wise man afraid to call the subversion, slaughter, ruin, destruction and
funerals of mankind, an innovation of things, and that thereby repareing their
strength they recover accrtaine youth agane. Heaven, says he, raines not, and
we labor of I know not of what scarcity of corn. What? do thou require
that the Elements serve thy necessities? and to the end thou may live more
daintily and delicately, that the times obsequiously apply themselves to thy
commodities? What if he that is desireous of navigation complain in like sort
that now along time there are no winds, and that the blasts of heaven are
ceased. Must we say there fore that such tranquillity of the world is
pernicious, because it hinders the desires of Passengers? What if any who has
been accustomed to toss himself in the sun, and to procure dryness to his
body, should in like manner complain that the pleasure of fair and clear
weather is by very often cloudinesse taken away? Must the clouds therefore be
said as enemies to hang and ouerspread the sky, because thou can not at thy
pleasure fry thy self in the flames and prepare occasions for drinking? All
these events which come to pass and fall out under the cope of Heaven are to
be weighed not by our petty commodities, but by the reasons and orders of
nature itself. Neither if any thing happen which touches us and our affairs
but with unwelcome successes, is it forthwith evil, and to be accounted
noxious. Whether the worldraine or not rain, it raineth or not ratneth to
itself, and which happily thou know not, either it consumes away the too
much moisture with the fervencie of drought, or temper these drought of a very
long time with the pouring out of raines. It sends pestilences, diseases,
famines, and other forms of evils threatening destruction: how do thou know
whether so it take away that whichis superfluous, and by itsowne losses set a
measure to the riot and excess of things? Dare thou say this or that is
evil in the world, the original and cause whereof thou art not able to unfold
and resolve? and because happily it hinders thy pleasures of the deleights and
lusts, will thou say it is pernicious and cruel? what then? If cold be
contrary unto thy body, and use to congeale the heat of thy blood, must not
winter therefore be in the World? And because thou can not endure the fervent
heat of the Sun, must the Summer be taken out of the year? and nature again
be ordered by other laws? Hellebore is poison unto men: ought it not for this
cause to be brought forth? The wolf lays wait for the flock of sheep: is
Nature in the fault which has bred so troublesome a beast unto those fleecie
creatures? The biting of the Serpent taket away life: shall I therefore speak
evil of the first beginnings of things because they have added so cruel
monsters unto living Creatures? It is too arrogant a part, seeing thy self art
not thine own, and live in possession of another, to presume to prescribe to
those that are mightier then thy self; and to require that that be done which
thou desire, not that which thou find by ancient constitutions already
settled in things. Wherefore if you men will have your complaints to take
place, it is requisite ye first teach us whence or what ye are: whether this
World be made and framed for you, or ye came as stranger^ unto it out of other
Countries? Which seeing you are not able to tell, and you cannot resolve us for
what cause you live under this hollow vault of Heaueu: leave off to suppose
that any thing belongs unto you, seeing the things that are done, are not
alike done, but are to be reckoned and accounted in the sum intended in the
whole. By reason of Christians, say they, these evils are come, and the gods
send these calamities upon corn. I demand when ye say these things, do ye
not see how desperately with open and manifest lies ye slander us? It is now
three hundred years more or less, since we Christians began to be, and bear
this name in the World have there been all these years continual wars,
continual dearths? has there been no peace at all in the Earth, no cheapnes,
no plenty of things? For he that accuses us must first of all demonstrate that
these calamities have been perpetual and continual, that mortal men have
never had any breathing time, and that without any holidays, as they say, have
endured the forms of manifold dangers. But do we not see in these middle
years and middle times, that innumerable victories have bin obtained over
conquered enemies? that the territories of the Empire have bin enlarged, and
Nations whose names were never heard of, bin brought in subjection? that
oftentimes the years have yielded marveilous great increase, and such cheapnes
and plenty of things, that there was no buying or selling at all, the prices of
things being so much fallen? For how could things be done, and how could
mankind continue until this time, if fertility and plenty did not supply all
whatsoever need required? But sometimes heretofore have bin in need and
necessity. And theyhaue bin recompensed again with abundance. Again some wars
have bin waged against our will. And they have afterward bin corrected by
victories and good success. What then shall we say? that thegods are sometime
mindful of our miseries. and sometime again unmindful? If at what time there
is Famine it be said they are angry, it follows that in time of plenty they
are not aengry nor displeased: and so all is brought to this issue, that by
turns they lightly lay aside and take up their angers, and by remembrance of
offenses return afresh unto them again. Although what that is wbieh they say
seems to be inexplicable, and cannot be known or understood. If therefore
they would have the Almans, Persians, Scythians subdued because Christians did
dwell and live among these Nations: Why did they give the Romans the victory
seeing Christians dwelt and lived among their Nations also. If it were their
pleasure that mice and locusts should therefore swarm in Asia and Syria,
because in like manner Christians dwelt in those Nations: why did they not at
the same time swarm in Spain and France seeing innumerable Christians lived
in these Provinces also? If for this very cause they send drought upon the
corn, and barrenness among the Getulians and them of Aquitaine: why did they
the same year give such plentiful harvests to the Moors and Numidians, the
like Religion being settled in these Countries also? If in any one City they
have caused through the hatred of our name very many to perish with famine: why
in the same place have they through the dearenes of all provision made not only
those that are not of our body, but even true Christians also much more the
richer and wealthier? It behooved therefore that either none should have had any
thing that was comfortable; if we be the cause of Evils, for we are in all
Nations: or seeing ye see that things profitable are mingled with those that
are incommodious, leave off at length to ascribe that unto us which impeacheth
your estates, since we be no hindrance at all to your wealth and prosperity.

SECT. 5. The fourth objection answered, which is borrowed from the authority
of Esdras.
THat which yet farther disables the validity of this testimony of Cyprian, is
that in the opinion of Sixtus Senensis, a learned Writer, he borrowed it from
the Apocryphal Esdras. For Canonical Scripture, he seems indeed to glance at
the name thereof by the way, but alleadges ^blioth. ^nct. lib. 1.
none; And if Senensis had thought that any book of the Canon had favored
this opinion of Cyprian, he would never have sent us to Esdras, but since the
appeal is made to Esdras, to Esdras let us go. He then in his fourth book
and fifth Chapter, v. 51, 52, 53, 54, and 55, thus speaks of this matrer. He
answered me, and said, ask a woman that bears children, and she shall tell
thee. say unto her, wherefore are not they whom thou have now brought forth
like those that were before, but less of stature; and she shall answer thee:
They that be borne in the strength of youth, be of one fashion, and they that
be borne in the time of age when the womb fails are otherwise. Consider thou
therefore also, how that ye are less of stature then they that were before
you, and so are they that come after you less then ye, as the creatures which
now begin to be old, and have passed over the strength of youth. Now as others
depend upon the authority of Cyprian, so Cyprian himself depending upon this
of Esdras, it will not I hope be thought either unseasonable or impertinent, if
we a little examine the weight thereof. First then, it is certain that this
book is not to be found either in Hebrew or Greek, neither is it by the
Tridentine Counsel admitted into the Canon, and no doubt but upon very
sufficient reason is it excluded both by them and us, in regard of the
doctrines which it teaches, manifestly repugnant to the rules of orthodoxe
faith; as in the fourth and seventh Chapters it teaches, that the souls of
the Saints departed this life are detained as it were imprisoned in certain
cells and vauts of the Earth until the number of the Elect be accomplished, and
that then they shall receive their Crowns of glory altogether, and not before.
In the sixth Chapter he tells us a most ridiculous unsavory tale, of two vaste
Creatures made upon the fifth day of the Creation; the one called Enoch, or
Behemoth, and the other Leviathan. In the seventh he deriues his pedigree from
Aaron, by nineteen generations, whereas the true Esdras, or Esras deriues his
but by fifteen. And to bring it home somewhat nearer to our purpose. In the
fourteenth chapter he shows himself manifestly a false Prophet, touching the
Consummation of the world, which (says he) has lost his youth, and the times
begin to wax old: for the world is divided into twelve parts, and ten parts
of it are gone already, and half of a tenth part, and there remains that
which is after the half of the tenth part. So that by his computation dividing
the whole time of the worlds duration into twelve equal portions, only one
and a half were then remaining; which had it been true, the world should have
ended almost fifteen hundred years ago. For the time from the worlds
Creation to Esdras, (according to the Scriptures calculation) contain about
three thousand four hundred and seventy years, and this sum of years
contain ten parts and an half of of the twelve, allotted for the whole
duration of the world, whence it consequently follows, that the residue of the
time from Esdras to the worlds end, could not exceed the number of five
hundred years: and yet from Esdras to this present year of the Lord, one
thousand six hundred twenty six, we find there are passed almost two thousand
years.

Hereunto may be added the sharp but well deserved Censure of Iunius in his
preface to the Apochryphall books. Nihil habet Esdrae quam falfo emendicatum
nomen and injuria maxima. Authorem enim, quem puduit sui operis long amplius
debuerat puduisse, cum suis somnijs nomen tanti viri praefigeret, and
impudenter Ecclesiam vellet fallere. He has nothing in him worthy of Esdras,
but only a borrowed name and that most injuriously assumed. He was ashamed of
his own name, but he should rather have shamed to prefixe the name of so
worthy a man before his dreams, and thereby attempt the deceiving of the
Church. And again in his annotations on the first chapter of that book, Quis
vero huic libro tantam fidem deinceps arroget, quae in ipsa front naeuos tam
immanes and in re tam euidenti mendacia tam puerilia, ne quid gravius dicam,
animadvertit. Quisquis es qui hunc librum legis, sum authoritatem probandi
atque judicandi sermones ejus, Non enim obstringit fidem tuam illius
authoritas, si qua est, in tam crassis erroribus. Who will hereafter give
credit to this book, who observes in the very forehead of it so notorious
blemishes, and in a matter so evident, (not to say worse of it) so childish
lies. Whosoever thou art that read this book, take to thy self authority
of trying and judging his speeches. For his authority cannot bind thy
Credence, if there be any in such gross errors. It shall not be amiss then
to follow this advise of Iunius, and to bring this counterfeite to the
touchstone, whereby we shall easily discern, that both the ground he
assumes is unsound, and his illation from thence deduced inconsequent. His
ground is that children borne or begotten in old age, are always weaker then
those in youth: Whereas Isaak borne of Sarah when she was now so old that she
was thought both by others and her self to be past conceiving, Genesis 18. 11. 12.
and begotten of Abraham when his body was now dead, was Romans 4. 19.
for any thing we find to the contrary of as strong and healthful a
constitution as Iaacob borne in the strength of Isaac and Rebecca. And Joseph
or Benjamin as able men as Reuben, though Iaacob in his blessing call him, The
beginning of his strength and the excellency of power, as being his first Genesis
49 3.
begotten. Nay often we see that the youngest borne in age not equals only,
but excells both in wit and spirit and strength and stature the Eldest borne in
youth. So unsure and sandy is this ground; and for his inference drawn from
thence, it is no less unwarrantable and insufficient. There being in the
resemblance betwixt a woman and the world as large a difference, as is the
dissimilitude between the fruit of the one and the generations of the other:
The one taking her beginning by the course of nature in weakness and so
growing to perfection and ripeness she quickly declines and hastens to
dissolution. She must necessarily expect the term of certain years before
she can conceive her fruit, and then again at the end of certain years she
leaves to conceive. Whereas the other being created immediately by a
supernatural power, was made in the very first moment (that it was fully made)
in full perfection which except it be for the sin of man it, never lost, nor
by any force of subordinate causes possiblely could or can loose. The
quickening efficacy of that word, Crescite and multiplicamini, though delivered
many thousand years since is now as powerful in beasts, in plants in birds in
fishes in men as at first it was. And thus much this false Prophet seems
himself to acknowledge in the chapter following, where he thus brings in the
Lord speaking unto him; All these things Cap. 6. 6.
were made by me alone, and by none other: by me also they shall be ended, and
by none other. And if they shall be ended immediately by the hand of the
Almighty, as immediately by it they were made, then doubtless there is no such
natural decay in them, which would at last without the concurrence of any such
supernatural power bring them to a natural d^ssolution, no more then there
was any natural forerunning preparation to their Creation. And thus we see,
how this Goliath has his head stricken off with his own sword, and this lying
Prophet condemned out of his own mouth. I have dwelt the longer upon this
examination, because I find that the testimony drawn from this Counterfeite
was it that in appearance misledde Cyprian, and both their testimonies
together, that which has yielded the principal both confidence and
countenance to the Adverse part.

SECT. 6. The last objection answered pretended to be taken from the authority
of holy Scriptures.
AS the testimony taken from Esdras wants authority: so those which re drawn
from authority of sacred and Canonical Scriptures want right explication and
application. Whereof the first that I have met with, are those misconstrued
words of the Prophet Isaiah, The world languisheth and fades away, or (as some
other translations read it,) The world is feebled Cap. 24 4.
and decayed. Which by Iunius and Tremelius are rendered in the future tence
Languebit, Concidet orbis habitabilis, and are undoubtedly to be referred to
the destruction and desolation of those Nations against which he had in some
chapters precedent, denounced the heavy judgments of God, As the Moabites,
Egyptians, Tyrians, Syrians, Assyrians, Ethiopians, Babylonians, and the
Isralites themselves. Iunius thus rightly summing the chapter, Propheta summam
contrahit judiciorum quae supra denunciauerat, The Prophet recapitulates or
draws into one head or sum the judgments which before he had denounced at
large, and in particular; which coming from the justice and immediate hand of
God for sin upon a part of the world, can in no sort be referred to the
ordinary course of Nature in regard of the Universal.

That which carries with it some more color of Reason is that by St. Paul, The
Crearure is said to be subject to vanity, to the bondage of corruption, Romans 8.
20. 21. 22.
to groaning, and to traveling in pain: All which seem to imply a decay and
declination in it: But in the judgment of the soundest Interpreters, the
Apostle by vanity and bondage of corruption, means, first, that impurity,
infirmity, and deformity, which the Creature has contracted by the fall of
man; Secondly, the daily alteration and change, nay declination and decay of
the Individuals and particulars of every kind under heaven; Thirdly, the
designation and hasting of the kinds or species themselves to a final and
total dissolution by fire; And lastly, the abuse of them, tending to the
dishonor of the Creator, or the hurt of his servants, or the service of his
enemies: All these may not improperly be termed vanity and a bondage of
corruption, under which the Creature groaneth and travelleth, wishing and
waiting to be delivered from it.

But that of S. Peter is it which is most of all stood upon, where he brings in
the profane scoffers at Religion, and especially at the article of the worlds
Consummation, thus questioning the matter; where is the promise of his coming?
For since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as 2. Pet. 3. 4.
they were from the beginning of the Creation. But in truth that place, if it
be well weighed, rather makes against the worlds supposed decay then for it,
in as much as if the Apostle had known or acknowledged any such decay in it, it
is to be presumed, that being invited, and in a manner forced thereunto by so
fair and fit an occasion, he would have pressed it against those scoffers, or
in some sort have expressed himself therein. But since he only vrges the
Creation of the world, and the overwhelming of it with water, to prove that the
same God, who wasthe Author v. 5. 6.
of both those, is as able at his pleasure to unmake it with fire, it should
seem he had learned no such divinity, as the worlds decay, or at leastwise
had no such assurance of it, and warrant for it, as to teach it the Church; Nay
in the 7 verse of the same chapter, he tells us, that the heavens and earth
which are now, are by the same word, by which they were Created, kept in store
and reserved to fire. It was not then their auerring, that things continued as
they were, that made them scoffers, but their irreligious inference from
thence, that the world neither had beginning, neither should have ending; but
all things should always continue as formerly they always had done. And thus
much may suffice for the consideration of the worlds decay in General, it
rests now, that we descend to a distinct view of the particulars, amongst
which the Heavens first present themselves upon the Theater, as being the most
glorious and operative bodies, and seated in the most eminent room.

LIB. II. Of the pretended decay of the Heavens and Elements, and Elementary
Bodies, Man only excepted.
CAP. 1. Touching the pretended decay of the Heavenly Bodies.
SECT. 1. First of their working upon this inferior World.
SUch and so great is the wisdom, the bounty, and the power which Almighty God
has expressed in the frame of the Heavens, that the Psalmist might justly say,
The Heavens declare the glory of God; the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars
serving Psalm. 19. 1.
as so many silver and golden Characters, embroidered upon azure for the daily
preaching and publishing thereof to the World. And surely if he have made the
floor of this great House of the World so beautiful, and garnished it with
such wonderful variety of beasts, of trees, of herbs, of flowers, we need
wonder the less at the magnificence of the roof, which is the highest part of
the World, and the nearest to the Mansion House of Saints and Angels. Now as
the excellency of these Bodies appears in their situation, their matter,
their magnitudes, and their Sphericall or Circular figure: so specially in
their great use and efficacy, not only that they are for signs and seasons,
and for days and years, but in that by their motion, their light, their
warmth, and Genesis 1. 14.
influence, they guide and govern, nay cherish and maintain, nay breed and
beget these inferior bodies, even of man himself, for whose sake the Heavens
were made. It is truly said by the Prince of Philosophers, Sol and homo
generant hominem, the Sun and man beget man, man concurring in the generation
of man as an immediate, and the Sun as a remote cause. And in another place
he doubts not to affirm of this inferior World in general, Necesse est
mundum inferiorem superioribus lationibus continuari, ut omnis inde virtus
derivetur: it is requisite, that these inferior parts of the World should be
conjoined to the motions of the higher Bodies, that so all their virtue and
vigor from thence might be derived. There is no question but that the Heavens
have a marvailous great stroke upon the air, the water, the earth, the
plants, the mettalls, the beasts, nay upon Man himself, at leastwise in regard
of his body and natural faculties: so that if there can be found any decay in
the Heavens, it will in the course of Nature, and discourse of reason
consequently follow, that there must of necessity ensue a decay in all those
which depend upon the Heavens: as likewise on the other side, if there be found
no decay in the Heavens, the presumption will be strong, that there is no such
decay (as is supposed) in these Subcaelestiall Bodies, because of the great
sympathy and correspondence which is known to be between them by many and
notable experiments. For to let pass the quailing and withering of all things,
by the recesse and their reviving and resurrection (as it were) by the
reaccesse, of the Sun; I am of opinion, that the sap in trees so precisely
follows the motion of the Sun, that it never rests, but is in continual
agitation as the Sun it self: which no sooner arriues at the Tropic, but he
instantly returns, and even at that very instant (as I conceive, and I think
it may be demonstrated by experimental conclusions) the sap which by degrees
descended with the declination of the Sun, begins to remount at the approach
thereof by the same steps that it descended: and as the approach of the Sun,
is scarce sensible at his first return, but afterward the day increases more
in one week, then before in two, in like manner also fares it with the sap in
plants, which at first ascends insensibly and slowly, but within a while much
more swiftly and apparently. It is certain, that the Tulypp, Marigold, and
Sun-flowre open with the rising, and shut with the setting of the Sun; So
that though the Sun appear not, a man may more infallibly know when it is
high noone by their full spreading, then by the Index of a Clock or Watch. The
hop in its growing winding it self about the pole, always follows the course
of the Sun from East to West, and can by no means be drawn to the
contrary, choosing rather to break then yield.

It is observed by those that sail between the Tropicks, that there is a
constant set wind, blowing from the East to the West, sailors call it the
Breeze, which rises and falls with the Sun, and is always highest at noone,
and is commonly so strong, partly by its own blowing, and partly by
ouer-ruling the Current, that they who sail to Peru, cannot well return home
the same way they came forth. And generally, Mariners observe, that caeter is
paribus they sail with more speed from the East to the West, then back again
from the West to the East, in the same compass of time. All which should argue
a wheeling about of the air, and waters by the diurnall motion of the Heavens,
and specially by the motion of the Sun. Whereunto may be added, that the high
Seasprings of the year are always near about the two Aequinoctials and
Solstices, and the Cock as a trusty Watchman, both at midnight and break of
day gives notice of the Suns approach.

These be the strange and secret effects of the Sun, upon the inferior
Bodies, whence by the Gentiles he was held the visible God of the World, and
termed the Eye thereof, which alone saw all things in the World, and by which
the World saw all things in it self.

Omma qui videt, and per quem videt omnia mundus.
And most notablely is he described by the Psalmist, in them has he set a
Psalm. 19. 4. 5. 6.
Tabernacle for the Sun, which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber,
and rejoices as a strong man to run a race. His going forth is from the end of
the Heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from
the heat thereof.

Now as the effects of the Sun, the head-spring of light and warmth, are upon
these inferior Bodies more active: so those of the Moon, (as being Vltima
coelo, Citima terris, nearer the Earth, and holding a greater resemblance
therewith) are no less manifest. And therefore the husbandman in sowing and
setting, graffing and planting, lopping of trees, and felling of timber, and
the like, upon good reason observes the waxing and waning of the Moon. which
the learned Zanchius well allows of, commending Hesiod for his rules therein.
Quod Hesiodus ex Lune decrementis De operibus Dei.
and incrementis totius agricolationis signa notet, quis improbet? who can
mislike it; that Hesiod sets down the signs, in the whole course of
husbandry, from the waxing and waning of the Moon? The tides and ebbes of the
Sea follow the course of it, so exactly, as the Seaman will tell you the age
of the Moon only upon the sight of the tide, as certainly, as if he saw it in
the water. It is the observation of Aristotle and of Pliny out of him, that
oysters, and mussels, and cockles. and lobsters, and Arist. l. 4. de partibus
animalium cap. 5. Plin. lib. 2 c. 41. and 99.
crabbs, and generally all shellfish grow fuller in the waxing of the Moon,
but emptier in the waning thereof. Such a strong predominancie it has even
upon the brain of Man, that Lunatikes borrow their very name from it, as also
does the stone Selenites, whose property, as S. Augustine and Georgius Agricola
record it, is to increase and decrease in light De civit. Dei lib. 21. c. 5. De
natura Fossil. lib. 5.
with the Moon, carrying always the resemblance thereof in it self. Neither
can it reasonably be imagined that the other Planets, and stars, and parts of
Heaven, are without their forcible operations, upon these lower Bodies,
specially considering that the very plants and herbs of the Earth, which we
tread upon, have their several virtues, as well single by themselves, as in
composition with other ingredients. The Physician in opening a vein, has ever
an eye to the sign then reigning. The Canicular star specially in those hotter
Climates, was by the Ancients always held a dangerous enemy to the practice of
Physic, and all kind of Evacuations. Nay Galen himself, the Oracle of that
profession, advises In 3. de diebus Criticis.
practitioners in that Art, in all their Cures to have a special regard to the
reigning Constellations and Conjunctions of the Planets. But the most admirable
mystery of Nature, in my mind, is the turning of iron touched with the
loadstone, toward the North Pole, of which I shall have farther occasion to
entreat, more largely in the Chapter touching the Comparison of the wits and
inventions of these times with those of former ages. Neither were it hard to
add much more, to that which has been said, to show the dependence of these
Elementary Bodies upon the heavenly. Almighty God having ordained, that the
higher should serve as intermediate Agents, or secondary Causes, between
himself and the lower: And as they are linked together in a chain of order,
so are they likewise chained together in the order of Causes, but so as in the
wheels of a Clock, though the failing in the superior, cannot but cause a
failing in the inferior, yet the failing of the inferior, may well argue
though it cannot cause a failing in the superior. We have great reason then,
as I conceive, to begin with the Examination of the state of Celestial
bodies, in as much as upon it the conditionof the subcoelestiall wholly
de-pends. Wherein five things offer themselves to our consideration, Their
substance, their motion, their light, their warmth, and their influence.

SECT. 2. Touching the pretended decay in the substance of the Heavens.
TO find out whether the substance of the heavenly bodies be decayed or no,
it will not be amiss a little to inquire into the nature of the matter and
form, of which that substance consists, that so it may appear whether or no
in a natural course they be capable of such a supposed decay. That the Heavens
are endued with some kind of matter, (though some Philosophers in their
jangling humor, have made a doubt of it,) yet I think no sober and wise
Christian will deny it: But whether the matter of it, be the same with that of
these inferior bodies, adhuc sub Iudice lis est; it has been, and still is a
great question among Divines. The ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Primitive
Church, for the most part, following, Plato, hold that it agrees with the
matter of the Elementary bodies, yet so as it is compounded of the finest
flower, and choicest delicacy of the Elements: But the Schoolmen on the other
side, following Aristotle, adhere to his Quintessence, and by no means, will
be beaten from it, since, say they, if the Elements Lib. 1. de Coelo, cap. 2.
and the heavens should agree in the same matter, it should consequently
follow, that there should be a mutual traffic and commerce, a reciprocal
action, and passion between them, which would soon draw on a change, and by
degrees, a ruin upon those glorious bodies. Now though this point will never
(I think) be fully and finally determined, till we come to be Inhabitants of
that place, whereof we dispute, (for hardly do we guess aright at things
that are upon earth, and with labor do we find the things that are at hand,
but the things Wisdom, 9. 16.
which are in heaven, who has searched out?) Yet for the present, I should
state it thus, that they agree in the same original matter, and surely Moses,
me thinks, seems to favor this opinion, making but one matter, (as far as
I can gather from the text) out of which all bodily substances were created.

Vnus erat toto naturae vultus in orb.
So as the heavens, though they be not compounded of the Elements, 1.
Metamorph.
yet are they made of the same matter, that the Elements are compounded of.
They are not subject to the qualities of heat, or cold, or drought, or
moisture, nor yet to weight, or lightness, which arise from those qualities, but
have a form given them, which differs from the forms of all corruptible
bodies, so as it suffers not, nor can it suffer from any of them, being so
excellent and perfect in it self, as it wholly satiateth the appetite of the
matter it informs. The Celestial bodies then, meeting with so noble a form
to actuate them are not, nor cannot, in the course of nature, be liable, to
any generation or corruption, in regard of their substance, to any augmentation
or diminution in regard of their quantity, no nor to any destructive alteration
in respect of their qualities.

I am not ignorant that the controversies, touching this form what it should
be, is no less then that touching the matter; Some holding it to be a living
and quickening spirit, nay a sensitive and reasonable soul, which opinion is
stiffely maintained by many great and learned Clarks, both Jews, and Gentiles,
and Christians, supposing it unreasonable that the heavens which impart life to
other bodies, should themselves be destitute of life: But this error is
notablely discovered and confuted by Claudius Espencaeus, a famous Doctor of
the Sorbone, in a Treatise which he purposely composed on this point; In as
much as what is denied De Coelorum animatione.
those bodies in life, in sense, in reason, is abundantly supplied in their
constant and unchangeable duration, arising from that inviolable knot, and
indissoluble marriage, betwixt the matter and the form, which can never suffer
any divorce, but from that hand which first joined them. And howbeit it cannot
be denied, that not only the reasonable soul of man, but the sensitive of the
least gnat that flies in the air, and the Vegetative of the basest plant that
springs out of the earth, are (in that they are endued with life) more divine
and nearer approaching to the fountain of life, then the forms of the
heavenly bodies; yet as the Apostle speaking of Faith, Hope, and Charity,
concludes Charity to be the greatest; (though by faith we apprehend and apply
the merits of Christ) because it is more universal in operation, and lasting
in duration; so though the forms of the Creatures endued with life do in that
regard, come a step nearer to the Deity, then the forms of the heavenly
bodies, which are without life, yet if we regard their purity, their beauty,
their efficacy, their indeficiencie in moving, their Vniversallity and
independencie in working, there is no question, but the heavens may in that
respect be preferred, even before man himself, for whose sake they were made;
Man being indeed immortal in regard of his soul, but the heavens in regard of
their bodies, as being made of an incorruptible stuff.

Which cannot well stand with their opinion, who held them to be composed of
fire, or that the waters which in the first of Genesis, are said to be above
the firmament, and in the hundred forty eight Psalm, above the heavens, are
above the heavens we now treat of, for the tempering and qualifying of their
heat, as did S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine, and Hexam. l. 2. c. 3. De Civit.
Dei, l. 11. c. vlt.
many others, venerable for their antiquity, learning, and piety. Touching the
former of which opinions, we shall have fitter opportunity to discuss it at
large, when we come to treat of the warmth caused by the heavens. But touching
the second, it seems to have been grounded upon a mistake of the word
Firmament, which by the Ancients, was commonly appropriated to the eight
sphere, in which are seated the fixed stars, whereas the original Hebrew
(which properly signifies Extention, or Expansion) is in the first of Genesis,
not only applied to the spheres in which the Sun and Moon are planted, but
to the lowest region of the air, in which the birds fly, and so do I with
Pareus and Pererius v. 15. v 20.
take it to be understood in this controversy. This region of the air being,
as S. Augustine somewhere speaks, Terminus intransgressibilis, a firm and
immovable wall of separation betwixt the waters that are bred in the bowels of
the earth, and those of the Clouds: and for the word heaven, which is used in
the hundred forty and eight Psalm, it is likewise applied to the middle region
of the air by the Prophet Jeremy, which may serve for a Gloss upon that text,
alleged out Ierimy. 10. 13.
of the Psalm. When he utters his voice, there is a noise of waters in the
heavens, and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth.

Now the Schoolmen finding that the placing of waters above the starry
heavens, was both unnatural and vnvsefull, and yet being not well acquainted
with the propriety of the Hebrew word, to salve the matter, tell us of a
Christalline or glassie heaven, above the eight sphere, which, say they, is
undoubtedly the waters above the firmament mentioned by Moses; which exposition
of theirs, though it do not infer a decay in the heavenly bodies, yet does
it cross the course of Moses his historical narration, his purpose being, as
it seems, only to write the history of things which were visible and sensible,
as appears in part by his omitting the Creation of Angels, whereas the
Christalline heaven they speak of, is not only invisible and insensible, but
was not at all discovered to be, till the days of Hipparchus or Ptolomy. Since
then the heavens in regard of their substance, are altogether free (for any
thing yet appears,) from any mixture or tincture of the Elements, being made
of an incorruptible and inalterable quintessence, which neither has any
conflict in it self, nor with any other thing without it, from thence may we
safely collect that it neither is, nor can be subject to any such decay as is
imagined.

SECT. 3. An objection drawn from Job, answered.
HOwbeit the deserved curse of God, deprived the earth of her fertility, in
bringing forth without the sweat of Adam, and his offspring, yet I find not
that it stretched to the Stars, or that any thing above the Moon was altered
or changed, in respect of Adams fault, from their first perfection. True indeed
it is which Eliphaz teaches, Job. 15. 15. and 25. 5.
that the heavens, and Bildad, that the stars are not clean in Gods sight:
it may be, because of the fall of Angels, the inhabitants of heaven, whom
therefore he charged with folly: Which exposition, Iunius so far favors, as
instead of Coelum, he puts Coelites, into the very body of the Job. 4 18.
text: But in my judgment it would better have sorted with the Margin, in as
much as by Coelites, we may understand either Saints or Angels, both Citizens
of heaven, either in actual possession, or in certain hope and expectation;
in possession, as Angels and Saints departed, in expectation, as the Saints
here in warfaire on the earth: And of these does Gregory in his Moralls on
Job, expound the place, hoc coelorum nomine repetijt quod Sanctorum prius
appellatione signavit, says he: Job repeates Cap. 15. 15.
that by the name of heaven, which before he expressed under the name of
Saints. And thus both he and S. Augustine expound that of the nineteen
Psalm, The heavens declare the glory of God. And with them most of the
Ancients, that petition of the Lords Prayer, Thy will be done on earth as it
is in heaven. But what need we fly to allegories, and figurative senses,
when the letter of the text will well enough stand with the analogy of faith,
the texts of other Scriptures, and the rule of sound reason. The very material
heavens then, may not untruly or improperly be said, to be unclean in Gods
sight. First, Quia habent aliquid potentialitatis admixtum, as Lyra speaks,
they have some kind of potentiality, (I know not how otherwise to render his
word) mixed with them, he means in regard of their motion, and the
illumination of the moon and stars from the Sun. But chiefly, as I take
it, they are said to be unclean, not considered in themselves, but in
comparison of the Creator, who is Actus purissimus and simplicissimus; all Act,
and that most pure, not only from stain and pollution, but all kind of
impotency, imperfection, or Composition whatsoever, And in this sense the very
blessed and glorious Angels themselves, which are of a substance far purer
then the Sun it self, may be said to be unclean in his sight, in which
regard the very Seraphins are said, to cover their faces and feet with their
Isay. 6. 2.
wings. But to grant that the heavens are become unclean, either by the fall
of man or Angels, yet does it not follow (as I conceive) that this uncleanness
does daily increase upon them, or which is in truth the point in controversy,
that they feel any impairing by reason of this uncleanness, it being rather
imputative, as I may earne it, then real and inherent. Nonne vides coelum hoc,
says Chrysostom, vt pulchrum, vt ingens, vt astrorum choreis varium, quantum
temporis viguit, quinque aut plus annorum Apud Augustinum Steuchum, l. 10. de
Perenni Philosoph^a.
millia processerunt, and haec annorum multitudo ei non adduxit senium; Sed vt
corpus novum ac vegetum floridae virentisque juventae viget aetate: Sic coelum,
quam habuit a principio pulchrit^dinem semper eadem permansit, nec quicquam
tempus eam debilitavit. Do not thou see the heavens, how fair, how spacious
they are, how bee-spangled with diverse constellations? how long now have they
lasted? five thousand years or more are past, and yet this long duration of
time has brought no old age upon them; But as a body new and fresh,
flourishes in youth: So the heavens still retain their beauty, which at first
they had, neither has time any thing abated it. Some error or mistake
doubtless there is in Chrisostomes computation in as much as he lived above
1200 years since, and yet tells us that the world had then lasted above 5000
years, but for the truth of the matter he is therein seconded by all the
school divines, and among those of the reformed churches none has written in
this point more clearly and fully then Alstedius in his preface to his
natural divinity. Tanta est hujus palatij diuturnitas atque firmitas vt ad
hodiernum vsque diem supra annos quinquies mill and sexcentos ita perstet vt
in eo nihil immutatum dimin^tum aut vetustate and diuturnitate temporis
vitiatum conspiciamus. Such, says he, and so lasting is the duration and
immovable stability of this palace, that being created above 5600 years ago,
yet it so continues to this day, that we can epsy nothing in it changed, or
wasted, or disordered by age, and tract of time.

SECT. 4. Another objection taken from Psalm the 102 answered.
ANother text is commmonly and hotly urged by the Adverse part, to like purpose
as the former, and is in truth the only argument of weight, drawn from
Scripture in this present question, touching the heavens decay in regard of
their Substance. In which consideration we shall be enforced to examine it
somewhat the more fully. Taken it is from the hundred and second Psalm, and
the words of the Prophet are these. Of old thou have laid the foundation of
the earth, and v. 25. 26. 27.
the heavens are the work of thine hands. They shall perish, but thou shall
endure: yea all of them shall wax old as does a garment, as a vesture shall
thou change them, and they shall be changed: But thou art the same, and thy
years shall have no end. To which very place undoubtedly, the Apostle alludes
in the first to the Hebrews, where he thus renders it, Thou Lord in v. 10. 11.
13
the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
works of thine hands: They shall perish, but thou remainest, and they shall
wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they
shall be changed: But thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. In
which passages the words which are most stood upon and pressed, are those of
the growing old of the heavens like a garment, which by degrees grows bare
till it be torn in pieces and brought to rags. S. Augustine in his
Enarration upon this Psame according to his wont, betakes him to an
Allegorical Exposition, interpreting the heavens to be the Saints, and their
bodies to be their garments wherewith the soul is clothed. And these
garments of theirs, says he, wax old and perish, but shall be changed in the
resurrection, and made comformable to the glorious body of Jesus Christ. Which
exposition of his, is pious I confess, but surely not proper, since the
Prophet speaks of the heavens, which had their beginning together with the
earth, and were both principal pieces in the great work of the Creation.
Neither can the regions of the air, be here well understood, (though in some
other places they be styled by the name of the heavens) since they are subject
to continual variation and change, and our Prophets meaning was, as it should
seem, to compare the Almighties unchangeable eternity, with that which of all
the visible Creatures was most stable and steadfast. And besides, though the
air be indeed the work of Gods hands, as are all the other Creatures, yet
that phrase is in a special manner applied to the starry heavens, as Ps. 19.
1. (...).
being indeed the most exquisite and excellent piece of workmanship that ever
his hands framed. It remains then, that by heavens here, we understand the
lights of heaven, thought by Philosophers to be the thicker parts of the
spheres, together with the spheres themselves, in which those lights are fixed
and wheeled about. For that such spheres and orbs there are I take it as
granted, neither will I dispute it, though I am not ignorant, that some latter
writers think otherwise, and those, neither few in number, nor for their
knowledge unlearned. But for the true sense of the place alleged, we are to
know that the word there used to wax old, both in Hebrew, Greek and Latin does
not necessarily imply a decay or impairing in the subject so waxing old, but
sometimes does only signify a farther step and access to a final period in
regard of duration. We have read of some who being well stricken in years have
renewed their teeth and changed the white color of their hair, and so grown
young again. Of such it might truly be said that they grew elder in regard of
their nearer approach to the determinate end of their race, though they were
younger in regard of their constitution and state of their bodies. And thus do I
take the Apostle to be understood, that which decays and waxes old is ready
to vanish away; Heb. 8. 13.
where he speaks of the Ceremonial law, which did not grow old by degrees,
at least before the incarnation of Christ, but stood in its full force and
vigor until it was by him abrogated and disanulled. To which purpose Aquinas
has not unfitly observed upon the place, Quod dicitur vetus significat quod
sit prope cessationem, the tearming of a thing old, implies that it hastens to
an end. This then as I take it may truly be affirmed of the signification of
the word in general and at large, and may justly seem to have been the
Prophets meaning in as much as he adds But thou art the same and thine years
shall have no end. From whence may be collected, that as God cannot grow old
because his years shall have no end: so the heavens because they shall have an
end may be therefore said to grow old. But whereas it is added, not only by the
Psalmist but by the Apostle in precise terms, They shall wax old as does a
garment, and again as a Vesture shall thou change them, the doubt still
remains whether by that addition, the sense of the word be not restrained to
a graduall and sensible decay. I know it may be said, that a garment waxing
old, not only looses his freshness, but part of his quantity and weight, it
is not only soyled; but wasted either in lying or wearing, and so in
continuance of time becomes utterly unserviceable, which no man I think will
ascribe to the heavens, I mean that their quantity is any way diminished. All
agree then that the Similitude may be strained too far, as the wringing of
the nose brings forth blood and the wresting of a string too high marres the
music: but yet the question still remains, how it is to be understood and how
far we me may safely extend it. For to say that waxing old in that passage is
only to be understood of a nearer approach to an alteration, or an abolishment,
seems to be too cold an interpretation, in as much as then needed not the
Prophet to have added for a clearer explication of his mind, in the manner of
their waxing old, as does a garment: it rests then to be showed as I conceive
wherein the similitude stands, which the interpreters I have met with do not
sufficiently unfold, and those that undertake the unfolding of it, run upon
the rocks by publishing harsh and unwarrantable positions; Me thinks the
Psalmist himself gives some light unto it, Thou coverest thy self, says he,
with light as with a garment, and stretchest out the heavens Psalm. 104. 2.
like a Curtain: his meaning then in my judgment may be this, that the Heavens
which for their expansion may well be campared to a Curtain or garment shall
wax old, the comparison standing between the heavens and a garment, not in
regard of their deficiencie, but their spreading, the heavens covering this
inferior world, as a garment does the body it is spread over. Or if the
comparison stand in their deficiencie, which seems, I confess, the more
kindly exposition, to my seemeing, Aquinas in few words loses the knot,
sicut uestimentum says he, quod sumitur ad vsum, and cessante vsu deponitur.
The heavens then shall wax old as does a garment in that their use shall cease
together with man, as does the use of a garment with him that uses it. Which
exposition he seems to have borrowed from Dydimus blind in his bodily eyes,
but in his mind sharp sighted, quod canit Psaltes, veterescent and mutabuntur,
designat eorum vsum abijsse and defecisse, Vt enim indumentum vbi officio
functum fuerit obvoluitur: sic coelum ac terrae functae munerihus suis abibunt.
In that the Psalmist professes, They shall wax old and be changed, his
meaning is when there shall be no further use of them. For as a garment having
performed that use to which it was ordained, is folded up and laid aside: so
the heaven and the earth having finished those services, for which they were
created, shall vanish and pass away. And upon this Comment of Dydimus,
Eugubinus thus comes. Hoc autem Lib. 10. De Perenni Philosophia.
summus docet Theologus primum mundum antiquandum, vetustate and senio
interiutrum, sed non'eo senio quo res mortales corrumpuntur atque abolentur, in
coelo tale senium nullum est, sed alium quoddam cujus similitudo ex vestibus
ostenditur, cum deponimus eas vbi nobis esse vsui desijssent, tanquam invtiles
eas exuimus atque obuoluimus, sic mundus, id est coelum, non eo delebitur quod
eadem vetustate atque omnia animalia and arbores, aliquando sit defecturus, sed
quia cessabit vsus ejus quo rerum tantos ordines peragebat. The purpose of this
great Divine was to teach, that the heavens should wax old and consume with
age, but not with such an old age, as that by which things mortal suffer
corruption and dissolusion. In heaven there is no such waxing old to be found,
but another kind there is, the resemblance whereof is taken from garments, when
we put them off, as having no further use of them, laying them aside and
folding them up: in like manner the heaven shall not therefore be disolued,
because it shall at any time suffer defect through that old age, which beasts
and plants feel, but because the use of it shall cease, by which it kept
these inferior bodies in due order. And perchance the Apostle himself,
rendering the words of the Psalmist, intends as much, As a vesture shall thou
fold them up: as the curtains and carpets and hangings are folded Heb. 1. 12.
up, and laid aside when the family remoues. Which seems likewise, to have
been foretold by the Prophet Isayah, the heavens shall be rouled together 34. 4.
as a scrole, and they shall pass away with with a noyce says S. Peter, like
the hissing of parchment, riueled up with heat, for so signifies the original
2. Pet. 3. 10.
word in that place. Howsoever, they shall not wax old by the course of nature,
but by the mighty power of the God of Nature, he that created them shall
dissolve them, and nothing else; which the Prophet seems to point at in this
very passage, Tu mutabis and mutabuntur, thou shall change them, not Nature,
but thou shall change and they shall be changed. And as for that fresh luster
and brightness wherewith (as is commonly thought) the heavens shall be renewed
at the last day, as a garment by turning is changed, and by changing refreshed,
it may well be by making them more resplendent then now they are, or ever at
any time were since their first creation, Not by scowring off of contracted
rust, but adding a new gloss and augmentation of glory. And whereas some
Divines have not doubted to make the spots and shadows appearing in the face
of the Moon to be undoubted arguments of that contracted rust, if those spots
had not been original and native of equal date with the Moon her self, but
had been contracted by age and continuance of time, as wrinkles are in the
most beautiful faces, they had said somewhat, but that there they were above
fifteen hundred years agone, appears by Plutarchs discourse De maculis in
facie Lunae, and that they have since any whit increased, it cannot be
sufficiently proved. Perchance by the help of the new devised perspectiue
glasses, they have been of late more clearly and distinctly discerned the^ in
former ages, but that proves no more that they were not there before, then
that the Sydera Medcaea lately discovered by virtue of the same instruments,
were not before in being, which the Discoverers themselves knew well enough,
they could not with any color of reason affirm. Galilaeus a Florentine.


SECT. 5. A third objection taken from the apparition of new stars answered.
HOwbeit it cannot be denied but that new stars have at times appeared in the
firmament, as some think, that was at our Saviors birth, yet in as much at it
pointed out the very House in which he was borne by standing over it, and was
not (for ought we find) observed by the Mathematicians of those times, I
should rather think it to have been a blazing light created in the Region of
the Air, carrying the resemblance of a star, then a new and true created
star, seated in the firmament.

As for that which appeared in Cassiopaea in the year one thousand five
hundred seventy two, (the very year of the great Massacre in France) I think
it cannot well be gainsaid, to have been a true star, it being observed by
the most skillful and famous Astronomers of that time to hold the same aspect
in all places of Christendom, to run the same course, to keep the same
proportion, distance and situation, euery-where, and in every point, with the
fixed stars by the space of two whole years: but this I take to have been
not the effect of Nature, but the supernatural and miraculous work of
Almighty God, the first Author and free disposer of Nature; and the like may be
said of all such Comets which have at any time evidently appeared, (if any such
evidence may be given) to be above the Globe of the Moon, from whence it can
no more be inferred that the heavens are composed of a matter corruptible,
naturally subject to impairing and fading, then that their motion is irregular,
or that it is in the power of mortal man to dispose of the course of those
immortal Creatures, because by a special privilege at the prayer of Iosuah,
both Cap. 10. v. 12.
the Sun and Moon were stayed in their wonted courses, and the shadow went
back ten degrees in the Dyall of Ahaz, for the assurance of the truth of the
Prophet Isaiahs message sent to King Hezekiah. Isay 38 8.


The same answer may not be unfitly shaped, to that wonder which S. Augustine
reports out of Varroes book, entitled de Gente Populi Romani, De Civit. Dei
11. 8.
and he out of Castor touching the Planet Venus, which to add the greater
weight and credit to the relation, being somewhat strange and rare, I will set
it down in the very words of Varro, as I find them quoted by S. Augustine. In
coelo mirabile extitit portentum, nam in stella Vener is nobilissima, quam
Plautus Vesperruginem, Homerus Hesperon appellat, pulcherrimam dicens, Castor
scribit tantum portentum extitisse, ut mutaret colorem, magnitudinem, figuram,
cursum, quod factum ita neque antea, neque postea sit, hoc factum Ogyge Rege
dicebant Adrastus, Cyzicenus, and Dyon Neapolites Mathematici nobiles. In
Heaven, says he, appeared a maruailous great wonder, the most noted star
called Venus, which Plautus terms Vesperrugo, and Homer Hesperus the fair,
as Castor has left it upon record, changed both color, and bigness, and
figure, and motion, which accident was never seen before, nor since that time,
the renowned Mathematicians Adrastus and Dyon averring, that this fell out
during the reign of King Ogyges. Which wonder neither Varro nor Augustine
ascribe to the changeable matter of the Heavens, but to the unchangeable will
of the Creator. And therefore the one calls it as we see Mirabile portentum, and
the other makes this Comment upon it, that it happened, quia ille voluit qui
summo regit imperio ac potestate quod condidit, because he would have it so,
who gouernes all things that he has made with a Sovereign and independing
power. So that two special reasons may be yielded for these extraordinary
unusual apparitions in heaven, the one that they may declare to the world that
they have a Creator and Commander, who can alter or destroy their natures,
restrain or suspend their operations at his pleasure, which should keep men
from worshipping them as Gods, since they cannot keep themselves from
alteration. The other to portend and foreshew his Judgments, as did that new
star in Cassiopoea, a most unnatural inundation of blood in France; and this
change in Venus, such a deluge in Achaia, as it ouerflowed and so wasted the
whole Country, that for the space of two hundred years following it was not
inhabited.

SECT. 6. The last objection drawn from the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon
answered.
THe last doubt touching the passibility of the matter of the Heavens, is
drawn from the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, in which they are commonly
thought to suffer, and to be as it were in travel during that time. Which if
it were so, it must of necessity by degrees consume the vigor and beauty of
those glorious bodies, and finally the bodies themselves. To this purpose is
alleged that of the Poet, where he calls these Eclypses, Virg. Georg* l. 2


Defectus Solis varios Lunaeque labores.
Defects and travels of the Sun and Moon.
As also the manner of the ancient Romans while such Eclypses lasted, to Tacit.
Annal. 1. 7.
lift up many burning torches toward Heaven, and withal to beat pans of
brass and basins, as we do in following a swarm of bees.

Commovet Gentes publicus error,
Lassantque crebris pulsibus era. Boethius lib. 4 m^t. 5.

A common error through the World does pass,
And many a stroke they lay on pans of brass
Says Boethius and Manilius, speaking of the appearance of the Moons Eclipse
by degrees in diverse parts of the Earth.

Seraque in extremis quatiuntur gentibus era, L^b. 1.

The utmost coasts do beat their brass pans last.
And the Satyrist wittily describing a tatling Gossip,

Vna laboranti poterit succurrere Lunae.
She only were enough to help Iuv, lib. 2. Sat. 6

The labors of the Moon.
They thought thereby they did the Moon great ease, and helped her in her
labor, as Plutarch in the life of Aemilius observes. Nay Aemilius himself a
wise man, as the same Author there witnesses, congratulated the Moons
delivery from an Eclipse, with a solemn sacrifice, as soon as she shone out
bright again, which action of his that prudent Philosopher and sage Historian
not relates only, but approoueth and commends as a sign of godliness and
devotion, yea this Heathenish and sottish custom of releeuing the Moon in
this case by noise and outcries, the Christians it seems borrowed from the
Gentiles, as appears by S. Ambrose in his eighty and third Sermon, where he
most sharply checks his Auditors for their rude and uncivil, nay profane and
irreligious Ser. 83, vel 82. Maximus Taurinensis has an Homily to the same
purpose, and in the same words.
carriage in this very point: And because his discourse there is not only smart
and piercing, but marvailous punctual and pertinent in regard of the question
in hand, I hope it will not be thought time or paper misspent, if I set it
down as there I find it. Who would not grieve at it that you should so far
forget your souls health, as you should not blush to call Heaven as a witness
to your sin. For when I lately preached unto you touching your covetousness,
even the same day at Evening there was so great a shouting of the people, that
your profaneness pierced the Heavens. I inquired what the meaning of that
noise might be: it was told me that with your outcries you relieved the
Moon, being then in travel, and succored her faintings with your shouting:
which when I heard, in truth I could not choose but laugh and wonder at your
vanity, that like devoute Christians you thought to bring aid to God, for it
seems you cried, least by means of your silence he might perchance loose one
of his noblest Creatures; or as if being weak and impotent he could not
maintain those lights himself had created, but by the assistance of your
voices. And surely ye do very well in that you succor the Deity, that by your
help he may govern heaven. But would ye do it to purpose indeed, then must
ye watch every night and all night. For how often trow ye is the moon eclypsed
while you sleep, and yet she falls not from heaven: Or is she always eclypsed
in the night, and not likewise in the day time? But then only it seems is the
moon eclypsed with you, when your bellies are well stuffed with a full supper,
and your brains steeled with full pots; then only the Moon labors in heaven,
when the wine labors in your heads; then is her circle troubled with charms,
when your sight is dazzled with over much qua^ing. How can thou then discern
what befalls the Moon in heaven, when thou can not discern what is done
near thee on earth, herein is that plainly verified which holy Solomon
foretold, a fool cha^geth as the Moon: Thou changest like the Moon, when
being ignorant of the Eccles. 27. 11.
motion thereof, thou who werst a Christian before, now beginnest to be
sacrilegious; for sacrilege thou committest against thy Creator, when thou
imputest such impotency to the Creature: Thou then changest like the moon,
when thou who before shinedst in the devotion of faith, now fallest away through
the weakness of unbelief: thou changest like the moon, when thy brain is as
void of wit, as the moon is of light, and I could wish thou did indeed
change as the moon for she quickly returns again to her fulness, but thou
by leisure to the use of thy wits; she soon recovers her light, but thou
slowly the faith which thou have denied. Thy change then is worse then that of
the moon; she suffers an Eclipse of her light, but thou of thy souls health.
But willsome man say, is not the moon in labor then? yes indeed she labors,
it cannot be denied: but she labors with the other creaturess, as the
Apostle Romans 8.
speaks, we know that the whole Creature groaneth and travelleth in pain
until now; and again, the Creature it self shall also be delivered from the
bondage of Corruption. It shall be freed from bondage. You see then that the
moon does not labor with charms, but with dutiful observances, not with
dangers, but with useful offices, not to perish, but to serve. For the
Creature is made subject to vanity not willingly, but by reason of him who has
subjected the same, So that the Moon is not willingly changed from her
condition, but thou wittingly and willingly robbest thy self of thine own
reason. She by the condition of her nature suffers an Eclipse, thou by consent
of thine own will, art drawn into mischief. Be not then as the moon when
she is eclypsed, but as when she fills her circle with light. For of the
righteous man it is written, He shall be established for ever as the moon,
and as the faithful witness Ps. 89. 37.
in heaven.

By which witty discourse of S. Ambrose, it plainly appears that in his
judgment, the moon suffered nothing by her Eclypse, which opinion of his is
confirmed not only by the testimony of Aristotle, in the eight of the
Metaphysickes, but by the evidence of reason, it being caused by the shadow of
the earth, interposed between the Sun and the Moon, as in exchange or
revenge thereof, (as Pliny speaks,) the Eclypse of the Sun is caused by the
interposition of the moon, betwixt the Lib. 2. cap. 10.
earth and it. The moon so depriving the earth, and again the earth the moon
of the beams of the Sun: Which is the true cause that in the course of
nature, the Moon is never eclypsed but when she is full, the Sun and she
being then in opposition; nor the Sun, but when it is new-moone; those two
Planets being then in conjunction: I say, in the course of Nature, for the
Eclypse at our Saviors passion, was undoubtedly supernatural: Quam Solis
obscurationem non ex canonico Syderum cursu accidisse satis ostenditur quod
tunc erat Pascha Iudaeorum. Nam plena Luna solenniter agitur, says S.
Augustine. It is evident that that Eclipse of the Sun happened not by the
ordinary and orderly course of the stars, Lib. 3. de. Civit. Dei, cap. 15.
it being then the Passover of the Jews, which was solemnized at the full
moon; And this was it, that gave occasion, as is commonly belecued, to that
memorable exclamation of Dennys the Areopagite, being then in Egypt: Aut Deus
Naturae patitur, aut machina mundi dissolvetur, either the God of Nature
suffers, or the frame of Nature will be dissolved. And heerevpon too, as it is
thought by some, was erected that Altar at Athens, Ignoto Deo, To the unknown
God: Though others think that Eclypse was confined within the borders of
Judea; howsoever it cannot Act. 17. 23.
be denied, but that it was certainly beside and above the course of Nature.
Neither ought it seem strange, that the Sun in the firmament of heaven,
should appear to suffer, when the Sun of Righteousness indeed suffered upon
earth.

But for other Eclypses, though their Causes be now commonly known, yet the
ignorance of them was it, which caused so much superstition in former ages, and
left that impression in men's minds, as even at this day wise men can hardly
be persuaded, but that those Planets suffer in their Eclypses, which in the
Sun is most childish and ridiculous to imagine, since in it self, it is not
so much as deprived of any light, nor in truth can be: it being the fountain
of light, from which all the other stars borrow their light, but pay nothing
back again to it, by way of retribution. Which was well expressed by
Pericles, as Plutarch in his life reports it, For there happening an Eclypse of
the Sun, at the very instant, when his Navy was now ready to lanch forth, and
himself was embarked, his followers began to be much apald at it, but
specially the Master of his own gally, which Pericles perceiving, takes his
cloak and with it hoodwinkes the Masters eyes, and then demands of him what
danger was in that, he answering none, neither says Pericles is there in this
Eclypse, there being no difference betwixt my cloak and that Veil, with which
the Sun is covered, but only in bigness. And the truth is that the Sun then
suffered no more by the intervening of the Moon, then from Pericles his
cloak, or daily does from the clouds in the air which hinder the sight of
it, or by the interposition of the Planet Mercury, which has sometimes
appeared as a spot in it; But whether these Eclypses either cause or presage
any change in these inferior Scalig. Exer. 72.
bodies, I shall have fitter occasion to examine heareafter, and so pass from
the consideration of the substance, to the motion of the heavenly bodies.

CAP. 2. Touching the pretended decay of the heavenly bodies in regard of their
motions.
SECT. 1. The first reason, that there is no decay in the motions of the
heavenly bodies, drawn from the causes thereof
MOtion is so universal and innate a property, and so proper an affection to
all natural bodies, that the Great Philosopher knew not better how to define
Nature, then by making her the Enginer and Principle of Motion: And therefore
as other objects, are only discernable by one sense, as colors by seeing, and
sounds by hearing, motion is discernable by both, nay and by feeling too, which
is a third sense really distinguished from them both. That there is in the
heavenly bodies no motion of Generation or Corruption, of augmentation, or
diminution, or of alteration, I have already showed. There are also who by
reason of the incredible swiftnes of the first Mouer, and some other such
reasons, dare deny that there is in them any Lation or Local motion, herein
Copernicus.
flatly opposing in my judgment both Scripture and Reason, and Sense; But to
take it as granted, without any dispute, that a Local motion there is, which
is the measure of time, as time again is the measure of motion, the line of
motion and the thread of time, being both spun out together: Some doubt there
is touching the moouer of these heavenly bodies, what or who it should be,
some ascribing it to their matter, some to their form, some to their figure,
and many to the Angels, or Intelligences, as they call them, which they
suppose to be set over them. For mine own part, I should think that all
these and every of them might not unjustly challenge a part in that motion: The
matter as being neither light nor heavy, the form as well agreeing with such a
matter, the figure as being Sphericall or Circular, the Intelligence as an
assistant: In the matter is a disposition; For whereas light bodies naturally
move upward, and heavy downward, that which is neither light nor heavy is
rather disposed to a Circular motion, which is neither upward nor downward. In
the figure is an inclination to that motion, as in a wheel to be carried
round, from the form an inchoation or onsett, and lastly from the Intelligence
a continuance or perpetuation thereof, as a great Divine of our own both age
and Nation has well expressed it, Gods own Hooker, Eccles. Policy, 5. 69.
aeternity,) says he) is the hand which leads Angels in the course of
their perpetuity, their perpetuity the hand that draws out Celestial motion,
that as the Elementary substances are governed by the heavenly: so might the
heavenly by the Angellicall. As the corruptible by the incorruptible, so the
material by the immateriall, and all finits by one infinite. It is the joint
consent of the Platoniks, Peripatetiks, and Stoikes, and of all the noted sects
of Philosophers; who acknowledged the Divine Providence, with whom agree the
greatest part of our most learned and Christian Doctors, that the Heavens are
moved by Angels, neither is there in truth any sufficient means beside it to
discover the being of such Creatures by discourse of Reason. Which to me is a
strong argument, that the Heavens can by no means err, or fail in their
motions, being managed by the subordinate ministry of such indefatigable and
unerring guides, whose power is every way proportionable to their knowledge,
and their constancy to both.

SECT. 2. The Second reason taken from the Certainty of demonstrations upon the
Celestial globe: The Third, from a particular view of the proper motions of
the Planets, which are observed to be the same at this day, as in former ages
without any variation: The Fourth, from the infallible and exact praediction of
their Oppositions, Conjunctions, and Eclypses for many ages to come: The Fifth,
from the testimony of sundry grave Authors, auerring perpetual Constancy and
immutability of their motions.
THe most signal motions of the heavens (beside their retrogradations,
trepidations, librations, and I know not what, which Astronomers have devised
to reconcile the diversity of their observations) are the diurnall motion of
all the fixed stars and Planets, and all the Celestial spheres from East to
West in the compass of every four and twenty hours, and the proper motion of
them all from the West to the East again. These motions whether they perform,
by themselves, without the help of orbs, as fishes in the water, or birds in
the air; or fastened to their spheres, as a gemme in a ring, or a nail or knot
in a Cart-wheele, I cannot easily determine: howbeit I confess we cannot well
imagine how one and the same body should be carried with opposite motions, but
by the help of somewhat in which it is carried, As the Mariner may be carried
by the motion of his ship from the East to the West, and yet himself may
walk from the West to the East in the same ship: Or a fly may be carried from
the North to the South upon a Cart-wheele, and yet may go from the South to
the North upon the same wheel: But howsoever it be, it is evident that their
motions are most even and regular, without the least jarre or discord,
variation or uncertainty, languishing or defect, that may be. Which were it
not so, there could be no certain demonstrations made upon the Globe or
material Sphere: Which notwithstanding by the testimony of Claudian are most
infallible, as appears by those his elegant verses upon Archymedes admirable
invention thereof.

Iuppiter in parvo cum cerneret ether a vitro,
Risit, and ad superos, talia dicta dedit:
Huccine mortalis progressa potentia curae?
Iam meus infragili luditur orb labor
Iura poli, rerumque fidem legesque Deorum
Ecce Syracusius transtulit art senex.
Inclusus varijs famulatur Spiritus astris
Et vivum certis motibus vrget opus
Percurrit proprium mentirus signifer annum
Et simulata nouo Cynthia mense redit.
Iamque suum volvens audax industria Mundum
Gaudet and humana sydera mense regit.
When Jove within a little glass survaid
The Heavens, he smiled, and to the Gods thus said:
Can strength of Mortal wit proceed thus far?
Lo in a frail orb my works mated are.
Hither the Syracusians art translates
Heavens form, the course of things, and humane fates.
Th'included spirit serving the star-deck signs,
The living work in constant motions winds
Th'adulterate Zodiaque runs a natural year,
And Cynthiaes forged horns monthly new light bear,
Viewing her own world, now bold industry
Triumphs and rules with humane power the sky.
The Gentiles says Julian, (as S. Cyrill in his third book against him,
reports it) videntes nihil eoru^ quae circa Coelu^ minui vel augeri neque vlla
sustinere deordinatam affectione^, sed congruam illius motionem ac been op^atu^
ordinem, definitas quoque leges Lunae, definitos ortus and occasus Solis,
statutis semper temporibus, merito Deum and Dei solium suspicabantur: seeing no
part of heaven to deminished or decreased, to suffer no irregular affection,
but the motion thereof to be as duly and orderly performed as could be desired,
the waxing and waning of the moon, the rising and setting of thee sun to be
settled and constant at fixed and certain times, they deservedly admired it as
God, or as the throne of God. The order and regularitie of which motions we
shall easily perceive by taking a particular view of them. I will touch only
those of the Plannets. The proper motion of Saturn was by the Ancients
observed, and is now likewise found, by our modern Astronomers, to be
accomplished within the space of thirty years, that of Jupiter in twelve,
that of Mars in two, that of the Sun in three hundred sixty five days and
almost six hours, that of Venus and Mercury in very near the same space of
time, that of the Moon in twenty seven days and all most eight hours:
Neither do we find that they have either quickened or any way slackned these
their courses, but that in the same space of time they always run the same
races which being ended, they begin them again as freshly as the first instant
they set forth; Cum per certa annorum spacia orbs suos De Consol. ad Albiaum.
cap. 6.
explicuerint iterum ibunt per quae venerant, says Seneca: when in certain
terms of years they shall have accomplished their courses, they shall again
run the same races they have passed. These then be the bounds and limits, to
which these glorious bodies are perpetually tied, in regard of their motion,
these be the unchangeable laws like those of the Medes and Persians whereof
the Psalmist speaks, He has Psalm. 148. 6.
given them a law which shall not be broken: which Seneca in his book of the
Divine Providence, well expresses in other words, Aeternae legis imperio
procedunt, they move by the appointment of an eternal law, that is, a law
both invariable and inviolable. That which Tully has delivered of one of them
is undoubtedly true of all: Saturni stella in suo cursu multa mirabiliter Lib.
2. denarura Deorum.
efficiens, tum ante^edendo, tum retardando, tum vespertinis temporibus
delitescendo, tum matutinis rursum se aperiendo, nihil tamen immutat
sempeternis soeculorum aetatibus, quin eadem ijsdem temporibus efficiat: The
plannet Saturn does make many strange and wonderful passages in his motion,
sometimes going before, and sometimes coming after, sometimes withdrawing
himself in the evening, and sometimes again showing himself in the morning,
and yet changes nothing in the continual duration of all ages, but still at
the same season works the same effects. And in truth, were it not so, both in
that Plannet and in all the other stars, it is altogether impossible they
should supply that use which Almighty God in their Creation ordained them unto,
that is, to serve for signs and seasons, for days and for years, to the
worlds end. And Genesis 1. 14.
much more impossible it were that the year, the month, the day, the hour,
the minute of the Oppositions, Conjuctions and Eclypses of the Plannets, should
be as exactly calculated and foretold one hundredth years before they fall out,
as at what hour the Snnne will rise to morrow morning. Which perpetual
aequability and constant uniformity in the Celestial motions, is both truly
observed and eloque^tly descibedby Boethius.

Si vis celsi jura Tonantis
Pura solers cernere mente, Lib. 4. de consol. Philosophiae. Met. 6.

Aspice summi culmina Coeli;
Illic justo foedere rerum
Veterem servant syder a pacem.
Non sol rutilo concitus igne
Gelidum Phebes impedit axem.
Nec quae summo vertice mundi
Flectit rapidos vrsa meatus
Vnquam occiduo lota profundo
Caetera cernens syder a mergi
Cupit Oceano tingere flammas.
Semper vicibus temporis aequis
Vesper ser as nunciat vmbras
Revehitque diem Lucifer almum.
Sic alternos reficit cursus
Alternus amor, sic astrigeris
Bellum discors exulat or is.
If thou with pure and prudent mind
The laws of God would see
Look up to heaven and thou shall find
How all things there agree.
In peace the stars their courses run
Nor is the Moons cold sphere
Impeached by the scorching Sun,
Nor does the Northern bear
Which swift about the Pole does move
Though other stars he see
Drencht in the Western Ocean, love
His flames there quenched be.
Nights late approach by courses due
The evening star does show
And morning star with motion true
Before the day does go:
Thus still their turns renewed are
By enterchanging love:
And war and discord banished far
From starry skies above,
And no less wittily by Manilius, Lib. 1.


Nec quicquam in tanta magis est mirabile mole
Quam ratio; and certis quod legibus omnia parent,
Nusquam turba nocet, nihil vllis partibus errat.
There is not ought that is to be seen in such a wondrous mass,
More wonderful and strange then this that Reason brings to pass:
That all obey their certain laws which they do still prefer,
No tumult hurts them, nor ought in any parr does err.
Wherewith the Divine Plato accords, Nec errant, nec praeter antiquum ordinem
In Epino^.
revolvuntur, neither do they run random, nor are they rolled beside their
ancient order. And Aristotle breaks out into this passionate Arist. de Mundo
admiration thereof, Quid unquam poterit aequari coelesti ordini, and
volubilitati, cum syder a convertantur exactissima norma de alio in aliud
seculum: What can ever be compared to the order of the Heavens, and to the
motion of the Stars in their several revolutions, which move most exactly as
it were by a rule and square, by line and level from one generation to another.

There were among the Ancients not a few, nor they unlearned, who by a strong
fancy conceived to themselves an excellent melody made up by the motion of the
Celestial Spheres. It was broached by Arist. l. 2. de coelo, cap. 9.
Pythagoras, entertained by Lib. 10. de Rep.
Plato, stiffely maintained by In lib. 2. de Somnio Scipionis cap. 3.
Macrobius and some Christians, as Lib. de Musica
Beda, Lib. de Musica cap. 2.
Boethius, and Lib. deimag. mundi cap. 24.
Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury: but Aristotle puts it off with a jest, as
being Lepide and musice dictum, factu autem impossible, a pleasant and
musical conceit, but in effect impossible, inasmuch as those Bodies in their
motions make no kind of noise at all. Howsoever it may well be that this
conceit of theirs was grounded upon a certain truth, which is the Harmonicall
and proportionable motion of those Bodies in their just order, and set courses,
as if they were ever dancing the rounds or the measures. In which regard the
Psalmist tells us that the Sun knows his going down, he appointed the Moon
for seasons, and the Sun knows his going down. Which words of his may not
be taken in a proper, but in a figurative sense; The Prophet thereby Psalm. 104.
19.
implying, that the Sun observes his prescribed motion so precisely to a
point, that in the least jot he never erreth from it: And therefore is he said
to do the same upon knowledge and understanding, Non quod animatus sit aut
ratione vtatur, says Basil upon the place, sed quod juxta terminum divinitus
praescriptum ingrediens, semper eundem cursum servat, ac mensur as suas
custodit: Not that the Sun has any soul, or use of understanding, but because
it keeps his courses and measures exactly according to Gods prescription.

SECT. 3. The same truth farther proved from the testimony of Lactantius and
Plutarch.
LActantius from hence gathers two notable Conclusions, the one, Lib. 2.
Instit. cap. 5.
that the Stars are not Gods as the Gentiles commonly imagined, the other,
that they are governed by God, which the Epicurians denied: for the former of
those, says he, argumentum illud quo colligunt vniversa coelestia Deos esse in
contrarium valet. Nam si Deos esse idcirco opinantur, quia certos and
rationabiles cursus habent, errant: Ex hoc enim apparet Deos non esse quod
exorbitare illis apraestitutis itineribus non licet; caeterum si Dij essent huc
atque illuc passim sine vlla necessitate ferrentur, sicut animantes in terra,
quorum quia liberae sunt voluntates, huc atque illuc vagantur vt libet, and
quocunque men's duxerit eo feruntur. That argument from whence the Heathen do
collect that the Stars must needs be Gods, does most plainly prove the
contrary: For if they take them to be Gods, because of the certainty of their
courses, they be therein much deceived: for this plainly prooveth, that indeed
they be no Gods, because they be not able to depart from their set courses.
Whereas if they were Gods, they would move both this way and that way in the
Heavens, as freely as living Creatures do upon the earth, who because they
have the liberty and freedom of their will they wander up and down whither
they themselves please. And for the latter, tanta rerum magnitudo, says he,
tanta dispositio, tanta in servandis ordinibus, temporibusque constantia, non
potuit aut olim sine provido Artifice oriri, aut constare tot seculis sine
incola potente, aut in perpetuu^ gubernari sine perito and sciente rectore,
quod ratio ipsa declarat. Such a greatness in their creation, such a comeliness
in their order, such a constancy in observing both their courses and their
seasons, could never either at first have been framed without a cunning hand,
or so long have been preserved without a powerful inhabitant, or so wisely
have been governed without a skillful Regent, as even reason it self makes
it plain and evident. And Plurarch affirms generally of all men, that the
very first motive that lead them unto God was that orderly motion whereby the
stars are carried. Homines caeperunt Lib. 1. De Placitis Philosophorum c. 6.
Deum agnoscere cum viderent stellas tantam concinnitatem efficere, ac dies,
noctesque aetate ac hyeme, suos servare statos ortus atque obitus. Men began
first to acknowledge a God when they considered the stars to maintain such a
comeliness, and both day and night in summer and winter to observe their
designed risings and settings.

SECT. 4. An objection of Du Moulins touching the motion of the Polar Star
answered.
ANd thus I hope the Heavens are sufficiently discharged from any imputation of
Decay in regard of their motion, the constant regularity whereof, we find to
have been observed and admired by the most learned of all ages: It remains
now that I should proceed to the examination of the other qualities thereof,
which before I attempt, it shall not be amiss to remove a rub cast in our way
by Du Moulin a famous French Divine, in his Book entitled, The accomplishment
of Divine Prophesies, touching the motion of the Polar star, his In cap. 5.
Apocal part 5.
words are these, or to this purpose. Astrology also does lend us some light
in this matter; For in the year of the World three thousand six hundred sixty
five, Ptolomaeus Philadelphus reigning in Egypt some four hundred sixty nine
years after the building of Rome, there lived one Hipparchus a famous
Astrologer, who reports that in his time the star commonly called the Polar
star, which is in the tail of the lesser Bear, was 12 degrees and two
fifths distant from the Pole of the Equator. This star from age to age has
insensibly still crept nearer to the Pole, so that at this present it is not
past three degrees distant from the Pole of the Equator. When this star then
shall come to touch the Pole, there being no farther space left for it to go
forward) which may well enough come to pass within five or six hundredth
years) it is likely that then there shall be a great change of things, and
that this time is the period which God has presixed to Nature. A bold
conjecture of a man so well versed in holy Scriptures and in other matters so
modest; as if God had written in the Heavens the period of times, or had so
written it as any mortal eye could discern it, his beloved Son professing,
that it is not for us to know Act. 1. 7.
the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own power. And as the
Conjecture is bold, so is it built upon as sandy a foundation which is, that
the Pole Star shall draw so near the Pole as to touch it, or shall ever be
brought to those straits, as it shall find no passage to go forward, whereas
it is certain, it shall ever remain in some certain distance from the Pole,
twenty six or twenty seven minutes at the least. True indeed it is, that about
five hundred years hence, if the World last so long, it shall then approach
the nearest, but then shall it withdraw it self again by degrees to as remote
a distance as it ever was before; As it heretofore has been the most
Southerly star in that Asterisme, and is now become the most Northerly: so in
process of time it may become the most Southerly again: But from hence to
infer that the Poles of the Equator are moveable, is inconsequent, and
incompatible with the most received and best approved grounds of Astronomy.
Besides, other fixed stars have their times of access and recesse, to and
fro^the Pole, as well as this: so that the motion of this can no more point out
the period of Nature, then of those: All which Du Moulin himself either by his
own observation or advertisement from others well perceiving, in a latter
Edition of that book printed at Sedane in the year one thousand six hundred
thenty one, has well mended the matter, by changing some words. For instead of
this in the first edition; From hence it appears that the Poles of the
Equatour are moveable, in the second, he has thus changed it: It being
certain, and observed by long experience, that the fixed stars move from the
West to the East in a motion parallel to the Eclyptique. In his first edition,
he says: When this star shall come to touch the Pole, there being no
further space left for it to go forward, but in his second he changes it
thus, when this star shall approach the Pole as near as it can: Again in
his first thus, which may well come to pass within these five or six hundred
years, in his second thus, which may well come to pass within sieve hundred
years: Lastly in his first thus, it seems that this time is the period which
God has prefixed to Nature, in his second thus, it seems that some notable
period shall then expire. And surely I cannot but as much commend his modesty
in this second change, as I found it wanting in his first conjecture, and I am
of opinion that S. Augustine never purchased more true honor by any book that
ever he writ, then that of his Retractations, the shame is not so much to
err, as to persevere in it being discovered. Specially if it be an error
taken up and entertained, by following those, whom for their great gifts we
highly esteem and admire, as it seems Du Moulin took his error at leastwise
touching the moueablenes of the Poles of the Equatour, from Joseph Scaliger:
But the motion of the heavens puts me in mind of passing from it to the light
thereof.

CAP. 3. Touching the pretended decay in the light of the heavenly bodies.
SECT. 1. The first reason that it decays not, taken from the nature of that
light, and those things whereunto it is resembled.
AS the waters were first spread over the face of the earth: so was the light
dispersed through the firmament: and as the waters were gathered into one heap,
so was the light knit up, and united into one body: As the gathering of the
waters was called the Sea, so, that of the light was called the Sun. As the
rivers come from the sea* so is all the light of the stars derived from the
Sun: And lastly, as the Sea is no whit leassened though it furnish the Earth
with abundance of fresh rivers: So though the Sun have since the Creation,
both furnished, and garnished the world with light, neither is the store of it
thereby diminished, nor the beauty of it any way stained. What the light is,
whether a substance or an Accident, whether of a Corporal or incorporall
nature, it is not easy to determine. Philosophers dispute it, but cannot well
resolve it. Such is our ignorance, that even that by which we see all things,
we cannot discern what it self is. But whatsoever it be, we are sure that
of all visible Creatures, it was the first that was made, and comes nearest the
nature of a Spirit, in as much as it moves in an instant from the East to the
West, and piercing through all transparent bodies, still remains in it self,
unmixed and undivided; it chaseth away sad and mellancholy thoughts, which
the darkness both begets and mainetaines; it lifts up our minds in
meditation to him who is the true light, that lightneth every man that comes
into the world, himself dwelling in light inaccessible, and clothing himself
with light as with a garment. And if we may behold in any Creature any one
spark of that eternal fire, or any far off dawning of Gods glorious
brightness, the same in the beauty, motion, and virtue of this light may best be
discerned. Quid pulchrius luce, says Hugo de sancto Victore, quae cum in se
colorem non habeat, omnium tamen rerum colores ipsa quodammodo colorat. What is
more beautiful then the light, which having no color in it self, yet sets a
luster upon all colors. And S. Ambrose, vnde vox Dei in Scriptura debuit inch
oar nisi a lumine? Vnde mundi ornatus nisi a luce exordium sumere! frustra
enim esset si non ^ideretur. From whence should the voice of God in holy
Scripture begin, but from the light? From whence should the ornament of the
world begin, but likewise from the same light? For in vain it were, were it
not seen.

O Father of the light, of wisdom fountain,
Out of the bulk of that confused mountain Bartas.

What should, what could issue before the light
Without which, Beauty were no Beauty hight.
SECT. 2. The second, for that it has nothing contrary unto it, and here
Pareus and Mollerus are censured for holding that the light of heaven is
impaired.
S. Augustine in diverse places of his works is of opinion, that by the first
created light were understood the Angels, and herein is he followed by Beda,
Eucherius, Rupertus and diverse others. Which opinion of his though it be
questionless unsound, in as much as we are taught that that light, sprang out
of darkness, which of the Angels can in no sort be verified, yet it shows
the 2 Cor 4. 6
lightsome nature of Angels, so likewise the Angelical nature of light, still
flourishing in youth, and no more subject to decay or old age, then the Angels
are. Since then in the properties thereof, it comes so near the nature of
Spirits, of Angels, of God, me thinks they who dare accuse the heavens, as
being guilty of decay and corruption in other respects, should yet have spared
the light thereof. The more I wonder that men reverenced for their learning,
and reputed lights of the Church, should by their writings go about to quench
or blemish this light. Videntur haud parum elanguisse minusque nitidi esse quam
fuerant initio, says Pareus in Epistolam ad Hebraeos, c. 1, v. 11.
one speaking of the heavenly bodies. They seem to hame suffered not a little
defect, and to have lost of that brightness, in which they were at first
created. And another: Non est nunc illa claritas luminis, nec sunt illae
stellarum vires quae fuerunt. There is not now that brightness Moll^r, in Psalm.
102. v. 27.
of the light, nor those virtues of the stars that have been. Venturous
assertions, and such I believe, as would have pusled the Authors of them to
have made them good, specially considering that as there is nothing contrary to
the Quintessentiall matter, and circular figure of the Heavens: So neither is
there to the light thereof. Fire may be quenched with water, but there is
nothing able to quench the light of Heaven, save the power of him that made it.
Again fire may be extinguished by withdrawing or withholding the fuel upon
which it feeds: But the light of heaven having no matter by which it is
nourished; there is no fear of the failing thereof through any such defect and
for the matter of the Celestial spheres and stars, in which it is planted,
it has already sufficiently appeared, that it neither is, nor in the course of
Nature can be subject to any impairing alteration: And so much Pareus himself
has upon the matter confessed in two several places in his Commentaries upon
the first of Genesis, whereof the first is this, v. 6.
speakeing of the firmament and the Epithetes of iron and brass, given it in
holy Scriptures, and by profane Authors, Haec Epitheta, says he,
Metaphorice notant Coeli firmitatem, quia tot millibus annorum immutabili lege
circumvoluitur, nec tamen atteritur motu aut absumitur, quia a Deo sic est
firmatum initio. These Epithetes metaphorically signify the firmenes and
stablenes of heaven, because by an unchangeable law it has now wheeled about
so many thousand years, and yet is it not wasted or worn by the motion
thereof, because it is established by God. And again within a while after, he
uses almost the same words, firmamentum non dicitur de duritie aut
soliditate, impermeabili, sed de firmitate qua perpetuo motu circumactum coelum
non atteritur, nec absumitur, sed manet quale a Deo initio fuit firmatum. Nay a
little before that last passage, dividing the whole firmament or Expansum,
containing all the Celestial Spheres and regions of the air, into two parts;
The higher, says he, (thereby intending the heavenly bodies) is purissima,
and incorruptibilis, and inalterabilis; most pure, incorruptible, and
inalterable. Now if it should be demanded, how the Heaveus may be said to
languish, and to have lost of their native brightness, and yet still to remain
incorruptible and inalterable, for mine own part, I must profess, I cannot
understand it, nor know which way to reconcile it. A number of the like
passages may be observed in the writings of our latter Divines: but I
sparetheir names for the reverence I bear their gifts, and places, and
persons, and so proceed.

SECT. 3. Hereunto some other reasons are added, and the testimony of
Eugubinus vouched.
I Remember Mr. Camden reports, that at the demolition of our In Yorkshire
Monasteries, there was found in the supposed monument of Constantius Chlorus,
father to the Great Constantine, a burning Lamp which was thought to have
burnt there ever since his burial, about three hundredth years after Christ,
and withal he adds out of Lazius, that the ancient Romans used in that
manner to preserve lights in their Sepulchers a long time by the oylelinesse of
Gold, resolved by Art into a liquid substance. Which if it be so, how much
more easy is it for the Father of lights to preserve those natural lights of
Heaven, which himself has made without any diminution. In artificial lights
we see, that if a thousand Candles be all lighted from one, yet the light of
the first is not thereby any whit abated, and why should we then conceive that
the Sun by imparting his light so many thousand years, should loose any part
thereof. They who mainetaine that the soul of man is derived ex traduce, hold
withal that the Father in begetting the sons soul looses none of his own,
it being tanquam lumen de lumine, as one light from another, nay more then so,
it is the very resemblance that the Nicene Fathers thought not unmeet to
express the inexpressible generation of the second person in Trinity from the
first, who is therefore termed by the Apostle, the brighnes of his glory. As
then the Father by communicating his substance to his son, looses none of his
Hebr. 13.
own, so the Sun by communicating his light to the world, looses no part nor
degree thereof. Some things there are of that nature, as they may be both
given and kept, as knowledge, and virtue, and happiness, and light, which in
holy Scripture is figuratively taken for them all. whether the same individual
light be still resident in the body of the sun, which was planted in it at
the first Creation, or whether it continually empty and spend it self, and so
like a river be continually repaired with fresh supplies; for mine own part I
cannot certainly affirm, though I must confess, I rather incline to the
former: But this I verily believe, that as the body of the Sun is no whit
lessened in extention: So neither is the light thereof in intention: Men being
now no more able to fix their eyes upon it, when it shines forth in its full
strength, then they were at the first Creation thereof. I will conclude this
chapter with that of Eugubinus in his tenth book de Perenni Philosophia.
Futuri interitus, ac senescentiae aliqua jam indicia praecessissent, non
constaret idem Sol, non eadem fulgoris esset plenitudo, idem radiorum vigor,
haec igitur Senectus nusquam est. Had there been in the heavens any such decay
or waxing old, as is supposed, we should have seen some forerunning tokens
thereof: The Sun would not have been like himself, he would not have
retained the same fulness of brightness, nor the same vigor in his beams:
This old age then is no where to be found. Where he takes it as granted,
that none would be so unreasonable, as to affirm that the strength and
cleerenes of the light of heaven is any way abated. Now what has been spoken
of the light, may no less truly be verified of the warmth and influence
thereof, which spring therefrom, and now succeed in their order to be examined.

CAP. 4. Touching the pretended decay in the warmth of the heavenly bodies.
SECT. 1. That the stars are not of a fiery nature, or hot in themselves.
THe light of Heaven, whereof we have spoken, is not more comfortable and
useful, then is the warmth thereof; with a masculine virtue it quickens all
kind of seeds, it makes them vegetate, and blossom, and fructify, and brings
their fruit to perfection, for the use of man and beast, and the perpetuating
of their own kinds, nay it wonderfully refreshes and cheares up, the spirits
of men and beasts, and birds, and creeping things, and not only impartsthe life
of vegetation, but of sense and motion, to many thousand creatures, and like a
tender parent forsters and cherishes it being imparted. Some there are that
live without the light of heaven, searching into and working upon, those bodies
which the light cannot pierce, but none without the warmth, it being in a
manner the universal instrument of Nature, which made the Psalmist say that
there is nothing hid from the heat of the sun. Few things are Psalm. 19. 6.
hid from the light, but from the heat thereof nothing. Our life withthe ligh
of heaven would be tedious and uncomfortable: but without the warmth
impossible. Since then such is the continual and necessary use of the
Coelstiall warmth, as well in regard of the generation, as the preservation of
these inferior bodies, accomodating it self to their several tempers and
uses, in several manners and degrees, it may easily be conceived to be a
matter of marveilous great importance in deciding the maine question touching
Natures decay, to inquire thoroughly into the state and condition of it, (upon
which so many and great works of Nature wholly depend) whether it be decayed or
no, or whether it still abide in the fulness of that strength and activitie
in which it was created. For the better clearing of which doubt, it will be
very requisite first to inquire into the efficient cause thereof, which being
once discovered, it will soon appear whether in the course of nature it be
capable of any such diminution or no.

I am not ignorant that S. Augustine, S. Basil, S. Ambrose, and generally as
many Divines, as held that there were waters, properly so termed, De civit.
Dei. Lib. 11. c. vlt. Hom. 3. in Ge(...). Hexem. 2. 2.
above the starry firmament, held with all that the Sun and Stars caused
heat as being of a fiery Nature, those waters being set there, in their
opinion, for cooling of that heat: which opinion of theirs seems to be
favored by Syracides in the forty third of Ecclesiasticus, where he v. 3. 4.
thus seakes of the Sun, At noone it parcheth the country, and who can abide
the burning heat there of. A man blowing a furnace is in works of heat: but
the sun burns the mountains three times more, breathing out fiery vapors.
Neither were there wanting some among the ancient Philosophers who maintained
the same opinion, as Plato and Plyny, and generally In Tim. Not. Hist. 2. 9.
the whole sect of Stoics, who held that the Sun and Stars were fed with
watery vapors, which they drew up for their nourishment, and that when these
vapors should cease and fail the whole world should be in danger of
combustion, and many things are alleged by Balbus in Ciceroes second book of
the nature of the Gods, in favor of this opinion of the Stoics. But that the
Sun and Stars are not in truth and in their own nature fieric and hot,
appears by the ground already laid touching the matter of the heavens, that it
is of a nature incorruptible, which cannot be, if it were fiery, inasmuch as
thereby it should become liable to alteration and corruption by an opposite and
professed enemy. Besides all fiery bodies by a natural inclination mount
upwards, so that if the stars were the cause of heat, as being hot in
themselves, it would consequently follow that their circular motion should not
be Natural but violent. Whereunto I may add, that the noted stars being so
many in number, namely one thousand twenty and two, besides the Planets, and in
magnitude so great that every one of those, which appear fixed in the
firmament, are said to be much bigger, then The least 18 times. 167 times.
the whole Globe of the water and earth, and the Sun again so much to
exceed both that globe and the biggest of them, as it may justly be styled by
the son of Syrach, instrumentum admirabile a wonderful instrument; which
being so, were they of fire, they would doubtless long Ecclesiastcus 43. 2.
ere this have turned the world into ashes, there being so infinite a
disproportion between their flame and the little quantity of matter supposed
to be prepared for their Fuel. That therefore they should be fed with
vapors, Aristotle deservedly laughs at it, as a childish and ridiculous
device, in as much as the vapors ascend no higher then the middle region of
the air, and from thence distill again upon the water and earth from whence
they were drawn up, and those vapors being uncertain, the flames likewise
feeding upon them must needs be uncertain, and daily vary from themselves
both in quantity and figure according to the proportion of their fuel.

SECT. 2. That the heat they breed springes from their light, and consequently
their light being not decayed, neither is the warmth arising there from.
THe absurdity then of this opinion being so foul and gross, it remains
that the Sun and Stars infuse a warmth into these Subcaelestiall bodies,
not as being hot in themlselues, but only as being ordained by God to breed
heat in matter capable thereof, as they impart life to some creatures and yet
themselves remain void of life, like the brain which imparts Sense to every
member of the body, and yet is it self utterly void of all Sense. But here
again some there are which attribute this effect to the motion, others to the
light of these glorious bodies: And true indeed it is, that motion causes heat,
by the attenuation and rarefaction of the air: But by this reason should the
Moon which is nearer the Earth, warm more then the Sun, which is many
thousand miles farther distant, and the higher Regions of the Air should be
always hotter then the lower, which notwithstanding if we compare the second
with with the lowest is undoubtedly false. Moreover the motion of the
celestial bodies being uniform, so should the heat derived from them in
reason likewise be, and the motion ceasing, the heat should likewise cease, and
yet I shall never believe, that when the Sun stood still at the prayer of
Joshua, it then ceased to warm these inferior Bodies. And we find by
experience, that the Sun works more powerfully upon a body which stands still
then when it moves, and the reason seems to be the same in the rest or motion
of a body warming or warmed, that receives or imparteth heat.

The motion being thus excluded from being the cause of this effect, the light
must of necessity step in, and challenge it to it self; the light then it is,
which is undoubtedly the cause of celestial heat in part by a direct beam,
but more vehemently by a reflexed: for which very reason it is, that the middle
Region of the air is always colder then the lowest, and the lowest hotter in
Summer then in Winter, and at noone then in the morning and evening, the beams
being then more perpendicular, and consequently in their reflection more
narrowly united, by which reflection and union, they grow sometimes to that
fervencie of heat, that fire springs out from them as we see in burning
glasses; and by this artificial device it was that Archimedes, as Galen
reports it, in his third book de Temperamentis, set on fire the Enemies
Gallyes, and Cap. 2.
Proclus a famous Mathematician, practiced the like at Constantinople, as
witnesses Zonaras in the life of Anastasius the Emperor. And very reasonable
me thinks it is, that light the most Divine affection of the Coelelestiall
Bodies, should be the cause of warmth, the most noble, active, and excellent
quality of the Subcoelestiall. These two like Hippocrates twins; simul
oriuntur and moriuntur, they are borne and dye together, they increase and
decrease both together, the greater the light is, the greater the heat; and
therefore the Sun as much exceedes the other stars in heat, as it does in
light. To drive the argument home then to our present purpose, since the light
of the Sun is no way diminished, and the heat depends upon the light, the
consequence to me seems marvailous fair and strong, which is, that neither
the heat arising from the light, should have suffered any decay or diminution
at all.

SECT. 3. Two objections answered, the one drawn from the present habitablenes
of the Torrid Zone, the other from a supposed approach of the Sun nearer the
earth then in former ages.
NOtwithstanding the evidence of which truth, some have not doubted to
attribute the present habitablenesse of the Torride Zone, to the weakness and
old age of the Heavens, in regard of former ages. But they might have remembered
that the Cold Zones should thereby have become more inhabitable by cold, as
also that holding as they do, an universal decay in all the parts of Nature,
and men according to their opinion, decaying in strength as well as the
Heavens, they should now in reason be as ill able to endure the present heat,
as the men of former ages were, to endure that of the same times wherein they
lived, the proportion being alike between the weakness, as between the strength
of the one and the other. But this I only touch in passing, having a fitter
occasion to consider more fully of it hereafter, when we come to compare the
wits and inventions of the Ancients with those of the present times.

That which touches nearer to the quick, and strikes indeed at the very throat
of the cause, is an opinion of very many, and those very learned men, that the
Body of the Sun is drawn nearer the Earth by many degrees then it was in
former ages, and that it daily makes descents, and approaches toward it,
which some ascribe to a deficiencie of strength in the Earth, others in the
Sun, most in both. Bodin out of Copernicus, Reinoldus Method. Hist. cap. 8,
and Stadius, great Mathematicians tell us, that since Ptolomies time, who
lived about an hundred and forty years after Christ, the Sun by clear
demonstrations is found to have come nearer us by one hundred and thirty
semidiameters of the earth, which make twenty six thousand six hundred and
sixty German miles, which are double to the French, as the French are to the
Italian and ours. This wonderful change Philip Melancthon, says he, ad
coelestium, terrestriumque corporum tabescentem naturam referendum putavit,
thought fit to impute to the declining estate of the celestial and
terrestrial Bodies. But if the terrestrial depend upon the celestial, (as
has already been proved, and is the common opinion of all, both Divines and
Philosophers) then what is wanting in the wonted vigor of the celestial,
being supplied by the approach thereof, the terrestrial should still without
any decay remain vnimpaired in their condition. The force of which reason
serves also strongly against them who maintain an habitablenesse under the
Torride Zone, through the weakness of the Sun, and yet withal hold a supply
of that weakness by the nearer approach thereof.

But consulting in this point with both the learned Professors in the
Mathematickes at Oxford, they both jointly agree, that this assertion of the
Suns continual declination; or nearer approach to the Earth, is rather an
idle dream, then a sound position, grounded rather upon the difference among
Astronomers, arising from the difficulty of their observations, then upon any
certain and infallible conclusions. Ptolomy who lived about the year of
Christ one hundred and forty, makes the distance of the Sun from the Earth to
be one thousand two hundred and ten semidiameters of the Earth. Albategnius
about the year eighr hundred and eighty makes it one thousand one hundred
forty six. Copernicus about the year one thousand five hundred and twenty,
makes it one thousand one hundred seventy nine. Tychobrahe about the year one
thousand six hundred, makes it one thousand one hundred eighty two. Now I would
demand, whether the Sun were more remote in Ptolomies time, and nearer in the
time of Albategnius, and then again more remote in the latter ages of
Copernicus and Tycho: which if it were so, then one of these two must needs
follow, that either their observations were notgrounded upon so certain
principles as they pretend, or that the declination of the Sun is uncertain
and variable, not constant and perpetual, as is pretended. But what would
Bodin say if he lived to hear Lansbergius, Kepler, and other famous
Astronomers of the present age, teaching that the Sun is now remote above two
thousand and eight hundred, nay three thousand semidiameters from the Earth,
affirming that Copernicus and Tycho neglected to allow for refractions, which
(as the Optics will demonstrate) do much alter the case.

I will close up this point with ^he censure of Scaliger upon the Patrons of
this fancy, Quae vero nonnulli prodere ausi sunt, solis corpus long Exercit.
99.
propius nos esse, quam quantum ab Antiquis scriptum sit, ita vt in ipsa
deferentis corpulentia locum mutasse videatur, vel ipsa scripta spongijs, vel
ipsi Authors scuticis sunt castigandi. In as much as some have dared to
broach, that the Body of the Sun is nearer the Earth then by the Ancients it
was observed to be, so that it might seem to have changed place in the very
bulk of the Sphere, either the Authors themselves of this opinion deserve to
be chastned with stripes, or surely their writings to be razed with sponges.

SECT. 4. A third objection answered, taken from a supposed removal of the Sun
more Southerly from us then in form^r ages.
AS some have inferred a diminution in the Heavenly warmth from a supposed
nearer approach of the Sun to the Earth, so have others (at leastwise in
regard of the Earth) from the removal thereof more Southerly then in former
ages. But craving in this point likewise the opinion of my worthy friend Master
Doctor Bainbridge Professor in Astronomy at Oxford, he returned me this
answer.

It is the general opinion of Modern Astronomers, that the Sun in our time
goes not so far Southernly from us in Winter, as it did in the time of Ptolomy
and Hipparchus, neither in Summer comes so much Northernly toward us, as
then.

For Ptolemy (above ann. Christ. 140) observed the greatest declination of the
Sun from the Aequinoctiall toward either Pole 23. 51. 20. agreeable to the
observations of Hipparchus 130 years before Christ, and of Eratosthenes before
Hipparchus. Whereupon Ptolemy thought the Suns greatest declination immutable.

But succeeding Ages have observed a difference; for about Anno Christi 830.
many learned Arabians observed the greatest declination of the Sun to be 23.
35. to whom agrees Albategnius, a Syrian, about an. Christ. 880. Yet did not
Albategnius from hence conclude any mutation in the greatest declination of the
Sun; for so small a difference might well happen by error of observations.

Afterward about ann. Christ. 1070. Arzachel a Moore of Spain, observed the
greatest declination of the Sun, 23. 33. 30. who to salve these different
observations invented a new Hypothesis, which yet was not received by
Astronomers of after times, who for many ages followed the greatest declination
of Arzachel without any alteration till the times of Regiomontanus and
Copernicus, for Copernicus by his observations some years before, and after
ann. Christi 1520. affirmed, the greatest declination of the Sun, to be no
more then 23. 28. 24. agreeable to the observations of Regiomontanus, and
Peurbachius some years before him. Copernicus collating his observations with
those of former ages, renewed the Hypothesis of Arzachel; that the Suns
greatest declination was mutable; yet so that it was never greater then 23. 52.
nor less then 23. 28. The difference being only 24. And that in 1717 years it
decreaseth from the former to the latter; and in other 1717 years increases
from this to that again.

According to which Hypothesis of Copernicus, above 65 years before Christ,
the greatest declination of the Sun was 23. 52. From which time accounting
backewards, it was less and less; so that about 1782 years before Christ,
the greatest declination of the Sun, was but 23. 28. from which time
accounting still backewards, it was more and more; till about 3499 years
before Christ, it was again 23. 52.

So after Christ, about the year 1652, the greatest declination of the Sun
by this Hypothesis shall be but 23. 28. and from thence again increase till
it become 23. 52. about the year 3369, after Christ. This opinion of
Copernicus is received by most of this time, some following him (...), others
somewhat varying in the difference of the greatest declination, making it when
it is least (as in our time) not less then 23, 30, and in the Periodicall
restitution thereof.

But to speak freely, I cannot so easily be drawn into this opinion, but
rather think the greatest declination of the Sun, to be (...), immutable,
and for ever the same; For the little difference of a few minutes betwixt us,
and Ptolomy may very well arise (as I formerly said) from the error of
observations by the Ancients. The greatest declination of the Sun from the
Aequinoctiall toward either Pole, being always the same; the Sun cannot go
more Southernely from us, nor come more Northernly toward us, in this, then in
former ages.

But supposing a mutability in the Suns greatest declination, according to
the former Periods; it follows that as the Sun about 65 years before the
Epoche of Christ went from our vertical point more Southernly then now it
does; So, many Ages before Christ, it went no more Southernly, then now it
does; and that many ages after our time, it shall go as far Southernly, as
at the Epoche of Christ.

Secondly, when the greatest declination was most. As then in Winter the Sun
went more Southernly from us then now, so in Summer it came more Northernly and
nearer us, then now.

Again, when the greatest declination is least, (as in our Age) it goes not
so far Southernly from us in Winter, as formerly, neither in Summer comes so
far Northernly.

From which answer it may (as I conceive) be fitly and safely inferred, first
that either there is no such remoueall at all of the Sun, (as is supposed) or
if there be, as we who are situate more Northernly, feel perchance the
effects of the defects of the warmth thereof, in the unkindly ripening of our
fruits and the like, so, likewise by the rule of proportion, must it needs
follow, that they who lie in the same distance from the South-Pole, as we from
the North, should enjoy the benefit of the nearer approach thereof; And they
who dwell in the hottest Climates interiacent, of the abating of the immoderate
fervency of their heat; and consequently, that to the Universal, nothing is
lost by this exchange: And as in this case it may happily fall out, so
undoubtedly does it in many other: from whence the worlds supposed decay is
concluded, We understand not, or at leastwise we consider not, how that
which hurts us helps another nation, we complain (as was before truly
observed out of Arnobius) as if the world were made, and the government thereof
administered for us alone; and hereby it comes to pass, that as he who looks
only upon some libbat or end of a piece of Arras, conceiues perhaps an hand or
head which he sees to be very vnartificially made, but unfolding the whole,
soon finds, that it carries a due and just proportion to the body: So, qui ad
pauca respicit de facili pronuntiat (says Aristotle) he that is so narrow
eyed as he looks only to his own person or family, to his own corporation
or nation, will paradventure quickly conceive, and as soon pronounce, that
all things decay and go backewarde, whereas he that as a Citizen of the
world, and a part of mankind in general takes a view of the Universal, and
compares person with person, family with family, nation with nation suspends
his judgment, or upon examination clearly finds, that though some members
suffer, yet the whole is thereby no way indammaged at any time, and at other
times those same members are again relieved. And from hence my second
inference is, that supposing a mutability in the Suns greatest declination;
look what damage we suffer by his farther remoueall from us in Summer, is at
leastwise in part recompensed by his nearer approach in Winter, and by his
Periodicall Revolutions fully restored. And so I pass from the consideration
of the warmth, to those hidden and secret qualities of the heavens, which to
Astronomers, and Philosophers are known by the name of Influences.

CAP. 5. Touching the pretended decay of the heavenly bodies, in regard of
their Iufluences.
SECT. 1. Of the first kind of influence, from the highest immovable Heaven,
called by Divines Coelum Empyraeum.
HOwbeit Aristotle through those works of his, which are come to our hands, to
my remembrance, has not once vouchafed so much as to take notice of such
qualities, which we call Influenences, and though among the Ancients Auerroes
and Auicenne, and among those of fresher date Picus Mirandula, and Georgius
Agricola Lib. 3. contra Astrolag. c. 5. Lib. 4. and. 5. de Causis subter.
seek to disprove them: Yet both Scripture, and Reason, and the weighty
authority of many great scholars as well Christians as Ethnickes, have fully
resolved me that such there are. They are by Philosophers distinguished into
two ranks, the first is that influence which is derived from the Empyreall
immovable heaven, the palace and Mansion house of Glorified Saints and
Angels, which is gathered from the diversity of Effects, as well in regard of
Plants, as beasts, and other commodities under the same Climate, within the
same Tract and latitude, equally distant from both the Poles, which we cannot
well refer originally to the inbred nature of the soil, since the Author of
Nature, has so ordained, that the temper of the inferior bodies should
ordinarily depend upon the superior, nor yet to the Aspect of the moveable
spheres and stars, since every part of the same Climate, successively, but
equally injoyes the same aspect: It remains then that these effects be
finally reduced to some superior immovable cause, which can be none other
then that Empyreall heaven; neither can it produce these effects by means of
the light alone, which is uniformly dispersed through the whole, But by some
secret quality, which is diversified according to the diverse parts thereof;
and without this, we should not only find wanting that connection, and unity
of order, in the parts of the world, which make it so comely, but withal,
should be forced, to make one of the worthiest pieces thereof void of action,
the chief end of every created being. Neither can this action misbeseeme the
worthiness of so glorious a piece, since both the Creator thereof, is still
busied in the works of Providence, and the Inhabitants in the works of
ministration. John. 5. 17. Heb. 1. 14.


SECT. 2. Of the second kind, derived from the Planets and fixed stars.
THe other kind is that which is derived from the stars, the aspect of
several constellations, the opposition and conjunction of the Planets, and the
like. These we have warranted by the mouth of God himself, in the thirty
eight of Job, according to our last, and v. 31.
most exact Translation; Can thou bind the sweet influences of the
Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? Can thou bring forth Mazzoreth in his
season? Or can thou guide Arcturus with his sons? Know thou the
ordinances of heaven? Can thou set the dominion thereof in the earth? whereby
the ordinances of heaven, it may well be thought is meant the course and order
of these hidden qualities, which without divine and supernatural revelation,
can never perfectly be known to any mortal creature.

Besides, as a wise man of late memory has well and truly observed, it cannot
be doubted, but the stars are instruments of far greater Sr W. R.
use, then to give an obscure light, and for men to gaze on after sun set, it
being manifest that the diversity of seasons, the Winters and Summers, more hot
or cold, more dry or wet, are not so vncertained by the Sun and Moon alone,
who always keep one and the same course, but that the stars have also their
working therein, as also in producing several kinds of mettalls, and
mineralls in the bowels of the earth, where neither light nor heat can pierce.
For as heat peirces where light cannot, so the influence pierces where the heat
cannot.

Moreover if we cannot deny, but that God has given virtues to springs and
fountains, to cold earth, to plants, and stones, and mineralls, nay to the
very excrementall parts of the basest living creatures, why should we rob
the beautiful stars, of their working powers? For seeing they are many in
number, and of eminent beauty and magnitude, we may not think that in the
treasury of his wisdom, who is infinite, there can be wanting, even for every
star a peculiar virtue and operation: As every herb, plant, fruit, and
flower, adorning the face of the earth, has the like. As then these were not
created to beautify the earth alone, or to cover and shadow her dusty face,
but otherwise, for the use of man and beast, to feed them and cure them: so
were not those incomparablely glorious bodies set in the sirmament, to none
other end then to adorn it, but for instruments and organs of his divine
providence so far as it has pleased his just will to determine.

I Will never believe that the Arch-Architect
With all these fires the Heavenly Arches decked
Only for show, and with these glistring shields
TO amaze poor sheepheards watching in the fields. Bartas.

I Will never believe that the least flower that pranks
Our garden borders, or the common banks,
And the least stone that in her warming lap
Our kind nurse Earth does covetously wrap,
Has some peculiar virtue of it own;
And that the glorious Stars of Heaven have none:
But shine in vain, and have no charge precise,
But to be walking in Heavens Galleries,
And through that Palace up and down to clamber,
As golden Guls about a Princes Chamber.
But how far it has pleased the Divine Providence to determine of these
influences, it is hard I confess, to be determined by any humane wisdom.

SECT. 3. That the particular and uttermost efficacy of these influences
cannot be fully comprehended by us.
IF in the true and uttermost virtues of herbs and plants, which ourselves sow
and set, and which grow under our feet, and we daily apply to our several
uses, we are notwithstanding in effect ignorant, much more in the powers and
working of celestial bodies. For (as was said before) hardly do we guess
aright, at things that are upon the earth, and Wisdom. 9. 16.
with labor do we find the things that are before us: but the things which
are in heaven who has searched out? It cannot well be denied, but that they
are not signs only, but at leastwise concurrent causes, of immoderate cold or
heat, drought or moisture, lightning, thunder, raging winds, inundations,
earthquakes and consequently of famine and pestilence, yet such cross
accidents, may and often do fall out, in the matter upon which they work, that
the prognostication of these casual events, even by the most skillful
Astronomers is very uncertain. And for the common Almanackes a man by
observation shall easily find that the contrary to their prediction is commonly
truest.

Now for the things which rest in the liberty of man's will, the Stars have
doubtless no power over them, except it be lead by the sensitive appetite, and
that again stirred up by the constitution and complexion of the body, as too
often it is, specially where the humors of the body are strong to assault, and
the virtues of the mind weak to resist. If they have dominion over Beasts,
what should we judge of Men, who differ little from Beasts, I cannot tell, but
sure I am, that though the Stars incline a man to this or that course of life
they do but incline, enforce they cannot: Education and reason, and most of all
Religion, may alter and over-master that inclination, as they shall produce a
clean contrary effect. It was to this purpose a good and memorable speech of
Cardinal Poole, who being certified, by one of his acquaintance, who professed
Duditius in vi-ta Poli.
knowledge of these secret favors of the stars, that he should be raised and
advanced to great calling in the world, made answer, that whatsoever was
portended by the figure of his birth, ^or natural generation, was cancelled
and altered, by the grace of his second birth, or regeneration in the blood of
his Redemer.

Again we may not forget that Almighty God created the stars, as he did the
rest of the Universal, whose secret influences may be called his reserved and
unwritten Laws, which by his Prerogative Royal he may either put in execution
or dispense with at his own pleasure. For were the strength of the Sarres such
as God had quitted unto them, all dominion over his Creatures, that petition of
the Lords Prayer, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, had
been none other but a vain expense of words and time. Nay be he Pagane or
Christian that so believes, the only true God of the one and the imaginary
Gods of the other, would thereby be dispoyled, of all worship and reverence and
respect. As therefore I do not consent with them who would make those glorious
Creatures of God vertulesse: so I think that we derogate from his eternal and
absolute power and providence to ascribe to them the same dominion over our
immortal souls which they have over our bodily substances, and perishable
natures. For the souls of men loving and fearing God, receive influence from
that divine light it self, whereof the Suns clarity and that of the Sarres is
by Plato called but a shadow, Lumen est vmbra Dei, and Deus est lumen luminis,
Light is the shadow of Gods brightness, who is the light of light.

SECT. 4 That neither of these kinds of influences is decayed in there benign
and favorable effects, but that curious inquisition into them is to be forborne.
NOw then since the Immovable Heaven by the confession of all that acknowledge
it; is altogether inalterable, since the aspect of the fixed constellations,
the conjunction and opposition of the Plannets, in the course of their
revolutions, is still the same, and constant to it self; since for their
number their quantity, their distance, their substance, th^is motion, their
light, and warmth, they are no whit impaired, why should we make any doubt but
that their influence is now likewise as sweet (as God in his conference with
Job teameth it,) as benign, as Job. 38. 31.
gracious, as favorable, as ever in regard of the Elements, thee Plants, the
beasts and man himself: and why should we not believe that education, reason
and eeligion, are now as powerful, as ever to correct and qualify their
unlucky and malign aspects, that the hand of God is no way shartned, but that
he is now as able as ever to control and check his creatures, and make them
work together for the best, to them that love him: As Romans 8. 28.
he did sometime in this very case, for his chosen people: they fought from
heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. He that set the
Sun Judges. 5. 20.
and Moon, at a stand in their walks, and commanded the shadow to retire in
the dyall of Ahaz, he that made a dry path through the red sea, musled the
mouths of thee Lions, and restrained the violence of the fire, so as for a
season it could not burn; has he bound himself to the influetce of a Star,
that he cannot bind it up or divert it, or alter it at his pleasure, and upon
the humble supplication of his servants? no, no, Sanctus dominabitur astris: if
according to Ptolomy the great Master of Judiciary Astrology, wisdom and
foresight overrule the stars, then surely much more devotion and piety. If
the Saints by their prayers command the Devils, and both shut and open Heaven
for rain and drought, as did Elias, then may they as well by virtue of the same
prayer Iam. 5. 17.
stop the influences of the stars, the isntrumental causes of drought and
rain. Be not dismaide then at the signs of heaven, for the Heathen be
dismaide at them. And surely they in whom corrupt Nature Ier. 10. 2.
swayes and reigns, have much more reason to be dismaide at them, then others
in whom Grace and the sense of Godliness prevails. And whiles they fear many
times they know not what, by means of their very fear they fall into that
which they stand in fear of: fear being the betrayer of those succors which
reason affords. Much noise there is at this present, touching the late great
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, and many July 9. 1623
ominous conjectures are cast abroad upon it, which if perchance they prove
true, I should rather ascribe it to our sins then the stars, we need not
search the cause so far off, in the Book of Heaven, we may find it written
nearer at home in our own bosoms: And for the stars, I may say as our
Savior in the Gospel does of the Sabbath, the stars were made for men, and
not men for the stars. they were not created to govern, but to serve him; if
he serve and be governed by his Creator; and if God be on our side, and we on
his, Jupiter and Saturn shall never hurt us; But whatsoever the force of the
stars be, upon the persons of private men, or the states of weale-publiques, I
should rather advise a modest ignorance therein, then a curious inquisition
thereinto, following the witty and pithy counsel of Phavorinus the Philosopher
in Gellius, where he thus speaks. Aut Lib. 14. 6. 1.
adversa eventura dicunt, aut prospera, si dicunt prospera and fallunt, miser
fies frustra expectando, si adversa dicunt and mentiuntur, miser fies frustra
timendo, si vera respondent, eaque sunt non prospera, jam inde ex animo miser
fies antequam e fato fias, si falicia promittunt eaque eventura sunt, tum plane
duo erunt incommoea, and expectatio te spe suspensum fatigabit, and futurum
gaudij fructum spes tibi defloraverit. Either they portend then bad or good
luck, if good and they deceive, thou will become miserable by a vain
expectation, if bad and they lie, thou will be miserable by a vain fear; if
they tell thee true, but unfortunate events, thou will be miserable in mind
before thou art by destiny; if they promise fortunate success, which shall
indeed come to pass, these two inconveniences will follow thereupon, both
expectation by hope will hold thee in suspense, and hope will deflowre and
devour the fruit of thy Content. His conclusion is, which is also mine both
for this point, and this Chapter, and this discourse touching the Heavenly
Bodies; Nullo igitur pacto vtendum est istiusmodi hominibus res futuras
praesagientibus: we ought in no case to have recourse to those kind of men
which undertake the foretelling of casual events, And so I pass from the
consideration of the celestial bodies to the subcoelestial, which by Gods
ordinance depend upon them, and are made subordinate unto them; touching which
and the celestial bodies both together, comparing each with other the Divine
Bartas, thus sweetly and truly sings;

Things that consist of The Elements uniting,
Are ever tossed with an intestiue fighting, Bartas 2 Day of the first week.

Whence springs (in time) their life and their deceasing,
Their diverse change, their waxing and decreasing:
So that, of all that is, or may be seen
With mortal eyes, under Nights horned Queen,
Nothing reteineth the same form and face,
Hardly the half of half an hours space.
But the Heavens feel not fates impartial rigor,
Years add not to their stature nor their vigor:
Use wears them not; but their greene-euer age,
Is all in all still like their pupillage.
CAP. 6. Touching the pretended decay of the Elements in general.
SECT. 1. That the Elements are still in number four, and still retain the
ancient places and properties.
Having thus proved at large, in the former Chapters touching the Heavens,
that there neither is, nor in the course of Nature can be, any decay either in
regard of their matter, their motion, their light, their warmth or influence,
but that they all continue as they were even to this day by Gods ordinance., it
remains that I now proceed to the consideration Psalm. 109. 91.
of the sublunary bodies, that is, such as God and Nature has placed under the
Moon. Now the state of these inferior, being guided and governed by the
superior, if the superior be vnimpaireable, as has been showed, it is a
strong presumption, that the inferior are likewise vnimpaired. For as in the
wheels of a Watch or clock, if the first be out of order, so are the second
and third, and the rest that are moved by it: so if the higher bodies were
impaired, it cannot be but the lower depending upon them, should taste thereof,
as on the other side the one being not impaired, it is more then probable that
the other partake with them in the same condition. Which dependence is well
expressed by Boeshius, where having spoken of the constant regularity of the
heavenly bodies. he thus goes on.

Haec concordia temperat aequis
Elementa modis, vt pugnantia De Consol. lib. 4 Hec. 6.

Vicibus cedant humida siccis,
Iungantque fidem frigora flammis,
Pendulus ignis surgat in altum,
Terraeque graves pondere sidant
Iisdem causis vere tepenti
Spirat florifer annus odores,
Aestas Cererem fervida siccat,
Remeat pomis gravis autumnus,
Hyemem defluus irrigat imber,
Haec temperies alit and profert,
Quicquid vitam spirat in orb
Eadem rapiens condit and aufert
Obitu me^gens orta supremo,
The concord tempers equally
Contrary Elements,
That moist things yield unto the dry,
And heat with cold consents;
Hence fire to highest place does fly,
And Earth does downward bend,
And flowrie Spring perpetually
Sweet odours forth does send,
Hot Summer harvest gives, and store
Of fruit Autumnus yields,
And showers which down from Heaven do power,
Each Winter drown the fields:
What ever in the world does breath,
This temper forth has brought,
And nourished: the same by death
Again it brings to naught.
Among the subcoelestiall bodies following Natures method, I will first begin
with the consideration of the Elements, the most simple and universal of them
all, as being the Ingredients of all mixed bodies, either in whole or in part,
and into which the mixed are finally resolved again, and are again by turns
remade of them, the common matter of them all still abiding the same.

Here Is nothing constant, nothing still does stay; Bartas.

For birth and death have still successiue sway:
Here one thing springs not till another dye
Only the matter lives immortally.
Th'Almightie's table, body of this All,
(Of changefull chances common Arcenall,
All like it self, all in it self contained,
Which by times flight has neither lost nor gained)
Changelesse in essence, changeable in face,
Much more then Proteus or the subtle race
Of roving Polypes, who (to rob the more)
Transform them hourly on the wauing shore:
Much like the French, (or like our selves their apes)
Who with strange habit do disguise their shapes.
Who loving novels full of affectation,
Receive the manners of each other Nation.
By consent of Antiquity they are in number four, the Fire, the Air, the
Water, and the Earth.

Quatuor aeternus genitalia corpora mundus
Continet: ex illis duo sunt onerosa, suoque
Pondere in inferius tellus, atque vnda feruntur:
Et totidem gravitate carent: nulloque premente
Alta petunt aer, atque aere purior ignis.
Quae quamquam spatio distant; tamen omnia fiunt
Et ipsis, and in ipsa cadunt.
Four bodies primitive the world still contains
Of which, two downward bend the earth and watery plains,
As many weight do want and nothing forcing, higher
They mount, the air and purer streams of fire
Which though they distant be, yet all things from them take
Their birth, and into them their last returns do make.
Three of them show themselves manifestly in mixed, the butter being the
Aieriall part thereof, the whey the watery, and the cheese the earthly: but all
four in the burning of green wood, the flame being fire; the smoke, the air;
the liquor distilling at the ends, the water; and the ashes, the earth.
Philosophy likewise by reason, teaches and proves the same, from their motion
upward and downward, from their second qualities, of lightness and heaviness,
and from their first qualities, either active, as heat and cold, or passive, as
dry and moist. For as their motion proceeds from their second qualities, so do
their second from the first, and their first from the heavenly bodies, next to
which, as being the noblest of them all, as well in purity as activity, is
seated the Element of the fire, (though many of the Ancients, and some latter
writers, as namely Cardane, among the rest seem to make a doubt of it)

Ignis ad aethereas volucer se sustulit aur as 1 de subtle. Manil. 1. Astron^m.

Summaque complexus stellantis culmina Coeli,
Flammarum vallo naturae moenia fecit.
The fire eftsoons up toward heaven did stie,
And compassing the starrie world, advanced
A wall of flames, to safeguard nature by.
Next the fire, is seated the air, divided into three regions, next the air
the water, and next the water the earth.

Who so (sometime) has seen rich Ingots tried,
When forced by fire their treasure they devide
(How fair and softly gold to gold does pass, Bartas.

Silver seeks silver, brass consorts with brass;
And the whole lump, of parts unequal, severs
It self apart, in white, red, yellow rivers)
May understand how, when the mouth divine
Opened (to each his proper place t'assigne)
Fire flew to fire, water to water slid,
Air clung to air, and earth with earth abid.
The veil both of the Tabernacle and Temple, were made of blew, and Exodus 36.
35. 2. Chron. 3. 14. Lib. 6. de Bell. Iudaico, c 6. and l. 15. Antiquit. c. 14.
purple, and scarlet, or crimson, and fine twisted linen: by which four, as
Josephus notes, were represented the four elements; his words are these:
Velum hoc erat Babylonium variegatum, ex hya^intho, and bysso, coccoque and
purpura, mirabiliter elaboratum, non indignam contemplatione materiae
commistionem habens, sed velut omnium imaginem praeferens; Cocco enim videbatur
ignem imitari, and bysso terram, and hyacintho aerem, ac mare purpura, partim
quidem coloribus, bysso autem and purpura origin, bysso quidem quia de terra,
mare autem purpuram gignit, The veil was Babylonish work, most artificially
imbrodered, with blue, and fine linen, and scarlet, and purple, having in it a
mixture of things, not unworthy our consideration, but carrying a kind of
resemblance of the Universal; for by the scarlet, seemed the fire to be
represented; by the linen, the earth; by the blew, the air; and by the
purple, the sea, partly by reason of the colors of scarlet and blue, and
partly by reason of the original of linen and purple, the one coming from
the earth, the other from the sea. And S. Hierome in his epistle to Fabiola,
has the very Epist 128.
same conceit, borrowed, as it seems, from Josephus, or from Philo, who has
much to like purpose, in his third book of the life of Moses: or it may be
from that in the eighteenth of the book of Wisdom, In the v. 14.
long robe was the whole world: As not only the vulgar lattin, and Arias
Montanus, but out of them and the Greek original, our last English
Translation reads it.

The fire is dry and hot, the air hot and moist, the water moist and cold, the
earth cold and dry: thus are they linked, and thus embrace they one another
with their symbolizing qualities, the earth being linked to the water by
coldness, the water to the air by moistnes, the air to the fire by warmth, the
fire to the earth by drought: which are all the combinations of the qualities
that possiblely can be; hot and cold, as also dry and moist, in the highest
degrees, being altogether incompatible in the same subject: And though the
earth and the fire be most opposite in distance, in substance, and in
activity; yet they agree in one quality, the two middle being therein directly
contrary to the two extremes, air to earth, and water to fire.

Water, as armed with moisture and with cold,
The cold-dry earth with her one hand does hold;
With the other the air: The air as moist and warm,
Holds fire with one; water with the other arm: Bartas.

As countrie-maidens, in the month of May,
Merrily sporting on a holy day
And lusty dancing of a lively round
About the May Pole, by the Bag-pipes sound;
Hold hand in hand, so that the first is fast
(By means of those between) unto the last.
But all the linkes of the holy chain which tethers
The many members of the world togethers,
Are such, as none but only he can break them
Who at the first did (of mere nothing) make them.
SECT. 2. That the Elements still hold the same proportions each to other, and
by mutual exchange the same dimensions in themselves.
THese four then, as they were from the beginning, so still they remain the
radical and fundamental principles of all subcoelestiall bodies,
distinguished by their several and ancient Situations, properties, actions,
and effects, and howsoever after their old wont they fight and combat
together, being single; yet in composition they still accord marvelous well.

Tu numeris elementa ligas; vt frigora flammis,
Arida conveniant liquidis, ne purior ignis
Euolet, aut mersas deducant pondera terras. Boethius, l. 3. Met. 9.

To numbers thou the elements do tie
That cold with heat may symbolize, and dry
With moist, least purer fire should sore too high,
And earth through too much weight too low should lie.
The Creator of them, has bound them, as it were, to their good behavior, and
made them in every mixed body to stoop and obey one pre-dominant, whose sway
and conduct they willingly follow. The air being predominant in some, as in
oil, which always swimmes on the top of all other liquors; and the earth in
others, which always gather as near the Center as possiblely they can. And as
in these, they vary not a jot from their native and wonted properties, so
neither do they in their other conditions. It is still true of them, that nec
gravitant nec levitant in suis locis, there is no sense of their weight or
lightness in their proper places, as appears by this, that a man lying in the
bottom of the deepest Ocean, he feels no burden from the weight thereof: The
fire still serves to warm us as it did, the air to maintain our breathing,
the water to cleanse and refresh us, the earth to feed and support us, and
which of them is most necessary for our use is hard to determine: Likewise they
still hold the same proportion one toward another, as formerly they have done:
For howbeit the Peripatetikes, pretending herein the Authority of their Mr
Aristotle, tell us that as 2 de Generat. c. 6.
they rise one above another in situation, so they exceed one another,
proportione decupla, by a tenne-fold proportion, yet is this doubtless a foul
error, or at leastwise a gross mistake, whether we regard their entire
bodies, or their parts; If their entire bodies, it is certain that the earth
exceedes both the water and the air by many degrees: The depth of the waters,
not exceeding two or three miles, and for the most part not above half a mile,
as Mariners find by their line and plummet, whereas the diameter of the
earth, as Mathematicians demonstrate, exceedes seven thousand miles. And for
the air, taking the height of Clauius in Sacrobosc. c. 1. Lib. de Crepusc. l.
10. propos. 60. 7. Perspect.
it from the place of the ordinary Comets, it contains by estimation about
fifty two miles, as Nonius, Vitellio, and Allhazen show by Geometrical
proofs. Whence it plainly appears that there cannot be that proportion
betwixt the entire Bodies of the Elements which is ptetended, nor at any time
was since their Creation. And for their parts, it is as clear by experience,
that out of a few drops of water may be made so much air as shall exceed them
fiuehundred or a thousand times atleast

But whatsoever their proportion be, it is certain that notwithstanding their
continual transmutation, or transelementation, as I may so call it, of one
into another, yet by a mutual retribution it still remains the same that in
former ages it has been, as I have already showed more at large in a former
Chapter: and Philo most elegantly expresses, Egregia Lib. de Mundi
incorrupcibilitate^
quidem est in elementis quaternarum virium compensatio, aequalibus, justisque
regulis ac terminis vices suas dispensantium: sicut enim anni circulus
quaternis vicibus distinguitur, alijs partibus post alias succedentibus, and
per ambitus eosdem vsque recurrente tempore: pari modo and elementa mundi
vicissim sibi succedentia mutantur, and quod diceres incridibile, dum mori
videntur, redduntur immortalia, iterum atque iterum metiendo idem stadium, and
sursum atque deorsum per eandem viam cursitando continue, a terra enim acclivis
via incipit, quae liquescens in aquam mutatur, aquaporro evaperat in aerem, aer
in ignem extenuatur, ac declivis altera deorsum tendit a Capite, igne per
extinctionem subsidente in aerem, aere vero in aquam se densante, aquae vero
liquore in terram crassescente. There is in the Elements a notable compensation
of their fourefold qualities, dispencing themselves by even turns and just
measures. For as the circle of the year is distinguished by four quarters,
one succeeding another, the time running about by equal distances: in like
manner the four Elements of the World by a reciprocal vicissitude succeed one
another: and which a man would think incredible, while they seem to dye, they
become immortal running the same race, and incessantly travailing up and down
by the same path. From the Earth the way rises upward, it dissolving into
water, the water vapors forth into air, the air is rarefied into fire; again
they desce^d down ward the same way, the fire by que^ching being turnedinto
air, the air thickened into water, and the water into earth. Hitherto Philo,
wherein after his usual wont he Platonizes, the same being in effect to be
found in Platoes Timaeus, as also in Aristotle's book de Mundo, if it be his,
in Damascene, Lib. 1. de sid. orth. c 3 De operibus sex dicrum. Ovid. Met. 15.
and Gregory Nyssen. And most elegantly the wittiest of Poets.

-- resolutaque tellus
In liquidas rarescit aquas tenuatur in auras,
Aeraque humor habet dempto quoque pondere rursus
In superos aer tenuissimus emicat ignes.
Inde retro redeunt: idemque retexitur ordo
Ignis enim densum spissatus in era transit
Hinc in aquas tellus glomerata cogitur vnda.
The Earth resolved is turned into streams,
Water to air, the purer air to flames:
From thence they back return, the fiery flakes
Are turned to air, the air thickened, takes
The liquid form of water, and that earth makes.
The four Elements herein resembling an instrument of Music with four
strings, which may be tuned diverse ways, and yet the harmony still remains
sweet, and so are they compared in the book of Wisdom, Cap. 19, v. 17.
The Elements agreed among themselves in this change, as when one tune is
changed upon an instrument of Music, and the melody still remains.

Since then the knot of sacred marriage,
Which joins the Elements, from age to age Bartas.

Brings forth the worlds babes: since their enmities,
With fell divorce, kill whatsoever dies:
And since but changing their degree and place,
They frame the various forms, wherewith the face
Of this fair world is so imbellished,
As six sweet notes, curiously varied
In skillful music, make a hundred kinds
Of heavenly sounds, that ravish hardest minds;
And with division (of a choice device)
The Hearers souls out at their ears entice:
Or as of twice-twelue letters thus transposed,
This world of words is variously composed,
And of these words, in diverse order sown,
This sacred volume that you read is grown.
Who so has seen, how one warm lump of wax
(Without increasing or decreasing) takes
A hundred figures, well may judge of all
Th'incessant changes of this nether ball:
Yet think not that this changing often remises
Ought into naught: it but the form disguises
In hundred fashions, and the substances
Inly, or outly, neither win nor leese.
For all that is made, is made of the first matter
Which in the old nothing made the All-Creator.
All that dissolues, resolves into the same,
Since first the Lord, of nothing made this frame:
Nought's made of naught, and nothing turns to nothing,
Things birth or death change but their formal clothing:
Their forms do vanish, but their bodies bide,
Now thick, now thin, now round, now short, now side*
Vtque novis facilis signatur Cera figuris,
Nec manet vt fuerat, nec formam servat eandem,
Sed tamen ipsa eadem est.
They be the verses of Ovid in the 15 of the Met. but may well be rendered by
those of Bartas touching several prints stamped upon the same lump of wax.

SECT. 3. An objection drawn from the continual mixture of the Elements each
with other answered.
THus then we see that the Elements are still the same, no way impaired in
regard of their portions or proportions: neither do I find any objection
against this of any moment or worthy our notice: Let us now examine whether or
no they be impaired in their qualities, for which I have often heard it
alleged, that their frequent interchange, their continual blending and
mixing together now for the space of so many thousand years, cannot in reason
but much have altered their inbred vigor and original constitution, as
Ilanders, and in them specially their maritine parts are thought by Aristotle,
and commonly by experience are found to be most tainted in their manners, by
reason that lying open to trade, they draw on the commerce and intercourse of
sundry foreign Nations, who by long conversation, debauch them in regard of
their Customs, their language, their habit and natural disposition. But this
allegation is in truth a bare and naked supposition. For though it be true
that such a continual traffic and inter-change there is betwixt the
Elements, yet does it not therefore follow that their qualities should thereby
degenerate, or become more impure, inasmuch as that impurity which by
intercourse they have contracted, by perpetual agitation they purge out
again, and by continual generation each out of other renew their parts, and
so by degrees return to their former estate and purity, Again, for the fire,
if we consider it in it is own sphere, (though as the rest of the Elements, it
be indeed subject to a successiue generation and corruption, in regard of the
parts thereof) yet is it always most pure, which is the reason that it neither
can be seen, as fiery Meteors are, neither can any creature either breed or
live in it. And as for the Air, Water, and Earth, if they were pure, it is
certain they could not be so serviceable as they are. If the Air were pure,
neither men, nor birds, nor beasts could breath in it, as S. Augustine reports
of the hill Olympus, Perhibetur in Olympi vertice aer esse tam tenuis vt neque
sustentare alites De Gen, ad literam. lib. 3. c. 2
possit, neque ipsos qui forte ascenderint homines, crassioris aurae spiritu
alere sicut in isto aere consueverunt: It is said that upon the top of the hill
Olympus, the air is so thin and pure, that it can neither bear up the birds
that offer to fly in it, nor be useful for the breathing of men, if any come
thither, being used to thicker air. Neither could any Meteors, did it still
continue pure, be bred in it: as rain and snow and dewes and frosts and the
like, which notwithstanding are many ways commodious and profitable for the
use of all living creatures, so as they could not live without them. And for
the water if it were pure, it could neither feed the fishes nor bear up
vessels of burden. As likewise if the earth were pure, it would be altogether
Barren, and fruitless, like sand or ashes, not able to nourish the plants that
hang upon the breasts of it. The Elements then being ordained for the ornament
of the world, but cheifely to serve the mixed bodies, there is nothing lost, but
much gained to the whole, by the loss of their purity, nay the restitution and
recovery thereof (if so they were created) would undoubtedly prove the utter
undoing of the whole, as the untainted virginity of either sex would of the
race of mankind; yet for farther satisfaction, it shall not be amiss to
consider these three asunder, in reference to the mixed bodies, the air I
mean, the water and the earth, that so it may appear whether the air be
decayed in it is temper, the water in it is goodness and virtue, the earth in
it is fatness and fruitfullnesse.

CAP. 7. Touching the pretended decay of the air, in regard of the temper
thereof.
SECT. 1. Of excessive drought and cold in former ages and that in foreign
Countries
THat the air is not distempered, more then in former ages, will as I conceive
appear by this, that unseasonable weather, for excessive heat and cold, or
immoderate drought and rain, thunder and lightning, frost and snow, hail and
winds, yea and contagious sicknesses, pestilentiall, Epidemicall diseases,
arising from the infection of the air, by noisome mistes and vapoures, to
which we may add, earthquakes, burning in the bowels of the earth, blazing
Comets, and the like, were as frequent, if not more, in former ages, then in
latter times, as will easily appear to such who please to look either into
the General history of the world at large, or the several Cronicles of
particular nations. Such burning like that of Phaeton, such floods like that of
Ogyges and Deucalion recorded by Orosius, Pliny, S. Augustine, and Varro, the
world has not felt or known since those times. To like purpose I remember
Iustus Lypsius a man rather partial for Antiquity then for the present age,
has written an Epistle upon occasion of a great drought which happened in the
year Epist. Select. 47.
one thousand six hundred and one, and lasted by the space of above four
months, to which he makes his entrance, Non tamen nimis insolens aut nova, et
si nobis sic visa. It is no new or vnusall thing, though to us so it seem:
whereupon he produces sundry instances for excessive heat and drought in
former ages as well from the Roman history, as the German Annals. Among
which the most remarkable, are that in the year one thousand two hundred
twenty eight, the heat was such, that their harvest was fully ended before
Midsommer, or to speak in his words, before the Festival of S. John the
Baptist, which we commonly call Midsomer day. And again two years after, in
the months of July, and August, it continued so fervently hot that men roasted
eggs in the sand.

And least we should think that their immoderate cold, was not answerable to
their heat, he goes on and tells us that in the reign of Lewis son to
Charlemaigne, in the year eight hundred twenty one, the winter was so long and
sharp that not only small brooks and streams, but the Rheine, Danubius,
Albis, the Seen, and generally all the great rivers both of France and Germany
were so hard frozen that for the space of thirty days or more, Laden Carts
passed over them, as it had been upon Bridges.

Vndaque jam tergo ferratos sustinet orbs, Virgill Georgicks. 3.

Puppibus illa prius, patulis nunc hospita plaustris.
The river on it is back now iron wheels sustaines,
And what did ships ere while, now Wagons entertaines.
But in the year one thousand eighty six, the winter continued so bitter that
from S. Martyns day, which is the Eleventh of November, to the first of April,
the Rheine was passible on foot. And for unseasonable cold, in regard of the
time of the year, he reports out of Hermannus Contractus, that in the year
one thousand sixty three, in the midst of April for the space of four days
the weather was so cruel with raging winds and abundance of snow that it killed
their Cattle and birds and destroyed their vines and trees. And lastly he
vouches out of Robertus de Monte that in the year one thousand one hundred
twenty five, it was so sore and biting a winter, that innumerable Eeles by
reason of the long continuance of the Ice, came creeping out of the ditches and
hiding themselves in the meddowes, were there found dead, and rotten by the the
wonderful excess of Cold, and upon the trees scarce appeared there any leaves
till the month of May: his Conclusion is, Quorsum ego ista? vt opinio illa
novitatis eximatur, quae male in omni dolor aut querela blanditur, nunquam
tale, nemini tantum: nugae et plebeii sermones, quos historiae refutent and
serio lectae, hunc quoque Constantiae fructum in animo gignant. But now to what
end are these examples alleged by me? Surely to no other purpose but to work
out of men's minds that opinion of novelty and strangeness, wherewith we
usually flatter our selves in our grief and complaints, never was the like,
no age ever saw or felt it, in such a measure: Trifling speeches, beseeming the
vulgar, but confuted by history, which being accuratly read, may serve to arm
us with constancy against these and the like accidents.

I think we shall hardly read or hear of a sharper frost in latter ages,
then that which Ovid mentions, in the place whither he was banished, at his
being there.

Nudaque consistunt formam servantia testae
Vina, nec hausta meri sed data frusta bibunt. Ovid de Trist*

Bare wines still keeping form of Caske stand fast,
Not gulpes, but gobbets of their wine they taste.
Agreeable whereunto is that of Virgill,

Caeduntque securibus humida vina, Georgick. 3.

And liquid wines with axes do they cleave.
Serres in the life of Francis the first reports, that at the siege of
Luxenbuge, in the year 1543, the weather was so cold, that the provant wine
ordained for the army being frozen, was divided with hatches, and by the
soldiers carried away in baskets. And Tacitus speaking of the Annal, 13. 8.
Romans war in Armenia, tells us that the winter was so sharp, and the
earth so long covered with ice, that they could not pitch their tents, unless
they had first dug the ground; many of their limbs grew stark with
extremity of cold, and many died in keeping the watch, and there was a
soldier noted carrying a faggot, whose hands were so stiff frozen, that
sticking to his burden, they fell from him as though they had been cut from
his arms.

SECT. 2. Of excessive draugh and cold and rain in former ages here at home,
and of the com mon complaint of unseasonable weather in all ages, together with
the reason thereof.
ANd if we look nearer home, we shall find that in the year one thousand
one hundred and fourteen, in the fourteenth year of King Henry the first, the
river of Thames was dried up, and such Survey of London. ex l. Bermun.
want of water there, that between the Tower of London and the bridge, and
under the bridge it self, that not only horse, but a great number of men
women and children, did daily wade over on foot. And for excessive and
unseasonable frosts, rain, snow, hail, winds and the like our stories are
full, specially Stowes Chronicles: and many of them were so immoderate, as we
have had none of latter times comparable thereunto.

Is is true indeed that in general, all Islands, and ours I beeleeue, above
any other in the world, is subject to such uncertainty of weather, that many
times we can hardly distinguish Christmas from Mid-summer, but only by the
length of days: So warm it is at Christmas, and again so stormy and cold at
Mid-summer. And for rain, through the year, I think, we have more then any
where upon the Continent: So that I may justly call our Island Matulam
Planetarum, the Vrinall of the Planets. I will give one instance for all: In
the two and twentieth year of Edward the third, from Midsummer to Christmasse,
for the more part, Hollenshed.
it continually rained: so that there was not one day and night dry together.
But this I take to be, specially for that it is environed by the Sea, and
withal stands so far to the Northwest. Since then it is still situate where
it was, it is likely that the air was here for the most part, tempered or
distempered in former ages, as now it is: Yet I know the complaint is common,
that our summers by reason of cold and moist, are not so kindly as they have
been:

Sternuntur segetes and deplorata colonis
Votajacent, longique perit labor irritus anni:
The corn lies down, the plowman does complain,
His hopes are void, and toiling all the year,
He only has his labor for his pain.
Neither will I altogether deny it, it may be God has a quarrel to us for
our sins, or seeks by this chastisement to draw us nearer to himself: But
what is this to the universal decay of Nature? doubtless the same complaint
has still been in the times of our Fathers, and Grandfathers, and Great
Grandfathers, and so upward in regard of the Generations before them. Nonne
quotidie hoc murmuratis, and hoc dicitis, quam Augustinus in Psalm. 33. in illa
verba: Quis est homo qui vult vitam, and diligit di^s videre b^nos.
diu ista patimur! quotidie peiora and peiora: apud parents nostros fuerunt
dies laetiores, fuerunt dies meliores. O si interrogares ipsos parents tuos,
similiter tibi de diebus suis murmurarent: Fuerunt beati Patres nostri, nos
miseri sumus; malos dies habemus; Do you not daily murmurre and thus say, how
long shall we suffer these things! All things grow worse and worse; Our
Fathers saw better and merrier days: But I wish thou would ask the
question of thy Fathers, and thou shall find them murmurre likewise in regard
of their days: saying, Oh our Fathers were happy, we miserable: we see
nothing but badde days. But had this complaint been as true as ancient, as
just as usual in all ages, we had not been left at this day to renew it: we
should by this time have had no weather to ripen our corn or fruits, in any
tolerable manner. For my self then, mine opinion is, that men for the most
part, being most affected with the present, more sensible of punishments then
of blessings, and growing in worldly cares, and consequently in discontent, as
they grow in years and experience, they are thereby more apt to apprehend
crosses then comforts, to repine and murmurre for the one, then to return
thanks for the other. Whence it comes to pass that unseasonable weather, and
the like cross accidents, are printed in our memories, as it were with red
letters in an Almanacke: but for seasonable and fair, there stands nothing but
a blanke: the one graven in is brass, the other written in water.

SECT. 3. Of contagious diseases, and specially the plague, both here at home
and abroad, in former ages.
NOW for contagious diseases, and specially the plague it self, it is well
known, that this land has now by Gods favor been in a mannerall together This
was writ ten in the last year of King James.
free from it since the first year of his Majesty's reign: whereas heretofore
it has commonly every seven or eight years at farthest spread it self
through the greatest part of the land, and swept away many thousands in the
year one thousand three hundred forty eight, it was so hot in Wallingford a
Town of Barkeshire, that in a manner it dispeopled the Town, reducing their
twelve Churches to one or two which they now only retain. In London Camden in
Barkshire.
it had so sharp and quick an edge, and mowed down such multitudes that
within the space of twelve months, there were buried in one Churchyard
commonly called the Cistersians, or Charterhouse, above Reb. Auesbury and
Tabian.
fifty thousand. They writ further, that through the kingdom it made such a
ravage, as it took away more then half of men, Churchyards Sam Daniell, Ann.
22. Eduardi, 3.
could not suffice to bury the dead, new grounds are purchased for that
purpose: And it is noted, that there died, only in London between the first
of January and the first of July 57374. Other Cities and towns suffering the
like, according to their portions: The earth being every where filled with
graves, and the air with cries. In the tenth year likewise of Edward the
second, there was so great a pestilence, and general sickness of the common
sort, caused by the ill nutriment they Ann: 1317.
received, as the living scaree sufficed to bury the dead.

Now if we cast our eyes abroad under the Emperors Vibius Gallus, and
Volutianus his son, about two hundred and fifty years after Christ, Pompon:
Let^ Zonaras, com. 2.
there arose a plague in Ethiopia, which by degrees spread it self into all
the provinces of the Roman Empire, and lasted by the space of fitteene years
together, without any intermission; and so great was the mortallity, that in
Alexandria, as Dyonisius himself, at that very time Bishop of that sea reports
it, there was not one house of the whole city Eusebius, l. 7. c: 17.
free, and the whole remainder of the inhabitants did not equal the number of
old men in former times: By means whereof S. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, who
lived in the same age, took occasion to write, that his excellent Treatise de
Mortalitate: And Lypsius his censure of this pestilence is, Non alia vnquam
mayor lues mihi lecta, spatio temporum De Constantia, l. 2. c. 22.
sieve terrarum: I never read of a more grievous contagion, whether we regard
the long lasting or the large spreading thereof: Yet was that certainly for
the time more impetuous and outrageous under Justinian, the fiercenes whereof
was such that only in Constantinople and the places near adjoining thereunto,
it cut off at least five thousand, and sometimes ten thousand persons in one
day: Which my self should hardly be drawn, either to report or to believe,
but that I find it recorded by faithful Historiographers of those times.
Neither less wonderful Procopius, l: 11: de bello Persico. Agathias, lib. 5.
Lib: 5. c. 8
was that pestilence in Africa, which snatched away only in Numidia, Octingenta
hominum millia, says Orosius, eight hundred thousand men. Or that under
Michael Duca in Greece, which was so sharp and violent, Vt viui prorsus pares
non essent mortais sepeliendis, they be the words of Zonaras, the living were
no way sufficient to bury the dead. But that which scourged Italy in
Petrarches time, in the year one thousand Lypsiius, vt supra.
three hundred fifty nine, as himself relates it, in my mind exceedes all
hitherto spoken of, there being scarely left alive ten ofa thousand through
the whole country. Whereby the way I cannot let pass, that under David,
though by most Divines held to be supernatural 2. Sam. 24: 15:
and miraculous, in which there died of the people seventy thousand men within
the space of three days.

Now for other infectious ^idemicall diseases in former ages, Pasquier assigns
a whole chapter to them, which he thus intitles, Des maladies qui ont
seulement vnifois Course par La disposition de L' air. Of those diseases Lib: 4:
c: 25:
which have but once had their course through the distemper of the air. Here
with us, we have not heard of late days of any such diseases, as the shaking
of the sheets, or the sweating sickness, touching which, it is very
memorable that Mr Camdem has delivered in his description of Shrewesbury; as
for the cause thereof, says he, let others search it out, for my own part I
have observed, that this malady has run through England thrice in the ages
afore-going, and yet I doubt not but long before also it did the like, although
it were not recorded in writing. First in the year of our Lord 1485, in which
King Henry the seventh first began his reign, a little after the great
Conjunction of the superior Planets in Scorpio. A second time yet more mildly,
although the Plague accompanied it in the 33d year after, Anno 1518, upon a
great opposition of the same Planets in Scorpio and Taurus, at which time it
plagued the Netherlands and high Almany also. Last of all 33 years after that
again in the year 1551, when another Conjunction of those Planets in Scorpio
took their effects: so that by Gods goodness for the space now of these last
seventy three years we have not felt that disease. Twice thirty three years
and more, and the same Conjunction and opposition of the Planets have passed
over, and yet it has not touched us. In the 31 year of King Henry the first,
a terrible murraine of cattle spread through the whole kingdom, in so much as
whole sties of hogs, and whole stalls of oxen were euery-where suddenly
emptied, and it continued so long, vt nulla omnino huius regni villa huius
miscriae immunis alterius incommoda ridere posset, (says Malmesburiensis) so
as no one village was so free from this misery that it could laugh at the
mishap of others. Novel. hist. l. (...)


Now adays we hear not of so frequent, of such foul and fretting kinds of
Leprosies any-where in the World as were anciently among the Jews, they had
the Leprosy of the skin, of the flesh, of the scab, of the Levit. 13.
running sore, of the hair, of the head, and beard: their garments both linen
and woollen were infected with it, so as sometimes it increased and spread it
self in the very garment, though separared from the body of Ibid. v. 55.
the diseased. Nay which is more strange, the walls of their houses were not
free from it: it tainted the very stones and the mortar with greenish and
reddish spots, so as they were forced sometimes to pluck down a part of the
House, sometimes the whole, when no other means was found Levit. 14. 33. etc.
to cleanse it. Now their great multitudes of Lepers appears in this, that
they had so many, and so solemn laws for their trial; for their cleansing,
and for the shutting of them up without the camp. And though we may well
conceive that some of them were stricken with this disease immediately by the
finger of God, as Number. 12. 10.
Myriam, Moses sister for her murmuring, 2. Kings. 5. 27.
Gehazi for his bribery, 2 Kings. 15. 5.
Azariah for his backwardnes in reformation of Religion, 2 Chronicles. 16. 19.
Vzziah for his presumptuous forwardnes in taking upon him the Priests office,
yet those four that sat together expecting the charity of Passengers at the
gate of 2 King. 7. 4.
Samaria, and those ten that our Lnke. 17. 12.
Savior healed at once, show that the number of their ordinary Lepers was very
great.

Lastly, none can be ignorant, that the sickness which we call the French
disease, they the Neapolitane, and the Neapolitanes the Indian, (because we
borrowed it from the French, they from the Spaniards at Naples, and they again
from the Indians) is neither so catching, nor so virulent, not so contagious,
nor so dangerous, as in former times it has been.

SECT. 4. Of earthquakes in former ages, and their terrible effects lively
described by Seneca.
TO the pestilences and other contagious diseases of former ages may be added
the Earthquakes arising likewise from the distemper of the air, though in
another kind. Of these we have heard little in these latter times, or at
leastwise they have been nothing so frequent and fearful as in the days of
our more ancient predecessors, in so much as they chiefly gave occasion to the
composing of that Letany, and therein to the petition against sudden death,
which by public authority is used through the Christian Church at this day by
the force of Earthquakes contrary to the Proverb, Mountains have met; Plin.
2. 83.
The City of Antioch where the Disciples of Christ were first called
Christians, with a great part of Asia bordering upon it, was in Traianes time
swallowed up with an Earthquake, as writes Dion, reporting very Lib. 68.
marvailous things thereof. By the same means at one time were twelve Pliny l.
2. c, 14. Tac. Annal. 2. 10. Lypsius de Constant. l. 1. c. 16.
famous Cities of Asia ouer-turned under the reign of Tiberius. And at an
other time as many towns of Campania under Constantine. And of the dreadfulnes
of this accident, above the pestilence or any other incident to mankind, Seneca
excellcntly discourses in the sixth book of his Cap. 1.
Natural questions: Hostem muro repellam, says he, praeruptae altitudinis.
Castella, vel magnos exercitus, difficultate aditus morabuntur, a tempestate
nos vindicant portus, nimborum vim effusam and sine fine cadentes aquas tecta
propellunt, fugientes non sequitur incendium, adversus tonitrua and minas Coeli
subterraneae domus and defossi iu altum specus remedia sunt, ignis ille
coelestis non transverberat terram, sed exiguo ejus objectu retunditur, in
pestilentia mutare seeds licet, nullum malum sine effugio est, nunquam fulmina
populos percusserunt, pestilens coelum exhausit vrbes non abstulit; hoc malum
latissime patet, inevitabile, avidum, public noxium, non enim domus solum and
familias, aut vrbes singulas haurit, sed gentes totas regionesque subvertit,
and modo ruinis operit, modo in altam voraginem condit, ac ne id quidem
relinquit ex quo appareat quod non est saltem fuisse, sed supra nobilissimas
vrbes sine vllo vestigio prioris habitus solum extenditur. A wall will repel
an enemy, rampires raised to a great height by the difficulty of their access
will keep out powerful armies, An Haven shelters us from a tempest, and the
covering of our Houses from the violence of storms and lasting raines, the
fire does not follow us, if we fly from it, against thunder and the threats of
Heaven, vaults under ground and deep caves are remedies, those blastings and
flashes from above, do not pierce the earth, but are blunted by a little piece
of it oppofed against them; In the time of pestilence a man may change
dwellings, there is no mischief but may be shunned, the lightning never stroke
a whole Nation, a pestilential air has emptied Cities, not ouer-turned them:
but this mischief is large in spreading, unavoidable, greedy of destruction,
generally dangerous. For it does not only depopulate Houses, and Families, and
towns, but lays waste and makes desolate whole Regions and countries:
sometimes covering them with their own ruins, and sometimes ouer-whelming
them, and burying them in deep gulphes, leaving nothing whereby it may so much
as appear to posterity, that that which is not, sometimes was, but the Earth
is levelled over most famous Cities, without any mark of their former
existence.

SECT. 5. Of dreadful burnings in the bowels of Aetna, and Vesuvius, and the
rising of a new Island out of the Sea with hideous roaring near Putzol in Italy.
AS the quakings of the earth were more terrible in former ages, so were the
burnings in the bowels thereof no less dreadful, the one being as it were the
cold and the other the hot fits thereof. The mountain Aetna in Sicilie has
flamed in time past so abundantly that by reason of thick smoke and vapors
arising therefrom, the Inhabitants thereabout could not see one another (if we
may give credit to Cicero) for two days together. And in the year of the
world 3982, it Sands his Relation, lib. 4.
raged so violently, that Africa was thereof an astonished witness. But
Virgils admirable description thereof may serve for all.

-- Horrificis tonat Aetna ruinis
Interdumque atram prorumpit ad aethera nubem;
Turbine fumantem piceo, and candente favilla,
Attollitque globos flammarum and sydera lambit,
Interdum scopulos, avulsaque viscera montis
Erigit eructans, liquefactaque saxa sub aur as
Cum gemitu glomerat, fundoque exaestuatimo.
Aetna here thunders with a horride noise,
Sometimes black clouds evaporeth to skies,
Fuming with pitchie curles and sparkling fires,
Tosseth up globes of flames, to stars aspires:
Now belching rocks, the mountains entrals torn,
And groaning, hurles out liquid stones there borne
Through the air in showers.
But rightly did another Poet divine of this mountain and the burnings therein,

Nec quae sulphurijs ardet fornacibus Aetna Ovid. Met. Lib. 15.

Ignea semper erit, neque enim fuit ignea semper.
Aetna which flames of sulphur now does raise.
Shall not still burn, nor has it burnt always.
The like may be said of Vesuvius in the kingdom of Naples, it flamed with the
greatest horror in the first, or as some say in the third year of the
Emperor Titus: where besides beasts, fishes and foul, it destroyed two
adjoining Cities Herculanum and Pompeios with the people sitting in the
Theater, Pliny the natural Historian, then Admiral of the Roman Navy
desirous to discover the reason was suffocated with the smoke thereof, as
witnesses his Nephew in an epistle of his to Cornelius Tacitus.

-- Sensit procul Africa tellus,
Tunc expuluerijs geminata incendia nimbis,
Sensit et Aegyptus Memphisque and Nilus atrocem
Tempestatem illam, Campano e littore missam,
Nec caruisse ferunt Asiam Syriamque tremenda
Peste, nec exstantes Neptunj e fluctibus arces
Cyprumque Cretamque and Cycladas ordine nullo
Per pontum sparsas nec doctam Palladis vrbem
Tantus inexhaustis erupit faucibus ardor
Ac vapor.
They be the verses of Hieronymus Borgius touching the horrible roaring and
thundering of this mountain, and may thus be englished.

Then remote Afric suffered the direful heat
Of twofold rage with showers of dust repleate
Scorcht Egypt, memphis, Nilus felt amazed,
The woofull tempest in Campania raised,
Not Asia, Syria, nor the towers that stand
In Neptunes surges, Cyprus, Creet, Jove's land
The scattered Cyclades, nor the Muses seat
Minervaes town that vast plague escaped such heat
Such vapors brake forth from full jaws --
Marcellinus farther observes that the ashes thereof transported in the air
obscured all Europe, and that the Constantinopolitanes being wonderfully
affrighted therewith (in so much as the Emperor Leo forsook the City) in
memorial of the same did yearly celebrate the twelfth of November. Who in
these latter ages has ever heard or read of such a fire issuing out of the
earth as Tacitus in the 13 of his Annals and almost the last words describes.
The city of the Inhonians in Germany confederate with us (says he) was
afflicted with a sudden disaster, for fires issuing out of the earth burned
towns, feilds, villages every where, and spread even to the walls of a colony
newly built, and could not be extinguished neither by rain nor river water,
nor any other liquor that could be employed until for want of remedy, and
anger of such a destruction, certain pesants cast stones a far of into it;
then the flame somewhat ^laking, drawing near they put it out with blows of
clubs and otherlike, as if it had been a wild beast, last of all they threw in
clothes from their backs which the more worn and fowler, the berrer they
quenched the fires.

But the most memorable both Earthquake and burning is that which Mr. George
Sands in the forth book of his Travels reports to have hape^ed near Puttzoll
in the kingdom of Naples likewise, in the year of our Lord 1538, and on the
29th of September, when for certain days foregoing the country thereabout
was so vexed with perpetual Earthquakes, as no one house was left so entire,
as not to expect an immediate ruin, after that the sea had retired two hundred
pases from the shore, (leaving abundance of fresh water rising in the bottom
(there visiblely ascended a mountain about the second hour of the night with
hideous roaring, horriblely vomiting stones, and such store of Cinders as
overwhelmed all the buildings therabout, and the salubrious Bathes of
Tripergula, for so many ages celebrated, consumed the vines to ashes, killing
birds and beasts; the fearful inhabitants of Puttzoll flying through the
dark with their wives and children naked, defiled, crying out and detesting
their Calamities; manifold mischiefs had they suffered, yet none like this
which nature inflicted: yet was not this the first Island that thus by the force
of Earthquakes have risen out of the sea, the Pliny lib. 2. cap. 85, 86, 87
like is reported both of Delos and Rhodos, and some others.

SECT. 6. Of the nature of Comets and the uncertainty of praedictions from
them, as also that the number of those which have appeared of late years, is
less then has usually been observed in former ages, and of other fiery and
watery prodigious meteors.
IT remains that in the next place I should speak somewhat of Comets or
Blazing stars, whether in latter times more have appeared, or more disastrous
effects have followed upon their appearance, then in former ages. Some took
the Comet to have been a star, ordained and created from the first beginning
of the world: but appearing only by times and by turns, of this mind was
Seneca. Cardan, likewise Nature. Quest. Lib. 7. cap. 21. 23.
in latter times harps much, if not upon the same, yet the like string. But
Aristotle (whose weighty reasons and deep judgment I much reverence)
conceiueth the matter of the Comet, to be a passing hot and dry exhalation,
which being lifted up, by the force and virtue of the Sun, into the highest
region of the air is there inflamed, partly by the Element of fire, upon which
it bordereth, and partly by the motion of the heavens which hurleth it about;
so as there is the same matter of an Earthquake, the wind, the lightning, and a
Comet, if it be imprisoned in the bowels of the earth, it causes an
Earthquake; if it ascend to the middle region of the air, and be from thence
beating back, wind, if it enter that region and be there environed with a thick
cloud, lightning; if it pass that region a Comet, or some other fiery Meteor,
in case the matter be not sufficiently capable thereof.

The common opinion has been, that Comets either as Signs or causes, or both
have always prognosticated some dreadful mishaps to the world, as outrageous
winds, extraordonary drougth, dearth, pestilence, wars, death of Princes and
the like.

Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether.
Mani^
Never did the Heavens with idle blazes flame:
But the late Lord Privy Seal Earl of Northampton, in his Defensatiue against
the poison of supposed prophesies, has so strongly incountred this opinion,
Cap. 16.
that for mine own part I must profess, he has persuaded me, there is no
certainty in those praedictions, in as much as Comets do not always forerunne
such events, neither do such events always follow upon the appearing of
Comets. Some instances he produces of Comets, which brought with them such
abundance of all things, and abated their prises to so low an ebb, as stories
have recorded it for monuments, and miracles to posterity: And the like, says
he, could I say of others, Ann. Dom. 1555. 1556. 1557. 1558. after all which
years nothing chanced that should drive a man to seek out any cause above the
common reach: and therefore I allow the diligence of Gemma-Frisius taking
notice of as many good, as badde effects, which have succeeded after Comets.
Moreover he tells us that Peucer, a great Mathematician of Germany,
prognosticated upon the last Comet, before the writing of his Defensatiue, that
men's bodies should be parched and burned up with heat: But how fell it out?
Forsooth, says he, we had not a more unkindly summer many years, in
respect of extraordinary cold: never less inclination to war, no Prince
diseased in that time, and the plague which had been somewhat quick before in
Lombardy, as God would have it, ceased at the rising of the Comet. Besides all
this, he reports of his own experience, as an eyewitness, that when diverse
upon greater scrupulosity, then cause, went about to dissuade Queen Elizabeth,
lying then at Richmond, from looking on a Comet which then appeared, with a
courage answereable to the greatness of her state, she caused the window to
be set open, and cast out this word, jacta est alea; the dice are thrown,
thereby showing that her steadfast hope and confidence, was too firmly planted
in the providence of God, to be blasted or affrighted with those beams, which
either had a ground in nature whereupon to rise, or at leastwise no warrant in
Scripture to portend the mishappe of Princes. Neither do I remember that any
Comet appeared either before her death (as at her entrance Ann: 1558:
there did,) nor that of Prince Henry, nor of Henry the Great of France, the
one being a most peerless Queen, the other a most incomparable Prince, and
the third for prudence and valor, a matchless King. And for the last Comet
which appeared, it was so far from bringing any excessive heat with it, that
for a long time there has not been known An: 1618:
more cold years the^ three or four immediately ensuing it. And though it be
true, that some great Princes died not long after it, yet after that immediately
going before, I cannot call to mind any such effect: but as Seneca truly
notes, Natural est magis nova quam magna mirari, it is natural Nature: Quest:
l: 7: c, 1:
unto us to be inquisitiue and curious rather about things new and strange,
then those which are in their own nature truly great: Yet even among the
Ancients, Charlemaigne professed, that he feared not the sign of the blazing
star, but the Great and potent Creator thereof. And Vespasian, as Dyon
reports, when the apparition of a Comet was thought to portend his death,
replied merrily: No, said he, this bushy star notes not me, but the
Parthian King: Ipse enim comatus est, ego vero calvus sum: For he wears bushy
locks, but I am bald Lastly, some Comets have been the Messengers of happy and
joyful tidings, as that at the birth of our Savior, and another at the death
of Nero, Cometes sum bonus apparuit, qui praenuntius fuit mortis magni illius
Tyranni and pestilentissimi hominis, says Tacitus: There appeared a favorable
and auspicious Comet, as an Herald to proclaim the death of that great Tyrant
and most pestilent man.

The praediction then, and success of mischievous and unfortunate accidents
from the appearance of Comets, appearing to be thus uncertain; it follows in
the second place to be considered, whether more have appeared in these latter
times, then in former ages. For mine own part I remember but two, for the
space of these last thirty years, and during his late Majesty's reign but
one, whereas my Lord of Northampton, (as we have heard before,) speaks of
four within the compass of four years. Before the death of Julius Caesar,
Virgill witnesses. Georg. l. 1.


Non alias coelo ceciderunt plura sereno
Fulgura, nec diri toties arsere Cometae.
Never in clear skymore lightnings did appear,
And direful comets never rifer were.
Beda and Paulus Aemilius mention two, which by the space of fourteen days
appeared together, in the reign of Charles Martell, father to Charlemaigne,
the one in the morning going before the Sun, and the others in the evening
following after it. The like whereunto I do not remember we any where read
of. Now that which has been said of Comets may likewise be applied to other
fiery and watery Meteors, as streamings, swords, flying dragons, fighting
armies, gapings, two or three Suns and Moons, and the like appearing in the
air many times to the great terror and astonishment of the beholders: of all
which and many more of that kind, he that desires to read more, I refer
him to Vicomercatus, Garzaeus, Pontanus, and Lycosthenes, de Prodigijs and
Portentis ab Garzaeus.
orb condito, vsque ad annum 1557. Of strange and prodigious accidents from
the beginning of the world, to the year of our Lord 1557. But the strangest
apparition in the air in this kind that ever I heard, or read of, was that
which I find reported by Mr Fox, whiles the Spanish match with Queen Many was
in the heat of treating, and near upon Acts and Mon. p. 1637.
the eoncluding, There appeared in London on the fifteenth of February 1554, a
Rainebow reuersed, the bow turning downward, and the two ends standing upward:
a prodigious and supernatural sign indeed of those miserable and bloody times
which quickly followed after.

SECT. 7. Of strange and impetuous winds and lighnings, in former ages, above
those of the present.
IN the last place we may add the impetuous thunders and lightnings, together
with outrageous winds in former times, such as latter ages have scarce been
acquainted with. And because the latter of these have of late played their parts
more fiercely both by sea and land, it shall not be amiss to remember, that
even in the Phophet David's time, Ann: 1624.
when in likeliehood they lanched not forth into the maine, but coasted along
by the shore, they were notwithstanding by the violence of tempests, lifted up
to heaven, and carried down again to the depths: which Psalm. 107. ver. 26.
the Poet has in a manner translated word for word.

Tollitur in coelum, sublato gurgite et ijdem
Voluimur in barathrum.
With surging waves to heaven we lifted are,
And in a trice to helward down we fare.
It was a terrible storm, and seldom heard of which encountered S. Paul and
his company in their voyage toward Rome, though they sailed in sight of land,
raised by a tempestuous wind called Euroclydon, insomuch as beside their
imminent danger neither Sun nor Stars, which should have been their,
guides in many days appeared unto Acts, 27. 20.
them. The concurrence and combating of contrary winds, which is now a days
not often observed to happen, and I think in course of Nature and discourse of
Reason can hardly be, yet Virgill mentions it more then once,

Vna Eurusque Nothusque ruunt creberque procellis
Affricus and vastos voluunt ad littora fluctus. Aeneid* 1.

Th'Eastwinde, the West, the Southwest and by West.
Rush forth together, and with boistrous storms
Huge waves to shoreward roll --
And again,

Omnia ventorum concurrere praelia vidi, Georg. 1

I saw the winds all combating together.
Such a wind it seems was that, which smote at once all the four corners of
the house of Jobs eldest son.

Let any who is desirous to inquire into, and compare things of this Job. 1. 19:
nature, but read what is recorded in the Turkish history of two wonderful
great storms, the one by land in Sultania, set down in the entrance of
Solymans life; the other at Algiers, not far from the mi'dst of the same
life. at Charles the 5th his coming thither, as also at his parting from
thence; and I presume he will admire nothing in this kind, that has fallen
out in these latter times.

Vidi ego, says Bellarmine, quod nisi vidissem non crederem, a vehementissimo
vento effossam, ingentem terrae molem, eamque delatam super pagum De ascen:
mentis in Deum per Scal. Creat gradu 2
quendam, vt fovea altissima conspiceretur, vnde terra eruta fuerat, and pagus
totus coopertus, and quasi sepultus manserit ad quem terra illa deuenerat. I my
self have seen, which if I had not seen, I should not have believed, a very
great quantity of earth, dug out and taken up by the force of a strong
wind, and carried upon a village thereby, so that there remained to be seen a
great empty hollownes, in the place from whence it was lifted, and the village
upon which it lighted, was in a manner all covered over and buried in it. This
example I confess^, could not be long since, since, Bellarmine professes that
himself saw it, Yet it might well be some skores of years before our last
great winds, which notwithstanding by some, for want of reading and experience
are thought to be unmatchable: And I know not whether that outrageous wind
which happened in London in the year 1096. during the reign of ohn Stow.
William Rufus, might not well be thought to parallel, at least, this recorded
by Bellarmine: It bore down in that City alone, six hundred houses, and blew
off the roof of Bow Church, which with the beams were borne into the air a
great height, six whereof being 27 foot long, with their fall were driven 23
foot deep into the ground, the streets of the city lying then vnpaued. And
in the fourth year of the same King, so vehement a lightning, (which as has
been said, is of the same matter with the wind) pierced the steeple of the
Abbay of Winscomb in Glostershire, that it rent the beams of the roof, cast
down the Crucisixe, brake off his right leg, and withal overthrew the image
of our Lady standing hard by, leaving such a stench in the Church, that neither
incense, holy water, nor the singing of the Monks could allay it: But it is
now more then time I should descend a step lower, from the air to the water.

CAP. 8. Touching the pretended decay of the waters and the fish, the
inhabiters thereof
SECT. 1. That the sea, and rivers, and bathes are the same at this present, as
they were for many ages past, or what they loose in one place or time, they
recover in another.
THough the Psalmist tell us, that the Lord has founded the earth upon the
Seas, and established it upon the floods, because for the more Psalm. 24. 2.
commodious living of man and beasts, he has made a part of it higher then
the seas, or at leastwise restrained them from incursion upon it, so as now
they make but one entire Globe; yet because the waters in the first Creation
covered the face of the earth, I will first begin with them. The mother of
waters, the great deep has undoubtedly lost nothing of her ancient bounds or
depth, but what is impaired in Sec lib. 1. cap. 3. Sect. 2.
one place, is again restored to her in another. The rivers which the Earth
sucked from her by secret veins, it renders back again with full mouth, and
the vapors which the Sun draws up, empty themselves again into her bosom.

The purest humor in the Sea, the Sun
Exhales in The Air: which there resolved, anon
Returns to water, and descends again, Bartas.

By sundry ways into his mother maine.
Her motions of ebbing and flowing, of high springs and dead Neapes, are still
as certain and constant, as the changes of the Moon and course of the Sun:
Her native saltnes and by reason thereof her strength, for the better
supporting of navigable vessels, is still the same: And as the Sea the mother
of waters, so likewise the rivers the daughters thereof, ^ither hold on their
wonted courses and currents, or what they have diminished in one age or place,
they have again recompensed and repayed in another, as Sr^bo has well
expressed it, both of the sea and rivers, Lib. 17
Quoniam omnia moventur and transmutantur, (aliter talia ac tanta administrari
non possent) existimandum est, nec terram ita semper permanere, vt semper tanta
sit nec quicquam sibi addatur aut adimatur, sed nec aquam, nec candem sedem
semper ab istis obtineri, presertim cum transmutatio ejus, cognata sit ac
naruralis, quini^o terrae multum in aquam convertitur, and aquae multum in
terram transmutatur. Quare minime mirandum est si eas terrae parts quae nunc
habitantur, olim mare occupabat, and quae pelagus sunt prius habitabantur.
Quemadmodum de fontibus alios deficere contingit, alios relaxari; item and
flumina and lacus. Because thnigs move and are changed (without which such and
so great matters could not well be disposed) we are to think that the earth
does not remain always in the same state, without addition or diminution,
neither yet the water, as if they were always bounded within the same lists,
specially seeing their mutual chang is natural and kindly but rather that
much earth is turned into water, and co^trarywise no less water in to earth it
is not the^ to be wondered at, if that part of the earth which is now habitable
was formerly overflowed with water, and that again which now is sea, was
sometimes habitable; as among fountains some are dried up and some spring
forth afresh, which may also be verified of rivers and lakes. wherewith
accordes that of the Poet.

Vidi ego quod fuerat quondam solidissima tellus
Esse fretum; vidi factas ex aequore terras.
Et procul a pelago Chonchae jacuere marinae, Metamorp. 15.

Et vetus inventa est in montibus anchora summis:
Quodque fuit campus, vallem decursus aquarum
Fecit; and eluvie mons est deductus in aequor.
Eque paludosa siccis humus aret arenis
Quaeque sitim tulerant stagnata paludibus hument.
Hic fontes natura nouos emisit, et illic
Clausit, and antiquis tam multa tremoribus orbis
Flumina prosiliunt, aut exsiccata residunt.
What was firm land sometimes that have I seen
Made sea, and what was sea made land again,
On mountain tops old anchours found have been,
And sea fish shells to lie far from the maine,
Plains turn to vales by water falls, the down
By overflowes is changed to champaine land,
Dry ground erewhile, now moorish fen does drown,
And fens again are turned to thirsty sand,
Here fountains new has nature opened,
There shut up springs which erst did flow amain,
By earthquakes rivers often have issued,
Or dried up they have sunk down again.
The Poet there bringes instances in both these: And to like purpose is that of
Pontanus.

Sed nec perpetuae seeds sunt fontibus vllae Lib. 48. Mete^:

Aeterni aut manant cursus, mutantur in aeuum*
Singula, and inceptum alternat natura tenorem,
Quodque dies antiqua tulit, post auferet ipsa
Fountains spring not eternally
Nor in one place perpetually do tarry,
All things in every age for evermore do vary,
And nature changes still the course she once begun,
And will herself undo what she of old has done.
which though it be true in many, yet those great ones as Indus and Ganges, and
Danubius, and the Rhene, and Nilus are little or nothing varied from the same
courses and currents which they held thousands of years since; as appears in
their descriptions by the ancient Geographers; But above all meethinkes the
constant rising of Nilus continued for so many ages, is one of the greatest
wonders in the world, which is so precise in regard of time, that if you take
of the earth adjoining to the river and preserve it carefully, that it come
neither to be wet nor wasted, and weigh it daily, you shall find it neither
more nor less heavy till the seventeenth of June, at which day it begineth to
grows Reported by Mr. Ge. Sands as a common experiment, affirmed by Alpinus a
Phisitia^, Marchitus the French Consul Elianus a Jesuit, and Varrat an
Englishma^
more ponderous and augmenteth with the augmentation of the river, whereby they
have an infallible knowledge of the state of the deluge.

Now for the Medicinal properties of Fountain or Bathes no man I think makes
any doubt, but that they are both as many and as efficacious as ever. some it
may be have, lost their virtue and are grown out of use: but others again
have in stead thereof been discovered in other places, of no less use and
virtue, as both Baccius and Blanchellus in their books de Thermis have
observed. And for those hot ones at the city of Bath I make no question but
Nechams verses may as justly be verified of their goodness at this present, as
they were four hundred years since, about which time he is said to have
written them.

Bathoniae Tharmas vix prefero Virgilianas
Confecto prosunt Balnea nostra seni.
Prosunt attritis, collisis, invalidisque,
Et quorum morbis frigida causa subest.
Our Baines at Bath with Virgills to compare
For their effects I dare almost be bold:
For feeble folk, and crazie good they are,
For brus'd, consumed, far spent, and very old
For those likewise whose sickness comes of cold.
SECT. 2. That the fishes are not decayed in regard of there store, dimensions,
or duration.
BUt it is said, that though the waters decay not, yet the fish, the
inhabitants thereof, at leastwise in regard of their number are much decayed,
so as we may take up that of the Poet.

-- Omne peractum est, Iuvenal* Sat. 5.

Et iam defecit nostrum mare --
All our Seas at length are spent and fail.
The Seas being grown fruitless and barren as is pretended in regard of
former ages, and that so it appears upon record in our Haven towns: But if
such a thing be, (which I can neither affirm nor deny, having not searched
into it my self) themselves who make the objection, shape a sufficient answer
thereunto, by telling us that it may so be by an extraordinary judgment of God,
(as he dealt with the Egyptians) in the death of our fish for the abuse of our
fleshpots, or by the intrusion of the Hollander, who carries from our coast
such store as we might much better load our selves with: and if we should a
little enlarge our view, and cast our eyes abroad, comparing one part of the
world with another, we shall easily discern, that though our Coast fail in
that abundance, which formerly it had by ouer-laying it, yet others still
abound in a most plentiful manner, as is by experience found upon the Coast of
Virginia at this present. And no doubt, but were our Coasts spared for some
space of years, it would again afford as great plenty as ever. Finally, if
the store of fish should decay by reason of the decay of the world, it must of
necessity follow that likewise the store of plants, of beasts, of birds, and of
men should daily decay by virtue of the same reason. Nay rather, since the
curse lighting upon man extended to plants and beasts, but not to fishes, for
any thing I find expressly registered in holy Scripture. As neither did the
universal Deluge hurt, but rather help them, by which the rest perished.
There are still no doubt even at this day as at the first Creation, in the Sea
to be found

As many fishes of so many features, Bartas.

That in the waters one may see all Creatures:
And all that in this All is to be found,
As if the World within the deepes were drowned.
Now as the store of fishes is no way diminished: so neither are they decayed
either in their greatness or goodness. I will instance in the whale, the King of
fishes, or as Job terms him, the King over the children of pride. That which
S. Basil in his Hexameron reports, namely that the whales are in bigness equal
to the greatest mountains, and their backs when they Lib. 51. c. 25
show above water are like unto Islands, is by a late learned Writer not
Brier^woods inquir^ c. 13.
vndeservedly censured, as intollerably hyperbolicall. Pliny in the ninth book
and third Chap. of his Natural history tells us that in the Indian Seas some
have been taken up to the length of four acres, that is, nine hundred and
sixty feet; whereas notwithstanding Arrianus in his discourse de rebus Indicis
assures us, that Nearchus measuring one cast upon that shore, found him to be
but fifty cubits. The same Pliny in the first Chapter of his 32 book sets
down a relation of King Iubaes, out of those books which he wrote to C.
Caesar, son to Augustus the Emperor, touching the History of Arabia, where he
affirms, that in the bay of Arabia, Whales have been known to be 600 foot
long, and 360 foot thick, and yet as it is well known by the soundings of
Navigatours, that Sea is not by a great deal 360 foot deep. But to let go
these fancies: and fables and to come to that which is more probable. The
dimensions of the Whale, says Aelian, is five times beyond the largest
Elephants: Lib. 16. c 12 Lib. 16. c. (...)
but for the ordinary, says Rondeletius, he seldom exceedes 36 cubits in
length, and 8 in height. Dion a grave Writer reports it as a Lib. 54
wonder, that in the reign of Augustus, a Whale lept to land out of the German
Ocean, full 20 foot in breadth, and 60 in length. This I confess was much, yet
to match it with lattet times, Gesner in his Epistle to Polidor Lib. 4.
Virgill avoucheth it as most true, that in the year of our Lord 1532, in the
Northern parts of our own land, not far from Tinmouth haven, was a mighty
Whale cast on land, found by good measure to be 90 foot in length, arising to
30 English yards, the very breadth of his mouth was six yards and an half, and
the belly so vast in compass, that one standing on the fish of purpose to cut
off a ribbe from him, and slipping into his belly, was very likely there to
have been drowned with the moisture then remaining, had he not been suddenly
rescued. From whence we may gather, that Jobs admirable description of this
fish under the name of Leviathan, is still true, and that in vastnes, since
Augustus Job. 41.
his time, he is nothing decreased: And yet I well believe, that those on the
Indian Seas may much exceed ours, which might perchance give occasion to those
large relations of Pliny and Iuba. Hereunto may be added the observation of
Macrobius touching the growth of Satur. l. 3. c. 16. Not. hist. 9. 17.
the Mullet. Plinius Secundus says he, temporibus suis negat facile mullum
repertum, qui duas pondo libras excederet, at nunc and majoris passim videmus,
and praesentia hac insana nescimus. Plinius Secundus denies that in his time a
Mullet was easily to be found which exceeded two pound weight; but now adays
we euery-where see them of greater weight, and yet are not acquainted with
those unreasonable prises which they then paid for them.

I will close up this chapter with a relation of Gesners in his Epistle to the
Emperor Ferdinand prefixed before his books De Piscibus, touching the long
life of a Pike which was cast into a pond or poole near Hailebrune in Swevia,
with this inscription engraven upon a collar of brass fastened about his neck.
Ego sum ille piscis huic stagno omnium primus impositus per mundi Rectoris
Frederici Secundi manus, 5 Octobris, anno 1230. I am that fish which was first
of all cast into this poole by the hand of Frederick the second governor of
the World. 5 of October. in the year 1230. He was again taken up in the year
1497, and by the inscription it appeared he had then lived there 267 years:
so as it seems, that as fishes are not diminished in regard of their store or
growth: so neither in respect of their age and duration. But I leave floting on
the Waters, and betake me to the more stable Element the Earth.

CAP. 9. Touching the pretended decay of the Earth, together with the Plants,
and beasts, and minerals.
SECT. 1. The divine meditations of Seneca and Pliny upon the globe of the
Earth. An objection out of Aelian touching the decrease of mountains answered.
That all things which spring from the earth return thither again, and
consequently it cannot decay in regard of the fruitfulness in the whole. Other
objections of less consequence answered.
BOth Seneca and Pliny have most divine meditations upon this consideration,
that the Globe of the Earth in regard of the higher Elements and the Heavens
wheeling about it, is by the Mathematicians compared to a prick or point.

These so many pieces of Earth (says Pliny) or rather, as most have Lib. 2. c.
68.
written, this little prick of the World, (for surely the Earth is nothing else
in comparison of the whole) is the only matter of our glory; this I say, is the
very seat thereof: here we seek for honors and dignities, here we exercise
our rule and authority, here we covet wealth and riches, here all mankind is
set upon stirs and troubles, here we raise civil wars still one after
another, and with mutual massacres and murders we make more room therein:
And to let pass the public fury of Nations abroad, this is it wherein we
chase and drive out our neighbor Borderers, and by stealth dig turfth from our
Neighbors soil to put into our own: And when a man has extended his lands,
and gotten whole countries to himself far and near, what a goodly deal of
earth enjoys he? and say, that he set out his bounds to the full measure of
his covetous desire, what a great portion thereof shall he hold, when he is
once dead, and his head laid. Thus Pliny, with whom Seneca sweetly accords.
Hoc est punctum quod inter tot gentes, ferro and igne dividitur, oquam ridiculi
sunt mortalium termini! Not. quaest. l. 1. praef.
Punctum certe est illud in quo navigamus, in quo bellamus, in quo regna
disponimus. It is but a point which so many Nations share with fire and sword.
Oh how ridiculous are the bounds of mortal men! It is verily but a point
inwhich we sail, in which we wage wars, in which we dispose of Kingdoms.
But from these sublime speculations, we are to descend to the examination of
the Earths supposed decay.

Aelian in the eight book of his history, tells us, that not only Cap. 11.
the mountain Aetna, (for thereof might be given some reason, because of the
daily wasting and consuming of it by fire,) but Parnassus and Olympus did
appear to be less and less, to such as sailed at sea, the height thereof
sinking as it seemed, and thereupon infers, that men most skillful in the
secrets of Nature, did affirm that the world it self should likewise perish
and have an end. His conclusion I cannot but approve, and most willingly accept
of, as a rich testimony for the confirmation of our Christian doctrine, from
the pen of a Gentile: But that he inferres it, from so weak grounds, I
cannot but wonder at the stupidity of so wise a man. For to grant that those
mountains decrease in their magnitude, yet shall I never yield a universal
decrease in the whole globe of the Earth, since the proportions as well of the
Diameter as Circumference thereof, are by Geometrical demonstrations found to
be the same which they were in former ages, or at leastwise not to decrease.
And for the difference, which is observed betwixt the Calculation of Ancient
and Modern writers; it is certainly to be referred to the difference of
miles, or of instruments, or the vnskilfullnesse of the Authors; not to the
different dimensions of the Earth, which I think no Geometrician ever so much
as dreamed of. Notwithstanding which truth, I must, and do readily subscribe
to that of Job, Surely the mountain falling comes to naught, Cap. 14. v. 18.
19
and the rock is removed out of his place, but let us take Jobs reason with
us, which he immediately adds; The waters wear the stones, thou washest away
the things which grow out of the dust of the earth: This diminution then of the
Mountains (as Blaucanus observes) is caused partly by Raine-water, and partly
by Rivers, which by continual fretting, by little and little wash away and
eat out both the tops, and sides, and feet of mountains; whence the parts
thus fretted through, by continual falling down, wear out the mountains,
and fill up the lower places of the valleys, making the one to increase as the
other to decrease; whence it comes to pass that some old houses, heretofore
fairly built, be now almost buried under ground, and their windows heretofore
set at a reasonable height, now grown even with the pauement. So some write of
the triumphall Arch of Septimius, at the foot of the Capitol mountain in
Rome, now almost covered with earth, in so much as they are enforced to descend
down into it, by as many stairs as formerly they were used to ascend; whereas
contrariwise the Roman Capitol it self seated on the mountain which hanges
over it (as witnesses George Agricola) discouers its foundation plainly above
ground, which without question were at the first laying thereof deep rooted in
the earth, whereby it apppeares, that what the mountain loses the valley
gains; and consequently that in the whole globe of the earth nothing is lost,
but only removed from one place to another, so that in process of time the
highest mountains may be humbled into valleys, and again the lowest valleys
exalted into mountains.

If ought to naught did fall;
All that is felt or seen within this all,
Still loosing somewhat of it self, at length
Would come to nothing: if death's fatal strength
Could altogether substances destroy,
Things then should vanish even as soon as die. Bartas.

In time the mighty mountains tops be bated;
But, with their fall, the neighbor vales are fatted
And what, when Trent or Avon overflow
They reaue one field, they on the next bestow.
And whereas another Poet tells us that

Eluviemons est diductus in aequor:
The mountain by washings often Ovid. 15. Met.

into the sea is brought.
It is most certain, and by experience found to be true, that as the rivers
daily carry much earth with them into the sea, so the sea sends back again
much slime and sand to the earth, which in some places, and namely in the North
part of Devonshire is found to be a marveilous great commodity for the
enriching of the soil.

Now as the Earth is nothing diminished in regard of the dimensions, (the
measure thereof from the Surface to the Center being the same, as it was at the
first Creation,) So neither is the fatnes and fruitfulnes thereof, at
leastwise since the flood, or in regard of duration alone, any whit impaired;
though it have yielded such store of increase by the space of so many
reuolutions of ages, yet he that made it, continually renews the face
thereof, as the Psalmist speaks, by turning all things 104: 30.
which spring from it into it again. Says one,

Cuncta suos ortus repetunt, matremque requirunt:
And another:

E terris orta, terra rursus accipit.
And a third joins both together,

Quapropter merito maternum nomen adepta est
Cedit enim retro, de terra quod fuit ante Lucr. l. 2.

In terras,
And altogether they may thus not unfitly be rendered.

All things return to their original,
And seek their mother: what from earth does spring,
The same again into the earth does fall
Neither do they herein dissent from Syracides, with all manner of living 16.
30.
things has he covered the face of the earth, and they shall return into it
again. And that doom which passed upon the first man after the fall, is as it
were engraven on the foreheads, not only of his posterity, but of all earthly
Creatures made for their sakes; Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return.

As the Ocean is mainetained by the return of the rivers, which are drayned
and derived from it: So is the earth by the dissolution and reuersion of those
bodies, which from it receive their growth and nourishment. The grass to feed
the beasts, the corn to strengthen, and the wine to cheer the heart of man,
either are or might be both in regard of the Earth and Heavens, as good and
plentiful as ever. That decree of the Almighty, is like the Law of the Medes
and Persians irreuocable; They shall be for signs, and for seasons, and for
days, and for years: And again, Hereafter seed time, and harvest, and cold,
and heat, and Genesis 8. 22.
summer, and winter, and day, and night, shall not cease so long as the Earth
remains. And were there not a certainety in these reuolutions, so that

-- In se sua per vestigia voluitur annus, Virgill.

The year in its own steps into in self returns:
It could not well be, that the Storke and the Turtle, the Crane and the
Swallow, and other fowls, should observe so precisely as they do the Ier. 8.
7.
appointed times of their coming and going. And whereas it is commonly
thought, and believed, that the times of the year are now more unseasonable
then heretofore, and thereby the fruits of the Earth neither so fair, nor
kindly as they have been; To the first I answer, that the same complaint
has been ever since Salomons time: He that observes the wind shall not
sow, and he that regards the clouds Eccles. 11. 4.
shall not reap. By which it seems, the weather was even then as uncertain
as now; and so was likewise the uncertain and unkindly riping of fruits, as
may appear by the words following in the same place: In the morning sow thy
seed, and in the evening let not thy hand rest: v: 6.
for thou know not whether shall prosper this or that, or whether both shall
be alike good: And if sometimes we have unseasonable years, by reason of
excessive wet and cold, they are again paid home by immoderate drought and
heat, if not with us, yet in our neighbor countries, and with us. I think,
no man will be so unwise, or partial, as to affirm that there is a constant
and perpetual declination, but that the vnseasonablenes of some years, is
recompensed by the seasonablenes of others. It is true that the erroneous
computation of the year we now use, may cause some seeming alteration in the
seasons thereof, and in process of time, must needs cause a greater if it be
not rectified: but let that error be reformed, and I am persuaded that
communibus annis, we shall find no difference from the seasons of former ages:
at leastwise in regard of the ordinary course of nature: For of Gods
extraordinary judgments, we now dispute not, who sometimes for our sins
emptieth the botles of heaven incessantly upon us: and again at other times
makes the heavens as brass over our heads and the earth as iron under our
feet.

SECT. 2. Another objection, to uching the decay of the fruitfulnes of the holy
land, fully answered.
WHen I consider the narrow bounds of the land of Canaan, (it being by S.
Hieromes account, who lived long there, but 160 Epist. 129. ad Dardanum.
miles in length, from Dan to Bersheba, and in breadth but 40, from Ioppa to
Bethleem,) and withal the multitude incredible (were it not recorded in holy
Scripture) both of men and cattle which it fed, there meeting in one battle
between Judah and Israel twelve hundred 1: Chron. 13. 3.
thousand chosen men: Nay the very swordmen, beside the Levites and Benjamites
were upon strict inquiry found to be fifteen hundred and 2. Chron. 21. 5.
seventy thousand, whereof the youngest was twenty years old, there being
none by the Law to be mustered under that age: and which is more strange, the
very guards of Iehosaphars person amounted to almost 2: Chron. 17. 14.
an eleven hundred thousand. And for the number of Cattle, there were slain
in one sacrifice at the dedication of Salomons temple, two 2. Chron: (...). 5*
and twenty thousand bullocks, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep. When
I say, I compare these multitudes of men and cattle with the narrow bounds of
that country; I am forced to believe that it was indeed a most fruitful
soil, flowing with milk and honey, and richly abounding in all kind of
commodities: Yet the reports of some, who have taken a survey of it in these
latter ages, bear us in hand, that the fruitfullnes thereof, is now much
decayed in regard of those times: From whence they would infer a general
decay in all soyles, and consequently in the whole course of nature. But it may
truly be said that this wonderful fruitfullnes proceeded from a special
favor of Almighty God toward this people, as appears in the 11 of
Deuteronomy, this land does the Lord thy God care for, the eyes of the Lord thy
God are always v: 12.
upon it, from the beginning of the year even to the end of the year. And
more clearly in the 26 of Leviticus: If you walk in mine ordinances, and v: 3.
keep my commandments, I will send you rain in due season, and the land
shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall give their fruit,
and your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach
unto the sowing time, and you shall eat your bread in plenteousnes, and dwell
in your land safely. But the miraculous providence of God showed it self most
evidently over this land in answering their doubt, what they should Levit. 25.
v. 20* 21.
eat the seventh year, if they suffered the land to rest, as God had enjoined
them; the reply is, I will send my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it
shall bring forth fruit for three years. Now then as this extraordinary
fruitfulnes proceeded from an extraordinary favor: so this favor ceasing, the
fruitfulnes might likewise cease without any natural decay of the soil: The
country about Sodom and Gomorrha was for fruitfulnes as the Paradise, or
garden of the Lord, till the curse of God fell upon it, then it became a wast
land, and so remains to this day: Yet can it not be gainesaid but that beside
this special blessing of God, this soil of Palestina was naturally* very rich
in it self, in as much as it fed Genesis 13. 10. Wisdom, 10 7. Joshua, 12. 24.
one and thirty Idolatrous Kings, with their people, before the entrance of
Gods chosen nation into it; one of which alone possessed, as it should seem
threescore cities and the pomegranats, the figs and the grapes, which the
spies (sent by Moses to discover the land) brought back with them, were
marveilous goodly and fair. And as this soil was thus rich Numb. 13. 24.
before the entrance of this people, so since the displanting of them from
thence, and the Saracens possessing it, it has not altogether lost its ancient
fruitfulnes whatsoever is pretended to the contrary, if we may credit
Brocardus, who about three hundred years since was himself an eyewitness
thereof. His words are these. Non est credendum De Terra sancta, part. 2. c. 1.
contrarium nunciantibus, neque enim eam diligenter considerarunt, his oculis
vidi quanta fertilitate Terra benedicta fructificat: frumentum enim vix terra
exculta sine stercore and simo mirabiliter crescit and multiplicatur. Agrisunt
velut horti in quibus feniculum, salvia, ruta, rosa passim crescunt. There is
no heed to be given to them who affirm the contrary; For they have not
thoroughly considered of the matter; with these eyes did I behold the exceeding
fertility of that blessed land: The Corn with a very little making of the
earth prospers and multiplies beyond belief, the fields are as it were gardens
of delight, in which fennel, sage, rue, and roses every where grow; And so
having largly described the admirable fruitfulness thereof in all kinds, at
length he concludes: Denique illic exstant omnia mundi bona, and vere terra
fluit rivis lactis and mellis. Finally there are to be had all the good things
the world can afford, so that it may still be truly termed, a land flowing
with rivers of milk and honey. And if it be degenerated from it is ancient
fertility (which upon the report of Bredenbachius Adrichomius and others, I
rather believe) I should rather impute it to the Curse of God upon that
accursed nation which possesses it, or to their ill manuring of the earth,
from which the proverb seems to have grown, that where the Grand Signiors
horse once treads the grass never grows afterward) then to any Natural decay
in the goodness of the soil.

SECT. 3. The testimonies of Columella and Pliny produced that the earth in it
self is as fruitful as in former ages, if it be made and manured.
NOw that which by Brocardus has been delivered touching the holy land in
particular, is by Columella in his books of Husbandry with no less
assuredness averred touching the nature of the Earth in general: nay to show
his confidence herein, he makes that assertion, the entrance to his whole
work, thus beginning the very first chapter of his first book. Saepenumero
Civitatis nostrae principes audio culpantes, m^do agrorum infoecunditatem, modo
Coeli per multa jam tempora noxiam frugibus intemperiem, quosdam etiam
praedictas querimonias velut ratione certa mitigantes, quod existiment vbertate
nimi^ prioris aevi defatigatum and effoetum solum, ^equire pristina benignitate
prebere mortalibus alimenta; quas ego causas Publi Sylvini procul a veritate
abesse certum habeo, quod neque fas est existimare rerum naturam quam primus
ille mundi genitor perpetua foecunditate donavit (quasi quodam morbo)
sterilitate affectam, neque prudentis credere tellurem, quae divinam and
aeternam juventam sortita communis omnium parens dicta sit, quia and cuncta
peperit and deinceps paritura sit, velut hominem consenuisse, ne posthaec reor
violentia Coeli nobis ista, sed nostro potius accidere vitio, qui rem rusticam
pessimo cuique servorum velut carnifici noxae dedimus quam majorum nostrorum
optimus quisque and optime tractauerit. I have often heard the chief of our
City complaining of the unfruitfulness of the earth, and sometimes again of
the vnkindlinesse of the weather now for a good space hurtful to the fruits,
and some have I heard with show of reason qualifying these complaints in that
they believe the earth being worn out and become barren by the excessive
fruitfulness of former ages, not to be able to yield nourishment to mankind,
according to the proportion of her accustomed bounty; but for mine own part
Publius Sylvinus I am well assured that these pretended causes are far from
truth, it being a piece of impiety so much as once to imagine that nature
(which the first founder of the world blessed with perpetual fruitfullnesse)
is affected with barrenness, as a kind of disease, neither is it the part of a
wise man to think that the Earth, (which being endued with a divine and
aeternall youth, is deservedly termed the Common Parent of all things,
inasmuch as it both does and hereafter shall bring all things forth) is now
waxen old like a man, so as that which has befalne us I should rather impute
it to our own default then to the unseasonableness of the weather, inasmuch
as we commit the charg of our husbandry to the basest of our slaves, as it
were to a public executioner, whereas the very best of our ancestors with
most happy success underwent that charge themselves, and performed that work
with their own hands. Now Sylvinus to whom he dedicated his works having
received and read this resolute assertion by reason he knew it to be against
the common tenet, and specially of one Tremellius, upon whose judgment it
seemed he much relied, made a Quaere thereof, and sent it to Columella, to
which in the very first chapter of his second book he returns answer with
this title title prefixed.

Terram nec senescere nec fatigari, si
stercoretur.
That the earth is neither wearied nor
waxes old, if it be made.
And then thus goes on. Queris a me Publi Sylvine quod ego sine cunctatione non
recuso docere, cur priori libro veterem opinionem fere omnium qui de cultu
agrorum loquuti sunt a principio confestim repulerim, falsamque sententiam
repudiaverim censentium longo aevi situ, longique jam temporis exercitatione
fatigatam and effoetam humum consenuisse. You demand a question of me
Sylvinus, which I will endeavor to answer without delay, which is, why in my
former book presently in the very entrance, I have rejected the ancient
opinion almost of all, who have written of husbandry, and have cast of their
imagination as false, who conceive that the earth by long tracte of time and
much usage is grown old and fruitles: where he is so far from recalling his
assertion, or making any doubt of the certain truth thereof: that he labors
farther to strengthen it with new supplies of reasons and at length concludes,
Non igitur fatigatione, quemadmodum plurimi crediderunt, nec senio, sed nosta
scilicet inertia minus benign nobis arva respondent: licet enim maiorem
fructum percipere, si frequenti and tempestiva and modica stercoratione terra
refoveatur. It is not through the tirednesse or age of the earth, as many have
believed, but through our own negligence that it has not satisfied us, so
bountifully as it has done. For we might receive more profit from it, if it
were cherished with frequent and moderate and seasonable dressing.

And with Columella agrees Pliny in the eighteenth book of his Natural
History, and third Chapter, where discoursing of the great abundance and plenty
in foregoing ages, and demanding the reason thereof, he thereunto shapes this
reply; Surely, says he, the cause was this, and nothing else: Great Lords and
Generals of the field, as it should seem, tilled themselves their grounds with
their own hands. And the Earth again for her part, taking no small pleasure as
it were to be aired and broken up, Laureato vomere and triumphali aratore, with
ploughs laureat, and ploughme^ triumphant, strained her self to yield increase
to the uttermost. Like it is also that these brave men and worthy Personages
were as curious in sowing a ground with corn, as in setting a battle in array;
as diligent in disposing and ordering of their lands, as in pitching a field.
And commonly every thing that comes under good hands, the more neat and
clean that the usage thereof is, and the greater pains that is taken about
it, the better it thriueth and prospers afterward. And having instanced in
Attilius Serranus, and Quintius Cincinnatus, he goes on in this manner. But now
see how the times be changed: they that do this business in the field, what
are they but bond-slaues fettered, condemned malefactors, and in a word noted
persons, such as are branded and marked in their visage with an hot iron, yet
we forsooth marvel that the labor of these contemptible slaves and abject
villains does not render the like profit, as that travel in former ages, of
great Captains and Generals of Armies. By which it appears that Columella and
Pliny imputed the barrennes of the Earth in regard of former ages) if any such
were) not to any deficiency in the Earth it self, but to the unskillfulness or
negligence of such as manured it. To which purpose Aelian reports a pretty
story of one Mises who presented the Great Lib. 1. c. 33.
King Artaxerxes, as he rode through Persia, with a Pomegranate of wonderful
bigness: which the King admiring, demanded out of what Paradise he had gotten
it, who answered, that he gathered it from his own garden, the King seemed
therewith to be marvailous well content, and gracing him with royal gifts,
swore by the Sun, this man with like diligence and care might as well in my
judgment of a little City make a great one. Videtur autem hic sermo innuere,
says the Author, omnes res cura and continua sollicitudine, and indefesso
labor meliores and praestantiores quam Natura producat, effici posse. It
seems by this, that all things by labor and industry may be made better then
Nature produces them. And it is certain that God so ordained it, that the
industry of man should in all things concur with the works of Nature, both
for the bringing of them to their perfection, and for the keeping of them
therein being brought unto it. As the Poet speaking of the degenerating of
seeds has truly expressed it.

Vidi lecta diu and multo spectata labor
Degenerare tamen, ni vis humana quotannis Virg. in his Georgicks l. 1

Maxima quaeque manu legeret.
Often have I seen choice seeds, and with much labor tried,
Eftsoons degenerate, unless man's industry,
Yearly by hand did lease the greatest carefully.
And this I take to be the true reason (as before has been touched) why
neither so good, nor so great store of wine is at this day made in this
kingdom, as by records seems to have been in former ages; the neglect I
mean, of planting and dressing our vines as they might be, and at this present
are in foreign countries, and with us formerly have been, and this neglect
has perchance arisen from hence, that we and the French being often and long
at defiance, and all friendly commerce ceasing betwixt us, partly to cross
them in the venting of their commodities, and partly to enrich themselves, men
were either by public authority set on work, or they set themselves on
work, to try the utmost of their endeavor in the making of wines, but since
peace and trade has been settled betwixt both kingdoms, that practice has by
degrees grown out of use, for that men found by experience that both better
wines and better cheap might be had from France then could be made here; and
I make no doubt but as tillage with us, so the planting of Vineyards is
increased with them, and for this reason, together with the Causes before
alleged, it seems to be, that the French wines are better with us at this
present then they were in the reign of Edward the second, as shall by Gods
help be fully manifested in the next Section. And that which has been
spoken of the making of wines may likewise be understood of the making of Bay
sale in this kingdom in former ages, for which (as I am credibly informed)
records are likewise to be seen; for to ascribe either the one or the other to
the Suns going more Southerly from us in Summer, is in my judgment both
unwarrantable and improbable: unwarrantable as has already been showed in
this very book Cap. 4. Sect, 4. improbable, for that if this plant should
decay for this reason, all other plants, and trees, and herbs, and flowers
should consequently partake of the like decay, at leastwise in some proportion,
which our best Physicians and Herbalists have not yet found to be so, nay the
contrary is by them avouched; and as our wines are in a manner utterly decayed
here, so their strength in France, in Spain, in Italy, in Hungary, in Germany,
should upon the same supposition be much abated, which notwithstanding I have
nowhere found to be observed,

SECT. 4. An argument drawn from the present state of husbandmen, and another
for the many and miserable dearths in former ages together with an objection
taken from the high prizes of victuals answered.
But that which farther persuades me, that neither the goodness of the soil,
nor the seasonablenesse of the weather, nor the industry of the husbandman is
now inferior to that of former ages, is this, that both this fine and rent
being raised, his apparel and education of his children more chargeable, and
the rates of public payments more burdensome, yet he fares better, and lays
up more money in his purse, then usually in those times he did.

Besides it is certain, that if we compare time with time, the famines of
former ages were more grievous then ours: I omit those of Jerusalem and
Samaria, because occasioned by the sieges of those Cities, as also those which
either Civil wars, or foreign invasions has drawn on. Of the rest that of
Lypsius. is undoubtedly true. Iam de fame De Constable l. 2. 22
nihil profecto nos aut aetas nostra vidimus, si videmus antiqua. Now touching
famine verily we and our age have seen nothing, if we behold ancient records.
Under the Emperor Honorius, so great was the scarcity and dearth of victuals
in Rome it self, that in the open marketplace this voice was heard, Pone
pretium humanae carni, set a price to man's flesh. And long before, even when L.
Minutius was made the first over-seer Zozimus 6. Annal. Lib. 4,
of the grain, Livy reports, multos e plebe, ne diutina fame cruciarentur,
capitibus obvolutis sese in Tyberim praecipitasse. That many of the Commons
least they should be tortured with long famine, covering their faces, cast
themselves headlong into Tyber. What a miserable dearth was that in Egypt, held
by the Ancients for abundance of Corn, the Granary of Gen 47. 23.
the world) when for want of bread their greatest Nobles were forced to sell
not only their lands, but themselves, and become bond-slaues to Pharaoh. How
universal was that foretold by Agabus, which also came to pass under
Claudius Caesar, as both Dion and Suetonius bear witness to S. Luke. But to
come nearer home, few histories, I think, exceed Act. 11. 28,
our own in this point. About the year 514, during the reign of Cissa king
of the South Saxons in his country reigned such an extreme Beda. l. 4. c. 13.
famine, that both men and women in great flocks and companies cast themselves
from the rocks into the Sea, in the year 1314, about the beginning of the
reign of Edward the second, the dearth was generally such over the land, that
purposely for the moderation of the prices of victuals, a Parliament was
assembled at London: but it increased so vehemently that upon S. Lawrence Eve,
there was scarcely bread to be gotten for the sustentation of the Kings own
family. And the year following Thomas de la Moore.
it grew so terrible, that horses and dogs, yea men and children were stolen
for food, and which is horrible to think, the thieves newly brought into the
gaoles, were torn in pieces, and presently eaten half alive by such as had
been longer there. In London it was proclaimed that no Corn should be
converted to Brewers uses, which Act the King (moved with compassion toward
his Nation) imitating, caused to be executed through all the kingdom:
otherwise says Walsingham, the greater part of the people had perished with
penury of bread. And again to conclude this sad discourse, in the year 1317,
in the tenth year of the same King, there was such a murraine of all kind of
cattle; Sam. Daniell.
together with a general failing of all fruits of the Earth by excessive
raines and unseasonable weather, as provision could not be had for the Kings
house, nor means for other great men to maintain their Tables: Inasmuch as
they put away their servants in great numbers, who having been daintily bred,
and now not able to work, skorning to beg, fell to robbery and spoil, which
added much to the misery of the Kingdom.

It will be said, if the plenty of corn and victuals, be as great as in former
ages, how comes it to pass that their prices are so much inhanced? But if we
compare our prices with those of the ancient Romans, we shall find that
theirs far exceeded ours. The Roman penny by the consent of the learned, and
the judgment of our last Translatours in diverse parts of their Marginall
notes, was the eight part of an ounce, accounting five shillings to the ounce,
so that it was worth of our money seven pence half penny. Now by the testimony
of Varro and Macrobius, their Peacocks eggs (which are now of no reckoning
with us,) were De Re Rust. l. 3. c. 6. Sat. l. 3. 13.
sold with them for five Roman pence a piece: and the Peacocks themselves for
fifty. Thrushes and Ousells or blackebirds were commonly sold for three pence a
piece. Nay Varro mentions one L. Axius, a Roman Varro, l. 3. c. 2,
Knight, who would not let go a pair of doves, minoris quadringentis
denarijs, Cap. 7.
for less then four hundred pence. But these insana pretia, as Macrobius
calls them, mad, and unreasonable prices, we shall have Cap. 16.
fitter occasion to speak of, when we come to treat of the luxury of the
Ancients, In the mean time it shall not be amiss to remember what our Savior
tells us in the Gospel, that two Sparrowes or passerculi, as Beza renders it,
were then sold for a farthing, thereby implying Mat. 10. 29.
their great cheapenes: Yet for the same money, it being the tenth part of a
Roman penny, and answering in value to half penny farthing of our coin, more
may be had at this day with us: But I leave foreign Nations and return to
our own. If then together with the inhancing of prices, we likewise take into
our consideration the inhancing of Coin, it will appear that the prices of
things are not so much inhanced as is supposed. About three hundred years
ago, in the latter part of the reign of Edward the second, and beginning of
Edward the third, an ounce of silver was valued at one shtlling and eight
pence, whereas now it is valued at five shillings: so that one hundred pounds
then was both in weight and worth fully as much as three hundred pounds are
now; and consequently, if they gave a groat for that which we now give a
shilling, they gave just the same price which we now give. The price of Claret
wine, as appears upon record among the statutes of Edward the second, was at
that time twelve pence the gallon, so that by proportion the price should now
be three shillings, and look how much it comes shot of that price, it is
certain that so much the cheaper it is at this day, then it was in that age.
Whereunto may be added the plenty of coin and multitude of men, both which are
doubtless in regard of those times much increased. For the former of which,
though it be true that some great ones heaped up huge masses of treasure, yet I
think it will not be denied, but that there are now more rich men then in
those times: Some wise men being of opinion that there is now more plate in the
land, then there was in Edward the thirds time both money and plate: And for
the latter, he that shall duly consider the daily enlarging of our cities and
towns, and the adding of new Isles to the greatest part of our Parish Churches,
within these last two or three hundred years, will easily believe that the
number of our people is not a little increased. Either of which asunder, but
much more both together must needs be a means of raising the prices of all
things. yet this complaint as it has been in all ages, so will it still
continue, since Ier: 44. 18.
we left to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to power out drink
offerings unto her, we have had scarceness of all things, and have been
consumed with the sword and with the famine.

SECT. 5. That there is no decrease in the fruitfulness, the quantities or
virtues of plants and simples, nor in he store and goodness of mettalls and
minerals, as neither in the bigness or life of beasts, together with an
objection touching the Elephant in the first of Macchabes, answered.
NOw if such be the condition of the Earth it self, and the fruits thereof,
what reason have we to conceive otherwise of the trees and plants, springing
up and nourished from thence. I cannot find that either Dioscorides,
Theophrastus, or Pliny among the Ancients; or among latter writers, Ruellius,
Fuchsius, or our own Gerard ever observed any decay, either in the grows,
the virtues or duration of these Vegetables; the Oak and Beetch, rise to as
great an higth and bigness, spread their branches and roots as far, last as
long, bring forth as fair mast; as they did a thousand year agone. Those
underground trees, whose bulkes are sometimes taken up entire, in Cheshshire,
Lancashire, Camden*
and other places, and are commonly thought to have lain buried there ever
since Noah's flood, are not found in length or largeness to exceed the bodies
of ours at this day. In former ages I grant was greater choice of good timber,
because greater plenty of woods, but those being cut down, tillage has
succeeded in the place thereof, which in regard of our increase of people,
seemed of the two, the more necessary, and for fuel, it is in most places
supplied with other kinds which were not then thought upon.

The like may be said for the virtues of Plants, Issop, Garlike, Hemlocke, and
the rest, they are still endued with the same temper, with the same degrees of
heat or cold, and are availeable for the same uses, as in former ages; as may
easily appear by comparing Galen de simplicium medicamentorum facultatibus,
with Wecker a modern Physician. The former makes Garlic hot in the fourth
degree, so does the latter. The former Practic. General. l. 4.
Issop hot in the third degree, and so does the latter. The former hemtocke
extremely cold, so does the latter. These may suffice for a taste, and thus may
we parallel simples, as for their first, so for their second and third
qualities, and application to diseases. The difference of their strength is
doubtless very great in regard of the different Clymats they grow in: But that
it should by succession of ages be abated in their several species, and in the
same Clymate, is more I think then ever any Herbalist in his writings, or
learned Physician in his practice has yet observed.

And if there be no decay found in the Vegetables, very likely it is that the
same may likewise be verified of the beasts those at leastwise which make them
their food, and are nourished by them. Surely he that shall compare the present
proportions of the elephant, the cammell, the horse, the dog, with the
descriptions of Aristotle, as also the present extention of their lives, with
that which both he, and other Ancients record of them, will easily find that
there is in them no sensible decrease. Vita equorum, (says he) plurimis ad
decimum octavum, atque etiam vicesimum annum, sed nonnulli viginti quinque, and
triginta egerunt: Et si cura Hist. Amnialiu^, lib. 12. c. 8.
diligenter adhibeatur vel ad quinquaginta protrahitur aetas horses commonly
live eighteen or twenty years, yet some last five and twenty or thirty, and
if they be very well kept, they may come to forty or fifty; which he makes in
a manner their utmost period. Whereas Albertus tells us, that himself was
assured by a soldier, that the horse he then used, was three score years
old, and yet was serviceable in the wars. And Augustinus Niphus yet latter,
that he was crediblely informed by the horsemen of Ferdinand the first, that
there was then in the Kings stable an horse that was seaventy years old.

Butaeo, a man much commended for his rare learning by many learned writers,
laboring to demonstrate by Geometrical proportions, that the Arc was capable
of so many several kind of beasts, as are faid to have been in it, as also
their provision for one year spaces, takes the ground of his demonstration
from the present dimensions of their bodies, and their present allowance for
food, proportioning the capacity of the Arc thereunto, and is therein
applauded not only by Goropius Becanus, but by Pererius and Sr Walter
Rawleigh: whereas, were there such a continual diminution in the quantity of
their bodies, and consequently in their food as is supposed, his ground were
falfe, and his demonstration frivolous. Whereunto may be added that the same
allowance of food, which Cato, and Varro, and Columella, in their books of
husbandry agreed upon to be sufficient for an ox, or a horse, or a sheep in
their times, is now likewise thought to be but competent: And the same
proportions of body, which the Ancient Painters and Caruers allowed to horses
and dogs, is now likewise by the skilfullest in those Arts found to be most
convenient. Indeed in the first book of Macchabes and sixth chapter, is
somewhat a strange relation v. 37.
made of Elephants, which are there described to be so big, that each of them
carried a wooden tower on his back, out of which fought thirty two armed men,
besides the Indian which ruled the beast. Whence some have conceited that the
Elephants of those times were far greater then those of the present age: But
doubtless the Author of that book speaks of the Indian race, which are far
beyond the Ethiopian, as Iunius in his annotations on that place has observed
out of Pliny. And there are of them, says Aelian, nine cubits high, which is
thirteen foot and an half. And those which have beeene in the great Mogulls
country assure us, that at this day they are there far more vast and huge
then any that we have seen in these parts of the world. But leaving the
Vegetables and beasts springing and walking upon the face of the earth, let us
a little search into the bowels thereof, and take a view of the mettalls and
mineralls therein bredde. Of the nature, causes, and grows, whereof Georgius
Agricola has written most exactly, but neither he, nor any man else, I think
ever yet observed that by continuance of time theirveines are wasted and
impaired, one treatise he has expressly composed de veteribus and novis
metallis, wherein he shows that as the old are exhausted, new are discovered.
It is true indeed which lib 33. in Proaem.
Pliny has observed, that we descend into the entrails of the earth, we go
down as far as to the seat and habitation of the infernal spirits, and all
to meet with rich treasure, as if she were not fruitful enough, and
beneficial unto us in the upper face thereof, where she permits us to
walk and tread upon her: Yet notwithstanding by the covetousness and toil of
men can her mines never be drawn dry, nor her store emptied.

The Earth not only on her back does bear
Abundant treasures gliftring every where,
But inwardly she is no less fraught with riches,
Nay rather more (which more our fowls bewitches) Bartas 3 day of the 1 week.

Within the deep folds of her fruitful lap,
So bound-lesse mines of treasure does she wrappe,
That the hungry hands of humane avarice
Cannot exhaust with labor or device.
For they be more then there be stars in heaven,
Or stormy billows in the Ocean driven,
Or ears of corn in Autumn on the fields,
Or savage beasts upon a thousand hills,
Or fishes diving in the silver floods,
Or scattred leaves in winter in the woods.
I will not dispute it, whether all mineralls were made at the first creation,
or have since received increase by tract of time, which latter I confess I
rather with Quercetan incline unto, they being somewhat In his epistle to
Aubertus de ortu and causis meta^orum.
of the nature of stones, which undoubtedly grow, though not by augmentation or
accretion, yet by affimilation or apposition, turning the neighbor earth into
their substance, Yet thus much may we confidently affirm, that the minerals
themselves wast not in the ordinary course, but by the insatiable desire of
mankind. Nay such is the divine providence, that even there where they are most
vexed and wrought upon, yet are they not worn out, or wasted in the whole. Of
late within these few years Mendip hills yielded, I think, more lead then
ever, and at this day I do not hear that the Iron mines in Sussex, or the
Tin works in Cornwall are any whit abated, which I confess to be somewhat
strange, considering that little corner furnishes in a manner all the Christian
world with that metal: and for mines of gold and silver, though by some it be
thought that they fail in the East Indies in regard of former ages: Yet most
certain it is that in the West Indies, that supposed defect is abundantly
recompensed.

SECT. 6. An objection taken from the Eclipses of the Planets, answered.
BEfore we conclude this Chapter, there remains yet one rub to be removed
touching the Eclypses of the Sun and Moon For as some have been of opinion,
that the bodies of those Planets suffered by them, so many have thought that
these inferior bodies suffered from them, and consequently that the more
Eclypses there are, (which by tract of time must needs increase in number) the
more do all things depending upon those planets decay and degenerate in their
virtues and operations. But as the former of these opinions is already proved
to be certainly false, so is this latter altogether uncertain. What effects
Eclypses produce, I cannot punctually define. Strange accidents I grant,
as well in the course of Nature, as in the Civil affairs, have often followed
upon them, as appears in Cyprianus Leouicius, who has purposely composed a
Tract of them. And Mr Camden observes that the town of Shrewesbery suffered
twice most grievous loss by fire within the compass of fifty years, upon
two several Eclypses of the Sun in Aries, but whether those Accidents were
to be ascribed to the precedent Eclypses, I cannot certainly affirm. Once we
are sure that the moon is Eclypsed by the interposition of the Earth, as is
the Sun by the moon. Since then the night is nothing else but the
interposition of the Earth between us and the Sun, I see no reason but we
should daily fear as dangerous effects from every night or thick cloud, as
from any Eclypse. But I verily believe that the ground of this error, as also
of the former, sprang from the ignorance of the Causes of Eclypses; Sulpitius
Gallus being the first amongst the Romans, and amongst the Greeks, Thales
Milesius, who finding their nature did prognosticate and forshew them. After
them, Hipparchus compiled his Ephimerides, containing the course and aspects of
both these Planets for six hundred years ensuing, and that no less assuredly,
then if he had been privy to Natures counsels. Great persons and excellent
doubtless were these, says Pliny, who above the reach of all humane capacity,
found out the reason of the course of so mighty stars, and divine Lib. 2. c.
12.
powers. And whereas the weak mind of man was before to seek, fearing in
these Eclypses of the stars, some great wrong, or violence, or death of the
Planets, secured them in that behalf. In which dreadful fear stood
Stesicorus and Pyndarus the Poets, notwithstanding their lofty style, and
namely at the Eclypse of the Sunce, as may appear by their Poemes. In this
fearful fit also of an Eclypse, Nicias the general of the Athenians (as a
man ignorant of the cause thereof) feared to set sail with his fleet out of
the haven, and so greatly endangered and distressed the state of his country:
But on the contrary, the forenamed Sulpitius being a Colonel in the field, the
day before that King Perseus was vanquished by Paulus, was brought forth by the
General into open audience before the whole host, to foretell the Eclipe that
should happen the next morrow, whereby he delivered the army from all
pensiveness and fear, which might have troubled them, in the time of
battle, and within a while after he compiled also a book thereof. Thus far
Plyny touching the harmless and innocent nature of Eclipses, himself in the
next chapter reducing their certain revolutions, and returns to the space of
two hundred twenty two months.

I will shut up all with a memorable story to this purpose taken out of John de
Royas in his Epistle to Charles the fifth, prefixed to his Commentaries upon
the plain Sphere. Colonus the leader of King Ferdinands army, at the Island of
Iamaica, being in great distress for want of victuals, which he could by no
means attain of the Inhabitants, and by his skill foreseeing an Eclips of the
Moon shortly to ensue, took order that it should be declared to the
Governors of the Island, that unless they supplied him and his with
necessaries, imminent danger hanged over their heads, in witness whereof they
should shortly see the Moon Eclypsed The Barbarians at first, refused his
demands and contemned his threatening: but when at the set time they indeed
beheld the Moon by degrees to fail in her light, and understood not the cause
thereof, they first gave credit to his words, and then supply of victuals to
his army, casting themselves to his feet and craving pardon for their offense.

Finally to the present objection, if any harmefull malignant effect be for the
present or afterward produced by the Eclips in those parts where it is seen,
yet no man I think will deny it, but to be repairable by by the tract and
revolution of time, or if irrepairable, yet this decay in the Creatures,
arises not from any deficiencie in themselves, from any waxing old or removal
from their first originals, (which is the very point in question) but from an
adventitious and external cause. And so I pass from the other Creatures to
the Consideration of Man the Commander and Compendium of all the rest, for
whose sake both they were first made, and this discourse was first undertaken.

LIB. III. Of the pretended decay of mankind in regard of age and duration of
strength and stature, of arts and wits.
CAP. I. Touching the pretended decay of men in regard of their age, and first
by way of comparison between the ages of the Ancients, and those of latter
times.
SECT. 1. Of the short life of man in regard of the duration of many other
Creatures and that he was Created Mortal, but had he not fallen, should have
been preserved to immortality.
SInce upon exammination we have found that there is no such perpetual and
universal decay as is pretended in the Hea^ens, in the Earth, in the Air, in
the Water, the fishes, the plants, the Beasts, the Mineralls: I see no reason
but that from thence we might safely and sufficiently conclude that neither is
there any such decay in man. But because this discourse was principally
undertaken and intended for the sake of mankind, I will consider and compare
them of former ages with those of latter, first in regard of age, secondly in
regard of Strength and stature, thirdly in regard of wits and inventions:
fourthly and lastly in regard of manners and conditions. And if upon due
consideration and comparison it shall appear that there is no such decay in
any of these as is supposed, the Question I trust touchthe worlds decay in
general will soon be at at end.

The ordinary age of man being compared with that of the heavens, the stones,
the mettalls, some beasts and trees is very short, but the longest being
compared with God and Eternity is but as a span, a shadow, a dream of a
shadow, nay mere nothing, which the Roman Orator has both truly observed,
and eligantly expressed. Apud Hypanim fluuium qui ab Europae Psalm. 39. 5. 1.
Tusculan.
part in pontum influit, Aristoteles ait bestiolas quasdam nasci quae vnum
diem viuant; ex ijs igitur hora octaua quae mortua est, provecta aetate mortua
est, quae vero occidente sole decrepita, eo magis si etiam Solstitiali die.
Confer nostram longissimam aetatem cum aeternitate, in eadem propemodum
brevitate qua istae bestiolae reperiemur. Aristole writes that by the river
Hypanis which on the side of Europe falls into Pontus, certain little animals
are bred, which live but a day at most: Amongst them then, such as dye the
eight hour, die old; such as dye at sun set, dye in their decrepit age
specially if it be upon the day of the Su^mer Solstice. Now compare our age
with eternity, and we shall be found in regard of duration almost in the same
state of shortness that those Creatures are.

The body of man even before the fall was doubtless in it self by reaof
contrary Elements, contrary humors, and members of contrary temper whereof it
was composed, dissoluble and morrall: As also by reason of outward accidents,
the daily wasting of his native heat, and the disproportionable supply of his
radical moisture: But these defects his Creator supplied, arming him against
outward accidents by divine providence, the guard of Angels and his own
excellent wisdom, against the contrarieties fighting in his body, by the
harmony of his soul: against the wasting of his native heat and radical
moisture by that supernatural virtue and efficacy which he gave to the fruit
of the tree of life: He was then Naturally Mortal: (for otherwise even after
his fall should he have continued immortal, as the Apostate Angels did) but
by special privilege and dispensation immortal. mortalis erat, says S.
Augustine, Lib. 7. de Genesis ad Lit. c. 25.
condition corporis animalis, immortalis autem beneficio-conditoris: He was
mortal in respect of his natural body, but immortal by the favor of his
Creator: Yet doubtless had he not sinned, he had not still lived here upon
earth, though in likelihood his age might be extended to some thousands of
years, but should have been at length translated from hence to heaven where
he could neither have sinned nor dyed^ Sic est immortalis conditus, Says
Gregory, vt tamen si peccaret, and mori Moral. lib. 4. cap. 26.
possit, and sic mortalis est conditus, vt si non peccaret etiam non mori
possit, atque ex merito liberi arbitrij beatitudinem illius regionis
attingeret, in qua vel peccare vel mori non possit. He was so created immortal
that if he sinned he might dye, and again so was he created mortal that, he
could not dye: But by the merit of his freewill should have been translated to
that place of bliss where he could neither sin nor dye.

SECT. 2. Of the long lives of the Patriarchs, and of the manner of Computing
there years, and that Almighty God drew out the lines of their lives to that
length for reasons proper to those first times.
THough upon the fall of man the duration of his continuance here upon the
earth was much shortened, yet certain it is that many of the Ancient
Patriarchs before the flood lived above nine hundred, and some to almost a
thousand years, Neither ought this to seem incredible, though Plyny
mentioning some who were reported to have lived five six or eight hundred
years, at length concludes Lib. 7. cap. 48.
that all these strange reports arise from the ignorance of times past, and for
want of knowledge how they made their account. For some, says he, reckoned the
Summer for one year and the Winter for another. There were also that reckoned
every quarter for a year, as the Arcadians whose year was but three months,
and some again you have, as namely the Egyptians, who count every change or
New moon for a year, and therefore no marvel if some of them are reported to
have lived a thousand years. Thus Pliny. But Josephus to justify the truth
of Moses his history touching the age of the first Patriarchs, Lib. 1. Antiq.
cap. 4.
vouches the authority of Manathon the writer of the Egyptian story, Berosus of
the Chaldean, Moschus and Esthieus of the Phenician, as also Hesiodus,
Hecataeus, Elamius, Acuselaus, Ephorus and others, all affirming that those of
the first age lived to a thousand years, but how they made their computation
Josephus does not express: Whereupon some have been so bold as to tell us,
that the years Moses there speaks of, are not to be computed as ours, but
were somewhat above the monthly year containing in them thirty six days
which is a number quadrat, being made up of six times six: So that one of our
years contains ten of them, and those years being divided into twelve
months, there could not above three days be attributed to each of them. But
this opinion (for I will not spare it though it make for me,) how not only
false it is, but manifestly repugnant to the sacred Scriptures, any man may of
himself easily discern. For if we embrace this computation, it will from
thence follow that Caynan and Enoch begat children when they were but six
years old and an Genesis 5. 12. Genesis 5. 21.
half, or seven at most, for the Scripture tells us, that the one begat them
when he was but sixty five years old, and the other at seventie: so that if
ten of their years made but one of ours, it would consequently follow, that
they begat children when they were yet but seven years of age: Besides, since
none of those Ancient Patriarchs attained to a thousand years, if their
years were so to be accounted, as these men would have it, none of them should
have arrived to ninety seven years; and yet many we know are now found to
pass an hundred. Again, the Scripture testifies, that Abraham died in a good
old age full of Genesis 25. 7. 8.
days, being one hundred seaventy five years old, which number according to
their computation, makes but seaventeene years and an half; a ridiculous old
age. Lastly, in the seventh and eight of Genesis in that one year alone, in
which the flood lasted, mention is made of the first, second, Genesis 7. 11 and 8.
4: 5: 13: 14.
and tenth month, and least any should imagine, that those months lasted
only three days, we have there named the seaventeenth day of the second, and
the twenty seventh of the seventh month. Gen: 7. 11: and 4. 5.


To take it then as granted that Moses his computation of the year was the
same with ours, and that those first Patriarchs lived much longer then any of
latter times; yet from thence cannot any sufficient proof be brought, that
there has been and still continues, a constant and perpetual decrease in
man's age, since for special Reasons and by special privilege Almighty God
granted that to them, which to their successors was denied: which I will
rather choose to express in Josephus his words then in mine own. Where having
assigned some other causes thereof, peculiar to those times and persons, at
length he concludes. Deinde propter virtutes and gloriosas vtilitates quas
iugiter perscrutabantur, Lib. 1. Antiq. c: 4:
id est astrologiam and Geometriam, Deus ijs ampliora viuendi spatia
condonauit, quae non ediscere potuissent, nisi sexcentis viuerent annis, per
tot enim an norum curricula magnus annus impletur. Again in regard of the
excellent and profitable use of Astronomy and Geometry, which they daily
searched into, Almighty God granted them a longer space of life, in as much as
they could not well find out the depth of those Arts, unless they lived six
hundred years, for in that revolution of time, the great year comes about.
Where what he means by the great year, since the most learned make a great
doubt, I for my part will not undertake positiuely to determine. But to this
reason of losephus may well be added another principal one, which is, that God
spared them of this first age the longer for the multiplying of the race of
mankind, and replenishing the Earth with Inhabitants. And as he granted them
for these reasons a longer space of life by special privilege: so likewise he
fitted their food, their bodies, and all other necessaries proportionable
thereunto; as extraordinary carefulnes and skilfulnes in the moderation and
choice of their diet together with a singular knowledge in the virtues of
plants, and stones, and mineralls, and the like, as well for the preservation
of their health, as the curing of all kind of diseases; which well agrees with
that of Roger Bacon, speaking of the Patriarchs in his book de scientia
experimentali. Quum fuerunt magna sapientia praediti, excogitaverunt omne
regimen sanitatis and medicinas secretas quibus senectus retardabatur and
quibus cum venit potuit mitigari and filij eorum hoc regimen habebant and
experimenta contra senectutem, nam Deus illustravit in omni sapientia, and ergo
diu vivere potuerunt. They being endued with singular wisdom, found out the
whole course of the regiment of health and secret medicines, whereby the pace
of old age was slackned, and when it arived the rigor of it was abated, and
from them their sons as by a tradition derived this skill, and these
experiments against old age, for God enlightened them with all kind of
wisdom; and from hence it came to pass that they lived long. Yet even among
them before the flood, we find that the first man, who in case of a decrease
should in reason have lived longest, was notwithstanding in number of years
exceeded not only by Methusalath, and Iered before, but by Noah after the
flood, except we will add unto Adams age threescore years, as some divines
do, upon a supposition that he was created in the flower of man's age,
agreeablely to those times.

SECT. 3. That since Moses his time, the length of man's age is nothing abated,
as appears by the testimony of Moses himself, and other grave authors,
compared with the experience of these times.
HOwsoever it fared with the Patriarchs, sure we are that since Moses his
time; who was borne in the year of the world 2434, or thereabout, above three
thousand years ago, when the world was now well replenished, and the most
necessary sciences depending upon observation and experience, in a manner
perfected, the length of man's age is nothing abated, as clearly it appears by
that most famous and evident testimony of his: the time of our life, (says
he) is three score years and ten, and though men be so strong that they
come to four score years, yet is their strength then but labor and sorrow,
so soon passes it away, and we are gone. And that these are indeed the
words of Psalm. 90. 10.
Moses, appears by the very Title of the Psalm prefixed to it. A Psalm of
Moses the man of God. For though S. Augustine seem to make some doubt of it,
because he finds it not recorded in his history: And Aben Ezra a Jewish
Rabbin, think the Author to have been one of David's singers so named, yet S.
Hierome doubts not constantly to auerre it to be that same Moses, who was the
penman of holy writ, and the Captain of the Hebrews, and that we might not
call it into question, the Holy Ghost seems purposely to have annexed that
Epithete, The man of God, that is, not only a godly religious and excellent
man, but a man endued with a prophetical spirit, and so is it taken, 1 Samuel 2.
27. and 1. Kings. 13. 1. In which regard Moses himself gives himself this
same Title, Deuter: 33. 1. This is the blessing wherewith Moses the man of God
blessed the children of Israel before his death. And for S. Augustines
objection, he would leave very few Psalms to David himself, were his
argument of any force. Yet some Expositours there are, who refer it to that
story of the Israelites, written in the 32 of Exodus, Others in the 14 of
Numbers, which I the rather am induced to believe, for that of all those six
hundred thousand Israelites, which under the conduct of Moses came out of
Egypt, only two, Caleb and Joshua entered into the land of promise, all the
rest, men, women, and children, young and old, leaving their carkases in the
Wilderness within the space of forty years. True indeed it is, that both
Moses. himself and his brother Aaron outliued the number of years set down
in that Psalm; yet says judicious Calvin, de communi ratione loquitur, he
speaks of the ordinary course, how it commonly fared with men in that respect
even in those times. And thus do I take Herodotus to be understood In Thalia.
jumping in the same number with Moses, spatium vivendi longissimum propositum
esse octoginta annos, that the utmost space of man's life is four score years:
Though Solon come a degree shorter, making the age of man threescore and ten,
as both Laertius and Censorinus in his book De die natali testify of him.
Plato who had (as Seneca witnesses) Laert. l. 1. c. 14.
a strong and able body, borrowing his name from his broad breast, not without
much care and diligence arrived to the age of eighty one years. Epist. 51.
And Barzillai who lived in David's time, is said to have been Senex valde, a
very aged man, yet was he by his own confession, but four score 2. Sam. 19.
32. v. 35.
years old. Nay David himself is said to have been old, stricken in years,
and Satur dierum, full of days, insomuch as they covered him with clothes, 1.
King. 1. 1. 1 Chro: 19. 28. 2. Sam. 5. 4.
but he got no heat: yet was he but threescore and ten when he died, thirty
when he began to reign, and forty years he reigned, being naturally of a
sound and healthful constitution. Solomon's age we cannot by Scripture
certainly determine: some Divines conjecture, that he little exceeded forty,
but the most learned, that he passed not fifty or threescore at most, yet is
it noted of him, that cum senex esset, when he was old, his wives turned away
his heart after other Gods: Of all the Kings of Judah 1 King. 11. 4.
and Jerusalem which followed after, the greatest part came not to fifty, very
few to threescore, and none full home to threescore and ten. In the whole
Catalogue of Roman, Greek, French, and Germane Emperors, only four are
found which attained to fourscore, and those not among the first of that
rank. In the bed-roll of Popes, five only lived to see those years, and those
of latter days in comparison, namely John 23. Gregory 12 and 13. Paulus 3 and
4. and which is more remarkable, our Queen Elizabeth of fresh and blessed
memory out-liued all her predecessors since the conquest, reigning the years
of Augustus, and living the age of David.

SECT. 4. The same confirmed by the testimony of other ancient and learned
Writers.
HEsiodus the first Writer as I take it (says Pliny) who has treated of this
argument, in his fabulous discourse touching the age of Lib. 7. c. 48 49.
man, affirms, (but upon what ground I know not) that a crow lives nine
times as long as we, and the Hearts or Staggs four times as long as the crow,
but the ravens thrice as long as they: And if we should consult with
Astrologers, Epigines says, that it is not possible to live an hundred and two
and twenty years: and Berosus is of opinion, that one cannot pass an hundred
and seventeen. In the Oracle of Sybilla Erithraea by the testimony of Phlegon
Trallianus are found these verses.

Viginti and centum revolutis protinus annis,
Quae sunt humanae longissima tempora vitae.
When six score winters are expired, which fate
Of humane life has made the longest date.
Moreover Trebellius Pollio in his book to Constantius thus writes,
Doctissimi Mathematicorum centum viginti annos homini ad vivendum datos
judicant, neque amplius cuiquam concessum dicunt, illud etiam adijcientes,
Mosen ipsum, (vt Iudaeorum libri testantur) Dei familiarem viginti quinque ac
centum annos vixisse, qui cum interitum hunc vt immutatum forte quereretur,
ferunt illi ab incerto Numine responsum, neminem deinceps amplius esse
victurum. The most learned Mathematicians are of opinion, that a man can live
but an hundred and twenty years, and that none can go beyond that period, yet
they add, that Moses himself, as the writings of the Jews testify, being
familiar with God, lived to the age of one hundred twenty five years, who when
he complained of this change, they report this answer to have been given him
by some divine power, that no man after that should pass those bounds. Thus
Pollio: ignorantly mistaking the age of Moses, but alluding as it seems to
that speech of God in the sixth of Genesis, his days shall be an hundred and
twenty years. Which words V. 3.
notwithstanding I should rather choose to refer to the continuance of the
world till the coming of the flood, then to the duration of the age of
particular men. For it is certain that after this, not only Noah, but Sem and
Arphaxad, and Salah, and Eber, and Peleg, and Nahor, and Terah, and Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, some of them by much; and all of them by some number of
years exceeded this proportion.

Crinitus in his seventh book de honesta disciplina reports out of Terentius
Varro from the authority of Dioscorides a great Astrologer, that the Egyptians;
(who took special care about the imbalming of dead bodies) by a subtle and
witty kind of reasoning found out, within what bounds of space to the very
utmost the age of man is confined, taking their estimate from the weight of the
heart, they affirmed then that the life of man is limited to one hundred
years, so that it could not pass that term, which the heart of those, say
they, who dye not untimely, does manifest; in as much as together with age, if
it be examined, it either receives increase or decrease; It receiving the
increase of two drams every year till a man come to fifty, and then again the
decrease of two yearly till he arrive to an hundred, and so returning to its
original weight, it can then make no farther progress. Now this observation
though it be doubtless more curious then true, yet does it show that the
common opinion of the Ancients was, that men did seldom pass one hundred
years. Seculum centum annorum spatium vocarunt, dictum a seen, quod longissimum
spatium^id putarint senescendorum hominum, says Varro, Seculum was the Lib. 5.
de delingua latina.
space of an hundred years, so called a seen, because they held that to be the
utmost point of growing old. And with Varro herein accords the son of Syrach,
The number of a man's days at the most are an hundred years. So as that Ecclus
18. 8.
prerogative extraordinary of Longevity was as I take it, specially annexed, as
to those first ages of the world, so to the Church and people chosen by God in
those times. For had men in all places and in all ages arrived to the lives of
the Patriarchs, the Earth by this time had not been able to sustain them
with food, nor hardly to contain their multitude; yet can it not be denied but
that in all times, and in all Nations some have been always found who have
exceeded that number of years which many of the Ancients (as we have heard)
accounted the utmost period of man's life.

SECT. 5. That in all times and nations some have been found who have exceeded
that number of years which the wisest of the ancients accounted the utmost
period of man's life, and that often those of latter ages have exceeded the
former in number of years, as is made to appear as well from sacred as
profane story.
TO let go fabulous and uncertain reports of the Arcadian kings and such
like, certain it is, that Marcus Valerius Corvinus, lived (...). 7. c. 48:
one hundred years complete, Metellus the Pontife or Supreme Priest lived
full as long. Epimenides the Cretian lived one hundred and fifty, whereof the
last fifty he spent under ground in a Cave. Zenophanes the Colophonian one
hundred and two at the least: for he traveled at twenty five, and returned at
seventy seven after his setting forth, but after his return how long he lived
it is uncertain. Gorgias the Sicilian a famous Rhetorician in his time, lived
to one hundred and eight. Hippocrates the renowned Physician to one hundred and
four, both approving and honoring the excellency of his Art by his age.
Asinius Pollio inward with Augustus, though of a luxurious life, surmounted an
hundred. And for women Ciceroes wife Terentia lived till she was one hundred
and three. Clodia wife to Ofilius went beyond her, and saw one hundred and
fifteen years, and yet had she in her youth fifteen children: Luceia a common
vice in plays followed the stage and acted thereon an hundred years, such
another vice that played the fools part, and made sport between whiles in
interludes, named Galeria Copiola was brought aga^ act her feats upon the
stage when Cn. Pompeius and Q. Sulpitius were consulls, at the solemn plays
vowed for the health of Augustus Caesar, when she was in the hundred and fourth
year of her age. The first time that ever she entered the stage to show proof
of her skill in that profession, was ninety one years before, and then was she
brought thither by M. Pomponius an Edile of the Commons in the year that C.
Marius and Carbo were Consuls. And once again Pompeius the great, at the
solemn dedication of his stately Theater, trained the old woman to the stage,
thereby to make a show of her to the wonder of the world.

And if from profane stories we should come to the sacred, we shall there
likewise find that some in all ages have reached to that number of years, and
that often (which I desire to be observed) those of latter times have exceeded
the former. To let go the Patriarchs of whom as far as Iaacob I have in part
already spoken, Joseph attained to an hunand ten, his brother Leui to one
hundred thirty seven, and Moses and Genesis 50. 26. Exo. 6. 16. Deuteronomy. 34. 7. Number.
33. 39.
Aron were each of them one hundred and twenty at the least. Phineas Arons
nephew, it may be by special favor for his great Zeal, is supposed to have
lived three hundred years: and justly no doubt, if the war of the Israelites
against the tribe of Beiamin, (in which expedition Phineas was Iud. 28.
consulted with) were acted in the same series of time, in which the history is
recorded. Joshua lived one hundred and ten. Job after his restitution Ios. 24.
29. Job. 42. 16.
lived one hundred and forty years, notwithstanding that before his affliction
he had children of the age of men and women. Elizeus seems to have been above
an hundred, inasmuch as he lived threeskore years after the assumption of
Elias; and such he was at that assumption as the children taunted him for his
bald pate. Tobias the elder lived to one hundred fifty and eight, the younger to
one hundred Tob. 14. 13. and 16.
twenty seven. Long after this Anna the Prophetess mentioned by S. Luke
seems to have out pitched an hundred, as our common translation 2 cap. v. 37.
reads it, she being a widow fowerskore and four years, married seven, and
by common account no less then fourteen or fifteen when she was married,
which being put together make up an hundred and six years or there about:
though I am not ignorant that Iunius and our last translation agreably to the
original render it thus, and erat vidua annorum quasi octoginta and quatuor,
she was a widow of about fowreskore and four years that is according to an
usual Hebraisme, about fouerscore and four years old, as Noah is said to
have been filius quingentorum Genesis 5. 32.
annorum, the son of five hundred years, that is, natus quingentos annos,
five hundred years old. John the divine and beloved desciple an apostle a
prophet and an evangelist, who of all the apostles only died in his bed, all
the rest suffering martyrdom for the name of Christ, was doubtless very aged
when he resigned his spirit for as witnesses Eusebius In Chron:
out of Irenaeus he deceased in the 2 year of Traian which was the 101 from
the nativity, the 68 from the passion of Christ; Cedrenus affirms that he lived
to 106, but surely considering he wrote his Gospel after he was 90 In Comp.
by the testimony of Epiphanius, it is more then probable that he drew Haer. 51
nere upon 100 if he exceeded it not.

After this again Plyny to show the error of some ^athematitians, who thought
that the life of man could not even then be extended beyond Lib. 7. c 49.
an hundred years, produces a taxation or review of the several ages of men
between Apennine and the Poo made under the emperors Vespatian, the father
and the son, in which upon examination were found at Parma three men that had
lived each of them one hundred and twenty years, at Brixels one that was one
hundred twenty five years old: Moreover at Parma two, one hundred and thirty
years of age; at Plaisance one elder by an year: at Faventia there was one
woman one hundred thirty two years old: at Bononia L. Taurentius the son of
Marcus and at Ariminium M. Aponius reckoned each of them one hundred and fifty
years. About Playsance, is a town situate upon the hills named Velleiacum
wherein six men brought a certificate that they had lived one hundred and ten
years a piece, four likewise came in with a note of an hundred and twenty
years, and one of an hundred and forty: But because we will not dwell (says
he) upon a matter so evident and commonly confessed in the review taken of the
eight Region of Italy, there were found in the role fifty four of one hundred
years of age, fifty seven of one hundred and ten, two of one hundred twenty
five, four of one hundred and thirty, as many that were an hundred thirty
five, or one hundred thirty seven, and last of all three men of one hundeed
and forty.

Now had Plyny vir vnus apud Latinos in observandis investigandisque Naturae
arcanis diligens and accuratus, the only man among the Latins who is a
diligent and curious tracer of the prints of Natures footsteps, Cri^itus.
had this man I say observed any such decrease as is pretended in men's ages in
regard of former times, he would doubtless have noted it, either in that
chapter where so fare an opportunity was offered him, or some where else through
his history: which I presume cannot be found, and I doubt not but if the like
review and list were made in those parts at this day, as many of like ages
would be found within the like compass; or if there were found defect in that
place, it may happily be supplied in another; or if a general defect in this
age by reason of some accidental occasion, yet may it be repaired and
recompensed again in future times by their remoueall: The defect then (if any
be) is not in the course of Nature, but in our wronging it; and yet I make no
doubt but a number in succeeding ages have equalled and some exceeded those
recounted by Plyny in number of years.

SECT. 6 The same assertion farther proved and enlarged by many instances, both
at home and abroad.
ARchapius the Philosopher boasted, as witnesses Roger Bacon in his book de
erroribus medicorum, that he had lived 1029 years: and farther adds that
himself had spoken with many eyewitnesses worthy Credit who knew a man qui
magnifico medicamine sumpto vixerat nongentis et multis alijs annis and habuit
litteras Papales in testimonium huius rei, who having used a princely
preservatiue lived nine hundred years, and had the Popes letters testimonial
to show for it.

To say nothing of the wandering Jew, by some named Johannes Buttadeus, of whom
about six years since, being seen and conferred with at Antwerpe, and again
about sixteen before that, in France was every where in those times so much
talk, as if he had been present at our Saviors passion, and had lived in
this wandering manner ever since; I will only refer the curious Reader, who
desires to be farther informed in that point to the relations of Guido Bonatus,
(who lived about 400 years since) in the first part, 5 tract and 141
consideration of his Iudiciarie Astrology, and to the seventh book of the
History of the peace betwixt the Kings of France and Spain in the year 1604,
where the story is not only related but learnedly disputed; and to an old
manuscript Chronicle de gestis Regis Iohannis lately in the keeping of the ever
renowned Sr Henry Savill, where report is made that in the year of Grace 1228,
an Archbishop of Armenia arriving as a pilgrim in this kingdom to visit the
relics of our Saints, and being demanded if he could say any thing touching
the wandering Jew, of whom at that very time was much rumor; a certain Knight
in his train made answer for him in french, that he knew him well, and had
often conuersed with him; and thereupon describes him both for his person, and
manners, and the occasion of his living in that fashion, Much like as does
Paul of Eitsen, Bishop of Sleswing, who is said to have met and conferred
with him at Hamborough, in the year 1542, in the French history before
alleged, but leaving him to his wandering life, I return to more certain
Relations.

Paul the Hermit lived to one hundred and thirty, S. Anthony to one hundred
and five, one Cornarius a Venetian by weighing his meat and drink which he
took every meal (as himself in his medicinal observations testifies)
suruiued an hundred in perfect sense and sound health. Gartius Aretinus great
Granfather to Petrarch, arrived to one hundred and four. Gulielmus Postellus,
a french man in our age held out to almost an hundred and twenty; the tops of
his beard in his higher lip being then somewhat blackish and not altogether
white. But above all, most memorable is the age of Johannes de Temporibus,
which Verstigan out of the Dutch Authors thus reports: Here by the way, says
he, I must note to the Reader that Johannes de Temporibus, that is to say, John
of times so called for the sundry times or ages he lived, was shield-knaue, or
Armor bearer to Charles the great, of whom he was also made Knight. This man
being of great temperance, sobriety, and contentment of mind in his condition
of life, but above all, of a most excellent constitution of body, residing
partly in Germany where he was borne, and partly in France, lived unto the
ninth year of the reign of the Emperor Conrade, and died at the age of three
hundred sixty oney ears, seeming thereby a very miracle of Nature, and one in
whom it pleased God to represent unto latter ages the long years and temperate
lives of the ancient Patriarchs. Mine Author goes on; it is said that there
has a man lately lived in the East Indies, of some thought to be yet living,
of greater age then this John of Times: The certainety hereof I cannot
affirm, but it is crediblely reported, that a wo^ lately lived at Segouia in
Spain of an hundred and threescore years of age. And Franciscus Alvarez
says, that he saw Albuna Marc: chief Bishop of Ethiopia being of the age of
an hundred and fifty years. Anthony Fume an Historiographer of good account,
reports that in the year one thousand five hundred and seaventy, there was
an Indian presented to Solomon General of the Turks army, who had outliued
three hundred years. And Sr Walter Rawleigh tells us, that himself knew the
old Countess of Desmond of Inchiquin in Munster, who lived in the year 1589
and many years since, and yet was married in Edward the fourths time, and held
her joynter from all the Earls of Desmond till then: And that this is true
(says he) all the Noblemen and Gentlemen of Munster can witness. My Lord of
S. Albans casting her age, brings her to one hundred and forty at least, adding
withal, ter per vices dentijsse, that she recovered her teeth after casting
them three several times. The same Author reports that a while since in
Hereford-shire at their Maygames there was a Morice dance of eight men, whose
years put together made up eight hundred, that which was wanting of an hundred
in some superabounding in others. Mr Carew in his survey of Cornwall, assures
us upon his own knowledge that fourscore, and fourscore and ten years of age
is ordinary there in every place, and in most persons accompanied with an able
use of the body and their senses. One Polezew, says he) lately living reached
to one hundred and thirty, a kinsman of his to one hundred and twelve. One
Beauchamp to one hundred and six, and in the parish where himself dwelt he
professed to have remembered the decease of four within fourteen weeks space,
whose years added together made up the sum of three hundred and forty. The
same Gentleman made this merry Epigram or Epitaph upon one Brawne an Irish
man, but Cornish beggar.

Here Brawne the quondam beggar lies
Who counted by his tale,
Some six score winters and above;
Such virtue is in ale.
Ale was his meat, his drink, his cloth,
Ale did his death repriue,
And could he still have drunk his ale,
He had been still alive.
And I make no doubt but the like observation might be made in other countries
under his Majesty's dominions, as well as in those two sheires, if the like
particular survey, and search were made.

And if we please a little to cast our eyes abroad, we shall likewise find
that even at this day the Indians, a barbarous people and living according to
Nature, reach to a marveilous great age, matchable to any that we read of
since the flood, either in sacred or profane story. Sr Walter Rawleigh in his
discovery of Guiana reports that the king of A^omaia, being one hundred and
ten years old, came in a morning on foot to him from his house which was
fourteen English miles, and re^urned on foot the same way: But that which is
written by Mons^r Besanneera a french Gentleman in the relation of Captain
Laudonr^ reis second voyage to Florida, is much more strange, and not unworthy
to be set down at large. Our men, says he, regarding the age of their
Paracoussy or Lord of the country, began to question with him thereabouts,
whereunto he made answer that he was the first living Original from whence
five generations were descended, showing them withal another old man which
far exceeded him in age, and this man was his father, who seemed rather an
Anatomy then a living body: for his sinews, his veins, his arteries, his
bones, and other parts appeared so clearly through his skin, that a man might
easily tell them, and discern them one from another. Also his age was so great
that the good man had lost his sight, and could not speak one only word but
with exceeding great pain. Monsieur d' Ottigni having seen so strange a
sight, turned to the younger of these two old men, praying him to vouchsafe to
answer to that which he demanded touching his age: then called he a company
of Indians, and striking twice upon his thigh and laying his hand upon two of
them, he showed by signs that these two were his sons; again smiting upon
their thighs, he showed him others not so old, which were the children of the
two first, and thus continued he in the same manner until the fifth generation:
But though this old man had his father alive more old then himself, and that
both their hair was as white as was possible, yet it was told them that they
might yet live thirty or forty years more by the course of nature, although
the younger of them both, was not less then two hundred and fifty years old.

Torquemado in the first journey of his discourse tells us, that being at Rome
about the year 1531: it was bruted through all Italy that at Tarentum there
lived an old man, who at the age of an hundred years was grown young again,
he had changed his skin like unto the snake and had recovered a new, being
withal become so young and fresh, as those which had seen him and known him
before, could then scarce believe their own eyes; and having continued above
fifty years in this estate, he grew at length to be so old, as he seemed to be
made of barks of trees; whereunto he further adds (and that the above written
relation, says he, may not seem impossible, we have a more admirable thing in
the same kind, recorded by Fernand Lopez of Castegnede, historiographer to the
King of Portugal in the eigth book of his Chronicle, where he says, that
Nonnio de Cugne, being Viceroy at the Indies in the year 1536, there was a man
brought unto him as a thing worthy of admiration, for that it was auerred by
good proofs and sufficient testimony, that he was three hundred and forty
years old, he remembered he had seen that City wherein he dwelt unpeopled,
being then when he spoke it one of the chief of all the East Indies; he had
grown young again four times, changing his white hair and recovering new
teeth. When the Viceroy did see him, he then had the hair of his head and of
his beard black, although he had not much, and there being by chance a
Physician at that time present, the Viceroy willed him to feel the old man's
pulse, which he found as good and as strong as a young man's in the prime of his
age. This man was borne in the Realm of Bengala, and did affirm that he had
hadd at times near seven hundred wives, whereof some were dead and some he
had put away. The King of Portugal advertised of this wonder, did often
enquire, and had yearly news of him by the fleet which came from thence: He
lived above three hundred and seventy years. The same Castegnede adds, that in
the time of the same Viceroy, there was also found in the City of Bengala
another man, a Moore or Mahometane called Xequepeer borne in a Province named
Xeque, who was three hundred years old, as he said: all those that did know
him did also certify it, having great presumption so to do. This Moore was
reputed among them an holy man by reason of his austerenesse and abstinence:
The Portugals did converse familiarly with him. Now besides that the histories
of Portugal touching the Indies are faithfully collected and certified by very
authentical witnesses, there were in my time, says Torquemado, both in
Portugal and Castile many which had seen these old men.

SECT. 7. That if our lives be shortened in regard of our Ancestors, we should
rather lay the burden of the fault upon our intemperance, then upon a decay in
Nature.
THe High-landers likewise in Scotland, and the wild Irish commonly live longer
then those of softer education, of nice and tender bringing up, (which often
falls out in the more civil times and countries) being no doubt a great enemy
to Longevity, as also the first feeding and nourishing of the Infant with the
milk of a strange dug; an unnatural curiosity, having taught all women but
the beggar to find out nurses, which necessity only ought to commend unto them.
Whereunto may be added hasty marriages in tender years, wherein nature being
but yet green and growing, we rent from her, and replant her branches, while
her self has not yet any root sufficient to maintain her own top. And such
halfe-ripe seeds for the most part wither in the bud, and wax old even in
their infancy. But above all things the pressing of Nature with over-weighty
burdens, and when we find her strength defective, the help of strong waters,
hot spices and provoking sauces, is it which impaires our health, and shortens
our life.

-- Simul assis Horat. lib. 2. Sat. 2.

Miscueris elixa; simul conchylia turdis
Dulcia se in bilem vertent, stomachoque tumultum
Lenta feret pituita; vides ut pallidus omnis
Coena desurgat dubia?
Mix sod with roast, and fish with flesh, straightwayes
The sweet will turn it self to bitter gall:
Tough phlegm will in the stomach tumults raise.
See not how doubtful suppers make men pale?
But elegant to this purpose are those verses of Lucan,

-- O prodiga rerum
Luxuries nunquam parvo contenta paratu,
Et quaesitorum terra pelagoque ciborum
Ambitiosa fames, and lautae gloria mensae.
Discite quam parvo liceat producere vitam,
Et quantum natura petat.
Non auro myrrhaque bibunt, sed gurgite puro
Vita redit, satis est populis fluviusque Ceresque.
O wastfull riot never well content,
With low-priz'd fare, hunger ambitious
Of Cates by land and sea far fetched and sent,
Vainglory of a table sumptuous:
Learn with how little life may be preserved,
In gold and myrrh they need not to carroufe,
But with the brook the peoples thirst is served,
Who fed with bread and water are not steru'd.
Multos morbos multa fercula fecerunt, says Seneca, our variety of dainty
Epist. 95.
dishes has bred variety of diseases. And again, Maximus ille medicorum, and
hujus scientiae Conditor, foeminis nec capillos defluere dixit, nec pedes
laborare: atqui haejam and capillis destituuntur, and pedibus aegrae sunt, non
mutata foeminarum natura, sed vita est. The greatest of Physicians and the
founder of that Science affirms that women neither loose their hair, nor grow
diseased in their feet: but now we see they are both bald and gowty, not
because their nature is chaung'd, but the course of their life. Beneficium
sexus sui vitijs perdiderunt, and quia foeminam exuerunt, damnatae sunt morbis
virilibus. They have forfeited the privilege of their sex by their own
vitiousnesse, and having together with their modesty put off their womanhood,
they are deservedly plagued with men's diseases.

Besides, our Ancestors used some things now grown out of use with us, which
were no doubt special means to preserve their health and prolong their lives,
as the anointing of their bodies, their frequent use of saffron and honey,
their wearing of warmer clothes, and dwelling in closer houses with little
doors and windows, choosing rather to admit less air then much light,
preferring their health before their pleasure, as also for the most part they
used less Physic and more exercise: so that if our lives be shortened in
regard of them, we have reason to acquit and discharge nature, and to lay the
whole burden of the fault upon our selves.

-- Natura beatis
Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognoverit vti.
Nature allows that all should blessed be,
Knew they to use her bounty prudentlie.
And doubtless through our own ignorance or negligence it is, if we make not
that use of Natures bounty which we might and should: and herewith that of
Roger Bacon accords in his book de retardatione accidentium senectutis: Mundo
senescente senescunt homines, non propter mundi senectutem, sed
multiplicationem viventium inficientium ipsum aerem qui nos circundat, and
negligentiam regiminis and ignorantiam illarum rerum, illarumve proprietatum
quae regiminis defectum supplent. The world waxing old, men likewise wax old,
not so much by reason of the worlds old age, as the multiplication of living
creatures infecting the air which environs us, and our negligence in the
government of our health, and our ignorance in the virtue of those things
which should supply the defect of that government; and again in his book de
scientia experimentali. Causa autem hujusmodi prolongationis and abbreviationis
existimaverunt multi a part coeli, nam existimaverunt quod coeli dispositio
fuit optima a principio, and mundo senescente omnia tabescunt, aestimantes
stellas fuisse creatas in locis convenientioribus, and in meliori proportione
earum ad invicem secundum diversitatem aspectuum, and proiectionem radiorum
invisibilem, and quod ab illo statu paulatim recesserunt, and secundum hunc
recessum ponunt vitae decurtationem vsque ad aliquem terminum fixum in quo est
status, sed hoc habet multas contradictiones and difficultates de quibus non
est modo dicendum. The cause of this prolonging and shortning our lives; many
conjectured to be in regard of the Heavens, for they thought that the Heavens
were best disposed at the first, and that as the world waxes old, all things
decayed, supposing that the Stars were created in more convenient places, and
in a fitter proportion each to other according to the diversities of their
aspects, and the invisible projection of their beams, and that by degrees they
are fallen off from that estate, and according thereunto they proportion the
decrease of life until it come to some settled period, beyond which there is
no farther progress; but this assertion includes many contradictions and
difficulties of which I cannot now speak.

Yet me thinks it may be demonstrated by evident reason, besides the arguments
already alleged, that at the least for these last thousand or two thousand
years, the age of mankind is little or nothing abated, which I will endeavor
to make good in the next Chapter.

CAP. 2. Farther Reasons alleged that the age of man for these last thousand
or two thousand years is little or nothing abated.
SECT. 1. The first reason taken from the several stops and pawses of nature
in the course of man's life, as the time of birth after our conception, our
infancy, childhood, youth, man's estate, and old age, being assigned to the
same compass of years as they were by the Ancients; which could not possible
be, were there a universal decay in mankind in regard of age; And the like
reason there is in making the same Clymactericall years and the same danger in
them.
THat the age of mankind for these last thousand or two thousand years is
nothing shortened, will farther appear by the several stages and stops which
the Ancients have marked out, as well in the growth of the infant in the mothers
womb, and time of birth, as in the distribution of man's age after the birth,
agreeable unto that which is generally received by the learned, and for the
most part we find to be verified by experience at this day. As among Plants,
those which last longest have likewise their seeds longest buried under the
earth before their springing above ground: so likewise among beasts, those
which live longest, are carried longest in the womb of their dammes; the bitch
carries her young but four months, the mare nine, the elephant two years
(not ten as some have vainly written) and look what proportion is found
betwixt their conception and birth, the like is commonly found betwixt their
birth and death. Nature then in her proceedings in natural actions being
alike, as well to them as to mankind, it should in reason seem, that as their
time is the same which the Ancients, (namely Hippocrates and Aristotle) have
left upon record, from their conception to their birth, and again ordinarily
(or caeteris paribus, as in Schools we speak) from their birth to their
death; so it should fare with mankind too: If then it shall appear that the
Ancients assigned the same space of time for the delivery of a woman with
child, which we now do, me thinks the consequent from hence deduced should
be more the^ probable, that as the space of their abode in the womb of the
mother, and coming from thence into the world, is the same as then it was, so
likewise ordinarily, and in the course of nature (if she be not wronged or
interrupted, nor on the otherside by a supernatural power advanced above
herself) it should be the same during their abode here in the world, and
their return to the womb of their common mother the earth: Now though it be
true that the space of time from the conception to the birth of man is more
variable then that of any other Creature (perchance because his food and
fancy are more variable, or because nature is more sollicitous of him, as
being her darling) yet most certain it is, the same periods which by
Hippocrates were assigned for his first coming into the light, are now also by
Physicians observed, and that so precisely as they exactly agree with him, not
only in the number of months but of days; the months assigned by him were
the seventh, the ninth, the tenth, and sometimes the Lauren. hist. Anat. l. 8.
eleventh, and so they still remain; and as the eight was by him held
dangerous and deadly, so is it now; and as the tenth month is our usual
computation, so was it likewise theirs, as appears by that of Neptune in Homer
speaking to a Nymph.

Anno circummacto speciosum partum edes
nimirum decimo mense. Odis. (...).

The year ended thou will be delivered
of a fair child, that is to say, in the 10th month.
From whence it may be observed that the Aeolians (of whom was Homer) counted
their year from thence, as did also the Romans till Numa's reign, I mean
from the usual time of a woman's going with child.

Quod satis est vtero matris dum prodeat infans,
Hoc anno statuit temporis esse satis.
Says the Poet speaking of Romulus.

That space which is unto our birth assigned, Fast. lib 1.

The same by him was to the year confined.
And to the end we may fully know what space is there by him understood, he
presently adds.

Annus erat decimum cum luna receperat orbem,
Hic numerus magno tunc in honor fuit,
Seu quia tot digiti per quos numer are solemus,
Seu quia bis quino famina mense parit.
Our year ten full moons did contain
This number then was honored
For that a woman going in pain
So long, was then disburdened.
But I proccede from the time of the birth to the Ancients distribution of man's
age after the birth.

Some of them divided the age of man into three, some into four, some into
five, some into six, some into seven parts: which they resembled to the seven
Planets; comparing our infancy to the Moon, in which we seem only to live
and grow as plants; the second age or childhood to Mercury, wherein we are
taught and instructed; the third age or youth to Venus, the days of love,
desire, and vanity: the fourth to Rodog. 10. 61. 62.
the Sun, the strong flourishing and beautiful age of man's life; the fifth
to Mars, in which we seek honor and victory, and in which our thoughts
travel to ambitious ends; the sixth to Jupiter, in which we begin to take
account of our times, judge of our selves, and grow to the perfection of our
understanding: The last and seventh to Saturn, wherein our days are sad and
overcast, and in which we find by dear and lamentable experience, and by the
loss which never can be repaired, that of all our vain passions and
affections past, the sorrow only abides.

Philo Iudaeus in that excellent book of the workemanshippe of the world,
discoursing of the admirable properties of the sacred number of seven, among
many other things alleged to that purpose, he affirms that at the end of
every seventh year, there is some notable change in the body of man, and for
better proof thereof, he produces the authority of Hippocrates, and an
Elegy of Solons which thus begins.

Impubes pueri septem voluentibus annis
Claudunt enatis dentibus eloquium
Post alios totidem Diuorum numine dextro
Occultum pubis nascitur indicium.
Annus ter septem prima lanugine malas
Vestiet aetatis robore conspicuus. etc.
When children once to seven years have aspired,
The tale of all their teeth they have acquired.
By that the next seven ended have their date
Pubertie comes and power to generate.
The third seven perfect's growth, and then the chin
With youthly down to blossom does begin.
But among all the Ancients I have met with, Macrobius in his first book of
Scipio's dream, extolling (as Plilo does) the rare and singular Cap: 6:
effects of the septenary number, most clearly and learnedly expresses the
remarkable pawses and chaunges of Nature every seventh year in the course of
man's age, as the casting of the teeth in the first seven, the springing of the
pubes in the second, of the beard in the third, the utmost period of growth in
the fourth, of strength in the fifth, a consistence in the sixth, and a
declination in the seventh. Now that which these Ancients observed touching
these secret stations and progresses of Nature in the state of man's body and
course of his life, is still found to be true, as well by the Verdict and
judgment of learned men, as by the proof and trial of Experience, which
could not possiblely be, were there a constant abatement in the length of our
whole age, by such an universal and irreuocable decay of Nature as is
pretented: for then should men doubtless grow to ripenes and perfection sooner,
as they are supposed sooner to hasten to death and dissolution, which must
needs draw on an alteration and confusion in all the noted changes through the
course of man's life: And therefore the holy Scripture assigning the Patriarchs
a longer life, assigns them likewise proportionablely thereunto a longer Loc,
Con: c: 12, Classis. 1
time before they were ripened for generation, as Peter Martyr has rightly
noted.

It is true and ever was, which Galen in his sixth book of the regiment of
health has observed, that these chaunges cannot so be tied to any such precise
number of years, but that a variation of latitude is to be admitted in them in
regard of some particulars: some growing to their puberty at fourteen, others
at fifteen: some declining at thirty, others at thirty five, according to their
several constitutions, educations, diet, situation of Clymates and countries
and the like; The Poet professed of himself above sixteen hundred year ago,
that his beard began to sprout and paint his cheeks before twenty.

Quamuis jam juvenile decus mihi pingere malas
Caeperit, and nondum vicesima venerit aetas. Ovid.

Though now my beard began my cheeks to grace,
Nor had I lived yet twice ten years space.
But as all rules in Science, so theses are held sufficiently current and
warrantable, if they be found infallible in the greatest part, and uniform,
where all circumstances concur in a like degree.

It is now commonly thought, that thirty three, or between that and 35 years,
is the flower and perfection of man's age, (it being the mid way St. Augustine
makes it sooner. Circa 30 quippe annos definierunt esse etiam huius Saeculi
doctissimi homines iuventulem, quae cum fuerit spatio proprio terminata inde
iam homine^ in detrime^ta pergere gravioris and saenilis aetatis, Civi. dei.
22. 15.
to seve^ty, which both Moses and Solon held the Epilogue and co^clusio^
thereof: so as those who run beyond that, are like Racers which run beyond the
goal.) And this was the age of our blessed Savior, to the perfection whereof,
the Apostle seems to allude in the 4 to the v. 13.
Ephesians: Till we meet together unto a perfect man and unto the measure of
the age of the fullnes of Christ: which passage De Civit. Dei. Lib. 22. c. 15.
S. Augustine interpreting, is of opinion, that we shall rise again by reason
of the perfection thereof, iu ea aetane vsque qua^ Christu^ pervenisse
cognovimus, as men of that age unto which Christ himself the head of the
Church arrived. I know there want not some, as namely Lib. 2. Cap. 39.
Irenaeus and others, who by occasion of that speech of the Jews, John 8. 57.
thou art not yet fifty year old, and have thou seen Abraham? conjecture that
he was about that age: but whether it were his cares and troubles that made him
seem elder then indeed he was, or the Jews would thereby signify that
though he had been much elder then he was, yet was it not possible for him to
have seen Abrabam in the flesh; certain it is that he came not to forty:
some late Divines being of opinion that he reached thirty five, but the most
part, as also the most Ancient and most learned, Decherius de anno ortus and
mortis Christi.
that he little exceeded thirty three since then our infancy ends and
childhood begins, our childhood ends and youth begins, our youth ends and
manhood begins, and lastly our manhood ends and our declining estate begins
where it did a thousand or two thousand year ago, I see no reason, but we may
safely conclude, that at leastwise since that time mankind is nothing decayed
in regard of age. and the like reason there is in there observing anciently the
same Clymactericall years and in them the same danger of sickness or death
that we do, as appears not only in Brodeus his Miscellanea lib. 6. cap. 26.
and in a little discourse, which M. Wright has written and annexed to his book
of the passions of the mind, occasioned as he there professes by the death of
Queen Elizabeth) but much more fully in Baptista Codronchus a famous both
Philosopher and Physician who has purposely composed a large treatise de annis
Climactericis, in which thus begins his preface to that work Antiquissimi and
peritissimi rerum naturalium observatores, nec vulgares homines vitae humanae
curriculum considerantes septimo quoque anno and presertim tertio supra
sexagesimum homines plerosque corporis and animi affectionibus conflictari, in
discrimine versari, ac saepius interire pluribus observationibus ac periculis
cognoverunt. The most ancient and skillful searchers into natural things, and
those no mean men taking into consideration the course of man's life by many
observations and trials, they found that every seventh year, and specially in
the 63 most men are sorely affected both in body and mind, are brought into
great danger, and many times die outright; I will bring only one instance from
Antiquity to show their agreement as in the other before mentioned, so likewise
in this point with these latter ages; it is borrowed from Gellius in his
fifteenth book, and seventh chapter of his Noctes Atticae, where he thus
speaks of this matter, Observatum in multa hominum memoria, expertumque est in
senioribus plerisque omnibus sexagesimum tertium vitae annum cum periculo and
clade aliqua venire, aut corporis morbique gravioris aut vitae interitus, aut
animi aegritudinis. It has been of a long time observed and experienced, in
almost all old men, that the 63 year of their life, has proved dangerous and
hurtful unto them, either in regard of some grievous sickness of body or
death or great grief of mind: and going on, he alleags to this purpose a part
of a letter which Augustus Caesar wrote to Caius his Nephew. Aue mi Cai, meus
ocellus iucundissimus: que^ semper medius sidius desidero quum a me abes; sed
precipue diebus talibus, qualis est hodiernus, oculi mei requirunt meum Caium;
quem vbicunque hoc die fuisti, spero laetum and benevolentem celebrasse:
quartum and sexagesimum natalem meum, nam vt vides (...) commnem seniorum
omnium tertium and sexagesimum annum evasimus. I greet the well my Caius, mine
own dear heart, whom in truth I always find wanting as often as thou art absent
from me, but cheifely upon such days as this is, mine eyes long to behold my
Caius, which wheresoeverthou were, I hope thou have kept festival, it being my
sixty fourth birthday, for as thou see I have escaped my sixty third being
the common climactericall of all old men.

SECT. 2. The second is drawn from the age, of Matrimony and Generation which
among the Ancients was fully as forward as ours now is if not more timely.
FOR the better clearing of which point, it shall not be amiss somewhat
farther to insist upon the age of Generation and Marriage, which among the
Ancients was both in opinion held, and in practice proved to be the same or
little different from that which amongst us is in use at this day. The third
council of Carthage ordained that public readers in the Church cum ad annos
pubertatis venerint aut cogantur vxores ducere aut continentiam profiteri, when
they came Cap. 19.
to years of puberty, should be forced either to marry or vow chastity; and
Quintilian of his own wife professes that having borne him two sons, she
died, Nondum expleto aetatis vndevicesimo anno being not yet Proem. Lib. 6.
full one and twenty years of age. Mulieres statim ab anno decimo quarto, a a
viris Dominae vocantur, says Epictetus: women no sooner pass fourteen,
En^irid. c. 55.
but presently they have given them from men, or from their husbands the title
of Mistresses. The Digest. l. 9. de Spons.
Civil Laws allowed a woman marriage at twelve, so did the. Burdorf. Synag.
Iud 3.
Jewish Talmud and the Lancelot. l. 2. tit. 11.
Canons of the Church, 2 Oper, and Dierum.
Hesiod at fifteen, De Spartana Re^up.
Xenophon and the E^ucho. Act 2: sc: 3:
Comaedian at sixteen, anni sedecem fios ipse, Polit: 7: 16:
Aristotle at eighteen, 5 de Repub: and 6 de Legibus Tranquillus in Claudio,
c. 23:
Plato at twenty: The reason of the difference I take to be this: The Laws
would not permit them to marry sooner, and Plato held it not fit they should
stay longer. And as we commonly are both ripe for marriage, and marry about
the same years the Ancients did, so men for the most part leave begetting, and
women bearing of children about the same time as they did.

Tiberius made a Law, known by the name of Lex Papia, by which he forbad de
such men as were past sixty, or women past fifty to marry, as being
insufficient for generation. To which Lactantius out of Seneca seems to
allude, thus jesting at the Ethnickes touching their great God Jupiter. Quare
apud Poetas salacissimus Jupiter desijt liberos tollere, vtrum Lib: 1: divine:
instit. cap. 16.
sexagenarius factus, and ei Lex Papia fibulam imposuit? How comes it to pass
that in your Poets the lecherous Jupiter begets no more children, is he past
sixty, and restrained by the Papian Law? Yet this Law by the Emperor Claudius
in part, but by Justinian (almost five hundred years L: Sa^inus 27: c: de ^upt.
after) was fully repealed as insufficient, in as much as men after that age
were, and still are found to be sufficient for that act; Seldom indeed it is
that men beget after seaventy, or women bear after fifty; and the same was
long since both observed and recorded by the principal both Secretary and
great Register of Nature in his time, adding farther that men commonly left
begetting at sixty five, and women bearing at forty five: Aristrt: bist: Ani^
l: 5: c. 14. Rom: 4: 19.
When Abraham's body was now dead in regard of generation, he was short of 100.
Indeed Plutarch reports of Cato Mayor, that he begat a son at eighty: and
Pliny of Masinissa, after eighty six: but they both 7. 14.
report it as a wonder, neither want there presidents in this age to parallel
either of them.

I well know that the accusation is common, and perchance in part not unjust,
that men now a days generally marry sooner then their Ancestors did, which
is made to be one of the chief causes of our supposed shorter lives: but that
many of them abstained not so long from marriage as we now commonly do, it
may be euidenced by these following examples, drawn from the Oracles of sacred
writ. There descended from Abraham in the space of four hundred years and
little more, and from Iaacob and his sons, within 200 or thereabout, above
six hundred thousand men, beside children and those who died in the interim,
and were slain by the Egyptians: which wonderful multiplication Exodus 12. 37.
within the compass of that time, should in reason argue that they married
timely. In the forty sixth of Genesis, Moses describing old Iaacobs journey
down into Egypt, tells us that the number of Genesis 46. 26.
persons springing from his loins, which accompanied him in that journey, were
sixty six souls, and not content with the gross sum he specifies the
particulars, among which the sons of Judah are named to be Er, and Onan, and
Shelah, and Pharez, and Zerah; (but Er and Onan, says the text, died in the
land of Canaan) and the sons of Pharez v. 12.
were Hezron, and Hamul; so that he begat Pharez upon Thamar his daughter in
law after the death of his eldest sons Er and Onan, who according to the Law
had married her successively, and Pharez begat Hezron and Hamul, and yet at
this time was Judah himself but forty Genesis 38. v. 18.
four years of age at most, as appears by this, that Joseph was then but
thirty nine, sixteen he was when he was sold by his brethren, and twenty Genesis
c. 37. 41. 45.
three years after, was his fathers journey into Egypt. Now it is evident that
Judah was but four years elder then Joseph, the one being borne in the
eleventh year of their Fathers abode in Mesopotamia, and the other after the
expiration of the fourteenth: In the compass then of forty four years or
thereabout, had Judah sons which were Genesis c. 29. 30.
married, namely Er and Onan, after that himself by mistake begets another
son upon their wife, viz: Pharez, who had likewise two sons at this time
when Iaacob went down into Egypt. S. Augustine is I confess much perplexed in
the loosing of this knot; and so is Pererius treading in his steps: They both
flying for the saluing of the Text to an Quest: 128: in Genes: Comment: in 38:
g^n: quest: 1:
Anticipation in the story, as if some of those who are named by Moses to have
descended with Iaacob into Egypt, had been both begotten and borne long after
his settling there: But this gloss seeming to Pareus somewhat hard, (as in
truth it is) he resolves the doubt, by making both Judah, and Er, and Onan, and
Pharez to marry all of them at the Comment: in 38 g^n. pa^e 1.
entrance of their fourteenth year, which in the ordinary course of nature
both then was, and still is the year of pubertie, and then thus concludes he:
In his omnibus nihil coactum aut contortum, nihil quod non consueto naturae
ordine fieri potuerit, vt nec miracula fingere sit opus, nec filios Pharez qui
in descensu numerantur in Aegypto demum natos asserere sit necesse: In all this
there is nothing strained or wrested, nothing but may well be done in the
ordinary course of nature, so as we need not either fly As do the Jew. in the
Sederolam, making Er to marry at 8, and Perez to beget a son at 9.
to miracles, or affirm that the sons of Pharez, who are ranked in the
number of those who descended with Iaacob, were afterward borne in Egypt. And
with Pareus herein accords the learned D^iure Connubiorum, c: 20: Sect. 3.
Arnisaeus, (some small difference between them in the calculation of years
set apart) wondering that two such great Clerks, as Augustine and Pererius
should trouble themselves so much about so slender a difficulty, not
considering, as it seems, the Examples of the like or more timely marriages,
recorded in holy Scripture. Whereof we have a notable one in the same Chapter
of Benjamin, who at the same time is made the father of ten sons, and yet was
he then but twenty three or twenty four years of v. 21.
age; being borne in the hundred and sixth year of his father, which was the
year before the selling of Joseph. Dina by the testimony of Apud Eusebeum l. 9
de praeparat. Euangel. c. vlt. commentar. in 34. Genesis Nicephorus ex Euodio, 2.
3. 2* Kings. 22. 1.
Polyhistor, when she was ravished and sued unto for marriage by Sichem was
but ten years of age, and by the computation of Caietan but fourteen, of
Pererius but fifteen or sixteen at utmost. The blessed Virgin when she
brought forth our Savior, but fifteen. Somewhat more evident is that of
Josiah, who was but thirty nine years old when he died, eight he was when he
began to reign, and he reigned thirty one; yet was Eliakim his son twenty
five years old when he began to reign, being by Pharaoh Neco substituted in
the place of his Cap. 23. 36.
brother Iehoahaz, after he had reigned three months; so that Josiah by just
computation could not well exceed fourteen years of age, when he was first
married: But that of Ahaz is yet more remarkable, who lived but thirty six
years in the whole, twenty years old was he when he began to reign, and he
reigned sixteen years; yet was his 2. King. 16. 2.
son Hezekiah, who immediately succeeded him, twenty five years old Cap. 18.
2.
when he began to reign: By which account Ahaz was married, and begat Hezekiah
at eleven, or before. And though Functius in his Chrononologie, moved with the
strangenes hereof, would make Hezekiah the Legal, not the natural son of
Ahaz, by adoption, not by generation, and Iunius in his annotations refer
those words; twenty years old was he when he began to reign, to Iothan the
father of Ahaz; yet herein they both stand alone, as well against reason, as
the ordinary phrase of Scripture and stream of interpreters. S. Hierome in his
epistle to Vitalis, to Epist. 132.
make it good, has recourse to Gods Omnipotency, Neque enim valet natura,
says he, contra naturoe Dominum: And again, Quod pro miraculo fit; legem
Naturae facere non potest: That which it pleases God to work supernaturally
as a miracle, may not be held for the ordinary law of Nature. Yet himself in
the same Epistle alleages the example of Solomon to the same purpose: And
another more strange then that; to the relation whereof he prefixes this
solemn preface; Audiui, Domino test, non mentior, I have heard, God knows I
feign it not, that a certain nurse, having the education of an exposed child
committed to her charge, who lay with her, being now of the age of ten
years, and The like story has Gregory in his Dialogues, touching a child of
nine years old
provoked to incontinencie by the nurse, overcharged with wine, she was found
with child by him.

I will conclude this reason with the example of Solomon, who is commonly
thought to come to the Crown at twelve years of age, and the Scripture
assures us that he reigned but forty, by which account he died at the age of
fifty two, which is the most received opinion as well of the 1 King. 11. 42.
Jewish Rabbines, as the Christian Doctors: yet was Rehoboam his son and
successor forty one years old when he began to reign: so that but an ele^en
years at most, are left for Solomon when he begat him: Such 1 King. 14. 21.
matches as these in this age, I think can hardly be matched neither in truth
do I hold it fit they should.

SECT. 3. The third is borrowed from the age which the Ancients assigned for
charge and employment in public affairs, Ecclesiastical, Civil and
Military, they were thereunto both sooner admitted, and therefrom sooner
discharged then men now adays usually are, which should in reason argue, that
they likewise usually finished the course of their life sooner.
ANother reason tending to the same purpose may not unfitly be drawn from the
age which the Ancients assigned for charge and employment in public affairs.
They were thereunto as soon admitted and sooner discharged then men now adays
usually are, which should in reason argue that they likewise ran their race and
finished their course sooner, in as much as quod citius crescit, citius finitur,
that which Baldus.
sooner comes to ripenes and perfection, hastens sooner to rottennes and
dissolution. Now public charges may well be distributed into Ecclesiastical,
Civil, and Military, of the Church, of the State, and of the wars: I will
begin with the Ministerial offices of the Church, and therein with the
Principal, which is that of the Bishop: Thomas Becket was chosen Archbishop of
Canterbury at the age of forty four years, as witnesses Matthew Parker (who
succeeded him in that See) in his book of the lives of the Archbishops
entitled Antiquitates Britannicae: Is qui ad Episcopalem dignitatem
promovendus est, annos natus esse debet non minus triginta, nam ea aetate
Dominum and baptizatum, and concionatum fuisse legimus, says Lancelot in his
Institutions of the Canon Law. He who is to be advanced to the dignity of a
Bishop, ought not to be less then thirty years old, inasmuch Lib. 1. tit. 7.
as we read that our Lord was baptized and preached at that age. Whereas now
adays with us seldom is any preferred to that place till he be past forty or
fifty. Venerable Bede our famous Countreyman Malmesberiensis de gestis Angli,
Reg. lib. 1. Histor. Eccles. l. 6. c. 2.
who lived about eight hundred years ago, was by hisowne testimony made
Deacon at nineteen. And Origin by the testimony of Eusebius, Catechist in
Alexandria at eighteen years of age. But that which to this point is most
memorable in the exercise of sacred functions, is that by the commandment of
God himself, the Levites after the age of Numb. 8. 25
fifty years were exempted from the execution of their office, which
notwithstanding was nothing so painful as that of the Ministry of the
Gospel, if faithfully discharged. Where by Levites it may well be that not
only those who served in inferior offices under the Priests, but the Priests
themselves as being of the tribe of Levi are to be understood, to which purpose
M. Nettles in his answer to the Jewish part of M. Seldens History of Tithes
has vouched the Rabbines, as named Aben Ezra on Leviticus 16. every Priest is
a Levite, but every Levite is not a Priest. And Ioshuah Ben Levi mentioning
that text, Numb. 18: 26. Speak unto the Levites, does under the name of
Levites understand also Priests, farther adding, that in four and twenty
places the Priests are called Levites, which being so; I see no reason but that
from thence we may safely infer, that in likelihood the same space of years
was assigned to the Priest, as well for his entrance upon his office, as his
discharge from it, specially considering that his place was of an higher nature.

Now for the wars. The Gauls put their sons in arms, and prepared Des
estals and emp^res. Tac. annal. 13 2
them to war at fourteen. Cneius Pompeius at eighteen years of age, and
Caesar Octavianus at nineteen sustained civil wars. The Jews indeed
ordinarily levied their soldiers from twenty years upward, as plainly
appears in the first of Numbers and diverse other places. But V. 3
the Romans from seventeen, which by Gellius out of Tubero is reported to
have been the practice and prescript of Servius Tullius one of their Lib. 10.
28
Kings. The same was afterward confirmed by the Gracchi, Gracchi lex iuniorem
annis septendecem militem non legi. The Gracchian Law ordained Plut. in Gracchis
that none should be levied under seventeen. Yet in times of Necessity they
came under those years, as in the second Punick war, Tum decretum, says
Livy, vt Tribuni plebis ad populum ferrent, vt qui minores annis 17. Sacramento
dixissent, ijs perinde stipendia procederent: ac si 17 annorum Lib. 25
aut maiores milites facti essent. It was then decreed that the Tribunes should
tell the people that such as being under seventeen had taken their military
oath, should in like sort receive their pay as if they had been full
seventeen or past. The Graecians indeed entered upon their military service
somewhat latter, but were discharged from it sooner, they took up soldiers for
the wars at eighteen, but discharged them at forty or thereabout. We find
in Demosthenes, that the state being endangered, they were all commanded to
tugg at the oar, vsque ad eos qui 45 annorum 3. Oly^th.
essent, even to those that were forty five: upon which Vlpian the Scholiast
commenteth, that this was an unusual practice, quia Lex apud Athenienses ad
annum quadragesimum duntaxat, iubet militare, exorsos a decimo octavo, because
the Laws among the Athenians commands men to serve in the wars only till
forty, entering upon the service at eighteen. And it should seem Macrobius
aims at this, discoursing of the efficacy of the Septenary number, Nonnullarum
Rerumpub. is mos est, vt post Lib. 1. in (...) (...).
sextam hebdomaden ad militiam nemo cogatur, in plurimis detur remissio post
septimam, it is the custom of some states, that after the sixth week no man
should be forced to serve in the wars, and in the most they are discharged
after the seventh: where by weeks he understands weeks of years, and in the
sixth week seems to point at the practice of the Athenian state, in the
seventh to that of the Roman. Neither the Roman nor the Grecian went
commonly beyond forty five, as Dyonisius affirms, or (...) de Mi^ (...)
(...): 1 (...): 2 Sir Henry Sa^ in his view of military m^ters
forty six, as Polybius: And even in dangerous times not beyond fifty, Lex a
quinquagesimo anno militum non cogit, a sexagesimo Senatorem non citat, says
Seneca in his last Chapter de brevitate vitae, the Law does not force a
Soldier to serve after fifty, nor a Senator after sixty.

By the testimony of Polyhistor, and the computation both of Caietan and
Pererius, Symeon and Levi, when they so fiercely and desperately set (...): 34
upon the Sichemites, little or nothing surpassed the number of twenty years,
in so much that Pererius breaks out into this admiration: Subit animum meum
vehementer admirari, praeferocem istorum animum, qui vix dum adolescentiam
egressitam atrox facinus and ani^o conceperint, and audacissime exsequentes
perfecerint: I cannot but ex^dingly marvel at their wonderful fiercenes, that
being scarce past their youth, they should in their minds conceive so bloody a
fact, and put it in execution so boldly. King Edward the fourth having been
Conqueror in eight or nine several set battles, died at the age of forty
one, and our famous King Arthur Comines.
(if we may believe Ninnius) having victoriously fought (...) (...) gave up the
ghost at the same age. Julian having been for diverse years a great Commander
in the wars was slain at one and thirty; and it Socrates in hist. (...): 6.
47.
is well known that the Great Alexander had conquered in a manner the known
World at thirty three. Upon the consideration whereof Julius Cicero. S. Philip.
Suctotonius. (...). cap. 7. Cap. 88.
Caesar beholding his statue in the Temple of Hercules at Cales, fetched a deep
sigh, as being ashamed that at that age himself had achieved no memorable
act, yet was himself but 56 when he was slain.

Lastly, for the administration of Civil affairs in the state, Romulus first
King of the Romans having reigned (says Plutarch in the very endof his life)
38 years dyed at fifty, by which account he must begin his ragne at 12 somewhat
too young (a man would think) for a King that was to lay the foundation of such
an Empire. Cicero by the testimony of Cornelius Nepos (who was his familiar
friend, and wrote his life) pleaded publicly for Sextus Roscius at 13, and by
the testimony of Aulus Gellius Euripedes 15. 20.
wrote one of his tragidies, Natus annos duo de viginti, at eighteen years of
age. Josephus witnesses of him self annos novendecem natus ad Rempub: caepi
me dare, I began to apply myself to the affairs of the In vita s^a.
weal public, being but yet nineteen years of age. And Moses of Joseph the
Patriarch, that when he had in a manner the whole government of Egypt committed
to his charge by Pharaoh, was but thirty years old; Genesis 41. 46. 2 Samuel 5. 4.
which was likewise David's age* when he began to reign. Augustus entered upon
the Consulship at twenty, and received virilem togam at sixteen says
Suetouius in his life. But Aurelius Antoninus a year younger as Spartianus
affirms, by which ornament or habit, they were judged fit Cap. 8 and 26.
for public employment in the common wealth. And Laevinus Torrentius in his
Annotations upon that place, observes that even the laws themselves at that
time reputed men fit for action in state affairs at seauenteene, at which age
Nero was chosen Emperor: Tertullian comes Suct. cap. 8.
much lower, tempus etiam Ethnici observant, vt ex lege naturae jura suis
aetatibus reddant: Nam foeminas a duodecem annis, masculos a duobus amplius ad
De vela^ virginibus.
negotia mittunt. The Ethnicks so observe their times, that from the law of
Nature they dispose of their ages in Civil affairs: for women they employ
after twelve, and men two years after that. And as they were reputed sooner
fit for action then we: so likewise sooner unfit: cum sexaginta annos
habebant, tum erant a publicis negotijs liberi atque expediti, Varro de vita.
Pop. Romani, test (...).
and otiosi: when they once came to sixty then were they freed from all
public service, and left to their ease and rest. In so much as it grew to a
Proverb amongst the Latins, Sexagenarios de ponte deijci oportere, that men of
sixty deserved to be cast from the bridge, as being unprofitable for the
commonwealth after that age. And from thence were they commonly called
Depontani which was upon this ocasion taken up, as witnesses Festus. Quo
tempore primum per pontem coeperunt com^iijs Ad verbum Sexagenarij.
suffragiu^ferre, iunio^es conclamavere, ut de ponte deijcerentur sexagenarij;
quia nullo publico munerefungerentur. at what time they held their assemblyes
and gave their suffrages upon the bridge, the younger sort cried out with one
voice, that such as were sixty should be thrown from the bridge, in as much as
they had no public charge. To which outcry of theirs Ovid alludes.

Pars pi^tat, vt ferrent juvenes suffragia Soli,
Pontibus infirmos praecipitasse senes. 5 Fastorum*

That younger men might voices give alone,
The elder were down from the bridges thrown. Aelianus lib. 4. c. 1.

This motion, the Barbiccians at seventy, in effect put in execution, ^nes
septaagesimum annum egressos interficiunt, viros mactando, mulieres vero
stangulando: they make away all that are past seaventy, sacrificing the men and
strangling the women. Now then since the age assigned by the Ancients not only
for marriage, but likewife for their entrance upon, and discharge from public
employment, as well in the Church and State as in the wars, was little or
nothing different from that which is both allowed and practiced at this day,
(save that they seemed to have been more indulgent and favorable to
themselves then now we are) what reason have we to imagine that the length and
duration of time which they usually lived, was different from ours?

I will close up this chapter with an observatio^ or two taken from the
Municipall laws of our own Land, which account prescription or custom by the
practicing of a thing time out of mind (as they call it) and that time they
confine to the same number of 60 years, as formerly they have done, which
could not stand with reason or justice were there such a notable and sensible
abatement in the age of man as is pretended. And again: Our Ancestors for many
revolutions of ages in their Leases or other instruments of conveyance commonly
valued three lives but at one and twenty years in account in Law. Whereas now
adays they are valued by the ablest Lawyers at twenty six, twenty eight, yea
thirty years: Whether it were that the wars and pestilentiall diseases then
consumed more, I cannot determine, but me thinks it should in reason argue
thus much, that our lives at leastwise are not shortened in regard of theirs,
which is as much as I desire to be granted, and more then is commonly yielded,
though (as I conceive) upon no sufficient ground denied; and so I pass from
the age of men to the consideration of their strength and stature.

CAP. 3. Containing a comparison betwixt the Giants mentioned in Scripture both
among themselves, and with those of latter ages.
SECT. 1. Of the admirable composition of man's Body, and that it can not be
sufficiently prooved that Adam as he was the first, so he was likewise the
tallest of men, which in reason sholud be, were there in truth any such
perpetual decrease in man's stature as is pretended,
AS the great power of Almighty God does shine forth and show it self in the
numberless variety of the parts of man's body: so does his wonderful goodness
in their excellent use, and his singular wisdom in their orderly disposition,
sweet harmony and just symmetrie, as well in regard of themselves, as in
reference each to other, but chiefly in the resultance of the beautiful and
admirable frame of the whole body. The consideration whereof made the Royal
Prophet to cry Psalm. 139. 13
out: I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, in thy
book were all my members written, and curiously wrought, marvailous are thy
works, and that my soul knows right well- This proportion is in all respects
so even and correspondent, that the measures of Temples, of dwelling Vitruvius
l. 3. c. 1
houses, of Engines, of ships were by Architects taken from thence, and those of
the Arc it self too, as it is probably thought. For as the Arc was three
hundred Cubits in length, fifty in breadth, and thirty in height, August. l. 15.
de Ciu. Dei c. 26. and ad Faus^um man. 12. 14. and Amb. de Noe and arca. cap. 6
so the body of man rightly shaped, answers thereunto. The length from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, and breadth from side to side, and
thicknes from back to breast carrying the proportion of three hundred, and
fifty, and thirty each to other: so that look what proportion fifty has to
three hundred, which is six to one, the same has the breadth of man's body to
his height or length. And what proportion thirty has to three hundred, which
is ten to one, the same has the thicknes to his length and breadth. Nay some
have observed 300 minuta (which I take to be barley corns, the fourth part of
an inch or thereabout Laurentius Ana^. l. 1, c. 20 Lomatius l. 1. c. 7
) to make up the length of a man's body of just stature, and consequently, fifty
in the breadth, and thirty the thicknes, answereable to the several numbers of
the Cubits in the several measures of the Arc.

Now to our present purpose, as God and Nature, (or rather God by Nature, his
instrument and handmaid) has fashioned the body of Man in those proportions,
so has he limited the dimensions thereof, (as likewise those of all other both
vegetable, sensitive and insensible Creatures) within certain bounds,

Quos vltra citraque nequit consistere
So that though the dimensions of men's bodies be very different in regard of
several Climats and Races, yet was there never any race of men found to the
bigness of mountains or whales, or the littleness of flies or aunts, because
in that quantity, the members cannot usefully and commodiously, either dispose
of themselves, or exercise those functions, to which they were by their maker
assigned, True indeed it is, that both history of former ages, and experience
of latter times teach us, that a great inequality there is, and has been: but
that since the fi^ ^reation of man there should be any such perpetual,
universal, an^ constant decrease and diminution, as is pretended, that shall I
never believe.

For then in reason should the first Man have been a Giant of Giants, the
hughest and most monstrous Giant that ever the world beheld, and upon this
ground it seems, (though faisely supposed) Johannes Lucidus Lib. 1. de
emendatione Temporum cap. 4. v. vit.
labors to prove him so indeed, from that passage in the fourteenth of Joshua,
according to the Vulgar Translation: Nomen Hebron ante vocabatur Cariah-Arbe,
Adam maximus ibi inter Enakim situs est, which may thus be rendered: Adam the
greatest of Giants lies there buried: And this fancy of Lucidus is
countenanced by that fable of the Jewish Rabbis, reported by Moses bar Cephas,
who supposing Paradise to be di^oyned Lib. de Paradiso.
from this world, by the interposition of the Ocean, tell us that Adam being
cast out of it, waded through the Ocean to come into this, by which account his
stature should rather be measured by miles then by cubits: But as Lucidus by
this opinion crosses the stream of Antiquity (S. Jerome only, and some few
others his followers excepted) holding that In mat. 27. and in Ephesians 5.
the first Adam was buried, not in Hebron, but in that place where the second
Adam triumphed over death, so does he likewise by following Origenes,
Athanasius, Basilius. Epiphanius Chrisostomus ex Graecis: ex Lat^is
the Vulgar Translation corrupt the Hebrew original, which is thus to be
rendered: Nomen autem Hebronis nomen fuerat Kiriath-arbah, is fuerat homo inter
Anakeos maximus: So that the word Adam or homo, is to be referred not to the
first man, but to Arbah, the first founder as is thought Tertullianus,
Cyprianus sieve qui scripsit de operibus Cardinalibus, Ambrosius Augustinus
atque alibi eti^m* ipse Hicronimus nempe epist. 17: ad Paul and Eustoch:
of that City; and thereupon our last Translation reads it thus: The name of
Hebron before was Kiriath-arbah, which Arbah was a great man among the Anakims.
Besides, the word Adam even in the Vulgar Translation it self, is not always
understood as proper to the first man, but common, as homo in Latin, or man in
English: And yet to grant the word in that place to be understood of the first
man, and that he was there buried; well might he be called the Greatest, yet
notsomuch in regard of any excessive vastness in the dimentions of his body,
as because he was the headspring and fountain of mankind, or in respect of
that original justice, with which before his fall he stood invested. There is
no necessity then, to believe that the first man was the tallest of men, nay
rather as he came short of many that followed after in age, and number of
years, so it may safely be thought, that he exceeded them not in stature or
dimentions of body; there being often found in the Creatures a reciprocal
corespondence, betwixt their durations and dimentions, as among the Graecians,
the same word signifies both; whence some translate (...) Ephesians: 4: 13: Luc: 2.
52:
it age, and some stature: So that those Patriarchs of the first age, who by
special dispensation lived longest, may well be conceived by virtue of the
same dispensation, to have had a stature and length of body in some sort,
suitable to the lasting and length of their lives.

SECT. 2. What those Giants were which are mentioned in the 6 of Genesis, and
that succeeding ages till David's time afforded the like.
YEt the first mention that holy Scripture makes of Giants is in the sixth of
Genesis, not long before the flood, but long after the Creation, v: 4:
There were Giants in the earth in those days, says the text; and also after
that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and thy bear
children unto them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of
renown. The Original word is Nephelim, derived from Naphal, which signifies
to fall, whence Iunius referres their name to their Eccles: 16: 7:
defection and apostacy from religion and the worship of the true God. Calvin
to the falling of others before them by reason of their Eccles: 23: 4
excessive pride, cruelty, and oppression. Philo in his book, which he has
purposely composed de Gygantibus, to their own falling from piety and godliness
to carnal thoughts and earthly desires. From which he fetches their name in
Greek: S. Cyrill about the beginning of his ninth book against Julian,
discoursing of this very passage of Moses, thus comments upon it. Mos est
divinae Scripturae Gigantes vocare agrestes and feroces and robustos: Nam de
Persis and Medis Iudaeam devastaturis, dixit Deus per Isayam, Gigantes venient
vt impleant furorem meum. It is the phrase of holy writ to call such Giants as
are in behavior rough and rude, wild, cap: 13:
and barbarous: So speaks God by the Prophet Isayah, of the Medes and
Persians, ordained for the laying wast of Judea; Giants shall come and execute
my fury upon you. So that if we rest in any of these interpretations, there is
no necessity we should conceive these Giants to have exceeded other men in
stature. Nay, S. Chrysostom seems to deny it, Gygantes a Scriptura dici
opinor non invsitatum hominum genus aut insolita^ formam, sed Heroas and viros
fortes and hellicosos: I think they are in Scripture called Giants, not any
uncouth kind of men for shape or feature, but such as were Heroycall and
warlike: Which exposition of his, has in truth some ground in the latter part
of the same verse, where Moses seems to unfold himself, thus describing those
whom immediately before he had called Giants, the same became mighty men, which
were of old, men of renown.

On the other-side Cassianus, Ambrose, and Theodoret are as express, Cass:
Coll: S: c: 21 Am^. de Noe and Arca c: 4: Theod. in Gen: qu: 48:
that by Giants, Moses there understood men of an huge and vast proportion of
body: But for mine own part, I see not but all these interpretations,
(Chrysostomes only excepted) may well enough stand together and be accorded.
These Giants being such as the Interlineary Gloss briefly but pithily
describes, immanes corpore, superbos animo, viribus praevalidos and inconditos
moribus: Giants then they were not only in regard of their pride, their
tyranny, their incivility, and infidelity, but like wise and that doubtless
most properly in respect of the monstrous enormity of their bodies: most of the
former being in likelihood occasioned by this latter.

Now as this is the first place that we read of Giants not long before the
flood, (which should argue they were taller and stronger then any that went
before them) so it is not the last, but in all times we may trace them through
the history of succeeding ages. From whence Reason collects, that even in
regard of these irregular prodigious birthes, for ought we find in Scripture,
Nature has suffered no apparent or sensible decay. Of this stamp it seems was
Nymrod, who has therefore this Character set upon him, that he was Robustus
Venator coram Domino, Gen: 10: 9:
a mighty hunter before the Lord: There were some likewise found of this
excessive stature in the time of Abraham, of Moses, of Iosuah, and of David,
whom we have registered under the names of Rephaims, Zuzims, Gen: 14: 5: Number:
13: 33 Deuteronomy: 2: 20: 21 Ios: 11: ^1: Amos: 2: 9:
Zanzummins, Emims, and Anakims. Also the Prophet Amos found among the Amorites
men of Gyant-like stature, whose height he compares to Cedars and their
strength to Oaks. Particularly it is noted in the third of Deuteronomy of Ogge
King of Basan four hundred years after Abraham, that his bed of iron kept
and showed as a monument in Rabbah was nine cubits long and four broad: And
surely if v: 11:
his stature were answerable to the dimensions of his bed, he was one of the
greatest Giants that we any where read of, not only in sacred but in any
warrantable profane story. For whereas nine cubits make up thirteen foot and
an half, if we should allow a foot and half for the length of his bed-steed
at both the ends beyond his body; yet there still remains twelve foot, which
is double to a just stature. And though I am not ignorant that both the Chaldee
Paraphrase, and Complutensian Bible following it, render it, In cubito eiusdem
Regis, as if the measure were to be taken by the Cubit of King Ogge himself;
yet Arias Montanus and Tremellius following the original, render it, in cubito
viri, or virili; and Iunius gives this note upon it, idest iustae and communis
mensurae, qualem mensuram cubitalem quisque Artifex observare solet: that is,
of the just and common measure, such as Artificers usually observe in their
cubits, and such as himself in the third of Iosuah translates, notam mensuram,
the ordinary known measure. And to say truth, the v: 4:
measuring of Ogge by his own cubit had been both to make his stature
altogeter uncertain, and the commensurations of his body most
disproportionable, there being no man, whose body is justly framed, who is full
four of his own cubits in length; neither had such a shape bin only
disproportionable, but exceeding weak, as well for offense, as defense, whereas
he is described as a mighty man, and of wonderful strength. Lastly, if we
shall imagine him to have been a transcendent Giant, and yet measure him by
his own cubit, double to the ordinary, his length will then arise to twenty
four foot at least, a stature most incredible. After this in David's time we
read that Goliath the Philistin of Gath, 1: Sam: 17: 4
was a Giant of six cubits and a spanne long: Neither do I remember that in
sacred Scriptures we have the measure of any precisely observed, save of him
only: the armor which he wore weighed five thousand shekels of brass, the
sheft of his spear was like a weavers beam, and his spear head weighed six
hundred shekels of iron: Also in tho second of Samuel, Cap: 21: 19:
there is mention of a brother to this (...), a man of like stature and
strength: And of two (...), the one of which was slain by Iehonathan David's
Nephew, he who had twelve fingers and as many toes, v: 20: 21.
four and twenty in number. And that before these, Sampson was of surpassing
strength and of a stature answerable the (...), no man need to doubt,
considering he tore a Lion as it had be^o a kidde, slew thirty of the
Philistines at once, and after that a thousand more of them with Iud: 14: and 16.
the iaw-bone of an ass: And lastly he took the gates of Assah, and the two
posts, and lifted them away with the bars, and put them upon his shoulders,
and carried them to the top of the mountain before Hebron.

SEC. 3. That latter times have also afforded the like both at home and abroad,
specially in the Indies, where they live more according to nature.
THE like may be said of all succeeding ages down to the present times; It is
the confession of Cassanion in his book of Giants; No^ vno tantum seculo aut
altero visi sunt; sed ferme ab initio mundi ad Davidis vsque tempora propagatum
id genus hominum magnitudine prorsus admiranda. They have not been seen in
one only or two ages, but almost from the beginning of the world even to
David's time has that kind of men of a monstrous bigness been deduced. S.
Augustine goes farther, Quasi vero Corpora hominum modum nostrum long
excedentia De Civit: Dei, 15. 23.
non etiam nostris temporibus nata sint: as if some bodies of men much
exceeding our ordinary stature were not likewise borne in these our times. And
yet more fully in the ninth Chapter of the same book; Nunquam ferme defuerunt
qui modum aliorum plurimum excederint; they have almost at no time been
wanting who have much exceeded the ordinary stature.

I will insist only upon the most signal instances drawn from the
testimonies of the most approved Authors. In the Gospells or writings of the
Apostles we read not of any, they intending, matters of greater, weight and
consequence: But Pliny tells us, that during the reign of Claudius the
Emperor, a mighty man one Gabbara by name was Lib. 7. c. 16.
brought out of Arabia to Room, nine foot hith was he, and as many inches.
There were likewise in the time of Augustus Caesar two others, named Pusio and
Secondilla higher then Gabbara by half a foot, whose bodies were preserved
and kept for a wonder within the Salustian gardens. Maximinus the Emperor, as
Julius Capitolinus affirms, exceeded eight foot; And Andronichus Comninus
ten, as Nicetas. In the days of Theodosius, there was one in Syria, (as
Nicephorus reports) five cubits high and an hand-breadth. Eginhardus and
Krantzius affirm that Charlemaigne Lib. 12. c 37.
was seven foot high: But in that they add of his own feet, they both leave
his height altogether uncertain, (as was before said in the description of
the stature of Ogge) and his body very disproportionable, there being no man
whose body is rightly featured, who exceedes fix of his Vitruvius, l. 3 c: 1.
own feet.

But to draw nearer to our own times: Julius Scaliger has left it upon
record, that at his being at Millane, he there saw in a public hospital
Exercit. 263.
a young man of so monstrous an height, that he could not stand upright, he
was therefore laid upon two beds, the one joined longwise unto the other, both
which he filled with his length. Goropius Becanus Physician to the Lady Mary,
Queen of Hungary, regent of th De Gygante^.
Netherlands, and sister to the Emperor Charles the fifth, assures us, thae
himself saw a woman ten foot high, and that within five miles of hit
dwelling, there was then to be seen a man almost of the same lengths whereupon
his assertion is, Audacter affirmamus, we boldly affirm: that men in former
ages were commonly nothing taller then now they, are: Their Giants were of six
or seven cubits high, and so are ours: nay he goes farther, Considenter de
philosophiae preceptis statuimus, nihil in humana statura ab inevnte mundi
aetate immutatum esse: We confidently auerre out of the grounds of
Philosophy, that since the Creation of the world nothing is altered in the
stature of mankind.

But to return to the Giants of latter ages, John Cassanion, who seems to
have undertaken his treatise of Giants purposely to censure and confute
Goropius, yet mentions one himself commonly called the Giant of Bordeaux, whom
King Francis passing that way beheld with admiration, Cap. 6.
commanding he should be of his guard: but being a pesant of a gross spirit,
not able to apply himself to a Courtiers life, he soon quited his halbard,
and getting away by stealth, returned to the place whence he came. An honorable
person, who had seen him archer of the guard, did assure me, says Cassanion,
that he was of such an height as any man of an ordinary stature might go
upright betwixt his legs when he did stride. There is at this present to be
seen here in England one Parsons, by trade a blacke-smith, now Porter at the
Kings Court, who by just measure is found to be no less then seven foot and
(...) 1614.
two inches. And I here that a Welch-man is lately entertained by the Prince
in the like place, who outstrips the Smith in height by five inches, and yet
is he still growing, so as in time he may well come unto eight foot.

But it may well be that in these parts of the world where luxury has crept
in together with Ciuility, there may be some diminution of strength and stature
in regard of our Ancestors; yet if we cast our eyes abroad upon those nations
which still live according to nature, though in a fashion more rude and
barbarous, we shall find by the relation of those that have lived among them,
that they much exceed us in stature, still retaining as it seems the vigorous
constitution of their Predecessors, which should argue, that if any decay be,
it is not universal, and consequently not natural, but rather adventitious
and accidental. For proof hereof, to let pass the stories of Olaus Magnus
touching the Inhabitants of the Northern Climate, I will content my self with
the Indies. Melchior Nunnez in his letters where he discourses Simon Mai^
dierum Canicul: colloq: 2:
of the affairs of China reports that in the chief city called Pag^, the
Porters are fifteen foot high, and in other letters written in the year
1555, he does auerre that the King entertaines and feeds five hundred such men
for Archers of his Guard. In the West Indies in the region of Chica near the
mouth of his streights; Ortelius describes a people whom he terms Pentagones,
from their huge stature, being ordinarily of five cubits long, which makes
seven foot and an half; whence their country is known by the name of the
land of Giants. Mr Pretty a Gentleman of Suffolk, in his discourse of Mr
Candish his voyage about Hackluit in his English voyage.
the world, being himself employed in the same action, tells us that
measuring the print of an Indians foot in the sand, not far from the coast
of Brasil; he found it to be eighteen inches long, by which computation, the
Indian himself in proportion could be no less then nine foot. Cassanion
likewise acknowledges that in the Island of Summatra and near the Antarticke
Pole, some are found of ten or twelve foot high. Lastly, Antony Pigafet a
great traveller in his time, as testifies Goulart, Memorables Hi stoires de
nostre temps.
affirms that he had seen toward the same Pole so tall a Giant, as other
tall men did not reach with their heads above his navell; and others beyond the
streights of Magellane, which had their necks a cubit long, and the rest of
their bodies answerable thereunto.

CAP. 4. More pressing Reasons to prove that for these last two or three
thousand years, the stature of the Ancients was little or nothing different
from that of the present times.
SECT. 1. The first Reason taken from the measures of the Ancients, which were
proportioned to the parts of man's body, and in the view of them we are first
to know that they were standards, that is, for public contracts, certain and
constant; and consequently if the grains of our barley corn, the first
principle of measure be the same with theirs, as has already been proved, it
cannot be but our ordinary measures should be the same with theirs, and so
likewise our statures.
I will not dwell upon these lighter skirmishes, but proceed on to a more
serious fight, and downeright strokes drawn from the demonstrations of more
weighty reasons, whereof the first shall be taken from the comparison of the
measures of the Ancients and ours, used in this present age, borrowed from the
body of man. It was a memorable saying of Protagoras, reported and repeated by
Plato, that man was rerum omnium mensura, the measure of all things; he is the
measure of In (...) and (...):
measures, the yard, the ell, the pace, the furlong, the mile, they are all
measured by the body of man and the parts thereof, which likewise serve for the
measuring each of other. So that if they hold that Symmetrie and commodulation,
(as Vitruvius calls it) which they ought from the proportion Lib. 3. c. 1:
of the head, the hand, the cubit, the foot, the finger, nay the tooth or the
least bone, may the dime^sions of the whole body be infalliblely collected. As
Pythagoras gathered the height of Hercules from the proportion of his foot;
and Pulcher a skillful Geometrician the height of a Giant Gellius out of
Plutarch: l: 1: c: 1
(discovered in Sicily by an earthquake) at the command of Tiberius from the
proportion of his tooth, sent from thence to the Emperor Trallianus out of
Apolloniu^ de mirabilibus and l^ngaevis.
for a taste and trial of the whole. To lay a ground then to that which I am to
say, that the building which I am to raise upon it may stand the surer, first I
take it to be an undeniable truth, that the cubit, the foot, the inch, the
digit were all of them standards, that is, certain and constant measures, it
being not lawful for every man to make or take his measures in public
contracts by his own cubit or foot, or of any whom himself would make choice
of, but by that which was common and indifferent to all, legally and publicly
allowed: And this much not only stands with right reason, but appears to be
true, by that Amphora Capitolina amongst the Romans, a standing stable
measure, kept in the Capitol, (with which all other measures were to accord)
mentioned by Julius Capitolinus in the life of Maximinus, as also by the Roman
Congius, whereof one was lately in the keeping of Cardinal Farnese, and is
exquisitely effigiated by Vyllalpandus in the latter end of his third tome upon
the Prophet Ezekiel. Among the Jews likewise the Law required that they should
not use or have a double weight or measure, which could not well be avoided,
except they had a common measure by which all particulars were to be regulated.

Secondly, this standard of cubits or feet was taken from the proportion of a
man, mediae or mediocris staturae, of a middle stature, and considering that
both the Roman and Grecian foot consists of twelve inches, and withal
that a foot is the sixth part of a man's body, it must needs follow that a man
of a middle stature consisted of six foot by the standard or assise. But
because it was observed that in diverse Climates, or it may be in the same
Climate in diverse ages men varied in their stature; and consequently that the
middle stature was not always and in all places the same, they measured the
digit, which is the least and last principal of measures in man's body, by
barley corns, allowing four barley corns laid athwart for the digit, as
Lucas Gauricus a great and famous Mathematician in his book of Geometry and
the parts thereof, has truly and wisely observed, Nam etsi, says he, ab
humanis membris dimensionu^ parts deno^inari Veteres voluere placuit tamen
propter humanorum corporum inaequalitatem, a certo quodam principio exordiri,
ex quo mensurae reliquae velut ex certis partibus constituerentur. Statuerunt
ergo Geometrae granum hordei transuersum, id est secundum latitudinem positum,
mensurarum minimam. Though the Ancients have pleased to denominate the several
parts of measures from the several parts of man's body; yet by reason of the
inequality of men's bodies, they thought it reasonable to take their rise from
some certain and vnvariable beginning, from whence other measures might
likewise be made up of even and certain parts. And to this purpose did the
Geometricians make the barley corn laid athwart, or according to its breadth
the least and first of all other measures. And that four of these make up a
digit, appears by these old verses which I find in the same Author,

Quatuor ex granis digitus componitur unus
Est quater in palmo digitus quater in pede palmus.
One foot four palms, one palm contains
Four digits, and one digit four grains.
Now that the barley-corne, the (Grownsell as it were, and simplest principle
of Measures) or at leastwise the fairest thereof which is used to that end, is
the same with us as with the Ancients, it cannot well be denied, if the
goodness and fruitfulness of the Earth be not decayed, as I have sufficiently
proved in a former Chapter, as well by reason as the testimony of Columella and
other grave Writers. And besides if we still Lib* 2: c. 9.
use the grains of barley for the weight of gold and silver, as the Ancients
did; I see no reason why we should except against them in this case. Well
then, four grains now concurring to the making up of a digit, as it did in
former ages, it must of necessity follow that our digit is the same with
theirs, and consequently our inch, and hand-bredth, and foot, and cubit, from
whence we collect that a body of six foot height according to those measures,
being now accounted but a middle stature, as anciently it was, our account is
still the same, and our stature at leastwise for the general the same, as
among the Ancients. And except it were so, their rules of proportion in
Architecture, in lymming, in carving and the statuary Art left us by them could
avail us little. For howbeit from them we might understand what proportion
each part should bear to other, yet can we not know what proportion the whole
should bear, unless their measures were the same with ours. But their works
in those kinds yet remaining, show that the measure which they allowed for an
horse or a man of a just and even stature, are the same for proportion both
with their own rules and our standing measures used at this day: And at this
day do the best Architects observe Vitruvius his measures, finding them to
agree with, or very little to disagree from ours.

SECT. 2. That in particular the ordinary Hebrew Grecian and Roman measures
were the same with ours or very little different.
THose Nations which have left us any notable Records of their several sorts
of measures, are to my remembrance but three: the Hebrews, the Graecians, and
the Romans. For the first it is clear that as they had some weights sacred or
of the Sanctuary, which were the beggar, and others of ordinary and common use,
which were the lesser: so were their measures; there was a special Cubit which
contained an handbredth more then the vulgar, (borrowed it seems from Ezekiel.
40. (...) 43. 13.
the Persians during the Captivity of Babylon) and an ordinary, which I take to
be the same with, or very little differing from ours. And this in holy writ is
termed the Cubit of a man, and the measure of a man, that is, of a man grown
up to ripe age and perfect stature. And both Iunius (as Deuteronomy. 3. 11. Revel. 21.
17.
before I observed) in his annotations on that of Deuteronomy and Ribera in his
Commentaries on the Revelation, seem both of them to refer it to the ordinary
measures which Artificers commonly use in taking their distances, and making
their dimensions. The first measures to my remembrance that we read of in the
sacred Oracles of Scripture are those Genesis 6. 15. Aug. de (...). Dei l: 15: c:
27.
of the Arc; which S. Augnstine lead by Origin held to be Geometrical,
containing six common Cubits: but it is certain, that casting the bigness of
it by the vulgar Cubit now in use, it was a vessel of so ample and huge
capacity, that it was fully sufficient for the preserving of all sorts of
creatures together with their food by God appointed to be reserved in it. The
length of it was three hundred Cubits, which multiplied by the breadth, namely
fifty cubits, and the product by the height of thirty cubits, shows the whole
concavity to have been four hundred and fifty thousand cubits, large enough
for stoage for Noah and his company, the beasts, and birds, and their
provision, and somewhat to spare, as Buteo has learnedly demonstrated.

Of Solomon's Temple it is noted that it was sixty cubits long, twenty broad,
and thirty high, which Ribera likewise makes to be vulgar and usual 1: Kings.
6. 2. De fabrica templi: c: 5:
cubits. And though the building may seem to have been very scant after that
proportion, yet if we consider that none might come within this space but the
Priests that then served, and that both the Altar of Houlocausts, and the Court
of the Priests who served not, was without, it will seem needless to require a
longer or larger room for those services to which it was assigned; Yet since
these cubits in the second book of Chronicles, are said to be ex primaria
mensura, after the primary or chief measure, it should seem they were no
ordinary cubits, but rather Cap. 3. v. 3.
sacred, which contained the common and vulgar cubit double, as may appear by
this, in that the pillars of brass Iachin and Boaz set up before the porch of
the Temple in the first of Kings, are said to be eighteen Cubits high: but in
the second of Chronicles, thirty five, which together Cap. 7. v. 15. Cap. 3. 15.
with the basis being one Cubit high, make thirty six, double to eighteen, as
the shekell of the Sanctuary was double to the vulgar: yet can it not be
gathered that the vulgar exceeded ours, nay the pillars with their Chapiters
and basis being by this computation above sixty foot in height, it may well be
conjectured, that their foot and Cubit either came short of ours, or was at
most but equal unto it. And for Solomon's own house which was one hundred
Cubits long, fifty broad, and thirty high, generally received it is, that they
were of the Common measure. We read that 1. King 7. 2.
some of the stones laid in the foundation of the house built for his wife
Pharaohs daughter, were of ten Cubits, which allowing a foot and a half to the
cubit, make up fifteen foot, a very large proportion, even by the v: 10:
length of the vulgar foot now in use: But those in Herod's Temple, twenty five
Cubits long (as witnesses Josephus who saw it himself) if the cubit by which
he reckoned exceed our ordinary, were of a length altogether Antiquit: l: 15:
c: 3.
incredible. And for mine own part, I know not how we should compute either the
height of Goliath, or the length of Oggs bed, and the like, but by the vulgar
and ordinary cubit, now commonly in use amongst us, as most of the learned do,
and if in so doing they err not, then are our measures, and consequently our
present stature undoubtedly equal with, or at leastwise not much inferior to
theirs that lived in Moses time, who as it may well be thought, borrowed this
Art of measuring from the Egyptians, in whose learning he was so perfectly
skilled.

Now for the measures of the Graecians, howbeit Causabon in his commentaries In
Tyberio. c: 6^
upon Suetonius, seem to make the Grecian foot, as likewise that of other
Nations, of less extent then the Roman; yet Georgius Agricola, who studied
this point more thoroughly, and has of set purpose composed a large volume of
the Grecian and Roman weights and measures, affirms the Grecian to exceed
the Roman by half an inch, and for proof thereof does he mention a pillar to
be seen in the Chapel of the twelve Apostles in the Vatican, which seemed to
him to have been brought out of Greece, with this inscription graven in the
higher part Libro dei Men suris, quibus intervalla (...).
thereof, (...), that is, nine foot, and from the measure and proportion of
this would he prove it to exceed the Roman by the quantity aforenamed, yet by
his own confession Marlianus who has written the Topography of Rome, and
exactly described whatsoever therein was worth the observing, has marked no
such difference: And for the Cubit, though Herodotus in one place speak of
Regius Cubitus, that contained twenty seven digits, which is three more then
the ordinary, yet that Lib: 1:
their ordinary either digit or cubit exceeded ours, I nowhere find it
expressly observed. And for their stature it is precisely noted by the same
Author, that Phya the wife of Pisistratus was held so tall, that she Lib: 1.
was exhibited and applauded as another Minerva, and yet wanted she three
fingers of four cubits. Neither adds he, Cubitorum Regiorum, of Regal cubits,
as in the other passage, which makes me conceive that he might rather mean the
vulgar. And for the Persians; from whom the Graecians borrowed their Regal
Cubit, he tells us that one Artaches a principal Lib: 7:
Commander in Xerxes his army, was statura inter Persas procerissima, the
tallest among all the Persians, and yet wanted he four digits of the measure
of five Regal Cubits, so that his height according to the vulgar Cubit was
about eight foot: And I think at this day there are few Kingdoms, though
much inferior to that of Persia, which cannot show one at least not much
inferior to that proportion.

In the third and last place come the ancient Roman measures to be compared
with ours: neither have I met with any who either affirm or so much as
conjecture that they exceeded ours: but many that they rather came short of
them. Sr Henry Savill a severe and exact man in the In his view of Military
matters.
search of Antiquity, speaking of the quadrantall, a measure of a Cubicall
Roman foot, sets this note in the margent, The Roman foot less then ours
by half an inch. In like manner Agricola censures Budaeus for making De
restit. Pond: and Mensur:
up the Roman quadrantall, by the measure of the french foot, whereas, says
he, it exceedes the Roman duobus digitis, by two fingers: and farther adds,
that the standing measure of the ancient Roman foot is yet at this day to be
seen cut in stone or marble in diverse places of Rome; and namely in the
gardens of Angelo Colocci: Some of these, it seems, Goropius Becanus met
with and measured, and by his own testimony, found them short of four of his
palms or hand-breadths; and yet, Gigantomachiae.
says he, statura mea mediocritate brevior, my self come short of a middle
stature. The mile we know was measured by the pace, and the pace by the foot,
now that the Roman mile came short of ours, appears by the great stones set
up at every miles end in the Appian way; and the Italian mile in use at this
day, taken, as it seems, from the ancient Roman, is shorter then ours, near
about the same proportion, as is the Roman foot said to be shorter then our
foot. To bring it home then to our present purpose; It is by Suetonius
reported of Augustus, that he was indeed Cap: 79.
somewhat short, nevertheless of a comely stature: Which from the testimony of
Julius Marathus, he notes to have been five foot and nine inches, the just
measure of our late famous Queen Elizabeth, who as she matched that renowned
Emperor in happiness and duration of reign, so did she likewise in the
stature of her body, nay if we admit the mentioned difference between the
Roman foot and ours, she exceeded him in height by more then two inches: And
I see no reason why Suetonius should term Augustus short, coming so near
the middle stature, except only because he came somewhat short of that. The
same Author writes that Nero levied a new legion of Italians of Cap: 19.
six foote-men, which he called the Phalanx of the great Alexander, by which it
should seem that very few exceeded that stature. And of Tiberius, he observes
that he was statura quae justam excederet, somewhat, as it seems, above six
foot. Valentinian and Valens gave order that for Cap: 68. Cod.
the common soldier five foot and seven inches should suffice; And Vegetius
Theodo^: titulo de Tyranibus: Lib: 1: c, 5.
witnesses of Marius the Consul, that such as were six foot high, or sieve
and ten inches should be ranked inter Alares Equites vel in primis legionum
cohortibus, among the principal troops that served either on horfe-backe or
on foot. From whence Causabon collecteth that such as were seven foot high
were counted Giants, and to that purpose voucheth In Suet: Tyb: c: 68:
he the authority of Sidonius Apollinaris who flourished about the year four
hundred and forty. In Carmine ad Catuli^um.


-- Spernit senipedem stylum Thalia
Ex quo septipedes vidit Patronos:
Six footed rimes Thalia does defy
Ere since she seven foot Patrons did epsy,
whom a little after he terms Giants:

Tot tantique petunt simul Gigantes,
Quot vix Alcinoi culina ferret
Giants so many and so hugely maine,
As scarce Alcinous Kitchen can sustain.
By all which passages it clearly appears, thar our ordinary stature at this
day, if it exceed not that of the Ancient Romans, yet does it equal it at
least.

Now before I conclude this Reason and Section, it shall not be amiss by the
way to remember that Nicephorus makes the stature of Christ by Lib. 1: c: 40:
tradition to have been, (if Langus render him right) ad palmos prorsus
septem, full seven hand breadths. Which length allowing four hand breadths to
the foot, according to the usual account, wants one hand breadth of two
foot; The stature of a dwarf of the least sise: but if by palmos he means
spannes, whereof about three make up two foot, so likewise could he be but
four foot and a spanne long, too short a stature for a comely body, such as
we may well and piously conceive he had, and all ancient Christian writers
confess; and Lentulus the Proconsull in that Epistle to the Roman Senate,
which goes under his name, confirms as much: And it should seem by that of
the Apostle, till we come to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of
the fullnes of Christ: Ephesians. 4. 13.
that his stature was complete and perfect, not excessive in height, for then
Zaccheus needed not to have gone up to a tree to have seen him, nor yet very
defective, that having been apt to expose him to scorn and derision. And in
likelihood we should have found it somewhere, by some one or other among so
many and malicious Adversaries, objected unto him. It is true that none of the
Evangelists, (most particular and precise in setting down other Circumstances)
have expressed any thing at all touching his complexion, or feature, or
stature: Happily to this end, that no picture or statue might be made of him,
as well knowing how inclinable by nature we are to turn the very resemblances
and memorialls of those, whom we most honor and reverence into Idols.
Another thing which I would note is this, that when I call six foot a middle
stature, my meaning is not that there are as many found to be above it, as
below it (which is the vulgar understanding of that word) but because it is,
and ever has been held by the Learned, the most competent and comely stature;
so as he who is under that, is somewhat too short, and he who is above it,
somewhat too tall in regard of the most even, just, and exact proportion. It
was so held among the Romans, as appears by Vitruvius, and by the
Commentatours on Suetonius in the life of Tiberius: And yet their ranking of
six foot men among Cap, 68.
their principal troops, and Nero his making up a legion of the levied from
all the parts of Italy, which in a kind of pride and glory he named the
Phalanx of Alexander the great, show that then very few exceeded that stature:
And yet, (which may not be forgotten) was their foot short of ours three
inches in the measure of six feet. And surely, now among us to raise a Legion
of five foot and nine inches in any of his Majesty's kingdoms, or perchance
in some one of our sheires, would prove, I dare say, no very hard task, or
such as we should hold a matter worth the glorying in.

SECT. 3. The second reason taken from the ordinary allowance of diet to
soldiers and servants, which appears to be of like quantity with us, as was
that among the Ancient Graecians and Romans, together with a doubt touching
Gods allowance to the Israelites, answered.
But I pass from this first Reason drawn from the comparison of ancient and
modern Measures, to a second no less weighty and pressing in my judgment,
borrowed from the allowance of diet, taking this for my ground, that caeteris
paribus, men for the most part feed according to the proportion of their
bodies; and withal that their public allowance was made according to their
customary feeding. To Hercules, being a man supposed of a mighty stature, is
allowed by Homer an ox at a meal when he was hungry. Of Maximinus the
Emperor aboue-named, Capitolinus reports, that he often ate in a day forty
pound weight of flesh, and sometimes sixty, as he adds out of Cordus.
Athenaeus alleages Theodorus Hieropolis in his books of the games of Greece,
that the ordinary fare of Milo the Crotonian, was twenty pound of flesh and
three Congij, or six gallons of wine. In the year one thousand five hundred
and eleven, the Emperor Maximilian the first, being at Ausburge S^ius in his
Commentaries of the memorable things of our time.
at an assembly of the states of Germany; there was presented him a man of an
unreasonable height and greatness, who at a few mouth-fulls and without any
stay, would devour a whole sheep, or a calfe, not caring whether it were roast
or raw, saying that it did but sharpen his appetite. Children for the most part
are not allowed the like quantily as men of riper years, though they be
growing, nor among men dwarfes the like as Giants: And it stands with great
reason that the portion of diet appointed for the nourishing of the body,
should in some sort be answerable to the proportion of the body nourished. If
then it shall appear that the daily bread allowed by the Ancients to their
servants and soldiers, was no more then is by us allowed at this day to ours,
it will, as I take it, from thence be more then probablely inferred, that the
common stature and strength of our bodies, is not so much inferior to theirs,
as is commonly supposed.

The ordinary allowance in corn among the Graecians, was the measure of a
Choenix a day, as witnesses Suidas; and fromhence, as it seems, was borrowed
that Motto of Pythagoras, remembered by Plutarch super Choenicem^ ne si^as, sit
not upon a Choenix, that is, having gotten food Symps. 7. prob. 4.
for a day, do not grow secure, as if that would never be spent. And Athenaeus
tells us, that Clearchus a great Coyner of new words, was wont upon this
occasion to call a Choenix Hemerotrophidem sustenance Lib: 3:
for a day. At leastwise in the Camp it was so, if we credit Herodotus in
his Polymnia, where he vittaileth the common soldier in Xerxes army at a
Ch^nix a day: The quantity of which allowance we shall find anon very near
to agree both with the Roman, and that which is in use at this day. The
measure then to a Roman foote-man for a month, says Polybius, was two thirds
of a Medimnus of wheat, which made up four Modij, the whole Medimnus by a
general consent of all the best Authors containing six Modij in all. With
which rate of Polybius precisely agrees Donate upon Terence, where he limiteth
dimensum Ia (...).
serui, (in the Gospel called, a servants portion of meat) to be four Modij
the month; the same portion which both Cato and Columella allow Luc. 12: 42.
So (...) and Beza (...) (...).
for country ^indes. Now that it may appear what this allowance was according
to our measures, we are to know that the Roman Modius, howbeit it be usually
in our language rendered a Bushel, and be so commonly construed in Schools;
yet is it about a pint less then a pecke, as is rightly observed, not only by
Sr Henry Savill in his view of military matters, but by our last Translatours
of the Bible, who though they have set bushel Mat. 5. 15. Man. 4. 21.
in the Text, yet in the Margin have they affixed this note, The word in the
original signisieth a measure containing about a pint less then a p^ke.

First then to compare the Grecian and the Roman allowance. The Medimnus
containing forty eight Choenices, as witnesses Budaeus out of Pollux, and six
Modij, as Tully, and Suidas, and Nepos, and others; the Roman Lib. 5. de Ass.
being allowed four Modij by the Month, and the Grecian a Choenix by the
day, their allowances were equal, or not much different, save that the Roman
seems to be somewhat larger: four Modij containing after that reckoning
thirty two Choenices, which amongst them was a months allowance. With which if
we compare our own measures, it will weekly amount to a pint less then a
pecke, and allowing two gallons to the pecke, it will arise to about a quart by
the day, which is but a competent allowance for a soldier or labour-man
(living most upon bread) at this day; as Budaeus by conference with his Baker,
has fully cleared the Lib: 5: de Ass:
point. And here it may not be forgotten that our last Translatours (to clear
the whole business more fully) in their marginall notes on the sixth of the
Revelation at the sixth verse, give us to understand, that the word Choenix
there used signifies a measure containing one wine quart, and the twelth part
of a quart. Now I am not ignorant that the Gomer of Manna, being the daily
allowance of the ^ewes during their abode in the wilderness, by Gods own
appointment, is by Rabanus valued at three Choenices, and by Iunius two and an
half, bating one fifth. But I should rather ascribe so large an allowance to
Gods special bounty, then to their necessity; and so much has Iunius himself
in his annotations upon that place confessed: inde colligitur, quam largiter
Deus Israelitas aluerit tam longo tempore: We may from thence collect, how
bountifully God dealt with the Israelites making them so large an allowance for
so long a time. And this marvelous great plenty, in likelihood was it that
gave them occasion to distaste it, to grow weary of it, and cast out those
murmuring speeches against God and Moses his servant and their leader, Animam
nostram taed^t huius pa^is vilis^imi, our soul loatheth this light bread; and
to Number. 21: 5:
fall a longing after the cucumbers and leekes, the onyons and garlic Cap.
11. 5:
of Egypt: Though the Manna, as well in regard of the delicacie thereof, as the
raining of it down from heaven, be by the Psalmist termed Psalm 78. 25:
Angels food; and in the book of Wisdom be commended for having in it a
certain contentfull delight agreeable to every man's ^ast. It is likewise Cap:
16: 20:
true that the Roman allowance to a horseman by the testimony of Polybius,
seemed to be larger then that of the foote-man, there being allotted Lil: 6:
him monthly seven Medimni of oats or barley for his horse, and two of
wheat for himself: But it may very well be, as Lypsius conjectureth, that he
had a spare horse and an attendant or two allowed him, and then his two Medimni
for himself, and his two servants agrees justly De militia Romana. l. 5: 16: c.
with the two thirds of a Medimnus to a foote-man.

SECT. 4. Diverse other reasons drawn from experience added as from the
armor, the bed-steeds, the seats, the doors, the pulpits, the Altars of the
Ancients, and other doubts cleared.
TO proceed, that which seems to make the matter more evident, because it
strikes more upon the sense, is the view of the roofes, the doors, the tables,
the seats, the robes, the bed-steeds, the weapons, the armor, the pulpits,
the Altars, the tombs of the Ancients, yet remaining to be seen; all which
argue that they were of the same stature, or very little differing from us.
Aristotle in his Mechanics gives us to understand, that the bed-steeds in his
time, did not commonly exceed six Quest. 26.
foot: Nay Magius himself, who has written a large discourse in defense of
the contrary and common opinion; yet at last confesses, Miscellan: c. 4.
that taking an exact measure of the Tombs at Pisa and other cities in Italy,
though some of them were made a thousand years since, some more; yet found he
them in dimensions parum aut nihil, little or nothing differing from those of
our times, and withal ingenuously acknowledges, that being at Pisaurum in the
Duke of Vrbines armory, he there saw certain brass helmets dug up in the
fields near Metaurum, where Asdruball was overthrown by the Roman forces,
and were verily thought to have layne there since that time: Quae tamen ab ijs
quas modo milites nostri gestare solent ad magnitudinem quod attinet, non
discrepabant: which notwithstanding, says he, in regard of bigness, differed
not from those which our soldiers now a days usually wear.

I know that the sword of Edward the third, the armor of John of Gaunt, the
tilting staff of Charles Brandon, the walking staves and riding staves of
Henry the eight showed in the Tower and other places far exceed the ordinary
of our times: but perchance some of them like Sinesius Grandio in Seneca
delighted in great things, or I should think that sometimes they were rather
for show then for use; and for the rest, it only argues the strength and
stature of those that used them, not for others, who lived in the same age with
them: Nay if we compare the common armor of the age wherein John of Gaunt
lived, or the most ancient in the Tower or otherwhere, with that which is now
in use, we shall find no such sensible difference as should argue a decay in
stature. Indeed their arrows generally exceeded ours both in bigness and
length; but this I should rather impute to their continual practice in
shooting from their very infancy, then to their strength and stature. The
truth whereof appears by this, that so long as that practice was continued,
(which was till the invention and ordinary use of Gunnes) so long the like
dimentions of their shafts were likewise continued without any diminution, as
may be seen by comparing the arrows commonly used in Henry the seventh and
Henry the eights time, with those in use many years before, few of which are
full a yard by measure; yet my Lord of S. Albans witnesses, that the
rebellious Cornish in the reign of King Henry the seventh, not much above one
hundred year ago shot an arrow of a full Cloth-yard long.

The doubt which may be made touching the Altar of the Tabernacle Exodus 27. v.
1.
seems to be of greater consequence, which by Gods appointment was to be three
cubits high, that is, four foot and an half, whereas those of latter times
are not above three foot or three and an half at most; which seems to
infer the difference in succeeding ages of the stature of those that were to
serve at the Altar: But I would demand whether the Cubit, Moses there speaks
of, were according to the ordinary stature of men then living; if so, then a
man rightly proportioned, being at most but four of his own Cubits, there was
left but one cubit for the Priest above the Altar, which was much too little
for him to minister with ease: And what then shall we say to Salomons Altar,
which was ten cubits 2. Chron. 4. 1.
high, surely it must in reason so be understood, that the height be accounted
from the lowest floor of the temple or tabernacle where the people stood; but
the Priest went up by certain slope degrees, certain easy ascents to the
Altar, so that the height of those ascents from the floor together with the
Altar it self made up the full measure there spoken of. It will be replied,
that it was expressly forbidden to go up by steps to the Altar: True indeed,
but the reason is there added, that Exodus 20. 26.
thy nakedness be not discovered thereon, so as such degrees of ascent as
occasioned not any danger or doubt of discovering his nakedness, who ministered
at the Altar, seeeme there not to be forbidden; which is the interpretation
both of Iunius and Abulensis, allowing then an Altar of three foot and half
high, and arising to it from the lower floor of a foot high; the height of the
altar from the lower floor will be four foot and an half, or three cubits,
which is the measure required in the Leuiticall Law, and differs little in
height from the Altars in foreign parts, or those which are yet standing with
us; if we likewise take their height from the lower floor, which by reason of
the continued and easy degrees of ascent to them may not unfitly be counted
their basis or foot And most certain it is, that the Altars which amongst
Christians were built for five or six hundred years since, and yet remain,
whereof there are in France, and Spain, and Italy not a few to be seen; serve
as commodiously for the stature of the men of this presentage, as they did of
those, in whose times they were built: whereas, were there such a decay as is
supposed, we now living should hardly reach their tops, much less be able to
serve at them with any tolerable conveniencie.

SEC. 5. The same farther proved, first for that the son often proves taller
then the father. Secondly, for that age and stature holding for the most part
correspondence, it being already proved that the age of mankind is not
decreased, from thence it follows that neither is their stature. Thirdly, for
that if mankind decreased in stature by the course of nature, so must of
necessity all other creatures, they being all alike subject to the same law of
nature. Fourthly, for that if men had still declined since the Creation, by
this time they would have been no bigger then rats or mice if they had at all
been.
BEsides were there such a general and continual decay of men in stature as
is supposed, either the Child would always com short of the Parents in
stature, or very seldom would it fall out otherwise, whereas now we find it
by daily experience that the son very often not only equals but exceedes the
father, and the daughter the mother. Nicephorus Calistus in the twelfth book
of his Ecclesiastical history tells us of one whom himself saw, of such an
excessive height, that Cap. 37.
he was held for a monster; Quem tamen brevis admodum staturae mulier in lucem
protulit, says he, whom notwithstanding a woman of a very short stature
brought forth. In the like manner S. Augustine reports of a woman De Ctvit. Dei
lib. 15. c. 25.
who in his time a little before the sacking of Rome by the Goths, came
thither with her Father and Mother, she was, says he, of a Gyant-like stature
far beyond all that saw her, though infinite troops came to behold that
spectacle, Et hoc erat maximae admirationi, this was matter of greatest
amazement, that both her Parents were but of ordinary stature. I have seen,
says Marcellus Donatus a learned Physician, a young maiden Lib. 3. c. 14
of a Gyant-like stature whom they carried from town to town to show her as a
prodigious thing, for the sight of whom every man gave some thing, wherewith
her mother that conducted her and her self were maintained. She was in an
hired Chamber by her self, and there suffered her self to be seen with
admiration; going as others did, I enquired carefully of every point, and did
learn both from her self and her mother, who was a woman of a mean stature,
that the maidens father was not tall, that in all their stock there was not
any one that exceeded the height of other persons. It is likewise reported in
the History of the Netherlands, that in the year 1323, was to be seen in
Holland a woman Gyantesse, to whom the tallest men seemed children, yet her
parents of mean stature. So then, if Giants be sometime borne or begotten of
such parents, no marvel that the son as often proves taller then the father,
as he comes short of him. But it commonly falls out in this kind, though not in
that extremity, as with the Samogitheans, a people lying betwixt Prussia and
Livonia, of whom Scaliger writes, that per vices tum Exercit. 263
proceros, tum pene nanos generant, by turns they bring forth Giants and
Dwarfes, like some trees, says he, which bear very plentifully one year, and
are the next altogether barren: Nature so disposing that what was deficient in
the Dwarfc, is abundantly repayed in the Giant.

Again, there is for the most part a mutual connection between age and
stature, (whence it may be in the Greek, the same word signifies both) so as
that race of men which is tallest and strongest, commonly hold out longest;
upon which ground, as it seems, they who invented the fable of the Pigmies
withal affirmed, that their women usually brought forth at five years, and
died at eight: But certain it is, that in those barbarous countries which are
not weakened by luxury, as they much exceed us in duration, so do they
likewise in dimensions, both which have been fully showed by sundry examples
already alleged, and generally we see that in the several kinds of beasts,
of birds, of fishes, of trees, of plants, the bigger they are in quantity, the
longer they last, and the lesser they are, the shorter space they continue:
Since then it has been, as I take it, sufficiently proved in the precedent
chapters, that the age of men is not so sensibly impaired in regard of former
times, as is commonly conceived, it will from thence consequently follow, that
neither is the stature of man, at least wise by any defect in the course of
Nature, so manifestly abated, as is imagined.

I say, by any defect in the Course of Nature, for then doubtless, all other
natural bodies should suffer the like defect, even the Elements and the
Heavens themselves, all which, (if I flatter not my self too much) I have in
my former discourse clearly freed from any such universal and perpetual
declination. And in truth, reason it self will easily teach us, that if men
were generally in former ages taller and larger then now they are, so must the
horses too upon which they rode; and if horses, other kinds of beasts too, and
if beasts, birds too; and if birds, fishes too; and if all these, trees too;
there being no warrantable reason, as I conceive, to be yielded, why among
those kinds of Creatures, (which wanting reason, are guided merely by
instinct of Nature) some should stand at a stay, continuing their ancient
perfection, and others in tract of time decay by degrees. Indeed Man among them
all by means of the abuse of his Reason and free choice, (which was given him
to help him, and not to hurt him, (had he the grace to make use of it) is most
subject to variation, and so to declination: yet as all men do not always
abuse their reason, at leastwise in a greater degree then their Predecessors,
(as shall God assisting be hereafter made good) so do they not always decline
in strength and stature, for then should they by this time scarcely have
exceeded the quantity of Rats or Mice, or at most have but equalled that Dwarf
of whom Nicephorus reports, (how truly I cannot say) that he had the shape, the
voice and reason of Lib. 12. c. 37
a man, yet was in body no bigger then a Partridge; or that other mentined Lib.
6. Fab. 19.
by Sabinus in his Commentaries upon the Metamorphosis: Vidit Italia nuper
virum iusta aetate non maiorem cubito circumferri in cavea psyttaci, cujus viri
meminit in suis scriptis Hieronymus Cardanus, There was lately to be seen in
Italy a man of a ripe age not above a cubit high, carried about in a Parrets
cage, of whom Hierome Cardan in his writings makes mention: But me thinks it
being the form which gives bounds to the matter (of it self unlimited and
boundless) and the form of man being still for essence and natural functions
the same which was from the beginning, the bounds of his quantity cannot vary
in any great or notorious difference, but through some exorbitancie and
aberration in nature, which as they have been in all ages, so have monsters
too, not only in figure and shape, but also both, in excess and defect.

CAP. 5. Wherein the principal objections drawn as well from Reason as from
authority and experience are fully answered.
SECT. 1. Of sundry fabulous narrations of the bones of Gianlike bodies dug
up, or found in Caves.
THe Truth being thus settled, it remains that we now dispell those mists and
clouds with which the brightness of it is sometimes ouercast: whereof the
chief is, the huge bodies and bones that at sundry times have been dug up,
and yet are kept in many places as monuments of Antiquity to be seen. Such are
they which are shown at Puteoli or Putzole in the Kingdom of Naples, upon
which Pomponius Laetus has bestowod verses, which he thus concludes,

Hinc bona posteritas immania corpora servat,
Et tales mundo testificatur avos.
Their huge corpse good posterity keeps here,
To witness to the World that once such were.
The like have I seen at Worms in Germany and other Cities standing upon the
Rheine hung up in Chains, or laid up in Megazines and other public places;
but says Philippus Camerarius, I have heard many dispute and make doubt
whether they were the bones of men, or of fishes. Meditat. histor. c. 82. sivc
libro 3 c. 2.
Infinite are the stories which to this purpose are recorded, it would require
a just volume to collect them into one body, and in truth it shall not need,
inasmuch as I find it already done by the same Camerarius, by Gassanion in his
book of Giants; and Fazelus in his first book and first Decade of the
affairs of Sicily; as also by our Hollenshed in the fourth Cassan. c. 11.
Fazelus c. 6.
chap. of his first volume, but with this Caution; For my part says he, I will
touch rare things, and such as to my self do seem almost incredible;
wherefore I will only point at a few of the most memorable, lest on the one
side I should seem purposely to baulke that rub which is commonly thought
most of all to thwart my way, or on the other side should cloy the Reader with
too many unsavory tales.

It is reported by Plutarch out of Gabinius, (which I confess, I somewhat In
vita Scrtorij
marvel at in so grave an Author) that Sertorius being in Lybia near the
streights of Morocco, found the body of Antaeus there buried, sixty cubits, to
which Fazelus adds ten more, and makes it up scaventy: But Strabo in the
seaventeenth of his Geography, mentioning the same thing, lays this censure
upon Gabinius the Author of it: Sed nec Gabinius Romanarum rerum Scriptor in
describenda Mauritania fabulis prodigiosis abstinet: neither does Gabinius in
his description of Mauritania abstain from the relation of monstrous fables.
In the fourteenth year of Fulgosus, l: c. 6:
Henry the second Emperor was the body of Pallas, (as 'twas thought,)
companion to Aeneas, taken up at Rome, and found in height to equal the walls
of that city: But as Galeotus Martius has well observed, his De doctrina
promiscua: cap. 36: Virgil: Aen: 11:
body was said to have been burned,

Arsurasque comas obnubit amictu,
The locks that shortly should consume in fire
He covered with his Robe.
Which I suppose to be likewise true of many of those bodies, which
notwithstanding are reported to have been found entire for their proportions
long after their deaths, though turned into ashes many years before: It being
the custom of those countries to burn, as it is ours to bury our dead. Our
Malmesburiensis likewise in his second book and thirteenth chapter de gestis
Rerum Anglorum mentions the same, story shall I call it, or fable, telling us
that in the year of grace 1042, and in the reign of S. Edward, the body of
Pallas the son of Euander, of whom Virgill speaks, Romae repertum est
illibatum ingenti stupore omnium quod tot saecula incorruptionem sui superavit,
was found at Rome entire and sound, to the great astonishment of all men, that
by the space of so many ages it had triumphed over corruption; and farther to
confirm the truth thereof, he assures us that the gaping wideness of the
wound which Turnus made in the midst of his breast, was found by measure to be
four foot and an half, a large wound, and the weapon which made it, we
cannot but conceive as large; and by the appearance of it at full, not only
the bones and skin and sinews, but the flesh to remain incorrupt; a matter
altogether incredible. Besides he sets us down his Epitath found at the same
time,

Filius Evandri Pallans quem lancea Turni
Militis occidit more suo iacet hic,
Which himself knows not well how to give credit too, quod non tunc
crediderim factum, (says he, which I cannot believe was then made, but by
Ennius, or some other of latter ages: But I proceed.

Herodotus in his first book tells us, that the body of Orestes being taken up,
was found to be seven cubits; but Gellius is bold to Lib. 3. c. 10.
bestow upon him for his labor the title of Homo Fabulator, a forger of
fables, rather inclining to the opinion of Varro, who held the utmost period of
a man's growth to be seven foot. What would he then have said to the body of
Oryon, which Pliny makes forty six cubits, or of Macrosyris which Trallianus
makes an hundred cubits, or of that body discovered Lib. 7. c. 16. De
Mirabi^bus and longaeuis. De Genealog. Deorum, l: 4:
in a vast cave near Drepanum in Sicilie, three of whose teeth, if we may
believe Boccace, weighed an hundred ounces, and the leadde of his staff, a
thousand and five hundred pounds. And the body it self by Cap: 63:
proportion of some of the bones was estimated to no less then two hundred
cubits, which makes three hundred feet, somewhat I think beyond Paul's
steeple. The more I wonder at S. Augustine, who confidently assures us, that
himself with others being on the sea shore at De Civit Dei Lib: 15: c: 9:
Vtica, he there saw a man's iaw-tooth so big, that being cut into small
pieces, it would have made an hundred such as the men living in his age
commonly had, by which computation the body it self must likewise in reason
have exceeded the bodies of his age an hundred times; so that being compared
with a body of six foot, and exceeding it one hundred times, it will be found
six hundred foot high, which is the just double to Boccace his Giant. Yet
Ralph the Munke of Cogshall, who wrote 350 years ago (as witnesses Camden)
it may be in imitation of S. Augustine, Camden in Essex:
auerres; that himself saw the like, which in a Munke is I confess more
tolerable then that which Lodovicus Viues, deservedly reputed a grave and
learned Author, upon that passage of S. Augustines affirms, that going to the
Church on S. Christophers day (the place he names not, but it seems to be
Louaine, because from thence he dates his Epistle dedicatorie to King Henry
the 8: He was there showed a tooth belonging, as it was thought to that St
bigger then a man's fist, the pattern whereof belike was taken from that huge
Colossus made to represent him at the entrance of Nostre-dame in Paris more
like a mountain then a man; whereas notwithstanding Baronius professes in
plain terms, se non habere quid dicat de Gigantea statura qua pingi
consuevit, that he knows Not in Martyr^l: Jul. 25.
not what to say to that Gyantlike stature, in which they commonly set him
forth: But Villauincentius goes farther, dubium nemini esse picturam hanc a
sanctis Patribus in hunc vsum proprie excogitatum, vt Evangelij preconem De
ratione conconc o^audi li. 3. c. 7 ex Hyper^:
adumbret, that no man need doubt but that picture was devised of holy men to
shadow forth the preacher of the Gospel, who whiles he lifts up Christ by his
preaching and carries him about to be seen and known, is endangered in the
waves of this world, and yet vpheld by the staff of hope. The like tooth is to
be seen in the Netherlands, pretended to belong to the Giant of Antwerpe, but
Goropius Becanus rather Gygantomacbi^
thinks it to be the tooth of an Elephant, whose conjecture is therein the
more probable, for that, (as witnesses Verstegan) at such time Cap: 4:
as the famous water passage was dug from Brussells unto the river of Rupell
at Willibrooke, there was found the bones of an Elephant, the head whereof,
(which is yet reserved) himself had seen. Of latter times it has been
written, and by some strongly auerred, that the body of William the Conqueror
was found vncorrupt more then four hundred Hollenshed, vol. 1. lib 1: c: 4.
years after it was buried, and in length eight foot; the former of which
could not well be, since his tomb being too narrow for the vnbowelled body,
(so say our stories) it brake in the laying of it down; and for the latter
there is as little show, since they who have written his life all agree, that he
was a man of a mean or middle stature, though for his limbs active and
strong: And for a full confutation of the said fable, (says Stow) when his
restless bones, which so hardly had obtained intombing, Toward the latter end
of his life.
did afterward as unluckily again lose it in the year of Christ 1562, viz:
when Chastillion conducting the remnant of those that escaped at the battle of
Dreux, took the city of Cane, certain savage soldiers as well English as
others, did beat down, and utterly deface the noble Monument of that
victorious King, pulling out all his bones, which some of them spitefully threw
away, (when they could not find the treasure they falsely surmised had been
laid up there) and others, specially the English, snatched every one to have
some piece of them, not making any wonder of them, as they would have done if
they had exceeded the length and bigness of men's bones of latter years,
whereas indeed there was no such thing noted in them, as I have been
certainly informed,) says the same Author) by English men of good credit,
who were then present eyewitnesses at the spoil of that Monument and bones,
and brought some part of them into this Realm. Theuet likewise in the second
Tome of his Cosmographie, describing the city of Cane, mentions the rifling
of his Monument, but of any such monstrous Lib. 15. Cap. 10:
bones or body there found, he speaks not a word. And besides it is most
unreasonable to conceive, that within the compass of five hundred years or
little more, there should be such a wonderful abatement; neither in truth if
our measures be the same as then they were, is it at all possible.

SECT. 2. Diverse reasons alleged why such bones might be found in former
ages and not now, and yet the ordinary stature of mankind remain the same.
NOtwithstanding all this, I am not so incredulous and diffident, or so
peremptory and daring in this case, as is Becanus, Non credam illud Orionis
apud Plynium, licet Lucius Flaccus and Metellus qui visum iuisse dicuntur per
capita sua iurarent: I will not credit that story of Orion reported by Pliny,
though Flaccus and Metellus who are said to see it, should swear by their
heads it was true. Let us not wrong Antiquity so far, but deal with them as
we desire our posterity should deal with us: Let us not conceive they were all
either so vain as to affirm they saw that which they saw not, or so weak as
not able to distinguish betwixt the figure of the bones of men and those of
beasts and fishes: specially when they found the Sceleton whole and entire.
Much I grant might be and no doubt was fained, much mistaken, much added to
truth through error, or an itching desire of Hyperbolicall amplifications; yet
I cannot but believe that many of their relations touching this point were
true: howbeit a diminution of the stature of mankind in general cannot from
thence be sufficiently enforced.

To let go then the conceit of Theophrastus and Paracelsus, that by the
Pliny, 36: 13: vide Agricolam de natura fossi^ium.
influence of the heavens such bones might be bred in certain tracts and
veins of the earth, I should rather choose to ascribe these superlatiue
prodigious shapes to artificial or supernatural then to natural and ordinary
causes. For the former it may be that either great princes out of ambition and
desire of honor in succeeding ages, or cunning woorkemen out of curiosity have
framed and composed such pieces which posterity discovering might behold with
astonishment, and the infernal spirits thereby to delude men, and the sooner
to draw them from the knowledge and worship of the true God to Idolatry and
superstition, have concurred with them herein, and yielded them their
assistance; who being able to raise wonderful tempests in the air and storms
in the sea, I see not but they might be as able to compose such frames under
the earth; The wit and art of man may go far, but being assisted by the
Devils help, it produces effects, almost incredible. That insana substructio,
that huge monstrous piece of work, known by the name of Stone-henge near
Amesbery, though it be by the Ancients termed Chorea Gigantum, the Giants
dance; yet shall I never think that it was performed by the strength of men,
but rather by some sleights or Engines now unknown, or by some artificial
composition, they being no natural stones hewn out of the rock, but
artificially made of pure sand by some glewy and unctuous matter knit and
incorporated together, as Camden seems to conjecture; or whether Merlin (as
the common saying is) brought them thither, reared and disposed them in that
order by Magic and the help of Devils; I will not take upon me to
determine* howsoever it were, it is doubtless a work for admiration nothing
inferior to the greatest Sceleton or frame of bones that was ever yet
discovered. And for teeth, I make no question but they may by mere art be made
so lively to resemble the natural teeth of men, that the wisest will hardly be
able to distinguish the counterfeite from the natural.

But that which I rather choose to insist upon, is, that the bodies of such men
were begotten by Devils, who that they have had carnal familiarity with
women, is the consent of all Antiquity. Creberrima fama est, says S.
Augustine, multique se exper^os vel ab ijs qui experti essent, de quorum fide
dubitandum non est, audisse confirmant, Sylvanos and Faunos, De Civit. Deil.
15: c: 23:
quos vulgo Incubos vocant, improbos saepe extitisse mulieribus, ac earum
appetisse and peregisse concubitum, and quosdam Daemones quos Dusios Galli
nuncupa^t hanc assidue immunditiam and tentare and efficere plures talesque
asseuerant, vt hoc negare impudentiae videatur. It is commonly reported and
many affirm, that either themselves have found it by experience, or heard it
from those of whose credit there was no doubt to be made, who had themselves
experienced it, that Satires and Fayres, whom they call Incubi, have been
often lewd with women lusting after them, and satisfying their lust with them:
and that certain Devils, whom the Gauls call Dusij, daily both attempt and
perform the samefilthines such and so many affirm, as to deny this were a
point of impudence: nay there are yet many nations, says Viues in his
commentaries on that place, which count it an honor to draw their pedigree
from Devils, who had the company of women in the shape of men. Thus not a few
of the Ancients imagined those Giants mentioned in the sixth of Genesis, to
have been begotten, as the Heathen likewise for the most part derive their
Heroes and mighty men from the like original. And that the birthes of such
monstrous mixtures must needs be monstrous, Tostatus truly observes: Talibus
conceptibus robustissimi homines and procerissimi nasci In 6. Genesis quas^ 6.
solent, of such conceptions are wont to be borne the strongest and tallest of
men. And Vallesius having given the reason hereof at large, (which for fear
of offending chaste ears, I list not here to repeat) at last concludes, De
sacra Phylosophia, c. 8.
Robusti ergo and grandes vt nascerentur, poterant ita Daemones procurare: Thus
then the Devils might procure that mighty huge Giants should be borne, whose
both opinion and reasons herein are both approved and farther proved by Delrio
in his Magical disquisitions. The Lib: 2. c. 15.
evidence hereof will yet farther appear, if we consider that where God was
least known and the Devil most powerfully reigned, there these impure Acts
were most frequently practiced, which is the reason, as I conceive, that among
the Hebrews, the chosen people of God, we read of no such matter: nay those
Giants we find mentioned in holy writ, were for the most part of other Nations:
But since the incarnation of the Son of God our blessed Savior, who came to
dissolve the works of the Devil, the delusions of these spirits have vanished
as a mist before 1. John. 3. 8.
the Sun: though their kingdom be not at an end, yet is their malice much
restrained and their power abated. Which Plutarch himself ingeniously
confesses in that excellent discourse of his, Cur Oracula edi desijrint, why
the Oracles ceased; and to this purpose relates a memorable story, which he
reports from the mouth of one Epitherses, sometimes his schoolmasters, that he
imbarking for Italy, and being one evening becalmed before the Paxe, (too little
Islands that lie between Cor^yra and Leucadia) they suddenly heard a voice
from the shore, most of the Passengers being yet awake, calling to one Thamus a
Pilot, by birth an Egyptian, who till the third call would not answer: then
quoth the voice, when thou art come to the Palodes proclaim it alowd, that the
great Pan is dead, all in the ship that heard this were amassed, when drawing
near to the foresaid place, Thamus standing on the pup of the ship, did
utter what was formerly commanded, forthwith there was, heard a great
lamentation, accompanied with groans and schreeches: This coming to the
knowledge of Tiberius Caesar, he sent for Thamus, who avouched the truth
thereof: And hereby was declared, as we may well conceive, the subjection of
Satan by the death of Christ: so that now he had no longer power to abuse the
illuminated world with his impostures. By this then appears both the reason of
such vast enormous bodies, as were in former times, and withal the Cause why
they have ceased since in succeeding ages. To which we may add, that if we
should ascribe these effects to God himself and his extraordinary power, for
the manifestation of his greatness; yet as other miracles, so likewise these are
now grown out of date and use: he manifesting himself to us in a cleerer
manner, rather by the gracious power of his word, then the miraculous greatness
of his power, and so our Conclusion still remains firm, that the stature of
mankind is not generally impaired in regard of any such universal decay in
the course of Nature as is pretended.

SECT. 3. An answer to the argument drawn from the testimonies on behalf of
the adverse opinion.
THe second maine rub, which to many gives occasion of stumbling, and comes
now to be removed, is the authority of diverse grave writers, and those not
only of latter stamp, but such as have been, and still are accounted
Venerable as well for learning as Antiquity. Among which, the most Eminent that
I find named by the adverse part, are Gellius, Pliny, Iuvenall, Virgill, and
Homer, and that I may neither wrong the Authors nor Vouchers, I will produce
them speaking in their own words Gellius having alleged the opinion of
Varro, that the utmost point of man's growth in the course of nature is seven
foot, and having styled Herodotus a Fabler for saying the body of Orestes was
seven cubits, presently adds, Nisi si vt Homerus opinatus est, vastiora Lib.
3. c. 10.
prolixioraque fuerint corpora hominum Antiquorum, and nunc quasi jam mundo
senescente, rerum atque hominum decrementa sint. Unless as Homer thought, men
were anciently bigger and taller, and now as if the world waxed old, there be a
decrease both of things and men. But this Nisi si of Gellius is too weak
thereby to draw him to their side, specially considering what he had said
immediately before out of Varro. Which testimony of his prevails so much with
Peter Martyr, that he Lo^orum com. c: 12: clas. 1:
cannot yield any decrease since the flood, si rogarer) says he) an existimem
corpora humana, quae postea fuerunt ab ijs immin^ta esse quae ante diluvium
producebantur, fortassis annuerem: sed quod a diluvio vsque ad hanc nostram
aetatem perpetuo decrescant, id non facile concederem, verbis praesertim
annotatis quae Aulos Gellius, 3: libr: scripsit vbi ait modum adolescendi
humani corporis esse septem pedum: quae mensura hodie quoque videtur esse
staturae procerioris. In Apocryphis tamen Esdrae legimus, lib. 4. ad finem 5.
cap. ne quid dissimulem, and nunc minora esse corpora nostra, ac indies
imminuenda, quod natura semper magis effoeta reddatur. Idemque vt paulo ante
dixi Cyprianus videtur statuere. Sed quare ^on tam facile assentiar* causam
attuli quia de mensura quam Gellius definivit, hodie nihil propemodum videam
immutatum. If I were demanded whether I think that men's bodies since the
flood are decreased in regard of those before the flood, happily I should grant
it: but that since the flood downward to this our present age they should still
decrease, that would I not easily yield, specially observing those words which
Aulus Gellius has in his third book, where he says, that the measure of
growth in man's body, is to seven foot, which at this day seems to be the
height of those of the tallest stature; yet to conceal nothing, we read
indeed in the fourth book, and toward the end of the fifth chapter in the
apocryphal Esdras, that our bodies are less then they were; and that still
they shall be lessened more and more, in as much as nature is every day weakened
more then other, and the same opinion (as I said before) seems to be approved
by Cyprian; but why I cannot easily yield assent thereunto, I have given my
reason, because I find little or nothing abated of that measure which Gelli^
defined

Plinyes words I must confess are more round and resolute, In plenum autem
cuncto mortalium generi minorem staturam indies fieri, propemodum Lib. 7. cap.
16.
observatur: rarosque patribus proceriores, consumente vbertatem seminum
exustione, in cuius vices nunc vergat aevum, which is thus rendered by Philemon
Holland, Doctor in Physic, whose Latin Copy differed it seems somewhat from
mine: or he added somewhat of his own. This is observed for an undoubted
truth, that generally all men come short of the full stature in times past, and
decrease every day more then other, and seldom shall we see the son taller
then his father, for the ardent heat of the Elementary fire (whereunto the
world inclines already now toward the latter end, as sometimes it stood much
upon the watery Element) devoureth and consumes that plentiful humor and
moisture of natural seed that ingen^eth all things, and this appears by
these examples following.

And then having brought the examples of Orion and Orestes, he adds, Iam vero
ante annos prope mill vates ille Homerus non cessavit minora corpora
mortalium, quam prisca, conqueri. And verily that great and famous Poet Homer,
who lived almost a thousand years ago, complained and gave not over, that
men's bodies were less of stature even then, then in old time.

But if I be not mistaken, this assertion of Plinyes directly crosses
himself in the very entrance of his Natural History, where he thus begins
Mundum, and hoc quod nomine alio calum appella^e libuit, cuius circumflexu
teg^ntur cuncta, numen esse credi par est, aeternum, immensum, neque genitum,
neque interiturum vnquam. The world, and this which by another name men have
thought good to call Heaven, believe we ought in all reason to be a God without
beginning and likewise Endless. If the world be Endless, how does it suffer a
perpetual decrease, and if it suffer any such decrease, how is it endless.
Againo, holding a decrease in stature, I see not how he can well avoid a
diminution likewise in age which notwithstanding in other places he seems to
deny, or at leastwise having in sundry several Chapters fair occasion
offered, does not maintain, but rather chooses to pass it over in silence, as
being thereof some what doubtful. Besides how the ardent heat of the
Elementary fire should cause any such decay, I cannot for my part conceive,
since that heat for any thing we find is not increased since the first
Creation, and this supposed decay is commonly attributed rather to a
deficiencie then an excess of heat. But Pliny who held that the Sun and
Stars were nourished by an Elementary moisture, must of necessity upon that
supposed, though false ground, likewise hold a sensible decay in the World,
inasmuch as that moisture cannot possibly suffice those bodies for food. And
thus we see how in this assertion he both plainly crosses himself, and builds
it upon a sandy foundation. He was doubtless an admirable Man in that which he
undertook, the Historical part of Nature: but whether he deserved the like
commendation in that which we call the Philosophical part thereof, I leave it
to others to judge, and pass to the examination of the testimonies of the
Poets. But before I descend to the particulars, it shall not be amiss a little
to consider of the Vanity of their fictions and fables about the Giants which
doubtless in part gave occasion to this common Error touching Man's and the
Worlds decay, though I verily believe that the Poets themselves had a mystical
meaning therein. They feigned them to be borne of the Earth, to have a thousand
hands and snakes for hairs, and to wage war with the Gods.

Terra feros partus immania monstra Gygantes,
Edidit ausuros in Iovis ire domum. Ovid, Fast. 5

Mill manus illis dedit and pro crinibus angues,
Atque ait, in magnos arma movete Deos.
Giants wild monsters earth great mother bare,
Who durst assail the sacred seat of Jove,
With thousand hands. and snakes instead of hair,
Armed, arms she charged them against the gods to move.
Which war of the Giants, Cornelius Severus thus elegantly describes.

Tentavere nefas olim detrudere mundo
Sydera, captivique Iovis transfer Gygantes
Imperium, and victo leges imponere Coelo.
The Giants did advance their wicked hand
Against the stars to thrust them headlong down,
And robbing Jove of his Imperial crown,
On conquered heavens to lay their proud command.
But Macrobius his interpretation of this fable is worth the observing: Sat^al.
lib. 1. cap: 20.
Gygantes autem quid aliud fuisse credendum est quam hominum quandam impiam
gentem Deos negantem, et ideo existimatam deos e coelesti sede pellere
voluisse. What otherthing should we imagine those Giants to have been, but an
impious race of men denying the Gods, and were therefore said to have attempted
the chasing of them out of Heaven. Yet these fables no doubt infected the
vulgar, as those of Guy of Warwick, Bevis of Hampton, Corineus and Gog-Magog,
Robin Hood and little John, Amadis of Gaul, Pontagruel, Gargantua, and the
like have since done: And therefore Plato banished Poets from his
commonwealth; and Moses, (as Philo in his book of Giants witnesses) both
painting and the statuary Art, cosen Germans to Poetry, Quod veritatem
mendacijs vitient, credulis animis per oculos illudentes. says he, because
they corrupt the truth with lies, and deceive credulous minds by those
representations which are presented to their eyes. Yet will we not deny them
the favor to hear what they can say for themselves. Let Iuvenall then first
speak.

Saxa inclinatis per humum quaesita lacertis
Incipiunt torquere, domestica, seditione Satyr. 15.

Tela, nec hunc lapidem quali se Turnus and Ajax,
Et quo Tydides percussit pondere coxam
Aeneae, sed quam valiant emittere dextrae.
Illis dissimiles, and nostro tempore natae.
Nam genus hoc vivo iam decrescebat Homero
Terra malos homines nunc educat atque pusillos,
Ergo Deus quicunque aspexit, ridet and odit.
Stooping for stones them (in brawles always
The readiest weapon) they commence their fray
Not that of Turn or Ajax, or whereby
The son of Tydeus brake Aeneas thigh,
But such as hands unlike to theirs, and now
Bred in our days well able are to throw.
For even while Homer lived this race decreased
And mother earth has ever since been pleased
Cowardly dwarfes to breed: those deities
That them behold, deride them and despise.
Now for as much as it is evident that Invenall herein followed Virgill and
Homer, as will clearly appear when we come to the examining of their
testimonies, I will likewise refer the answer hereunto, to that place. For
Virgill then, he speaking of Turnus and his great strengh, thus poetizes:
Aenead: 12:


Saxum antiquum ingens campo qui forte iacebat
Limes agro positus litem vt discerneret aruis
(Vix illum lecti bis sex ce^vice subirent
Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus)
Ille manu raptum valida toquebat in hostem.
A huge old stone which then by chance lay in the field
To bound out several grounds, and quarrels to prevent,
Scarce twelve choice men such as now mother earth does yield
Could bear it on their necks, yet he incontinent
Caught it with puissant arm, and to his foe it sent.
With which accords that in the first of his Georgickes touching the plowing up
of the Emathean and Emonean fields, where many bloody battles had been fought.

Scilicet and tempus veniet cum finibus illis
Agricola incurvo terram molitus aratro
Exesa inveniet scabra rubigine pila.
Aut gravibus rastris galeas pulsabit inanes
Grandiaque effossis mirabitur ossa sepulchris.
The time will one day come when in those feilds
The painful husband plowing up his ground,
Shall find all fret with rust both pikes and sheilds,
And empty helmes under his harrow sound;
Wondering at those great bones those graves do yield.
But what credit shall we give to Virgill in these things who tells us of
Enceladus.

Fessum quoties motat latus intremere omnem
Trinacriam. --
As often as wearied he from side to side does turn
Trinacria trembles.
And of Titius,

-- Per tota novem cui i^gera corpus
Porrigitur.
Whose body stretches to nine akers length.
And besides he was doubtless herein as in many other passages through the
Aeneads Homers ape, who thus brings in Hector,

Hector autem rapiens lapidem portabat, qui portas Iliad, 12:

Stetit ante, deorsum crassus, sed superne
Acutus erat, hunc neque duo viri e populo optimi
Facile ad plaustrum e terra perducerent,
Quales nunc sunt homines.
Hector caught up a stone before the gate that lay,
The upper pointed was, blunt was the nether part:
Two of the better sort such as live now a day
Could scarce with all their force mount it into a cart.
To like purpose, and very near in the same words is that which he has in
another place of Diomedes, throwing a stone at Aeneas. Iliad. 5:


Saxum accepit manu
Tytides magni ponderis quod non duo viri ferrent
Quales nunc homines sunt.
Into his hand Tydides took
A stone of wondrous weight,
Two men such as the world now yields
To bear't have not the might
From whence it is manifest that all the alleged Authors herein followed
Homer, he being named by Gellius, Pliny, and Iuvenall, and so plainly imitated
by Virgill, that we need not doubt from whom he borrowed it, rendering Homers

Quales nunc sunt homines -- into
Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus;
But herein he exceedes Homer that he turns two into twelve, more
tollerablely I confess, because more Poetically, that a man may know it at the
first blush to be but a fiction.

And as for Homer himself, the founder and springhead of this opinion, as he
was the Author of many excellent inventions, so as it was truly written of
him,

Hic ille est cuius de gurgite sacro
Combibit arcanos vatum omnis turba furores.
This is the man whose sacred stream has served all the Crew

Of Poets, thence they drank their fill, thence they their furies drew. And
therefore was he painted vomiting, and the Poets round about licking up his
vomit; yet as a rank and battle soil that abounds both in corn and weeds,
so was he likewise the fruitful parent of many errors and fables, which were
afterward taken up and embraced with like greedines as were his best and
choicest inventions. Such is naturally our affection, that whom in great things
we mightily admire, in them we are not persuaded willingly that any thing
should be amiss: The reason whereof is for that as dead flies putrify the
ointment of the Apothecarie: Eccles. 1. 10.
so a little folly him that is in estimation for wissdome. And this in every
profession has too much authorized the judgment of a few. I will not stand to
make a Catalogue of Homers mistakes and fictions, which his admirers in
succeeding ages have entertained as certain truths. That fable of the Pigmies
(because it has some affinity with our present matter) and their manner of
fighting with Cranes shall suffice for all: which many not only Poets but
great Philosophers, and among them Aristotle himself relying upon his
authority have taken up upon trust: whereas all the parts of the world being
now in a manner discovered there is no such country or people to be found in
it. And for this particular opinion, it is not only objected by Goropius, but
by Magius freely acknowledged that Homer, by Plutarches computation, (who
composed a treatise purposely of his life) living but one hundred years or a
little more after the Trojan wars, made such a difference in men's strength
and stature, as was altogether incredible within the compass of so short a
space: nay himself makes Hectors spear to be Iliad, 12:
but ten Cubits long, the ordinary length they are at even at this day: and
brings Telemachus Ulysses his son thus speaking to his nurce Euriclea.

Haud equidem quenquam longinquus sit licet hospes Odyss 19.

Absque labor feram contingere Chanica nostram:
No guest though come from far I thee assure
To touch my Choenix will I Choenix endure.
From which Budaeus inferres that even then a Choenix was the daily allowance
5. de Ass.
for a man, as it likewise was many hundred years after Homers times among the
Graecians. For conclusion, though ten persons be brought to give testimony in
any cause, yet if the knowledge they have of the thing whereunto they come as
witnesses, appear to have grown from some one among them, and to have spread
it self from hand to hand, they are all in force but as one testimony; and if
it appear that the fountain, from which either immediately or mediatly they
all draw, be corrupted, if the testimony of the first man upon whom they
depend, prove invalide, then is this one upon the matter no testimony, which is
in truth the case of the counter-witnesses produced in this business.

SECT. 4. Of the wonderful strength of diverse in latter ages, not inferior
to those of former times.
But to grant that Hector, and Ajax, and Diomedes, and Hercules, and the like
excelled in strength, yet can it not be denied, but some such have likewise
been recorded in succeeding ages, as C: Marius by Trebellius Pollio, Maximinus
by Capitolinus, Aurelian by Vopiscus, Scanderbeg by Barlet, Galiot Bardesin a
Gentleman of Catana, by Fazell, Tamerlane, Ziska, Hunniades, by others; George
Le Feure a learned Germane writes, that in his time in the year 1529 lived at
Mis^a in Thuring one called Nicholas Klunher Provost of the Great Church that
was so strong, as without Cable or Pulley or any other help he setch up out of
a Cellar a pipe of wine, carried it out of doors and laid it upon a cart. I
have seen a man, says Mayolus an Italian Bishop, in the In diebus (...). Co^o
(...). 4.
town of Aste, who in the presence of the Marquess of Pescara handed a pillar
of marble three foot long, and one foot in diameter, the which he cast high
in the air, then received it again in his arms, then lasht it up again,
sometime after one fashion, sometime after another, as easily as if he had
been playing with a ball or some such little thing. There was, says the same
Author, at Mantua, one named Rodamas, a man of a little stature, but so strong
that he brake a Cable as big as a man's arm, as easily as it had been a
small twine thread: mounted upon an horse and leading another by the bridle, he
would run a full Cariere and stop in the midst of his course, or when it
liked him best. Froissard a man much esteemed for the truth and fidelity of his
history, reports that about two hundred years since, one Ernaudo Burg a
Spaniard, and companion to the Earl of Foix, when as attending the Earl, he
accompanied him to an higher room, to which they ascended by twenty four
steps, the weather cold; and the fire not answerable, and withal espying out
at the window certain asses in the lower court laden with wood, he goes down
thither, lifts up the greatest of them with his burden on his shoulder, and
carrying it to the room from whence he came, cast both as he found them into
the fire together. Lebelski a Polander in his description of the things done at
Constantinople in the year 1582, at the circumcision of Mahumet the son of
Amurath Emperor of the Turks, writes that amongst many active men which there
showed their strength, one was most memorable, who for proof thereof lifted up
a piece of wood that twelve men had much ado to raise from the earth, and
afterward lying down flat upon his back, he bore upon his breast, a weighty
stone, which ten men had with much a do rolled thither, making but a jest of
it. Many are yet alive, says Camerarius, that know how strong and mighty
Meditat: Hist: (...). 82.
George of Fronsberg, Baron of Mindlehaim of late memory was. There is a book
printed and published in the Germane tongue containing his memorable acts, and
howbeit Paulus Iouius handles him but roughly, as being an enemy to the Pope;
yet extolleth he highly his wonderful great force, being able by the
acknowledgment of Iouius with the middle finger of his right hand to remove a
very strong man out of his place, sat he never so fast: He stopped a horse
suddenly, that ran with a maine Carriere, by only touching the bridle, and
with his shoulder would he easily shoue a Canon whither he listed. Cardan
writes that himself saw one dancing with two in his arms, two upon De
subtilitate lib: 11.
his shoulders, and one hanging about his neck. Potocoua a Polonian and
Captain of the Cosakes, during the reign of Stephen Batore, was so strong, as
witnesses Leonclauius, that he would tear in pieces new horse shoes, as it
had been paper. The history of the Netherlands reports, Insupplem: Ann^l.
Turcicor:
that the woman Gyantesse before mentioned was so strong, that she would lift
up in either hand a barrel full of Hamborough beer, and would easily carry
more then eight men could.

Before these, but long since those ancient Heroes, was the Giant Aenother
borne in Turgaw, a village in Sweuia, who bore arms under Charlemaigne,
A^entinus, hist. B^iorum, l: 4:
he felled men as one would mow hay, and sometimes broached a great number of
them upon his pike, and so carried them all upon his shoulder, as one would
carry little birds spitted upon a stick. Hinc apparet (says Camerarius) quod
nostra aetas and natio tales viros produxerit quos fortitudine and robore cum
veteribus confer licet. From hence it appears that our age and nation has
brought forth such men, as every way are matchable with the Ancients in
actiuity and strength. Oflatter days and here at home, Mr Richard Carew a
worthy Gentleman in his survey of Cornwall assures us that one John Bray (well
known to himself, as being his tenant) carried upon his back at one time by
the space well near of a But-length six bushels of wheaten meal, reckoning 15
gallons to the bushel, and the miller a lubber of 24 years age upon the
whole: whereunto he adds that John Roman of the same sheire, a short clownish
grub would bear the whole carcass of an ox, though he never tugged with it,
when he was a calfe, as Milo did. To these might be added diverse other
domestical examples of latter times, save that such kind of relations seem
as unsavory and incredible to the most part of Readers, as they are certain,
admirable, and delightful to the beholders.

It is most true that the great works our noble Predecessors have left us,
our Cathedral Churches, our ruins of Castles and Monasteries, our bridges,
our highways, and Cauce-wayes, and in foreign parts their Arches, Obelisks,
Pyramids, Vawtes, Aqueducts, Theaters, and Amphitheaters seem to proclaim, as
the greatness of their minds, so likewise of their bodies: But I should
rather ascribe this to their industry, their devotion, their charity, uniting,
their forces and purses in public works and for the public good, then to
the bodily strength of particular men.

SECT. 5. Two doubts cleared, the first touching the strong physic which the
Ancients used, the second touching the great quantity of blood which they are
said usually to have drawn at the opening of a vein.
A greater doubt arises touching the little, but strong physic which the
Ancients used, and the great quantity of blood which they usually drew at the
opening of a vein: For the first of these, I should think that it rather
argued the strength of our bodies, who notwithstanding our disuse of exercise
and more frequent use of Physic, and that many times from the hands of
unskillful Empericks, we ordinarily hold out as long as they did: And for the
strength of their Physic, let us here Goropius a famous Physician, and
doubtless a very learned man, as his works testify, and his greatest
adversaries cannot but confess. Dicunt olim medicamenta multo vehementiora
data fuiss^ quam nunc hominum natura far possit: They say that the Physic
which the Ancients administered was much stronger then the nature of man is now
capable of; to which he replies, eos qui sic arbitrantur insigniter falli
contendo, ferunt enim corpora aeque nunc helleborum atque olim eodem vel majori
pondere, vt ipse in alijs and meipso sum expertus: Verum inscitia eorum qui
nihil Medici habent praeter titulum and vestem longam, and impudentem
arrogantiam in causa est vt sic opinentur. I am confident that those who thus
think are notablely deceived, in as much as our bodies can now as well endure
the like or greater quantity of Elleborum, as I have made trial in my self
and others: But the ignorance of such as have indeed nothing in them of the
Physician but the bare title, a long gown, and impudent arrogancy, is the
cause that men so think. And with him herein plainly accords Leonardus
Giachinus of the same profession, who having composed a Treatise purposely to
show what damage arises to learning by preferring Authority before reason,
makes this the title of his first Chapter, Corpora nostra eadem far posse
auxilia quibus Veteres vsi sunt, idque cum ratione tum experientia comprobari:
That our bodies now a days may well enough suffer the same helps of Physic
which the Ancients used, and that this may be made evident as well by reason as
experience. And I suppose skillful Physicians will not deny, but that the
Physic of former times agrees with ours as in the receites, so for the dosis
and quantity; and for them who hold a general decay in the course of Nature,
they are likewise forced to hold this. For if plants, and drugges, and
minerals, decay in their virtue proportionablely to the body of man, (as is the
common opinion) then must it consequently follow, that the same quantity having
a less virtue may without danger and with good success be administered to our
bodies though inferior in strength: Roger Bacon in his book de erroribus
medicorum, tells us, that the disposition of the heavens is changed every
Centenary or thereabout; and consequently that all things growing from the
earth change their complexions, as also does the body of man; and thereupon
infers that eaedem proportiones medicinarum non sunt semper continuandae sed
exigitur observantia certa secundum temporis discensum: The same proportions of
medicines are not still to be continued, but there is required a certain
quantity according to the variation of time. Where, by the change of the
disposition of the heavens, I cannot conceive that he intends it always for
the worst, for so should he cross himself in the same book, neither for any
thing I know have we any certainty of any such change as he speaks of, but
this am I sure of, that if together with the heavens, the plants change their
tempers, and with the plants the body of man, then needs there no alteration in
the proportion of medicines; in as much as what art should therein supply,
nature her self preuents and performs: But for mine own part holding a
natural decay in neither, upon that ground, as I conceive, may more safely be
warranted the continuance of the ancient proportions.

Now touching the drawing of blood, I know it is said that Galen usually drew
six pounds at the opening of a vein, whereas we for the most part stop at
six ounces, which is in truth a great difference if true, specially in so short
a time, he living three hundred years or thereabout since Christ. For decision
then of this point, we must have recourse to Galen himself, who in that book
which he purposely composed of cures by letting of blood, thus writes: Memini
quibusdam ad sex vsque libras sanguinem detractum fuisse, ita vt febris
extingueretur. I remember that Ca^: 14:
from some I have drawn six pounds of blood, which has rid them of their
fever: yet from others he took but a pound and a half, or one pound, and
sometimes less, as he saw occasion: neither in old time, nor in these present
times was the quantity ever definite or certain, but both then and now
variable more or less according to strength, the disease, age, or other
indications; and in pestilent fevers his advise is, vbi valida virtus subest,
and aetas permittit, vsque ad animae defectum sanguinem mittere De me^hodoi
m^dendi l 9. c. 4
expedit: where the strength and age of the patient will bear it, it will do
well to take blood even to a fainting or sounding; and such was the case (as by
his own words it appears) in which he drew so great a quantity: Neither is
this without example in our age: Ambrose Par a French Surgeon, (and a man
expert in his profession, as his books show) reports that he drew from a
patient of his in four days twenty seven pallets, Lib. 9. c. 14.
every pallet of Paris containing three ounces and more, so that he drew from
him about seven pounds, allowing twelve ounces to the pound, which was the
account that Galen followed, as appears in his own Treatise of weights and
measures, and so continues it in use among Physicians and Apothecaries unto
this day. The whole quantity of blood in a man's body of a sound constitution
and middle stature was anciently estimated, and so is it still at about three
gallons: and I have been informed by a Doctor of Physic of good credit and
eminent place in this University, that a patient of his has bled a gallon at
nose in one day, and has D. C.
done well after it; which (as I conceive) could not be so little as seven or
eight pounds, allowing somewhat less then a pound to a pint, in as much as I
have found a pint of water to weigh sixteen ounces. Now what Nature has done
with tollerance of life, Art may come near unto upon just cause without
danger. And if any desire to be farther informed in this point, he need go no
further then the Medicinal observations of Johannes Shenkius de capite Humano,
where to his 333 observation he prefixes this title, Prodigiosae narium
haemorragiae, quae interdum 18, interdum 20, nonnunquam etiam 40 sanguinis
librae profluxere. Prodigious bleedings at the nose, in which sometimes 18,
sometimes 20, sometimes 40 pou^ds of blood have issued. The Authors from whom
he borrows his observations are Matheus de Gradi in his commentaries upon the
35 chapter of Rasis ad Almans Brasauolus comment. ad Aphor. 23. lib. 5. Donatus
lib. de variolis and morbillis cap. 23. Lusitanus Curat. 100. Cent. 2. And
again Curat. 60, Cent. 7, his instances are of a Nun who voided by diverse
passages 18 pounds of blood, of Diana a noble Lady of Est, who bled only at
the nostrils 18 pounds besides what was spilt on the ground, upon her apparel,
in napkins and other linnens about her; of one Andrew, Cook to Frederick
Gonzaga Cardinal, who bled in one day and two nights 20 pounds. And lastly of
a young man named Berdavid, from whom there issued at the nose within the space
of six days 40 pounds, and yet they all lived after it, and did well penes
Authors fides esto*

SEC. 6. A third doubt cleared touching the length of the Duodenum or first
gut, as also of the several opinions of Iacobus Capellus, and Johannes
Temporarius, touching the decrease of humane strength and stature.
ANother doubt tending to the same end, I received from an other D. B.
Doctor of Physic of special note, and of mine ancient acquaintance, well
known in London for his sufficiency in his profession, and from him likewise
I must acknowledge the best part of the answer which I shall frame thereunto.
The objection, because, of any I have met with, it is most fully opened and
seriously urged by Archangelus Piccolhomini in his Anatomicall Lectures, I will
express in his words, where speaking of the first gut, he thus goes on,
Dicitur etiam graecis dodecadactylos, nobis duodenu^, Lib. 2. lect. 11
quod duodecem digitos longum illis temporibus videretur: nam his nostris
temporibus vix 9 digitorum apices aequat, fortassequod hac nostra aetate
homines minores, illis saeculis grandiores essent, idcirco longiora me^bra
proportione responde^tia. Dicitur quoque pyloros, id est ianitor portonarius
translato nomine inferioris orificij ventriculi ad superiorem duodeni partem
quae ex eo proxime enascitur. It is called of the Graecians dodecadactylos, and
of us duodenum, because it seems in those times to have been 12 inches long,
whereas in this age it hardly equals the tops of nine fingers, perchance
because now adays men being less and then bigger, they had likewise bigger
parts of the body answereable thereunto. It is also called pyloros or the
porter, which name is borrowed from the nether orifice of the stomach, and
applied to the higher part of the duodenum which grows out of it. Thus he;
where what he means by the apices or tops of nine fingers, I do not well
apprehend, but Riolanus I am sure in the 2 book and 12 Chapter of his
Anthropographia tells us plainly that ab Herophylo duodenum dicitur quoniam
olim duodecem transversos digitos longum erat, vbi hodie vix quatuor digitos
aequat. It was by Herophylus called duodenum because anciently it was 12 inches
long, whereas now it is scarce full four. How long since this Herophilus lived
I cannot certainly determine, nor well conjecture, his name I find not in
Gesners Bibliotheca, indeed Tertullian in his book de anima mentions him, by
which it appears that he lived before him, but how long it appears not;
suppose it to be 5, 6, or 8 hundred years (which is as much as in reason can
well be demanded, and upon that supposition allow him to have lived two
thousand years ago, which being granted, and withal that all the other parts
of man's body are decayed proportionably to the duodenum, (which Piccolomini
himself confesses, and thereof I think no wise or learned man will once
offer to make any doubt) this I say being granted, it must of necessity follow
that in the space of 2000 years, two thirds of humane stature are lost, for
that is the proportion of 4 to 12; so as if men now be five foot high, they
were then 15, and 2000 years before that again (if we shall allow the like
proportion of decrease to the like space of time (45 foot high, and so upward,
which how unreasonable it is to affirm or conceive, I leave to the Authors and
Patrons of that fancy to imagine. Again I would willingly know whether in
Herophilus time the inch were the same with ours or no, if so, then belike
there is no such notorious diminution in stature as from him is collected* and
if it be varied according to the diminution of stature, then should our
duodenum be as well 12 of our inches now, as was their duodenum 12 of their
inches then, for to say that theirs was 12 of their inches and ours but 4 of
our inches, is both an irregular comparison, and a matter altogether
incredible. And I wonder that Galen or Hippocrates, or some other of those
ancient Physicians had not found the variation thereof in their time in regard
of former ages, as well as we in ours in regard of theirs; or that finding it,
they have left no record or mention of so notable an observation in any of
their writings, which me thinks is a strong presumption that indeed either in
their practice or reading they observed no such matter. But to make a plain
and full answer to this objection, we need go no farther then that of Riolanus
immediately annexed to the passage before alleged. Nec mensuram antiquam
deprehendes nisi graciliorem and angustiorem ventriculi partem a fundo inferne
exporrectam vsque ad anfractuum principium addideris quam saepe 12 digitos
aequare vidi. Neither shall you find the ancient measure, unless you add to
the duodenum the lower and narrower part of the stomach, and extend it to that
place where the guts begin their pleats and windings, and this have I often
seen to equal 12 inches: out of which words I make mine answer thus, that if
we take duodenum strictly, only for so much as is from the lowest orifice of
the stomach to the winding guts, then I say it is scantly four inches long,
but if we take in that thinner part and end of the ventricle which the Greeks
call pyloros, and the Latins from thence ianitor or portonarius the porter,
then by Riolans observation it has, and no doubt may be found fully as long as
the ancient measure. Now that the pyloros has been by ancient Writers taken
into the duodenum, and accounted as one with it, not only Riolan in the place
before alleged, and Laurentius lib. 6. cap, 13. but Piccolhomini himself
confesses in the latter part of the passage already quoted, and Leonardus
Fuchsius in the third book and 1 chapter of his Paradoxes brings to that
purpose. Celsus lib. 4, cap. 1. Avicen fen. 6. can. 3. tract. 1. cap. 1.
Valescus 4. 22. Johannes Matthaeus de Gradi in his Commentaries upon the ninth
book of Razis cap. 11: and lastly Alexander Benedictus in his second book of
Anatomy chapt. 8. and though he there make Galen to speak in a different
language, yet are Riolan and others of another opinion therein.

Whiles this part was even upon going to the Press, there came to mine hands
two books written by two learned French men, Iacobus Capellus and Johannes
Temporarius, the one entitled de mensuris, the other Chronologicae
demonstrationes; in both which the point in hand is touched to the quick: The
former, Capellus I mean, in his very preface sharply censures the Poets,
Homer and Virgill and Iuvenall for their hyperbolicall amplifications, in
speaking of the enormous stature of the Ancients, and so does he Pliny,
Solinus, S. Augustine, and Ludouicus Vives for following them therein, and then
alleging that passage of Julius Scaligers, where he affirms that the
Samogithians, a people seated betwixt Prussia and Liuonia, by turns beget
dwarfes and giants; he graunts that this vicissitude, though not in that
degree, yet in some sort may be observed in all nations: yet this man after all
this flourish tells us, that it cannot be but some kind of truth there should
be in those complaints of the Poets, and that the world waxes old, though not
in post-hast as they would have it: yet sensim and sine sensu, as he terms
it, soft and fair, and by degrees insensible. The only reason he buildes upon
being this, that the measures of all Nations being proportioned (as he
imagines) to their statures, and withal that as the Nations rise in
antiquity one above another, so do their measures: from whence he inferres,
that as the measures of the Ancients were longer, so were likewise their
statures. Wherein he manifestly crosses both himself, and as many as I have
read of that subject, either occasionally or of set purpose; for himself he
freely acknowledges in another place of the same discourse, that both the
present Parisian foot in France and the Picen in Italy are bigger then the
Ancient Roman; for the latter of which, he both vouches and well approues the
testimony of Cardan de subtle: lib. 11: Adducor authoritate scribentium olim de
re militari qui tyronum mediocrem magnitudinem quinque pedum esse statuerunt,
vt quarta part pes antiquus mensura pedis nostri minor sit. I am induced by
the authority of those who writing of military matters, set down five foot for
the ordinary stature of a common soldier, to believe that the ancient foot
was by measure a quarter less then ours. Again himself confesses (neither
without manifest folly can it be denied) that some nations in regard of their
Clymate much exceed others in stature, as for the most part do the Western,
the Eastern, and the Northern, the Southern, so as if his comparison had
been made betwixt the ancient and modern measures of the same nation, it
might well have carried at leastwise some semblance of truth, but to make it
betwixt different nations though in different ages, as he does, carries with it
in my judgment no color at all: Lastly, he holds not the like decrease in age,
and wits, and manners, that he does in stature, nor in the heavens, the earth,
the beasts, the plants, that he does in men; which though it stand with his
purpose; yet how it can stand with the course of nature, for mine own part I
cannot imagine, as neither can I conceive how there should be any such
alternatiue vicissitude of stature in all nations as he holds, and yet withal
an universal and perpetual decrease: all which himself it seems foreseeing
modestly, concludes the point: Nos igitur haec, ea potius mente in medium
adduximus, vt haec vere nobilis question ab eruditis viris luculentius and
accuratius pertractetur, quam quod veluti de inventa veritate gloriemur and
nobis ipsi suffeni simus: We then have produced these things to this purpose,
that this question truly noble, may by learned men be more clearly and exactly
handled, not that I would glory in the finding out of a truth, or as if I were
only pleased with mine own conceit. Now for Johannes Temporarius he does not
mince the matter as Capellus, but in his Chronologicall demonstrations Anno
mundi 410, and fourth Chapter, strikes downright right blows, telling us
roundly and plainly that nothing is altered in the stature of man since the
Creation, and that eadem est hominum and primi saeculi and insecutorum
magnitudo, that the stature of the men of the first age and those which
afterward ensued is the ^ame: and that as there were Giants then, so have there
since been in all ages downward, and some every way as tall, if not taller
then they: and afterward discoursing of the Arc and the capability thereof out
of Buteo (though indeed he name him not) he makes Moses his cubit to be the
same with ours, and the beasts then to be of the same bigness as now they are,
and to spend no more quantity of food then now they do; herein likewise
treading in Buteo his steps, though in some other things touching the fabrique
of the Arc he dissent from him.

SECT. 7. Another rub removed taken from the impurity of the seed,
contracted by the succession of propagation, as also touching some late
memorable examples of parents famously fertile, in the lineage issuing from
their bodies, beyond any examples in that kind in former ages.
THE last, but in the opinion of many not the least rub to be removed, is
drawn from the impuritie of the seed, contracted by the succession of
propagation, from whence there must needs in reason succeed, as a diminution
in the continuance and duration, so likewise an imparing both in the strength
and stature of mankind. This argument I find thus expressed in a treatise
published in Mr C^ffs name, and entitled, The differences of the ages of man's
life; As is nutrition, says he, to the particular, so is generation to the
species, in the case of their continuance and preservation: Wherefore as by the
nourishment we take for our natural moisture, there being supplied not so
pure humiditie as was lost, the particulars decaying by little and little, are
at last clean consumed: so by procreation, (the mainetenance of our species)
the purity of our complexion being by degrees and time diminished, at length
there follows even of necessity an absolute corruption: but for answer
hereunto, though it be granted that generation be as requisite to the
continuance of the species, as is nutrition for the preservation of the
particular, and withal that our food does not so kindly and fully supply our
radical moisture, which is daily wasted by our vital heat feeding upon it,
whence finally ensues the Individuals extinguishing: Yet that every
individual should necessarily yield weaker and wors^r seed for the
propagation of the species then it self was generated of, that I constantly
believe can never be proved: Nay the contrary thereunto is manifested by daily
experience, in as much as we often see feeble and sickely parents to beget
strong and healthy, short to beget tall, and such as have dyed young,
long-liued children: And undoubtedly if this were so indeed as is pretended,
mankind had long since been utterly extinguished, and with it had this
controversy been at an end; and not only mankind, but the several kinds of
fowls, and fishes, and beasts, and plants, since they are all maintained by
their seed as man is, whose decay notwithstanding is questioned but by few.

Before I conclude this discourse touching the comparison of the strength of
the Ancients with ours, it shall not be amiss to remember a modern example or
two of Parents famously fertile in the lineage issued from their bodies, such as
I do not remember any where to be parallelled by antiquity. In the memory of
our Fathers, says Vives in his commentary upon the eight chapter of the
fifteenth book of the City of God, there was seen a village in Spain of
about an hundred houses, whereof: all the inhabitants were issued from one
certain old man who then lived, when as that village was so peopled, so as the
name of propinquity how the youngest of the children should call him could not
be given: Lingua enim nostra supra Abav^m non ascen^t: For our language, says
he, meaning the Spanish, affords not a name above the great Grandfathers
father. Likewise in S. Innocents Churchyard, in the city of Paris, is to be
seen the Epitaph of Yelland ^aeily, widow to Mr Dennis Capell, a Proctour at
the Chastellet, which does show that she had lived eighty four years, and
might have seen 288 of her children and childrens children; she dyed the 17
of April 1514. Now imagine, says Pasquier, how much she had been troubled to
call them by a proper Lib: 6: c: 46.
denomination that were distant from he^ the fourth and fifth degree. Whereunto
we may add, that which Theodore Zwinger, a Physician of Basil, in the third
volume of the Theater of man's life, recites of Lib. 11:
a noble Lady, of the family of the Dalburgs, who saw of her race even to the
sixth degree, whereof the Germans have made this distich.

1 Matter 2 ait natae 3 dic natae filia 4 natam
5 Vt moneat natae 6 plangere filiolam.
That is to say, The mother said to her daughter, daughter bid thy daughter
tell her daughter that her daughters daughter cries. The more I wonder at Pliny
that he should report it as a wonder, and worthy the Chronicle, that Crispinus
Hilarus praelata pompa, with open ostentation Lib: 7: c. 13.
sacrificed in the Capitol, 74 of his children and childrens children,
attending on him. And so I pass from the consideration and comparison of the
stature and strength of men's bodies, to that of their minds, consisting in the
more noble faculties of the reasonable soul, and the beautiful effects
thereof.

CAP. 6. Containing a discourse in general, that there is no such universal
and perpetual decay in the powers of the mind, or in the Arts and Sciences as
is pretended.
SECT. 1. The excellency of the Ancients in the powers of the mind compared
with those of the present, as also their helps and hindrances in matter of
learning, balanced.
SInce it is a received conclusion of the choicest, both Divines and
Philosophers, that the reasonable soul of man is not conveied unto him from
his Parents, but infused immediately by the hand of the Creator; and withal,
that the souls of all men at their first Creation and infusion, are equal and
perfect alike, endued with the same essence and abilities; it must needs be,
that the inequality and disparity of actions, which they produce, arise from
the diverse temper of the matter which they inform, and by which, as by an
instrument they work. Now the matter being tempered by the disposition of the
bodies of our parents, the influence of the heavens, the quality of the
elements, diet, exercise, and the like; it remains, that as there is a variety
and vicissitude of these in regard of goodness, so is there likewise in the
temper of the matter whereof we consist, and the actions which by it our
souls produce: Yea where both the agents and the instruments are alike, yet by
the diversity of education or industry, their works are many times infinitely
diversified.

The principal faculties of the soul, are imagination, judgment, and memory.
One of the most famous for memory among the Ancients, to my remembrance, was
Seneca the Father, who reports of himself, that (...), lib: 1. Controvers,
he could repeat two thousand names, or two hundred verses, brought to his
Master by his Schoole-fellowes backward or forward: But that which Muretus
reports of a young man of Corsica, a student in the Civil V^ierum L^ctionum,
l. 3.
Law, whom himself saw at Padua, far exceedes it; he could, says he^,
recite thirty six thousand names in the same order as they were delivered,
without any stay or staggering, as readily, as if he had read them out of a
book: His conclusion is, Huic ego ne ex antiquitate quidam quem opponam habeo,
nis^ forte Cyrum quem Plinius, Quintilianus, and alij Latini Scriptores
tradiderunt tenuisse omnium militum nomina. I find none among the Ancients,
whom I may set against him, unless Cyrus perchance, whom Plini^, Quintilian,
and other Latin writers, report to have remembered the names of all his
soldiers, which yet Muretus himself doubts was mistaken of them: Zenophon, of
whom only or principally they could learn it, affirming only that he
remembered the names, (...), of his Captains or chief commanders* And Aeneas
Sylvius in his history of the Council of Basil (at which himself was
present) tells us of one Ludovicus Pontanus of Spoleto, a Lawyer likewise by
profession, (who dyed of the Pestilence at that Council, at thirty years of
age) that he could recite not the titles only, but the entire bodies of the
Laws, being for vastnes and fastnes of memory, nemini Antiquorum inferior, as
he speaks, nothing inferior to any of the Ancients. It is to this purpose
very memorable, which Famianus Srada, in the first book of his Academicall
P^olusions, relates of Francis Suarez, who has, says he, so strong a memory,
that he has S. Augustine (the most copious and various of the Fathers) ready
by heart, alleging every where (as occasion presents it self) fully and
faithfully, his sentences, and which is very strange, his very words; nay if
he be demanded any thing touching any passage in any of his volumes (which of
themselves are almost enough to fill a Library,) Statim quo loco, quaque
pagina disseruerit ea super re expedite docentem ac digito commonstrantem saepe
vidimus; I my self have often seen him instantly showing and pointing with
his finger, to the place and page in which he disputed of that matter; This is
I confess the testimony of one Jesuit, touching another. But of Dr Rainolds,
it is most certain that he excelled this way, to the astonishment of all that
were inwardly acquainted with him, not only for S. Augustines works, but
almost all Classike Authors: so as in this respect it might truly be said of
him, which has been applied to some others, that he was a living library, or
third university: I have heard it very crediblely reported, that upon occasion
of some writings, which passed to and fro, betwixt him and Doctor Gentilis,
then our Professor in the Civil Laws, he publicly professed, that he
thought Dr Rainolds had read, and did remember more of those Laws then
himself, though it were his profession.

And for the excellency of the other faculties of the mind, together with that
of the memory It is wonderful the testimony that Viues (himself a man of
eminent parts) in his Commentaries on the second book, and 17 Chapter de
civitate Dei, gives Budaeus; Qu^ viro, (says he) Gallia acutiore ingenio,
acriore iudicio, exactiore diligentia, maiore eruditione nullum vnquam
produxit, hac vero aetate nec Italia quidem; then which man, France never
brought forth a sharper wit, or more peircing judgment, of more exact
diligence, and greater learning, nor in this age Italy it self. And then going
on, tells us, that there was nothing written in Greek or Latin, which he had
not turned over, read, examined; Greek and Latin were both alike to him, yet
was he in both most excellent, speaking either of them as readily, and
perchance with more ease then the french, his mother tongue; he would read
out of a Greek book in Latin, and out of a Latin book in Greek. These
things which we see so exquisitely written by him, flowed from him ex tempore;
he writes more easily both in Greek and Latin, then the most skillful in
those languages understand. Nothing in those tongues is so abstruse and
difficult, which he has not ransacked, entered upon, looked into, and brought
as it were another Cerberus from darkness to light. Infinite are the
significations of words, the figures, and properties of speech, which unknown
to former ages, by the only help of Budaeus, studious men are now acquainted
with. And these so great and admirable things, he without the directions of any
teacher, learned merely by his own industry; Foelix and foecundum ingenium,
quod in se vno invenit, and doctorem, and discipulum, and docendi viam
rationemque, and cuius decimam partem, alij sub magnis magistris vix discunt,
ipse id totum a se magistro ed^ctus est: An happy and fruitful wit, which in
it self alone found both a master, a scholar, and a method of teaching; and
the tenth part of that which others can hardly attain unto under famous
teachers, all that learned he of himself, being his own reader; and yet
(says he) hitherto have I spoken nothing of his knowledge in the laws, which
being in a manner ruined, seem by him to have been restored, nothing of his
Philosophy, whereof he has given us such a trial in his books d^ Ass, that
no man could compose them, but such a one as was assiduously versed in the
books of all the Philosophers; and then having highly commended him for his
piety, his sweet behavior, and many other rare and singular virtues added to
his great wit; he farther adds, that notwithstanding all this, he was
continually conversant in domesticke and state affairs at home, and ambassages
abroad; so as it might truly be said of him, as Plinius Caecilius speaks of
his uncle Secundus, when I consider his state affairs, and the happy dispatch
of so many businesses, I wonder at the multiplicitie of his reading and
writing; and again, when I consider this, I wonder at that, and so leave him
with that happy Distich of Buchanan:

Gallia quod Graeca est quod Graecia barbara non est
Vtraque Budaeo debet vtrumque suo:
That France is turned to Greece, that Greece is not turned rud^

Both owe them both to thee, their dear great learned Bude.

And if we look over the Perynees, Metamorus, in his Treatise of the
Universities and learned men of Spain, spares not to write of Tostatus, Bishop
of Abulum, si alio quam suo seculo viuere contigisset, neque Hipponi
Augustinum, neque Stridoni Hieronymum, nec quempian^ ex illis proceribus
Ecclesiae antiquis nunc invideremus. Had he lived in any other age save his
own, we should not have needed now to envy either Hippo for Augustine, or
Stride^ for Hierom; nor any other of those ancient noble worthies of the
Church. To which Posseuin in his Apparatus adds, that at the age of two and
twenty years, he attained the knowledge of almost all Arts and Sciences. For
beside Philosophy and Divinity, the Canon and the Civil Laws, history and the
Mathematiques, he was well skilled in the Greek and Hebrew tongues: so as it
was written of him,

Hic stupor est mundi, qui scibile discutit omne, Bellarm: de Eccles: script:

The worlds wonder for that he
Knows whatsoever known may be:
He was so true a student, and so constant in sitting to it; that with Didymus
of Alexandria, aenea habuisse intestina putaretur, he was thought to have a
body of brass, and so much he wrote and published, that a part of the epitaph
engraven on his tomb was;

Primae natalis luci folia omnia adaptans
Nondum sic fuerit pagina trina satis;
The meaning is, that if of his published writings, we should allow three
leafes to every day of his life, from his very birth, there would be yet some
to spare; and yet withal he wrote so exactly, that Ximines his scholar,
attempting to contract his Commentaries upon Matthew, could not well bring it
to less then a thousand leafes in folio, and that in a very small print, and
others have attempted the like in his other works with like success. But that
which Pasquier has observed out of Monstrelet, is yet more memorable, touching
a young man who being Lib. 5: c. 38.
not above 20 years old, came to Paris in the year 1445, and showed himself
so admirably excellent in all Arts, Sciences, and Languages, that if a man of
an ordinary good wit and found constitution should live one hundred years, and
during that time study incessantly without eating, drinking, sleeping, or any
recreation, he could hardly attain to that perfection: insomuch that some were
of opinion, that he was Antichrist begotten of the Devil, or somewhat at
leastwise above humane condition: Which gave occasion to these verses of
Castellanus. who lived at the same time, and himself saw this miracle of wit.

I'ay veu par excellence
Un jeune de vingt ans
Auoir toute science and les degrez montans
Soy sevantant scauoir dire
Ce qu' onques fut escrit
Par seule fois le lire
Comme un jeune Antichrist.
A young man have I seen
At twenty years so skilled,
That every Art he had, and all
In all degrees excelled.
What ever yet was writ
He vaunted to pronounce
Like a young Antichrist, if he
Did read the same but once.
Not to insist upon supernaturals, were there among us that industry, and that
union of forces, and contribution of helps as was in the Ancients, I see no
sufficient reason but the wits of this present age might produce as great
effects as theirs did, nay greater, inasmuch as we have the light of their
writings to guide and assist us: we have books by reason of the Art of
Printing more familiar, and at a cheaper rate: most men being now unwilling to
give three hundred pound for three books, as Plato Gellius l. 3. c. 17
did for those of Phylolaus the Pythagorean. And by this means are we freed
from a number of gross errors, which by the ignorance or negligence of
unskillful Writers crept into the text: yet on the other side it is as true
that we are forced to spend much time in the learning of Languages, specially
the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, which the Ancients spent in the study of things,
their learning being commonly written in their own Language. Beside the
infinite and bitter controversies among Christians in matter of Religion since
the infancy thereof even to these present times, has doubtless not a little
hindered the advancement and progress of other Sciences, together with a vain
opinion, that all Arts were already fully perfected, so as nothing could be
added thereunto, and that the Founders of them were Giants, more then men for
their wits in regard of us, and we very dwarfes, sunk below our species in
regard of them. Sed non est ita, says Lodovicus Vives, nec nos sumus nani, nec
De Causi. corrupt. A^m l. 1.
illi homines Gygantes, sed omnes eiusdem staturae, and qnidem nos altius
evecti eorum beneficio, maneat modo in nobis quod in illis, studium, attentio
animi, vigilantia and amor very; quae si absint, jam non sumus nani, sed
homines justae magnitudinis humi prostrati. It is not so, neither are we
Dwarfes, nor they Cyants, but all of equal stature, or rather we somewhat
higher, being lifted up by their means, conditionally there be in us an equal
Inte^tion of spirit, watchfulness of mind, and love of truth: for if these
be wanting, then are we not so much dwarfes as men of a perfect growth lying
on the ground.

Likewise it cannot be denied, but that the encouragements for study and
Learning were in former times greater: what liberal bountiful allowance did
Alexander afford Aristotle for the entertainment of Fishers, 800 Talents.
Faukeners and Hunters to bring him in b^asts, fowls, and fishes of all kinds
for the discovery of their several natures and dispositions: Nay the daily
wages of Roscius the stage player, as witnesses Macrobius, Sa^al. li^ 3. c. 14.
was a thousand denarij, which amounts to thirty pound of our coin. And
Aesope the Tragoedian grew so rich by the only exercise of the same trade, if
we may credit the same Author, as he left to his son above one hundred and
fifty thousand pound sterling: Whereunto may be added, that the Ancients
coppying out their books for the most part with their own hands, it could not
but work in them a deeper impression of the matter therein contained, and
being thereby forced to content themselves with fewer books, of necessity they
held themselves more closely to them. And it is most true which Seneca has
as well in reading as eating, in books as diet, Varietas delectat, certitudo
prodest, 2.
Variety is delightful, but certainty more useful and profitable.

So that upon the matter, all reckonings being on all sides cast up, and one
thing being set against another, as we want some helps which the Ancients
had, so are we freed from some hindrances wherewith they were encumbered, as
again it is certain that they both wanted some of our helps, and were freed
from some of our hindrances: if then we come short of their perfections, it
is not because Nature is generally defective in us, but because we are wanting
to our selves, and do not strive to make use of, and improoue those abilities
wherewith God and Nature has endowed us. Male de Natura censet quicunque vno
illam aut altero partu effaetam esse arbitratur, says Vives; He thinks
unworthily and irreverently of Nature who conceiues her to be barren after one
or two births; no, no, that which the same Author speaks of places, is
likewise undoubtedly true of times, Vbique bona nascuntur ingenia, excolantur
modo, alibi fortassis frequentiora, sed vbique nonnulla. Euery-where and in all
ages good wits spring up, were they dressed and manured as they ought, though
happily more frequently in some places and ages then in others. Scythia it
self anciently yielded one Anacharsis, and no doubt had they taken the same
course as he did, more of the same metal would have been found there.

SECT. 2. That there is both in wits and Arts as in all things besides, a kind
of circular progress as well in regard of places as times.
THere is (it seems) both in wits and Arts, as in all things besides, a kind
of circular progress: they have their birth, their growth, their flourishing,
their failing, their fading, and within a while after, their resurrection, and
reflourishing again. The Arts flourished for a long time among the Persians,
the Chaldeans, the Egyptians, and therefore is Moses said to be learned in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Act. 7. 22.
who well knowing their own strength, were bold to object to the Graecians,
that they were still children, as neither having the knowledge of Antiquity,
nor the antiquity of knowledge: But afterward the Graecians got the start of
them, and grew so excellent in all kind of learning, that the rest of the
world in regard of them were reputed Barbarians, which reputation of wisdom
they held even to the Apostles time, I am debtor, says S. Paul, both to the
Graecians and to the Barbarians, both to the wise and to Romans 1. 14.
the unwise. And again, the Jews require a sign, and the Graecians seek
after 1: Cor. 1. 22
wisdom. By reason whereof they rellished not the simplicity of the Gospel,
it seeming foolishness unto them: And in the 17 of the Acts the Philosophers
of Athens; (sometimes held the most famous University in the World) out of an
opinion of their own great learning scorned S. Paul and his doctrine, tearming
him a sower of words, a very Babbler or tri fler: yet not long after this, these
very Graecians declined much, and themselves (whether through their own
inclination, or by reason of their bondage under the Turk, the common enemy
both of Religion and Learning, I cannot determine) are now become so strangely
barbarous, that their knowledge is converted into a kind of affected
ignorance, as is their liberty into contented slavery: yet after the loss both
of their Empire and Learning, they still retained some spark of their former
wit and industry.

Ingenium velox, audacia perdita, sermo
Promptus, and Isaeo torrentior, ede quid illum ^ven. Sat. 7

Esse put as quemvis hominem secum attulit ad nos
Grammaticus, Rhetor, Geometres, Pictor, Aliptes,
Augur, Schaenobates, Medicus, Magus, omnia novit
Graeculus esuriens, in coelum iusseris is, ibit.
Quickwitted, wondrous bold, well spoken, then
Isaeus fluenter, tell who all men
Brought with himself: a Southsayer, a Physician,
Magician, Rhetorician, Geometrician,
Grammarian, Painter, Ropewalker, all knows
The needy Greek; bid go to heaven, he goes.
But now they wholly delight in ease, in shades, in dancing, in drinking, and
for the most part no farther endeavor the enriching either of their minds or
purses then their bellies compel them.

The lamp of Learning being thus near extinguished in Greece,

In Latium spret is Academia migrat Athenis.
Athens forsaken by Philosophy,
She forthwith ^avell'd into Italy.
(...) began to shine afresh Italy near about the time of the birth of
Christ, there being a general peace through the world and the Roman Empire
being fully settled: and established, Poets, Orators, Philosophers, Histori^s*
never more excellent. From thence this light spread it self over Christendom,
and continued bright till the inundation of the Goths and H^nnes, and V^ndals,
who ransacked Libraries, and defaced almost all the monuments of Antiq^y,
insomuch as that lamp seemed again to be put out hy the space of almost a
thousand years, and had longer so continued, had not first Mensor King of
Africa and Spain raised up and spurred forward the Arabian wits to the
rest^raton of good letters by proposing great rewards and encouragements unto
them. And afterward Petrarch a man of a singular wit and rare natural
endowments, opened such Libraries as were left vndemolished, beat off the dust
from the motheaten books, and drew into the light the best Authors. He was
seconded by Boccace and John of Raven^; and soon after by Areline, Phil^lphus,
Valla, Poggius, Omnibonus, Vergerius, Blondus, and others. And those again
were followed by Aeneas Sylvius, Angelus Politianus, Hermolaus Barbarus,
Marsilius Ficinus, and that Phaenix of Learning Johannes Picus Earl of
Mirandula, who as appears in the entrance of his Apology proposed openly at
Rome nine hundred questions in all kind of faculties to be disputed, inviting
all strangers thither, from any part of the known world, and offering himself
to bear the charge of their travel both coming and going, and during their
abode there: so as he deservedly received that Epitaph which after his death
was bestowed on him.

Johannes iacet hic Mirandula, caetera norunt
Et Tagus, and Ganges, forsan and Antipodes.
Here lies Mirandula, Tagus the rest does know,
And Ganges, and perhaps the Antipodes also.
And rightly might that be verified of him which Lucretius sometimes wrote of
Epicurus his Master.

Hic genus humanum ingenio superavit, and omnes
Praestrinxit stellas exortus vt aethereus sol.
In wit all men he far has overgone,
Eclipsing them like to the rising Sun.
This path being thus beaten out by these Heroical spirits, they were backed
by Rodulphus Agricola, Reucline, Melancthon, Ioachimus Camerarius, Wolphangus
Lazius, Beatus Rhenanus, Almaines, the great Erasmus a Netherlander, Ludovicus
Vives a Spanyard, Bembus, Sadoletus, Eugubinus Italians, Turnebus, Muretus,
Ramus, Pithaeus, Budaeus, Amiot, Scaliger, Frenchmen, Sir Thomas More, and
Li^aker Englishmen; And it is worth the observing, that about this time the
slumbering drowzie spirit of the Graecians began again to be revived and
awakened; in Bessarion, Gemmistius, Trapezontius, Gaza, Argyropilus,
Calcondilas, and others: nay,, those very Northern Nations which before had
given the greatest wound to learning, began now as by way of recompense to
advance the honor of it by the same of their studies, as Olaus Magnus,
Holsterus, Tycho Braye, Hemingius, Danes: H^sius, Frixius, Crummerus,
Polonians: But the number of those worthies, who like somany sparkling stars
have si^ce through Christendom succeeded, and some of them exceeded these in
learning and knowledge* is so infinite, that the very recital of their names
were enough to fill whole volumes: And if we descend to a particular
examination of the several professions, Arts, Sciences and Manufactures, we
shall surely find that praediction of the Divine Seneca accomplished,
Mu^venientis aev^populus ign^ nobis sciet, the people of Natural. quaest. l. 7.
c. 31.
future ages shall come to the knowledge of many things unknown to us: And
that of Tac^us most true, Nec omnia apud priores meliora, sed nostra quoque
aetas multa laudis and ar^um imitanda posteris (...) Neither Annal. l. 3. c. 12.
were all things in ancient times better then ours, but our age has left unto
posterity many things worthy praise and imitation. Ramus goes further, and
perchance warrantably enough: Maiorem doctorum hominum P^aefat. Scho^l. (...).
and oper^ proventum saeculo vno vidim^, quam totis antea 14. maiores nostri
viderant. We have seen within the space of one age, a more plentiful crop of
learned men and works, then our Predecessors saw in fourteen, next going before.

CAP. 7. Touching the three principal professions, Divinity; Law, and Physic.
SEC. 1. Of the Divinity of the Gentiles and Jews before Christ, and the next
ages after Christ.
WE will begin with the high and noble profession of Divinity, this among the
Gentiles was partly profane and fabulous in their vain discourses touching
the Genealogy, the number and nature of their Gods, and partly mixed with much
error and weakness in their Metaphysics, professing themselves to be wise,
they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.
Ante Christum quam Romans 1. 21. 22.
molestae disputationes, says Lodovicus Vives in his 5 book and 9 chapter de
veritate fidei Christianae, how irksome where the disputes? how tedious their
deliberations in comparing honesty with profit? because they knew not what was
honesty, nor in very truth what was truly pro^table. How diverse and uncertain
were their ends of goodness? which held men's minds in suspense, but Christ
has now fully cleared and opened all points, we are now well acquainted with
the true end and the means that conduce to that end, what is honest, what
profitable, what hurtful, the resolutions are now easy and perspicuous; and
in the fourth chapter of the same book, nunc r^onditissima mysteria scitu
digna and necessaria, melius nostrae mulier^le intelligunt, quam maximi olim
philosophi, Our silliest women now better understand the deepest Mysteries
worthy or needful to be known, then the profoundest Philosophers then did.
They were (as the Apostle speaks in another case) ever learning, but never
came, nor indeed could ever come to the knowledge of truth, in as much as the
mere natural man perceives not, nor can perceive the hid things of God,
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, which made them to be, as Minutius
Foelix in his Octauius has truly observed, Semper adversus sua vitia facundi,
always eloquent in declayming against their own vices; but we (says he) qui
non habitu sapientiam sed mente praeferimus, who do not place, or wear
wisdom in the robe but in the mind: non eloquimur magna sed viuimus, we
speak not big but live well, and glory in this, that we have found that,
which they with all eagerness sought, but could not find. His conclusion is:
Quid ingrati sumus? quid nobis invidemus, si veritas divinitatis nostri
temporis aetate maturuit? fruamur bono nostro: Why are we ingrate? why do we
envy our selves, if the true knowledge of the deity have been brought to
ripeness and full perfection in our age? In Gods name let us enjoy our own
blessing. Among the Jews, the only visible Church, the sacred Oracles of God,
containing the revelation of supernatural truths, were indeed preserved: But
hereunto, their Talmudists and Cabalists, their Scribes and Pharisees, their
Sadduces atd Essens added such traditions, such fictions, such corrupt glosses
and malicious interpretations, as the fruit of their doctrine lay hid under
the leaves; and as the learned in their language well know, very little use
can be made of their best Commentaries upon Scripture; howbeit they presumed,
that their chiefes kill lay that way: So that we need not doubt, but the most
excellent Divines, have all been since the coming of Christ. It is to me
very strange, that not only the Pharisees should be infected with ths opinion
of the Pythagoreans, Josephus de bello Jud. 2. 7.
touching the dwelling of the same soul in diverse bodies successively, and in
diverse ages; but that Herod, and the whole nation of the Jews, should be
tainted with that gross error, as appears in that they held our Savior to
be John the Baptst, or Elias, or one of the Prophets; Mat. 14. 2. Mar: 18: 28:
Luk: 9. 19:
all which they knew to be dead, and some of them long before: Their meaning
being, that the soul of the Baptist, or of Elias, or of one of the Prophets,
was by traduction passed into our Saviors body; as Pythagoras writes of
himself, that he was first Euphorbus, and then Callidas, then Hermotimus, then
Pyrrhus, and lastly Pythagoras: But yet far more strange it is, that the
Apostles of our Savior themselves should be thus misled; and yet it should
seem by that their demand touching him that was borne blind, Master, who did
sin this man, or his parents, John. 9: (...)
that he was borne blind; that they were indeed possessed with that opinion,
for how could they conceive that he should sin before he was borne, but in
some other body which his soul actuated before? and in truth Saint Cyrill
upon that occasion, is induced to think, that they were swayed with the common
error of that nation and those times; In Graeca Ca^na.
and Calvin confidently cries our Prodigij sane instar hoc fuit quod in electo
Dei populo, in quo coelestis sapientiae per Legem and Prophetas lux accensa
fuerat, Comment. in locum.
tam crasso figmento fuerit datus locus. Truly, this is a prodigious kind of
wonder, that among the elect people of God, who were enlightened by the heavenly
wisdom of the Law and the Prophets, way should be given to so palpable a
fiction. Yet I know not whether their stupiditie, were greater in this, or in
that other demand of theirs, at our Saviors ascension, Lord, will thou at
this time restore the kingdom to Israel? where Act. 1. 6.
Calvin again stands amazed, that they should all with one consent (for so much
does the text imply) join together in such a foolish question as he terms
it, mira profecto illorum fuit ruditas, quod tam absolute tantaque cura per
triennium edocti non minorem inscitiam produnt, quam si nullum vnquam verbum
audissent, totidem in hac interrogatione sunt errores quot verba: wonderful in
truth was their rawnesse and rudeness, that having been so exquisitely and
diligently taught by three years space, they notwithstanding bewray as much
ignorance, as if they had never heard so much as one word of instruction, as
many errors are in their question as words: But this likewise of restoring
them a temporal kingdom, then was, and at this day continues to be, the
common error of that whole nation, neither by any means will they be beaten
from it: That which to me seems more admirable, is, that S. Peter himself,
even after the descending of the holy Ghost, was ignorant of the calling of the
Gentiles, of whom together with the Jews, the Catholic Church was to be
made up: whereby it should seem, that then likewise he was ignorant, that
himself was the head of the Catholic Church, as by those who hold themselves
the only Catholics, he is now made; yet may it not be denied, or so much as
doubted, that the holy and blessed Apostles were all endowed with singular
gifts and graces, as well for knowledge and wisdom, as all kind of moral
virtues, fitting for so high a calling; and that in their writings, they were
the penmen of God, inspired by the holy Ghost: but leaving them, let us
descend a little lower in the Church of Christ. As then the three first
Centuries are commended for Piety, Devotion, and Martyrdom, so is the fourth
for learned and famous Divines. Habuit haec aetas si quae vnquam alia plurimos
praestantes and illustres Doctores, say the Magdeburgians: This age if ever any
abounded in excellent and famous Doctors, as namely Arnobius, Lactantius,
Eusebius, Centur. 4: c. 4:
Athanasius, Hilarious, Victorinus, Basilius, Nazianzenus, Ambrosius,
Prudentius, Epiphanius, Theophilus, Hieronymus, Faustinus, Didymus, Ephraim,
Optatus, to which number, they might well have added, (for that he began to
show his worth in the same Centurie) that renowned pillar of truth and hammer
of heresies S. Augustine. These and the like great Divines of those ages I much
honor, and eorum nominibus semper assurgo, I confess I reverence their very
names; yet most certain, it is they had all their slips and blemishes in
matter of doctrine: But before this age, Tertullian, and Origin, and Cyprian,
are specially branded for notorious errors, and Vincentius Li^inensis gives
this rare commendation of the Fathers, assembled in the Council of Nice, that
they were tantae eruditionis, tantaeque doctrinae, of so profound learning and
singular knowledge, vt prope omnes possent de dogmatibus disputare, that almost
all of them could reason of matters of faith: Yet in those very Contra
haereses, cap: 41.
times, was the Church so rent and torn in sunder with Capital heresies,
trenching upon the very vital parts and fundamental principles of Christian
Religion, touching the sacred Trinity, and incarnation of our blessed Savior.
vt illis temporibus ingeniosares fuit esse Christianum, so as Erasmus.
in those times it was a matter of wit to be a Christian: Such were the
nicities, wherein their Teachers differed, and such their subtilties, they
bound their scholars to maintain.

But that which to me seems most strange, is, that so many of them were
infected with the error of the Millenaries, that so many, specially of the
Greek Fathers, held that the Angels were created long before the creation of
the visible world, that a number both of the Greek and Latin maintained, that
the souls of men departed this life, go neither to heaven nor hell, till the
resurrection of the body, but remained in certain hidden receptacles they
knew not whree, that Antichrist was to come of the tribe of Dan, that the
sons of God, who in the sixth of Genesis, are said to have fallen in love
with the daughters of men. were the blessed Angels: upon which occasion,
Pererius a learned Jesuit has these memorable words, Pudet dicere quae de
optimis Scriptoribus hoc loco dicturus sum: I even blush to utter those things
which here Comment. in locum:
I am to speak of most excellent writers, they being not only false, but
absurd and shameful, unworthy the wit and learning of so famous men, as also
of the purity and holiness of the blessed Angels; yet truth inforceth me to
speak, partly, least that should seem probable to any man, by reason of the
countenance of so grave Authors, which is no way to be approved; and partly,
that from hence it may appear how much the Church of Christ, from that time to
this has profited in the knowledge of holy Scriptures and divine mysteries:
Nam multa quondam vel doctissimis viris, aut obscura and dubia, aut etiam
incognita, nunc vel mediocriter eruditis perspicua indubitata, explorateque
percepta sunt: for many things anciently either obscure or doubtful, or
altogether unknown to the most learned among them, are now become even to
mean Clerks clear and certain. And with him fully accords Andradius in Lib.
2:
his defense of the Tridentine Council, God has revealed many things to us
that they never saw. And Dominicus Bannes a famous schoole-man: It 2a. 2ae page
58.
is not necessary, that by how much the more the Church is remote from the
Apostles times, by so much there should be the less perfect knowledge of the
mysteries of faith therein, because after the Apostles times, there were not
the most learned men in the Church, which had dexterity in understanding and
expounding matters of faith Roffensis likewise, our Countryman strikes upon
the same string: It cannot be unknown to any, but that many things are more
Confut. assert. Luth: art. 8.
narrowly sifted and clearly understood by the helps of latter wits, as well
in the Gospells, as other parts of the Scriptures, then formerly they have
been; and lastly, to make up the music full, Cardinal Caietan bears a
part, Let In 1 Gene.
no man think it strange, if sometimes we bring a new sense of holy writ,
different from the ancient Doctors, but let him diligently examine the Text
and context, and if he find it to agree therewith, let him praise God, who has
not tied the exposition of the sacred Scriptures, to the senses given by the
ancient Doctors. These testimonies, I the rather vouch for that the Authors
of them being professed Champions of the Roman Church, withal profess
themselves to be the greatest friends to the ancient Fathers.

SECT. 2. Of ensuing ages.
YEt not to conceal a truth, these were lightsome times in regard of those
succeeding ages that followed after, when Divinity was wouen into distinctions,
which like Cobwebbs were fine and curious in working, but not much useful. And
in the mean time for the most part in the Scriptures and holy Languages there
was so great ignorance, vt Graece nosse suspectum fuerit, Hebraice prope
Haereticum, that, as witnesses Espencaeus himself a Doctor of the Sorbon, to
be skilled in 2 Timothy 3. digressione 17.
Greek was suspicious, in the Hebrew almost haereticall, which suspicion
Rhemigius an Interpreter of S. Paul's Epistles, surely was not guilty of: for
commenting upon these words, a vobis diffamatus est sermo, he tells us, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8
that diffamatus, was somewhat improperly put for divulgatus, S. Paul being not
very sollicitous of the propriety of words: whereupon Ludovicus Vives demands,
Quid facias principibus istis Scholarum qui nondum sciunt Paulum non Latin,
sed Graece scripsisse: What shall we say to these Comment. de Civ Dei l. 2. c.
21.
Masters in Israel, who know not that S. Paul wrote not in Latin, but in
Greek. It appears by the rescript of Pope Zachary to Boniface a German
Bishop, that a Priest in those parts baptized in this form, Baptizo te 3.
part. Decret, deconsecr. d^stinct. 4. Can, 84
in nomine Patria, and Filia, and Spiritua sancta: And by Erasmus, that some
Divines in his time would take upon them to prove, that Heretics were to be
put to death, because the Apostle says, Haereticum hominem devita, which it
seems they understood as if he had said, de vita toll. I have somewhere read,
that two Friars disputing whether God made any more worlds then one, the one
wisely alleging that passage of the Gospel touching the ten Lepers which
were cleansed, Annon december facti sunt mundi, as if God had made ten worlds,
the other looking into the text, replies as wisely, with the words immediately
following, Sed vbi sunt novem? but what is become of the nine? so as from
thence he would prove but one to be left. He that is disposed to make
himself merry in this kind; may find in Henry Stevens his Apology of
Herodotus, a number of like stuff, I will only touch one or two of the
choicest. Du Prat a Bishop and Chancellor of France, having received a letter
from Henry the eight King of England, to Francis the first of France, wherein
among other things he wrote, mitto tibi duodecem Molossos, I send you twelve
mastife dogs, the Chancellor taking Molossos to signify Mules, made a
journey of purpose to the Court to beg them of the King; who wondering at such
a present to be sent him from England, demanded the sight of the letter, and
smiling thereat, the Chancellor finding himself to be deceived, told him
that he mistook Molossos for Muletos, and so hoping to mend the matter, made
it worse. Another tale he tells of a Parish Priest in Artois, who had his
Parishioners in suit for not paving the Church, and that the charge thereof lay
upon them and not upon him he would prove out of the 17 of the Prophet Jeremy,
Paveant illi, non paveam ego. I remember Archbishop Parker somewhere in his
Antiquitates Britannicae, makes relation of a French Bishop, who being to take
his oath to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and finding the word Metropoliticae
therein, being not able to pronounce it, he passed it over with Soit pour dict,
let it be as spoken; and when they had most grossly broken Priscians head,
being taken in the fact, their common defense was, those words of S. Gregory,
non debent verba coelestis Oraculi subesse regulis Donati, the words of the
heavenly Oracles ought not to be subject to the rules of Donatus.

But about 200 years since, together with the Arts, the languages likewise
began to revive, in so much as Hebrew and Greek are now as common as true
Latin then was, and for the true sense of holy Scripture, never had the Church
more judicious and faithful Interpreters, then by the Divine providence it
has enjoyed these last 100 years: besides, the Sermons of this latter age,
specially in this land, have doubtless bin more exquisite and effectual, then
ordinarily they have bin in any precedent age; insomuch, as it is observed,
that if there were a choice collection made of the most accurate, since the
entrance of Queen Elizabeth, to these present times, (leaving out the
largeness of applications thereupon) it would prove one of the rarest pieces
that has been published since the Apostles times. Hereunto might be added
for practical divinity, the decisions of cases of conscience, which the
Ancients did not handle professedly, but only upon the Bye, and the many
singular treatises tending to devotion, which I wish they were as well practiced
as they are written. And no doubt but the great agitation of controversies,
which these latter times have produced, has not only sharpened the spirits of
Divines, but made the grounds of Christian religion to be better understood.
For, as S. Augustine speaks of the Fathers writings before Pelagius, ante
exortum Pelagium securius loquebantur Patres, before the rising of Pelagius the
Fathers spoke more securely: so may we truly say, before Luther arose and
awakened the world, Divines spoke and wrote more loosely then since they have
done: The sparks of truth being forced out of contention, as the sparks of
fire arc out of the collision of the flint and steel.

To conclude this Section, touching Divinity, it is most true which alearned
Divine of our own times and Church has rightly observed, (...):
that whosoever shall pervse the Church story digested into Centuries or
Annals, or cast but a glance of his eye upon the Catalogues of writers, made
by S. Hierome, Suidas, Photius, Gennadius, Abbas Tritemius, Illyricus, Ball,
and Bellarmine, shall find the ages of the Church to resemble the stars of
the sky: In some parts we see many glorious and eminent stars, in others
few of any remarkable greatness, and in some none but blinkards and obscure
ones: In like manner, in some ages of the Church, we may behold many worthy and
glorious lights like stars of the first or second magnitude, in others few of
any note or bright luster, and in some none but obscure and unknown Authors,
resembling the least and obscurest stars in the sky. After we have passed
the eight age of the Church, we fall into Cymerian darkness. Bellarmine
cannot speak of the ninth age with patience. Seculo hoc nullum extitit De
Roman Pontifice, l: 4: c. 12:
indoctius aut infoelicius, quo qui mathematicae aut Philosophiae operam dabat
vulgo Magus putabatur: never was there any age more unlearned or unhappy then
this, in which he that studied the Mathematikes or Philosophy was commonly held
a Magician. Sabellicus is at a stand in admiring the palpable Egyptian
darkness thereof: mirum est quanta Eneead: 9:
omnium bonarum artium obliuio per id tempus mortalium animos obrepserit, vt ne
in Pontificibus quidem vllis sieve Principibus quicquam illuceret quod vitam
iuvare possit: A wonder it is, how strange a forgetfullnes of all good arts
about this time crept upon the minds of men: so as neither in Prelates nor
Princes appeared any thing which might farther civility. Genebrard after a
sort blesses himself from it, Infoelix dicitur hoc seculum, Chron. lib: 4:
exhaustum hominibus doctrina, and ingenio claris, sine etiam claris
Principibus atque Pontificibus: This is called the unhappy age, void of men
renowned either for wit or learning, as also without any famous, either Princes
or Prelates: So great an alteration there is in the studies and endeavors of
men in diverse ages, sometimes for the better, sometimes for the worse, and
then by Gods blessing for the better again.

SECT. 3. The Lawyers of this last age, preferred before those of former times.
NExt Gods Laws, those of the Empire seem to challenge their place, howbeit
with us, having neither that reward nor employment as they deserve, they have
lost both their rank and dignity, but in foreign parts where they are
cherished and honored, they maruellously flourish, in so much as in some
transmarine kingdoms their Lawyers are held, and for the most part undoubtedly
are, more sufficient Scholars then their Divines; and within this last
Centenarie, much more sufficient then the writers and professors of the same
faculty in many precedent ages, as well in that part which is professed in
Schools, as the practique expressed in judgments and pleadings. He that shall
judiciously compare Baldus and Bartolus, Jason and Accursius, with Cuijacius,
Alciatus, Ottomannus, Duarenus all french men, shall easily find these latter,
not only for their phrase more polite, and for their method more exact, but
for the marrow and true sense of the law more profound. I will instance only
in the two first. For Cuijacius, it is a memorable testimony which is yielded
him by Massonius; Iacobus Cuijacius juris Romani radices tanta cura effossas in
lucem protulit, vt caeteri ante eum ignorasse illas ipse solus post multos and
quaesiuisse diligentius, and penitius invenisse videatur: James Cujace with so
great industry dug up and brought to light, the very roots of the Imperial
Law, that both others before him seemed to be ignorant of them, and he alone
after others to have sought them more diligently, and discovered them more
fully: But that of Pithaeus outuies this of Massonius, where in an Epitaph
erected to him, he doubts not to style him, Romani iuris a primis Conditoribus
interpretem primum and vltimum, the first and the last interpreter of the
Roman Law since the first founders thereof: adding withal, that what clear
and native light soever is at all brought to that science, this present age
has derived it from him, and to him posterity must owe it, which he has well
expressed in this Distich:

Cuijacij Themidisque vides commune sepulchrum,
Conduntur simul hic quae periere simul.
Cuias and Themis here lie in one common grave,
They di'd together and one sepulcher they have.
Whereunto may be added the grave testimony which Arias Montanus gives Alciat.

Eloquio ius Romanum lucabat and art
Turba obscurarunt barbara legulei.
Andreas prisco reddit sua iura nitori
Consultosque facit doctius inde toqui.
The Civil Law with art and eloquence did shine,
But barbarous pettifoggers did the same obscure
In season Alciat came and did the Laws refine,
And taught the Lawyer thence to speak more pure.
Yet Cuijacius himself, whether out of judgment or modesty I cannot affirm,
was content to yield the bucklers to Gouianus, touching whom Thuanus witnesses
that himself heard him thus protesting, Gouianum Bibliot. hist. 99.
ex omnibus iuris Iustinianaei interpretibus, quotquot sunt vel fuere, vnum
esse, cui, si quaeratur quis excellat, palma deferenda sit: that of all the
Interpreters of the Laws of Justinian, which either are, or have bin, if the
question should be, who amongst them most excelled, Gouianus was the only
man, to whom the price was of right to be adjudged. Now for the latter part,
which is the practique, it may easily be euidenced to any who will be pleased
to look into it, that by the observations, experience, pains, and learning of
the Lawyers of these latter ages, it is grown to much more exactness and
perfection, then former ages had. Which appears by the judgments, decisions,
arrests, and pleadings of the highest Courts of the greatest part of the
Christian Nations, which are extant in great numbers, as the decisions of the
several Rotes of Italy at Rome, at Naples, at Florence, at Genoa, at Bononia,
at Mantua, at Perusium, and the rest. The judgments of the Imperial chamber
at Spire, which is the last ressort of the Germane Nation, and the arrests of
the several Courts of Parliament in France, as Paris, Aix, Bordeaux,
Gren^ble, and the rest: to which may be added the pleadings of Monsieur Seruin,
the french Kings advocate, and others of that nature, which are all published
and extant, partly in Latin, and partly in their own languages, with that
variety and learning as much exceedes the former ages.

SECT. 4. Ancient and modern Physicians compared especially in the knowledge
of Anatomy and Herbary, the two legs of that Science.
THE third great Profession is Physic, in which besides the uncertain and
fabulous reports of Apollo and Esculapius, we read not of any excellent till
Hippocrates, and after him being much decayed, it was revived by Galen, vt sub
eo rursum nata medicina videatur, so (...).
as it seemed under him to be borne again. Two special parts thereof are the
knowledge of the body of man, and the knowledge of simples: touching the
former, the opening and anatomizing of men's bodies. It was doubtless among the
Ancients in very little use, I mean the Egyptians, the Hebrews, the
Graecians, the Romans, and the Primitive Christians. First then I know the
Egyptians are by some said to have been this way most skillful, but
considering how excessiuely curious and ceremonious, or rather superstitious
they were in preserving their bodies entire and vnputrified, I conceive their
opening them to have been rather for the imbowelling and imbaulming, then the
anatomizing of them: and for the Graecians they could not well practice it, in
as much as they usually burnt their dead bodies, by the testimony not only of
Homer and Herodotus, (whose authorities yet in this case might pass as
sufficient) but likewise of Thucidides and Plutarch, witnesses beyond all
exception, whereof the latter in the 3 book and 4 question of his Symposiaques
gives us to understand, that their custom was with the bodies of ten men to
burn one of an woman, because they supposed their flesh to be more unctuous,
and thereby to help forward the burning of the rest more easily and speedily;
and surely had Anatomy been in use among the Graecians, me thinks Physicians
and Anatomists should somewhere discover it in the works of Hippocrates yet
extant, which I presume cannot be shown, once I am sure, that when at the
instance of the Abderites he came to visit Democritus, he found him (as may
be seen in his Epistle to Damogetus) cutting up several beasts, who being by
him demanded the reason thereof, Democritus returns him this answer, Haec
animalia quae vides propterea seco, non dei opera perosus, sed fellis, bilisque
naturam disquirens, these beasts which thou seestI cut up, not because I hate
the works of God, but to search into the nature of gall and choler: now if
he feared lest the cutting up of beasts might be censured as an hating of Gods
works, he must needs much more have feared that censure, had he cut up the
bodies of men.

But among the Jews it is evident, that this Art could not be in use, for that
their executed malefactors were put to death either by burning or stoning,
(whom they buried under an heap of stones) or by crucifying them upon a
cross, and for these they had express charge, Deuteronomy. 21. at the last verse,
that they should no^ suffer them to hang all night upon the tree, but in any
wise must they bury them the very day they were crucified: and besides it was
most precisely enjoined them Number, (...) 11 that they might not so much as
touch the dead body of any that was either executed, or died otherwise, and he
that touched it was by the law of Moses so far held unclean, that if he
presumed to enter into the tabernacle before he was purified, he was to be cut
off from Israel for defiling it; nay, if in this case he but touched bread or
pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, he thereby made it unclean, as
appears Aggai 2. 13.

Some more doubt seems to be touching the ancient Romans, but I think it may
easily be showed, that from the Graecians they likewise took up and practiced
the burning of dead bodies, the places which they commonly used to this purpose
were by them called puticuli or culinae, and the pots or vessels in which they
preserved the bones and ashes of the burnt bodies, Vrnae, whereof I have seen
one in M. Chambers his keeping at Bath: but all the difficulty seems to
consist in this, when this custom began among them, and when it ceased, for
the former it is commonly held, that it was not in use among the Romans before
Sylla the Dictator, who having himself cruelly tyrannized upon the dead body
of Marius, and fearing lest the same measure might be showed to himself,
commanded that his body instantly upon his death should be burned, whereas Pli-
7. 54. only says, that he was thefirst of the Cornelian family that had his
body burnt: and Tully 2 de legibus restrains it more narrowly, Primus e
patritijs Cornelijs igni voluit cremari, he was the first of the Cornelian
nobility that commanded it, and he that attentively reads the Roman story will
easily find, that this custom was practiced among them long before Sylla,
even from the first foundation of Rome, so witnesses Ovid in his 4 de Fastis,
speaking of Remus the brother of Romulus.

Arsarosque artus vnxit.
The limbs that now were to be burnt
His brother did anoint.
And again.

Vltima plorato subdita flamma rogo est,
The last fire now was set unto his hearse.
After this Numa being by sect a Pythagorean, forbade his own body to be
burnt, as witnesses Plutarch in his life, which he needed not have done had
not the custom then been usual, and Tullus Hostilius his successor had not
his body therefore burnt because he was stricken dead with lightning, for so
was the Law After this again Tully in his second de legibus telsvs, that the
Law of the 12 Tables commanded, Hominem mortuum in vrbe ne sepelito, neve
vrito, let no dead body be buried or burned in the City, which (as he there
adds) was for fear their buildings might from thence take fire: now the Laws
of the 12 Tables were composed, as witnesses Gellius 20. 1. in the 300 year
after the foundation of the City, which was almost 400 years before Sylla; and
if any desire further satisfaction in this point, I refer him to the learned
and copious Annotations of Blasius Vigenerus in French upon the first Decade of
Livie, which Author himself has excellently translated into that language;
among other examples produced by him to this purpose, he makes it plain ou^ of
Livie lib. 8, that the body of the son of Manlius the Consul, (who contrary
to his fathers command fought out of his rank and was therefore by a command
from the same mouth put to death) was presently carried out of the camp and
burned with all military pomp, and this he assigns to the year 412 by his
computation above 270 years before the death of Sylla.

Now this practice of the Romans I have the longer insisted upon, partly for
the checking of a common error, holding that before Sylla the Romans burnt not
their dead bodies, and partly to show that many of those monstrous giantlike
bodies, which as well among the Romans as Graecians are said to have been
dug up, were undoubtedly burnt, but chiefly that hereby it may appear, that
the noble and useful practice of anatomizing men's bodies, was not in use among
them, neither indeed could it be, considering they held it unlawful, aspicere
humana exta, as Pliny speaks in his proeme to his 28 book, to look upon the
entrals of men's bodies, and Dion in his 55 tells us, that it was granted to
Tiberius to touch the body of Augustus, quod nefas alias erat, which was
otherwise unlawful, and from hence it was that their Vespillones, Coriarij,
Pollinctores, Libitinarij, and other officers of that kind employed about the
washing, the anointing, the carrying forth, the burning and providing things
necessary about the dead, were not suffered to live in the City, and the
bodies themselves were burnt without the City, and few there were that went
forth of the city gates to wait on the funerals of their nearest and dearest
friends: Sen. not. quest. 3 18


Now the Antiquity of this custom being cleared, a second doubt there is, when
it ceased, manifest then it is that it continued in use till the Antonins, and
tben began it by degrees to be disvsed, Macrobius witnessing in the seventh
book and seventh chapter of his Saturnals, that in his time it was in a manner
grown out of use, yet certain it is that the bodies of Pertinax and Severus
fifty years after were both burned, as reports Dion of the one, and Herodian
in his fourth book of the other, and near about this time it was that Galen
lived, so as I verily believe he never or very seldom opened the bodies of
men, I know that Riolan and Laurentius have both of them zealously defended him
against the Neotericks, who charge him with much weakness and ignorance in
this Art, but I cannot observe that either of them has produced so much as one
clear passage out of any part of his works, to prove that he ever so much as
once opened the body of a man, dogs indeed, and swine, and apes it appears
he opened, and once an Elephant, but for his usual opening of men's bodies, in
my mind they bring no sufficient proofs, which Laurentius himself well
perceiving, modestly concludes his answer to the first instance brought
against Galen with a verisimile est, it is likely that he cut up the bodies of
men.

But let us pass on from the Jews and Gentiles, to the Primitive Christians
who were (as their works show) professed adversaries to this practice.
Tertullian in the fourth chapt. of his book de anima, speaking of Herophilus,
doubts whether he may call him medicum or lanium, a Physician or a butcher, qui
hominem odijt vt nosset says he, who hated mankind that he might know it, and
S, Augustine de Civit. dei 22. 24. harpes much upon the same string, Etsi
medicorum diligentia nonnulla Crudelis quos anatomicos appellant lani^uit
corpora mortuorum: howbeit the ouerdiligent cruelty of some Physicians whom
they call Anatomists has butchered the bodies of the dead: And to like purpose
is that of Boniface, the eigth extrauag. commun. lib. 3. tit. 6. cap. 1. where
he severely threatens such with the thunderbold of excommunication irreuocable,
but only by the sea Apostolic, who exenterate dead bodies, and cut the flesh
from the bones, mangling it into gobbets, quod non solum (says he) diuinae
maiestatis conspectui abominabile plurimum redditur, sed etiam humanae
considerationis obtutibus occurrit vehementius abhorrendum which is a practice
abominable in the eyes both of God and men. Out of all which it appears that
this practice of anatomizing the dead bodies of men, so profitable to bring us
to the knowledge of our selves, and consequently of our maker, so necessary to
Physicians and Surgeans was never brought into the body of a perfect art, till
this latter age. Nos multa quotidie prioribus seculis incognita obseruamus: we
observe many Laurentius.
things utterly unknown to former ages: And this last age in truth has
yielded men singular in this art* Vesalius, Vassaeus, Varolius, Sylvius,
Fallopius, Piceolhominaeus, Columbus, Riolanus, Laurentius, who followed Henry
the fourth of France in his civil wars, and gained much experience by cutting
up the bodies of such as were slain in the field, vt videatur haec Ars nunc
summum perfectionis fastigium attigisse, they be his own words, so as this Art
now, and never before seems to have reached the very top of perfection.
Never was it in any age so illustrated with lively and exquisite pictures, so
encouraged with stipends, so furnished with schools, fitting instruments and
all manner of helps, and generally so honored as it is at this day. And
truly I have often not a little wondered with my self, that an University so
famous in foreign parts as this of Oxford, was never to my knowledge provided
of a public Lecture in this kind, till now; as neither was it for a garden of
simples, now in good forwardnes by the noble munificence of the Heroical Earl
of Danbie, nor of a History Lecture, nor of an Arabique, though it were long
since solemnly decreed in the Council of Vienna, that this University, as
likewise Paris, Bononia, Salamanca, and Rome (which were undoubtedly then
accounted the principal Universities in Christendom) should each of them have
maintained two professors in that language, as also in Chalde and Hebrew,
Clementinarum, lib. 5. Tit. 1. cap. 1.

Now for the knowledge of Simples, the other leg, as it were, upon which
Physic stands, as Theophraestus was in many things amended by Plynie, and
Plynie by Dioscorides, so has Dioscorides himself by the happy travells of
Ruellius, and Rouillius, and Leonardus Fuchsius, who in his Epistle to
Ioachimus Marquis of Brandenburg, tells us, that this part of Physic was a
while since so utterly neglected and defaced, that, had not God raised up
industrious and learned men to restore it, actum plane de Medicina Herbaria
fuisset, it had been utterly lost: But Hermolaus Barbarus was he, who by
translating Dioscorides out of Greek into Latin, and by adding his
Corrolarium thereunto touching the same subject, first recovered the ancient
luster thereof. And since, by reason of the discovery of many parts of the
world unknown to the Ancients, many plants, gummes, drugges, and mineralls,
are by Monaedus and others known to us, which they never heard of.

SECT. 5. Of the profitable use of extractions, and the Paracelsian Physic,
either wholly unknown to the Ancients, or little practiced by them
TO the perfiting of the Anatomicall and reviving of the Botanicall art in this
latter age; may be added a new kind of physic professed by a new sect of
Physicians, never heard of in the world before; and altogether differing from
the Ancients, as in name, in terms of art, so likewise in rules, in matter,
in method and manner of proceeding, as well for doctrine as practice* a founder
it had (if we may credit himself) descended of a noble and ancient family
among the Heluetians, the name which he gives himself Philippus, Theophrastus,
Bombastus, ab Hoenhaim, or Paracelsus, by which name he is now commonly known;
borne he was in or about the year 1494, and died at Salisburge in Germany in
the year 1541, being then but forty seven; a man strangely composed, as
Bullinger, and Gesner, and Operinus, a citizen of Basile (his bosome-friend and
individual companion from some years) have characterized him: without
learning, without civilitie, without religion, being never heard to pray, a
great hater of women, and yet an excessive lover of wine, exceedingly
vaineglorious in his words and writings, and yet sordide in his apparel, and
base in the company he willingly made choice of, which for the most part were
coach-men and carters, or bores of the country, and with these would he sit
up drinking all night, and (then seldom shifting himself) cast himself down
on a bed to sleep, prodigal he was in his expenses, yet seldom wanted money,
and sometimes having not a penny in his purse over night, he would draw forth
handfulls of gold in the morning, which made men believe he had indeed the art
of transmutation of metals, and that he carried with him the philosophers
stone in the pommell of his sword, which he always wore: he spent sometime in
most of the Universities in Christendom, consulting in matters of physic
with Doctors, Surgeans, keepers of bathes, wise women, Magitians, Alchimists,
Monks, and of all kind of people: And lastly, passing into Arabia, he there
likewise spent ten years more in the same studies, (if we may credit
Bickerus in Hermete rediuiuo) and so returning (as he there speaks) laden
with the spoils of the East; he brought to light in these parts of the world
the use of Hermeticall, Spagyricall, or Chymicall physic, (as they term
it.) So as where Galen mentions in his time but three sects of physicians,
Emperikes, Methodists, and Dogmatiques; we have now a fourth that go under the
name of Chymiques, Hermetiques, or Paracelsiaus, and a branch of them (as I
conceive, is the order Roseae Crusis) who treading in the steps of their
master, have changed Aristotle's 3 principles of natural bodies, matter, form,
and privation into Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; and from the several temper of
these three, they affirm all sicknesses and health to arise. I will not in all
things undertake the defense of them, neither can I if I would; the truth is,
they magnify themselnes too much, and ouervaluing themselves and their own
wits, and worth; they too much disesteeme the precepts and practice of the
Ancients; yet it cannot be denied, but by reason of their artificial
extractions, seperations, and preparations of their medicines; they have had
happy success in the curing of some desperate diseases, which in former ages
have bin thought incurable; and Paracelsus himself, even by the acknowledgment
of his adversaries, wrought wonders in the speedy healing of inveterate and
festered ulcers, for that he was able by mere art to make Homunculos little
men, or to raise the dead to life, or to prolong the life of a man to some
thousands of years, (as he vainly boasts of himself) is I confess no part
of my Creed. Well then, leaving their vanities to themselves, I doubt not but
the most learned Physicians of this age who stick most to Galen, (if they be
not led with faction or fancy, but with judgment, reason, and experience)
will easily confess at times a profitable use of the Paracelsian extractions
in their practice, as being less loathsome, and cumbersome, and withal more
active and vigorous, more spiritfull and operative; as on the other side it
must be granted, that being applied without good advise and moderation, they
cannot but prove dangerous, by reason of their peircing and searching nature;
so as the joining of the Galenicall and Paracelsian Physic together, making
use of the^ both as occasion serves, is by De velere and nova medicina.
Audernacus, de Chymicoru^ cum Galeni^ consensis.
Sennertus, Phrarmac^paea dogmaticorum restituta.
Quercitan, and some others of best note, held the best and safest course. I
cannot here omit Quercitanes words to this purpose: Si Hiprocrates, vel
Aristoteles, vel ipse etiam Galenus nunc reuiuisceret, obstupesceret certe tot
ornamentis artem hanc adauctam atque illustratam, tot novis inventis ditatam,
tot mirificis operationibus confirmatam: If Hippocrates, or Aristotle^ or Galel
himself were now alive, they would wonder to see this art enlarged and
beautified with so many ornaments, enriched with so many new inventions,
confirmed by so many strange practices and experiments. Whereupon he infers,
verissimum itaque est quod sapientum quidam medicorum nostri seculi ait,
creurunt cum ingenijs and ipsae scientiae artesque magna and incredibilia
incrementa sumpserunt: It is most true, which one of the wisest Physicians of
our age affirms, together with good wits the sciences sprang up, and the Arts
are incrediblely inproued.

CAP. 8. Touching History, Poetry, and the Art Military.
SECT. 1. That the modernes far exceeded the Ancients in Chronology and
Cosmographie the two eyes of History.
AS the two legs of Physic are Anatomy and Herbarie, so the two eyes of
History are Chronology and Topographie, computation of times, and description
of places: in both which it is certain, that the Modernes have so far
exceeded the Ancients, as these seem to have seen nothing in a manner in
regard of them. First then for Chronology, how dimsighted are the Ancients in
the computation of times, how miserably do they wander up and down in the
dark, and knock their heads each against other, and how excellently have
latter Writers, and specially Joseph Scaliger in that most elaborate work of
his de emendatione Temporum, cleared those mists, and chaced away that
darkness. It is to this purpose a notable speech of Causabons, Scientia
temporum quantopere Ex. 1. in Baron, p. 150.
fuerit post renatas liter as exculta, quam admiranda acceperit incrementa,
asinus est qui ignorant inter literatos, malignus and beneficioru^ dei ingratus
aestimator qui dissimulat, stupenda enim sunt quae summi viri in nostra
praesertim Gallia and Germania praestiterunt. He that knows not how much the
knowledge of times has been labored since the new birth of good letters,
among the learned, can be held but an ass, and he who dissembles it, envious
and an ungrateful vnder-valuer of Gods blessings toward this age: admirable
things they are which in this kind men of note have achieved, specially in
our France and Germany. The learned works in Chronology of Funccius,
Buntingius, Bucholcerus, Helvicus, Calvisius, Genebrardus, Gordonus, Salianus,
Torniellus, and our English Lively (of whose skill in Chronology the same
Causabon makes honorable mention cont. Bar. Exer. 16. n. 13. their works, I
say, published to the world, make his words good, and fully testify what he
there affirms*

Now for Topographie, the other eye of History, Strabo often, and that
deservedly censures Eratostenes, Hipparchus, Polybius, Possidonius, the gravest
Authors among the Ancients, and Ptolomie sharply takes up Marinus Tyrius,
though otherwise a diligent Writer: yet both Strabo and Ptolomy themselves, if
they be compared with our latter Geographers, Hondius, Mercator, Thevet,
Merula, Ortelius, Maginus, how defective, how imperfect will they be found. The
ignorance of former ages in this point was so gross, that what time Pope
Clement the sixth, as we read in Robert of Auesbury, had elected Lewis of
Spain to be Prince of the Fortunate Islands, and for to aid and assist him,
mustered Soldiers in France and Anno 1344.
Italy, our Contrymen were verily persuaded that he was chosen Prince of
Britain, as one (says he) of the Fortunate Islands: yea and our very Ligier
Ambassadors there with the Pope, were so deeply settled in this opinion, that
forthwith they withdrew themselves from Rome, and hasted with all speed into
England, there to certify their Countrymen and friends of the matter: Yet
that which to me seems more strange, is that those two learned Clearkes
Lactantius and Augustine, should with that earnestness deny the being of any
Antipodes. Their words are worth the noting, thereby to see their confidence
and eagerness in the maintenance of so evident a mistake. Quid illi, says
Lactantius, qui esse Divi^arum Inst^* 1. l. 3. c. 24.
contrarios vestigijs nostris Antipodes putant, number aliquid loquuntur? aut est
quisquam tam ineptus qui credat esse homines quorum vestigia sunt superiora
quam capita? aut ibi quae apud nos jacent inversa pendere? fruges and arbores
deorsum versus crescere, pluvias, and nives, and grandinem sursum versus cadere
in terram? and miratur aliquis hortos pensiles inter septem mira narrari, quam
Philosophi and agros, and maria, and vrbes, and montes pensiles faciunt? What
shall we think of them who give out there are Antipodes, that walk opposite
to us, do they speak any thing to the purpose, or is there any so blockish as
to believe there are men whose feet are higher then their heads, or that those
things there hang, which with us lie on the ground? that the plants and trees
spring downward, that the snow and rain, and hail fall upward upon the
earth? and need any man marvel that hanging gardens are counted in the number
of the seven wonders of the world, since the Philosophers have made both fields
and seas, cities and mountains all hanging. Lactantius is herein seconded by
Augustine: Quod vero and Antipodes esse fabulantur, id est homines a contraria
De Civit. Dei l. 16. c. 9.
part terrae vbi sol oritur quando occidit nobis, adversa pedibus nostris
calcare vestigia, nulla ratione credendum est. Their fable of the Antipodes,
that is, men dwelling in the opposite part of the earth where the Sun rises
when it sets to us, having their feet opposite to ours, is a matter altogether
incredible, and by no means to be believed. But Zachary Bishop of Rome, and
Boniface Bishop of Mentz, led (as it seems) by the authority of these Fathers,
went farther herein, condemning one Virgilius Aventinus in hist. (...) an. 745.
a Bishop of Saltzburg as an Heretic only for holding that there were
Antipodes. But time and travel have now discovered the contrary so evidently,
that we may as well doubt the being of a Sun in the firmament as the
experimental cleerenes of this truth.

And as evident it is now likewise found to be by certain experience, that
under the middle or burning Zone) which the Ancients by means of excessive
heat, held altogether inhabitable) there is as healthful, temperate, and
pleasant dwelling as any-where in the world, as appears by the relations of
Benzo, Acosta, and others. Besides the Ancients (as it seems) were altogether
ignorant of the new World discovered in the year 1492 by Columbus, now known
by the name of America or the West Indies, whatsoever from Platoes Atlantis, or
Salomons Ophir be slightly pretended to the contrary: yet I confess I have
often wondered not a little at Senecaes bold prepheticall spirit touching that
Discovery. (...) in (...).


Venient annis Secula seris,
Quibus Oceanus Vincula rerum
Laxet, and ingens Pateat tellus,
Typhisque novos Detegat orbs,
Nec sit terris Vltima Thule,
In latter times an age shall rise
Wherein the Ocean shall the bands
Of things enlarge: there shall likewise
New Worlds appear, and mighty Lands
Typhis discover, then Thule
The Worlds end shall no longer be.
This prophecy we have found fulfilled not only in the discovery of those
vast Regions before unknown, but in opening by means of Navigation, and the
help of the Compass every creek and corner of the habitable World, worth the
knowing: so that now it has, and never before had it through lights made in it.
Nay particular countries have bin of late years most exactly described by
several Writers. The Netherlands by Lewis Guicciardine, Great Britain by the
renowned Camden, and the like by others. Neither have there wanted some who
have descended to Provinces and Shires, Master Carew to the survay of
Cornwall, and Master Lambert to the perambulation of Kent, and Master Burton
to the description of Lecestershire: yea particular Cities, Rome, Venice,
Paris, London, and the Houses of great Princes have found their particular Maps
and delineations so fully and perfectly expressed, that a man who never saw
them but in representation, may now speak as particularly of them, as if he
had been borne and bred in them.

SECT. 2. That the defect of the Ancients in Natural and Ecclesiastical
history is justly corrected by the moderns, and in Civil history the moderns
are matched with the Ancients: And of the knowledge of weights and measures,
and the true valuation of coins recovered and restored by latter Writers,
which through the neglect of former ages had well nigh perished.
THe body of History branches it self into History Natural,
Ecclesistasticall, and Civil. For the first it is most certain, that even
Aristotle himself and Pliay were ignorant of many things, and wrote many not
only uncertain, but now convinced of manifest error and absurdity, Conradus
Gesnerus has labored this part of History most industriously: but others who
have undertaken several pieces of this burden more exactly, Some of birds, de
animalibus insectis, crustaceis, testaceis, Zoophytis, as Aldrouandinus. Some
of fishes, as Rondoletius, some of Bathes as Baccius, and Blanthellus, some of
Metals, as Georgius Agricola, and some of plants and vegetables, as Mathiolus,
Ruellius, Fuchius, to whom may be added the commendable pains of Gerrard in
our own language. And some others again purposely of some one particular
kind of beasts, or birds, or fishes, or plants, or bathes, or metals.

History Ecclesiastical has likewise been shamefully abused by thrusting
into it many fabulous narrations of the lives of Saints and deaths of Martyrs.
Baronius, and before him the Magdeburgians, have both very diligently, though
with different purposes traveled herein; in so much that now between them
both, we have made up a complete history of the Church, which former ages
never saw.

Civil history indeed the Graecians and Romans excelled in, but with much
partiality on both sides, and many speches they have put into the mouths of
Commanders and others merely fained, and besides they lay in darkness and
obscurity, for the space of many hundred years together, till this latter age,
in which they were not only drawn into the light, but aemulated and equalled.
Cornelius Tacitus so much magnified, Sr Henry Savill sharply censures for his
style, taking occasion from those words in the life of Agri cola, bonum virum
facile crederes, magnum libenter: at te (says he) Corneli Tacit bonum
historicum facile credimus, bonum oratorem crederemus libe^ter, In his annot.
were it not for this and some other sayings of the like making: Fuit illi
viro, says Tacitus (judging of Seneca as we may of him) ingenium amaenum, 13
Annal.
and temporis illius auribus accommodatum: How that age was eared long or round
I cannot define, but sure I am it yielded a kind of sophisticate eloquence and
riming harmony of words, where-vnder was small matter in sense; when there
seemed to be most in appearance, and diverse instances he brings out of
Tacitus; and as Sr Henry Savill taxes him for his phrase, so does Strada for
his history, in that not content Lib. 1. prol. 2.
with bare relations he adds of his own conjectures, animadversions,
interpretations of actions, sometimes savouring of detraction, sometimes of
flattery, and for the most part, as it best served his turn, to make way for
the displaying of his wit in his political observations and precepts, as he
shows by diverse passages taken out of him, accusing him likewise of
irreligion: and with Strada herein accords Lipsius, who calls Tacitus in notis.
immemorem, secumque pugnantem, unmindful of what he had said, and crossing
himself: Bonamicus, sectantem very speciem relicta veritate, a follower In
sermo: Poet: ser: 5 de verissim
of the shadow of truth, leaving the truth it self: Caesar Baronius who
convinces him of envy, and lying: Tom. 1. Annal. lib. 21. cap. 24 as likewise
does Marsilius Ficinus de Christiana religione, cap. 35. and Dion nepos in vita
probi Imperatoris. And to pass by others, Tertullian, who in Apolog. c. 16.
lived in the next age after him, styles him mendaciorum loquacissimum, a loud
liar; and in truth his vain and fabulous narration touching the Jews, in the
last book of his history, together with his virulency against the Christians,
annal. 15. 10. show him to have bin none other, whatsoever he pretend to the
contrary: But I leave him and descend to modern Historiographers.

Sr Walter Rawleigh, for so far as he has gone in the history of the world,
is matchable with the best of the Ancients. Francis Guicciardine, Comines,
Thuanus not inferior to any: and the particular histories of most countries,
have received, as it were, new light and fresh colors in this latter age. The
Spanish from Mariana, and Turquet; the French from Peter Matthew, and Du Serres,
the high Dutch from Paulus Iouius and Sleidan the low Dutch from Meteranus, the
Scottish from Buchanan, the Irish from Stannihurst, the Sicilian from Fazelus,
the Turkish from Knoles, and for our own story, it lay dispersed in the
narrations of several writers, and those for the most part Monks, till
Polidor Virgill collected it into one body: but in my judgment Sr Henry
Savill and Mr Camden have better deserved, by presenting us the Authors
themselves in two several volumes: Some pieces hereof we have very well done
in our own language, as the three Norman Kings, and Henry the fourth by Dr
Hayward: Edward the fifth, or rather Richard the 3 by Sr Thomas More; Henry the
seventh by my Lord of S. Albanes; the life of Q. Elizabeth by M. Camden since
translated. Neither have there been wanting such as have written, and that
very commendablely the lives of particular men, eminent for virtue, or
learning, or place. Onuphrius and Cicarella come nothing short of Anastasius
and Platina in the lives of the Popes. The lives of the Emperors, Petrus
Mexias has well performed. Serrarius of the Archbishops of Mentz, and Matthew
Parker Archbishop of Canterbury of his predecessors. Barlet has with good
approbation published the life of Scanderbegge, and Catena of Pius Quintus,
Doctor Humphreys of Bishop Jewel, and Sir George Paul of Archbishop
Whitegift: and it were to be wished that this kind of history were more in
use, as well for the honor of the deceased, as the incitement of the living; in
which kind Theuet, and Paulus Iouius, and the right Reverend father in God
Doctor Godwin, now Bishop of Hereford, deserve both praise and imitation.

An appendix of history is the right valuation of weights, and measures, and
coins, which though they were doubtless known to the Ancients who used them;
yet since for many ages past, the knowledge of them has much grown out of
use, and was in a manner lost; which bred a marveilous great mistake and
confusion in history, until by the worthy pains of Budaeus, Gesnerus,
Alciatus, Glarianus, Agricola, Villalpandus, Mariana, and our learned
Countryman Edward Brierwood, late professor of Astronomy in Gresham
College, it was again regained and restored: And if any desire to see all
that have written of this subject, I refer him to Gaspar Wolphius his
treatise, entitled Virorum illustrium alphabetica enumeratio qui de ponderibus
ac mensurarum doctrina scripserunt.

SECT. 3. A Comparison between the Greek and Latin, as also between the
ancienter and latter Latin Poets, and those that have written in other
languages, and that poetry as other arts has fallen and risen again in this
latter age.
TOuching Poetry for the inventiue part thereof, Sir Phillip Sydneyes Arcadia
is in my judgment nothing inferior to the choicest piece among the Ancients,
and for the Poets themselves it is true of the most ancient, both among the
Greeks and Latins which Bartas has of Marrot.

Thee Marrot I esteem even as an old Colosse
All soyled, broken, ouergrowen with moss,
Worn picture, Tomb defaced, not for fine work I see,
But in devout regard of their antiquity.
Volcatius Sedigitus having named nine of the Roman Comedians, adds in
Gellius, 15. 24.
the close of all.

-- Decimum addo antiquitatis causa Ennium.
Ennius as tenth I add
Because he ancient'st is.
This controversy being, it seems on foot in Horace his time, (as in all
ages it has bin) he wittily demands this question.

Si meliora dies vt vina poemata reddat,
Scire velim pretium chartis quotus arroget annus.
If as time betters wine it betters Poems too,
Tell me how many years does give them price enough.
And in the end concludes,

Qui veteres ita miratur laudatque Poetas
Vt nihil anteferat, nihil illis comparet, errat.
Who praises and admires old Poets much does err,
If naught he dare compare, or naught to them prefer.
Hercules Ciophanus witnesses, that Planudes well knowing that Grecce had not
a Poem so abounding with delight and beauty, as Ovids Metamorphosis translated
it into that language. And generally the Lattine Poets, who came after the
Greek in time, are notwithstanding by Scaliger Poetices, l. 5. c. 2.
preferred before them; And by name Virgill before Homer, Virgilius artem ab eo
rudem acceptam lectioris naturae studijs atque iudicio ad summum extulit
fastigium perfectionis: Virgill receiving from him an unpolished art by the
study and judgment or a choiser temper, raised it to the utmost point of
perfection. And again, Equidem vnum illum censeo sciuisse quid esset non
ineptire, vnum esse inter omnes vnicum, singulis autem instar Ibid.
omnium. Truly I think he only knew what it was not to trifle, that he was
the only one amongst them all, and instead of all being compared with any one.
To which I know not what can be added, except that of Macrobius exceed it:
Haec est Maronis gloria vt nullius laudibus crescat, nullius vituperatione
minuatur: This is Virgills commendation, that a man can neither add to him by
praising him, nor take from him by dispraysing him: Yet if I should match him
with Ariosto or Torquato Tasso in Italian, Bartas in French, or Spencer in
English, I think I should not much wrong htm. Of the latter of which, our
great Antiquary in the life of Q. Elizabeth anno 1598, gives this testimony,
Musis adeo arridentibus natus, vt omnes Anglicos superioris aeui poetas (ne
Chaucero quidem conciue excepto) superaret, he was borne so far in favor of
the Muses, that he excelled all the English Poets of former ages, not excepting
Chaucer himself his fellow citizen. And among the Latin Poets, as they began
their infancy or childhood in Liuius Andronicus, Ennius, Idem Scalig. Ib.
Accius, Pacuvius, Neuius, Plautus; so they came to their full strength in
Terence, Catullus, Tibullus, Ovid, Horace, Virgill, plus est exacti iudicij in
vna Comaedia Tere^ttana quam in Plautinis omnibus, there is more Eras^us.
exa^ judgment in one of Terence his Comedies, then in all those of Pla^s.
They declined in Martial, Iuvenall, Silius, Statius: grew old in Serenus,
Sidonius, Severinus, Ausonius; but sprang up and reflourished again in
Palingenius, Aonius, Politianus, Cerratus, Vida, Pontanus, Sanazarus,
Fracastorius; Quos cum quovis veterum compares, multis and non ignobilibus
anteponas, says the same Scaliger, whom a man may safely compare with any of
the Ancients, and prefer before many of them, and those not of the lowest
rank. Crinitus his censure of the Latin Poets differs not much from this of
Scaligers: and Famianus Strada has so In 5. libris de Poetis Latinis.
well both censured and imitated the chief of them, that he comes nothing
short of the Authors themselves, which is the more to be wondered at; in that
therein he is to act so different parts, and to apply himself to so different
veins; nay his imitation of Claudian in expressing a controversy between a
Lutist and a Nightingale for quicknes and life, may without prejudice be
equalled with any thing that Antiquity can boast of in that kind.

It is true that (Mantuan excepted) few of the Monks or Friars, (who were
counted the only Scholars for a while) excelled in Poetry, for the most part
they only delighted in rhyming, without either sharpness of wit, or neatness
of style, and sometimes they wanted all three: witness those poor verses upon
Venerable Bede.

Presbyter hic Beda requiescit carne sepultus,
Dona Christ animam in coelis gaudere per aevum,
Daque illi Sophiae d'ebriari font cui jam
Suspiravit ovans intentus semper amore.
Presbyter Bedes corse rests buried in this grave;
Grant Christ his soul in Heaven eternal joys may have:
Give him of to be drunk the well of wisdom, to
Which with such joy and love he strived and breathed so.
Which verses William of Malmesburie, though himself a Monk, bitterly De
rebus gestis Anglorum l. 1.
censures, as being shameful ones, unworthy the monument of so worthy a man:
Neither can the shame, says he, be lessned by any kind of excuse, that in the
Monastery, which whiles he lived, flourished as a School of good letters, not
a man could be found to commend his memory to posterity, but in so barren and
slender a style: Yet were these tolerable verses in regard of those which
passed with applause in succeeding ages, the famous King Ethelbert had this
Epitaph set upon him.

Rex Ethelbertus hic clauditur in poliandro,
Fana pians certus Christo meat absque Meandro.
King Ethelbert lies here
Closed in this Polyander,
For building Churches sure he goes
To CHRIST without Maeander.
Gervasius de Blois, son to King Stephen, and Abbot of Westminster, was there
buried with this,

De Regum genere pater hic Gervasius ecce
Est and defunctus, mors rapit omne genus.
Even father Gervase borne of Kings race,
Lo is dead, thus death all sorts does deface.
Upon the Great Seal of Edward the Confessor was this verse ing^en,

Sigillum Eaduuardi, Anglorum Basilei.
But I most pity the mishap of Francis Petrarch a man of singular learning and
himself an excellent Poet as those times afforded, that his bones could find
no better an Epitaph then this at Arqua in Italy.

Frigida Francisci lapis hic tegit ossa Petrarchae
Suscipe virgo parens animam, sat virg^ne parce
Fessaque jam terris coeli requiesc^t in (...)*
This stone does cover the cold bones of ^anc. Petrarch,
Thou Virgin Mother take his soul, thou Christ pardon grant,
Now weary of the earth he rests in Heavens Arc.
But when together with the regeneration of other kinds of learning Poetry
likewise grew in request, among an infinite number which excelled in this
kind, I will only instance in two, Ronsard and Buchanan: of the former of
which Pasquier has written this singular Epigram.

Seu tibi numeri Maroniani, Lib. 1.

Seu placent Veneres Catulli^,
Sive tu lepidum velis Petrarcham,
Sieve Pindaricos modos refer,
Ronsardus numeros Maronianos,
Ronsardus Veneres Catullianas,
Neonon Italicum refert Petrarcham,
Neonon Pindari^um refert leporem.
Quin and tam been Pinda^ ^mulatur,
Quin and tam vary expr^mit Petrarcham,
Atque Virgilium, and meum Catullum
Hunc ipsum vt magis aemulentur illi:
Rursus tam graviter refert Maronem,
Vt nullus putet hunc Catullianum.
Rursus tam lepide refert Catullum,
Vt nullus putet hunc Maronianum,
Et cum sit Maro totus and Catullus,
Totus Pindarus, and Petrarcha totus,
Ronsardus tamen est sibi perennis,
Quod si nunc redivivus extet vnus
Catullus, Maro, Pindarus, Petrarcha,
Et quotquot veteres fuere vates,
Ronsardum nequeant simul refer
Vnus qui reliquos refert Poetas.
Whether thee Maro's number please,
Or elegant Catullus vain,
Or Petrarchs Thuscan gracefulness,
Or Theban Pindars lofty strain:
Ronsard does Maro's rimes express;
And elegant Catullus vain,
And Petrarchs Thuscan gracefulness,
And Theban Pindars lofty strain.
He so expresses Pindars style,
So does Catullus emulate,
Virgil and Petrarch, that the while
They all seem him to imitate.
Grave Maro he resembles so,
None would him think Catullian:
So elegant Catullus too;
None would him think Maronian,
Though all Catullus, all Virgill,
All Pindar he and Petrarch be,
Yet the same Ronsard is he still.
Maro, Catullus might we see,
Pindar or Petrarch live again,
And all the old Poets more or less
All jointly hit not Ronsards vain,
Who only does them all express.
To which we may add Pithaeus his Epitaph upon the same Ronsard.

Sum poetarum quos prisca and nostra tulerunt
Quosque ferent Galli^ posthuma saecla tuis:
Parce nec ista tibi veluti data justa putato
Sed tanquam summis manibus inferias.
Greatest of Poets whom old or present times,
Or future to thy French shall ere bring forth,
Pardon, these are not rights fitting thy worth.
But to thy great ghost like some sprinkling rimes.
Of the latter Joseph Scaliger gives this testimony,

Namque ad supremum perducta poetica culmen
In te stat, nec quo progrediatur habet:
Bomani imperij fuit olim Scotia limes,
Romani eloquij-Scotia limes erit.
Unto the highest pitch have thou advanced Poetry,
Raised to the height in thee it stands, and higher cannot fly.
Scotland sometime the limit was of Roman Empirie,
By thee of Roman eloquence Scotland the bound shall be.
SECT. 4. In military matters the Romans exceeded the Graecians, and have
themselves been matched, if not surpassed in latter ages, in weapons, in
fortifications, in stratagems, but specially in sea fights.
THough Mars and the Muses have little affinity, and seldom lodge together,
yet will I not fear to join the Art Military next to Poetry. And though the
knowledge hereof belong not to my Profession, yet I dare say, it will not be
gainsaid, but as Alexander herein exceeded his Predecessors, so did Julius
Caesar him: and Sir Walter Rawleigh in his history of the World part. 1. lib.
5. cap. 1.. 1.
generally the Romans the Graecians; yet a worthy Knight and expert Captain
himself demanding the question, whether was the better Soldier, the Grecian
or Roman, makes answer the Englishman. And truly I think, he who well
considers what noble acts Edward the third, the black Prince his son, and
Henry the fifth performed in France, and upon what terms and conditions, with
what numbers, and against what enemies, will easily believe, that he spoke not
so much out of affection as judgment: The Grecian built his glory and erected
his triumphs of victory and trophies of honor, upon the delicacie of the
Persian and nakedness of the Indian, and the Roman for the most part, upon the
division and rudeness of poor barbarous nations; but the English his; upon
the ruins of a stout warlike, and every way accomplished Nation: And for
Caesar himself, if I should parallel him with Charlemaigne, Hnnniades,
Tamerlane, Castriot, Ziska, or the great Henry of France, I think I should not
disparage him. Of which latter Pythaeus, comparing him with the great
Alexander, has composed his Epigram.

Cui palma vestrum deferatur bellica
Certavit orbis, resque stetit anceps diu,
Sed mors secundum; Henrice, te litem dedit
Fe^itque primum and vltimum simul ducem.
Which of you twain the warlike palm should wear
Has the world strove, and long bin at a pause,
But death O Harry gave to thee the cause
Both first and last of captains name to bear.
The armor and weapons now used in the wars, as well for offense as defense,
are nothing inferior to the Ancient, nay many of them are doubtless more
commodious, and some much more terrible: what childish weapons were the
long-bow and crosse-bow, if we regard annoyance of the enemy, in comparison of
the Gunne and great Ordinance: and yet nothing so many are now slain in the
wars as then: so as the present are both of more ready dispatch, and for the
most part in conclusion of the war less bloody. I am not ignorant that
discourses have been written by soldiers on both sides, some preferring the
bow before the gunne, others the gunne before the bow, but the latter have
been by the most judicious preferred before the former, and time and
experience have found their judgment true.

But for the matter of Fortification, there is no question, but this age
exceedes any that has gone before it, as far as we can trace the prints and
footsteps of Antiquity. It being now brought into Art, the professors whereof
we name Ingeners, a word unknown to our Ancestors, at least in that sense:
But the Italians are they who in this Art have showed themselves most skillful,
as well in the precepts as practice thereof, and have carried away the Bell from
all other Nations, as may appear both by their books and works.

And for Stratagems of war, whether we take them in their projects or
effects, I conceive those of latter ages to be nothing inferior to those of
ancient times; howsoever Policaenus and Julius Frontinus in their several
books of that subject be pleased to admire them: What a blunt invention was
that of the Trojane horse, in comparison of the surprise of Amiens by the
Spaniard; or of Breda by the states of the united Provinces, in the
Netherlands; or the disordering of the Spanish fleate, by Sir Francis Drake in
88: But that recorded by Sir Walter Rawleigh in the fourth book of his first
part of the History of the world, and acted in Cap. 2. parag. 18
Queen Mary's time, is in my judgment matchable to any that ever yet I heard
or read of. He thus relates it: The Island of Sarke joining to Garnesay, and of
that government, was surprised by the French, and could never have been
recovered again by strong hand, having corn and cattle enough upon the
place, to feed so many men as would serve to defend it; and being every way so
inaccessable, as it might be held against the great Turk; yet by the industry
of a Gentleman of the Netherlands, it was in this sort regained: He anchored in
the road with one ship of small burden, and pretending the death of his
Merchant, besought the French, being some thirty in number, that they might
bury their Merchant in hallowed ground, and in the Chapel of that Isle;
offering a present to the French of such commodities as they had aboard:
Whereto (with condition that they should not come a shore with any weapon, no
not so much as with a knife) the French men yielded: Then did the Flemings put a
coffin into their boat, not filled with a dead carcass, but with swords,
Targets, and Harquebushes. The French received them at their landing, and
searching every of them so narrowly, as they could not hide a penknife, gave
them leave to draw their coffin up the rocks with great difficulty; some part
of the French took the Flemish boat and rowed aboard the ship to fetch the
commodities promised, and what else they pleased; but being entered, they were
taken and bound. The Flemings on the land, when they had carried their coffin
into the Chapel, shut the door to them, and taking their weapons out of the
coffin, set upon the French: they run to the cliffe and cry to their company
aboard the Fleming to come to succor, but finding the boat charged with
Flemings, yielded themselves and the place.

Lastly, for Sea Fight, this age undoubtedly surpasses the Ancient, theirs
being but boys play in comparison of ours. What poor things were their
Galleys to our ships, their pikes and stone-bowes and slings, to our Canon and
musket shot; how untowardly the managing of their vessels, in regard of that
skill, which latter ages have found out and practiced: And herein I dare match
our own Nation (if perchance the Hollander have not gotten the start of us)
with any in the world: only it were to be wished, that some worthy pen would
undertake the reducing of these kinds of fights into an Art, as many have done
the landseruice, by setting down rules and precepts for it, gathered out of
observation: Sir Richard Hawkins has done somewhat in this kind, but brokenly
and glancingly, intending chiefly a discourse of his own voyages: Sir Walter
Rawleigh tells us in his history of the world, that himself had entered upon
such a work, at the command of Prince Lib. 5. c. 1. p. 6.
Henry, but upon his death put it by: The intendment was noble, and the writer
doubtless very able; so as it were to be wished, that those pieces and fragments
which he left behind him, touching that subject, were sought up and brought to
light, that they might serve, if not for sufficient directions in matter of
practice; yet for patterns and delineations to such as would farther advance
and perfect so worthy a business; there being no one thing (as I conceive)
which can be more important for the state, or more concern the safety and
welfare of this Island.

CAP. 9. Touching Grammar, Rhetorique, Logic, the Mathematiques, Philosop, by
Architecture, the Arts of Painting and Navigation.
SEC. 1. Touching Grammar, Rhetorique, and Logic.
But leaving these considerations to Soldiers, let us return to our own
Element, taking a view of the liberal sciences, among which Grammar deservedly
challenges the first rank, as being indeed the key that opens the door to
the rest. This latter age has herein excelled so far, that all the great
learned Scholars, who have of late risen, specially if they adhered to the
reformed Churches, have been by the Friars, and such like people, in a kind of
scorn termed Grammarians: But these Grammarians are they, who by the help of
Phylologie, and the languages have discovered so many forgeries and
supposititious writings, now by all acknowledged so to be, which before passed
as current, as well in the works of the Fathers of the Church, as profane
Authors. These are they, who have presented us with so many exact Translations
out of Greek and Hebrew into Latin, and again out of Latin into other
languages. And howsoever Albericus Gentilis, and some others have written in
defense of the Latinity of that translation of the Bible, which goes under the
name of the Vulgar; yet can it not be denied, but it is justly accused of much
incongruity and barbarism, which by latter Translations have been reformed.
These are they, who have vindicated infinite Authors from a number of foul
corruptions, which by tract of time had crept upon them, through the ignorance
or negligence of Transcribers or Printers or both: So that they have herein in
a manner restored the Authors to themselves, making them speak in their own
words and sense; and besides by annotations, animadversions, commentaries and
expositions, by the search and help of coins, old Epitaphs, inscriptions, and
such like remainders of Antiquity, have further added a marveilous great light
unto them.

In the next place, Rhetorique presents it self, which in truth was brought
to the height amongst the Graecians and Romans, specially whiles their states
remained popular: But in the general declination and decay of Arts which
followed after, this likewise was well near extinguished, that little life of
it which remained, being reserved only in the predicancie of Postillers, or
the patheticall sermons of Friars, till Sadoletus, Bembus, Muretus, and others
revived and reduced it to its ancient luster.

Logic indeed is it, wherein we are thought to be most defective in regard of
former ages; and it is true, that the Schoolmen had set their stock, the
utmost of their endeavors upon this part of learning, their whole life being
in a manner little else but a perpetual wrangling and altercation, and that
many times rather for victory and ostentation of wit, then a sober and serious
search of truth: so as their entrance being vain, their end was likewise
fruitless. What huge volumes have they compiled of the Predicables and
Predicaments? as if in them consisted the very spirit and soul of Logic;
whereas in truth they are rather an Appendix or preparatiue unto it, then part
of it. By which means they kept men so long in the porch, that they entered not
into the house till it was more then time to go out of it. Latter ages finding
this intolerable inconvenience have well compacted the body of this Art into a
lesser compass, (yet so as Aristotle's Text is not to be neglected) and to this
body have they not improperly added the doctrine of Methods as a necessary
limb thereof: whereas we do not find that anciently, it was so held either by
the Founders or principal Masters of this science, or at leastwise they have
left us no sufficient Rules and precepts touching this most useful part. Even
Hooker himself (though otherwise no friend to Ramystry) acknowledges that it
is of mavelous quick dispatch, 1. 6.
showing them that have it as much almost in three days, as if it dwelt three
score years with them: and again, that the mind of man is thereby restrained,
which through curiosity, does many times with peril wade farther in the
search of truth then were convenient. And for Raymundus Lullius (a man it
seems of a strong brain) some great wits are of opinion, that by his ars
breuis greater matters may in the sciences be more speedily effected, then by
any helps of the ancients that went before him.

SECT. 2. Touching Astronomy and Geometry, as also the Physics and
Metaphysics.
FOr the Mathematiques, Regio-Montanus might in Ramus his judgment safely
enough compare with the best of the Ancients: Noriberga Schol: Math. l. 2
tum Regiomontano fruebatur, Mathematici inde and studij and operis gloriam
tantam adepta, vt Tarentum Archyta, Syracusae Archimedi Bizantium Proclo,
Alexandria Ctesybio non justius quam Noriberga Regio-Montano gloriari possit:
Then did Norinberg enjoy Regio-Montanus, and from thence purchased so great
honor both of the study and practice of the Mathematiques, that Tarentum could
not more justly glory in Archytas, nor Syracuse in Archimedes, nor Bizantium in
Proclus, nor Alexandria in Ctesybius, then might Norinberg in Regio-Montanus. I
will only touch the two most noble parts thereof, Astronomy and Geometry. It
was the opinion of the greatest part of the Ancients, not only Grecians,
Egyptians, Arabians, and Hebrews, but many Doctors of the Christian Church,
as appears by Espencaeus in his Treatise de Coelorum animatione, that the
Heavens, or at least the stars were living bodies, informed with quickening
souls. It was likewise the opinion of Origin, and Chrysostom, and his Master
Eusebius Emissenus, that the stars were not fixed in the Heavens, as nails in
a Cart wheel, or knots in a piece of timber, but moved in it as fishes in the
Sea, or birds in the Air. Nay Philastrius goes so far, as to condemn the
opinion of their fixednesse for an heresy: Hae^esi 82.
Multi scriptores Ecclesiastici coeli rotunditatem non modo negarunt, sed etiam
sacris literis adversari existimarunt, says Pererius in his second book and
third question upon Genesis; many of the Ecclesiastical Writers not only
denied the sphaericall or circular figure of the Heavens, but were of opinion
that it crossed the holy Scriptures. S. Augustine himself in diverse places
seems to make a doubt of it; but Chrysostom in his Homilies upon the epistle
to the Hebrews dare challenge any that should defend it, and herein is he
followed by Theodoret and Theophilact. But these fancies are now so generally
cried down, that to reviue them would be counted no less then folly, and to
defend them absurdity. In how many things are Aratus and Eudoxus corrected by
Ptolomy, and Ptolomy himself by Regiomontanus, Alphonsus, Purbachius,
Copernicus: and they again by Clavius, Tycho-Braye, Galilaeus, Kepler, and
others. It was the error of Aristotle; that via lactea was a meteor, and not
only of Aristotle, but almost all before him that there were but eight
Celestial Spheres; after this Timocaris about 330 years before Christ found
out nine, but about the year of Christ 1250, Alphonsus discovered ten, and the
received opinion now is, that there are eleven, the highest of all being held
immovable, the seat of Angels and blessed spirits. And thus we see how Truth
is the daughter of Time, how one day teaches another, and one night certifieth
another; which is likewise verified in the admirable invention of composing the
Ephemerides, unknown to Ptolomy and the Ancients, who for want of the use of
it were forced by Tables to make their supputations in a most toylesome manner,
who was the first inventor thereof I am not certain, says Cardan de rerum
varietate lib. 11. cap. 59: but Purbachius was the first who seems to have
brought it to light, after whom Regiomontanus enlarged it, but Zelandinus and
others to have perfected it, ita vt jam nihil desiderari posse videatur,
nothing seems to be wanting to it.

The like may be said of Geometry, I will instance only in one demonstration,
which is the Quadrature of a Circle. This Aristotle in diverse places calls
scibile but not scitum, a thing that might be known, but as then not known,
in as much as the means of finding it out, though much labored, yet was it in
his time unknown among the Ancients: Antiphon, Bryse, Hippocrates, Euclide,
Archimede, Apollonius, Porus traveled long and earnestly in the discovery
hereof, but Buteo in a book written of purpose, has accurately discovered
their errors herein. And Pancirollus in his nova reperta tells us, that annis
abhinc plus minus triginta Titulo 17.
Ars ista fuit inventa, quae mirabile quoddam secretum in se continet: about
thirty years since was that Art found out, which contains in it wonderful
secrets; and to show that it is indeed found out, he there makes demonstration
of it, approved and farther explicated by Salmuth, who has both translated
him, and written learned commentaries upon him. Notwithstanding Joseph Scaliger
in an Epistle of his to the States of the United Cyclomet. Element.
Provinces, challenge this Invention to himself: Nos tandem in conspectum post
tot secula sistimus, we at last after so many ages have brought it to light,
and exposed it to public view.

I will close up this consideration of the Arts and Sciences with a view of
Philosophy, which branches it self into the Metaphysickes, Physics,
Ethickes, and Politickes: the two latter of which I will reserve to the next
Book, contenting my self at this time with the 2 former: First then for the
Metaphysics that part of it which consists in the knowledge of immateriall
substances was undoubtedly neither so well studied nor understood of the
ancient Philosophers, as now it is of Christian Divines. They knew little what
belonged to the attributes of God, which of them were communicable to the
Creature, which incommunicable, so as they might truly grave that inscription
upon their Altars, Ignoto Deo, to the unknown God; Their ignorance was likewise
no less touching the nature and office of Angels, the mansion or function of
separated souls, nay not a few of the most ancient Christian Divines held the
Angels corporeal, though invisible substances, and that the reasonable soul of
man was derived from his Parents, whereas the contrary opinions are now
commonly held both more divine and more reasonable.

The Physics or Natural Philosophy is it which the ancients, and specially
the Graecians, and among them Aristotle has with singular commendation much
enriched, yet can it not be denied, but he is by the experience of latter ages
found very defective in the historical part thereof: And for the speculatiue,
both himself and his followers seem to refer it rather to profession and
disputation, matter of wit and credit, then use and practice: It is therefore a
noble and worthy endeavor of my Lord of S. Albanes so to mix and temper
practice and speculation together, that they may march hand in hand, and
mutually embrace and assist each other. Speculation by precepts and infallible
conclusions preparing a way to Practice, and Practice again perfecting
Speculation. Now among those practical or active parts of Natural Philosophy
which latter ages have produced- Pancirollus names Alchymie for a chief one:
And Nova reperta tit. 7.
it is true that we find little mention thereof in Antiquity, not suspected of
forgery: But for mine own part I much doubt whether any such experiment be yet
really found or no: And if it be whether the operation of it be not more
dangerous and difficult then the effect arising from it, is or can be
advantageous. But of this am I well assured, that as he who dug in his
Vineyard for gold missed it, but by opening the roots of the Vines thereby,
found their fruit the next year more worth unto him then gold: so whiles men
have labored by transmutation of metals from one species to another to make
gold, they have fallen upon the distillations of waters, extractions of oils,
and such like rare experiments unknown to the Ancients, which are undoubtedly
more precious for the use of man then all the gold of both the Indies.

SECT. 3. Of the Arts of Painting and Architecture revived in this latter age.
Hereunto may be added the Arts of Horsmanship, and Herauldry, Agriculture, and
Architecture, Painting and Navigation, all which have been not a little both
enlarged and perfected in these latter ages: yet with this difference, that
some of them together with the other Arts decayed, and again revived with
greater perfection: Others were never in their perfection till now: I will
instance only in the three latter. To begin then with the Art of painting.
When the Romans arrived to the height of their Empire, they equalled, nay
excelled the Graecians herein, who before were esteemed the best in the world.

Venimus ad summum fortunae, pingimus-atque Horat Ep. 1. l. 2

Psallimus, and luctamur Achivis doctius vnctis.
To Fortunes height we are aspired, we paint, we sing,
The skillful Greeks we pass in wrestling.
Quintilian in the last chapter save one of his last book, shows how much
this Art was accounted of among the Ancients, and how by degrees it grew to
perfection, and so does Pliny in his 35 book, and 9 and 10 chapters. Some
inventing colors, others shadows and landskips, and others rules of
proportion, but in tract of time, it so far again decayed, that Aeneas
Sylvius who lived about 200 years since, tells us in one Epistle, videmus
picturas ducentorum annorum nulla prorsus art politas, We Ep. 119.
see the pictures madu 200 years since polished with no kind of art: And in
another immediately following, Si ducentorum, trecentorumve annorum, aut
sculpturas intueberis, aut picturas, invenies non hominum, sed monstrorum
portentor umque facies, If we look upon the sculptures or pictures made about
200 or 300 years since, we shall find faces rather of monsters then men. And
to like purpose is that of Durerus himself an excellent Eipstola ae^te
Geometria^.
Painter, Penitus deperdita vltra mill annos latuit, ac tandem ante ducentos
hos annos per Italos rursum in lucem prodijt: This Art lay hid in obscurity as
it had bin utterly lost above a thousand years; til at length about 200 years
ago it again brake forth into light by help of the Italian wits. The most
famous Italians in this Art were Michael Angelo, and Raphael Vrbin. Some of our
own Nation, as namely Master Heliard an Exeter man borne, and many
Netherlanders, whose names and Icones are published by Hondius, have herein
deserved good commendation: But Durerus of Norinberg is indeed the Man, who
as well for practice as precepts in this Art, is by the most judicious most
commended. He was commonly styled whiles he lived, the Apelles of Germany, nay
Erasmus in his Dialogue of the right pronunciation of the Greek and Latin
Tongues, seems to prefer him before Apelles: Equidem arbitror (says he) si
nunc viveret Apelles, vt erat ingenuus and candidus, Alberto nostro cessurum
huius palmae gloriam. Truly I am of opinion, that did Apelles now live, being
as he was of an ingenuous disposition, he would in this Art yield the
Bucklers to our Albertus. But for singular rules in this kind, Lomatius may
not be forgotten, whom Mr Richard Haydocke has translated out of Italian into
English, and dedicated to the ever honored Sir Thomas Bodley.

Such is the affinity betwixt the arts of painting and building, by reason
they both stand chiefly upon proportions and just dimentions, that Vassari,
who was both himself, has likewise written the lives of the most famous and
best skilled in both. Vitruvius who lived but in the reign of Augustus, is the
only man in a manner among the Ancients, either in Greek or Latin, who is
renowned for the rules of Architecture: Among those of latter times, Sir Henry
Wotton in his preface to his Elements of Architecture, reputes Leon Baptista
Alberti the Florentine, the first learned Architect beyond the Alps: To whom
Angelus Politianus in an Epistle of his to Laurentius Medices, Duke of
Florence, yields this testimony. Ita perscrutatus antiquitatis vestigia est, vt
veterem Architectandi rationem and deprehenderit and in exemplum reuocauerit:
He so narrowly traced the prints and foote-steps of Antiquity, that he both
fully comprehended the manner of the ancient building and reduced it into
pattern; and in the end concludes touching his worth as Salust of Carthage,
Tacere satius puto quam pauca dicere, I hold it safer to be silent then to
speak in few words now as the most sufficient modern Architects in most
things follow the ancients, so in many things they vary from the^, and that
upon just reason. The ancient Grecians and the Romans by their example in
their buildings abroad where the seat was free, did almost religiously
situate the front of their houses toward the South: But from this the modern
Italians do justly vary. Again, the Ancients did determine the longitude of
all rooms which were longer then broad by the double of the latitude, and the
height by the half of the breadth and length summed Vitruvius, l. 6. c. 5.
together: But when the room was precisely square, they made the height half
as much more as the latitude: from which dimensions, the modern Architects
have likewise taken leave to vary and that upon good discretion.

The public buildings of the Grecians and Romans were doubtless very
artificial and magnificent, and so were likewise many of those of the ancient
Christians, I mean their Churches, Monasteries, Castles, bridges, and the
like: But the houses of private men were in the memory of our Fathers, for the
most part very homely, till the Princes of Italy began to bestow more art and
cost upon them. Cosmo Medices Duke of Florence being one of the first who set
upon this work; the Italians were soon followed by the French after the
victorious return of Charles the eight from Naples, and they again by us ever
since the uniting of the two roses in King Henry the seventh, who at his
coming to the Crown, had spent the greatest part of his time in France:
Before his entrance we had indeed some huge vast buildings; but his house at
Richmond and his Chapel at Westminster (except perchance some would prefer
Kings College Chapel in Cambridge began by Henry the sixth) were the two
first neat curious pieces that this kingdom had seen: The latter of which
may well enough compare, not only with any piece this day in Christendom, but
for the bigness of it, with any thing in antiquity of that kind. But for a
stately dainty house, that of Nonesuch excells, which King Henry the eight,
says our great Antiquarie, Camd^n in Su^rey.
built with so great sumptuousnes, and rare workemanshippe, that it aspireth to
the very top of ostentation for show: So as a man may think, that all the
skill of Architecture is in this one piece bestowed and heaped up together. So
many statues and lively images there are in every place: so many wonders of
absolute workemanshippe and works seeming to contend with Roman Antiquities,
that most worthily it may have and maintain still this name that it has of
Nonesuch, according as Leland has written of it.

Huic quia non habeant similem laudare Britanni
Saepe solent; nullique parem cognomine dicunt.
The Britains often were wont to praise this place for that through all

The Realm they cannot show the like, and Nonesuch they it call.

So as what Sebastianus Serlius a skillful Architect spoke of the Pantheon at
Rome, may not unfitly be applied to this pile of building, that it is vnicum
exemplar consummatae Architecturae, the only pattern we have of perfect
Architecture; whether we cast our eyes abroad into the country upon the houses
of Noblemen and Gentlemen, or upon the Colleges and Schools in the
Universities, or upon the dwellings of the Merchant and Artificer in the town
and city, specially in the Metropolis; we shall generally find a wonderful
great change in building within these last hundred years, this latter as much
exceeding the former, as Augustus his marble Rome did that of brick. And if we
look into foreign parts, the Escuriall in Spain and the Gallery in France,
will yield to nothing Antiquity can boast of in that kind: Yet if we may
believe reports, the King of Chinaes palaces, at leastwise for riches and
state, put down any thing which is to be seen in Europe at this day.

Now I know the Pyramides raised by the Egyptian Kings, and the Obeliskes by
the Grecian and Roman Emperors are much spoken of, as being unparalleled by any
thing in these latter ages, and they were indeed insanae substructiones, as
Pliny speaks, mad kind of buildings, only for show and ostentation, nothing
at all for use: yet that Obeliske, which in the year 1586 was raised by the
direction of Dominicus Fontana, and at the charge of Sixtus Quintus (which
Thuanus terms, inter opera eius primum and praecipuum, the first and the
principal among all the great Histor. l. 85. tom 4.
works which he did) may well be counted little inferior to the chiefest of
them. It was one solid stone 107 foot in height, weighing 956148 pounds: It
was traslated from the Vatican, where it lay in an obscure and durtie place,
almost covered over with filth, and erected in a more eminent place near S.
Peter's Church. There were disbursed about this work (as Fontana himself has
written) 37975 Crowns; there being employed therein from the beginning of May
to the middle of September 900 men and 70 horses.

SECT. 4. Of the art of Navigation, brought to perfection in this latter age,
and upon that occasion of the situation of Ophir.
THe last, but the chief and most useful of the three Arts which I last named
is Navigation, in which those of former ages were so ignorant, that they
ingraued Non vltra upon Hercules pillars, that the Nations about Pontus thought
no sea in the world like their own, and doubted whether there were any other
sea but that only; whereof it came that Pontus was a word used for the sea in
general. That the Egyptians, held otherwise a witty people, used to coast the
shores of the red Sea upon Raffs, divised by King Erythrus: And in the time of
the Romans, the Britains our Ancestors had a kind of boat (with which they
crossed the Seas) made of small twigs and covered with leather, of which Lucan
the Poet.

Primum cana salix madefacto vimine paruam
Texitur in puppim, caesoque induta juvenco
Vectoris patiens, tumidum superenatat amnem.
Sic Venetus stagnante pado fuscque Britannus
Nauigat Oceano:
The moistened osyre of the hoarie willow
Is woouen first into a little boat
Then clothed in bullocks hide upon the billow
Of a proud river lightly does it floate
Under the water-man.
So on the Lakes of ouer-swelling Poe
Sails the Venetian, and the Britains so
On the out-spread Ocean.
And to like purpose is that of Festus Auienus:

Navigiaiunctis semper aptant pellibus,
Corioque vastum saepe percurrunt salum.
Of stitched hides they all their vessels had,
And often through sea in leather voyage made.
But that which is more obseruable is, that the Jews were so unskillful in
this art, as they commonly called the Mediterranean sea the great sea; not
being in those times, as it seems, much acquainted with the Ocean: Numb. 34.
v. 6.
And though the Phoenicians and Carthaginians, the Tyrians and Sydonians, are
much renowned in histories for great Navigatours; yet it is thought by the
learned that those voyages they performed, was only by coasting and not by
crossing the Ocean.

-- Haec aetas quod fata negarunt
Antiquis totum potuit sulcare carinis
Id pelagi immensum quod circuit Amphitrite.
This age what fates to former times denied
Through the vast Ocean now in ships does ride
Says Fracastorius, and Acosta, Equidem navigationem altissimo Oceano
commissam neque apud Veteres lego, neque ab illis aliter Oceanum navigatum Lib.
1, de natura noviorbis, c. 1. 8
puto quam a nostris Mediterraneum: That the Ancients adventured themselves
into the maine Ocean, neither do I read it in any of their Writers, nor do I
believe they otherwise sailed over the Ocean, then we do now over the
Mediterranean Sea. And it should seem they undertook not their longest
voyages without Oars, which the Scripture implies in that undertaken by Jonas,
where the Mariners upon the rising Jonas, 1. 13.
of a violent tempest were constrained to use their Oars.

I am not ignorant, that as Vatablus and Arias Montanus would make Ophir,
whither Solomon sent his Navy (by reason of the affinity of the 1 King 9. 28.
name) to be Peru in the West Indies, so Pineda spends no less then twelve
leaves in the largest folio, to prove Tharsis, to which it is likewise commonly
De ^bus Salomo^is, l, 4: c: 14:
thought to have gone to be Tartessus in Spain: But for the first of these
opinions, Cornelius Wytfliet, Secretary of state in the Counsel of Brabrant,
in his book entitled Descriptionis Ptolomaicae argumentum, or Occidentis
notitia, has strongly confuted it; and so has Pererius in his third book
upon Genesis treating of Hauilah. But Sir Walter Rawleigh is confident that
himself has so knocked it in the head, as it were idle to make any more
question thereof: That this question, says he, be a subject of no farther
dispute. It is very true that there is no Region in the world of that name,
(meaning Peru) sure I am that at least America has none, no not any city,
village, or mountain so named: But when Francis Pizarro first discovered the
lands to the South of Panama, arriving in that Region which Attabaliba
commanded, (a Prince of Magnificence, riches and dominion, inferior to none)
some of the Spaniards utterly ignorant of that language, demanding by signs
as they could, and pointing with their hand athwart the river or brook that
ran by, the Indians answered Peru, which was either the name of that brook or
of water in general: The Spaniards thereupon conceiving that the people had
rightly understood them, set it down in the iournall of their enterprise, and
in the first description made and sent over to Charles the Emperor, all that
West part of America to the South of Pannama had the name of Peru, which has
continued ever since, as diverse Spaniards in the Indies assured me. Which also
Acosta the Jesuit in his natural and moral History of the Indies confirms.
And whereas Montanus also finds that a part of the Indies called Iucatan
took the name of Iocktan, who as he supposes, nauigated from the utmost East
of India to America: It is most true that Iucatan is nothing else in the
language of that country, but, What is that, or What say you? For when the
Spaniards asked the name of that place, no man conceiving their meaning, one of
the Saluages answered Iucatan, which is, What ask you? or what say you. Thus
far Sir Walter Rawleigh, yielding the reason of his dissent from Montanus and
Vatablus, holding that Ophir, to which Salomons Navy sailed for gold, was Peru
in the West Indies, Whereunto may be added out of Salmuth in his Commentary
upon Pancirollus, that in all likelihood, this land of Ophir took Titulo de
novo orb.
its name from Ophir the son of Ioctan, (as the land of Hauilah likewise did
from another son of his, mentioned in the same place) who as Genesis 10. 19.
Josephus witnesses, fixed his seat in the E^st, placing the country of Lib.
1. Antiq. c,
Ophir about Chersonesus, with whom accords Gaspar Varrerius in his
Commentaries purposely written de Ophyra Regione, where he plainly proves
Ophir to be that Aurea Chersonesus in the East Indies, which is now called
Malaca Moreover one of the principal commodities which Solomon's fleet brought
home was yvory, of which in the West Indies there is none to be found, it being
known to want Elephants: And lastly out of the Text it appears* that Solomon
prepared his Navy for a voyage into the East, inasmuch as his ships set forth
at Ezion-Geber bordering 1 King. 9. 26. 27.
upon the Red sea, and thither as to the Rendevouz came the Tyrians and
Sydonians, Hirams men to join with them: which had been a most indirect
course, had they intended their voyage toward the West.

Now for Pineda his making of Tharshis; to be Tartessus in his own Country
of Spain, though herein he follow Goropius Becanus, yet in the judgment I
suppose of most men, recitasse est refutasse, the very recital Hispanicorum l.
7.
of it, is refutation sufficient. For if I should demand Pineda where those
Spanish mines are now to be seen, from whence Salomons ships brought so much
treasure, he must tell me, that either they are dried up, or transported to the
Indies, from whence in fleetes they are yearly brought back into Spain, as
Sarrarius sports with him, in nov^m orbem translata magnis classibus
revehuntur: So as had not Spain it self an Ophir or Tarshis to furnish it
with gold, the poverty of it would doubtless soon appear to the world.
Besides Pineda herein dissents from Acosta his own countryman and brother of
the same society, who thinks that by Tarshis the Hebrews indefinitely
understand some remote, strange, and De Natura novi Orbis l 1. c. 13.
rich place, as we, says he, do by the Indies. And if we should say, that
Salomons Tarshis by a little change of letters was Paul's Tarsus a famous
city in Silicia (which seems likewise to have its name from Tarsis the Act.
21. 39.
2 son of Iavan) we therein should I think, shoot nearer the mark then Genesis
10. 4,
Pineda: but I must confess for mine own private judgment, I rather incline to
their opinion who by Tarshis understand none other then the Sea. The Israelites
and Phenicians, because they knew no other Sea then the Mediterranean in the
beginning, and that the people of Tarshis had the greatest ships, and were
the first Navigators in those parts with such vessels, they were therefore
called Men of the Sea, and the word Tharshis used often for the Sea. Thus S.
Hierome in his commentaries on Daniel, Cap. 10
Jonas fugere cupiebat non in Thars^ Siliciae, sed absolute in pelagus. Jonas
desired to fly not to Tars^s in Silic^a but to the Sea. But Iunius and
Tremelius go farther, translating Tharshis by Oceanus, thus: Nam classis
Oceani 1 King. 10. 22.
pro Rege cum class Chir^ erat, semel ternis annis veniebat classis ex Oceano;
afferens aurum and argentum etc. which we thus render in our last English
Translation: For the King had at Sea a navy of Tharshis with the navy of Hiram*
once-in-three years came the navy of Hiram, bringing gold and silver. And from
this opinion, that by Tarshis is or may be understood the sea, the learned
Drusius in his sacred observations dissents not; only he affirms that not
Tharshis, but Iam is the common ^ame for the sea, and Lib. 9. c. 1^.
that not in Syriack as S. Hierome would have it, but in Hebrew. Whereas then
it is said or understood, that the ships of Solomon went every three years
to Tharshis, if by Tharshis we understand the Sea, the phrase is not improper
or strange at all: for we use it ordinarily wheresoever we navigate, namely,
that the Kings ships are gone to the Sea or returned from the Sea, by which
it appears, (not to touch their opinion who deceived by the Chalde Paraphrast,
by Tharshis understand Carthage) that the voyage of Salomons Navy was neither
to Peru in the West Indies, n^r Tartessus in Spain, but to Ophir in the East
Indies, which being performed by coasting, needed perchance more time, but
less skill in navigation.

The perfection then of this Art seems by Gods providence to have been
reserved to these latter times, of which Pedro de Medina, and Baptista Ramusio
have given excellent precepts. But the Art it self has bin happily practiced
by the Portugals, the Spaniards, the Hollanders, and our own Nation, whose
voyages and discoveries, Master Hackluit has collected and reported in three
several volumes, lately enlarged and perfected by Master Purchase, and it were
to be wished as well for the honor of the English name, as the benefit that
might thereby redound to other Nations, that his collections and relations had
been written in Latin, or that some learned pen would be pleased to turn them
into that Language. Among many other famous in this kind, the noble spirited
Drake may not be forgotten, who, God being his Guide, wit, skill, valor and
fortune his attendants, was the next after Magellanus that sailed round about
the world, whereupon one wrote these verses unto him.

Drake peragrati novit quem terminus orbis Camden in Devonshire.

Quemque semel mundi vidit vterque polus:
Si taceant homines facient Te sydera notum
Sol nescit comitis immemor esse sui.
Sir Drake whom well the worlds end knew,
Which thou did compass round:
And whom both Poles of Heaven once saw,
Which North and South do bound.
The stars above will make thee known
If men here silent were:
The Sun himself cannot forget
His fellow traveller.
And for the better breeding, continuance, and increase of such expert Pilots
amongst us, it would doubtless be a good and profitable work, (according to
Master Hakcluits honest motion in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Lord Admiral,
then being) if any who has the means had likewise the mind to give allowance
for the reading of a Lecture of Navigation in London, in imitation of the late
Emperor Charles the fifth, who wisely considering the rawnesse of his Seamen;
and the manifold shipwracks which they sustained in passing and repassing
between Spain and the West Indies, established not only a Pilot Mayor for the
examination of such as were to tak^ charge of ships in that voyage, but also
founded a Lecture for the Art of Navigation, which to this day is read in the
Contractation house at Sivill. The Readers of which Lecture have not only
carefully taught and instructed the Spanish Mariners by word of mouth, but
have also published sundry exact and worthy Treatises concerning Marine Causes,
for the direction and encouragement of posterity: and namely these three,
Alonzo de Chauez, Hieronymo de Chauez, and Rodorigo Zamerano, and to this
purpose it is a commendable work of Master Hues, who for the instruction of
Navigators in the principles of Geometry and Astronomy, and thereby for the
improuement and advancement of the Art of Navigation, has written and twice
published in two several editions a learned Treatise of the Celestial and
terrestrial Globes, and their use, which for the better use of such as are
ignorant of the Latin tongue, and desirous to learn, I could wish were
translated into our own Language.

CAP. 10. Touching diverse artificial works and useful inventions, at
leastwise matchable with those of the ancients, namely and chiefly the
invention of Printing, Gunnes, and the Sea-Card or Mariners Compass.
SECT. 1. Of some rare inventions and artificial works of this latter age,
comparable both for use and skill to the best of the Ancients.
AS the Arts and Sciences have all of them in these latter ages either been
reviued from decay or reduced to use, or brought forward to perfection: so many
secrets of Nature and rare conclusions have been found out and imparted to the
World by Albertus Magnus, Levinus Lemnius, Fernelius, Fracastorius, Baptista
Porta, Cornelius Agrippa, Cardanus, Trithemius, Delrio, and others, and many
singular artificial inventions, for the use, ease, delight, or ornament of
mankind, as a number of Mechanical, Mathematical, and Musical Instruments,
Chimneyes, stirrups, paper, spectacles, Porcellan, perspectiue glasses, fining
of sugars, hand-mils, gloves, hats, bands, watches, besides diverse excellent
works in stuffs, in silks, in linnens, in hangings, in carpets, and the like,
particularly set down by Polidore Virgill de Inventoribus Rerum, and
Pancirollus in his Nova-reperta, and Cardanus in his 17 book de artibus,
artificiosisque rebus, to whom notwithstanding much more might easily be added,
For as truth is the daughter of time, so are useful Inventions too, as rightly
Manilius, lib. 1.

Sed cum long a dies acuit mortalia corda
Et labor ingenium miseris dedit, and sua quenque
Advigilare sibi jussit fortuna premendo,
Seducta in varias certarunt pectora curas,
Et quodcunque sag^x tentando repperit ^sus,
In commune bonum commentum laeta dedere.
But when that tract of time had whet men's wits,
And industry had molded them, by fits
Fortune pressing each man to endeavor
To free himself from misery, together
They bend their minds to search out sundry things
And what is found by observation sage,
They cheerfully impart from age to age.
I will only specify some of the rarest artificial works of this latter
age, comparable for the workmanship with the best of the ancient.

Peter Ramus tells us of a wooden Eagle, and an iron fly made by Regiomontanus
Schol. Math. l. 2
a famous Mathematician of Norinberg, whereof the first (in imitation and
emulation of Architas his dove) flew forth of the city aloft in the air, met
the Emperor a good way off coming toward it, and having Gellius l. 10. and
cap. 12
saluted him, returned again, waiting on him to the city gates. The second at
a feast whereto he had invited his familiar friends, flew forth of his hands,
and taking a round, returned thither again to the great astonishment of the
beholders: Both which the divine pen of the noble Du Bartas has excellently
expressed.

Why should I not that wooden Eagle mention, The 6 day of the first week.

A learned Germans late admired invention,
Which mounting from his fist that framed her
Flew far to meet an Almaine Emperor.
And having met him with her nimble train
And weary wings, turning about again
Followed him close unto the Castle gate
Of Norinberg, whom all their shows of state,
Streets hanged with Arras, arches curious built,
Gray Headed Senate, and youths gallantise,
Graced not so much as only this devise.
He goes on and thus describes the fly,

Once as this Artist more with mirth then meat
Feasted some friends whom he esteemed great,
From vnder's hand an iron fly flew out,
Which having flowne a perfect round about,
With weary wings returned unto her Master,
And as judicious on his arm he placed her.
O divine wit, that in the narrow womb
Of a small fly could find sufficient room
For all those springs, wheels, counterpoise and chains,
Which stood instead of life, and spur, and raines.
Desinamus itaque Archytae columbam mirari, cum muscam, cum aquilam geometricis
alis alatam Noriberga exhibeat, says Ramus, let us give over to wonder at
Archytas his dove, sithence Norinberg has exhibited both a Fly and an Eagle
winged with Geometrical wings. Bartas likewise remembers the curious Dial and
clock at Strausburgh, which my self have beheld not without admiration,

But who would think that mortal hands could mould
New heavens, new stars whose whirling courses should
With constant windings though contrary ways
Mark the true monds of years and months and days,
Yet it is a story that has often been heard
And by an hundred witnesses auer'd.
Neither does he forget that most exquisite silver sphere (matchable with
Archimedes, or that of Zapores King of Persia) which was sent as a present from
the Emperor Ferdinand to Solomon the great Turk, and is mentioned by Paulus
Iouius and Sabellicus: It was carried as they write, by twelve men, vnframed
and reframed in the Grand Signiours presence by the maker, who likewise
delivered him a book containing the mystery of using it.

Nor may we smoother nor forget ingratelie
The Heaven of silver, that was sent but lately
From Ferdinando as a famous work
Unto Bizantium to the greatest Turk:
Wherein a spirit still moving too and fro,
Made all the Engine orderly to go;
And though the one sphere did always slowly slide,
And contrary the other swiftly glide;
Yet still their stars kept all their courses even
With the true courses of the stars of heaven.
The Sun there shifting in the Zodiaque
His shining houses, never did forsake
His pointed path, there in a month his sister
Fulfilled her course and changing often her luster
And form of face, (now larger, lesser soon)
Followed the changes of the other moon.
SECT. 2. Of the benefits and Inventour of the most useful Art of Printing.
But leaving these,

Magna nec ingenijs investigata priorum
Quaeque diu latuere canam:
I Will speak of greater things which long lay hid
Neither were found by search of former wits.
These spoken of, are in truth but toys and tryfles in regard of those three
most useful inventions, which these latter ages challenge as due and proper to
themselves, Printing, Gunnes, and the Mariners compass; of which Cardane
comparatively speaks in high terms. His tribus tota De subtle. l, 17.
Antiquitas nihil par habet, All Antiquity can boast of nothing equal to these
three. Upon these then will I insist, and with these conclude this comparison
of Arts and Wits; the rather for that there is none of them but some have
excepted against, as being not modern but ancient inventions. I will begin
with Printing, touching which Bodin outvies Cardane, Vna typographia cum
omnibus omnium veterum inventis certare facile De ^eth: hist. lib: 7:
potest: Printing alone may easily contend for the prize with all the
inventions of the Ancients. And Polidore Virgill having spoken of the famous
Libraries erected by the Ancients, presently adds, Fuit illud omnino magnum
mortalibus munus, sed nequaquam conferendum cum hoc De Jnventor: rerum, l: 2:
c: 7:
quod nostro tempore adepti sumus, reperto novo scribendi genere: tantum enim
vno die ab vno homine literarum imprimitur, quantum vix toto anno a pluriribus
scribi possit. That was indeed a great benefit to mankind, but not to be
compared with this which our age has found out and enjoyed, since a new kind
of writing was brought to light and practiced, by means whereof, as much may
be printed by one man in one day, as could be written by many in a whole year;
or as Sabellicus, as much as the readiest Enead. 10: 6:
penman could well dispatch in two years. And by this means, books which
were before in a manner confined to the Libraries of Monasteries, as their
only Magazines, were redeemed from bondage, obtained their enlargement, and
freely walked abroad in the light; so as now they present themselves familiarly
to the eyes and hands of all men, and he that has but slender means, may
notwithstanding furnish himself in a competent manner, there being now more
good Authors to be bought for twenty shillings then could then be purchased
for twenty pounds. And besides, they then spoke such languages as it pleased
the Monks to put into their mouths, who many times through ignorance, or
negligence, or wilfulnes mistook words and sentences, and sometimes thrust
that into the Text which they found in the Margin. From whence arose such a
confusion in most Authors, that it much puzzled the best wits how to restore
them to the right sense, as Lodouicus Viues In prefa^ioae:
complains, it befell him in the setting forth of S. Augustines works de
Civitate Dei, and diuinandum saepeuumero fuit, and coniecturis vera restituenda
Lectio: I was often forced to guess at the sense and none otherwise then by
conjectures could the text be restored to the true reading: And Erasmus in his
preface to the works of the same father, vix in alterius tam impie quam in
huius sacri Doctoris voluminibus lusit otiosorum temeri^as, hardly has the
rashness of idle brains so impiously played its part in the volumes of any
other, as of this holy Doctor: Yet that other complaint of his in his preface
before S. Hieromes works, touching the many and gross corruptions which
therein he found, far exceedes this, Vnum illud and vere dicam and audacter
minoris arbitror Hieronymo suos constitisse libros conditos quam nobis
restitutos: This one thing may I truly and boldly affirm, that in mine
opinion, S. Hieromes books cost him less pains the making, then me the
mending. Again, it cannot be denied but the fairenes of the letter beyond that
of ordinary writing, adds no small grace to this invention. Mira certe Ars,
says Cardane, qua mill chartarum vna die conficiuntur, nec facile est
iudicare an in tanta facilitate De varietate rerum, l: 13: c: 64:
ac celeritate pulchritudo, an in tanta pulchritudine celeritas and facilitas
sit admirabilior: An admirable Art sure it is, by which a thousand sheets may
be dispatched in a day, neither is it easy to judge whether in so great
easiness and quickenesse of dispatch the fairenes of the letter, or in the
fairness of the letter the quickenesse of dispatch and easiness thereof, be
more to be wondered at. Lastly, it is not the least benefit of printing, that
by dispersing a number of Copies into particular men's hands, there is now hope
that good letters shall never again suffer so universal a decay as in forrmer
ages they have done, by the burning and spoiling of public Libraries, in
which the whole treasure of learning was in a manner stored up. Since then by
this means; books are become both fairer, and cheaper, and truer, and less
subject to a total perishing: and since by this Art the preserver of Arts, the
Acts and writings of worthy men are made famous and commended to posterity; it
were a point of heinous ingratitude to suffer the Inventor thereof to be buried
in oblivion.

Some difference I confess there is about his name, yet not such but may be
reconciled without any great difficulty. Peter Ramus seems to attribute it to
one John Fust a Moguntine, and in truth shows good Schol. Mathem. lib: 2:
cards for it, telling us, that he had in his keeping a copy of Tullies
Offices printed upon parchment with this inscription added in the end thereof:
Praesens Marci Tullij clarissimum opus Johannes Fust Moguntinus ciuis non
atramento, plumali canna, neque aerea, sed art quadam perpulchra manu Petri de
Gerneshem pueri mei faeliciter effeci, finitum an. 1466, 4 die mensis
Februarij. This excellent work of Marcus Tullius I John Fust a citizen of
Mentz happily imprinted, not with writing ynke, quill, or brass pen, but with
an excellent Art by the help of Peter Gerneshem my servant: finished it was in
the year 1466, the 4th of February. Pasquier averres Lib: 4: c: 22: Titul. 12:
that the like had come to his hands, and Salmuth that one of the same
impression was to be seen in the public Library at Ausburg, and another (as
others) in Emanuell College in Cambridge, and my self have seen a fifth in
the public Library at Oxford, though with some little difference in the
inscription. Yet Pollidore Virgill from the report of the Moguntines themselves
affirms, that John Gutenberg a Knight, and dwelling Lib. 2. c: 7:
in Mentz, was the first Inventor thereof, and therein with him accord
Palmerius in his Chronicle, Melchior Guilandinus in the 26 Chapter of his
Treatise touching paper and parchment; Chasaneus in his Catalogue of the Glory
of the world, the second part and 39th Consideration, Veignier in his
Bibliotheque, Bibliander de communi ratione omnium linguarum, in his chapter of
printing (professing that therein he follows Wymphilingius in his Epitomie of
the affairs of Germany) Johannes Arnoldus in his book of the Invention of
Printing; And lastly, Munster in his Cosmographie, who adds this particular,
that he smoothered it a long time, laboring to conceal it all that he might.
For the reconciling then of this difference, it may well be that Gutenberg was
indeed the first happy inventour of this invalueable Art: But Fust the first,
who taking it from him, made proof thereof in printing a book: They both then
deserve their commendation, but in different degrees: Gutenberg in the highest,
Fust in a second or third; and no doubt, but many since have added much to the
speed, grace and perfection thereof, whose names, though we know not, yet
perchance, have they as well deserved of the commonwealth of learning as he:
Sure we are, that Manutius Operinus, Raphelengius, Plantin, and both the
Stephens; the Father and the Son, are not to be forgotten, but remembered with
honor, for the furthering and perfecting of this Art.

Yet some there are who writing of the affairs of the Indies, as Petrus Hist.
Ind. l. 6 Lib. 2. A^cm. apud Indos c. 38.
Maffaius, Garzias ab Horto, and Paulus Iovius assure us, that either the
Germans borrowed this Inventio^ from the 1 Chinese, or at leastwise the
Chinese had the practice and use of it long before them. Whereunto I answer
Lib. 14. Hist.
(not to question the credit of the Authors) though in truth (as is well
known) no great friends to the German nation, that though it were long since
in use with the Chinese, yet, for ought appears, was it never, nor yet is
with them brought to that perfection as it is with us at this day: Si a
veteribus tale quiddam excogitatum sit, vt nemo debita laud sraudandus, fateri
quisque debeat omnia minus fuisse exculta, nitida, subtilia, elimata, nec tam
spectabili literarum varietate exornata atque expolita, says Levinus Lemnius.
If any such thing were discovered by the Ancients (either De occultis rerum
mi^ac. l. 3. c. 4.
by the Chinese or otherwhere) as they are not to be robbed of their due
praise, so ought we to confess, that all things are now more exact and
perfect, and better polished with a fair variety of letters. But that the
Germans should borrow it from the Chinese, as is pretended by the Spaniards,
is more I think then is true, I am sure then is yet proved, or in likelihood
does appear: And the Germans themselves will never with patience endure such a
wrong. Germania certe nunquam sibi hanc laudem patietur extorqueri, says
Salmuth, Germany will never suffer the praise of this Invention to be wrested
from her, And Beroaldus.

O Germania muneris repertrix,
Quo nil vtilius dedit vetustas
Libros scribere. Quae doces premendo.
Thou Germany this blessing did invent,
Then which the world more useful never saw,
To write on books thou teach thus by print.
And with him accords Laurentius Valla, though himself an Italian, if those
verses be his which are ascribed unto him in the front of his Works.

Abstulerat Latio multos Germania libros,
Nunc multo plures reddidit ingenio.
Etquod vix toto quisquam perscriberet anno,
Munere Germano conficit vna dies.
Germania drew great store of books from Italy,
But now much more she does. then she received, repay:
What erewhile in one year could scarcely written be;
Now by Germania's help is finished in one day.
SEC. 1. Of the use and invention of Gunnes.
AS the Invention of Printing is chiefly in use in time of Peace, so is that
of Gunnes in time of war, with which the Aries, Onagri, Catapulta, or
Balistae, Engines of the Ancients, (which I know not well how to English, they
being grown for the most part out of use) are no way comparable, Nec vlla ex
part huic conferendus est antiquus Aries, vires inferiores habebat, and
difficilius admuros adigebatur, says Patricius, The Ram anciently for
battery, is in no sort to be compared with De reg^ l. 7. tit. 6.
this Engine, it had less strength, and more difficulty there was in bringing
it, and applying it to the walls. And Bodine to like purpose, (though Method.
hist. c. 7.
herein perchance he jumpe not with Lipsius in his Poliorcetica) omitto
Catapulta Veterum and antiqua belli tormenta, quae si cum nostris conferantur
sane puerilia quaedam ludicra videri possint: I pass over the Engines of the
Ancients, which being compared with ours, are rather childish toys then
instruments for war. And Lipsius himself calls it, Geniorum, non hominum
inventum* an invention of spirits, and not of men. Such is the De Machinis
^alogo 11.
force of these modern Engines, that they not only destroy men, but cast down
walls, rampires, towers, castles, cities, and shake the tallest ships into
shiuers, there being nothing that comes within their reach that can stand
against them. It was a piece of almost incredible bigness which by Mahomets
command was employed against Constantinople, ad quam trahendam adhibebantur
septuaginta juga boum, and bis mill viri, as witnesses Chalcondilas in his
eight book de rebus Turcicis, for the drawing of which were employed seventy
yoke of oxen, and two thousand men. It is true that there is nothing more
mischievous to besieged cities, and so is there nothing that helps them more
for the chasing away of the befiegers, it being so for the most part in all
things, which either the Art or wit of man, or God and Nature has framed, that
the more helpefull they are being well used, the more hurtful are they being
abused: then fire and water there is nothing more commodious to the life of
man, yet is the Proverb true, that when they are once enraged, and pass their
bounds, they become merciles: The tongue is said by Esope to be both the best
and the worst meat that comes to the market: for with it we both bless God and
curse men, says S. James. And iron by Pliny is rightly termed, optimum,
pessimumque vitae instrumentum, the best and worst instrument belonging to man,
But sure it seems that God in his providence had reserved this Engine for
these times, that by the cruel force and terrible roaring of it, men might the
rather be deterred from assaulting one another in hostile and warlike manner;
And I verily believe, that since the invention and use thereof, fewer have
been slain in the wars then before. Neither does it serve, (as is commonly
objected,) to make men cowards, but rather hardens them. For he that dares
present himself to the mouth of a Cannon, cannot fear the face of death in
what shape soever it present it self.

Howsoever some have not been wanting, who would bear us in hand that this
Invention is not of latter times, but ancient; among whom Sir Walter Rawleigh
is one, who in his History of the World, referres not Lib. 1. c. 7. sect. 4
only the Invention of Printing, but of Gunnes too, and Ordinance of battery to
the Indians, grounding himself herein upon the report of the Portugals: And
hereby, says he, we are now made to understand, that the place of Philostratus
in vita Apollonij Tianei, is no fable, though expressed Lib. 2. c. 14.
in fabulous words, when he says, that the wise men which dwell between
Hyphesis and Ganges use not themselves to go forth to battle, but that they
drive away their enemies with thunder and lightning. But hereof I can say
nothing, choosing with Camerarius, potius credere quam Meditat. histor. c^ntur.
2. c. 28 De occult. rerum miraculis
cum molestia experiri, rather to believe it, then to endure the hazard and
trouble to make trial of it. Others refer it to Salmoneus, as witnesses
Levinus Lemnius, induced thereunto by those verses of Virgill l. 3. c. 4.
Aenead. l 5.


Vidi and crudeles dantem Salmonea poenas,
Dum flammas Iovis and sonitus imitatur Olympi.
Quatuor hic invectus equis ac lampada quaessans
Per Graium populos mediaeque per Elidis vrbem
Ibat ovans, Divumque sibi poscebat honores
Demens qui nimbos and non imitabile fulmen,
Aere and cornipedum cursu fimulabat equorum.
I saw Salmoneus there endure
Most cruel pains and great,
For that he dared the flames of Jove,
And thunder counterfeit.
In Chariot drawn with horses four,
Shaking a fiery brand
Through mids of Elis town he rode,
And through all Grecian land
Triumphing wise: and to himself
Audaciously did take
Honors divine. Mad frantic man
That did not inlie quake:
With horne-foot horses, and brasse-wheeles,
Jove's storms to emulate,
And lightenings impossible
For man to imitate.
But Servius in his Commentaries conceiues, that this imitation of thunder was
by driving his Chariot over a brazen bridge: And if he used any Engine, it
seems to have been rather for rattling and terror, then for any real
effect: And whereas great Ordinance exceed thunder, this was such that it came
far short of it: And therefore as' Rota has well observed, the Poet calls it.

-- non imitabile fulmen.
But this I leave as a very uncertain ground for the ancient invention of this
Engine. Petrarch and Valturius upon better show of reason (as De remed.
v^ivsque fort. dial. 99.
they conceive) refer it to Archimede, found out (as they pretend) by him for
the ouer-throw of Marcellus his ships at the siege of Syracuse. Dear Militar.
But it were strange that both Plutarch and Liuie, who have written largely of
his admirable wit and wonderful Engines, and particularly of the siege of that
city, should among the rest forget this rare invention; and yet more strange
that the Romans upon the taking of the city should not take it up and make
use of it: Nay, as Magius (who has written a chapter of purpose, to refute
them who refer this invention to the Miscel: l: 1: c: 1:
Ancients) has observed; neither Heron, nor Pappus, nor Athenaeus, nor Biton
in their manuscrips of the Mechanniques, (for printed they are not) have
described any such Engine: nor Aegidius Romanus, (who lived De regimine
Principum. l. 3. part 3: c: 18:
and wrote in the reign of Philip the fair King of France about the year
1285,) where he treates purposely of warlike Engines and instruments, remembers
any such thing. Brightman in his exposition on the Revelation of S. John, tells
us that by the fire, and smoke, and brimstone which in that place are said to
have issued out of the mouths of the horses, are to be understood our powder
and gunnes now in use, and that of them S. John prophesied, but how these can
be said to issue out of the mouths of horses, he does not well express, nor I
think well understood.

The common opinion then is, that this divise was first found out by a Monk of
Germany, whose name many writers affirm to be deservedly lost: But Forcatulus
in his fourth book of the Empire and Philosophy of France, names him Berthold
Swarts of Culle^, and Salmuth, Constantine Nova Reperta, tit. 11:
AnklitZen of Friburg: Howsoever they all agree that he was a German Monk, and
that by chance a spark of fire falling into a pot of Niter, which he had
prepared for Physic or Alchimy, and causing it to fly up, he thereupon made a
composition of powder, with an instrument of brass and iron, and putting fire
to it, found the conclusion to answer his expectation. The first public use
of Gunnes that we read of, was thought to be about the year 1380 as Magius,
or 400 as Ramus, in a battle betwixt the Venetians and the Genowayes fought at
Clodia-Fossa, in which the Venetian having from this Monk belike, gotten the
use of Gunnes, so galled their enemies, that they saw themselves wounded and
slain, and yet knew not by what means, or how to prevent it, as witnesses
Platina in the life of Vrbane the sixth. And Laurentius Valla in the second
book and 34 Chapter of his Elegancies, (which as himself testifies, he wrote
in the year 1438) affirms that the Gunne grew in Lib: 3: c: 14:
use not long before his time. His words are, Nuper inventa est machina quam
Bombardam vocant, the Engine which they call the Gunne was lately found out.
And Petrarch who lived somewhat before him to like purpose in his 99 dialogue
of the Remedies of both fortunes, though therein I confess he seem to cross
himself, Erat haec pestis nuper rara, vt cum ingenti miraculo cerneretur: This
pestilent devise was lately so rare, that it was beheld with marvelous great
astonishment. Yet I have seen the copy of a record, that great ordinance were
brought by the French to the battery of a Castle or fort called Outhwyke,
near to Callis, and then in possession of the English, the first year of
Richard the second; of which fort, one William Weston was Captain, and being
questioned in Parliament for yielding up the fort, he does in his excuse
alalleage, that the enemies brought to the battery thereof nine pieces de
grosses Canons par les quelles les mures and les measons da dit Chastel furent
rentes and percussez en plusiears lieux, of great Canons, by means whereof the
walls and houses of the said Castle were in diverse places rent in sunder and
sorely battered; and in another place, he terms them huge, most grievous,
and admirable Ordinance: nay more then so, I am credibly informed, that a
commission is to be seen for the making of Saltpeter in Edward the thirds
time, and another record of Ordinance used in that time some twenty years
before his death: by all which it should appear, that either the invention of
Gunnes was sooner then is commonly conceived, or that our Nation and the French
had the use of it with the first, howsoever, it is most clear, that at
leastwise in these parts of the world this invention was not known till in
latter ages in comparison of the worlds duration.

SECT. 4. Of the use and invention of the Martiners Compass or sea-card, as
also of another excellent invention said to be lately found out upon the
Lodestone, together with a conclusion of this comparison touching Arts and
Wits, with a saying of Bodins, and another very notable one of Lactantius.
TO these inventions of Printing and Gunnes, may be added in the last place
that of the Mariners compass, of which Bodin thus Methodo hist: cap: 7:
confidently speaks, Cum Magnete nihil sit admirabilius in tota rerum natura,
vsum tamen eius plane diuinum Antiqui ignorarunt: Though there be nothing more
admirable then the Lodestone in the whole course of Nature, yet of the Divine
use thereof were the Ancients ignorant: And Blondus, Certum est id navigandi
auxilium Priscis omnino fuisse Italia Illustrata regi^ 13:
incognitum: It is certain that help of sailing was altogether unknown to the
Ancients. And Cardan, a man much versed in the Rarities of Nature, de (...): c:
17.
inter caetera rerum inventa admiratione primum digna est ratio Nauticae
pyxidis: Among other rare Inventions, that of the Mariners compass is most
worthy of admiration. By means of it, was Navigation perfected, the lives and
goods of many thousand have bin, and daily are preserved: It finds out a way
through the vast Ocean, in the greatest storms and darkest nights, where is
neither path to follow, nor inhabitant or passinger to inquire; It points out
the way to the skillfull Mariner when all other helps fail him, and that
more certainly though it be without reason, sense, and life, then without the
help thereof all the Wisards and learned Clearks in the world, using the
united strength of their wits and cunning can possiblely do: By means of it
are the commodities of all countries discovered, trade, and traffic, and
humane society maintained, their several forms of government, and religion
observed, and the whole world made as it were one Commonwealth, and the most
distant Nations fellows citizens of the same body politic.

This wonderful instrument we have amply described by Cieze in his second
tomb and ninth chapter de Rebus Indicis, and Bellonus in his second book and
sixteenth chapter de Singularitatibus: But for the reason thereof, I say with
Acosta, Causas huius tanti prodigij alij rimentur, and Sympathiam De Natura
noviorbis: l. 1:
nescio quam conentur inducere, ego summi Opificis potentiam providentiamque
quoties intueor, and vehementer admiror and iucundissime celebro. Let others
search out the causes of this so wonderful an instrument, and pretend therein
I know not what Sympathy, I for my part as often as I look upon it, cannot but
exceedingly admire, and most willingly praise the power and providence of God.

Whether it were known to the Ancients or no, some doubt is moved, as of all
things else there is: But herein, in my judgment, without any sufficient
reason. For can we conceive that so rare a devise and of so singular use could
be known to Aristotle, Theophrastus, Pliny, Dioscorides, Galen, and that we
should no where in any of their works find the least mention thereof? Surely,
I for my part shall never believe it; neither can I be persuaded that so
precious and useful an invention could possiblely be entertained and commonly
practiced, and yet lost again out of the world as if it had never been. But
that indeed it was not practiced appears by this, that the Ancients, when by
reason of a storm or mist they had lost the sight of the lights of heaven,
they had no remedy to fly unto; Nullum coelo nubibus obscurato a magnete aut
alio instrumento petebatur auxilium, when the heaven was darkened with Blondus
Italia illustrata Regione 13:
clouds, they had no assistance from the Lodestone or any other instrument.

-- Clauumque affixus and haerens
Nunquam amittebat oculosque sub astra tenebat. Aenead, 5:

The helm he held and never it forsook
^ut on the stars his eyes did ever look.
Says the Poet, as long as the stars appeared; but when they were be misted,
they then wandered they knew not whither.

Tres adeo incertos caeca caligine soles,
Erramus pelago, totidem sine fidere noctes. Aenead. 3:

On Sea we rou'd three days as dark as night,
Three nights likewise not feeing starrie light.
And in S. Paul's coasting voyage by sea, when they had lost the sight of the
Sun and Stars all hope that they should be saved was then taken Act. 27: 20:
away.

Some notwithstanding have been found, who have thought this invention
ancient. Levinus Lemnius in his third book and fourth chapter de Occultis
naturae miraculis seems to doubt of it. An hoc instramentum Nauticum
superioribus seculis extitit, an nostro idaevo excogitatum, non ausi^ certo
pronunciare: whether this instrument of Navigation were in being in former
ages, or found out in latter times, I cannot certainly define. Now that which
chiefly causes him to make a doubt thereof, is those words of Plautus, Hic
ventus nunc secundus est, cape modo versoriam: In Mercatore S^na 5:
where by versoriam, Lemnius would have us understand the Mariners Compass,
and then adds, Quanquam ut opinor haec pixidicula nostro jam tempore magis
exculta sit, elimata, expolita, omniaque exactius demonstret, as in the same
chapter he speaks of printing: Yet I believe that this instrument was in
latter ages brought to exact perfection: But for Plautus I dare say he was
never guilty of such a meaning: Turnebus by Versoriam Lib. 20 advers. cap. 4.
understanding the rope with which the sail, others the rudder, with which the
ship is turned: Neither of which are impertinent or improper, so as there is no
necessity of applying it to the Mariners Compass. Stephen Pasquier in his 4
Book and 23 chapter of his Recherches of France brings it up as high as the
times of S. Lewis by the verses of one Hugh En sabible guyo^.
de Bercy, who lived in his reign, and as he pretends plainly describes it:
but whether the words be so plain as he makes them, or whether they were
published by some other since Bercy, but in his name, is very uncertain,
specially since no Poet or Historiographer contemporary with him, or more
ancient then he, are found to make mention thereof: and yet S. Lewis died not
much above 300 year since. Pineda for the more Lib. 4. de r^bus Solomonis c. 4.
commodious placing of Tharshis in Spain, is confident that it was in use in
Solomon's time, making his universal wisdom, and deep insight in the nature
of all things, the principal ground of his opinion: But Solomon's wisdom
though it were universal, and deep beyond all the children of the East,
inasmuch as God gave him latitudinem cordis, a large heart as the sand on the
sea shore, yet was it finite and limited as well in things natural as
supernatural. I doubt not but Adam in the state of integrity knew more then
Solomon, and yet I dare not pronounce him omniscious, that being an attribute,
(as is likewise Omnipotency, vbiquity and eternity) individually proper to the
Godhead, and incommunicable to any created substance, though merely
incorporeall, whether they be the damned or the blessed spirits. If then the
holy Angels, if Adam in Paradise knew not all things, nay if the Son of God
himself, as he was man confess himself to be ignorant of some things, why
should we think it strange to affirm, that Solomon knew not all things. If
there be such a secret as the artificial transmutation of other metals into
gold, (which by the experiments of many is confidently avouched) it is more
then probable he was ignorant of it: for had he known it, he needed not to have
sent his Navy to Ophir or Tharshis for gold; as likewise had he known this
secret of the Lodestone, it needed not to have spent three years in going and
coming, neither should his Mariners have needed to crave the assistance of
the Tyrians and Sydonians, as Pilots for the better conducting of them in their
voyage. I conclude then that either Solomon knew not this secret, or if he knew
it, he put it not in practice, or if he put it in practice, it was since lost
and recovered again, which to me seems the most unlikely of all.

Now to the authority of these three, who plead for the antiquity of this
Invention, may be opposed thirteen, and those in learning nothing inferior
who plead against it, maintaining it to have been an Invention of latter ages
unknown to the Ancients, as Acosta lib. 1. histor. Ind. cap. 17. Mariana lib.
1. de rebus Hispaniae cap. 22. Maluenda lib. 3. de Antichristo cap. 24. Gomara
tomo 1. Indicae Historiae cap. 10. Turnebus lib. 20. advers. cap. 4.
Pancirollus in his Nova reperta tit. 11. Salmuth in his Commentaries on that
place. Philander in his Comment. upon Vitruvius lib. 10. cap. 14. Lilius
Giraldus. lib. de Navig. cap. 1. Cardan de subtilitate lib. 17. Bozius de
signis Ecclesiae lib. 2. Bodin in his method of History cap. 7. Ramus in
Schol. Mathemat. lib. 2. and to those may be added many more, were I ambitious
in mustering up of names, or did the cause require it. Since the writing hereof
I find that our Fuller Miscell. 4. 19. thinks it likewise very probable, that
the Tyrians anciently had the use of the Compass, and that Solomon might be
the Inventor thereof, but against him may be produced the reasons before
pressed against Pineda, and not only the authorities already alleged, but
unto them we may farther add that of Gaspar Varrerius in his Commentary De
Ophyra Regione, Cujus vim nativamque lapidis in Arctos semper respectantis
antiquis ignotam fuisse manifestum est It is clear that the native property
of this stone of turning always to the North, was to the ancients unknown.

But a greater doubt presents it self about the time and Author of this
Invention, when and by whom it should first be found out and set on foot.
Doctor Gilbert our Countreyman (who has written in Latin a large and learned
Discourse of the properties of this stone) seems to be of opinion that Paulus
Venetus brought the Invention of the use thereof from the Chinese. Osorius in
his discourse of the acts of King Emanuel, referres it to Gama and his
Countrymen the Portugals, who as he pretends took it from certain barbarous
Pirates roauing upon the Sea about the Cape of good hope. Goropius Becanus
likewise thinks he has great reason to entitle it upon his Countrymen the
Germans, in as much as the 32. Hispanicorum l. 3.
points of the wind upon the Compass borrow the names from the Dutch in all
Languages. But Blondus, who is therein followed by Pancirollus, Italia
illustrata Regione 13.
both Italians, will not have Italy loose the praise thereof, telling us that
about 300 years ago it was found out at Malphis or Melpbis a City in the
Kingdom of Naples in the Province of Campania, now called Terra di Lavorador;
But for the Author of it, the one names him not, and the other assures us, he
is not known: yet Salmuth out of Ciezus and Gomara confidently christens him
with the name of Flavius, and so does Du Bartas in those excellent verses of
his touching this subject.

We Are not to Ceres so much bound for bread,
Neither to Bacchus for his clusters red,
As Signior Flavio to thy witty trial,
For first inventing of the Sea-mans dyall,
The Use of the needle turning in the same,
Divine device, O admirable frame
Whereby through The Ocean in the darkest night
Our hugest Carracks are conducted right,
Whereby we are stored with trou^h-man, guide and Lamp,
To search all corners of the watery Camp.
Whereby a ship that stormy heavens have whorld
Near in one night into another world
Knows where she is, and in the Card descries
What degrees thence the Aequinoctiall lies.
It may well be then that Flavius the Meluitan was the first Inventor of
guiding the ship by the turning of the needle to the North: but some German
afterward added to the Compass the 32 points of the wind in his own
language, whence other Nations have since borrowed it. But surely a pity it is
that the Author of such an Invention is not both more certainly known and
honorably esteemed: He better deserving in my judgment to be enrolled and
ranked among the great benefactors of the world, then many who for their
supposed merits, of mankind were deified among the Heathen.

Another excellent and secret conclusion upon this stone, pretended to be found
out in these latter times, is, that by touching two needles with the same
stone, they being severally set so as they may turn upon two round tables,
having on their borders the Alphabet written circlewise, if two friends
agreeing upon the time, the one in Paris, the other in London, (having each of
them their table thus equally fitted) be disposed upon certain days and at
certain hours to confer, it is to be done by turning the needle in one of
the tables to the Alphabet, and the other by Sympathy will turn it self in
the same manner in the other table, though never so far distant: which
conclusion if infallibly true, may likewise prove of good and great
consequence: howsoever I will set it down as I find it described by Famianus
Strada in imitation of the style and vain of Lucretius.

Magnesi genus est lapidis mirabile, cui si Lib. 2. Prolusione 6.

Corpora ferri plura stylosve admoveris, inde
Non modo vim motumque trahent quo semper ad vrsam
Quae lucet vicina polo se vertere tentent,
Verumetiam mira inter se ratione, modoque
Quotquot eum lapidem tetigere styli, simul omnes
Conspirare situm motumque videbis in vnum.
Vt si forte ex his altquis Romae moveatur
Alter ad hunc motum quamvis sit dissitus long
Arcano se naturai foedere vertat.
Ergo age si quid scire voles qui distat amicum
Ad quem nulla accedere possit epistola, sum
Planum orbem patulumque notas, elementaque prima,
Ordine quo discunt pueri, describe per or as
Extremas orbis, medioque repone jacentem
Qui tetigit magneta stylum, vt versatilis inde
Litterulam quamcunque velis contingerepossit.
Hujus ad exemplum simili fabricaveris orbem
Margin descriptum, munitumque indice ferri,
Ferri quod motum Magnete accepit ab illo,
Hunc orbem dissessurus sibi portet amicus;
Conveniatque prius quo tempore, queisve diebus
Exploret stylus an trepidet quidve indice signs.
His ita compositis si clam cupis alloqui amicum
Quem procul a Te Te terrai distinet ora
Orbi adjunge manum, ferrum versatile tracta,
Hic disposta vides elementa in margin toto
Queis opus est ad verba notis hunc dirige ferrum
Litterulasque modo hano modo and illam cuspide tange
Dum ferrum per eas iterumque iterumque rotando
Componas singillatim sensa omnia mentis.
Mira fides long qui distat cernit amicus
Nullius impulsu trepidare volubile ferrum
Nunc huc, nunc illuc discurrere conscius haeret
Obseruatque styli ductum sequiturque legendo
Hinc atque hinc elementa quibus in verba coactis
Quid sit opus sentit ferroque interpret discit.
Quin etiam cum stare stylum videt, ipse vicissim
Si quae respondenda putat simili ratione
Litterulis vary tactis rescribit amico:
O vtinam haec ratio scribendi prodeat vsu
Cautior and citior properaret epistola, nullas
Latronum verita insidias fluviosque morantes,
Ipse suis princeps manibus conficeret rem
Nos soboles scribarum emersi ex aequore nigro
Consecraremus calamum Magnetis ad aras.
The Load above all other stones has this strange property,
If sundry steels thereto, or needles ye apply,
Such force and motion thence they draw, that they incline
To turn them to the bear which near the Pole does shine.
Nay more, as many steels as touch that virtuous stone,
In strange and wondrous sort conspiring all in one,
Together move themselves, and situate together:
As if one of those steels at Rome bestir'd, the other
The selfsame way will stir though they far distant be,
And all through Natures force and secret Sympathy:
Well then if you of ought would feign advise your friend
That dwells far off, to whom no letter you can send;
A large smooth round table make, write down the Christcrosse row
In order on the verge thereof, and then bestow
The needle in the midst which touched the Load, that so
What note soever you list it straight may turn unto:
Then frame another orb in all respects like this,
Describe the edge, and lay the steel thereon likewise,
The steel which from the selfsame Magnes motion drew;
This orb send with thy friend what time he bids adeu:
But on the days agree first, when you mean to prove,
If the steel stir, and to what letters it does move.
This done, if with thy friend thou closely would advise,
Who in a country off far distant from thee lies,
Take thou the orb and steel which on the orb was set,
The christcrosse on the edge thou see in order writ,
What notes will frame thy words to them direct thy steel,
And it sometime to this, sometime to that note wheel,
Turning it round about so often till you find
You have compounded all the meaning of your mind;
Thy friend that dwells far off, o strange! does plainly see
The steel to stir, though it by no man stirred be,
Running now here now there: He conscious of the plot
As the steel guides pursues, and reads from note to note;
Then gathering into words those notes, he clearly sees
What Is needful to be done, the needle truchman is:
Now when the steel does cease its motion; if thy friend
Think it convenient answer back to send,
The same course he may take, and with his needle write
Touching the several notes what so he list indite.
Would God men would be pleased to put this course in ure,
Their letters would arrive more speedy and more sure,
Nor Rivers would them stop, nor thieves them intercept;
Princes with their own hands their business might effect:
We Scribes from black sea escaped, at length with hearty wills
At the altar of the Load would consecrate our quils.
Of this devise, how two absent friends might confer at great distance,
Viginerius in his Annotations upon T. Liuius, speaks somewhat in the 1316
column of his first volume; as namely that a letter might be read through a
stone wall of three foot thick, by guiding and moving the needle of a
compass over the letters of the Alphabet, written in the circumference: but
the certainety of this conclusion, I leave to the experiment of such as list to
make trial of it, and so conclude this comparison touching Wits and Arts with
the words of Bodi^: Non minus peccant Method. hist. cap. 7.
qui a veteribus aiunt omnia comprehensa, quam qui illos de veteri multarum
artium possessione deturbant, habet Natura scientiarum thesauros numirabiles
qui nullis aetatibus exhauriri possunt. They are no less to blame who affirm
all things to have been found out by the ancients, then they who would thrust
them out of the possession of many Arts found out by them: For the Nature of
sciences includes in it infinite treasure which can never be exhausted Or
rather with those of Lactantius worthy to be written in letters of gold, as
being no less true and pertinent, Lib 2. c 8. Divine. Inst.
then witty and elegant: Dedit omnibus Deus pro virili portione sapientiam, vt
and inaudita investigare possent, and audita perpendere; nec quia nos illi
temporibus antecesserunt, sapientia quoque antecesserunt, quae si omnibus
aequaliter datur, occupari ab antecedentibus non potest. Illibabili^est (...)
lux and claritas solis, quia vt sol oculorum, sit sapientia (...) est cordis
humani. Quare cum sapere, id est veritatem quaerere omnibus sit innatum,
sapientiam sibi adimunt qui sine vllo judicio inventa maiorum probant* and
(...) (...) more ducuntur. Sed hoc eos fallit quod Maiorum nomine posi^ non
patant fieri posse, vt aut ipsi plus sapiant quia Minores vocantur, aut illi
de^rint quia Maiores nominantur. God has given wisdom unto all according to
a competent measure, that they might both find out things unheard of before,
and weigh things already ^ound out* Neither because they had the start of us in
time, does it likewise follow that they have it also in wisdom, which if it
be indifferently granted to all, it cannot be forestalled by them which went
before. It is vnimpaireable like the light and brightness of the sun, it being
the light of man's heart as the sun is of his eyes. Sithence then to be wise,
that is, ^search the truth, is a disposition inbred in every man, they debar
themselves of wisdom, who without any examination approve the inventions of
their Ancestors, and like unreasonable creatures, are wholly led by others. But
this is it which deceiues them, the name of Ancestors being once set in the
front, they think it cannot be that either themselves should be wiser, because
they are called Punies, or the others should in any thing be mistaken, because
they are called their Ancestors. And thus have we seen that there is in
mankind no such universal and perpetual decay in regard of age and life, of
strength and stature, of arts and wits, as is commonly pretended: It now
remains, that in the last place we examine their manners and conditions,
virtues and vices, whether it be so that men always grow worse and worse, as
it is likewise generally and confidently both held and believed.

LIB. IV. Of the pretended decay in matter of manners, together with a large
proof of the future consummation of the world, from the testimonies of the
Gentiles, and the uses which we are to draw from the consideration thereof.
CAP. 1. That there is no such universal and perpetual decay in the manners
of men as is pretended, which is first proved in general, and then from
Religion the ground of manners.
SECT. 1. That there is a vicissitude and Revolution in virtues and vices, as
there is in Arts and Sciences
SVCH is the near affinity and mutual connection betwixt these four, Age,
Strength, Wit, and Manners, that as the three former ordinarily follow the
temper and complexion of the body, so for the most part does the fourth too;
though I must confess that by the freedom of the will in moral matters we
are more masters of the fourth, then of the other three, which are more
natural, and consequently less in our power to alter or command; as strength
then is the comfort of age, and (...) the grace of strength, and virtue, the
guide of wit: so age without strength is tedious, strength without wit
dangerous, wit without virtue hurtful and pernicious. If then having matched
men of latter ages with those of the former in regard of age, strength, and
wit, they should not likewise prove matchable in regard of virtue, it were a
blemish rather then an ornament, a discommendation then a praise.

Now though it be true that vice at this day so abounds through the world, as it
commonly does, and well may breed a doubt even in the best, whether these last
times be not indeed the worst, and as it were the lees and dregs of all ages;
yet when I consider that in these latter ages, (if we compare them with the
precedent since the Creation) a great part of the known world has been
converted to the Christian doctrine, and that the Author of it has told us,
By their fruits ye shall know them; me thinks I should wrong both him and
it, if I should yield that the world has not thereby been bettered, even in
regard of civil virtue and moral goodness: Deus vt parens diligentissimus
appropinquante vltimo tempore nuncium misit, qui vetus illud seculum fugatamque
Iusticiam reduceret, ne humanum genus maximis and perpetuis agitaretur
erroribus; Redijt ergo species illius aurei temporis, says Lactantius. God as
a most tender father, the Lib 5. (...). c. 7
end now drawing on, sent his Messenger, who should reduce that old age and
banished justice, least mankind should always be tossed up and down with
infinite and continual errors, so as now we have brought back again unto us
a representation of those golden times.

But as I cannot easily grant that men always, and in all places wax worse
and worse; so I do not believe that always, and in all places they wax
better and better, or that they stand at a stay: But as in the Arts and
Sciences; so likewise in matter of manners, there is a vicissitude, an
alternation and revolution as before has been touched in part. The world is
sometimes better and sometimes worse, according to the times of war or peace,
the conditions of Princes and Laws, and the execution of them. Sometimes
virtue increases in one kingdom and decreaseth in another, and again in the
same kingdom one vice grows up and another withers, at leastwise for a time.
This circulation of virtue and vice has been observed, and the observation
thereof commended to posterity by the soundest and sagest writers in Antiquity:
Nisi forte in rebus cunctis inest quidam velut orbis, and quemadmodum temporum
vices ita morum vertantur, nec omnia apud priores meliora, sed nostra quoque
aetas multa laudis and artium imitanda posteris tulit, says Tacitus. Unless
perchance there be in all things a certain circular change, and as there is by
turns Annal. l. 3. c. 12.
an intercourse of times, so also of Customs and Manners. Neither were all
things in ancient times better then ours, bur our age has likewise left to
posterity many things worthy praise and imitation And again, vitia erunt donec
homines, sed neque haec continua, and meliorum interventu Cerealis apud
Tacitum, hist. l. 4.
pensantur. Vices there will be, as long as men are, but these Iast not
always, and they are often recompensed by the intervening of better times. And
with him accords the grave Seneca: Hoc maiores nostri questi sunt, hoc nos
quaerimur, hoc posteri nostri querentur, euersos esse mores, De benef. l. 1. c.
10.
regnare nequitiam, in deterius res humanas and in omne nefas labi: at ista
stant loco eodem, stabuntque paululum duntaxat vltra aut citra mota, vt fluctus
quos aestus accedens longius extulit, recedens maiore littorum vestigio tenuit,
nunc in adulterio magis quam in alio peccabitur, abrumpetque frenos pudicitia,
nunc conviviorum vigebit furor, and foedissimum patrimoniorum exitium culina,
nunc cultus corporum nimius, and formae cura, prae seferens animi deformitatem;
nunc in petulantiam and audaciam erumpet male dispensata libertas, nunc in
crudelitatem priuatam ac publicam ibitur bellorumque ciuilium insaniam, qua
omne sanctum ac sacrum profanetur, habebitur aliquando ebrietati honor, and
plurimum meri cepisse virtus erit. Non expectant vno loco vitia, sed mobilia
and inter se dissentientia, tumultuantur invicem fuganturque. Caeterum idem
semper de nobis pronunciare debebimus, malos esse nos, malos fuisse, invitus
adijciam, and futuros esse. This our Ancestors complained of, this we
complain of, this our posterity will complain of, that manners are corrupted,
that wickedness reigns, that humane affairs grow worse and worse, but these
stand where they were, and so shall remain, being only at times a little
removed; sometimes this way, sometimes that way, as the waves which the tide
flowing carries farther in, but ebbing leaves farther off. Sometimes Adultery
spreads it self more then any other sin, and immodesty will endure no
bridle: and sometimes again the madness of feasting is in fashion and the
kitching the basest kind of consuming a man's patrimony; And then again the
immoderate decking of our bodies and care of preserving our beauty, which too
much discouers the deformity of the mind, sometimes liberty dispensed with
breaks out in to desperate boldness, sometimes into cruelty public and
private, and the rage of civil wars, whereby all holy things and places come
to be profaned, and the time will come when drunkenness shall be had in honor,
and it shall be held a virtue to swill down much wine. Vices rest not in any
one state or place, but shifting hither and thither, and sighting one against
another, they both assault and put one another to flight: But howeuer it go,
it shall always be truly said of us, that we are naught, naught we have
been, (and which I unwillingly add) we shall still be naught. And the same
Author having related a story out of Asclepiodorus, how Phillippe of Macedon
sent men down into an old mine to search what store was Natural. Quest. l. 5.
cap. 15.
left in it, and whether the covetousness of former ages had not drawn it dry,
cum magna haec voluptate legi, says he, intellexi enim saeculum nostrum non
novis vitijs sed iam antiquitus traditis laborare, nec nostra aetate primum
auaritiam venas terrarum lapidumque rimatam in tenebris male abstrusa
quaesisse: Illi quoque Maiores nostri quos celebramus laudibus, quibus
dissimiles querimur nos esse, spe ducti montes ceciderunt and supra lucrum sub
ruina steterunt. This I read with marveilous great content: for thereby I
understood, that our age was not burdened with new vices, but such as were
anciently practiced, nor that Avarice now first searched into the veins of the
earth and stones, seeking out those things which Nature has buried in
darkness. Even those our Ancestors, whom we so highly extol, to whom we
complain that our selves are unlike, in hope of lucre cut through mountains and
under danger of ruin stood upon their gain.

It cannot be denied, but that a wicked Governor has many times a good
successor, and a graceless father a godly and virtuous son.

Egregia est soboles scelerato nata parente:
A worthles sire begets a worthy son.
Thus Constantine succeeded to Dioclesian, Iouinian to Julian, Alexander
Seuerus to Heliogabalus, Hezekias to Ahaz, and Josias to Ammon. And doubtless
were the son always worse then the faher, the successor then the
predecessor, and succeeding ages then the proceeding, villny had long ere this
stretched it self to the utmost period, and that complaint which the satyrist
uttered by way of Poetical aggrauation had long before this time been
verified in truth and in deed:

Non habet vlterius quod nostris moribus addat
Posteritas.
Naught has posterity
Which to our manners may yet further added be.
SECT. 2. The extreme folly of the ancients, in adoring and invocating images.
IN this comparison of manners, I will first begin with the Religion of the
Ancients, which ouer-spread almost the whole world, because from their foul
errors in matters of the first Table we shall easily guess at their gross
irregularities in those of the second, the duties of the latter depending upon
the observation of the former: And besides in the very choice and exercise of
their Religion will appear much inhumanitie and brutish stupiditie; Their
Idols of gold, and silver, and stone, and wood were to the inspired penmen of
holy writ so ridiculous, that every where they inveigh against them as most
sottish vani^es, and the worshippers of them, as men void of common Reason,
showing themselves more blockish then the very blocks they adored, in that
being themselves made according to Gods image, they worshipped images made with
their own hands, and bestowed upon their own works the Deity of him, from
whom they received breath and being. Their Idols are silver and gold, says the
Prophet David, even the works of men's hands, they have a mouth and speak not,
eyes have they and see not, they have Ps. 115. 4.
ears and hear not, noses have they and smell not, they have hands and touch
not, feet have they and walk not, they that make them are like unto (...),
and so are all they that put their trust in them. And the Prophet Esaias having
Cap: 44 9. etc.
showed how a man plants a tree, and when it is grown up cuts it down, with
part thereof he baketh his bread, with part he rosteth his meat and warmeth
himself, and with the residue thereof he makes his god, even his Idol: The
Carpenter stretches out a line, he fashioneth it with a red thread, he planeth
and he pourtraieth it with the compass, and makes it after the figure of a
man, and according to the beauty of a man, that it may remain in an house;
then boweth he and worshippeth, and prays unto it, and says, Deliver me for
thou art my God: And thereupon inferres, they have not known nor understood,
for God has shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their hearts, that they
cannot understand. And the Prophet Ierimy much to like purpose, one cutteth a
tree out of the Forest with an axe, and another decketh Ier. 10. 3. etc.
it with silver and with gold, they fasten it with nails and hammers, that it
fall not, the Idols stand up as a palm tree, but they speak not: They are
borne because they cannot go, and then concludes, They dote and are foolish,
for the stock is a doctrine of vanity. But most lively and elegantly, yet with
scorn and derision have we this blockish vanity described in the book of
Wisdom. Miserable Cap. 13. 10. etc
are they, and among the dead is their hope that call them Gods, which are the
works of men's hands, gold and silver, and the thing that is invented by Art
and the similitude of beasts, or any vain stone that has been made by the
hand of antiquity. Or as when a Carpenter cutteth down a tree meet for the
work, and pareth off all the bark thereof cunningly, and by Art makes a
vessel profitable for the use of life, and the things that are cut off from
his work he bestows to dress his meat to fill himself, and that which is
left of these things which is profitable for nothing, (for it is a crooked
piece of wood, and full of knobs) he carueth it diligently at his leisure, and
according as he is expert in cunning, he gives it a proportion, and
fashioneth it after the similitude of a man, or makes it like some vile beast,
and straketh it over with vermilion, and painteth and covers every spot that
is in it; And when he has made a convenient Tabernacle for it, he sets it
in a wall, and makes it fast with iron, providing so for it lest it fall: for
he knows that it cannot help it self, because it is an image that has
need of help: Then he prays for his goods, and for his marriage, and for his
children, he is not ashamed to speak unto it that has no life, he calls
on him that is weak for health, he prays unto him that is dead for life, he
requires help of him that has no experience at all, and for his journey him
that is not able to go, and for gain and success in his affairs, asks
ability to do of him that is most unable to do any thing.

This childish foppery the Primitive Christians also scoffed and laughed at,
Quae amentia est, aut ea fingere quae ipsi postmodum timeant, aut timere quae
finxerunt, says Lactantius: What a madness is it either to make things which
themselves fear, or to fear those things which themselves have made. Nec
intelligunt homines ineptissimi quod si sentire simulacra and movere possent,
vltro adoratura homines fuissent a quibus sunt expolita. Neither do these
foolish men understand that the images they adore, had they but sense and
motion, would adore them who framed and formed them. Sed haeo nemo considerat,
ac mentes eorum penitus succum stultitiae perbiberunt: adorant ergo
insensibilia qui sentiunt, irrationalia qui sapiunt, exanima qui vivunt,
terrena qui oriuntur e coelo. Iuvat ergo velut in aliqua sublimi specula
constitutum vnde vniversi exaudire possint Persianum illud proclamare,

O cur as hominum, o quantum est in rebus inane,
O curvae in terris animae and coelestium inanes!
But these things none considers, their minds being thoroughly drenched with
the liquor of foolishnes: They which have sense adore things without sense,
which have life things without life, which are from heaven things earthly. It
were good then from some high tower that all might hear it, to proclaim alowd
that of Persius,

O cares of men! O world all fraught
With vanities! O minds inclined
Toward earth, all void of heavenly thought!
And Sedulius an ancient Christian Poet, by Nation a Scot, has excellently
described this palpable folly,

Heu miseri qui vana colunt, qui cord sinistro
Religiosa sibi sculpunt simulacra, suumque
Factorem fugiunt, and quae fecere verentur,
Quis furor est quae tanta animos dementia ludit?
Vt volucrem, turpemque bovem, torvumque draconem,
Semihominemque canem supplex homo pronus adoret.
Ah wretched they that worship vanities,
And consecrate dumb Idols in their hearts,
Who their own Maker God on high despise,
And fear the work of their own hands and Art!
What fury, what great madness does beguile
Men's minds, that man should ugly sh^pes adore
Of birds, or bulls, or dragons, or the vile
Half dog half man on knees for aid implore.
To these ugly shapes does Seneca allude: Nu^ina vocant quae si accepto spiritu
occurrerent monstra haberentur. Divine powers they call those which if they
should meet having life put into them, would be held monsters. And one of
their own Poets seems to ^est at their grossness herein.

Olim truncus eram ficulnus invtile lignum,
Quem Faber incertus scamnum facere^ne, Priapum Hora^us.

Maluit esse deum.
Even now I was the stock of an old fig tree,
The workman doubting what I then should be,
A bench or god, at last a god made me.
It is indeed true, that the Romans for a time were altogether without images
for any religious use, but afterward they received into their City those of all
other Nations by them conquered, so as they who were Lords of the whole world,
became slaves to the Idols of all the World: Which bables, as witnesses S.
Augustine. that learned Varro both bewailed and utterly condemned in express
words: Qui De Civit. Dei l. 4. c. 31.
primi simulacra Deorum populis posuerunt, ij and civitatibus suis timorem
ademerunt, and errorem addiderunt: They who first erected Idols for the peoples
use thereby both abolished all fear of the Deity and introduced error. But
the wise Seneca thus derides them, Simulacra Deorum venerantur, illis
supplicant genu posito, illa adorant, and cum haec suspiciant, fabros qui illa
fecere contemnunt: the Images of the Gods they worship, those they pray unto
with bended knees, those they adore, and while they so greatly admire them,
they contemn the Artificer that made them.

SECT. 3. Their gross and ridiculous blockishnesse in the infinite multitude
of their gods.
THeir strange infatuation will yet appear farther unto us if we rise a
little higher from the Images to the Gods which they represented, and surely
whether their practice about their images, or their opinion touching their Gods
were more gross and ridiculous, it is hard to define: Whether we regard their
number or their condition, or their manner of service. For their number he that
reads Boccace his books de Genealogia Deorum, will easily find them almost
numberless; so as the Apostle might well say, There be Gods many, and Lords
many. Crinitus 1 Cor. 8. 5. De (...) disciplina 3. 14.
out of Hesiodus makes them thirty thousand strong: and the Iuppiters alone out
of Varro no less then three hundred. There were Dij majorum gentium, which
were worshipped generally throughout the greatest part of the world; and Dij
Tutelares, gods of several Nations and Provinces, chosen to be their patrons
and guardions, which may be gathered by those high places which Solomon built
for his Idolatrous wives, wherein they worshipped the several Gods of their
several Nations, Ashtoreth the 1 King. 11.
Goddess of the Sidonians, and Milcom the God of the Ammorites, Cbemosh the
God of the Moabites, and Molech the God of the Ammonites: so likewise for all
the rest of his outlandish wives, which burnt incense and offered unto their
Gods, whereby it appears that every Nation had a God of his own, and yet
farther may it be seen by the practice of those Nations which Salmanezer
transplanted into the Samaritan Cities, of whom it is recorded, that though
they feared the Lord, yet they worshipped every one his own peculiar God, of
whom there is a Catalogue in the same place set down, The Babylonians Succoth
Benoth, the Cuthites 2 King. 17.
Nergall, the Hammathites Ashima, the Avites Nibhaz, and Tartak, the
Sepharvites Adramelech, and Anamelek. And as several Nations and Provinces
chose to themselves their Gods, so did likewise the Cities as we may partly see
by that rabble of them mustered up by Rabshaketh in his Oration to King
Hezekiah, where is the God of Hamah and Arpad, Capl 18.
where is the God of Sepher-vaim Hevah and Iuah: and in imitation of the
Gentiles did the men of Judah multiply their gods according to the Ier. 2. 28.
11. 13
number of their Cities. Neither did Nations, Provinces, and Cities only
affect to have every one unto themselves their own peculiar and several Gods,
as their Patrons and defenders, but the same was likewise followed by all their
several families, who still had their Lares and Deos Penates, that is, their
household Gods, as the Protectours of their families, whom because they adored
in the secret and inward parts of their houses, the Poets use to call Deos
Penetrales: Yea and as Pliny reports, not only several families had their
several Gods, but also every several person would adopt a several God of his
own; insomuch that he thought the number of Gods to be multiplied above the
number of men. Major Coeli^um populus etiam qu^m hominum intelligi potest, cum
Lib. 2. cap. 7.
singuli quoque ex semetipsis singulos Deos faciant, I^nones Geniosque
adoptando sibi. We may well conceive greater multitudes of Gods then of men,
seeing every man adop^eth as he pleases both greater and small^r gods to
himself. All which considered, otiosum est per omnia Deorum nomina per^urrere
qui colerentur a veteribus, says Ter^ullian. It were an idle thing to attempt
to run through the names of all the Gods which the Ancients worshipped, they
had so many old Gods and new Gods, he Gods and she Gods, city Gods and
country God, common Gods and proper Gods, land Gods and sea Gods. And with
Tertull^an herein accords S. Augustine, Quando autem possins vno loco libri
h^us ^morari De Ciui^. Dei l. 4. (...).
omnia nomina Deorum aut Dearum, quae illi grandibus volum^bus vix
comprehendere potuerunt singulis rebus propria dispertie^tes officia Numinum.
How can all the names of their Gods and Goddesses be recounted in one chapter
of this book, which themselves could not range within the compass of many
great volumes, appointing a p^rticular God to wait on every particular thing;
nay for some thing, says he, they had many Gods, as namely for corn they had
Segetia for the sowing of it, while it lay under the earth Tutelina, when it
sprang up Proserpina, Nodotus when it shut into a blade, when it spired
Voluti^a, when the ear opened Patilena, when it brake forth Host^lina, when it
blosomed Flora, when it kerned Lacturtia, when it grew ripe Ma^uta, when it was
reaped (...). His conclusion is, which also shall be mine for this point, Ne
omnia commemoro quia me piget quod illos non (...): neither do I name all, for
that it grieueth me to wri^e what they were not ashamed to act.

SECT. 4. The most shameful and base condition of their gods.
THe quality and condition of their gods was doubtless much more shameful th^n
their multitude. The common opinion touching their great god Jupiter was, that
he was intombed in Creete, and his monument was there to be seen. Whereupon
Lactantius wit ily demands, Lib. 1. c. 11.
Quomodo potest Deus esse alibi vivus alibi mortuus, alibi habere templum,
alibi sepulchrum? Tell me I beseech you how can the same god be alive in one
place and dead in another, have a temple dedicated to him in one place, and a
tomb erected in another. Nay Callimachus himself in his hymn on Jupiter,
calls the Cretians liars in this very respects, (...) etc. which part of his
hymn is thus translated into Latin by Bonaventura Vulcanius.

At certe mendax est Creta, sepulchrum
Quae posuit tibi qui haud moreris, nam semper es idem.
The Cretians always liars are, who raised unto thy name
A sepul^her, that never die, but ever art the same.
Moreover, they gave divine honor to notorious common strumpets, as unto
Goddesses, to Venus, to Faula, to Lupa the nurse of Romulus, so called among
the sheepheards for the common prostitution of her Lactantius. l. 1. c: 20.
body, and to Flora, who having gained much by her meretricious trade; she made
by her will the people of Rome her h^ire, and left a sum of money, by the use
whereof, her birthday was yearly to be celebrated, with the setting forth of
games, which in memory of her they called Floralia. Nay, their great Goddess
Juno; they make both the wife and the sister of Jupiter, and Jupiter himself
with the other gods, no better then Adulterers, Sodomites, murderers, thieves:
Neither were these things concealed or whispered in private, but published to
the world; they were lively described by their Painters in their tables, by
their Poets in their verses, and acted by their Players upon their stages.
Quanta maiestas putanda est. Quae adoratur in templis, illuditur in theatris,
what great majesty call ye me that, which is adored in the temples, and
Lactant. l 5. c. 21.
profaned in the Theaters. And so far were the worshippers of these goodly
gods from punishing or censuring them therein, that they were highly applauded
and approved by the people, and rewarded by the state: Neither were these
things written or spoken by Lucian, or such as scoffed at Religion, but by
those who professedly undertook the praise of their Gods, Non enim ista
Lucilius narrat aut Lucianus qui Dijs and hominibus non pepercit, sed hi
potissimum qui Deorum lauds canebant, and Cap. 9.
quibus credemus si fidem laudantibus non habemus? These things are not
reported by Lucilius or Lucianus, who spared neither God nor man, but specially
by them who sung the praises of the Gods; and to whom I pray you in such cases
should we give credit, if not to them, who purposely seek to commend?

Besides, they worshipped ridiculous gods, as Fortunam, Fornacem, Mutam, the
passions of the mind and the diseases of the body, Timorem, Pallorem, Febrem,
nay Vices, Priapum, Cupidinem, non nomina colendorum sed crimina colentium, not
names fit for Divine powers to be worshipped, being nothing else but the vices
of the worshippers. Hereunto may be added their silthy gods, Crepitus ventris,
Cloacina, sterquilinium, well deserving that reproach which is cast upon them
by Aristophanes, that they were Dij Merdiuori, and so Moses calls the^ in
express terms, dirty dunghill gods, as the original is rendered by Iunius
and Tremelius. Deos stercore^s, Deuteronomy. 29. 17. Hist. l. 3. c. 6.
Four whole days, says Tacitus, Cremona ministered matter to sack and to
burn, and all things beside both holy and profane being consumed into ashes;
the temple of Mephitis without the walls remained untouched, either because it
stood out of the way, or by reason of some divine virtue of the goddess: Now
would you know what this goodly Lady was, surely none other then the Goddess
of ill savors: and these kind Sir H. Savill in his marginall notes on that
place. Deuteronomy. 32. 13.
of Gods and Goddesses Lactantius deservedly wishes to be ever present with
their worshippers: Yet not content with this, they worshipped the Devils
themselves, they sacrificed unto devils not unto God, says Moses: And I say,
says the Apostle, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, 1. Cor. 10. 20.
they sacrifice to Devils and not to God.

What should I speak of the Thebans worshipping a wezell, the Trotans a mouse,
the Egyptians an onion or a leeke, and such like contemptible things: which
notorious folly, Iuvenall, who lived a while amongst them, thus wittily derides.

Porrum and caepe nefas violare and frangere morsu
O sanctas Gentes quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Satyr: 15.

Numina!
A leeke, an onyon o'tis wickedness,
These once to violate and to eat no less,
Sweet Saints they are, and holy ones I trow,
To whom their gods do in their gardens grow.
And diverse such absurd Gods they worshipped, which would make a modest man
even blush to name, as Sybilla has truly noted:

-- Haec adoratis
Et multa alia vana quae sane turpe fuerit praedicare
Sunt enim Dij hominum deceptores stultorum:
These foolish Gods and many more
Like vain, they worship and adore:
Which filthy were to name in Schools,
Such filthy gods deceive but fools.
SEC. 5. Their barbarous and most unnatural cruelty, in sacrificing their
children to their Gods.
NOw if from the multitude and quality of their Gods we proceed yet a little
farther, to search into the manner of their service, we shall easily find
that more frentike and unreasonable, then either of the two former. Which
madness of theirs is well set forth by Seneca, Si (...) fragmentis.
intueri vacet quae faciunt, quaeque patiuntur superstitiosi, inveniet tam
indecora honestis, tam indigna liberis, tam dissimilia sanis, vt nemo fuerit
dubitaturus, furere eos si cum paucioribus furerent, nunc sanitatis patrocinium
est insanientium turba: If a man had but the leisure to look into those
things, which men led with superstition both do and suffer, he shall find them
so unbefitting honest, so unworthy of ingenuous, so unlike sound and sober
minds, as no man would doubt but they were stark mad, were but the number
of them fewer that thus go a madding, whereas now the only plea for themselves
that they are in their right wits is the number of mad men.

Alexander ab Alexandro has of set purpose composed an entire Dierum G^ialium.
l. 6 c. 26.
chapter touching this point, where the maine matter he insists upon, that
made the sacrifices of the Heathen most odious, was the effusion of humane
blood in the service of their Gods; yet had this barbarous unnatural practice
spread it self well near over the known world: It was in use among the
Trojans, as it should seem by that of Virgill, touching Aeneas:

Vinxerat and post terga manus quos mitteret vmbris
Inferias caeso sparsurus sanguine flammas. Aeneid. 11:

Their hands behind their backs he bound whom he had destined
A sacrifice unto the ghosts, and on whose flames to shed
Their blood he purposed.
And again in another place,

-- Sulmone creatos Aeneid. l. 10.

Quatuor hic iuuenes totidem quos educat Vfeus
Viventes rapit, inferias quos immolet vmbris
Captiuoque rogi perfundat sanguine flammas.
Sulmos four sons alive he took, Vfeus four sons likewise,
Whom to the ghosts he purposed eftsoons to sacrifice,
And on those burning carkases to spill their captive blood.
Whereupon Lactantius cries out, quid potest esse hac pietate dementius, quam
mortuis humanas victimas immolare, and ignem cruore hominum tanquam Lib. 5. c.
10.
oleo pascere? What can be more frentike then this kind of piety, which
sacrifices living men for the ease of the dead, and feeds the fire of the
Altar with humane blood, as it were with oil. The Grecians in like manner were
infected with this bloody and deadly disease:

Sanguine placastis Divos and Virgin caesa
Cum primum Iliacas Danai venistis ad or as Aeneid. l. 2.

Sanguine quaerendi reditus, animaque litandum
Argolica.
With blood and offering of a maid the Gods were pacifide,
When first to Troy-ward ye were bound, with blood ye must again
Seek your return, with Grecian soul they must be satisfide
The Virgin he means was Iphigenia, who was sacrificed in the sight of her
father Agamemnon, which gave occasion to that of Lucretius,

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum?
Such, so much wickedness Religion could persuade.
This wicked custom was likewise taken up by the Carthaginians, as appears by
Silius Italicus:

Mos fuit in populis quos condidit advena Dido
Poscere caedi Deos, veniam, ac flagrantibus aris Lib. 4.

(Infandum dictu) parvos imponere natos
Vrna reducebat miserandos annua casus.
The ancient custom of that state, Queen Dido stablished,
Was this, with humane sacrifice the Gods they worshipped.
On burning Altars (out alas) their children young they slew,
An yearly lot these cruelties did solemnly renew.
And Lactantius reports out of Pescenius Festus, that the Carthaginians having
Lib. 1. c. 21.
for a time intermitted that kind of sacrifice, and being ouerthrown in a
battle by Agathocles King of Sicill, for the paci^ying of their God Saturn,
whom by their loss they conceived to be displeased with the^; they sacrificed
at once unto him two hundred children, sons to the chief Nobility of the city;
whereby perchance, says he, they gave themselves a greater blow, then
Agathocles their professed enemy had done. The Gauls also our next neighbors
were guilty of this devilish kind of worship, if we may credit Lucan.

Et quibus immitis placatur sanguine diro
T^utates, hor^ensque feris altaribus Haesus
Et Taranis Scythicae non mitior ara Dianae.
And they that use with cursed blood their Idol Gods to please
Teutates fierce, and Hesus grimme whom naught else may appease;
But sacrifice of humane flesh and Taranis likewise
Worshipped as cursed Diana is just after Scythike wise.
Neither were the Moabites free from this horrible sin* as may be seen in the
2 of Kings and the 3, where the King of Moab took his own son, as some think,
or others the King of Edoms son, and offered him for a burnt offering upon
the wall. And generally it was practiced by the Inhabitants of the land of
Canaan, Their sons and their daughters they burnt V 27. Deuteronomy 12 31.
in the fire to their Gods. The parents killed with their own hands souls
destitute of help. Good God, that the candle of reason should be so far
Wisdom 12. 6.
dimmed, and the image of God defaced in man, as to think that an acceptable
sacrifice, which was in truth an horrible and sacrilegious impiety, as if
religion did extinguish natural affection, or that were lawful at the Altar
or in the temple, which in the market place was most unlawful, and punishable
in an high degree: Nonne satius esset pecudum more viuere, says Lactantius?
were it not better to live as beasts without all sense of religion, then to
exercise it in such savage manner: Yet was not this so strange in the barbarous
nations, their religion being herein suitable to their manners, as in the
Romans, the professed Masters forsooth of Morality and Civility: Yet came this
damnable practice long in use among them too, until it was to be abolisht by
decree of Senate, during the Consulship of Cornelius Lentulus, and Licinius
Crassus: Which makes me the more to wonder that Virgill held amongst them, as
the world then went; an honest understanding man, should after the publishing
of this decree, commend it in Aeneas as an act of piety, and not rather censure
it as a most abominable impiety.

Haec culpa non illius fuit qui literas fortasse non didicerat, sed tua qui cum
esses eruditus, ignorasti tamen quid esset pietas, and illud ipsum quod
nefarie, quod detestabiliter fecit, pietatis esse officium credidisti, says
Lactantius. This was not so much Aeneas his fault, who was perchance
altogether unlearned, Lib. 5. c. 10.
as thine, who being endued with knowledge, yet wast ignorant what was piety,
and beleeuest that to be a pious act, which he most wickedly and detestablely
committed.

But that which I most admire, is, that it should creep in amongst the Jews,
the peculiar people of the true God, as himself complains by the Prophet
Ierimy: And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley
of the son of Hinnon, to burn their sons and their daughters in the Ier. 7. 31.
fire, which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart; By the
Prophet Ezekiell, when they had slain their children to their Idols, then they
came Ezekiel. 23* 39.
the same day into my sanctuary to prrphane it; and by the Prophet David, They
were mingled among the Heathen, and learned their works, and they served Psalm.
106. 35. 36 37. 38.
their Idols which were a snare unto them; yea they sacrificed their sons and
their daughters unto Devils, and shed innocent blood, even the blood of their
sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan, and
the land was polluted with blood. Thus Ahaz made molten images for Baalim, and
burnt his children for sacrifice before the Idol Moloch, or Saturn, 2 King.
16. 3. 2 Chronicles. 28. 3. Seldom de Dis Syris.
which was represented by a man like br^sen body bearing the head of a calfe,
set up not far from Jerusalem, in a valley shadowed with wood, called Gehinnon
or Tophet, from whence is the word Gehenna used for hell. The children offered
were enclosed within the carcass of this Idol, and as the fire increased, so
the sacrificers with a noise of Cymbals and other instruments filled the air,
to the end, the horrible cries of the children might not be heard; and hence
the place borrowd the name of Tophet, from Top, which signifies a timbrell; of
which most detestable impiety, able to make a man's hair stand an end and his
heart tremble even at the relation thereof: Paulus Fagius has written at large
in his Commentary upon the Chalde Paraphrase, and before him S. Hierome upon In
Lev^icum.
the tenrh of S. Matthew, and since him Wolphius in his Expositions on the
second book of Kings, added for supplement of Peter Martyrs, thus sharply but
justly censures it; Fuit autem haec plusquam belluina immanitas; quae enim
ferae suos catulos non potius ament, amplectantur, foveant, nutriant, quam
occidant, ne dum crudeliter excruciatos necent; This monstrous inhumanity was
more then brutish: for what wild beasts do not rather love, embrace, nourish
and cherish their young ones, then kill them and cruelly torment them to death?

SECT. 6. Their monstrous beastliness in the worship of Priapus and
Berecynthia, as also of their doting folly in their divinations, together with
a touch upon the childish fables of the Jewish Rabbines, the absurd opinions
and horrible practices of ancient Heretics in the primitive Christian Church,
and the incredible ignorance and superstition of the Romish.
I cannot tell whether their cruelty were greater in the worship of Moloch, or
their beastliness in the worship of Priapus, described by Gyraldus at large,
in his history of the Gods: And Tostatus in his 50 Syntagm. 8.
question upon the 20 of Exodus. It was so obscene, as the very mention of it,
cannot but offend chaste ears; Hic morbus, hoc crimen, hoc dedecus habet
August. de Civ. Dei, 6. l. 8. cap.
inter illa sacra professionem quod in vitiosis hominum moribus vix habet inter
tormenta confessionem. They profess in the holding of those sacrifices, that
beastly crime, which the most vicious men will hardly confess upon the rack.
I will therefore skip over it as cleanely as I may, as men commonly do over
boggs and quagmires. The shape in which this God was represented, was such as
nature has taught us to hide: The gestures of the Priests in serving him, such
as I wonder their Matrones Nos pudore pulso (...) sub Jove Coleis apertis.
and Virgins, in whom were any sparks of modesty, could behold it with
patience: And for the people who came to worship, the sacrifice being ended,
they all stepped aside into a thicked, which was always planted near the
Altar of this God, and there like brute beasts promiscuously satisfied their
lust, thereby as they conceived best pleasing their God; which was the cause,
as it seems, that the true God commanded, that no groves should be planted
near the place of his worship, and if any were, they should be cut down. This
Priapus, as S. Hierome and Isidore are of opinion, was the same with that
Baal-peor or Beel-phegor, Lib. 1. contra Iouinianum, c. 12. Originim, c. 8.
Numb. 25. 5.
whom the Moabites and Madianites adored, and the Israelites themselves for
love of the Madianitish women: And the same S. Hierome makes Maacha the mother
of Asa, guilty of the same villainy, in his commentaries upon the fourth of
Hosea, where he thus translates part of the fifteenth chapter of the first
book of Kings: Insuper and Maacham matrem suam amouit, ne esset princeps in
sacris Pryapi, and in luco eius: Moreover he deposed Maacha his mother, that
she might not be chief in the sacrifices of Pryapus and his groves.

Of much like condition to this worship of Pryapus, was that of Berecynthia,
the mother of the gods, as we find it described by S. Augustine, out of his
own experience; his words are these. Ante eius Lecticam De Ciui^. Dei lib. 2.
c. 4.
die solenni la^ationis eius, talia per publicum cantitabantur, a nequissimis
scenicis qualia non dico matrem Deorum, sed matrem qualiumcunque Senatorum vel
quorumlibet honestorum virorum, imo vero qualia nec matrem ipsorum Scenicorum
deceret audire: Such filthy stuff was by loose lewd varlets sung before her
charet on the solemn day of her lavation, as was utterly (...), I will not say
for the mother of the Gods, but of any Senarour, nay of any honest man, nay of
the singers themselves to hear: and perchance, says he, they would have
blushed to have spoken that before their own mothers at home, which before the
mother of the Gods in the (...) and hearing of innumerable multitudes of both
sexes they boldly sang, and therevpo^ breaks out into this exclamation, Quae
sunt sacri legia, si illa erant sacra? quae inquinatio, si illa lavatio? what
should we call sacrilege, if this were sacrificing? what pollution, if this
lauation? and if this be sacrilege, then surely the worshipping of God by
blasphemies and cur^ings, as did the Lyndians, is a degree beyond sacrilege;
who notwithstanding proceeded so far in this devilish mad custom, vt ea
sacra pro violaris haberentur, si quando inter solennes ritus vel imprudenti
alicui ex^ider et bonum verbum, as witnesses Lactantius, that they held it a
violation of their sacrifice, if during their solemn Ceremonies, but a good
Lib. 1. c. 21.
word chanced to slip from any man though unawares. Now what a lamentable
case is this, to consider that the common enemy of mankind should so far
prevail in blinding their understandings, as to conceive that the Author of
life should be worshipped with the effusion of humane and innocent blood, the
fountain of holiness with brutish impurity, the father of blessings with
execrable cursings?

Hereunto may be added the vain divinations which the Romans made upon the
entrals of Beasts, upon the flying, the feeding, the singing, the cherping of
birds: But the sage Cato and those of the wiser sort well saw the doting folly
of these lying vanities, Potest Augur Augurem Cicero de divinatione, l. 2.
videre, and non ridere? Can one Diuiner look upon another and not smile? And
the same Cato, as S. Augustine reports it, when one asked counsel of him in
sober earnest, what harm he thought aboded him because De doctor. Christiana,
l. 2. c. 21.
Rats had gnawne his hose, he answered with a jest, that it was no strange thing
to see that, but it had been much more strange if his hose had devoured the
Rats. Tully likewise in his disputations touching such arguments, when one to
enforce the verity of divination had said, that a victory De divinatione, lib.
2.
which fell to the Thebanes, was foreshewed by an extraordinary crowing of
cocks, he could reply upon that with a very smooth and quick put off, that it
was no miracle cocks should crow, but if fishes had so done, that had bin
wonderful indeed.

I will conclude this point, as Alexander ab Alexandro does his last Die^um
Genialium.
book: Quantum debemus Christo Domino Regi and Doctori nostro, quem (...)rum
Deum veneramur and scimus, quo praemonstrante explosa monstrosa ferarum Gentium
doctrina rituque immani and barbaro, veram religionem edocti* humanitatem and
verum Deum colimus, evictisque erroribus and infandis inep^ijs quas Prisci
coluere, quid quemque deceat and quibus sacris quaque mente Deum colere
oporteat noscitamus. How much do we owe to Christ our King and Master, whom we
acknowledge and worship as true God, by whose guidance and direction, the
monstrous doctrine and barbarous rites of those savage nations being chased
away, and we being taught true Religion, embrace civility and the true God; and
the errors and unspeakable follies which the Ancients had in honor and
reverence, being brought to light, we know what our duty is, with what
ceremonies, and with what mind God is to be worshipped; which is in effect
the same with that of the Apostle, Thanks be to God, who has delivered us
from the power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of Coloss. 1.
13.
his dear son.

If I were disposed to enlarge this discourse, here might easily be remembered
the unsavory tales, the childish fancies and fables of the Jewish Rabbis in
their Talmud and Cabal, the most absard opinions and horrible practices of
Ancient Heretics in the Primitive Church, the incredible ignorance and
superstition among those, who for the space of many ages were commonly
accounted the best, nay the only Christians: But each of these would require a
large volume, and are already fully discovered by others. The first by
Gala^inus de arcanis Catholicae veritatis, and Buxdorsius in his Synagoga
Iudaica; the second by (...), Philastrius, Epiphanius, Augustine, ^rateolus,
Alphonsus a Castro and others; the third by the writers of the reformed
Churches, who have set themselves to oppose the corruptions and abuses of the
Church, or rather the court of Rome: And howbeit the Romanists in requital
here of would prove their Adversaries doctrine to open a gappe to disobedience
and licentiousnes; yet I doubt not but the more sober minded among them, find
that to proceed, rather out of eagerness, and heat of disputation, then from
any solid reason or settled judgment; since it is certain, that since Luther
awakened the world, the manners even of the Romish Clergy themselves are not a
little reformed.

CAP. 2. Touching the Laws of the Ancient Grecians and Saxons, whereof some
were wicked and impious, others most absurd and ridiculous.
SECT. 1. The unjust and absurd Laws of Solon the Athenian Emperor.
AS Religion is the hinge upon which the government of the Political state
depends and mooues, so next after it good and wholesome Laws serve much for the
bettering of a Commonwealth in matter of manners. Law being therefore defined
by Plato to be a reasonable Rule leading and directing men to their due end
for a public good, ordaining De Legibus.
penalties for them that transgress, and rewards for them that obey. And by
Cicero to be the highest and chief reason grafted in nature, commanding Lib.
1. de Legibus.
those things which are to be done, and forbidding the contrary. But by the
Civilians most briefly and properly, Lex est sanctio sancta, jubens honesta,
prohibens contraria, Law is an holy decree, (that is, a decree not to be
violated) commanding honest things, and forbidding the contrary. Now See Fi^z
Herbert in his Treatise of Policy and Religion. part. 1. c. 7.
as the ancient Paynims were defective in points of true Religion: so were they
likewise in making just Laws, sometimes commanding where they should forbid,
and again forbidding where they should command, rewarding where they should
punish, and punishing where they should reward. I will instance only in some
particular Laws of the Graecians, and of our Predecessors the Saxons.

Among the Graecians four Lawmakers were most renowned, Solon, Lycurgus,
Plato, and Aristotle, two of which actually founded Commonweals, the one the
Athenian, the other the Lacedemanian. The other two only framed them in Idea
or speculation, yet all provided Laws for them, such as they were. I will
begin with Solon, accounted one of the seven Sages in Greece, highly commended
for his great wisdom in making Laws both by Aristotle and Plato, who
proposes him and Lycurgus as patterns for all such as shall institute
Commonweals, and devise Laws for them. Solon then resolving for the
releeuing of the poor to make a Law for the abolishing and cancelling all
contracts and Plutarch in Solone.
obligations of debts past, and imparting his mind therein to some of his
entire friends, they seeing his resolution, borrowed great store of money, and
employed it in the purchase of land, whereupon it followed that when Solon
published his new Law, they remained exceedingly enriched, their Creditors
defrauded, and he much suspected of deceit, as to have had secret intelligence
with them, and part of their gain. And although it seems that therein he had
wrong, for he lost by his own Law, as some write, 15 talents which were owing
him, yet in two things he cannot be excused, the one in that he caused not his
friends to restore the money which they had guilefully borrowed, and the other
that without examination of the particular causes and reasons of every man's
debt, he ordained a general abolition of all debts both good and bad, whereby
as well those which were able to pay, as the unable were discharged, and all
Creditors without difference defrauded, contrary to all equity and justice,
which as Cicero says speaking of the like case, requires Offic. lib. 2.
above all things that every man have his own, and that equal regard be had
to the rich as well as to the poor; which (says he) is no way observed, cum
locupletes suum perdunt, and debitores lucrentur alienum, when rich men loose
their own, and debtors gain that which belongs to other men.

Another of Solons absurd Laws was, that whosoever in any public sedition
should be nuter (...) and take neither pa^, should remai^ ever after infamous:
his reason was for that he thought it not convenient that any man should so
much love his own ease, as not to participate of the trouble of the
Commonwealth whereof he was a member, which reason of his together with the
Law it self, Plutarch wisely and worthily rejects, for that it would be an
assured means to put (as it were) fire to gunpowder, and to set all the
Commonwealth on a ^ame without help of any internal remedy. For (says he)
as in a sick body all the hope of help within it self is to be expected from
the pa^s that are sound, and therefore when the body is wholly corrupted, there
is no help of remedy but from abroad, even so in a politic body sick with
sedition, all the internal remedy is to come from the whole sound parts
thereof, that is to say, such as are Neutralls, who may labor with the one
side, and with the other to compound the quarrel: for otherwise where all is
in tumult, no remedy can be expected, except it come from abroad, and therefore
Plutarch holds it for the highest and principal point of Politic Science
in any governor to know how either to prevent seditions that they never grow,
or else quickly to appease them when they are grown, be they never so little.
For as the least spark that is may fall into such matter, that it may set an
whole house on fire: so the least civil sedition may fall among such persons
and in such times that it may put a whole Commonwealth in combustion; and
utterly ruin it.

SECT. 2. The unreasonable and irreligious Laws of Lycurgus the Lacedemonian
Lawgiuer.
NOw for Lycurgus if we examine his Commonwealth and the Laws thereof, we
shall find that he likewise failed both in true prudence and in moral virtue.
For whereas a good Lawmaker ought to frame his Commonwealth no less to
religion, justice, temperance, then to fortitude, that it may stand and
flourish as well in time of peace, as in time of war, his Laws tended
principally to make the people valiant and warlike, whereupon it followed that
the Lacedaemonians flourished so long as they had wars, and when they came to
enjoy peace, they fell to decay within a while, as Aristotle notes. Whereby
Pol. 2. 7.
the weakness of the Laws of Lycurgus evidently appeared. For as peace is not
ordained for war, but war for peace, as motion and labor is ordained for
rest: so in like manner a Commonwealth is rather to be framed and ordained
for peace then for war: and yet so for both, that it may stand by both: But
in the Common-weaelth of the Lacedaemonians this was no way performed. For the
Laws of Lycurgus tending only to make them strong, laborious and valiant,
could not make them religious, just and truly temperate. Which for civil
discipline and peaceable government is most requisite. For as for Laws tending
to religion, we find none made by Lycurgus, nor any religious act of his but
only one, more ridiculous then religious, as that he dedicated an Image to
laughter, which he made a God, or at least would have to be worshipped for a
God, to make the people merry at their public feasts and meetings; and
besides he opened a great gappe to injustice and to all cosenage and deceit:
for he ordained that it should be lawful for any man to steal any kind of
meat, so that he were not taken or discovered in the doing of it, and that
boys and children should have so little allowed them to eat, as they should
be forced to sharke and proole for their better provision to make them thereby
more industrious, nimble and quick of spirit, and others more wary and
watchful to keep well that which they had. Insomuch that who could steal
most cunningly was most commended; But who sees not that this was the next way
to fill the Commonwealth with Thieves. For is it likely that those who from
their infancy are brought up in pilfering trifles, will afterward, when they
have got the habit and ability thereof, forbear to steal things of great
importance? Or can thieves practice their occupation with more safety any way
to become in the end most expert, and thereby pernicious to the Commonwealth,
then with the warrant and under the protection of the Law? seeing the penalty
which was ordained for them that were taken with the manner, was not inflicted
for the injustice of the fact, but for their lack of skill and dexterity in
the performance, which must needs make every man labor to excel in the act
of theeuery. Finally, when the Law not only permits, but induces men to
deceive sometimes, and in some things, does it not also dispose, and as it were
direct them to deceive as often and howsoever they may. Therefore good and wise
Lawmakers seek to prevent evils, and to cut off the occasions of vice, and
not to minister matter thereunto, which in our corrupt natures needs a bridle
to restrain it, and not a spur to prick it forward.

This may also be said in respect of another Law of Lycurgus, inducing to
intemperancie and all kind of incontinencie. For although he ordained some
things notably for the education of youth, tending as it seemed to the
repression of concupiscence and dissolute life, as a very spare and homely
diet, hard bedding of reeds, or (as some write) no bedding at all, continual
labor and exercise, one only garment for Justin. l. 3.
the whole year and such like; yet it appears that his meaning was none
other therein, but only the better to enable them to endure the labor and
toil of the war. For he ordained other laws so much in favor and
furtherance of lust and all carnallity, yea in the worst kind, that it might
justly be said, he made his whole commonwealth worse then a Burdell. For he
instituted certain wrestlings, and dances, and other exercises of boys and
wenches naked, to be done in public at diverse times of the year, in the
presence both of young and old men, which what effect it might work in the
minds and manners of their citizens, any man may easily judge, especially,
seeing that both their laws and customs, permitted that men should be
inamored of boys, which was held for laudable and necessary for their good
education, it being presumed that their lovers would carefully instruct them in
virtue.

Furthermore adultery which was punished with death, not only by the law of
Moses, but also by the laws of other nations, as a thing pernicious to the
commonwealth, was not only permitted, but also approved by Lycurgus his law,
ordaining, that if an old man married a young wife, she might with her husbands
license, make choice of any young man that she liked to have a child by him,
which her husband brought up as his own: And if a valiant or virtuous man, as
good soldiers were there termed, liked well of another man's wife, he might
demand leave of her husband to have issue by her: which was not denied, but
thought convenient for their commonwealth, to maintain a good race and breed
of valiant men; as Plutarch signifies in defense of this law of Lycurgus.

This then being so, what marvel is it that all sin of the flesh, and
beastliness, reigned more in Lacedemonie, then any where else in Greece, as
Aristotle witnesses: Nay, what wonder is it that Almighty God of Po^it. l 2.
c. 7.
his just judgment plagued them for it in the end, with a memorable ouerthow
in the plain of Leuctra, where they lost the dominion of Greece by the occasion
and for the punishment of an horrible rape committed Doidor: Sicul^s. 15. c. 14.
by two of their citizens.

SECT. 3. The impious and dishonest Laws of Plato.
TO Solon and Lycurgus, we may add Plato and Aristotle, who though they
founded no commonweals, as did the other two, yet they framed in writing
either of them one, in which they labored to show both the excellency of
their own wits, and perfection of humane policy; wherein nevertheless they
evidently showed the imbecility and imperfection of both: For what can be more
absurd or more impious, then the community which Plato ordained in his
commonwealth, not only of goods and possessions, but also of women, to the
end, that no man should have any thing proper or peculiar to himself: in
so much, that Fathers and Mothers should not know their own children, neither
yet any child know his own parents; whereby he thought to establish in the
commo^-wealth such a perfect unity, that no man should be able to say, that is
thine, or this is mine: But every one have a general care of all; whereas if
that law were in practice, the utter overthrow of the commonwealth, and of all
humane society must needs follow thereon. For Matrimony being taken away, and
such a promiscuous and beastly procreation introduced, the natural love
betwixt parents and their children, brethren, kinsfolk, and allies, and all
consanguinity, kindred, and affinity would be quite abolished: horrible incest
between kinsfolk, brethren and sisters, father and daughter, mother and son
which all nations abhor, would ordinarily be committed: And by occasion of
quarrels, which sometimes could not be avoided; one brother would kill
another, the father the son, and the son the father, for lack of knowledge
one of another: Besides many other great inconveniences, declared very
particularly and at large by Aristotle in the second book of his Politiques;
And Lactantius in the third of his Divine Institutions, where he proves this
imaginary community of Plato, Cap. 1. 2. 3. and 4. Cap. 21. 22.
to take away frugality, abstinence, shamefastnes, modesty, and justice it
self, the mother of all other virtues. Sic honesta and legitima esse incipiunt
quae solent flagitiosa and turpia iudicari, in as much as thereby those things
are held honest and lawful, which are commonly accounted foul and wicked. Sic
virtutem dum vult omnibus dare, omnibus ademit, and by this means, while he
pretended to make all virtuous, he made all vicious. Nam re^um proprietas and
vitiorum and virtutum materiam continet, communitas autem nihil aliud quam
vitiorum licentiam: For a propriety in things, contains in it the subject
matter as well for virtue as for vice to work upon, but community has nothing
in it besides the liberty of vice. Qui ergo vult homines adaequare, non
matrimonia, non opes subtrahere debet, sed arrogantiam, superbiam, tumorem, vt
illi potentes and elati pares se esse mendicissimis sciant; detracta enim
diuitibus insolentia and iniquitate, nihil intercrit vtrumne alij divites alij
pauperes sint, cum animi pares sint quod efficere nulla res alia preter
religionem Dei potest. Putavit ergo fe justitiam invenisse cum eam prorsus
everterit, quia non rerum fragilium sed mentium debet esse communitas. He then
that would bring in an equality among men, must not take away weddings and
wealth, but arrogance, pride, and swelling, that those, who by reason of their
great power, are puffed up, may know themselves to be peers to the poorest
beggars. For remove insolency, injustice, and uncharitableness from the rich,
and there will no inconvenience follow from having some poor, and others
rich: Their minds being equal, which nothing but true religion can possiblely
effect. Plato thought then he had found justice, when indeed he overthrew it,
in as much as there ought not to be a community of things, but of minds. And
farther, both Aristotle and Lactantius though upon different reasons, show,
that the unity which Plato sought by this means to establish in his
commonwealth, would not follow thereupon: Non invenit concordiam quam
quaerebat, quia non videbat vnde oriatur, he found not that concord he sought
for, because he saw not from whence it sprang. Whereby appears his double
error, the one, that he found not that virtue he sought to plant, the other,
that he found that vice he sought to prevent; And so I pass to another most
dishonest and unreasonable law of his, which was this.

Having ordained that young men should for increase of their strength and
agility of body, exercise themselves naked at certain times and in certain
places appointed for that purpose, called Gymnasia; commanded also not as
Lycurgus did in Lacedemonia, that young girls and wenches should dance naked
amongst boys; but far more absurdly, that women in the flower of their youth
should dance, run, wrestle, ride, and do all exercises with young men naked
as well as they, which, says he, whosoever misliketh, understands not how
profitable it is for the commonwealth. But who could imagine that the Prince
of Philosophers, (for so was Plato esteemed) could so far forget himself, as
having instituted and framed his commonwealth to all kind of virtue, as the
only means to arrive to perfect felicity, who, I say, considering this, could
imagine, that this great Professor, Master, and Teacher of virtue, would not
only permit, but also ordain a thing so contrary to his own profession, to the
end of his commonwealth, and to his own laws, precepts, and counsels, as the
lascivious aspect of naked women, whereby the fire of concupiscence being
kindled in men, and the bridle of natural modesty taken from women, what else
could follow thereon but all beastly dissolutenes and carnality of life, as well
in the one as in the other. For precepts are given, and laws ordained in vain
against incontinencie, when the occasions, provocations, and nourishments
thereof are permitted, which whosoever uses to admit, plaieth with the flame,
as does the fly, and commonly is burned thereby.

SECT. 4. The vnnatutall and unchaste laws of Aristotle.
BUt perhaps some may think that Aristotle, Platoes scholar, who was the
wonder of the world for his wit, and undertook to censure and syndicate both
his Master, and all other Lawmakers before him, saw cleerer in matter of laws
for the reformation of manners and the good of the commonwealth then he. Let
us then examine him a little, and we shall find that he erred more absurdly
then any of them: This may appear by two of his laws; whereof the one was,
that if a man had any deformed or lame child, he should cast it out like a
whelpe, and expose it to perish: And the other was, that if a man had above a
Polit. 7. c. 16.
certain number of children, which number he would have to be determined
according to every man's ability, his wife should destroy the fruit in her
womb, when she found that she had conceived; wherein he showed himself more
unnatural and inhumane then the very brute beasts. For, as Cicero says very
well, these two things cannot agree together, to wit, that nature would have
procreation, and that it would Lib. 3. de Finibus.
not have the creature when it is borne to be beloved and conserved; the which
appears, says he, evidently in brute beasts, whose labor and care in the
conservation of that which is borne of them is such, that we acknowledge the
force and voice of Nature therein. What then can be more dissonant from Reason
and Nature, then that a man who is borne and naturally inclined to clemency,
humanity and piety, should show himself unkind and inhumane not toward
beasts, but toward men, not toward strangers or servants, but toward his
own offspring, and that not for any fault of theirs, but for some defect or
deformity of body, which they could not either prevent or remedy, and ought
rather to move a man to compassion and pity, then to cruelty. Expectet aliquis
ut alieno sanguini parcant, qui non parcunt suo: non possunt innocents
existimari, qui viscera sua in praedam canibus obijciunt, and quantum in ipsis
est crudelius necant, quam si strangulassent, says Lactantius. Can any man
expect Lib. 6. cap. 20.
they should spare other men's blood, that spare not their own? innocent they
cannot be held, who expose their own bowels for a prey to dogs, and as much
as in them is, kill more cruelly then if they had strangled them.

Besides such corporal defects do not always nor often hinder the operation
of the mind and understanding, and therefore it may very well happen by the
execution of this inhumane Law of Aristotle, not only that a Father shall be
deprived of a son, but also the Commonwealth of a serviceable and notable
member. For as Seneca says, ex casa vir magnus exire potest, and ex deformi
humilique corpusculo formosus animus and magnus, A worthy man may come out of a
base cottage, and a beautiful high spirit out of a low deformed body.

The like may be said of the other Law of Aristotle concerning abortion or the
destruction of the Child in the mothers womb, being a thing punished severely
by all good Laws as in^urious not only to nature, but also to the
Commonwealth, which thereby is deprived of a designed Citizen, as Cicero
terms it, speaking of a woman of Miletum in Asia, who having procured
abortion of her child a little before her time of travel was condemned to
death, neque injuria, says he, quia designatum Cic. per A. Cluentio.
reipub. civem sustulisset, and very justly for that she had made away one
that was designed to be a Citizen of the Commonwealth: In which respect the
Civil and Common Law do grievously punish all wilful abortion after
conception, and the Canonists teach it to be a mortal sin.

And here I cannot forbear to say somewhat of another Constitution of
Aristotle's, which I know not whether it were more absurd or ridiculous: for
whereas he forbade in his Commonwealth the use of lascivious pictures and
images, lest young men, and specially children Pol. 7. 17.
might be corrupted by the sight thereof, nevertheless in the same Law he
excepteth the Images and pictures of certain Gods, in whom, says he, the
custom allows lasciviousness, meaning no doubt the painted tables and
graven stories of the adulteries of Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and other Gods and
Goddesses, set forth euery-where among the Paynims, as well in private houses
as in their Temples and other public places. Wherein may be observed the
ridiculous absurdity of this great Philosopher, for what could it avail to
take away all other wanton pictures and representations that might corrupt the
minds of youth, when he expressly allows the use of the lascivious pictures
of the Gods, which must needs corrupt them much more? and as it were instill
into them vicious affections and desires together with their religion, yea by
the example of their Gods; by the imitation of whom they could not but hope to
attain as well to perfection of virtue, as to eternal felicity, believing as
they did, that they were true Gods. For how could any man be persuaded that
adultery deserved punishment, or was not a great, yea a divine virtue seeing
Mars taken tardy with Venus, or Jupiter stealing away Europa in shape of a
bull, violating Leda in the form of a Swan, and entering into the house of
Danae by the lover like a golden shower; would not any man that should be
religiously devoted to these Gods, be animated by the sight thereof to do the
like? yea and children learning their religion, and not only hearing, but
seeing everywhere by pictures and images that such acts were committed by
their Gods, could they imagine that the same were evil and not to be imitated?
This is very well declared by Lucian of his own experience, who in his
Dialogues makes Menippus say thus, When I was yet but a boy, says he, and
heard out of Homer and Hesiod of the Adulteries, fornications, rapes and
seditions of the Gods, truly I thought that those things were very excellent,
and began even then to be greatly affected toward them: for I could not
imagine that the Gods themselves would ever have committed adultery if they had
not esteemed the same lawful and good: And the like signifies also Cheraea in
Terence, who beholding a table wherein it was painted, how Jupiter deceived
Danae when he came in In Eunuch.
at the top of the house, says, that he was greatly encouraged to defloure a
young maid by the example of so great a God: at quem Deum, says he, qui
templa coeli summa sonitu concutit, ego homuncio hoc non facerem? ego vero
illud ita feci and lubens. But what God was this trow you? marry he who shakes
the highest Temples of Heaven with thunder; and therefore might not I who am
but a silly wretch do the like? yes truly I did it and that with all my
heart. And it is doubtless most true which S. Augustine has observed to this
purpose, magis intuentur quid fecerit Jupiter, quam quid docuerit Plato vel
censuerit Cato: they rather considered what Jupiter did, then what Plato
taught, or Cato thought.

SECT. 5. The barbarous and uncivil laws of the Gauls and the Saxons our
Predecessors.
NOw these Laws of the Graecians were not more dishonest and vnmorall then
were those of the Gauls and Saxons our Predecessors uncivil and barbarous; I
mean their ordeall Laws which they used in doubtful Cases when clear and
manifest proofs Pasq 4. 1. 2. Verstig. c. 3.
wanted to try and find out whether the accused were guilty or guiltless.
These were of four sorts, as Aeneas Sylvius, Beatus Rhenanus, Johannes
Pomarius, Cornelius Killianus, and others in their Histories and Chronicles
report. The first was by Campfight or Combat, the second by iron made red hot,
the third was by hot water, and the fourth by cold water.

For their trial by Camp-fight, the Accuser was with the peril of his own
body to prove the accused guilty, and by offering him his glove or gantlet to
challenge him to this trial: which the other must either accept of, or
acknowledge himself culpable of the crime whereof he was accused. If it were
a crime deserving death, then was the Campe-fight for life and death, and that
either on horseback or on foot: if the offense deserved imprisonment and not
death, then was the Camp-fight accomplished when the one had subdued the other
by making him to yield, or unable to defend himself, and so be taken prisoner:
the accused had the liberty to choose another in his steed, but the accuser
must perform it in his own person, and with equality of weapons. No women
were admitted to behold it, nor men children under the age of thirteen years;
the Priests and people did silently pray, that the victory might fall to the
guiltless. And if the fight were for life and death, a Beer stood ready to
carry away the body of him that should be slain. None of the people might
cry, skrecke, make any noice, or give any sign whatsoever. And hereunto at
Hall in Suevia (a place appointed Munsler. l. 3.
for Campfight) was so great regard taken, that the Executioner stood beside
the Judges with an axe ready to cut off the right hand and left foot of the
party so offending. He that being wounded did yield himself, was at the mercy
of the other to be killed or let to live: if he were slain, then was he
carried away and honorably buried, and he that slew him reputed more
honorable then before: But if being overcome he were left alive, then was he
by sentence of the Judges declared utterly void of all honest reputation, and
never to ride on horsbacke, nor to carry arms.

The trial by red hot iron, called Fire-Ordeall was used upon accusations
without manifest proof, though not without suspicion, that the accused might
be faulty; the party accused and denying the offense, was adjudged to take red
hot iron, and to hold it in his bare hand, which after many prayers and
invocations that the truth might be manifest, he must either adventure to do,
or yield himself guilty, and so receive Aventin. l. 4.
the punishment that the Law according to the offense committed should award
him. Some were adjudged to go blinde-folded with their bare feet over
certain plow-shares, which were made red hot and laid a little distance one
from another, and if the party in passing through them did chance not to tread
upon them, or treading upon them received no harm, then by the Judge he was
declared innocent: And this kind of trial was also practiced here in England,
(as was likewise the Camp-fight for a while) upon Emma the mother of K. Edward
the Confessor, who was accused of dishonesty of her body with Allwin B. of
Winchester, and being led blind-folded to the place where nine hot Culters were
laid, went forward with her bare feet, and so passed over them, and being past
them all and not knowing it, good Lord, said she, when shall I come to the
place of my purgation, then having her eyes uncovered and seeing her self to
baue passed them, she kneeling down gave God thanks for manifesting her
innocence in her preservation, and in memorial thereof gave nine Lordships to
the Church of Winchester, and King Edward her son repenting he had so
wrongfully brought his Mothers name into question, bestowed likewise upon the
same Camden in Dorcet.
Church the I Will of Portland with other revenewes. A much like trial unto this
is recorded of Kunigund, wife to the Emperor Henry the second, who being
falsely accused of adultery, to show her innocence did in a great and
honorable assembly take seven glowen irons one after another in her bare
hands, and had thereby no harm.

The trial called Hot water, Ordeall was in cases of accusation as is before
said, the party accused being appointed by the Judge to thrust his arms up to
the elbowes in seething hot water, which after sundry prayers and invocations
he did, and was by the effect that followed judged faulty or faultles.

Lastly, cold water Ordeall was the trial, which was ordinarily used for the
common sort of people, who having a cord tied about them under their arms,
were cast into some river, and if they sunk down to the botttome thereof
until they were drawn up, (which was within a very short limited space) then
were they held guiltless, but such as did remain upon the water were held
culpable, being, as they said, of the water rejected and cast up. These kinds
of impious and unjust laws, the Saxons for a while after their Christianity
continued, but were at last by a decree of Pope Stephen the second utterly
abolished, as being a presumptuous tempting of God without any grounded reason
or sufficient warrant, and an exposing many times of the innocent to manifest
hazard.

CAP. 3. Touching the insufficiency of the precepts of the Ancient
Philosophers for the planting of virtue, or the rooting out of vice, as also of
the common error touching the golden age.
SECT. 1. Touching the insufficiency of the precepts of the ancient
Philosophers for the planting of virtue, and the rooting out of vice; as also
of the manners of the Ancients, observed by Caelius secundus Curio, out of
Iuvenall and Tacitus.
TO these laws of the Graecians and Germans, may be added the opinions and
precepts of the Ancient Philosophers, touching virtue and vice, final
happiness and the state of the soul after this life which were as diverse one
to another as they were all erroneous and opposite to the truth, the growth of
virtue or suppressing of vice. What could possiblely ^ore hinder the course of
virtue, then the doctrine of the Epicureans, that sovereign happiness
consisted in pleasure? or more strengthen the current of vice, then that of the
Stoics, that all sins were equal. The Epicureans though they granted a God,
yet they denied his providence, which should serve as a spur to virtue, and a
bridle to vice. The Stoickes, though they granted a divine providence, yet
withal they stiffely maintained such a fatal Necessity, not only in the
events of humane actions, but in the actions themselves, as thereby they
blunted the edge of all virtuous endeauours, and made an excuse for vicious
courses. Again, the Epicurean gave too much way to irregular affections; and
on the other side, the Stoicke was too professed an enemy to them, though
regulated by reason; but both of them doubted, if not denied the immortality of
the soul, whereby they opened a wide gappe to all licentiousness, not
censureable by the laws of man, or which the executioners whereof either
through ignorance could not, or through fear or favor would not take notice of.
Which has often made me wonder that the commonwealth of the Jews would
suffer such a pestilent sect in the bowels of it, as the Sadduces, who flatly
denied, not only the resurrection of the body, but the immortality of the
soul. Since Act. 23. 8.
then the Christian religion, and that alone teaches both, as fundamental
articles of our belief, and withal a particular providence of God, extending
to the very thoughts, and a particular judgment after this life, rewarding
every man according to that he has done in the flesh, whether it be good or
evil; and besides, requires a reformation of the heart and inward man, the
fountain and source of all outward actions and speeches; it is most evident,
that howsoever our lives be, yet our rules tend more to virtue and honesty
then did those, either of the Gentiles, or of the Jews; who although they were
not all infected with the foul leprosy of the Sadduces, yet it is certain,
that these doctrines and rules were not in the law of Moses and the Prophets so
clearly delivered, as now they are by Christ and his Apostles in the Gospel;
nay the law it self permitted unto the^ such a divorce, though for the hardness
of their hearts, as is not now allowed. And though the Law allowed not
Polygamie, yet Mat. 19. 8.
in regard of their frequent practice, we have great reason to conceive, that
they scarce held it to be a sin. And the Pharisees, though of all other sects
they pretended, and seemed to be the most zealous and strict obseruers of the
Lan^; yet teaching others and themselves, practicing the observation thereof as
they did, only in regard of outward conformity, thereby perhaps made their
disciples formal Iusticiaries, but withal Mat. 5.
damnable hypocrites, boiling in malice, and lust, and covetousness while they
set a fair face on it, and made a goodly semblance of holiness, piety, and
devotion. And if it so fared with the Jews, no marvel that the Gentiles,
(their natural inclination carrying them headlong to wickedness, and withal
their religion, their laws, the doctrine and examples of their Teachers, being
as so many provocations to draw them onward) proved such indeed as the Apostle
describes them to be in the 1 of the Romans, full of all unrighteousness
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousnes, full of envy, of murder,
of debate, of deceit, taking all things in evil part, whisperers,
backebiters, haters of God, doers of wrong, proud, boasters, inventers of evil
things, disobedient to Parents, without understanding, covenant breakers,
without natural affection, such as never can be appeased, merciless, which
men though they know the Law of God, how that they which commit such things are
worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but favor them that do them. And
so I pass from the root to the fruit, from the causes to the effects, from
their laws and precepts touching manners, to their practice, and customs, and
manners themselves. And here I must freely profess my self to accord with
Sidonius Apollinaris, veneror antiquos, non ita tamen vt aequaeuorum meorum
virtutes and merita postponam: Lib. 3. Ep. 8.
I have the Ancients in such due respect and veneration as they deserve, yet so
as I would not willingly disesteeme or undervalue the virtues and merits of
those who have lived since, or now live in the same age with me. The Ancients
I know well, had many great virtues, and we no less vices, yet let no man be
so unwise or unjust, to surmise that either the former ages were free from
notorious vices, or the latter void of singular virtues. And surely, he that
shall read Bohemus of the manners of the Gentiles, or the books of Judges,
the Kings, the Chronicles, the Prophets, and Josephus of the manners of the
Jews, will easily acknowledge the former: Whereunto we may add the testimony
of Coelius Secundus Curio, a witty and learned man of this age in his Epistle
prefixed to his commentary upon Iuvenall, where he tells us, that meeting with
those verses of Horace.

Damnosa quid non imminuit dies?
Aetas parentum peior avis tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
What does not wastfull time impair?
Our Fathers worse then Gransires are,
We worse then they, our progeny
More vicious then ourselves will be.
He began to doubt of the truth of them, and thereupon fell to a serious
inquiry thereinto, and for his better proceeding in that search, made special
choice of two Authors, Tacitus and Iuvenall, the one held as impartial in
history as the other in Satyrs, to make report what they found in matter of
manners in their times, and having thoroughly consulted with them both, but
chiefly with the latter; from them he makes this relation, Quibus auditis,
says he, and nostri seculi cum illa facta contentione deprehendt long ab illa
nostram aetatem vitijs, illam a nostra multis and magnis virtutibus superari:
Upon the hearing of them, and the comparing of this present age with that, I
found that ours was much surpassed by that in vice, and that again by ours in
many and great virtues. Yet long before Horace did Aratus in Phoenomenis take
up the same complaint:

Aurea degenerem pepererunt saecula prolem,
Vos peiorem illis sobolem generabitis. --
Those golden sires a baser race begat:
Your race shall be yet more degenerate.
But Hesiod in his (...), is more advised and moderate, hoping, it seems, for
better times then himself saw.

O vtinam quinto hoc minime mihi vivere saeclo,
Sed fas vel post nasci, aut ante perire fuisset.
Would God this fifth age I had never seen,
But or had died before, or after been.
For with Ovid I can scarce hope that any should accord and profess,

Prisca iuvent alios, ego nunc me denique natum
Gratulor.
Let others like old times, but I am glad
That in this latter age my birth I had,
SECT. 2. Touching that idle tale of the golden age first forged by Poets, and
since taken up by Historians.
THat which has deceived many in this point is that idle tale and vain fancy
forged by the Poets, and taken up by some Historians, and believed by the
vulgar of the four ages of the world. The first of gold, the second of silver,
the third of brass, and the fourth of iron. Thus elegantly described by the
wittiest of Poets.

Aurea prima sata est aetas quae vindice nullo Ovid. Met.

Sponte sua sine lege sidem rectumque colebat,
Poena metusque aberant, nec vincla minacia collo
Aere ligabantur, nec supplex turba timebat
Iudicis ora sui; sed erant sine judice tuti, etc.
Postea Saturno tenebrosa in Tartara misso
Sub Jove mundus erat, subijtque argented proles,
Auro diterior fulvo, pretiosior aere, etc.
Tertia post illam successit ahenea proles,
Saevior ingenijs, and ad horrida promptior arma.
Non scelerata tamen. De duro est vltima ferro
Protinus erupit venae pejoris in aevum
Omne nefas, fugere pudor, verumque fidesque
In quorum subiere locum fraudesque, dolique,
Insidiaeque, and vis, and amor sceleratus habendi.
The golden age was first, which vncompell'd,
And without rule in faith and truth excelled:
As then there was not punishment nor fear,
Nor threatening Laws in brass prescribed were,
Nor suppliant crouching prisoners shook to see
Their angry Judge, but all was safe and free, etc.
But after Saturn was thrown down to Hell,
Jove ruled, and then the silver age befell.
More base then gold, and yet then brass more pure, etc
Next unto this succeedes the brazen age,
Worse natured, prompt to horride war and rage,
But yet not wicked stubborn, yr'n the last,
Then blushlesse crimes which all degrees surpast
The world surround, Shame, faith and truth depart,
Fraud enters, ignorant in no bad Art,
Force, treason, and the wicked love of gain, etc.
And from hence it seems was that of Boethius borrowed

Faelix nimium prior aetas
Contenta fidelibus arvis. Lib. 2. Met. 5

Nec inerti perdita luxu,
Facili quae sera solebat
Iejunia solvere glande,
Nec Bacchica munera nor at
Liquido confundere melle,
Nec lucida vellera serum
Tyrio miscere veneno.
Tunc classica saeva tacebant
Odijs neque fusus acerbis
Cruor horrida tinxerat arma.
Vtinam modo nostra redirent
In mores tempora priscos.
Thrice happy former age well pleased
With faithful fields, from riot free,
Whose hunger readily was eased
With akornes gathered from the tree,
They skilled not with Lyaeus juice,
The liquid honey to compound,
Nor knew that twice the Serian fleece
In Tyrian die was to be drowned,
Alarmes of war were silent then,
And horrid arms all smeared with blood
Through malice shed of cruel men
Were yet unseen. O would to God
These times so much degenerate
Might turn again to the ancient state.
But that all this ado about the golden age is but an empty rattle and
frivolous conceit, like Apuleius his tale of a golden ass, Bodin is so
confident, that he breaks forth into this assertion, Aetas illa quam auream
Method. Hist. c. 7.
vocant, si ad hanc nostram conferatur, ferrea videri possit. That which they
call the Golden age being compared with ours, may well seem but iron: And in
truth he may boldly affirm it, if that be true which Cicero writes of it. Fuit
quoddam tempus cum in agris homines passim bestiarum Cicero de inventione
Rhetor. l. 1
more vagabantur, and sibi victu ferino vitam propagabant, nec ratione animi
quicquam, sed pleraque viribus corporis administrabant. Nondum divinae
religionis non humani officij ratio colebatur, nemo legitimas viderat nuptias,
non certos quisquam inspexerat liberos, non jus aequabile quid vtilitatis
haberet, acceperant. Time was when men like beasts wandered in the fields, and
maintained their life by the food of beasts* neither did they administer their
affairs by justice, but by bodily strength: There was no heed given either to
Religion or Reason, no man enjoyed lawful marriage, nor with assurance beheld
his own issue, neither were they acquainted with the commodity which upright
Laws bring with them. During this golden age flourished Camesis and Saturn,
and there is no doubt but by Camesis is understood Cham the son of Noah, and by
Saturn Nimrod, whose son Jupiter Belus (famous for the deposition of his
father, incest with his sister, and many other villainies) saw the last of this
age. Now how virtuous these men and times were, appears by the story of Moses.
Cham like a most ungracious child discovers and derides the nakedness Genesis 9.
22.
of his aged and worthy Father, and was therefore deservedly accursed to be a
servant of servants. Nimrod grandchilde to Cham, as his name signifies, was a
notorious Rebel, Robustus venator coram Domino, a Cap. 10. v. 9.
great Oppressor, a Robber, as Aristotle numbers robberi^ among the several
kinds of hunting: And besides he is thought to have been the ringleader in
that out-ragious attempt of building the tower of Babel. And such kind of men
are those Giants supposed to have been, who Cap. 11. 4.
before this are called Mighty men, men of renown; In as much as Moses Genesis 6.
4.
presently adds, And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually: And it repented tbe Lord that he had made man on the earth, and V
5. 6.
it grieved him at his heart. Quibus verbis intelligit, says Cassanion, tantas
De Gygant. c. 1.
ea-tempestate fuisse morum corruptelas, vt omne vitiositatis, nequitiaeque
genus vbique regnaret. Cum autem ex robore and potentia qua isti pollebant
nominis celebritatem adepti sint, in eo animadvertere licet qualis fuerit prima
mundi nobilitas aestimata, non quae pietatis, justitiae, aliusve cujusdam
virtutis specie, and pulchritudine illustris appareret, sed quae solius
potentiae, fortitudinisue titulo sese venditabat: Nam qui tum caeteris
valentiores, robustioresque erant, ij vim aliis audacter inferentes,
nobiliores, praestantioresque censebantur. Vnde fortassis illud invaluit, ut
gentilitia quorundam insignia non nisi crudelium belluarum, rapaciumque ferarum
and volucrium habeant imaginem. By which words he understands, that such and so
great was the universal corruption of manners in those times, as all kind of
vice and wickedness euery-where reigned: And in that the men of that age are
said to have gotten renown by means of their exceeding great might, from
thence we may gather how the first Nobility of the world was valued, not such
as was co^spicuous by the beauty and Iustre of piety, justice, or any other
virtue, but such only as gloried and contented it self with the title of
strength and power. For those who then were more mighty and powerful then
others, and were thereby imboldened to oppress others, were commonly held the
most noble and worthy. And happily from hence it was that some families carry
in their Scutchions the representation of wild beasts or birds of prey.
Howsoever we are sure that upon this universal inundation of sin, followed
the universal deluge of water, washing and cleansing the earth from that
abominable filthiness which had generally infected and polluted it. And as
about this time sin was ripened, so in the very infancy of the world it grew
up so fast, that the second man in the world wilfully murdered the Gen 4. 8.
third, being then his only brother. And another of the same race soon after
was the founder of Polygamie, and a while after it is added, Then Genesis 4. 26
men began to call upon the name of the Lord, as if till then they had not done
it, at leastwise in public assemblies. And in that, Enoch not long after
this, is said to have walked with God, Iunius gives this note upon it, Genesis 5
23.
id est, non est sequutus malitiam sui seculi, that is, he followed not the
wicked courses of the age wherein he lived, and therefore was he translated,
least wickedness should alter his under standing or deceit beguile his mind.
Haec Wisdom. 4 11. Bodin. loco citato.
est illa aurea aetas quae talia mo^stra nobis educavit, this is forsooth that
goodly golden age which has brought into the world and bred such foul
mo^sters. After this the world was pestered with a number of intolerable
Tyrants, whom Hercules subdued, and yet was himself accounted by many a
Captain of Pirates. And certain it is, he was most foul, and yet I know not
whether more foul, or strong in matter of lust; and both Theseus and Peri^hous
(whom he admitted into his society) were of a strain much alike. But because
these things happily may seem fabulous, let us listen to Thucidides, one of
the ancientest and truest fathers of history. He then has left upon record,
that a little before his time in Greece it self so great was the wildnes and
barbarousnes thereof, that both by sea and land robberies were commonly
practiced, and that without any touch of disgrace; it was usually demanded of
passengers, whether they were Thieves or Pirates. And Caesar in a manner reports
the same of the Germans: Latrocinia nullam habent apud Germanos infamiam quae
extra fines cuiusque civitatis fiunt, atque ea iuventutis exercendae atque
desidiae mi^uendae causa fieri praedicant. It is no discredit among the Germans
to rob, so it be without the bounds of their cities, and this they allow for
the exercise of their youth and the shunning of idleness. But particulars are
infinite, wherefore I will content my self with one nation, and three or four
notorious vices of that Nation. The Nation shall be that of the ancient Romans,
I mean before their receiving of Christianity, because they were commonly
reputed the most civil and best disciplined of the whole world. The special
vices I will instance in, shall be their cruelty, their covetousness, their
luxury, their vainglory and ambition; and in these will I show their
wonderful excess beyond latter ages, concluding with a demonstration, that
the most eminent and renowned virtues of the Romans, as their wisdom and
courage, have likewise been at least matched by some of latter ages, and that
in some other virtues, as namely in modesty and humility, they have been much
exceeded.

CAP. 4. Of the excessive cruelty of the Romans toward the Jews, the
Christians, other Nations, one another and upon themselves.
SEC. 1. Of the Roman cruelty toward the Jews.
THe savage and barbarous inhumanity of the Romans appears partly in their
cruel handling of the Jews and Christians, and partly of other Nations: But
chiefly in their unnatural disposition one toward another and upon
themselves: First then for the Jews, it is indeed true, that by putting to
death the Lord of life, and crying alowd, His blood be upon us and upon our
children, they wilfully drew upon themselves the Divine vengeance and that
dreadful threate: Lo the days shall come when they shall say, happy are the
barren and the wombes that have not borne children, and the paps that have not
given suck. Yet were the Romans, though greater enemies to Christian Religion
then the Jews, appointed by divine providence, as the Executioners of that
vengeance, which they performed in a most unmerciful manner: And in regard of
themselves, an undue and unjust measure. For to let pass all other bloody
massacres of them in diverse towns and cities through the Roman Empire, after
the passion of our Savior, and before the destruction of Jerusalem; surely
their cruelty acted in the siedge of that city, recorded by Josephus, was such
as were able, even to resolve an heart of steel into tears De bello Iudaico,
l. 6, and 7.
of blood. It was on every side so straightly begirt, that the besieged by
extremity of famine, were forced to (...), not only horses, asses, dogs,
rats, and mice, and the leather that covered their shields and bucklers, but
also the very dung out of their stables; yea, and a Noble woman was known to
eat her own child that sucked upon her breast, wherein no doubt was fulfilled
the prophecy of our Savior, happy are the barren. Such as were taken by the
Romans, were by the commandment of Titus, crucified before the walls of the
city, to the number of five hundred every day, until at length (as Josephus
reports) there wanted both crosses for the bodies and place for the crosses.
Also great numbers of them, who being forced with famine, sought to save their
lives, by yielding themselves to there enemies, were nevertheles killed by the
merciless soldier, and their bowels ripped up, in hope to find gold therein,
upon a report, or at least a conceit, that the Jews did swallow their gold to
convay it out of the city by that means. Finally, the number of those which
were slain and died during the siege, was, as witnesses Josephus, a million
and an hundred thousand, and of the Captives nine hundred and seventy thousand,
whereof Josephus himself was one, and Lib 7. c. 17.
of those, some were condemned to the public works, others of the stronger
and handsommer sort carried in triumph, and such as were under the age of
seventeene years, were sold for little or nothing, and those which remained in
their country, were laden with such grievous impositions and tributes, that
they lived in a continual misery and slavery worse then death. Yet the cruelty
of the Romans toward these miserable Jews ceased not here, but in the next
age, in the time of Traiane the Emperor, within less then fifty years after
the subversion of Jerusalem, infinita eorum millia, says Eusebius, infinite
thousands of them Lib. 4. c. 2.
were killed in Egypt, and Mesopotamia, in Macedonia they were utterly
extinguished, and in Cyprus they were all either put to the sword or banished;
and a law made, that it should be death for any Jew to arrive there, though he
were driven thither by tempest against his will. And in a few years after
Julius Severus, being called out of Britain by the Emperor Adrian, and sent
into Judea, destroyed almost all the country. For as Dyon writes, he
dismantled fifty strong forts, and razed or burnt nine hundred eighty five
towns or villages, and killed above fifty thousand Jews in battle, besides
an infinite number of others that died either by fire, famine, or pestilence,
or were sold for slaves. Shortly after Adrians time, they were also miserablely
afflicted by the Emperor Antoninus Pius, and after him by Marcus Aurelius, and
again some years after that by the Emperor Seuerus, who renewed the decrees
of Adrian for their exclusion from the sight of their country, and triumphed
for his great victories against them. Now though it be true, that the wickedness
of the Jewish Nation was such, as they well deserved to be thus severely
punished; yet cannot the Romans be excused from unreasonable cruelty in
dealing thus unmercifully with them, as if they had been beasts rather then
men.

SECT. 2. Their cruelty toward the Christians, first in regard of the
insatiable malice of their persecutors.
THeir dealing with the Christians, (whom they likewise named Jews, because
our Saviors Apostles and first disciples, were all of that nation) was yet
more merciless because more unjust; They pretended the frequent rebellions of
the Jews, to be the reason of their great severity toward them: But the
Christians they deadly hated and Tacitus Annal. 15. 10.
most cruelly persecuted only for their religion, whereas they suffered all
religions save the Christian, to be quietly exercised through their dominions.
Now their cruelty toward the poor Christians appeared in the insatiable
malice of their persecutors, the incredible number of those that suffered as
Martyrs or Confessors, and the exquisite variety of their tortures. St.
Augustine and his scholar Orosius compare the ten persecutions of De Ciuit.
Dei l. 18. c. 52.
the Primitive Christians, (which as so many raging waves came tumbling one
upon the neck of another,) to the ten plagues of Egypt; the first of which
was under Nero, whose cruelty or luxury was of the two more monstrous and
unnatural, cannot easily be determined. He caused Rome to be set on fire, that
he might the better conceive the flames of (...). c. 37.
Troy, singing unto it Homers verses. His father and brother he poisoned,
murth^red his master, wife, and mother, taking an exact view of her dead body,
commending the proportion of some parts and discommending others. Besides, he
made away whosoever was valiant or virtuous in Senate, in city, in Province
without any difference of sex or age. No marvel then, that being of a
disposition so bloody he fell as a bitter storm upon the Christians, and his
cruelty be by S Paul compared 2 Timothy 4 17.
to the mouth of a Lion. Nay by reason of that violent persecution, which under
him the Christians endured; he was, as witnesses S. Augustine commonly
reputed Antichrist: But certain it is, that Rome De Ci^. Dei, l. 20. c. 19.
being by his command set on fire, he falsely accused and punished most
greevously the innocent Christians for it. The second persecution was T^ Annal.
under Domitian, whom Tertullian calls Neronis portionem, Eusebius, ^aeredem,
the one a part, the other the heir of Nero: And Tacitus puts only this
difference between them, that Nero indeed commanded cruel In vi^a. (...)
(...).
murders, but Domitian not only commanded them, but beheld them himself.
What the world was to expect from him; appeared in his very entrance to the
Empire, retyring himself every day into a private closet, where he passed his
time in killing of flies with a sharp bodkin, insomuch that one demanding who
was within with the Emperor, Vibius Crispus made answer, ne musca quidem, not
so much as a fly: But from the blood of flies he proceeded on to the shedding
of the Sue^on. c 3.
blood of men, so far, and in so fierce a manner,

-- Vt timeas ne Iuvenal. Satyr. 3.

Vomer deficiat, ne marrae and sarcula desint.
Well might ye doubt
Least culters, mattocks, spades, ye soon should be without.
The Author of the last and most grievous persecution, was Dioclesian, whose
raging cruelty toward the Christians, Lactantius sets forth in lively colors.
Nemo h^ius tantae belluae immanitatem potest pro merito describere, Lib. 5. c.
11*
quae vno loco recubans tamen per totum orbem dentibus ferreis saevit, and non
tantum artus hominum dissipat, sed and ossa ipsa comminuit and in cineres
furit, ne quis extet sepulturae locus. Quaenam illa f^itas, quae rabies, quae
insania est, lucem viuis, terram mor^uis denegasse? No man can sufficiently
describe the cruelty of this so unreasonable a beast, which lying in one place,
yet rages with his iron teeth through the world, and does not only scatter the
members, but break the bones of men; yea shows his fury upon their very
ashes, least there should be found any place for their burial: what rage, what
madness, what barbarous cruelty is this, to deny both the light to the living,
and the earth to the dead? Where Lactantius seems to allude to that fourth
namelesse beast of Daniell, Daniel. 7 7.
which was fearful and terrible, and very strong, it had great iron teeth, it
devoured, and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue under his feet. And
though I have instanced only in these three, yet it is certain, that the
Authors and Instruments of these persecutions were all of a disposition much
alike: Of whom the same Lactantius affirms, that they have borrowed the shapes
of beasts, and yet were more cruel then they, pleasing themselves in this,
that they were borne men, and yet had they nothing but the outward figure and
lineaments of men. For what Caucasus, what India, what Hircania, says he, ever
bred or brought forth so cruel and bloody beasts; the rage of other beasts
cease when their L. 5. c. 11.
appetite is satisfied, and their hunger being slaked, they grow more mild and
tame, but the rage of these never cease, their appetite is never satiated
with blood; the truth whereof will easily appear, if in the second place we
do but cast our eyes upon the infinite multitude of innocent Christians that
every where suffered death, and for none other cause but only the profession of
their religion.

SECT. 3. Secondly, in regard of the incredible number of those that suffered.
OMnis fere sacro Martyrum cruore orbis infectus est, neque vllis vnquam magis
bellis exhaustus est, says Sulpitius: well nigh the whole Sacr. Histor. l. 2
world is stained with the blood of the Martyrs; neither was it ever in the
like sort emptied by any wars. And Gregory the great almost Homilia 27 in
Evangelia.
in the same words, totum mundum fratres aspicite, Martyribus plenus est, jam
pene tot qui videamus non sumus quot veritatis testes habemus, Deo ergo
numerabiles, nobis super arenam multiplicati sunt quia quanti sunt a nobis
comprehendi non possunt. Brethren, look abroad upon the whole world, it is
filled with Martyrs, we are hardly so many in number to behold them, as we have
witnesses of the truth, who have sealed it with their blood, in regard of God
they are numerable, but in regard of us they are multiplied above the sand on
the sea shore, in as much as we cannot comprehend their number. And happily
those latter words of Gregory had reference to that of Cyprian, himself a
glorious Martyr, in his exhortation to Martyrdom: Exuberante postmodum copia
virtutis and fidei numerari non possunt Martyrs Christiani, testante
Apocalypsi and dicente, post haec vidi, etc. The strength of courage and faith
afterward increasing, the Christian Martyrs could not be numbered, according to
that testimony in the Apooalyps. After these things I beheld, and lo a great
multitude, which no man could number of all nations, and kindreds, and people,
and Apocal. 7. 9.
tongues, stood before the Throne and before the Lamb, clothed with long
white robes, and palms in their hands: Whereunto might be added, that other
Prophetical passage of the same book; The wine press was trodden without the
city, and blood came out of the wine press unto the horse bridles by the
Cap. 14. 20.
space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. Which Prophesi^ we may well
conceive, to have been accomplished to the full, when the very axes and swords
of the Executioners were blunted with executions, and themselves were forced to
give over and sit down, being utterly wearied therewith, when the day failing,
the bodies of the executed, were burnt in the night, to give light to
passengers; and thirty three Roman Bishops Tac. Aunnl. 15. 10.
successively from S. Peter to Sylvester, were all martyred, when hundreds,
thousands, yea ten or twenty thousands were slaughtered at once: Lastly, when
by the testimony of S. Hierome in his Epistle to Chromatius. and Heliodorus,
(if it be his) there was not a day in the year to which above five thousand
might not justly be assigned, the Kalends of January only excepted.
Lactantius, 5. 11.


Funditur ater vbique cruor, crudelis vbique
Luctus, vbique pauor and plurima mortis imago.
Piteous lamenting, dreadful fear, and bloodshed every where,
And many a ghastly shape of death did every where appear.
SECT. 4. Thirdly, in regard of the various and divelish means and instruments
which they devised and practiced for the execution or torture of the poor
Christians.
NOw though the Roman cruelty sufficiently appear in the malice of the
principal persecutors of the Christians, and the infinite number of Martyrs
that suffered, yet doubtless the various and devilish means and instruments,
which they divised and practiced for their dispatch or torture does more
evidently prove it. Quae autem per totum orbem singuli gesserint enarrare
impossible est? Quis enim voluminum numerus capiet tam infinita tam varia
genera crudelitatis? says Lactantius. Lib. 5. c. 11.
Those things which in this kind through the world were every where acted, to
recount were impossible. For what number of volumes can contain so infinite
and diverse kinds of cruelty? And again, dici non potest huiusmodi iudices
quanta and quam gravia tormentorum genera excogitaverint, vt ad effectum
propositi sui pervenirent. It cannot be expressed, how many and how grievous
kinds of torments those Judges divised, that they might attain the end of
their purpose. And Gregory to like purpose, Quae poenarum genera novimus quae
non tum vires Martyrum Moral. 32. 12.
exercuisse gaudemus? What kind of punishment can we conceive which we rejoice
not then to have exercised the strength of the Martyrs? They were burned in
furnaces, they were put into vessels of boiling oil, they were pricked under
the nails with sharp needles, their breasts were seared, their eyes boored,
their tongues cut out, they were roasted at a soft fire with vinegar and salt
powered upon them, they were thrown headlong down the mountains and rocks
upon sharp stakes, their brains were beaten out with malles, their bodies
were scraped with sharp shells and the tallents of wild beasts, they were fried
in iron chaires,, and upon grid-irons, their entrals were torn out and cast
before their faces, they were crucified with their heads downward, they were
hanged by the middles, by the hair, by the feet, their bones were broken with
bats, they were torn a sunder with the boughs of trees, and drawn in pieces
with wild horses, they were tossed upon bulls horns, and thrown to Libards
and Lions; they were covered under hogs-meate, and so cast to swine, they were
stabbed with penknifes, they were dragged through the streets, they were fleyd
alive, they were covered in the skins of wild beasts and torn in pieces with
dogs, as witnesses Tacitus, they were set to combat with wild beasts, as
witnesses Annal. 15: 10.
the Apostle of himself,

Non mihi si centum linguae sint, oraque centum 1 Cor. 15 32. Virg. Aen. l. 6.

Ferrea vox, omnes scelerum comprendere formas,
Omnia paenarum percurrere nomina possem.
An hundred tongues, an hundred mouths, an iron voice had I,
I could not all those torments name, nor kinds of villainy.
SECT. 5. Of their extreme cruelty toward others, their very Religion leading
them thereunto, as witnesses Lactantius.
ANd least we should think that this cruelty of the Romans toward the Jews
and C^ristians was only in regard of their Religion, their own Histories
inform us of the like upon other Nations, nay their own very Religion was (it
seems) their strongest motive and greatest inducement to cruelty: Nec vllam
aliam ad immortalitatem viam arbitrantur, quam exercitus ducere, aliena
vastare, delere vrbes, oppida exs^indere, liberos populos aut trucidare, aut
subij^ere servituti, says Lactantius, They conceive there is no other way to
immortality but by leading Armies, laying waste other men's Dominions, razing
Lib. 1. c. 18.
cities, sacking towns, rooting out or bringing under the yoke of slavery
freeborn people. Si quis unum hominem jugulaverit, pro contaminato and
nefario habetur, nec ad terrenum hoc domicilium Deorum admitti eum fas putant,
ille autem qui infinita hominum millia trucidaverit, cruore campos inundaverit,
flumina infecerit, non modo in templum, sed etiam in coelum admittitur, apud
Ennium sic loquitur Africanus.

Si f^s caedendo coelestia scandere cuiquam est
Mi soli coeli maxima porta patet.
Scilicet quia magnam partem generis humani extinxit ac perdidit. O quantis in
tenebris Africane versatus es, vel potius O Poeta, qui per caedes and sanguine^
patere hominibus asoensum in coelum putaveris. Cui vanitati and Cicero
assensit; Est vero inquit Africane, nam and Herculi eadem ipsa porta patuit,
tanquam ipse plane cum id fieret, janitor fuerit in coelo. Equidem statuere non
possum, dolendumne an ridendum putem, cum videam and graves, and doctos, and ut
sibi videntur sapientes viros in tam miserandis errorum fluctibus volutari. Si
haec est virtus quae nos immortales facit, mori equidem malim quam exitio esse
quamplurimis. If a man kill but one, he is held for a villain, neither is
thought fit to admit him to the houses of the Gods here upon earth, but he who
murders infinite thousands, waters the fields, and dies the rivers with blood,
is not only admitted into the Temple, but into Heaven; Thus in Ennius speaks
Africanus.

If man by murdering may climb Heaven, assuredly,
The widest gate of Heaven is open laid for me.
Forsooth, because he had extinguished and made away a great part of mankind.
O with how great darkness art thou compassed Africanus, or rather thou Poet,
who thoughtest that by slaughter and blood an entrance was opened for men into
Heaven; yet to this vanity even Cicero himself assents; It is even so
Africanus, says he; for the same gate was open unto Hercules, as if himself
had then been a Porter in Heaven when that was done. Truly I cannot well
determine whether I should rather grieve or laugh when I see grave and learned,
and (as to themselves it seems) wise men, so miserably tossed up and down in
the waves of Error: if this be the virtue which makes us immortal, for mine
own part I profess I would rather die then be the death of so many. Yet had
this doctrine (as it seems) generally taken such deep root in the minds of
the Romans, that he who shed most blood was held the worthiest and the
holiest man, that is most like the Gods, and fittest for their hahitation,
which is the chief reason, as I conceive, that we read of such wonderful
slaughters committed by them, even to the astonishment of such as have been
acquainted but with the principles of Christian Religion. Within the space of
seventeen years their wars only in Italy, Spain, and Sicily consumed above
fifteen hundred thousand men, Quaesivi enim curiose, says Lypsius, I have
diligently De Constable. l. 2. c. 21.
searched into it. One Caius Caesar, o pestem, perniciemque generis humani, O
plague and mischief of mankind, professes of himself, and boasts in it,
that he had slain in the wars eleven hundred ninety two thousand, yet so as
the slaughter of his Civil wars came not into that account, but only during
his command a few years in Spain and France. Quintus Fabius slew of the
French one hundred and ten thousand. Cajus Marius of the Cimbri two hundred
thousand. Aetius one hundred sixty two thousand of the Hunnes. Polybius writes
that Scipio at the taking of Carthage gave charge that all should be put to the
sword without sparing any; And then adds, that this was a common fashion of
the Romans, Videntur enim, says he, terroris gratia hoc illi facere, itaque
frequenter videre est quando Romani civitates capiunt, non homines modo occidi,
sed canes etiam dissecari, and aliorum animalium membra truncari. It seems
they did it to terrify others, and therefore it has been often seen that
the Romans upon the taking in of a City, not only slew the men, but also cut
in sunder the dogs, and mangled other living Creatures. Servius Galba at his
being in Spain having assembled the Inhabitants of Valerius l. 9. c. 6. Paul.
Diac. l 4. c. 9.
three cities under a pretense of consulting with them about their welfare, on
a sudden slew seven thousand of them, among whom were the very flower of their
youth. Likewise Licinius Lucullus Consul in the same country, put to the
sword twenty thousand of the Caucaei by the Appianus in Ibericit
hands of his soldiers sent into the city against the express covenants of
their rendering. Octavianus Augustus having taken Perusia, sacrificed three
hundred of the principal Townsmen, which yielded themselves Su^t onius.
(as it had been beasts) before an Altar erected to Divus Julius, Antonius
Xiphi^inus and Herodianus.
Caracalla being incensed against the citizens of Alexandria for some petty
jeasts broken upon him; entering into the city in a peaceable manner, and
calling before him all their youth, he surrounded them with armed men, who at
the sign given, fell instantly upon them, and slew every mothers son of them,
and then using the like cruelty upon the residue of the Inhabitants, he
utterly emptied a spacious and populous city. Volesus Messalla Proconsull of
Asia, took off with the axe the S nec. de Ira l. 2 cap. 5.
heads of three hundred in one day, and then walking in and out among the dead
bodies with his hands behind him, as if he had performed some noble act, he
cries out, o rem vere regiam, an exploit worthy a Prince. But me thinks that
of Sulpitius Galba exceedes them all, who entering Lypsit admiranda l. 4. c. 6.
into Portugal in an hostile manner laid waste the country, the Inhabitants
wondering thereat, and not knowing the reason, neither being guilty to
themselves of any offense, they send Ambassadors to renew their former league,
he entertaines them, and seems to take pity on them that they were thus
afflicted, but it may be, says he, it was your wants that caused you to make
some spoils and show of war, I will remedy the matter, I will range you into
three parts, and will seat you in a good and fat soil where you may lead the
rest of your life more happily and securely: Come with your wives and children
into such a valley, and there will I assign you your portions. They miserable
people come on joyfully, being ranged into three bands; to the first of which
when he came, he bids them lay aside their weapons, as being now friends and
fellows, which being laid aside, he sets his soldiers upon them, and kills
them all upon the place, in vain calling upon the Gods, and his faith given
them. The same course he took with the second and third band, before the
report of his first bloody act could come unto them.

Neither did their cruelty extend only to men, but to towns and cities.
Sempronius Gracchus, if we may credit Polybius, razing and laying waste three
hundred in Spain. Nec habet omne aevum opinor quod adstruat his exemplis
praeter nostrum, sed in orb alio, says Lypsius. I suppose no age can afford
examples matchable to these, except ours, but that in another World; where he
instances in the Spanish cruelties upon the naked Indians. It is true indeed
that Theodosius a Christian Emperor for a small Paul. Diac. hist. mise. l. 13.
6. 4.
matter in comparison, caused seven thousand Innocents of Thessalonica being
called together into the Theater, as for the beholding of some plays, to be
slain by soldiers upon the place, and though he might well for the present
purpose be numbered among the ancient Roman Emperors, yet as a Christian I
rather choose to excuse him, and that justly, in as much as being admonished by
S. Ambrose he heartily repented of that bloody fact: and thereupon at the
instance of that worthy Prelate made a Law that from thenceforth thirty days
should pass betwixt the sentence of death and the execution thereof, in as
much as the guilty, though spared for a time, might notwithstanding afterward
be executed. But the guiltless being once executed, could never again be
restored.

SECT. 6. Of their cruelty one toward another by the testimony of Tacitus and
Seneca, and first in their civil wars.
NOw that which yet much more aggravates the Roman cruelty is this, that they
were not only thus hard-hearted toward strangers, but without natural
affection, implacable, merciless one Romans 1. 30.
toward another, as appears partly in their factions and civil wars,
partly in the tyranny of their Emperors and inferior Governors, and partly
in their bloody games and pastimes. What a miserable complaint is that which is
made by Tacitus. Legimus cum Aruleno Rustico Petus Thrasea, Herennio Senefioni
Priscus Heluidius laudati essent capitale fuisse, nec in ipsos modo Authors,
sed in libros eorum saevitum, delegato Triumviris ministerio vt monumenta
clarissimorum ingeniorum in comitio ac foro vrerentur, scilicet illo igne vocem
populi Romani, and libertatem Senatus, and conscientiam generis humani abolere
arbitrabantur, Expulsis insuper sapientiae professoribus, and omni bona art in
exilium acta, ne quid vsquam honestum occurreret. Dedimus profecto grande
patientiae documentum, and sicut vetus Respub: videt quid vltimum in liberate
esset, ita nos quid in servitute: adempto per inquisitiones etiam loquendi,
audiendique commercio, memoriam quoque ipsam cum voce perdidissemus, si tam in
potestate nostra esset oblivisci quam tacere. We read that when Petus Thrasea
was praised by Arulenus Rusticus, and Priscus Heluidius by Herennius Senesio,
it was made a capital crime, neither did their rage extend only to the
Authors, but to their books. Command being given from the Triumviri, that the
monuments of those rarewits should be burnt in the pleading and market places.
Forsooth in that flame they made account at one blaze to extinguish the voice
of the people of Rome, and the liberty of the Senate, and the conscience of
mankind. Besides the Professors of wisdom and all ingenuous Arts were
banished, that nothing carrying the face of honesty might any-where appear.
Then did we show a singular example of Patience, and as former ages saw the
utmost of liberty, so we of servitude. Moreover the mutual commerce of
speaking and hearing being by inquisitions abridged, we had surely lost our
memory together with our voice, had it bin as well in our power to forget, as to
be silent. Yet more pitiful is that sad complaint of Seneca touching his
times: Adeo in publicum missa nequitia De Ira l. 2. c: 8.
est, and in omnium pectoribus evaluit vt innocentia non rara sed nulla sit.
Numquid enim singuli aut pauci rupere fidem? undique velut signo dato ad fasque
nefasque miscendum coorti sunt.

-- Non hospes ab hospite tutus,
Non socer a genero, fratrum quoque gratia rara est:
Lurida terribiles miscent aconita Novercae,
Imminet exitio vir conjugis, illa mariti,
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos.
Sed quota pars ista scelerum est? Wickedness is become so common, and has
taken in all breasts such deep rooting, that innocence is not only rare, but
nowhere to be found: Neither have single persons, or some few only
transgressed the Law, but as it were at the giving of a sign men are on all
sides euery-where risen up to the blending and confounding of right and wrong.

-- The host his guest betrays;
Sons father in laws, twixt brethren love decays,
Wives husbands, husbands wives attempt to kill,
And cruel step-mothers pale poisons fill,
The son his fathers hasty death desires.
And yet how small a part is this of the present villainies.

But the Civil wars was it which chiefly discovered the bloody and
vindictiue disposition of this Nation. Before which, as testifies Saint
Augustine, their dogs, their horses, their asses, their oxen, and all such
beasts as lived under the service and for the use of men, of tame became Deciv.
Dei. l. 3. c, 23.
so wild, that they forsook their mansions and masters, and got them into
mountains and woods, not without the danger of such as offered to reduce them
to their former condition. And surely this wildnes of the beasts served as a
forerunner of that fierceness and inhumanity which afterward appeared in
their Masters. The sedition of the Gracchi being appeased, Lucius Opimius
Consul executed 3000 as being guilty of that conspiracy by judicial
process, ex quo intelligi debet, says S. Augustine, quantam multitudinem
mortuorum habere potuerit turbidus conflictus armorum quando tantam habuit
judiciorum velut examinata cognitio. From Cap. 24.
whence we may probably gather what multitudes died in the confused conflict of
Armies, since so great a number was made away by a legal trial. But Sylla was
he, who under pretense of chastising the outrages of Marius, filled the city
with blood. Illo bello Mariano atque Syllano Cap. 27.
exceptis his qui foris in Asia ceciderunt, in ipsa quoque vrbe cadaveribus
vici plateae, fora, theatra, templa completa sunt, vt difficile judicaretur
quando victores plus funerum ediderunt vtrum prius vt vincerent, an postea quia
vicissent. In the wars of Marius and Sylla, besides those which were slain
in the fields abroad, in the city it self their streets, their market places,
their theaters, their temples were all strewed over with carcases, so as it was
hard to judge when the Conquerours slaughtered more, either first that they
might conquer, or afterward having conquered. Sylla alone quem neque laudare,
neque vituperare quisquam satis digne potest, Valerius lib, 9. cap. 2.
quia dum quaerit victorias Scipionem se populo Romano, dum exercet, Hannibalem
representavit, whom no man can sufficiently either commend, or dispraise, for
that in pursuing his victories he showed himself as another Scipio to the
Roman state, in making use of them another Hannibal, he alone I say, by his
infamous proscription, bereaved the city of four thousand and seven hundred
Citizens, whose names he commanded to be registered in the public Records,
videlicet ne memoria tam praeclarae rei dilueretur, forsooth lest the memory of
so notable a fact should be extinguished, neither were they of the baser rank
of the people, there being among them no less then one hundred and forty
Senators, besides infinite slaughters committed either by his command or
permission, neither did he thus rage against those only who bore Arms against
him, but to the number of the proscribed he added the most peaceable citizens
if they were rich, he also drew out his sword against women, as not being
satisfied with the slaughter of men, Id quoque inexplebilis feritatis indicium
est, says Valerius, that was likewise a sign of most insatiable cruelty, that
he commanded the heads of such as he had slaughtered to be cut off and
brought into his presence, though retaining neither life nor visage, vt oculi^
illa, quae ore nefas erat manderet, that he might feed upon them with his eyes,
because with his mouth he could not: the eyes of Marius he plucked out before
he deprived him of life, and then brake in pieces all the parts of his body,
and Marcus Ple^orius because he fell into a sound at the sight of that
execution he commanded presently to be slain upon the place, novus punitor
misericordiae, apud quem iniquo animo scelus intueri scelus admittere fuit, a
rare punisher of mercy, with whom unwillingly to behold a wicked act, was to
commit wickedness; but perchance though he thus tyrannized upon the living, he
spared the dead, no such matter, for digging up the ashes of C. Marius, who was
sometime Questor, though afterward his enemy, he threw them into the river
Amen, En quibus actis foelicitatis nomen sibi asserendum putavit, behold with
what goodly acts he purchased to himself the name of happiness. vix mihi
verisimilia narrare videor, I scarce seem to my self to report likelyhoods,
says Valerius: And S. Augustine tells us, that some counseled him, sinendos
esse aliquos vivere, vt essent quibus Aug d^ Civit. Dei lib. 3* c. 28.
possit imperare: that he should do well to suffer some to live, lest there
should be none whom he might command. And from Quintus Catulus he deservedly
wrested that bitter speech, Cum quibus tandem victuri sumus si in bello
armatos, in pace inermes occidimus, with what forces are we likely to vanquish
our own enemies if we thus kill our own men both armed in war and unarmed
in peace. And from Lucan it drew those excellent verses, Lib. 2.


Sylla quoque immensis accessit cladibus vltor,
Ille quod exiguum restabat sanguinis vrbi
Hausit, dumque nimis jam putrida membra recidit,
Excessit medi^ina modum, nimiumque secuta est
Qua morbi duxere manus.
After these barbarous butcheries revengefull Sylla came,
The little blood that yet remained in Rome he spilt the same,
And whilst he off the rotten parts does cut, the reme^die
Due measure too much does exceed, his hands the malady
Pursue too far.
And that herein he delivered no more then truth, or rather indeed came short
of it, may sufficiently appear by this one bloody act; Sylla Vale^us lib. 9
having upon his credit received to favor four Legions (which make up twenty
four thousand) of the adverse part; he caused them notwithstanding in public
to be cut in pieces, calling in vain for mercy at his treacherous hand. And
when the Senate hearing their groans and scritches stood amazed at it; the
satisfaction he gives them, was none other then this. Hoc agamus Patres
Conscripti pauculi seditiosi iussu meo puniuntur: My Lords let us to the
business, as for the tumult you hear, it is only a few mutinous soldiers are
punished at my command. Upon which, Lypsius gives this just censure: Nescio
quid magis hic mirer, hominem id facere potuisse an dicere: I know not whether
of the two I should more wonder at, that a man could either so do, or so
speak. Yet me seems we need not much wonder at it, since the Senators
themselves were drawn out of the Senate house, as it had been a prison to
execution. Nay Mutius Scevola, being both a Priest and a Senator, was slain,
embracing the very Altar in the temple of Vesta, then which nothing among the
Romans w^ held more sacred, and was like to have quenched with his blood that
fire, which was always kept burning by the care of Virgins: Quae rabies
exterarum gentium, quae saevitia barbarorum, huic de civibus victoriae civium
comparari potest, says S. Augustine: What rage of foreign nations, what
cruelty of barbarians was ever comparable to De Civit. Dei l. 3. c. 29.
this victory of fellow citizens upon each other. Yet was the fire of these
broils scarce quenched before the flame burst out afresh in the civil wars,
betwixt Sertorius and Catiline, Lepidus and Catulus, Caesar and Pompey; of
which Lucan.

-- Alta sedent civilis vulner a dextrae Lib. 1.

Heu quantum terrae potuit pelagique parari
Hoc quem civiles hauserunt sanguine dextrae?
Deep stick the wounds which civil arms have made:
What lands, what seas might have bin purchased,
Even with that blood which civil wars have shed?
And again,

-- Desuntque manus poscentibus arvis:
They wanted hands
For tillage of their lands.
And in another place,

-- Generis quo turba reducta est
Humani?
Hard it was to find
What was become of mankind.
Yet after all this, again upon the death of Caesar in the Senate the
Triumuiri, Octavius, Lepidus, and Antony, under pretense of revenging his death
and reforming the state, like the true scholars of Sylla ordained the like
proscription as he had done, proscribing at once the heads of three hundred
Senators, and two thousand Roman Knights: Read Appian, and in him a most
lively description of the incredible cruelty of those De bellis civili^us. l. 4.
times, some making themselves away, some flying, some hiding themselves in
wells and draughts, servants, and wives, and children, hanging and howling
about their masters, and husbands, and parents, but not able to help them: Heu
scelera quibus nihil acerbius Sol ille vidit visur^sque est ab ortu omni ad
occasum, peream ego nisi humanitatem ipsam perijsse dicas fero and ferino illo
aevo, they be the words of Lypsius the great patron of the De constantia, lib.
2. c. 24.
Roman virtues. O horrible cruelty, then which the Sun never saw or shall
see any thing more grievous from the rising to the fall thereof. Let me not
live, if you would not believe that humanity it self was utterly lost out of
the world, in that bloody and barbarous age.

SECT. 7. Secondly, of the cruelty of their Emperors toward their subjects,
their Captains toward their soldiers, their Masters toward their slaves,
and generally of their whole nations.
YEt within a while after pax cum bello de crudelitate certabat and vicit,
peace contended with war which should be more cruel and overcame: August.
I will instance only in Tiberius and Caligula, the third and fourth Emperors,
and content my self only with a part of Suetonius his testimony concerning
their monstrous cruelties. Touching the first, specie gravitatis and morum
corrigendorum, sed and magis naturae obtemperans, says he: Under a color of
gravity and reformation, but in truth Suet. in Tiber. c. 59.
by a powerful inclination in his nature he did many such outrageous acts, as
it gave occasion among others to the casting out of these verses on him*

Fastidit vinum, quia iam sitit iste cruorem,
Tam bibit hunc avide quam bibit ante merum.
He loatheth wine, and now he after blood does thirst,
Drinks this as greedily as wine he drank at first.
Nullus a poena hominum cessanit dies, ne religiosus quidem ac sacer; no day
was privileged from executions, no not the most solemn holy days. Because
Virgins by a received custom were not to be strangled; he caused Cap. (...).
the hangman first to deflower a Virgin, and then to strangle her. He thought
death so light a punishment, that when he heard Carnulius had by death
prevented his tortures, he cried out, Carnulius me evasit, Carnulius has
escaped me. His thoughts were so intent upon nothing else but horrible
executions, that having by familiar letters invited a Citizen of Rhodes to
come to him to Rome, and being informed of his coming, c. 62.
he commanded him instantly to be put to the rack, and his error being
discovered, to be put to death, least it should be divulged. Having caused men
to be drawn on to fill themselves with wine, he would suddenly command
their privy parts to be fast bound with lute-strings, that so for want of
means for avoiding their urine, they might endure miserable torments.

Caligula, a man of much like temper, succeeded him in the Empire, but in
cruelty far exceeded him. Many of honorable rank being first Suet. Calig.
c. 27.
branded with infamous marks, he condemned to the mines, or the beasts, or
shut them up like beasts in cages, or sawed them asunder in the midst. And
that not for great matters, but either because they had no good opinion of his
shows, or had not sworn by his Genius: He forced fathers to be present at the
execution of their sons, and to one, excusing himself by reason of his
sickness, he sent his litter for him, inviting him to mirth and iollity.
Having recalled one home, who in his Predecessors days was sent into
banishment, he asked him how he c. 28.
spent the time while he was abroad, who answered by way of complement, that he
incessantly prayed for the speedy death of Tiberius, and his succession to the
Empire: whereupon, conceiving that his banished men prayed likewise for his
death; he presently dispatched away messengers to the Islands where they lived
in exile, commanding them all to be put to the sword. When he desired that a
Senator should be torn in pieces; he hired one, who entering in to the Senate
house, should assault him as an enemy to the state, and stabbing him with
stillettoes, should leave him to be torn by others. Neque ante satiatus est
quam membra, and artus, and viscera hominis tracta per vicos atque ante se
congesta vidisset: Neither was he satiated before with his eyes he beheld the
members and bowels of the man dragged through the streets and cast before him.
He did not commonly execute any, but with many and soft strokes, his command
c 30.
being now general and commonly known: Ita feri vt se mori sentiat, so strike
him that he may feel himself to die; Being offended with the multitude for
crossing his desires, he was heard to say, Vtinam populus Romanus vnam cervicem
haberet, I could wish the people of Rome but one neck; meaning to chop them
off at one blow. He was wont c. 31.
openly to complain of the unhappy condition of his times, that they were not
made famous by any public calamity: That Augustus his government was
memorable by the slaughter at Varia; and that of Tiberius by the fall of the
scaffolds at Fidenae: but his was like to be buried in oblivion, by the calm
and prosperous current of all things. And thereupon would he often wish, for
the overthrow of his armies, famine, pestilence, fire, earthquakes, and the
like, and when he was sporting or feasting himself, he abated nothing of his
inbred and wonted cruelty, but showed c. 32.
the same fierceness both in his words and deeds: Many times while he was
dyning were some examined upon the rack in his presence, and other had their
heads stricken off. At Putzoll at the dedication of a bridge, having invited
many unto him from the shore, on the sudden he gives order for the tumbling
of them down headlong into the sea, and such as took hold of any thing to
save their lives, he causes to be beaten off with poles and oars. Being one
day very free at a great feast, he suddenly brake forth into a great
slaughter: And the Consuls, who were next him, demanding the reason thereof,
his answer was, Quid? nisi vno meo nutu jugulari vtrumque vestrum statim
posse, nothing but this, that at a beck from me, both your throats may
presently be cut. In the midst of his ieasts, when standing near the statue
of Jupiter, he demanded Apelles the Tragedian, which of the two, himself or
Jupiter seemed the greater; Apelles making a pause, he commands him to be
sliced in pieces c. 33.
with rods, now and then commending his voice calling for mercy, as being
sweetly tuneable in the very groaning. As often as he kissed the neck of his
wife or mistress, he would commonly add, tam bona cervix simul ac iussero
demetur, so fair a neck may be taken off the shoulders when I list: And
sometimes he boastingly threatened, that he would wrest it out of the heart of
Coesonia his darling with the rack, why he so affectionately loved her, so as
it might truly be said of him, that he was indeed none other then lutum
sanguine maceratum, a lump of clay soked in blood, and of his times might
justly be verified, what Seneca in his preface to his fourth book of natural
questions speaks of Caius, sciebam olim sub illo in eum statum res humanas
decidisse vt inter misericordiae opera haberetur occidi^ under him things were
brought to that pass as it was reckoned amongst the works of mercy to be
slain.

Neitheir was this the disposition only of their Emperors, but of their
inferior governors and officers, happily by imitatio of their Emperors: in
masters toward their slaves, in Generals toward their soldiers, and
generally the whole multitude one toward another. Ved^us Pollio was wont upon
every light occasion, as sometimes for the breaking of a glass or some such
trifle, to cast his slaves into his pond of Lampres, to be devoured by them: Vt
in visceribus earum aliquid de servorum suorum corporibus and ipse gustaret,
says Tretullian; that the entralls of his Tertullian d^ Pallioc. 5. Lib: 9: c:
23:
Lampres might relish somewhat of the flesh of his slaves: But Pliny gives
this censure upon it: Invenit in hoc animali documenta sae^ae, non tanquam ad
hoc feris terrarum non sufficientibus, fed quia in alio genere totum pariter
hominem distrahi spectare non p^terat. He found out in this fish a new kind of
cruelty, not but that the wild beasts of the earth were sufficient to effect
the same, but because he could in none other kind be hold the whole man to be
torn in pieces* Not much inferior to this, was the rigorous cruelty of their
Generals toward the soldiers, masked under the vizar of strict discipline.
It is in this kind a memorable example, that Seneca ^elates of Piso, who
finding a soldier De Ira, l. 1. c. 16
to return from forraging without his companion, as if he had slain him whom
he brought not back with him, condemned him to death; his execution being in
readiness, and he stretching forth his neck to receive the stroke of the axe,
behold in the very instant his companion appears in the place; whereupon the
Centurion, who had the charge of the Execution, commands the Executioner to
sheath his sword, and carries back the condemned soldier to Piso, together
with his companion, thereby to manifest his innocence, and the whole army
waited on them with joyful acclamations: But Piso in a rage gets him up to the
Tribunal, and condemns both the soldiers, the one for returning without his
companion, and the other for not returning with him; and hereunto adds the
condemnation of the Centurion for staying the execution without warrant, which
was given him in charge; and thus constituti sunt in eodem loco perituri tres
ob vnius innocentiam: Three, Seneca Ibid*
were condemned to die for the innocence of one. In more ancient times, three
of the Albanes named Curiatij, combating with three of ^
of the Horatij Romans for the Empire, by consent of both their states, two of
the Romans were vanquished by the three Albanes, and the three Albanes again
by one of the Romans, whose sister having married one of the Albanes, because
she wept to see her brother wear the spoils of her husband, she was instantly
dispatched by him. Huma^r hu^us vnius foeminae quam vniversi populi Romani mihi
videtur fuisse aff^tus, says S. Augustine; the disposition of this one woman
seems to De (...) l: 3: c: 14
me more humane then that of the whole body of the people of Rome. Here unto
may be added that bloody speech, cast forth by the daughter of Appi^s Coecus,
who being crowded by the multitude, as she came (...) seeing some public
show, Vtinam, inquit; revi vis^at frat^r; aliamque Gellius (...) 10: c: 6.
classem in Siciliam ducat atque istam multitudinem perditum eat, quae me male
nunc miseram convexavit: I wish, says she, my brother were alive again, that
he might conduct another fleet against Sicilie, and so make away this
multitude which thus troubles me: Now her brother Publius Claudius lately
before had lost many thousands of the Romans in an expedition by sea against
the Sicilians, and with them his own life.

SEC. 8. Thirdly, of their cruelty one toward another in their swordfights: In
which first is considered the original and increase of these games, as well in
regard of their frequencie, as both the number and quality of the fighters.
ANd no marveill this speech should fall from her coming from a public show,
in as much as the whole body of this people made the effusion of humane blood,
and the slaughtering of men their common sport and pastime. Some they cast to
beasts, some they set to fight with beasts, some to fight one with another.
These they called Gladiatores, swordplayers, and this spectacle, munus
gladiatorium, a sword-fight; in which their skill in defense was not so much
regarded or praised, as the undaunted giving or receiving of wounds, and life
vnfearefully parted with: neither mattered it who had the hap to surviue, he
being reserved but for another days slaughter. And here I shall crave pardon,
if I descend a little to particulars, and insist somewhat largely upon some of
them; The matter in it self seems to require it, being no doubt very strange
to such as are not acquainted with the Roman history, so strange, that in a
people so renowned for their moral virtues, it might happily seem incredible,
but that I make it good by the testimony of grave Authors, and which is more;
their own: The testimony of any man against himself being in reputation of
law of sufficient validity, without either legal exception, or just suspicion.
If the Apostle judged the testimony of Epimenides the Poet, forcible against
his own contrymen the Cretians, why should not we judge the Titu^. 1. 12.
testimony of the most approved Roman Historiographers, Poets, and Orators
weighty enough, being alleged against the Roman Nation. First then, I will
consider the cruelty of the act it self, together with some aggravating
circumstances. Secondly, the cruel disposition of the people, in entertaining
it with that heat and fervencie of affection, as is wonderful. Thirdly, that
the Christian Religion was it which first cried out against it by the pens of
her Divines, and then cried it down by the edicts of her Emperors.

The beginning of these kind of shows originally sprang from a superstitious
conceit, (suggested no doubt by the common enemy of mankind) of sacrificing
with the blood of men for the Manes or Ghosts of their deceased parents or
near friends. Iunius Brutus was the first Floru^.
we read of that began it in honor of his fathers funerals, about 500 years
after the Cities foundation. He exhibited to this purpose in the market place,
22 paires of sword-players: Hoc scilicet erat expiare manes patris, vel potius
placare diabolum, says Peter Martyr: This forsooth was to appease his fathers
Manes, or rather to please the Devil. After this, they grew so common, that
men by their testaments appointed them at their funerals. Some there are,
says Seneca, who undertake to dispose of matters, even beyond the term of
their lives, taking order for stately monuments, pompous funerals, and ad rogum
munera, and at the end of their funerals, the exhibiting of sword-fights. And
whereas it was in use only at the funerals of great men, within a while private
men took it up, privatorum memorijs Legatariae editiones parentant, says
Tertullian in somewhat an harsh African phrase I confess, but doubtless De
Spectac.
his meaning is, that even private me^ by legacies in their last wills, provided
for these sword-fights, which by the Romans were called Editiones. Neither was
this used at the funerals of men only, but of women too. Julius Caesar
exhibiting it at the death and for the honor of his daughter, which none ever
did before him* and so from a small Suetonius, c. 26.
brook, it increased to a great and mighty sea, and from matter of Religion,
became a matter merely of honor in those that gave it, and of pleasure in
those that beheld it. Transijt hoc genus Editionis ab honoribus mortuorum ad
honores viventium: These shows passed from the honor Tertullian.
of the dead to the honor of the living: The Aediles, the Pretors, the
Quaestors, the Consuls, the Priests, the Emperors exhibited them at their
birth days, at the dedication of public works and at triumphs, and by
degrees they came to set solemn days, which they held as festival, and at
the last, not the Magistrates alone, but private men exhibited them at all
times, without difference of persons or days. Iuvenall speaking of some that
of base fellows were become rich, adds

Munera nunc edunt and verso pollice vulgi
Quemlibet occidunt populariter. Saty^ ^3:

Sword-playes they do bestow, and when they turn the thumb,
They murder whom they list.
And Martial tells us of a Cobbler that exhibited them,

Das gladiatores sutorum regule Cerdo,
Quodque tibi tribuit Subila, sica rapit.
Brave king of Cobblers, thou sword-players do maintain,
And what thine awle does get, the sword soon spends again.
The number of sword-players thus exhibited, grew in the end to a multitude
incredible. Caesar in his Edileshippe exhibited three hundred and twenty pair.
Gordianus sometimes 500, and never less then an hundred every month. Traian
by the space of 123 days without intermission ten thousand; but that of Nero
exceedes all, and almost belief it self: Exhibuit ad ferrum quadringentos
Senatores sexcentosque Equites Suetonius, c. 12.
Romanos: He brought forth to the sword-fight four hundred Seanatours and six
hundred Roman Knights So that in regard of those excessive number thus
wilfully cast away through the Roman Empire, we may justly complain with
Lypsius, Non temere a funere ortares, Sermon. Satu^. 1: 1^:
quae revera funus and pestis orbis terrae, credo, imo scio, nullum bellum
tantam cladem vastitiemque generi humano intulisse, quam hos advoluptatem
ludos, numerum cum animis vestris recensete dierum quos dixi hominumque,
mentior, si non vnus aliquis mensis Europae stetit vitenis capitum millibus,
aut tricenis (...)* It seems upon good reason to borrow its original from
Funerals; it being in truth the very funeral and plague of the World, I
think, nay I know that no war ever made such havocke of mankind as those
games of pleasure* Do but count the number of days and men which I named, and
let me^ not be credited, if one month sometimes did not cost Europe twenty
thousand or thirty thousand heads* Yet was the expense infinite which these
bloody games cost the masters of them in hiring, in dyeting, in disciplining,
in arming, in bringing forth their sword-players, in preparing the Theater and
the like* And in this regard as for some noble and meritorious act, they had
ti^es and honors bestowed upon them, and pillars with inscriptions erected to
them, and during their shows they had the power of public Magistrates: And
though those whom they exhibited in the^e games at first were ^ues only or
captives, over whom they had ^us vit^ and neci^, power of life and death, yet
afterward they drew into the sand free men, Knights, Sen^ours, yea Histories
not only affirm, that Commodus the Emperor did himself play the Gladiator
in person, but his Statue in that fashion stark naked with his naked sword in
his hand is yet to be seen at Rome in the palace of the Farnesi. But that
which passes all bounds of humanity, moderation and modesty is, that Domitian
exhibited women in these sword-fights, of which Statius,

Stat sex us rudi^ insci^que; ferri
Et pugnas capit improbus viri^es, (...) (...).

Credas ad Tanaim serumque Phasin
Thermodonti^as calere turmas.
Th'vnskilfull sex not fit for broils*
In bloody fights to manlike toils:
You at Tanais would have thought
Or Phasis, Amazons had fought.
SECT. 9. Secondly, of the fervent and eagen affection of the people to these
games, as also that they were in use in the Provinces, and namely among the
Jews, but refused by the Graecians, and why.
NOw the affection of the people to these bloody games was such, that at the
death of a great man they would call for them as due, and mutine if they had
them (...). The marketplace being not able to contain the multitude that
flockt unto them, they had Theaters and Amphitheaters built if not purposely,
yet specially for these shows, which places were of incredible both charge and
capacity, some one of them being sufficient to hold above a hundred thousand
persons, and yet all little enough in regard of the infinite troops that
resorted thither. Equidem existimo, says Tully, nullum tempus esse
frequentioris populi quam illud Oratione pro Sestio.
Gladiatorium: Truly I think there is at no time a greater concourse of the
people then at the sword-playes. And again, Id autem spectaculi genus erat
quod omni frequentia atque omni genere hominum celebratur, quo multitudo maxim
delecta^; that kind of show is it which is most frequented with company of all
sorts, and with which the multitude is most delighted. They left all other
sporrs to run to this,

Primo actu placeo cum interea rumor venit
Datum iri gladiatores, populus convolat*
Tumultuantur, clamant, pugnant de loco.
They be the words of the Comicall Poet, My first act pleased them well, when
in the mean while a rumor was raised that the sword-players were at hand, at
which noise the people flock thither: They strive tumultuously, they cry out,
they fight for their places. When the day was ser, they sought the time long
before it came, as appears by that of Seneca, Quicquid interjacet grave est,
tam mehercules quam quando dies gladiatorij De ^revit* (...)
muneris dictus est, transire medi^s dies volunt. Whatsoever falls in between is
troublesome, as are the days which come between the publishing of the day of
the sword-playes and the coming of it. Being assembled, and the sword-players
entered the fight, Irascitur populus and injuriam putat Do Ira lib. 1.
quod non libenter pereunt, says the same Seneca, the multitude grows angry
and hold it a wrong and scorn done them, if they dye not willingly. With who^
Lactantius accords in sense, and almost in words, Irascuntur etiam pugnantibus
nisi celeriter e duobus alter occisus est, and tanquam humanum Lib. 6. c. 20.
sanguinem sitiant, oderunt mor^s (...). They are displeased with the
sword-players except one of them be presently slain: And as if they thirsted
for humane blood, they are impatient of delays. Such as were wounded, and lay
weltering in their blood, they desired to be searched; Ne quis illos simulata
morte deludat, lest any should deceive them with a feigned death: And this was
not done only by men, but by women, by Virgins, by Uirgines devoted to
Religion, by the Vestall Virgins themselves.

-- Consurgit ad ictus Prudentius.

Et quoties Victor ferrum jugulo inserit illa
Delicias putat esse suas, pectusque jacentis
Virgo modesta jubet converso pollice rumpi.
-- Rise up at every stroke she must*
And whiles into the throat the Victors knife is thrust,
That Is the only sport, and then the modest Vestall Priest
Turning her thumb commands to stab him through the breast.
Besides this, some of them bathed their hands in the blood of the slain, as
Lampridius observes in the life of Commodus; And which of all is most horrible
to imagine, they sucked the recking blood out of the fresh wounds. For which we
have the testimony of Pliny: Now a days, says he, you shall see them that are
subject to the falling evil to Lib. 28. c. 1.
drink the very blood of Fencers and sword-players as out of living cups; a
thing that when we behold within the same shew-place, Tigres, Lions, and other
wild beasts to do, we have it in horror as a most fearful and odious
spectacle, and these monstrous minded persons are of opinion, that the said
blood for sooth is most effectual for the curing of that disease, if they may
suck it breathing warm out of the man himself, if they may set their mouth
close to the vein, to draw thereby the very heart blood, life and all; How
unnatural soever otherwise it be holden for a man to put his lips so much as
to the wounds of wild beasts for to drink their blood. So as it seems they
still retained the nature of that wolf which Romulus their founder sucked, and
as their walls were tempered with blood

Fraterno primi maduerunt sanguine muri
With brothers blood the walls at first imbrewed were.
So were their minds; And yet as if in all this they had done mavelous well,
they proclaimed these games, they set up bills in public places to signify
the time and the number of the days they lasted, together with a list of the
names and qualities of the sword-players, and sometimes the more to content and
provoke the multitude, but too forward of themselves, they set forth and
exposed to public view those Tragical sports in painted tables, artificially
done and to the life, which practice was first begun by Terentius Lucanus, as
witnesses Pliny: All Lib. 35. 7.
which considered, I have often wondered at two things, the one that Satan
should so far prevail upon this people in blinding their vnde^nding, being
otherwise held a wise Nation, and great Professors of Morality; the other, that
the Divine Vengeance should suffer such prodigious Cruelty to pass so long
vnrevenged: yet Bodin rightly and truly Method^ Hist. c. 7. Tacitus Annal. 4.
14.
observes, that by Gods judgment at Fidenae fifty thousand men beholding a
sword-fight, were at once slain by thr fall of a Theater: which
notwithstanding this foul practice infected most of their Provinces and
Colonies, and so far wrought it upon the Jews themselves, that Agrippa
Josephus l. 19.
exhibited unto them vna commissione paria septingenta, seven hundred paires of
Fencers at one sitting, exceeding therein the Romans themselves. And a kind
of shadow hereof we have resembled in the 2. of Samuel and the 2. Abner said to
Ioab, Let the young men now arise and play before us: and Ioab said, let them
arise: Then there arose and went over twelve of Benjamin by number which
pertained to Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David,
and every one caught his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his
fellows side, so they fell down together. In which combat, says Peter
Martyr in his Commentaries on the place, their meaning was not to decide the
controversy by the event of the conflict, for the sparing of blood as was
intended in the duells betwixt David and Goliath, the Horatij and the Curiatij,
sed nihil aliud hic quaeritur quam vt homines barbarico and belluino more sese
mutuo sauciantes and cadentes, spectantium oculos pascerent horrendo
spectaculo: Here they sought for nothing else but that men wounding and
killing one another in a barbarous and a beastly manner, and so falling down
dead before them they might feed the eyes of the beholders with an horride
spectacle. Now for the Graecians, though it be true that the Athenians indeed
desired the sword-playes after the Roman manner, yet Demonax gave them a short
and wise answer, prius evertendam esse aram misericordiae quam tanta atrocitas
public reciperetur, that the Altar erected to Mercy was first to be
demolished before so outrageous cruelty could with reason be admitted.

SECT. 10. Thirdly, these bloody spectacles were cried out against by the
tongues and pens of Christian Divines, and then cried down by the Laws and
power of Christian Emperors.
But after the bright beams of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ began to
shine through the world, these bloody games were cried out against by the
writings of Christian Divines, and at last cried down and utterly abolished by
the power and edicts of Christian Magistrates. Lactantius is full and round in
this point, Qui hominem quamvis Lib. 6. c. 20.
ob merita damnatum in conspectu suo jugulari pro voluptate computat,
conscientiam suam polluit tam scilicet quam si homicidij quod fit occulte
spectator and particeps fiat; hos tamen ludos vocant in quibus humanus sanguis
effunaitur, adeo long ab hominibus facessit humanitas, vt cum animas hominum
interficiant ludere se opinentur nocentiores ijs omnibus quorum sanguinem
voluptati habeant. He that makes it his pastime to behold a man put to death,
though justly deserving it, stains his Conscience as much as if he were guilty
of secret murder, yet these they call games in which the blood of men is shed,
so far is manhood abandoned from men, that they think it but a sport, being
in truth themselves more worthy to suffer then they, in the shedding of whose
blood they thus delight. And before him Cyprian, Paratur gladiatorius ludus, ut
libidinem crudelium Epist. ad D^natum.
luminum sanguis oblectet; The sword-playes are prepared, that the blood
gushing out may satiate the wicked longing of their cruel eyes. And before him
again Tertullian, Qui ad cadaver hominis communi lege defuncti exhorret, idem
in amphitheatro derosa and dissipata, and in suo sanguine De spectacul^s.
squalentia corpora patientissimis oculis desuper incumbit. He that startles
at the sight of the Corpse of a man dead by the common course of Nature, most
patiently and contentedly beholds them in the Amphitheater mangled and all to
be goared with their own blood.

Now as the pens and tongues of the Christians were thus armed against this
Monster, so were likewise their Laws and Swords. Constantine the first
Christian Emperor was he that first gave it a deadly wound. Vetuit Idolis
sacrificari, vetuit gladiatorum caedibus pollui vrbes; He forbade Eusebius. l 4
de vita Constant.
sacrificing to Idols, and the pollution of cities by the slaughter of
sword-players. And the Law it self we have inserted into the Code, Lib. 2.
Tit. ^3
Cruenta spectacula in otio civili and domestica quiet non placent, quapropter
omnino gladiatores esse prohibemus; such bloody spectacles in these peaceable
time we like not, and therefore straightly forbid all kind of sword-playes.
Yet after this (such was the madness of the people upon them) that they were
vehemently desired and brake out by starts, but it was a resolute and worthy
answer of Theodosius to them earnestly soliciting him for the restitution of
these games, Pium Principem oportet non tantum regnare, sed etiam spectare
clementer; it behooues a religious Prince not only to reign but to look
mildely and mercifully, that is, not to accustom himself to such cruel
spectacles. And to the same purpose writes Prudentius to Honorius.

Iam solis contenta feris infamis arena, Lib. vlt. contra Symachum.

Nulla cruentatis homicidia ludat in armis,
Nullus in vrbe cadat cujus sit poena voluptas.
The infamous sand is now with beasts content,
In bloody arms manslaughter is not played,
Nor pleasure made of death and punishment.
SECT. 11. The Romans being thus cruel toward others, likewise turned the
edge of their cruelty upon themselves, partly by a voluntary exposing
themselves to present death in those public shows, either for money, or upon
a bravery, or by laying violent hands upon themselves; which by their gravest
writers was held not only lawful and commendable, but in some cases
honorable.
THus we see how these bloody shows had their birth from Paganism, but their
death from Christianity, yet before we conclude this point touching the Roman
cruelty, it shall not be amiss to consider how by the just judgment of God,
they who were thus barbarously cruel toward others, turned the edge of their
cruelty upon their own breasts, and became likewise most unmerciful and
unnatural toward themselves; not only by a voluntary exposing of themselves
to death in their Theaters, by encountering with men and beasts, but by holding
it lawful, yea in some cases both commendable and honorable, to lay violent
hands upon themselves, and to cut off the thread and extinguish the lamp of
their own lives. For the first, it is certain that many of them were well
content to sell their lives for money,

-- Quanti sua funera vendant,
Quid refert? vendunt nullo cogente Nerone.
What skils it for how much their death they sell?
They sell't, yet them no Nero does compel.
says Iuvenal. and Manilius to like purpose.

Nunc caput in mortem vendunt and funus arenae Lib. 4.

Atque hostem sibi quisque parat cum bella quiescunt.
In the Amphitheater to death and slaughter they their head
Do sell, and seek out enemies when wars are quieted.
And with this did the Christians vpbraid them, Nec vitae quidem suae parcunt,
sed extinguendas public animas vendunt, says Lactantius, Neither Lib. 5. c. 9
do they so much as spare their own lives, but sell their souls to be
publicly extinguished, and sometimes they did it upon a bravery to show their
courage, as appears by that of Tertullian in his exhortation to Martyrdom,
Quot otiosos affectatio armorum ad gladiu^ vocat, certe ad feras ipsas
affectatione descendunt, and de morsibus and cicatricibus formosiores sibi
videntur? How many idle companions only through a vain affectation of applause
are drawn into the sword-fights, nay encounter with wild beasts, seeming to
themselves more beautiful by the scarres and wounds which they there receive.

Neither did they only thus voluntarily expose their lives for a prize or
v^ine-glory to the rage of men or beasts, but which was more cruel, their
greatest Clearkes held it not lawful only, but commendable, and in some cases
honorable, to cut off the thread of their own lives* Heerevpon he cries out
in the Tragedy.

Vbique mors est optime hoc cavit Deus, O^dipus apud Sen came Theb. act. 1.
scen. 1.

Eripere vitam nemo non homini po^est,
At nemo mortem, mill ad hanc aditus patent.
Death's everywhere, God would it so should be,
Life every man from man, death none can take,
A thousand ways thereto wide open lie.
And lest we should think this to be but a Poetical fiction, whereby men are
made to speak what the Poet pleases, let us hear the wisest and worthiest
among them speaking in good earnest in this matter. Quintilian affirms, that
nemo nisi sua culpa diu dolet, no man is long in pain or s^rrow In pr^emio l.
6.
unless it be through his own fault, meaning that killing himself he may be
rid of it when he pleases. Yea even Seneca himself approues of this
selfe-homicide in diverse places, and though himself of a contrary Sect, yet
he highly commends that speech of Epicurus, Malum est Epist. 1^
in necessitate vivere, necessitas nulla est: Quidni nulla si^? patent vndique
ad libertatem viae multae, breves, faciles, agamus Deo gratias quod nemo in
vita teneri potest. Indeed it is a misery to live in necessity, but there is no
necessity for a man so to live, there are many, and short, and easy ways to
free our selves, let us give thanks to God that no man can be compelled to
live whether he will or no. And again, Si me quidem velis audire, hoc
meditare, exerce te vt mortem and excipias, and si ita res suadebit, a cersas,
Epist. 70.
interest nihil an illa ad nos veniat, an ad illam nos. If thou will follow my
counsel, so prepare thy self, that thou may entertain death, nay if need
be, thou may send for it. For it matters not whether death come to us, or we
go to death. Yea he mockes and derides those that Epist. 70.
make any scruple thereof, bono loco res humanae sunt, quod nemo nisi vitio suo
miser est, placet? Vive: si non placet, licet eo reverti vnde venisti, the
condition of our estate in this is happy, that no man is miserable but by his
own default: Does thy life please thee? live; if it please thee not thou may
return when thou will from whence thou came. And in another De Iral. 3. c. 15
place, Quocunque respexcris ibi malornm finis est, vides illud praecipitem
locum? illac ad libertatem descenditur. Vides illud mare, illud flumen, illud
puteum? Libertas illic in imo sedet; vides illam arborem, brevem, horridam,
infaelicem? Pendet inde libertas. Vides iugulum tuum, guttur tuum, cor tuum?
effugia servitutis sunt. Nimis mihi operosos exitus monstras, and multum animi
atque roboris exigentes. Quaeris quod sit ad libertatem iter? quaelibet in
corpore toto vena. Which way soever thou look, there is an end of all evils
to be found. Do thou see an high and steep place? by falling down from it,
thou shall fall into liberty. See thou such a sea, or such a river, or such a
pit? liberty lies in the bottom of them, if thou have the heart to cast thy
self into them. Do thou see a tree whereon others have been hanged? there
hangs liberty, if thou will hang thy self. Do thou see thine own neck,
throat, heart? they are all places of escape to fly from bondage. Are these
too hard and painful means to get out, and would thou yet know the way to
liberty? Every vein in thy body is a way to it. To conclude this point, Pliny
would have us believe that our mother earth having pity on us, does bring
forth Pl^ny, l. 2. c. 63.
poisons to dispatch our selves out of this wretched world with an easy
draught, without wounding the body, or shedding the blood, when there shall be
due occasion. And to this purpose, the fact of Cato and Pomponius Atticus, are
by their Historians highly commended, as is likewise that of Rasias, by the
Author of the books of Macchabees, as Macch^. 2. 14.
a manfull and noble act. But among Christians, though it be sometimes
practiced, yet it is not taught by them; nay by the Christian religion, it is
straightly forbidden and condemned, and so far as punishment may light upon
the dead, it is punishable, not only by the Common, but by the Cannon and
Civil Laws. The Romans are generally much commended for their courage, their
wisdom, their justice: But I would demand what courage it is for a man to
run away from misery, that he may not grapple with it or look it in the
face? What Wisdom, to commend their citizens for dispatching themselves at
their own pleasure, so robbing the state of a member, and perchance a very
serviceable one, such as Cato was? What justice, that men either through
weakness of mind, or strength of passion not always capable of reason, should
be permitted to give sentence, and do execution upon themselves? And least we
should think that this was the only vice this Nation, (so much renowned for
civility and virtue) was subject unto; I will likewise in passing touch their
Covetousness, which was in truth insatiable, and th^en take a larger view of
their luxury, spreading it self into many branches, but all of them most
excessive, and were they not recorded by their own writers almost incr edible.

CAP. 5. Of the excessive Covetousness of the Romans, and their insatiable
thirst, of having more, though by most unjust and indirect means.
SECT. 1. Of the excessive covetousness of the Romans in general, by the
testimonies of Petronius Arbiter, Iuvenall, Galgacus, and Hanniball; and in
particular Caecilius Claudius, Marcus Crassus, and specially Seneca the
Philosopher are taxed for this vice.
THe rapine and covetousness of the Romans was such, that being Lords in a
manner of all the known world, yet therewith they rested not content.

Orbem jam totum Victor Romanus habebat, Petronius Arbiter.

Qua mare, qua tellus, qua sydus currit vtrumque,
Nec satiatus erat,
Now the victorious Roman all the world had won,
Sea, land, and all where both the stars their course do run,
Yet was not satisfied.
These are they, whom brave Galgacus in the life of Julius Agricola justly
styles Raptores orbis, unjust robbers of the world who having left no land,
says he, to be spoiled, search also the sea, whom not the East nor West have
satisfied: To take away by maine force, to kill and to spoil falsely they call
Empire, and when all is laid waste as a wilderness, that they call peace. This
unquenchable desire of theirs, Hanniball likewise both truly and wittily
expressed; before whom, when Antiochus mustered a great army prepared against
the Romans, richly furnished with weapons inamiled, ensigns, saddles,
bridles, and trappings, imbossed and imbrodered with gold and silver, being
demanded by the King, whether all that gallant show were not sufficient for
the Romans, his answer was short but sharp, taxing as well the Cowardice of
Antiochus his soldiers, as the covetousnes of the Romans: Plane Macrobius. l
2. cap. 2. E^ Gellio, l. 3. c. 6.
satis esse credo Romany haec etsi avarissimi sint, yes truly I believe here
is enough for the Romans though they be most excessiuely covetous. But this
honor of theirs afterward increased infinitely, as appears by that of
Iuvenall,

Vberior nunquam vitiorum copia, nunquam Iuven. Sat. 1.

Mayor avaritiae patuit sinus.
Was never yet more plenteous store of vice,
Nor deeper gulf lay open of avarice.
And Manilius,

Nullo votorum fine beati,
Victuros agimus semper, nec viuimus vnquam. Lib. 4.

Never contented with our present state,
We Are still about to live, but live not till too late:
Every man says he wishing for that he has not, but making no reckoning of
that he has.

Nec quod habet numerat tantum quod non habet optat
For particulars, Pliny tells us, that when Asinius Gallus and Martius
Censorinus Pliny, l. 33. c. 10
were Consuls died Cecilius Claudius, who signified by his last will and
testament, that albeit he had sustained exceeding great loss during the
troubles of the civil wars, yet he should leave behind him at the thoure of
his death, of slaves belonging to his retinew four thousand one hundred and
sixteen, in oxen three thousand and six hundred yoke, of other cattle two
hundred fifty seven thousand, and in ready coin, according to ^octour
Holland, whose translation of Pliny I commonly follow, as a so his computation
of the Roman coins, mentioned by that Author.
three score millions of sesterces, besides a very great sum he set out for
defraying his funeral charges. And for Marcus Crassus, the same Author in the
same chapter affirms, that he was wont to say, that no man was to be accounted
rich and worthy of that title, unless he were able to despend by the year,
as much in revenew, as would maintain a legion of soldiers. And verily, says
Pliny, his own lands were esteemed worth two hundred millions of Sesterces;
and yet such was his avarice, that he could not content himself with that
wealthy estate, but upon an hungry desire to have all the gold of the
Parthians, would needs undertake a voyage against them; in which expedition he
was taken prisoner by Surinas, Lieutenant General for the King of Parthia, who
stroke off his head, and powered gold melted into his mouth to satisfy his
hunger after it. But I most wonder at Seneca the Philosopher, who every where
in his writings bitterly inveighs against these co vetous desires, and yet
within four years space gathered he three thousand times three hundred
thousand Sesterces, which amounts in our Tacitus, Annal. l. 13. c. 10.
coin to 2343750 pounds, and in casting up this sum, both the Translatour of
Tacitus his Annals, and Master Brerewood precisely accords. De pouderibus, c.
19.
And whatsoever fair pretense he make in his books of mortification and
contempt of the world, yet certain it is, that beside this mass of treasure,
he had goodly farms in the country, as appears by his own Epistles, and in
the city spacious gardens, and princely sumptuous palaces, the one mentioned
by Iuvenall. Sat. 10.

Senecae praedivitis hortos:
The gardens of Seneca the rich:
The other by Martial: lib: 4. Epigram: 40,
Et docti Senecae ter numeranda domus:
Three houses of Seneca the learned.
SECT. 2. Of their wonderful greediness of gold, manifested by their great
toil and danger in working their mines, fully and lively described by Pliny.
But that which much more aggravates this vice of the Romans is, that commonly
they gathered their riches either by violent rapine, extortion, and oppression,
or by cunning slights, and base practices, or lastly by the infinite toil of
such as therein they employed, not without the indangering of the lives of many
thousands. I will begin with the last; and that I may the more clearly and
effectually express it, I will deliver it in the words of Pliny, where he thus
speaks of the earth, torn and rent in sunder for rich metals and precious
stones.

The Lib: 2: c: 63.
misvsages, says he, which she abides above and in her outward skin, may
seem in some sort tolerable, but we not satisfied therewith, pierce deeper
and enter into her very bowels, we search into the veins of gold and silver,
we mine and dig for copper and lead metals, and for to seek out gemmes and
some little stones, we strike pits deep within the ground. Thus we pluck the
very heart strings out of her, and all to wear on our finger one gemme or
precious stone. To fulfill our pleasure and desire, how many hands are worn
with digging and delving, that one ^oynt of our finger might shine again.
Surely, if there were any Devils beneath, ere this time verily these mines (for
to feed covetousnes and riot) would have brought them up above ground. And
again in his proeme to his 33 book, we descend, says he, into her entralls,
we go down as far as to the seat and habitation of infernal spirits, and
all to meet with rich treasure, as if the earth were not fruitful enough,
and beneficial unto us in the upper face thereof, where she permits us to
walk and tread upon her. Now the infinite toil, the fearful and continual
danger of these works, he notably describes in the fourth chapter of the same
book. The third manner of searching of this metal is, says he, so painful
and toylesome, that it surpasses the wonderful work of the Giants in old
time. For necessary it is in this enterprice and business to undermine a great
way by candle light, and to make hollow vautes under the mountains, in which
labor the Pioners work by turns, successively after the manner of a releife
in a set watch, keeping every man his hours in just measure, and in many a
months space, they never see the sun nor daylight. This kind of work and
mines they call Arrugiae; wherein it falls out many times, that the earth
above head chinketh, and all at once without giving any warning setleth and
falls, so as the poor Pioners are overwhelmed and buried quick: yet say,
they work safe enough, and be not in jeopardy of their lives by the fall of
the earth, yet be their other difficulties which impeach their work: For other
whiles they meet with rocks of flint and rags, which they are driven to
cleave and pierce through with fire and vinegar; yet for fear of being stifled
with the vapor arising from thence, they are forced to give over such
fire-workes, and betake themselves oftentimes to great mattockes and pickaxes,
yea and to other engines of iron, weighing one hundred and fifty pound a
piece, where with they hew such rocks in pieces, and so sink deeper and make
way before them. The earth and stones which with so much ado they have thus
loosed, they are feign to carry from under their feet in scuttles and baskets
upon their shoulders, which pass from hand to hand evermore to the next
fellow. Thus they moyle in the dark both day and night in these infernal
dungeons, and none of them see the light of the day, but those that are last,
and next unto the pits mouth or entry of the cave. Howbeit, be the rock as
ragged as it will, they count not that their hardest work: For there is a
certain earth resembling a kind of tough clay, which they call white Lome;
this being intermingled with gravel or gritty sand, is so hard baked together,
that there is no dealing with it; it so scorneth and checketh all their
ordinary tools and labor about it, that it seems impenetrable. What do the
poor laborers then? They set upon it lustily with iron wedges, they lay on
load incessantly with mighty beetles, and verily they think there is nothing
in this world harder then this labor, unless it be this insatiable hunger
after gold, which surpasses all the hardness and difficulty that is.

Now notwithstanding the great danger and toil of those works, infinite was
the number which the Romans employed therein, as may in part appear by the
same Author in the same chap: Here says he, comes to my remembrance an Act
of the Censors extant upon record, as touching the gold mine of Ictimulum a
town in the territory of Verselles, which act contained an inhibition, that
the Publicanes, whofarmed that mine of the City should not keep above five
thousand Pioners together at work there:

By which restraint it should seem, that their usual practice was to keep
more, and this have we by Polybius fully cleared, affirming that in the
Spanish mines at New Carthage, no less then forty thousand men were daily
employed.

SECT. 3. Their unmerciful pilling and poling, robbing and spoiling the
provinces, not sparing the very temples and things sacred.
YEt had all this been in some sort tolerable, had they not hereunto added
the pilling and poling, the robbing and spoiling of their provincials;
sometimes by open force and rapine, but commonly under the colorable pretenses
of tributes or Fees. Demades was wont to say when he was advanced to any place
of government; ad auream messem se venisse, that he was come to a golden
harvest; and this was surely the conceit of the Roman Presidents when they
went to their charges every one like another Jason, promised to himself the
bringing back of a golden fleece, these were in truth those Harpyes.

-- Quarum decerpitur vnguibus orbis, Rutili^: Itiner. 1.

Quae pede glutineo quae tetigere trahunt.
Whose claws spoil all the world, whose glewie feet
Draw to themselves what ere they touch or meet.
That which Cicero charged Verres with, in the government of Sicilie, was
doubtless the common practice of them all in like places; as in part appears by
the conclusion of C. Gracchus his speech to the people after his return to
Rome from the government of Sardinia, as Gellius relates it; the bags, says
he, which I carried forth with me full of money, 15: 12:
I brought back empty; whereas others returned home those barels full of
silver, which they sent forth filled with wine. They had officers under them
for their collecting of their tributes, whom they named Publicanes; which word
we have still retained in our Gospells; but so as it there appears, they were
an odious kind of people, by reason of their unjust and unmerciful exactions;
whence some (though improperly in regard of the word, yet not impertinently in
regard of their snarling and biting conditions) have styled them Publicani,
quasi publici canes, and if these were dogs, sur^ly the Presidents themselves
were wolves and lions, not leaving the bones till the morrow, as the Prophet
describes the Princes and Judges of Israel. One of them while he was yet
Zephany, 3. 3.
trembling at S. Paul's sermon touching Righteousness, temperance, and the
Act. 24. v. 26. 27.
judgment to come, yet such a corrupt habit had he gotten, that even then he
groped him for a bribe, though a man most unlikely to afford it, as well in
regard of his doctrine and profession, as his poor estate. But some where have
I read of this unhappy Felix, that he was inexplebilis avaritiae gurges, an
insatiable gulf of covetousnes. Such a one, I am sure, was Sylla, who raised
out of the lesser Asia alone, twenty thousand talents yearly: Yet Brutus and
Cassius went farther, forcing them to App^anus, l. 5. bellorum civilium.
Plutarch.
pay the tribute of ten years within the space of two, and Anthony in one;
by which computation they paid in one year two hundred thousand talents, a
mighty sum. L. Paulus held one of their best citizens, pretending to make
the Epirotes free, as were the Macedonians whom he had conquered, under that
pretense, calling out ten of the chief of every city, he advised them to
bring forth their gold and silver, which done, he divided his cohorts among
them, and gave in charge to the Tribunes and Centurions what his pleasure was:
In the morning his command was executed by the Townsmen, and at four of the
clock sign was given to his soldiers for the sacking of the Towns. Tantaque
praeda fuit, says Livie, vt in equitem quadringenti denarij, peditibus Lib. 45.
duceni dividerentur: So great was the spoil, as there fell to the share of an
horseman four hundred denarij, and of a foote-man two hundred. Nay, in Italy
it self Plemminius Lieutenant to Scipio Africanus Idem. l 43.
proceeded so far upon the Locreans, over whom he was set with a garrison,
that he abstained not from sacrilege, neither did he spoil other Churches
alone, but that of Proserpina, robbing and carrying away, intactos omni aetate
the sauros, treasures till then untouched. These were strange outrages, that of
Galba was indeed less outrageous but more base, he being Proconsull in Spain
under Nero, the Taraconians sent him for a present a Crown of gold, affirming
that it weighed fifteen pounds. He received it, and causing it to be weighed,
found it to want three pound, which he exacted from them: Postposito omni
pudore, says Fulgosus, laying aside all shame, as if it had been a due debt.
And to Lib. 8.
show he was no changeling, even after his coming to the Empire, he gave with
his own hand to a certain musician that pleased him, out of his own purse 20
Sesterces about three shillings English, and to his steward at the making up of
his books, a reward from his table. This was base, but that of Julius Caesar
most dishonest, who in his first Consulship stole out of the Capitol three
thousand weight of gold, laying up as much gilded Sueton. c. 54.
copper instead thereof. He sacked in an hostile manner certain towns of the
Portugals, though they disobeyed not his commands, but freely and friendly
opened their gates unto him for his entrance. In France he robbed the Oratories
and Temples of the Gods, stored with rich offerings and ornaments, and laid
waste their Cities, Saepius ob praedam quam ob delictum, says Suetonius,
oftener for love of booty then for any offense by them committed, and afterward
supplied the expense of his civil wars, his triumphs, his shows to the
people, evidentissimis rapinis and sacrilegijs, by most notorious pillaging and
sacrilege. And no marveill, since as witnesses Cicero in the third book of
his Offices, he had always that of Euripides in his mouth.

Si violandum est jus, imperij gratia,
Violandum est:
If right for ought a man may violate,
It Is for a kingdom.
And I see not, but that he might as safely hold that justice is to be violated
for treasure, by which Empire is to be gotten and maintained, as for Empire it
self.

SECT. 4. Of the base and most unconscionable practices of Tiberius and
Caligula, nay even of Vespasian himself for the heaping up of treasure.
NOw if this were the opinion and practice of Julius Caesar, what should we
expect from Nero, Tiberius, and Caligula, of whom the first wasted Italy by
contributions and borrowing of money, ruined the provinces, and impoverished
the confederates of the people of Tac. Annal. 15. 11.
Rome, and the cities which were called free: Yea the Gods themselves were not
privileged from being made a prey: But the temples in the city were robbed,
and the gold carried away, which the people of Rome in all ages, either in
triumphs or vows, in prosperity or fear had dedicated to the Gods: Yea in
Achaia and Asia not only consecrated gifts, but the images of the Gods were
taken away; Acratus and Secundus Carinates being sent thither of purpose. The
second being presented with a goodly fish, he sent it to be sold in the market,
and being designed Seneca Epist. 95.
here by Cn. Lentulus one of the Augures, and a man of great revenewes, Suet.
cap. 49
never left him till through fear and anguish he had brought him to his grave.
Also to pleasure Quirinus who had been Consul, a wonderful rich man, but
childlesse, in hope to be his heir, he condemned his wife Lepida a noble and
worthy Lady divorced from her husband after twenty years marriage, and accused
of contriuing his death by poison long before. Venon likewise King of Parthia,
who being driven out of his own Kingdom, and betaking himself to the trust
of the people of Rome, came to Antiochia with infinite treasure, he caused most
perfidiously to be robbed both of it and his life, and of his life for it.

Verum ut hoc in eo horrenda fuerunt, ita quae sequuntur dedecoris plena, as
these things in him were horrible, so were those that followed most abominable
and shameful, says Fulgosus, in reference to Caligula, the successor to
Tiberius as well in vice as Empire. Some with threats he forced to name him
their Heir, and if they recovered after the making of Sueton. c. 38. and in
sequen^ibus.
their wills, he dispatched them by poison, holding it ridiculous that they
should long live after their wills were made. For the bringing in of money he
set up stews both of boys and women in the palace it self, and sent some
through the streets to invite men thither for the increasing of the Emperors
revenewes, and having by this and such like wretched means amassed huge sums
of treasure, he to satiate his appetite contrectandae pecuniae cupidine
incensus, being inflamed with a longing desire of touching money, would
sometimes walk upon heaps of gold, and sometimes as they lay spread abroad in
a large room, roll himself over them stark naked. O ingentem nimiamque
avaritiam quae in tanto imperio tantum Principem excaecatum in eam vilitatem
abjectionemque deduxisti, vt neque dedecus suum, neque imperii ignominiam
agnosceret, says Fulgosus, most transcendent and excessive covetousnes which
blinded so great a Co^mander, and cast him into such extremity of baseness as to
become a public Pander and a poysoner for love of money, which no ingenuous
minded man though pressed with extreme necessity would practice though in
private.

But this was in these Monsters no miracle, I more wonder at Vespasian, who had
the reputation (perchance by reason of their villainy*) of a good Emperor, yet
even he was so impotently covetous, that he not Suet. (...).
only called for the arreareages due in Galbaes time, but raised new tributes,
and laid upon the Provinces more grievous impositions, doubling them in some
places, Negotiationes vel privato pudendus propalam exercuit, he publicly
practiced such kind of traffic, as even a private man would shame to do;
taking up commodities at a cheap hand, that afterward he might vent them at
dearer rates: neither did he spare to sell honors to such as sued for them, or
absolutions to such as were accused, whether they proved guiltless or guilty,
he was thought of set purpose to have made choice of the most ravenous poling
officers he could any-where find out, and to have advanced them to the
highest places, that being thereby grown rich, he might condemn their
persons, and confiscate their goods, and these men he was commonly said to use
as sponges, Quod quasi and siccos madefaceret, and exprimeret humentes, because
he both moistened them being dry, and wrung them out being moistened. Nay which
was more base, he laid an imposition upon urine, and being by his son Titus put
in mind of the baseness of it, he took a piece of money received for that
use, and putting it to his sons nostrils, demanded of him whether he felt
any other savor from it then from any other money, adding withal, Bonus odor
lucri ex re qualibet, the smell of gain is good from any thing whatsoever.

SECT. 5. That the whole Nation was deeply infected with the same vice.
ANd to speak a truth, the whole body of this people was so far possessed
with this dropsy, that Salvianus makes it their National Lib. 7. de Prov^n.
i^.
disease, Avaritiae inhumanitas proprium Romanorum malum, inhumane
covetousness is the disease proper to all the Romans. And with him accords
Mithridates in Justin, Non temere se lupi vberibus alitos Lib 36.
jactare, omnet enim habere luporum animos inexplebiles, sanguinis, imperij,
divitiarumque avidos esse and jejunos; that they did not without reason boast
themselves to be nourished from the dugg of a she wolf, inasmuch as they have
all of them insatiable minds of wolves, greedily thirsting after Empire, blood
and riches. And this well appeared in two public Acts of theirs, the one was,
that a piece of Land being in controversy between the Ardeatines and the
Aricinians, they both by joint consent Live. dec. 1. l. 3
referred themselves to the arbitration of the Romans, binding themselves to
stand to their award: but they adjudg'd it to themselves. The other was that
the Senate having taken great sums of money of certain tributary Cities to
make them free, forced them afterward to pay their old tribute without
restoring unto them the money they had paid for their freedom; which says
Cicero was turpe imperio, a shame to their Empire, Piratarum enim melior fuit
fides quam Senatus, for the faith of pirates (...). 3*
was better then the faith of the Senate. This was most dishonest, yet I know
not whether that which follows were not more dishonorable. Their greatest men
took to farm their basest tributes before mentioned, and worse then those,
yea and sued for them, Non aliter quam militarem aliquam praefecturam aut
civilem Magistratum, they be the words of Euagrius, none otherwise then it had
been some great Command Lib 3. c. 39.
in the wars, or some principal office in the City. And Iuvenal speaking of
those who from small matters were raised to great fortunes thus describes them.

Conducunt foricas, and cur non omnia? cum sint Iuven. Sa. 3.

Quales ex humili magna ad fastigia rerum
Extollit quoties voluit fortuna jocari.
They draughts (and why not all things else?) do hire,
Being such as fortune when she would be merry,
To highest place does raise from lowest mire.
What marvel then if Seneca complain, Haec ipsa res tot magistratus tot
judices Epist. 116.
detinet quae Magistratus and Iudices facit pecunia. This selfsame thing
which keeps in so many Magistrates and Judges, In their places, is it which
makes both Magistrates and Judges, to wit, money; Mercatoresque and venales
invicem facti, quaerimus non quale sit quid sed quanti, and being become
Merchants on all hands, we seek not so much of what quality things are, but of
what price. And all kind of offices being thus purchased with money, as the
places of Judicature were commonly bought, so was Justice openly sold. Omnium
sermon percrebuit in his judicijs quae nunc sunt, pecuniosum hominem, quamvis
sit nocens, neminem posse damnari, says Cicero. It is rife in every man's mouth
in these Courts of Justice, which now are, that a monied man, though he be
guilty cannot be condemned: and again, nihil tam sanctum quod non violari,
nihil tam munitum quod non expugnari pecunia possit: there is nothing so sacred
which with money may not be violated, nothing so fenced which may (...).
not be razed. Nay Catiline could say of Rome, o vrbem venalem and mature
perituram si emptorem invenerit! O mercenary city and soon to be ruined by
sale if it might find but a Chapman.

Not without reason then have some found in the word ROMA, Radix Omnium Malorum
Avaritia, Covetousness is the root of all mischief, 1 Timothy 6. 1^*
taking the first letters of those words as they lie in their order for the
making up of that name. And not without proper signification Cap. 39. v. 2^*
29. 30.
did Rome take to her self the Eagle for her Ensign, which as Job speaks,
dwells and abides on the rock, upon the cragge of the rock and the strong
place: from thence she seeks the prey, and her eyes behold a far off, her
young ones also suck up blood, and where the slain are, there is he. So as
generally might be verified of them, what Claudian writes of Ruffinus.

Plenus sevitiae, lucrique cupidine fervens,
Non Tartassiacis illum satiaret arenis
Tempest as pretiosa Tagi, non stagna rubentis
Aurea Pactoli, totumque exhauserit Hermum
Ardebit majore siti.
Greedy of filthy gain, and full of cruelty,
Nor can Tartessian sands him of the precious Tage,
Or golden streams of red Pactolus satisfy,
Might he all Hermus drink his thirst the more would rage.
Or Strozza of Scaurus.

Scaurus habet villas, vrbana palatia, nummos,
Pinguiaque innumeris praedia bobus arat:
Huic tamen assidue mayor succrescit habendi
Nunquam divitijs exsatiata fames.
Scaurus has farms, coin, cities, palaces,
With many an ox his fertile fields he plowes:
Yet wealth his hunger never satisfies,
But his desire to have still greater grows.
CAP. 6. Of the Roman Luxury in matter of Incontinency and Drunkenness.
SECT. 1. A touch of the Roman Luxury in general, and in particular of the
sins of the flesh.
NOw as the Roman Covetousnes was insatiable, and their cruelty unquenchable:
so was their Luxury most incredible, were it not recorded by their own Writers.

Nunc patimur longae pacis mala, saevior armis Ivven, Sat. 6

Luxuria incumbit, victumque vlciscitur orbem,
Nullum crimen abest facinusque libidinis ex quo
Paupertas Romana perit.
Now suffer we the plagues and mischiefs of long peace,
Now is the conquered world revenged by luxury,
Far worse then arms, and since Rome's poverty did cease,
There wants no attempt or crime of lechery.
Pariterque and luxuria nata est, and Carthago sublata, says Pliny, no sooner
was 33. 1.
Carthage vanquished by us, but we by luxury: and these two covetousness and
luxury mutvally made way each for other:

Luxuriamque lucris emimus luxuque rapinas.
We draw on luxury by unjust gain, Man. lib. 4.

And rapine by luxury is drawn on again:
Eiusmodi tempora constat a Tacito in annalibus esse descripta quibus nulla
unquam fuerunt turpissimis vitijs foediora, neque aut virtutum steriliora, aut
virtutibus inimicitiorae, as witnesses Causabon in his preface to Polybius: It
is evident that those times are by Tacitus described in his Annals, then which
never were any more fruitful in most shameful and abominable vices, or of
virtues more barren, or to virtue more opposite: The branches of the Roman
luxury were monstrous excess in all kind of uncleanness and incontinency,
in diet, in apparel, in retinew of servants, in buildings and furniture of
their houses, in bathings and anointings of their bodies, in prodigal gifts,
and lastly, in setting forth their plays and Theatricall shows. I am not
ignorant that Meursius a Netherlander has composed an entire book purposely
of this subject, intituling it, De luxu Romanorum, of the Roman Luxury, and
concluding it with this censure, damno, damno luxum vestrum Romani, and in hac
sententia concludo, O ye Romans, I damn I damn your Luxury, and with this
sentence I conclude: yet is it certain that he has omitted many material
Collections which might have been added, and the most obserueable in him I
shall not fail to make choice and use of. First then for their excess in the
sins of the flesh it is evident that they acted more then is now commonly
known to Christians, and I rather desire the foulness thereof should be
eternally buried in oblivion, then by exposing it to public view defile my
pen with it, and perchance teach whiles I reprehend. The Apostle in the
first to the Romans has given us a touch thereof; yet so as no doubt but he
concealed much that he knew, and many things by them were practiced, which came
not to his knowledge. Though this infection were so generally spread, and had
taken so deep root amongst them, that they made but a jest of the foulest
sins in that kind. They had certain pastimes, which they termed Ludos
Florales, in honor of Alexander ab Alexandro 6. 8:
Flora, a notorious strumpet. Qui ludi tanto devotius quanto turpius celebrari
solent, says S. Augustine in his second book de Civitate Dei, and 27 chapter;
which games of theirs the more dishonestly, the more devoutly they were
celebrated. In these the common queanes, which got their maintenance by that
trade, ran up and down the streets by daylight, and in the night with burning
torches in their hands, having their whole bodies stark naked, and expressing
the most beastly motions and gestures, and uttering the most filthy speeches
and songs that could possiblely be imagined. To these the Poet alludes.

Turba quidem cur hos celebret meretricia ludos, Ovid. Fastor. 5:

Non ex difficili cognita causa fuit.
Why queanes these plays do celebrate I trow,
It Is not so difficult the cause to know.
Yet to these shameful, or rather shameless pastimes were their youth
admitted, thereby adding, as it were fire to tinder, nay their sagest
Senators, gravest Matrones, and severest Magistrates were well content to
grace them with their presence, as it had bin some very commendable or
profitable exercise: But these Florall plays were but once a year, their
enterludes in the Theater, acted upon the open stage were almost daily, yet so
abominable, that the godly d^voute Fathers of the Primitive Christian Church
can hardly write of them with patience, specially Salvianus, whose words to
this purpose are very smart and piercing: Talia sunt, says he, quae illic
fiunt vt ea non solum dicere, sed etiam recordari De Gubernat D. il. 6.
aliquis sine pollutione non possit. Alia quippe crimina singulas sibi in nobis
vendicant portiones, vt cogitationes sordidae animum, impudici aspectus oculos,
auditus improbi aures, ita vt cum ex his vnum aliquid erraverit, reliqua
possint carere peccatis, in Theatris vero nihil horum reaetu vacat, quia and
concupiscentijs animus and auditu aures, and aspectu oculi polluuntur, quae
quidem omnia tam flagitiosa sunt, vt explicare ea quispiam atque eloqui salvo
ore non valeat. Quis enim integro verecundiae statu dicere queat illas rerum
turpium imitationes. illas vocum ac verborum obscaenitates, illas motuum
turpitudines, illas gestuum foeditates, quae quanti sint criminis vel hinc
intelligi potest quod and relationem sui interdicunt. His conclusion is, Quae
cum ita sint, ecce qualia aut omnes aut pene omnes Romani agunt. Of such a
nature they are which are there acted, that a man cannot speak of them, nor
well remember them without some touch of pollution, Other offenses challenge to
themselves but a part of us, as impure thoughts the mind, unchaste sights the
eyes, wicked speeches the ears; so that when one of these is tainted, yet the
rest may be clear from pollution, but in the Theater none of them is free from
the guilt of infection, in as much as the mind is there defiled with corrupt
thoughts, the affections with naughty desires, the ears by hearing, and the
eyes by seeing, all which are so lewd, that no man without blushing can so much
as name them, much less fully describe them. For what modest man is there, who
can rccount those representations of beastly actions, those filthy speeches,
and motions, and gestures, which how sinful they are, we may from hence
conjecture that they cannot well be related: which being so, behold what manner
of things all, or at leastwise the greatest part of the Romans practice. And
this may we add to Salvianus, that the Actors of these Comedies were by the
state it self highly regarded and richly rewarded, as if they had done some
profitable piece of service for the Commonwealth. But this kind of luxury,
as being loathsome in the very handling I briefly pass over, as men lightly
skippe over quagmires and proceed to their luxury in diet, and first of their
excess in drinking.

SEC. 2. Of their excess in drinking.
THis we may partly guess at, by that which Ammianus Marcellinus Lib: 22:
writes of their pots, graviora gladijs pocula erant, their pots were heavier
then their swords: Among the rest, they had a kind of cups which Horace calls
ciboria.

-- Oblivioso lavia massico Carm. l: 2. od. 7.

Ciboria imple.
Go fill the biggest cups you may,
With liquor that drives care away.
Thought to be the leaves of the Egyptian bean, which are so broad, that
Dioscorides for their largeness compares them to a bonnet, Theophrastus to a
Thessalian hat; and Pliny thus describes them under the name Lib: 21: c: 15:
of Colocassia. The leaves of Colocassia are exceeding large and comparable to
the broadest that any tree bears, of these plaited and infolded one within
another, the Egyptians make them cups of diverse forms and fashions, out of
which they take no small pleasure to drink; whereby the leaves of Colocassia,
Adrianus Iunius conceives Horace his Lib: 1: Ani^ad: cap: 10:
Ciboria to be described. Such a kind of cup, it seems, was that, which that
mad fellow speaks of in Plautus, upon casting the dice.

Iacto basilicum propino magnum poclum
Ille ebibit. Plautus in Curcul one.

I threw the principal chance, and thereupon begin an health in the greatest
bowl, and he instantly pleadges me the whole. Now the principal chance was
Venus.

-- Quem Venus arbitram Horace Carm: l: 2: od: 7:

Dicet bibendi,
Whom Venus shall name
To be Judge of the game.
And this Lord of misrule in their compotations or drunken meetings, called
Modiperator, or Magister; his office was to prescribe rules, and to see them
executed, and there he commanded as a Sovereign Monarch in his kingdom.

Nec regna vini sortiere talis, Horace Carm. l. 1. od. 4.

Nor shall thou any more by chance of dice
Win Bacchus kingdom or the drinking price.
Their rules of drinking they borrowed, for the most part, from the Grecians,
the most debosht drunken Nation, I think that ever was, in so much, as their
very name is for that quality grown into a proverb, both in Latin and
English. Of these rules, one was to drink down the Pergr^cari. (...) merry.
Greek. in men:
evening star, and drink up the morning star, ad Diurnam stellam matutinam
potantes, says Plautus. another commonly practiced among them, was the
drinking of so many healths as there were letters in their Mistresses name.

Naevia sex Cyathis, septem Iustina bibatur, Martial.

Quinque Lycas, Lyde quatuor, Ida tribus.
Six healths to Naevia drink, seven to Iustina,
To Lycas five, to Lyde four, and three to Ida.
And yet it should seem by Plutarch in his Symposiaks, that they had a
superstitious conceit of drinking four healths, perchance because an even
number.

Aut quinque bibe, aut tres, aut non quatuor:
Three drink, if more,
Five, but not four.
These drunken matches were in a manner the daily trade of their Poets.

Nulla manner diu nec vivere carmina possunt,
Quae scribuntur aquae potoribus,
Who naught but water d^inke, their rhyme
Cannot endure or live long time.
Nunc est bibendum, nunc pede libero
Pulsanda tellus. Horace Car: l. 1. od: 37,

Now let us drink out wit,
And dance and frolic it.
Neither were their very women free from this excess. Nay Seneca assures
Epist: 95:
us, that in this practice they put down the men themselves; Non minus
pervigilant, non minus potant and oleo and mero viros provocant; aeque invitis
ingesta visceribus per os reddunt, and vinum omne vomitu remetiuntur, aeque
nivem rodunt solatium stomachi aestuantis: They no less sit up late in the
night, they drink no less then men themselves, nay they challenge men to the
anointing of their bodies, and the swilling down of wine, regorging what they
eat and drink as well as they; neither do they forbear to chaw upon snow, as
men do for the refreshing of their boiling stomachs.

SECT. 3. The same amply confirmed by the testimony of Pliny.
THis vice of excessive drinking is by some thought to be the Epidemicall,
proper disease of this age: But he that will be pleased patiently to pervse,
and advisedly to consider this ensuing discourse, which I shall here annexe
out of Pliny, will I presume alter his opinion therein, not by excusing the
present, but by not excusing the former ages, and the better learn to detest
this beastly vice in both. Thus then writes he, no less sharply then
elegantly of this vice, and the great excess thereof in his time. If a man
mark and consider well the Pliny. l. 14: c: 12:
course of our life, we are in no one thing more busy and curious, nor take
greater pains then about wine, as if Nature had not given to man the liquor of
water which of all other is the most wholesome drink; and wherewithal other
Creatures are well contented: But we thinking it not sufficient to take wine
ourselves, give it also to our horses, mules, and laboring beasts, and force
them against nature to drink it. Besides such pains, so much labor, so great
cost and charges we are at to have it, such delight and pleasure we take in it,
that many of us think they are borne to nothing else, and can skill of none
other contentment in this life: Notwithstanding when all is done, it
transporteth and carries away the right wit and mind of men, it causes fury
and rage, and induces, nay it casts headlong as many as are given thereunto
into a thousand vices and misdemeanors; and yet forsooth to the end that we
may take the more cups, and power it down the throat more lustily, we let it
run through a strainer for to abate and geld, as it were, the force thereof;
yea and other devices there be towhet our appetite thereunto, and cause us to
quaffe more freely; nay to draw on their drink men are not afraid to make
poisons, while some take hemlocke before they sit down, because they must
drink perforce then or else die for it; others the powder of the Pumish stone
and such like stuff, which I am abashed to rehearse, and teach those that be
ignorant of such lewdnes. And yet we see those that be the stoutest and most
redoubted drinkers, even those that take themselves most secured of danger, to
lie sweating so long in the baines and brothell houses for to concocke their
surfeit of wine, that otherwhiles they are carried forth dead for their labor:
You shall have some again, when they have been in the hot house not to stay
so long as they may recover their beds, no not so much as to put on their
sherts, but presently in the place all naked, as they are puffing and laboring
still for wind, catch up great cans and huge tankards of wine (to show what
lusty and valiant Champions they be) set them one after another to their mouth,
power the wine down the throat without more ado, that they might cast it up
again and so take more in the place, vomiting and revomiting twice or thrice
together that which they have drunk, and still make quarrel to the pot, as if
they had been borne into this world for none other end but to spill and mar
good wine, or as if there were no way else to spend and waste the same but
through man's body. And to this purpose were taken up at Rome these foreign
exercises of vauting and dancing the Moriske, from hence came the tumbling of
wrastlers in the dust and mire together, for this they show their broad
breasts, bare up the heads, and carry their necks far back, in all which
gesticulations, what do they else but profess that they seek means to
procure thirst, and take occasion to drink: But come now to their pots that
they use to quaffe and drink out of: are there not graven in them fair
pourtraites think you of adulteries? as if drunkenness it self were not
sufficient to kindle the heat of lust, and to teach them wantonness. Thus is
wine drunk out of libidinous cups, and more then that, he that can quaffe best
and play the drunkard most, shall have the greatest reward. But what shall we
say to those (would a man think it?) that hire a man to eat also as much as he
can drink, and upon that condition covenant to yield him the price for his
wine-drinking and not otherwise. You shall have another that will injoyne
himself to drink every denier that he has won at dice. Now when they are
come to that once, and be thoroughly whittled, then shall you have them cast
their wanton eyes upon men's wives, then fall they to court fair Dames and
Ladies, and openly bewray their folly even before their jealous and stern
husbands, then I say the secrets of their heart are opened and displayed. Some
you shall have even in the midst of their cups make their wills even at the
board where they sit, others again cast out bloody and deadly speeches at
random, and cannot hold but bluit out those words which afterward they are
forced to eat again, for thus many a man by a lavish tongue in his wine has
come by his death and had his throat cut. And verily the world is now grown to
this pass, that whatsoever a man says in his cups is held for sooth, as if
truth were the d^ughter of wine But say they escape these dangers, certes speed
they never so well, the best of them all never sees the Sun rising, so
drowzie and sleepie they are in bed every morning, neither live they to be old
men, but die in the strength of their youth. Hence comes it that some of them
look pale with a pair of flaggie cheeks, others have bleared and sore eyes,
and there be of them that shake so with their hands that they cannot hold a
full cup, but shed and power it down the floor. Generally they all dream
fearfully, which is the very b^ginning of their hell in this life) or else
have restless nights. And finally if they chance to sleep (for a due guerdon
and reward of their drunkenness) they are deluded with imaginary conceits of
Venus delights, defiled with filthy abominable pollutions: and thus both
sleeping and waking they sin with pleasure. Well what becomes the morrow after?
they belch sour, their breath stinketh of the barrel, and tells them what
they did over night, otherwise they forget what ever they did or said: they
remember no more, then if their memory were utterly extinct. And yet our jolly
drunkards give out and say that they alone enjoy this life, and rob other men
of it: But who sees not that ordinarily they loose not only the yesterday
past, but the morrow to come? Of all Nations the Parthians would have the glory
for this goodly virtue of wine bibbing: and among the Greeks Alcibiades indeed
deserved the best game for this worthy feate. But here with us at Rome,
Nivellius Torquatus, a Millanois wan the name from all Romans and Italians
both. This Lombard had gone through all honorable degrees of dignity in Rome,
he had been Praetor, and attained to the place of a Proconsull. In all these
offices of state he won no great name: but for drinking in the presence of
Tiberius 3 gallons of wine at one draught and before he took his breath
again, he was dubbed Knight by the surname of Tricongius, as one would say,
the 3 gallon Knight. And the Emperor stern, severe and cruel otherwise
though he was, now in his old age, (for in his youthful days he was given
overmuch to drinking of wine) would delight to behold this worthy and renowned
Knight with great wonder and admiration. For the like rare gift and commendable
quality men think verily that C. Piso first rose, and afterward was advanced
to the Provostship of the City of Rome by the said Tiberius: and namely for
that in his court being now Emperor he sat two days and two nights drinking
continually, and never stirred foot from the board. And verily Drusus Caesar
(by report) in nothing more resembled his Father Tiberius than in taking his
drink. But to return again to noble Torquatus, herein consisted his
excellency, that he did it according to art (for this you must take withal,
there is an Art of drinking, grounded upon certain rules and precepts)
Torquatus (I say) drank he never so much, was not known at any time to falter
in his tongue, never eased himself by vomiting, never let it go the other way
under board: how late soever he sat up at the wine over night, he would be
sure to relieve the morning watch and sentinel. He drunk most of any man at one
entire draught before the pot went from his head: and for smaller draughts
besides, he went beyond all other in number, his wind he never took whilst
the cup was at his mouth, but justly observed the rule of drinking with one
breath: he was not known to spit for all this: and to conclude, he would not
leave a drop behind in the cup, not so much as would dash against the
pavement, and make the least sound to be heard, a special point and precise
law to prevent the deceit of those that drink for a wager. A singular glory no
doubt in him and a rare felicity. Tergilla challenged M. Cicero the younger,
son to that M. Cicero the famous Orator, and reproached him to his face, that
ordinarily he drank 2 gallons at once, and that one time above the rest when
he was drunk he flung a pot at M. Agrippa his head. And truly this is one of
the fruits and feats of drunkenness. But blame not young Cicero if in this
point yet he desired to surmount him that slew his father, M. Antonius I mean;
for he before that time strained himself, and strove to win the best game in
this feate, making profession thereof, as may appear by a book which he
compiled and set forth with this title, Of his own drunkenness: wherein he
was not ashamed to avow and justify his excess and enormities that way, and
thereby approved (as I take it) under pretense and color of his drunkenness
all those outrages of his, all those miseries and calamities that he brought
upon the whole world. This Treatise he vomited and spued out a little before
the battle of Actium, wherein he was defeated. Whereby it may appear very
plainly, that as he was drunken before with the blood of the Citizens: so
still he was the more bloudthirsty: For this is a property which necessarily
follows this vice, that the more a man drinks, the more he may, and is
always dry. And herein spoke to good purpose a certain Ambassador of the
Scythians, saying, that the Parthians the more they drunk the thirstier they
were.

SECT. 4. In particular this excess of the Romans in drinking is confirmed by
the practice of Anthony, specially at his being with Cleopatra, as also by the
practice of Clodius son to Esope the Tragoedian in drinking of dissolved
pearl.
NOw because Pliny has instanced in Anthony as one of the most notorious
drunkards among the Romans, not only for the practice but for the defense
thereof, notwithstanding his eminent place and great command, it shall not be
amiss a little farther to enquire into some particulars touching his great
excess therein. It is a most shameful one which Cicero charge him with: Sed
haec quae robustioris Philip. 2.
improbitatis sunt omittamus; loquamar potius de iniquissim^ genere levitatis
Tu istis faucibus, istis lateribus, ista gladiatoria totius corporis firmitate,
tantum vini in Hippiae nuptiis exhauseras, ut tibi necesse esset in Populi
Romani conspectu vomere postridie. O rem non modo visa foedam, sed etiam
auditu! si inter coenam in tuis immanibus illis poculis, hoc tibi accidisset,
quis non turpe diceret? in coetu vero populi negotium publicum gerens, magister
Equitum, cui ructare turpe esset, is vomens frustis esculentis vinum
redolentibus, gremium suum and totum tribunal implevit. But those villainies
which require more strength let us omit, and speak rather of his wicked kind
of lightness. Thou with those chaps of thine, with those sides, with that
ruffian-like strength of thy whole body at the wedding of Hippia did take in
so much wine, that the next day thou must needs vomit in the open view of the
people of Rome, a filthy act not only to be seen but to be heard, if at
supper-time in the midst of those thy monstrous pots the same had fallen out,
who would not have cried out shame on thee? but now the Master of the Horse
being about a public business in an assembly of the people where it had
been a shame for such a man to belch, vomiting out gobbets of flesh smelling
strongly, therewith filled both his own bosom and the whole court of Justice.

This was indeed very foul in it self though but once done, even without the
Orators Rhetorical aggravation: but his daily practice of excessive drinking
during his abode with Cleopatra was less excusable, because more frequent;
touching which Pliny relates two memorable stories, though in different kinds,
the one was this.

Here by the way (says he) I cannot choose but remember the device of Plin. l.
21. c. 3.
Queen Cleopatra, full of fine wit, and as wicked and mischievous with(...).
For at what time Anthony prepared the expedition and journey of (...) against
Augustus, and stood in some doubt and jealousy of the said Queen, for all the
fair show that she made of gratifying him, and doi^g him all pleasure, he was
at his taster, and would neither eat nor drinko a^her ^able without assay
made. Cleopatra seeing how timorous he was, and minding yet to make good sport
and game at his needless fear and foolish curiosity, caused a Chaplet to be
made for M. Anionius, having before dipped all the tips and edges of the
flowers that went to it in a strong and rank poison, and being thus prepared,
set it upon the head of the said Anthony. Now when they had s^tten at meat a
good while, and drunk themselves merry; the Queen began to make a motion and
challenge to Anthony for to drink each of them their chaplets; and withal beg
an unto him in a cup of wine seasoned and spiced as it were with those flowers
which she ware her own self, O the shrewd and unhappy wit of a woman when
she is so disposed! who would ever have misdoubted any danger of hidden
mischief herein? Well, M. Anthony yielded to pledge her: off goes his own
garland, and with the flowers minced small, dresseth his own cup. Now when he
was about to set it to his head, Cleopatra presently put her hand between and
stayed him from drinking, and withal uttered these words; My dear heart and
best beloved Anthony, now see what she is whom thou so much do dread and
stand in fear of, that for thy security there must wait at thy cup and
trencher extraordinary tasters; a strange and new fashion ywis, and a curiosity
more nice then needful; lo how I am not to seek of means and oportunities
to compass thy death, if I could find in my heart to live without thee; which
said, she called for a prisoner immediately out of the jail, whom she caused to
drink off the wine which Anthony had prepared for himself: no sooner was the
goblet from his lips again, but the poor wretch died presently in the place.

The other story he thus relates; Two only pearls there were together, the
fairest and richest that ever have been known in the world, and those
possessed at one time by Cleopatra the last Queen of Egypt, which came into
her hands by the means of the great Kings of the East, and were left unto her
by descent. This Princess when Marcus Antonius had strained himself to do
her all the pleasure he possibly could and had feasted her day by day most
sumptuously and spared for no cost: in the height of her pride and wanton
bravery (as being a noble Curtezan and a Queen withal) began to debase the
expense and provision of Anthony, and made no reckoning of all his costly fare.
When he thereat demanded again how it was possible to go beyond this
magnificence of his, she answered again, that she would spend upon him in one
supper 100 thousand Sestertij. Anthony who would needs know how that might be
(for he thought it was impossible) laid a great wager with her about it, and
she bound it again and made it good. The morrow after when this was to be
tried, and the wager either to be won or lost, Cleopatra made Anthony a
supper (because she would not make default, and let the day appointed pass)
which was sumptuous and royal enough, howbeit there was no extraordinary
service seen upon the coenam para vi^ pollucibilem Macrobius Sat. 3. 17.
board: Whereat Antonius laughed her to scorn, and by way of mockery, required
to see a bill with the account of the particulars. She again said, that
whatsoever had been served up already, was but the overplus above the rate and
proportion in question, affirming still, that she would yet in that supper
make up the full sum that she was seized at: yea her self alone would eat
above that reckoning, and her own supper should cost six hundred thousand
Sestertij: and with that, commanded the second service to be brought in. The
Servitours that waited at her trencher (as they had in charge before) set
before her only one crewet of sharp vinegar, the strength whereof is able to
dissolve pearls. Now she had at her ears hanging Monstruosae magnitudini^
Macrobius. Sat: 3 17.
those two most precious pearls, the singular and only jewels in the world,
and even Natures wonder. As Anthony looked wistly upon her, and expected what
she would do, she took one of them from her ear, steeped it in the vinegar,
and so soon as it was liquefied, drank it off. And as she was about to do
the like by the other: L. Plancius the judge of that wager, laid fast hold upon
it with his hand, and pronounced withal, that Anthony had lost the wager:
whereat the man fell into a passion of anger. There was an end of one pearl:
But the fame of the fellow thereof may go therewith. For after that this brave
Queen, the winner of so great a wager, was taken prisoner and deprived of her
royal estate, that other pearl was cut in twain, that in memorial of that
one half supper of theirs, it should remain unto posterity, hanging at both
the ears of Venus at Rome in the temple Pantheon.

And yet, says the same Pliny, as prodigal as these were, they shall not go
away with the prize in this kind, but shall loose the name of the chief and
principal in superfluity of expense. For long before their time, Clodius the
son of Aesope the Tragaedian Poet, the only heir of his father who died
exceeding wealthy, practiced the semblable in pearls of great price: so that
Anthony need not be over proud of his triumvirate, seeing that he has to match
him in all his magnificence one little better then a stage player: Who upon no
wager at all laid (and that was more princely and done like a King) but only in
a bravery, and to know what taste pearls had, mortified them in vinegar and
drunk them up. And finding them to content his palate wondrous well, because
he would not have all the pleasure by himself, and know the goodness thereof
alone, he gave to every guest at his table one pearl a piece to drink in like
manner.

The madness of Clodius, Horace thus describes.

Filius Aesopi detractam ex aure Metellae Sermon. 2.

(Scilicet vt decies solidum exsorberet) aceto
Diluit ingentem baccam, qui sanior ac si
Illud idem in rapidum flumen iaceretue cloacam.
The son of Esop from Metellas ear,
(That he at once ten thousand sols might drink)
Plucked off, and it dissolved in vinegar,
As wise as if he had thrown't into a sink.
SECT. 5. Of excessive drinkers among the Romans in regard of the quantity of
the liquor; and how both their Princes and people were all generally tainted
with this vice.
THese were luxurious drinkers in regard of the pretiousnes of the liquor, such
as I think this age has not heard of, and God forbid it should. Now for
excess in quantity of wine at one draught or one sitting, Lypsius has written
a large Epistle, wherein he has made a collection of many examples, borrowed
from the ancient Historians to that purpose, the title of it is, de potoribus
and Edonibus, of excessive Ep. 63 ad Con^ubernales suos.
drinkers and eaters, and beginning with the first of these he thus makes his
entrance. Quos vbi and quando non est invenire? in veteri and nostro aevo, in
noto and novo orb videas, and Plinij dicto, nulla in part mundi cessare
ebrietatem. Which kind of men where and when shall you not find? you may see
them as well in the old as in our age, both in the known and new world, and to
use Plynies speech, no part of the world is free from them. To let go the
Graecians, and those Romans already named, out of Spartianus he tells us of one
Firmus, who under Aurelian was Deputy of Egypt; this man being challenged by
Barbarus a famous drinker, Situlas duas plenas mero duxit, he took off two
buckets full of wine. Bonosus was such another who lived about the same time,
of whom the same Emperor, as witnesses the same Author, was wont to say, non
vt vivat natus est, sed vt bibat, he was borne not to live but to drink: and
being hanged for some misdemeanour, they jeasted on him, amphoram pendere non
hominem, that a barrel or tankard hung there, not a man: But that which
Capitolinus reports of the Emperor Maximinus is almost incredible: Bibisse
saepe in die vini Capitolinam amphoram, that he often drank in one day an
Amphora of the Capitol, an Amphora containing of our measure nine gallons,
counting a gallon and a pint to the Congius, whereof the Amphora contains
eight; Trepidarem haec scribere, says Lypsius, sed bonus and priscae fidei
Author adserit, quam ego non sugillem: I should fear to write these things;
but that I vouch it from an Author of good credit, which I durst not impeach
or question. Yet one instance beyond this again he brings out of Vopiscus, in
the life of Aurelian of one Phagon, who drank out in one day plus orca, what
measure this Orca held, I cannot well determine; neither could Lypsius
himself, yet thus much he confidently affirms of it, Scio vas vin^rium fuisse
and amphora quidem majus, sed quanto mihi latet, I know for certain that it
was a vessel of wine, and that bigger then the Amphora, but how much I know
not.

Now that which most of all infected the state with this beastly vice, was,
that the Emperors themselves were deeply infected with it, both heartily
affecting it themselves, and highly rewarding it in others. Tiberius Nero
propter nimiam vini aviditatem, says Suetonius, by reason of Cap. 42.
his excessive drinking, was nicknamed Biberius Mero; and besides, Piso, whom
Pliny told us before, he advanced to the Provostship of the city for that
quality; he likewise for the same promoted Flaccus Pomponius to the
presidentship of the Province of Syria, stiling them in his letters patents,
Iucundissimos and omnium horarum ami^os, his most pleasant companions and
friends for all seasons: But that which exceeded the rest, and indeed reason
it self, was that ignotissimum Quaesturae candidatum nobilissimis anteposuit
ob epotam in convivio propinante se vini amphoram, that he preferred a base
fellow, who was a suitor for the Treasurershippe, before the most noble and
worthy that stood in competition with him, only for the taking off of an
Amphora of wine at a feast which himself had began. Now who would not strive
to excel and exceed in this lewd practice, when it was in such request and
esteem with the greatest Commanders? the multitude soon conforming
themselves to their manners, specially in naughtines, and being thereunto
encouraged by commendation and rewards. And how far this unmanly vice had
infected the Commons, may appear by that of Macrobius, who affirms, that at
that time when Lex Fannia was made against drunkenness, Saturnal: l: 3: c: 17:
eo res redier at vt plerique ex plebe Romana vino madidi in comitium venirent,
and ebrij de Reipub: salute consulerent; to such a pass were things brought,
that the greatest part of the common people of Rome came laden with wine into
the Counsell-house, and being drunk, consulted of the safety of the state.

SECT. 6. Of the costlinesse and curious workemanshippe of the vessel out of
which they drank, which was likewise a means to draw them on to excessive
drinking.
NOw as I began this discourse of drunkenness with the greatness, so will I end
it with the costlinesse and curious workmanship of the vessels out of which
they drank; which was likewise a means to draw them on to excessive drinking.
The world (says Pliny) is given 33. 11:
to such inconstancy, as touching silver plate, that a wonder it is to see the
nature of men, how variable they be in the fashion and making of such vessel:
For no workmanship will please them long. One while we must have our plate out
of Furnius his shop, another while we will be furnished from Clodius: And
again in a new fit, none will content us but of Gratius his making (for our
cupbords of plate and tables, forsooth, must bear the name of such and such
goldsmiths shops:) Moreover, when the toy takes us in the head. all our delight
is in chased and embossed plate; or else so carved, engraven, and deep cut in,
as it is rough again in the hand, wrought in imagerie or flower work, as if
the painter had drawn them. These celatures in their drinking cups were so
framed, that they might put them on or take them off at pleasure, and were
therefore called Emblemata: Such was that, whereof the Satirist speaks.

-- Stantem extra pocula caprum. Iuvenal: Satyr.

-- A goat standing out from the cup.
Two of this kind wrought by the hand of Mentor, cost Lucius Crassus the
Orator one hundred thousand Sestercies: Sometimes were they Pliny. l. 33. c.
11.
made of Onix stones drawn out of the mountains of Arabia, sometimes of
mother of pearl, or some rare precious shells. Idem 36: 7:


Cum perfusa mero spumant vnguenta Falerno,
Cum bibitur concha. Iuven: Satyr: 6:

When their Falernian wines mingled with ointments crop,
And when they drink in shells.
And all these kinds they richly inameld with pearls and precious stones; we
drink, says Pliny, in rooes of pearl, and garnish our pots Lib: 33: 11.
with emeralls; it delights us to hold the Indies in our hands as a provocation
to drunkenness, and gold is now become but an accessorie. And for this reason
had they some at their feasts set to watch their drinking vessel.

-- Custos affixus ibidem Iuven: Satyr. 5.

Qui numeret gemmas vnguesque observet acutos.
Fast by some one is set to watch and tell the plate,
Least any be purloind by some lime fi^gred mate.
Neither were they content to garnish their cups with pearl and precious
stone, but made them of entire gemmes, they thought not themselves dainety
enough, says Pacatus, nisi luxuria intervertisset annum, nisi hibernae poculis
rosae innatassent, nisi aestivam in gemmis capacibus glaciem fal^rna Jn
Panygerico
fregissent, unless luxury had changed the season of the year, unless
winter roses swam upon the top of their po^s, unless their pleasant wines
dissolved the summer ice in a large gemme. And such a one was that which Tully
mentions; Erat etiam vas vinarium ex vna gemma praegrandi 6: in (...)
trulla excavata, cum manubrio aureo: There was likewise a drinking cup for
wine made of one entire gemme or precious stone, with a great hollow bowl and
an handle of gold. They had also drinking vessels of Murrin and Crystal of
wonderful great prices. Video isthic Cristallina quorum accendit fragilitas
pretium, omnium enim rerum voluptas apud imperitos ipso, quo fugare debet,
periculo crescit; Video Murrina pocula, parum scili^et luxuria magno fuerit,
nisi quod vomant capacibus gemmis inter se propinarent: I there see, says
Seneca, their Cristall glasses, whose very brittlenes De beneficijs, l. 7. c. 9.
inhaunces their price: For among the vulgar, their delight in things is
increased by the very danger, which should rather induce them to shun it. I
likewise see their Murrin cups, their luxury being not held sufficient,
unless they may in large gemmes drink that which soon after they vomit up
again. The price of some of these, Pliny takes the pains particularly to
relate: Crescit indies eius rei luxus Murrino 37. 2:
octoginta Sestertiis empto, capaci plane ad sextarios tres calice: The
excessive luxury hereof increases daily, a Murrin cup of three quarts being
sold for four score thousand Sesterces; one of these bought for three hundred
thousand, Petronius, who had been Consul, brake in pieces a little before his
death out of a spite to Nero, vt mensam eius exhaeredaret, that he might
disinherit his table thereof. Another of Cristall, mentioned by the same
Author, I may not forget; alius hic furor, here is another kind of madness,
one Cristall bowl being bought by the mistress of a family, and she not over
rich neither, cost her one hundred and fifty thousand Sesterces. Hereunto might
not unfitly be added the beastly forms of many of their cups,

Vitreo bibit ille Priapo,
Says Iuvenall; and Pliny to like purpose, in poculis libidines caelare iuvat
and per obscaenitates bibere. But I pass from their drunkenness to their
gluttony.

CAP. 7. Of the excessive gluttony of the Romans.
SECT. 1. Of their costly tables, their huge platters, the quality; order, and
number of their waiters; and also of their Art and Schools of Carving:
TOuching their excess in gluttony, it is an Ocean both boundles and
bottomless, whether we consider the rarity or the variety of those dishes which
at their solemn feasts they presented: But before I come to the furnishing of
their tables, it shall not be amiss to say somewhat touching the tables
themselves, upon which they placed, and some monstrous platters in which they
served in their provision, and the number and order of their waiting servants.
They had tables of silver and some of gold.

Sustentatque tuas aurea mensa dapes. Martial. l 3. Epigr. 31.

Tables of gold thy dainties do sustain.
But their most precious which they had in greatest request were of Citron, as
appears by the same Poet in another Epigram: These, as witnesses Lib. 4.
Epig. 89. In Satyrico.
Petronius Arbiter, they fetched from Africa.

-- E^ce Aphris eruta terris
Citrea mensa
Tables of Citron brought from Africa.
With whom Pliny the rein accords, who in his natural history has Lib. 13.
c. 15.
a discourse proper to this purpose. The Moors, says he, that border upon the
mountain Atlas, are stored with abundance of Citron trees, from whence comes
that excessive expense and superfluity about Citron tables made thereof: And
our dames at home by way of revenge twit us their husbands therewith, when we
would seem to find fault with the costly pearls which they wear: There is at
this day to be seen a board belonging sometimes to Tullius Cicero, which cost
him ten Thousand Sesterces; a strange matter, considering he was no rich man;
but more wonderful, if we call to mind the severity of that age wherein he
lived. Much speech there is besides of Asinius Gallus his table, sold for an
eleven thousand Sesterces: Moreover there are two other which King Iuba sold,
the one was prized at fifteen thousand Sesterces, and the other held little
under; a round sum, and the price of a good fair Lordship: which incredible
prizes are notwithstanding confirmed by Seneca, who farther tells us, they were
valued according to their knottinesse: video istic mensas et aestimatum lignum
De benefici^, l. 7. c 9. the tax of a Senator was then (...) Sestertium,
twelve hundred thousand Sestertii, Suet: Aug. 41. De Pallio c: 5:
censu Senatoris, eo praetiosius quo illud in plures nodos arbor is
infoelicitas torsit: I see there their tables, and a piece of wood valued at a
Senators revenew, so much the more precious, as the unhappy tree is wrested
into diverse knots. To which passages of Seneca and Pliny, Tertullian seems to
allude, for having produced the instances of Tully and Asinius Gallus mentioned
by Pliny, though with some addition to the prices, he presently adds: Hem
quantis facultatibus aestimauere ligneas ma^ulas, at what high rates did they
value these spots in wood. Besides, these tables they supported with Yuorie
feet.

Tu libicos Indis suspendis dentibus orbs, Martial: l. 2. Epig. am, 43.

Fulcitur testa fagina mensa mihi.
Thy Lybian tables Indian teeth do rear:
My Beechen board an earthen caske does bear.
And these yuorie feet were artificially carved into the shape of Lions or the
like, which was so common, that without these, their greatest dainties could
not relish to their pallates,

Nil Rhombus nil dama sapit, putere videntur Iuvenal. Salyr. 11,

Vnguenta atque rosae, latos nisi sustinet orbs
Grande ebur: and magno sublimis pardus hiatu:
Nor buck nor Turbet taste, sweet ointments yield no sent,
And roses stink, unless huge gaping yvorie Pards
Bearing aloft their large round tables give content.
Yet such was the store which one man possessed of these, that it exceeded some
hundreds.

Cum mensas habeat fere trecentas,
Pro mensis habet Annius ministros. Martial: l. 7: Epigr* 47.

An hundred ta les Annius has thrice told,
And waiters at his tables manifold.
And Dion reports of Seneca, that notwithstanding his severe and Stoicall
profession, he was stored with four hundred of those Citron tables. Lips. l 1
manuduct: ad Stoicam Philos. ca. 18. Lib. 33: c: 11:


Touching their platters or chargers, no longer since, says Pliny, then in the
days of Claudius the Emperor, Drusillanus a slave of his surnamed Rotundus,
the Senescall or Treasurer under him in high Spain, had a silver charger of
five hundred pound weight; for the working whereof, there was a forge framed
aforehand of set purpose, and the same was accompanied and attended with eight
more of a smaller size, weighing fifty pound a piece: Now I would gladly know
if it might please you, says Pliny, how many of his fellows, such sl^ues I
mean as himself, there must be to carry the said vessel and serve it up to
the table, or what guests they might be who were to be served with such huge
plate: Lib. 35. c 12,
But this is nothing to that Charger of Vitellius, who whiles he was Emperor
caused one to be made and finished that cost Decics Sestertium according to
Budaeus: but if you read according to Ho^t manus, ducenties it is twenty times
as much more
a million of Sesterces; for the making whereof, there was a fu^nace built of
purpose in the field; alluding to this monstrous platter Mucianus in his second
Consulship, when he ripped up in a public speech the whole life of Vitellius
now dead, vpbraided the memorial of him in these very terms, calling his
excess that way, Patinarum paludes, platters as broad as pooles or ponds: And
verily, says he, that platter of Vitellius came nothing behind another, which
Cassius Seuerus reproached Aspr^nas withal, whom he accused bitterly, and
said, that the poison of that one platter had killed one hundred and thirty
persons, who had tasted thereof. Matchable to these, was the famous platter of
Esope the Plin. l. 10 c. 51. Seneca Ep. 95.
Tragaedian, save that it was more notorious for the daintiness of the
provision which he served in it, then for the massines of the dish it self.

Their waiters were sometime^ naked wenches Tiberius (says Suetonius) sent to
Sextius Claudius, that he would come and sup with him, upon Cap: 42.
condition, that he should change nothing of his wonted fashion, vtque nudis
pu^llis ministrantibus coenaretur; a message worthy of him, who as the same
Author reports in the same place, erected a new office, a voluptatibus, only
to devise new pastimes and pleasures. But Seneca describes Epist 95.
the order and number of their waiters more particularly: They had waiting on
them, says he, puerorum infoelicium greges, whole troops of unfortunate
Ganymedes, they had exoletorum agmina, armies of Exoletes grown to men's
estat^, these they ranged into several b^nds according to their nations and
complexions, they of the same band were all of a smoothnes alike, or had the
same length of downy moss in their chin; nay special care was had, that their
hair might be suitable, as in length, so in color and kind: ne quis cui
rectior est coma crispulis misceatur, that none whose hair grew long and
straight, should be ra^ked with the curlepates. He farther tells us of the
infinite number of their Cooks and Bakers, and such like officers; Per quos
signo dato ad inferendam canam discurritur, by whom the wayters run presently
upon the sign given for the car^ying in of supper: his conclusion is Dij boni
quantum hominum vnus venture exercet, good God, what a number of men does one
belly set a work; and in another place, Conviuia mehercule horum non posuerim
inter De brevitate vitae. c. 12
vacantia tempora, cum videam quam solliciti argentum ordinent, quam diligenter
exoletorum suorum tunicas succingant, quam suspensi sint quomodo aper a coquo
caesus exeat, quanta celeritate signo dato glabri ad ministeria decurrunt:
quanta art scindantur aues in frusta non enormia, quam curiose infoelices
pueruli ebriorum sputa detergant. Truly for my part, I should not put their
feasts among their vacant or leisure times, when I see how sollicitous they are
about the ordering of their plate, how diligently they tucke up the coats of
their Exoletes, how careful they are in what manner the Bore come out of the
Cooks hands and be served in, how suddenly the smooth-^inne Catamites run
to the dresser upon the sound given, with what singular art their birds are
cut up into competent portions, how studiously and curiously their unhappy
boys wipe out the spuing and spitting of their drunken Masters.

And to this their artificial carving and ordering their dishes on the table
does the Satyrist allude, where he intimates Schools and Masters of that Art,
who taught their Scholars by dishes fashioned in wood after what manner, and
with what gesture of the body they should cut them up.

Sed nec structor erit, cui cedere debeat omnis Iuv. l, 4. Sat. 11.

Pergula, disoipulus Tripheri doctoris, apud quem
Sumine cum magno lepus, atque aper, and pygargus,
Et Scythicae volucres, and phoenicopterus ingens,
Et Getulus oryx, hebeti lautissima ferro
Caeditur, and tota sonat vlmea coena Subura.
The carvers at my board disciples never were
To Doctor Trypherus, with whom none may compare,
Sowes milkie teats, the hare, the boar, white buttockt roe,
Phesant, Getulian goat, huge Phenicopter too,
All dainties with blunt knife he carves as is most meet,
And th'Elmen supper sounds through all Subura street.
SECT. 2. That after-ages sometimes reformed the abuse of former times: of the
great number and chargeable hire of their Cooks; of Apicius his wastefulnesin
belly-cheere, that such wastefulnesse was common among them.
NOw for their provision, I may say with Budaeus, Majora sunt ista Lib. 4. de
Ass.
omnino nostrae aetatis captu, it was beyond the reach and conceit of our age,
so as Pliny herein has proved a true Prophet, nos fecimus Lib. 33. c. 3.
quae posteri fabulosa arbitrentur, we have done those things which posterity
will not believe, but account fabulous. In the handling hereof it shall not be
impertinent first to observe that after-ages sometimes reformed the abuse of
former times. Thus Latinus Pacatus in his Panegyricke commends Theodosius for
his sobriety and frugality in regard of his Predecessors, in as much as there
was then no need ad penum Regiam flagitare remotorum littorum piscem, peregrini
aeris volucrem, alieni temporis florem, to take up and purvay for the Emperors
use and provision a fish of a remote coast, a bird of a strange air, or a
flower of a contrary season: Then goes he on to describe the excessive Luxury
of former ages in respect of the present.

In like manner Macrobius in a conference at a supper betwixt Horus and
Cecinna, makes Horus to declaime against the Luxury of his own Saturnal. l. 3.
c. 13.
times, but Cecinna answers him by proouing that Antiquity was much more
faulty that way. Among other instances and reasons alleged by him, this is
one; that Peacockes eggs were formerly sold for five pence a piece, which then
were nothing worth to be sold: and again, that anciently so many Laws were
made against it, as Lex Orchia, fannia, Cap. 17.
didia, Licinia, Cornelia, and others, and then concludes, nisi pessimis
effusissimisque moribus viveretur, profecto opus tot legibus ferendis non
fuisset, vetus verbum est, Leges bonae ex malis moribus procreantur: Except men
had then lived in a most inordinate and licentious manner, they had never
needed the making of so many laws; it being an old saying, that good Laws are
^ccasioned by evil manners.

Another argument for their excessive gluttony in former times might be taken
from the number and excessive hire of their Cooks and their wonderful
expenses in their Kitchins and at their Tables. For the number of their Cooks,
Aspice culinas nostras, says Seneca and concursantes inter tot ignes coquos
nostros; Look into our Kitchins, and mark the number Epist. 115.
of our Cooks running up and down among so many fires. And in another
Epistle, innumer abiles esse morbon mirab^is, coquos numera, 95.
In Rhetorum ac Philosophorum scholis solitudo est: At quam celebres culinae
sunt? quanta circa nepotum focos juventus premit? Do you wonder that our
diseases are innumerable? number our Cooks if you can: The S^ho les of
Rhetoricians and Philosophers are empty: but how are our Kitchins frequented?
what multitudes of youth press about the chimneyes of unthrifts? And for their
hire, they were wont to complain, says Pliny, Lib: 9 17.
that the hire of a Cook was as much as the price of an horse, whereas now a
days we can hardly get them for the price of three horses: nullusque Trium
b^rum, not t^ium pho^um as some read it.
jam prope mortalis aestimatur pluris, quam qui peritissime censum Domini
mergit; and scarce any man is in greater request, then he that can most
artificially waste his Masters substance. And what infinite wast they made this
way, the only story of Apicius a famous belly-god may Plin. 9. 17.
suffice to show: who ^auing spent a million of Sesterces in his Kitchen and
sent going besides many great gifts of Princes, and a mighty revenew of the
Capitol in riotous feasting and banqueting, being deep in debt, he began at
last, though sore against his will, to look into his reckonings, and take an
account of his estate, and found that all being cast up, he had yet left unto
himself clear one hundred thousand Sesterces, and thereupon velut in ultima
same victurus, veneno vitamfinivit, as if he should hau^ been forced poor
man to live in a hunger-starved fashion Seneca de consolatione ad Albinam c. 10.
he poisoned himself: Quanta luxuria est cui sestertium centies egestas fuit,
how great was that Luxury to which one hundred thousand Sesterces seemed
poverty? This notable vanity and folly of Apicius, the Epigrammatist most
deservedly scoffs at. Martial. l. 3. Epigr. 22.


Dederas Apici bis trecenties ventri,
Sed adhuc supererat centies tibi laxum, It seems it should be read ^er
trecenties.

Hoc tu gravatus ne famem and sitim ferres.
Summa venenum potione duxisti,
Nil est Apici tibi gulosius factum.
Apicius thou did on thy gut bestow
Six hundred thousand: yet when this was spent
One hundred thousand still remaind, which thou
Fearing to suffer thirst and famishment
In poisoned potion drankst: Apicius
Of all thy facts this was most gluttonous.
And no marveile Apicius should run so far upon the score and consume such
a mass of treasure by this means, since it was usual to lavish out and
devour whole patrimonies at a sitting,

-- Vna comedunt patrimonia mensa.
Quid est coena sumptuosa flagitiosius, and equestrem censum consumente, and
tricies tamen Sestertio adijciales coenae frugalissimis Viris constiterunt?
What Iuven. Sat. 1. Seneca Ep. 95.
is more ^ewde, says Seneca, then a sumptuous supper wasting a Knights
revenewes? yet it stands the most frugall commonly, if it be solemn, in three
hundred thousand Sesterces. And he that shall but look into their bills of fare,
and take a particular view of the number of their Courses at a feast, and of
their dishes at a Course, and of the prises of their dishes, together with
their long and often sittings, will rather wonder that they spent so little,
then that they brought going so much.

SECT. 3. Of their long and often sitting and usual practice of vomiting even
among their women, as also of the number of their courses at a sitting,
together with the rarity and costlinesse of their several services.
FOr their long sittings Suetonius reports of Tiberius, that he spent a Cap. 42
whole night and two days outright in nothing else but eating and drinking,
Noctem continuumque biduum epulando, potandoque consumpsit: And of Nero, Epulas
e media die ad mediam noctem protrahebat, he held Cap. 27
out his feasts from noone day till midnight. And of Vitellius for often Cap.
12.
sittings, that he feasted usually three times, sometimes four times a day,
every sitting being valued at four hundred thousand Sesterces, facile omnibus
sufficiens vomitandi consuetudine, being easily able to go through them all by
a continual custom of vomiting: which it seems was among them a common
practice: Vomunt vt edant; edunt vt vomant: epulas, Seneca de Consolatione ad
Albinam c 9.
quas toto orb conquirunt, nec oncoquere dignantur: they vomit that they may
eat, and eat again that they may vomit, and those delicates which they hunt
for through the world, they vouchsafe not so much as to concoct, nay the very
women practiced it, aeque invitis ingesta visceribus Seneca epist. 95
per os reddunt, and vinum omne vomitu remittunt, as well as men they eat
against their stomaches that which they soon return by their mouths, and all
their wine they quickly send back by vomiting: And from hence (as I conceive)
did they usually rise from their great feasts so colourlesse and indisposed,

-- Vides, vt pallidus omnis
Coena desurgat dubia? quin corpus onustum Hor. Sat. 2. l. 2.

Hesternis vitijs, animum quoque praegravat vna,
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.
See thou how pale they from their doubtful supper rise?
The body furthermore surcharged with riotise
Of yesterday, weighs down the soul, and in the mire
Of this base earth does plunge the spark of heavenly fire.
The number of their Courses at a sitting were usually seven, and that
sometimes when they sat privately,

-- Quis fercula septem Hor. Sat. 1.

Secreto coenavit avus?
Which of our Auncesters upon
Seven services did sup alone?
But that monster Heliogabalus had served in at one feast two and twenty
several courses, Exhibuit aliquando and tale convivium vt haberet viginti
Lampridius.
d^o fercula ingentium epularum; he once made such a feast that he had served
in, two and twenty Courses, all of the choicest fare.

For their variety of dishes we may partly guess at them by that adventitious
supper (as Suetonius calls it) which was made Vitellius by his Cap. 13.
brother, in qua duo millia lectissimorum pis^ium, septem avium apposita
traduntur, in which are said to have been served in two thousand of the
choicest fish, and seven thousand foul.

Now for the delicacie and prices of their dishes, it certainly exceeded their
variety and number, they were far fetched and dear bought Quicquid mare aut
terra, aut etiam coelo gigneretur, ad satiandam ingluviem suam natum existimans
faucibus ac dentibus suis subdidit, says Macrobius Saturn. 3. and 17
of Anthony, he devoured with his chaps and teeth whatsoever the Sea or Earth
or Air brought forth, as if all had been borne only to satisfy his luxury.
And Salust of Metellus Proconsull in Spain, Epulae vero exquisitissimae, neque
per omnem mudo provinciam, sed trans maria ex Mauritania volucrum and ferarum
incognita antea plura genera His feasts were most exquisite not only of all
the dainties which were to be had in those parts; but many kinds of birds
and beasts before unknown in that Country were brought from beyond the Seas
and out of Mauritania. Quis ganeonum aut l^conum possit vel ausit imitari? Quis
nostrum hodie Lipsius.
aves aut feras trans mare coenae causa conquirit: Which of our thriftlesse
Belly-gods can or dare imitate him? which of us now a days sends for birds or
beasts beyond the Seas to make a Supper? Yet was this practice among them no
rare matter, as may appear by that of Petronius Arbiter.

Ingeniosa gula est siculo scaurus aequore mersus
Ad mensam vivus deducitur* inde Lucrinis
Eruta littoribus vendunt conchylia coenis
Vt renovent per damna famem; jam phasidos vnda
Orbata est avibus, mutoque in littore tantum
Solae desertis aspirant frondibus aurae.
The throat is witty, thence the Guilthead that does cliue
Sicilian sea is brought unto the board alive.
Shelfish they sell that in the lake of Lucrin grew
To sup on, by their loss their hunger to renew.
The banks of Phasis now are dumb, the birds are gone,
And on forsaken boughs now breathes the wind alone.
And least we should think that he speaks Poetically and hyperbolically, the
grave Seneca in his sober and sad manner goes beyond it. Non est necesse
Deconsolat. ad Albinam c: 9
omne perscrutari profundum, nec strage animalium ventrem onerare, nec
conchylia vltimi maris ex ignoto littore eruere, Dij istos Deaeque perdant
quorum luxuria tam invidiosi imperij sines transcendit, ultra phasin capi
volunt quod ambitiosam popinam instruat, nec piget a Parthis a quibus nondum
poenas repetivimus, aves petere, vndique convehunt omnia vota fastidienti gulae
quod dissolutus delicijs stomachus vix admittat ab vltimo portatur Oceano.
There is no necessity of searching the deep, nor of filling our bellies with
the slaughter of beasts, nor of dragging shellfish of the most remote seas and
the unknown shore: The Gods and Goddesses plague them, whose luxury cannot
bound it self within the lists of so large and so much envied an Empire: It
must be taken beyond the river Phasis, which should serve the provision of
their ambitious kitchen, neither are they ashamed to borrow birds from the
Parthians, upon whom they have not yet taken revenge, from all places they hunc
after that which they long for to satisfy their yawning appetite; nay they
fetch that from the farthest part of the Ocean, which their stomach weakened
with delicacies, will hardly admit. And a while after, o miserabiles quorum
palatum nisi ad pretiosos cibos non excitantur, pretiosos autem non eximius
sapor aut aliqua faucium dulcedo, sed raritas and diffi^ultas parandi facit. O
wretched men, whose pallates are not stirred but with precious meats,
specially when that which makes them precious is not any singular relish or
excellent, savor they have, but only their scarcity and difficulty of
procuring them.

And herein Latinus Pacatus in his Panygeri ke a^cords well with Seneca, if he
go not a strain beyond him; Ho^um gulae angustus erat orbis noster, namque
appositas dapes non sapore sed sumptu aestimantes, illis demum cibis
acquiescebant, quos extremus Oriens aut positus extra Romanum Colchus Imperium,
aut famosa naufragijs maria misissent: This our world was too narrow for their
throats: for not valuing their Cates by their taste but by their cost, they
rested content only with that provision which they got from the uttermost parts
of the East, or Colchus seated beyond the Roman Empire, or seas infamous with
shipwrackes.

-- Magis illa placent quae pluris emuntur. Iuvenal. Satyr: 11.

That pleases most
Which dearest cost.
SECT. 4. Of the sumptuous provision of two platters furnished out, the one by
Vitellius, the other by Aesope the Tragaedian, as also of the horrible excess
of Caligula and Heliogabalus.
THese dainties we may partly guess at by the furnirure of two famous
platters, the one of Vitellius, which for the huge bigness Suet. c. 13.
thereof, he was wont to call Minerva's buckler, in this he blended together
the livers of guiltheads, the brains of fesants and peacockes, the tongues of
Phaenicopters, and the melts of Lampres brought from the Spanish and Carpathean
Seas, by the Masters of ships and Galleys. The other of Aesope the
Tragaedian, which he furnished out with Valor. l: 9: c: 1:: Senec: Ep: 96
the rarest singing birds, or such as imitated man's voice; they cost him six
thousand Sesterces a piece, and the whole platter six hundred thousand: Nulla
alia inductus voluptate nisi vt in his imitationem hominis manderet, Tertul. de
Pallio: Pl. 10. 51.
induced hereunto by none other pleasure, says Pliny, but that thereby he
might eat the imitation of mankind, or perhaps imitatione hominem, mankind by
imitation.

To these may be added the horrible excess of Caligula and Heliogabalus, the
former of which, videtur natura edidisse vt ostenderet quid summa Seneca de
consolatione ad Albinam, c. 9:
vitia in summa fortuna possent, whom nature seems to have brought forth, to
show what effects the greatest vices joined with the greatest fortune could
produce. This man, says Suetonius, nepotinis sumptibus omnium prodigorum
ingenia svperavit, in thristles expenses exceeded the Cap: 37.
wits of all the prodigalls that ever were, commentus porten^osissima genera
ciborum atque caenarum, inventing most monstrous kinds of meats and suppers,
the most orient pearls that were to be gotten, he dissolved in vinegar and
swallowed down, and set before his guests bread and victuals of gold, aut
frugi hominem esse oportere dictitans, aut Caesarem, commonly saying, that a
man need be thrifty or Caesar; yet notwithstanding, says Seneca, being
assisted with the inventions of all his companions, he De Consol. ad Abinam:
cap. 9:
could hardly find the means to spend the tribute of the Provinces at one
supper. Which I wonder Seneca should affirm, considering he practiced the
dissolving and swallowing of pearls.

Now for Heliogabalus, Lampridius thus begins his story. Vitam Heliogabali
Antonini impurissimam nunquam in literas as misissem, ne quis fuisse Romanorum
Pricipem sciret, nisi ante Caligulas, and Nerones, and Vitellios Vitellios idem
h^uisset Imperium: The most beastly life of Heliogabalus Anto^inus I would
never have committed unto writing, that it might not have bin known, that ever
there was such an Emperor of the Romans, unless Caligula, and Nero, and
Vitellius had before sat in the same throne. Of him then, besides his other
most abominable filthiness, he reports for his excess in diet, that at one
supper he caused to be served in the heads of six hundred Ostriches, only for
the eating of their brains, being near the sea, he never tasted fish but in
places farthest distant from the sea, all his diet was upon fish: And in the
Inland he fed the country clownes with the melts of lampres and pikes. To be
brief, coenas and Vitellij and Apicij vicit, he exceeded the suppers both of
Vitellius and Apicius.

SECT. 5. Of the excessive luxury of more ancient times.
WHAT should I speak of more ancient times, of the Dictator Caesar, who
borrowed of Hirrius six thousand lampres by weight, for the furnishing out of a
triumphall supper, and by Macrobius, Saturn. 2: 11: Pliny, 9. 55.
weight to be repaid again; and if such were his store of lampres, what shall
we conceive of his other provision. Of Fabius Gurges, so called for devouring
his patrimony through his throat. Of Metellus Pius, Macrob: Saturn: 3: 13:
who made suppers vltra Romanorum ac mortalium etiam morem, not only beyond the
custom of the Romans, but of mankind. Of Metellus Salust.
Pontifex, of whom Macrobius having specified the dainties served in at his
table in all kinds, concludes, Vbi iam lux^ria tunc accusaretur quando tot
rebus farta fuit coena Pontificum? who should then accuse luxury when the
table of the high Priest was furnished with such variety of rarities? Of
Hortensius, who usually watered, if I may so speak, his plane trees with wine,
in so much, that one day being to plead in a cause, wherein Cicero was likewise
retained, he solicited him to change turns with him, that so he might
return the sooner to his country farm, to power wine on his planes with his
own hand; and so curious he was about his fish ponds, that the same Cicero
some-where calls Phillip and him, Piscenarios, pond-men or fish-mongers, and so
charie withal of his fish, that sooner should you get by his good will, ex
equili rhedarias mulas quam ex piscina barbatum mullum, his coach mules out of
his stable then one barble Varro de re rustica. 3. 17.
out of his pondes: yet was a mule sold sometimes for the price of an house.

-- Pluris mula est quam domus empta tibi. Martial. l. 3. Epigr. 2.

More for a mule then for a house thou pai'st.
Of Asinius Celer, who laid down for one mullet six thousand Sesterces, as
Tertullian, seven thousand, as Macrobius, eight thousand, as Pliny, Tertul: de
Pallio: Macr: Satur: 3. 16: Pl. 9: 17:
In qua re luxuriam illius seculi eo magis licet aestimare; says Macrobius,
quod Plinius secundus temporibus suis negat fa^ile mullum repertum qui duas
pondo libras excederet, at nunc and maioris ponderis passim videmus, and pretia
haec insana nescimus: wherein we may the sooner guess at the luxury of that
age, in as much as Plinius Secundus affirms that in his time, 'twas hard to
find a mullet of above two pound weight, whereas now we have them every where
of a greater quantity, and yet are not acquainted with those mad prices. Of
Lucullus a great statesman, whom Tully and Pompey meeting by chance in the
market place, out of a desire they had to know what his daily fair might be,
invited themselves to suppe with him that night, but upon condition, he should
give no warning thereof, for that they desired not to put him to charge: He
began at first to put them off with excuses for that time, wishing them rather
to agree on the next day; but they importuning him for the present, he
demanded of them, whether or no they would then suffer him to give order in
what room they should sup; that they permitted: whereupon he presently
dispatches away a message in their hearing, that he would that night suppe in
Apollo; within a while they follow after, and find all things ready in a
pompous and princely manner, but knew not the true reason, all the cunning
lying in the word Apollo: For he had so disposed of his rooms, that being
distinguished by names, their provision and charge when he sat in them was
accordingly allotted to the^; by which means his steward and cook, as soon
as they heard the room named, knew presently what to provide. Now among the
rest, that which bore the name of Apollo was chiefest, the sum allotted
thereunto, being, as witnesses Plutarch, Quinquaginta millia drachmarum, which
Budaeus ^asts up to 5000 Crowns, and adds withal, hujusmodi Lib: 4:
multa a Plutarcho referuntur fidem omnino excedentia, si ex presenti seculo
aestimentur: Many such things are reported by Plutarch, which if they should be
valued by the scantling of our present times, would seem altogether
incredible. Of Sergius Aurata or Orata, who borrowed his name from a fish so
called, because he loved it most; the first Macrob: Satur. 3. 15.
he was that adjudged the price to the Lucrine oysters for taste. Of Licinius
Crassus, who, as witnesses Cicero, being held a grave and stayed man, and most
eminent among the citizens of the best rank and note, mourned in black for a
Lamprey which died in a pond adjoining to his house, as it had been for his
daughter; and thereupon was afterward commonly called Licinius Murena. Or
lastly, of Octavius, Admiral of the Navy, who finding that the Scarus was not
to be had in the Idem: 3: 16:
Italian Seas, dispersed an incredible multitude of them, being brought thither
in ships, between Hostia and Campania, miroque ac novo exemplo pisces in
mari, tanquam in terra fruges aliquas seminavit; by a strange and new example
sowed fishes in the sea, as it had been corn in the field: And the same man,
tanquam s^mma in hoc vtilitatis publicae verteretur, as if herein had consisted
the welfare and chief happiness of the state for five years employed his
utmost endeavors, that if among other fishes any fisherman by chance lighted
upon a Scarus, he should again restore him to the sea safe and sound. Belike
this was the same Octavius, of whom Seneca relates this pleasant stroy: Mullum
ingentis formae, (quare autem non pondus adijcto and aliorum gulam irrito?
quatuor Epist. 95:
pondo and ad Selibram fuisse aie^ant) Tiberius Caesar missum sibi cum in
macellum deferri and venire iussisset, amici inquit omnia me fallunt, nisi
istum mullum aut Apicius emerit aut Publius Octavius. Vltra spem illi
coniectura processit, licitati sunt, vicit Octavius and ingentem consequutus
est inter suos gloriam, quum quinque millibus HS emisset piscem quem Caesar
vendiderat, ne Api ius quidem emerat. Tiber. Caes being presented with a goodly
mullet of a vast quantity (but why do I not add his weight, that so I may
provoke the appetite of others? he was said to weigh four pounds and half)
sent it presently to the market there to be sold; and my friends, quoth he, I
am much mistaken, if either Apicius or Publius Octavius buy him not: It fell
out beyond expectation; they both cheapned it, but Octavius carried it away,
and thereby got him wonderful applause among his companions, that he had with
five thousand sesterces bought a fish which the Emperor sold, and Apicius
durst not buy. For mine own part I cannot tell, whether I should more wonder
at the base parcimony of Tiberius, or the riotous prodigality of Octavius, that
the one being an Emperor should send a fish which was given him for a present,
to the market to be sold; or the other, being but a private man, should buy it
at such a rate, Yet it should seem by the Satyrist, this price was not so
rare, but others outvied it.

-- Mullum sex millibus emit, Iuvenal. Satyr: 4.

Aequantem sane paribus sestertia libris.
He for a mullet did six thousand pay,
Which equal pounds did with those thousands weigh.
By which proportion it seems, they equalled a thousand Sesterces to a pound
of fish.

SECT. 6. Of their wonderful niceness in the strangeness, weight, and
newness of their fishes, as also of diverse other their strange curiosities
about them, and of the vastness of their fishponds, and great store of fishes
in them.
ANd no marveile since those fishes among them were in greatest request which
were brought from remote Seas, their own being in a manner drawn dry,

Mullus erit dominae quem misit Corsica, vel quem Iuven. Sa^yr. 5.

Tauromenetanae rupes quando omne per actum est,
Et jam defecit nostrum mare.
That Is the only Mullet which from Corsica is sent,
Or from Sicilian rocks, for all our Sea is spent,
And altogether fails.
And of the Lampry to like purpose in the same Satyr.

Virroni murena datur quae maxima ve^t
Gurgite de Siculo.
A Lamprey one on Virto did bestow,
The greatest that Si^ilian gulf^ did know.
Of their weight they were so curious and observant, that they had them weighed
many times at their very tables in the presence of their guests, many standing
by and noting it in their table books, as witnesses Ammianus Marcelli^us.
Poscuntur etiam (...) aliquoties trutinae ut appositi pisces and volucres
ponderentur, and glires quoru^ magnitudo saepius delicata non Lib. 28.
sine tedio praesentium vt antehac invsi^ata laudatur assidue, maxim cum haec
eadem numerantes notarij prope triginta adsistant, cum thecis and pugillaribus.
The balances are sometimes sent for in the midst of their feasts, that the
fishes which are set before them, and the birds, and the reare-mice may be
weighed, whose excessive greatness not without tediousness to some present, as
being a thing heretofore unusual, is daily magnified and extolled, specially
when almost thirty Notaries standing by, set down the exact weight in their
table-bookes. To which custom the Poe^ alludes.

-- Laudas insane trelibrem
Mullum. Hor. l. 2. Sat. 2.

A Mullet thou do praise
Mad man that three pound waighs.
And as the weight much commended their fish and inhanced their price, so did
the newness and freshness thereof: they being come to such a niceness and
delicacy at last that parum videtur recens mullus nisi qui in Sen. not. quest.
3. 17.
convivae manu moreretur, that mullet seemed not new enough which died not in
the guests hand. To this purpose they brought them alive in glassen bottles
filled with water, into the rooms where they sat: in cubile natant pisces,
and sub ipsa mensa capitur, qui statim transferatur in mensam, our fishes
swim in our chambers, and that very fish is taken up under our board which is
instantly served in, to our board They took a marveilous delight to see their
mullets change color whiles they were expiring, Mullum expirantem versicolore
quadam and numerosa varietate spectari 39. 17*
proceres gulae narrant: The headmen and peers of Luxury affirm that the
mullet when he lies a dying shows himself in many and those very various and
changeable colors. But Seneca hereupon cannot hold but desires leave to leave
his matter a while, and to lash these gluttons. Permit mihi quaestione
seposita castigare luxuriam: and then goes on. Quo Cap. 18.
pervenere deliciae? and pro putrido jam piscis affertur qui non hodie eductus,
hodie occisus est; nescio de re magna tibi credere, ipse oportet mihi credam
huc afferatur, coram me animam agat; ad hunc fastum pervenere ventres
delicatorum, vt gustare non possint piscem nisi quem in ipso convivio natantem,
palpitantemque viderint, To what pass is our daintiness now come? it is held
for a stinking fish which is not that very day drawn out of the water and
killed: I cannot trust thee in a matter of so great moment, bring him hither that
he may expire in my presence: to such an highth are our belly-gods come, that
they cannot taste the fish unless they see him in the very feast swimming and
panting. And to this end, says he, cursu advehitur and gerulis cum anhelitu
and clamore properantibus datur via, he is brought in in a posting speed, and
way is given to the Porters making haste with panting and outcries. His
conclusion is, non tempero mihi quin vtar interdum temerariis verbis, and
proprietatis modum excedam: non sunt ad popinam dentibus and ventre, and ore
contenti, oculis quoque gulosi sunt. I cannot refrain but that sometimes I
must use unadvised and improper words, they are not content to play the
gluttons with their jaws and belly, and mouth, but they must do it with their
eyes too. And Meursius hereupon inferres, Quae malum hae deliciae? vix credamus
Cap. 14.
nisi ab ipsis authoribus haberemus, quorum fidem hic negare sit piaculum. What
a mischief, what a niceness is this? we should not believe it, but that we
have it from those authors whose credit once to question were a kind of
impiety. Yet that Sammonicus Severus writes to Severus the Macrob. Sat. 3. 16.
Emperor touching the serving in of the Acipenser or Sturgeon is me thinks a
degree beyond all that has been yet spoken, it therein appearing that indeed
they made their belly their God. Dignatione vestra Philip. 3. 19.
cum intersum convivio sacro animadverto hunc piscem a coronatis ministris a
Tibicine introferri. When your sacred Majesty is pleased to admit me to your
feast, I observe that this fish is ever served in with music: the wayters
that bear him wearing garlands or chaplets on their heads. Whereupon Macrobius
makes this Comment, Quasi quada^ non deliciarum sed numinis pompa, as it had
been not for delight, but for devotion to some divine power.

Since then they were thus curious in the choice of their fish, we need not
much marveile at him in Iuvenal, who

-- Circaeis nata forent an Iuven. Sat. 4.

Lucrinum ad saxum Rutipinove edita fund^
Ostrea, callebat primo deprendere morsu
Et semel aspecti littus dicebat Echini.
No sooner did he taste an Oister, but he knew
Whether it from Circes town, or Lucrin lake they drew,
Or from Richborow deep; and Lobsters also he,
What shore them bred can tell when first he does them see.
But rather that of Martial touching the Lampryes in Domitians fishponds Lib.
4. epig. 30.
at Baiae.

Piscator fuge ne nocens recedas
Sacris piscibus hae natantur vndae,
Qui norunt Dominum, manumque lambunt
Illam qua nihil est in orb majus.
Quid quod nomen habent and ad Magistri
Vocem quisque sui venit citatus.
Angler would thou be guiltless? then forbear,
For they are sacred fishes which swim here,
Who know their Sovereign and will lick his hand,
Then which none's greater in the worlds command:
Nay more th'haue names, and when they called are,
Do to their several owners call repair.
Which latter part is confirmed by Pliny, Spectantur and in piscinis Caesaris
Lib. 10. 70.
genera piscium ad nomen venire, quosdamque singulos. In the Emperors
fishponds are seen a kind of fishes which come at the calling of them by
their names, and that particular and single ones. And of Antonia the wife of
Drusus he reports, that at Baulos she hung jewels as it had been Lib. 9, 35.
eare-rings in the gilds of a Lamprey which she loved; and that Hortensius the
Orator was seen to shed tears for the death of one whom he dearly affected.

These kind of fish ponds for the keeping of Lamp^eyes besides the Emperor
diverse private men had, and that so large as is almost incredible what is
reported of them, were it not written by Authors of good credit. The same
Hirrius whom we mentioned before, received for the yearly rents of his
buildings raised about his fish ponds, as witnesses Varro, twelve thousand
Sesterces; All which he disbursed De re ru^ica 3, 17.
again in the feeding of his fishes: his farm he sold, and specially in
regard of his fish ponds for four hundred thousand Sesterces. And Cato (as
writes the same Author, being Guardian to Lucullus, sold out Ibid. c. 2
of his fishponds so much fish as he received for it forty thousand
Sesterces. But Columella making report hereof out of Varro, whether Lib. 8. c.
16.
upon a mistake or no I know not, makes the sum ten times as much: his words
are, attamen ijsdem temporibus quibus hanc memorabat Varro luxuriem maxima
laudabatur severitas Catonis, qui nihilominus and ipse tutor Luculli grandi
aere sestertium quadringentorum millium piscinas pupilli sui venditabat. In
those very times in which Varro mentions this Luxury, the severity of Cato was
highly commended; yet he being guardian to Lucullus, sold his Wards fishponds
for a great sum of four hundred thousand Sesterces; the difference is great
between Varro and Columella, but it should seem, the one speaks of the fish
alone, and the other of the fishponds with it. Howsoever the sum was
doubtless very great, which argued their great store of fish, and yet their
prices being so great withal, it must needs argue that their Luxury was
universal, and greater then either their prices or store.

SECT. 7. Of their excessive gluttony in foul as well as in fish, together
with their luxurious appurtenances to their solemn feasts, as also that their
gluttony rose with their Empire, and again fell with it.
NOw as their Luxury showed it self chiefly in their fish, so likewise did it
in birds, though not happily so much, yet foul enough to discover their
insatiable appetites: Gellius to this 15. (...).
purpose alleges a notable passage out of a set speech of Favorinus, an
ancient Orator, which he used in reproach of their luxurious suppers, when he
persuaded the Licinian Law for the cutting off of superfluous charge that way,
which is the more remarkable, because in those times. Praefecti popinae atque
luxuriae negant coenam lautam esse, nisi quum libentissime edis, tum auferatur,
and alia esca melior atque amplior succenturietur. is nunc flos coenae habetur
inter istos, quibus sumptus and fastidium pro facetijs procedit: qui negant
vllam avem praeter ficedulam totam comesse oportere: caeterarum avium atque
altilium, nisi tantum apponatur vt a cluniculis inferiori part saturi fiant,
convivium putant inopia sordere: superiorem partem avium atque altilium qui
edint eos palatum non habere. The masters of the Art of Cookerie and Luxury
deny it to be a rich supper, unless that meat which you feed upon with a good
stomach be taken off, and more dainty and full dishes be mustered in place
thereof. That is now held the flower of delicacle, when in steed of merriment,
costlinesse even to loathing is substituted: they deny that any bird is to be
eaten whole but only the * gnat-snapper, and except such a quantity of other
birds and Ficedula.
fatted foul be served in, and set on, as a man may glut himself only with
the hinder part of them, they hold it but a poor feast: and such as taste the
forepart, they censure as having no palate. The foul which they specially
hunted after and most delighted in, were Phoenicopters, Peacockes, Thrushes and
Pigeons. For the first of these I know not what kind of bird it was, but
Martial thus describes it.

Dat mihi penna rubens nomen sed lingua gulosis Lib. 13. Epig. 71

Nostra sapit, Quid si garrula lingua foret?
Red wings gave me my name, my tongue's a dainty cate,
To gluttons: would be more if that my tongue could prate.
Their peacockes grew in greatest request in Varroes time, De pavonibus nostra
Lib. 3. c. 6.
memoria greges habere caepti, and vaenire magno, ex ijs Aufidius supra
sexagena millia nummum in anno dicitur capere: Flocks of peacockes began to be
kept in our time, and to be held at high rates, Aufidius is said to receive
yearly for these birds sixty thousand Sesterces; their bodies being commonly
sold for fifty, and their eggs for five pence a piece. What reckoning they
made of their thrushes in part appears by that of Martial.

Inter aves turdus si quid me judice certum est Lib: 13: Epig. 92

Inter quadrupedes mattea prima lepus.
Amongst birds the thrush, amongst beasts the hare,
In my conceit the choicest are.
Of thrushes they had mavelous great abundance, and yet were they very dear;
both which, we have testified by Varro upon his own Lib: 3: cap: 2:
knowledge. In this farm alone, says he, which is ordained for an Ornithon or
the keeping of birds, Quinque millia scio venisse turdorum denarijs ternis vt
sexaginta millia ea pars reddiderit eo anno villae; I know to have been sold
five thousand thrushes for three pence a piece, so as that commodity alone
brought in that year three score thousand Sesterces. And no marveill, since
the places in which these were kept, were, as writes the same Author, as
large as the whole manor house it self. Now for Pigeons, a pair were
commonly sold for two hundred Sesterces, if they were fair, for a thousand.
And Lucius Accius having it seems some excellent breed, would not sell them
under four hundred pence the pair; and this in Varro's age, which was more
severe. Lib: 3: c: 7. Lib: 8. cap. 8:
But afterward in Columella's time they were held at four thousand Sesterces,
his words are worth the noting, Pretijs earum domini complent arcam, sicut
eximius Author Marcus Varro nobis affirmat, qui prodidit, etiam severioribus
suis temporibus paria singula [Columbarum] millibus singulis Sestertiorum
solita vaenire, nam nostri pudet seculi, (si credere volumus,) inveniri qui
quaternis millibus nummum binas aves mercantur. The owners of them fill their
chests with the money which they receive for them; as that renowned Author
Marcus Varro affirms, who witnesses that even in his times, which were more
severe, a pair of pigeons were usually sold for a thousand Sesterces: For, of
the age in which we live, I cannot speak without blushing, some being found
therein (if it be not a matter beyond belief) who have laid down for two of
those birds four thousand sesterces. Yet were they not content with these
storehouses at home, but mustered in the provinces abroad whole cohorts of
fowlers and hunters to bring them in provision; as Latinus Pacatus has
elegantly expressed it. Vt taceam infami saepe delectu scriptos inprovincijs
aucupes ductasque sub signis venatorum cohortes militasse conviuiis. Not to
speak of their infamous leavying of fowlers mustered within the Provinces, and
whole bands of hunters marching under several colors; the end of whose
wars, was, to make work for their feasts: In which, their curiosity
likewise about their very bread was such, that the number of them was not the
least, says Gellius in his 15 book, cap. 19. To whom that of M. Varro in his
Satyr, (...) might not unfitly be applied, si quantum operae sumsi^i vt tuus
pistor bonum faceret panem eius duodecimam philosophiae dedisses, bonus
iampridem esses factus, nunc illum qui norunt volunt emere millibus centum, te
qui novit nemo centussi: If thou had bestowed but the tweft part of that
pains in the study of Philosophy, which thou have that thy Baker might make
thee good bread, thou thy self might long since have been made good;
whereas now they that know him, will be content to lay down for him five
hundred pounds, but for thee, such as know thee scarce one hundred pence.

Now if I should hereunto add the appurtenances to these feasts, as their
infinite variety of sawces, whereof Seneca, inventae sunt mill conditurae
Epistola. 95.
quibus aviditas excitaretur, a thousand kind of sawces are found out for the
stirring up of the appetite; their bathings and annointings before their
feasts, their perfumes and sweet odours in diverse kinds at their feasts; Cr^o
sparsa humus, the very floor was strowed over with saffron: the changing of
their apparel, as also the roof of the room where Salust: of Metellus:
they sat, with some new device in it at the bringing in of every several
course. And lastly, of their damnable practice after their feast ended, not fit
to be named among Christians, I should tire both my self, and the Reader, and
some of these I shall perchance have fitter occasion to speak of, when I come
to treat of their luxury in buildings and in apparel.

And though it be true in the condition of the state, as in the course of
private men.

Nemo repent fit turpissimus.
No man ever arrived to the height of villainy at first dash, yet when their
Empire was at the height, their riches and fullness bred such excessive
luxury, as is scarcely matchable in all respects in any nation at any time:
But doubtless as far beyond all that latter ages have afforded as was the vast
extent of their dominions. Near about the second Punike war they were come
to that pass, that Cato the Censor openly complained, non posse salvam esse
vrbem in qua piscis pluris quam bos vaeniret, that it could not go well with
that city, in which a fish was sold for more then an ox. But in Tiberius his
time it was come to another pass, when one fish was valued at the price of
above ten oxen, Tres mullos triginta millibus nummum vaenisse graviter
conquestus est, says Suetonius Cap: 34:
of that Emperor: He greivously complained that three mullets were sold for
thirty thousand Sesterces, which is two thousand Sesterces upon a fish beyond
any yet spoken of; which I wonder was forgotten by Pliny in that place where he
purposely mentions the excessive prices of fishes: But as their Empire declined
so did their luxury, as we Lib. 9: c. 17:
have heard before out of Macrobius and Latinus Pacatus; by which it appears
that Vices have their rising, their reigning, and their falling, as all other
things have: As their fuel increases, so do their flame: but that once
failing they are soon extinguished.

SECT. 8. That their riot did not only show it self in the delicious choice of
their fare, but in their voracity and gurmandizing, in regard of the quantity
some of them devoured at a meal.
NEither did their excessive luxury show it self only in the delicious choice
of their fare, but there were among them, who likewise strangely exceeded in
voracity and gurmandizing, in regard of the quantity and weight thereof.
Maximinus the Emperor devoured many times in one day quadraginta libras
carnis, vt autem Cordus dicit, Cap^olinus.
etiam sexaginta: forty pounds of flesh, or as Cordus has it, Sixty. Clodius
Albinus another Emperor, did eat so much, quantum ratio humana non patitur, as
humane reason cannot well comprehend it: Nam and quingentas ficus passarias
quas Graeci Callistruthias vocant jeiunum comedisse Idem.
Cordus dicit, and centum Persica Campana, and melones ostienses december, and
vuarum Lavicarum pondo viginti, and ficedulas centum, and ostrea quadraginta:
In the morning fasting, he dispatched five hundred dried figs, as writes
Cordus, and an hundred peaches of Campania, and ten melones of Ostia, and
twenty pound weight of grapes of Lavica, besides an hundred A bird like a
nightingall, feeding on figs.
gnat-gnappers, and forty oysters.

Dij talem terris avertite pestem,
God from such monsters us defend.
But Phago, in whom Aurelian took singular delight for his wonderful eating,
surpassed in my mind both the former, ridding at one meal in the Emperors
presence, aprum integrum, centum panes, vervecem and porcellum, a whole bore,
an hundred loaves, a weather, and a young pig: Vopiscus in Aureliano:
and it should seem, that this serving in of whole bores was a thing not
unusual, even when they sat alone and in private.

-- Quis feret istas
Luxuriae sordes? quanta est gula quae sibi totos Iuven: Satyr: 1:

Ponit apros, animal propter convivia natum.
This filthy luxury who can endure? how great a beast
Is that same gut, which would whole bores
Ordained for feasts) to be before him set.
And the other Satyrist to like purpose.

Rancidum aprum antiqui laudabant, non quia nasus
Illis nullus erat: sed, credo, hac mente, quod hospes Horat: l: 2: Sat: 2.

Tardius adveniens, vitiatum commodius, quam
Integrum edax dominus consumeret.
Our Ancestors well liked a rancid boar, not that
They had no nose, but (as I think) if guests came late,
'Twas thought much fitter they should eat a tainted one,
Then the feasts founder should devour one all alone.
Mark Anthony, says Plutarch, having but twelve guests provided eight boares,
one set to the fire after another, that whenever he came in, sooner or
latter, one at least might come in prime. Nay Caranus, says Athenaeus, set
before every guest a boar in a several dish.

Now I have been long, I confess, in this point, but their infinite vanity
and extreme madness therein has made me so, the rather for that this excess
is commonly brought as a reason of the general decrease of mankind now a
days, as well in strength and stature, as age and duration: And though it be
true, that we exceed this way too much, wasting that in superfluous and riotous
pampering of our bodies, which would be far better bestowed on such as want
necessaries; yet it is as true, that they as far exceeded us this way, as we
come short of them in riches and dominion: And yet I doubt, much of that which
has been spoken, will hardly be believed, though I have alleged their own
Authous, and for the most part in their own words, thereby to add the greater
weight, and procure the greater credit thereunto. Nam vetera nunc fere hoc
fatum habent, vt etsi vera, vix videantur, an sui magnitudine, an nostra
declinatione, says a great Antiquarie, speaking of this Lypsiius, Epist:
select. 63.
very thing: These ancient records are for the most part subject to this
destiny, that although they be true, yet they seem not so, either through their
own excess, or our coming so far short of them: But I hope I shall prepare
a way to an easier belief of that which is past, by that which is now to
follow, touching their luxury in building and appar^ll, and other prodigal
expenses every way suitable to their luxury in diet, if not exceeding it.

CAP. 8. Of the Romans excessive luxury in building.
SECT. 1. Of their excess in the great variety of their far fetched and dear
bought marble.
THe chiefest materials of building, in which the Romans most generally
exceeded, was the great variety of their far fetched and dear bought Marble:
of which Pliny, as being himself an eyewitness speaks so feelingly, and yet
withal so wittily, that he best deserves to be heard: Though I profess to
make choice of his words, as they lie here and there, and suit best with the
present purpose. It now remains, (says he) to write of the nature of stones,
that is to say, the principal point of all enormous abuses, and the very
height of wastfull superfluities. For all things else which we have handled
heretofore even to this book, may seem in some sort to have been made for
man, But as for Mountains, Nature has framed them for her own self, partly
to strengthen, as it were certain ioints within the veins and bowels of the
earth, partly to tame the violence of great rivers, and to break the force of
surging waves and inundations of the sea. And yet notwithstanding for our
wanton pleasures, and nothing else we cut and hew, we load and carry away
those huge hills and inaccessible rocks, which otherwise to pass only over,
was thought a wonder. Our Ancestors in time past, reputed it a miracle, and in
a manner prodigious, that first Hanniball and afterward the Cimbrians
surmounted the Alps: But now even the same mountains we pierce through with
pickaxe and mattocke, for to get out thereof an hundred sorts of marble; we
cleave the Capes and Promontories, we lay them open for the sea to let it in;
down we go with their heads, as if we would lay the whole world even, and
make all level. The mighty mountains, set as limits to bound the frontiers of
diverse countries, and to separate one nation from another, those we transport
and carry from their native seat: Ships we build of purpose for to fraught
with marble: the cliffes and tops of high hills they carry to and fro amid
the waves and billows of the sea. Now let every man think with himself what
excessive prices of these stones he shall hear anon, and what monstrous pieces
and masses he sees drawn and carried both by land and sea, and then let him
consider withal how much more fair and happy a life many a man should have
without all this, and how many cannot choose but die for it, whenever they
go about to do, or if I should speak more truly, to suffer this enterprise.
Also for what use else or pleasure rather, but only that they might lie in beds
and chambers of stones, that forsooth are spotted, as if they never regarded
how the darkness of the night bereaveth the one half of each man's life of
those delights and joys.

SECT. 2. Of their excessive sumptuousness in their temporary or transeunt
buildings, made only for pastime to last but for a short time.
NOw their buildings were either private or public: and the public again,
either merely for pleasure or for use: such were their places for civil
assemblies, their bridges, their Aqueducks, their draughts under ground, their
market places and high ways; and these, though respectively to their several
ends they were very sumptuous, yet because they were for public use, I will
not touch, but will only insist upon their excessive snperfluity, cast away
upon those which were only for public pleasure, or the vain delight of
private men. Among those that were destined to none other end, but game and
pastime, their Theaters and Amphitheaters first present themselves to our view,
and among these, the renowned Theater of Scaurus. This Scaurus, says Pliny,
when he was Aedile, caused a wonderful piece of work to be made, Lib. 36:
Cap: 15:
and exceeding all that ever have been known wrought by man's hand, not only
those that have been erected for a month, or such a thing, but even those
that have been destined for perpetuity, and a Theater it was: The stage had
three lofts one above another, wherein were 360 columns of marble; the base or
nethermost part of the stage was all of Marble, the middle of glass (an
excessive superfluity, never heard of before or after) as for the uppermost,
the boards, planks and floores were gilded; the columns beneath were 40 foot
high wanting twain: and between these columns there stood of statues and
images in brass to the number of 3000. The Theater it self was able to
receive 80000 persons to sit well and at ease. As touching the other furniture
of this Theater of Scaurus in rich hangings which were cloth of gold, painted
tables the most exquisite that could be found, Players apparel, and other
stuff meet to adorn the stage, there was such abundance thereof, that there
being carried back to his house of pleasure at Tusculum the surplusage thereof,
(over and above the daintiest part whereof he had daily use at Rome) his
servants and slaves there, upon indignation for this waste and monstrous
superfluities of their Master, set the said country house on fire, and burnt
as much as came to an hundred millions of Sesterces. Yet was this magnificent
piece of building, by the testimony of the same Pliny but Temporarium Theatrum,
a Theater set up but for a short time: And in another place, vix vno mense
futurum in vsu, Lib. 36 c. 2.
scarce to endure for a month.

Such a kind of work was Caligula his bridge, novum and inauditum Sueton. c.
19
spectaculi genus, a new and unheard of kind of show: It reached from Putzoll
to Bauly three miles and a quarter: He built it upon ships in a few days, and
in emulation of Xerxes, over this he marched with the Senate and the
Souldierie in a triumphant manner, and in the view of the people, upon this he
feasted and passed the night in dalliance and gaming: but like Jonas his gourd,
it was suddenly up, and suddenly down, Immensum opus perpendenti, sed cui
laudem vanitas detrahit; nam Lypsius.
quo fine structum nisi vt destrueretur? a marveilous great work indeed, but
such as the vanity thereof deprived it of commendation, for to what end was it
raised but to be demolished: thus sported he, says Seneca, Me brenit-vitae
cap. 18:
with the power of the Empire, and all in imitation furiosi and externi, and
infoeliciter superbi regis, of a foreign, frentique, and unlucky proud King.
Of like nature were those buildings set up by the command of Caracalla, (whom
we may not unfitly or unjustly call another Caligula) Vbicunque hyematurus erat
aut etiam putabatur hyematurus, cogebantur Dio.
amphitheatra and circos struere, et ea ipsa mox diruenda, wheresoever he
wintred, or but intended to winter, they were constrained to erect
Amphitheaters and Cirkes for public games, and those within a while to be
taken down again: So as upon the matter they were put to that excessive
charge only for the imaginary use of one man.

SEC. 3. Of their infinite expense in their permanent Amphitheaters, and the
appurtenances belonging thereunto, namely their Curtains and Arena.
But I pass by these transeunt buildings, and come to their permanent, among
which the Amphitheater began by Vespasian, but finished and dedicated by Titus
was one of the most famous, Cujus summitatem aegre visio humana conscendit; the
height whereof was such, Ammianus.
that the eye of man could hardly reach it. It was reared says Cassiodore;
divitiarum profuso flumine; with rivers of treasure powered out, it contained
only upon the steps or degrees sufficient, and easy seats for eighty seven
thousand, so as the vacant places besides might well contain ten or twenty
thousand more. Martial preferres it before all the rare great works of Rome.

Omnis Caesareo cedat labor Amphitheatro,
Vnum praecunctis fama loquatur opus.
To Caesar's Amphitheater all other works must veil,
To sound this one above them all Fames trump shall never fail.
And in another place he bestows upon it the title of Venerable.

Hic vbi conspicui venerabilis Amphitheatri,
Erigitur moles stagna Neronis erant.
In that place where sometimes stood cruel Nero's ponds,
That venerable piece th'Amphitheater stands.
Now as the mass of treasure was infinite which they cast away in the raising
of these buildings; only to make the people sport, so was it incredible what
they spent in the furnishing of them, and setting forth their games therein:
Quid dicendum est de ijs qui populari levitate ducti, vel magnis vrbibus
suffecturas opes exhibendis muneribus impendunt? says Lactantius: what shall
we say of them who being led with popular applause, Instit. lib. 6.
spend in exhibiting sword-fights, treasure enough for the building or
maintaining of great Cities? And Ambrose to like purpose, Sermon 81.
Magistratus in Theatris, mimis, athletis, gladiatoribus, alijsque hujusmodi
generibus hominum totum patrimonium suum largitur and prodigit, vt vnius horae
favorem vulgi acquirat. The Magistrate upon Theatricall games, jeasters,
wrastlers, swordplayers, and such kind of men, lavishes out his whole
patrimony, and that only to purchase the applause of the people for an hour:
And surely we may well conceive and believe as much whether we consider their
frequency, or their appurtenances: for the former of which Augustus alone is
said to have set forth public games in his own name for himself four and
twenty several times: And for Suetonius.
other Magistrates who either were absent or wanted means to go through with
it three and twenty. Nay Titus at the dedication of his Amphitheater held them
for an hundred days together. Now for the appurtenances I may say,

-- Materiam superabat opus.
The workmanship did far the stuff exceed.
They were beyond the strangeness of their buildings, their whole furniture
was sometimes of silver, as that of Julius Caesar, and C. Antonius, Plin. l.
33. c 3.
sometimes of gold, thus Nero for the ostentation of his greatness to Teridates
King of Armenia covered over not the stage only, but the whole Idem Ibidem.
Theater with gold: All the instruments then used and furniture thereof were
likewise gilded, and the veil or curtain which hung over them to keep them
from the heat of the Sun was all of purple, imbroadered with stars of gold,
ex quo and dies ille aureus appellatus, from Dio Cassius in Nerone.
whence that was ever after called, the golden day. To these kind of curtains
which were doubtless of very great charge, being colored and shadowing so
spacious a place does Lucretius allude,

Et vulgo faciunt id lutea rufaque vela,
Et ferrugina cum magnis intenta theatris
Per malos vulgata trabesque trementia pendent:
Namque ibi concessum Caveai subter and omnem
S^nai speciem, patrum, matrumque, Deorumque
Inficiunt, coguntque suo fluitare color.
So do those curtains yellow, russet, red,
When over the Theaters streacht out and spread,
On masts and beams they trembling hang: for then
The scaffolds underneath, and all the Scene
Of Gods, of Fathers, and of Matrons grave,
They with their colors die, and cause to wave.
Hereunto may be added the Arena, the place below in which their games were
exhibited, so called, for that it was strowed over with sand for the drinking
in of the blood which was spilt upon it, and officers they had purposely for
this business, who in the Laws and Writings of the Christian Doctors are
termed Arenarij, Sanders, who as they first strowed it over, so between
whiles during the same sitting, they renewed it again, as appears by those
verses of Martial, where he speaks of a Lion suddenly enraged who slew two of
those Sanders,

Nam duo de tenera juvenilia corpora turba,
Sanguinem rastris quae renovabat humum:
Saevus and infoelix furiali dente peremit,
Martia non vidit majus Arena nefas.
Two youthful bodies of that company,
Which did with rakes the bloody ground renew;
With furious tooth the savage Lion slew,
A fouler deed the sand did never see.
This place Nero in steed of sand caused to be strowed over with dust of Plin.
33. 5.
gold, himself being to try a match of Chariot-driving therein: and so did
Caius Caligula, Edidit and Circenses quosdam praecipuos minio and Chrysocolla
Suetonius c. 18
constrato Circo; he set forth certain notable games in the Circus, being
strowed over with vermilion and dust of gold.

SECT. 4. Of their incredible expense in the ^iring and arming, and dieting of
their sword-players, in the hunting, bringing home, feeding, and keeping of
their wild beasts, in other admirable shows to the astonishment of the
beholders, in refreshing the spectators with precious and pleasant perfumes,
and the like, and lastly in casting their largess among the people, neither
was this* the pract^se of the Emperors only, but of private men.
But the greatest expense of all was the multitude of Fencers who were all
hired for great prizes (and great reason, their lives being exposed to evident
hazard) besides the arming and dieting of them before they entered, and if they
exhibited beasts, it is almost past credit, the relations that are made by
Historians touching their number. The Emperor Probus commanded to be let
loose at once, a thousand Vopiscus in Probo.
Ostrichges, a thousand stagges, a thousand wild boares, and a thousand fallow
dear, besides wild goats, wild sheep, and other beasts, all which he gave
over to the mercy, or rather the rage of the people, every one to catch what he
could* the Circus being set all over with tall and mighty trees, which by the
Soldiers were taken up by the roots as they grew in the woods, and there
planted with green turfe about them, and fastened with beams and yrons. The
next day he let in to the same place centum jubatos leones, one hundred maned
or crested Lions* which with roaring filled the air as it had been with
thunder, one hundred Leopards of Lybia, one hundred of Syria, one hundred
Lyonesses, and three hundred bears. Now if we should cast up the expense he
was at for the hunting, for the bringing home, for the feeding and keeping of
all these, it is not for an ordinary reach to comprehend: yet stood he not
alone in this kind. Gordianus exhibited in one day an hundred wild beasts of
Lybia, and in another, one thousand bears, as Capitolinus in his life
witnesses.

And they striued as it should seem who should outvy one another in rarity of
shows, and riotousnesse of expense, even Titus himself, who in their stories
is named, Deliciae generis humani, the delight or delicacy of mankind,
marveilously exceeded this way. He set forth the whole tragedy of Orpheus, so
that creeping rocks and running woods were exhibited in the Arena, as Martial
has well expressed it.

Quicquid in Orp^o Rhodope spectasse theatr^
Dicitur, exhibuit Caesar Arena tibi.
Repferunt (...), mirandaque sylva cucurrit,
Quale fuisse nemus creditur Hesperidum.
What Rhodope in Orpheus Theater did see
Th'Amphitheater that exhibits unto thee
O Caesar: Rocks do creep, and woods do move apace,
The Orchard such they say of Atlas daughters was*
Nay there were that together with Land-Beasts brought in Sea Monsters, as the
Sea-calfe and the Seahorse, which Calphurnius at the games of Carinus
testifies that himself beheld,

Nec solum nobis sylvestria cernere monstra
Contigit, Aequoreos ego cum certantibus vrsis
Spectavi vitulos and equorum nomine dignum Hippopotamos.

Sed deforme pecus.
Nor only did I see wood Monsters there,
But Sea-calves also tugging with the bear,
And that misshapen ugly beast withal,
Which we not without cause the Seahorse call.
And that which was more strange, they brought in the Sea it self, and therein
ships, representing the form of a sea fight. But Heliogabalus went beyond all
conceit: Fertur in Euripis vino plenis naves Circenses Dio in Nerone.
exhibuisse, they be the words of Lampridius, he is said to have exhibited
ships in the Circus, sailing and contending in wine. It was in Hortensius a
great folly and vanity to water his plane trees with wine, but for ships to
sail and contend in wine was a most monstrous superlatiue madness.

Now amid all these sights, it was ordinary to refresh the spectatours with
pleasant perfumes from gummes, or sweet water, or ointments, Apuleius.
Spartianus in Adriano. Seneca Ep. 90.
or balsamum, or saffron mixed with wine, or somewhat in that kind, which they
conveyed in close pipes through the whole Amphitheater; and the fight ended,
they commonly cast a largess among the people, wrapping up the names of those
things in little pellets, which they intended to give, and every one as he
could catch them, brought them to the Masters of the games, who delivered them
the thing it self specified in their pellet. Such gifts Titus cast abroad by
the space of an hundred days (as witnesses Dion) for so long his games
lasted, and many of them were of good value, as appears by the testimony of
the same Author, not only meat, and drink, and apparel, but vessels of
silver and gold, horses, cattle, slaves, and the like* but it is wonderful
what Nero did in this kind, to the forenamed he added curious pictures,
pearls, and precious stone, yea naves insulas, agros, ships, houses, Suet. c.
11^ Lypsius.
farms: O res vix Suetonio fidissimo testi credendas, things hardly to be
credited, though delivered by Suetonius a most faithful Historian

Neither was this the practice of Emperors only, but even of private men.
Cicero testifies of Milo, that in these kind of games he wasted three
patrimonies; and Vopiscus with some indignation relates the like In Carin^.
of Messalla, Legate hunc locum Iunius Messalla, quem ego libere culpare audeo;
ille enim patrimonium suum Scaenicis dedit, haeredibus abnegavit: Let Iunius
Messalla read this place, whom I dare freely accuse, for that he has cast
away his patrimony upon stage players, and defrauded his heirs thereof; and
then reckoning many particulars of his wastfull riot that way, at length he
thus concludes, Et haec quidem idcirco in literas misi, vt futuros editores
pudor tangeret, ne patrimonia sua proscriptis legitimis haeredibus mimis and
bal^tronibus deputarent: These things have I therefore committed to writing,
that such as hereafter set forth these kind of games, might blush to confer
their patrimony upon jesters and base raskalls, excluding their lawful heirs.

SECT. 5. Of their superfluous expense, as in the number and largenes, so
likewise in tbe beauty and ornament of Bathes; which were likewise of little
other use then for pleasure.
But leaving their Theaters and Amphitheaters which were only for pleasure,
let us take a view of their Bathes, which were likewise of little other use, at
leastwise as they used them; as appears by that of Artemidorus, Balneum nihil
aliud suo aevo fuisse quam transitum ad coenam, that a bath in his time was
nothing else but a passage to supper, so as they which often took repast,
washed as often; it being noted of Commodus the Emperor, that he washed seven
or eight times in a day. And among the Christians, Sisinius a Bishop was
censured as intemperate for washing twice in a day: Yet a wonder it is to
consider, to what an infinite height these kind of buildings for Bathings
amounted, as well in regard of their number and largeness, as their beauty and
ornament. Agrippa, as witnesses Pliny, during his Aedilship, built for
public and free use Lib: 36.
one hundred and seaventie, and the same Author there adds, that at Rome in
his time their number was infinite: and for their largeness, some of them,
says Olimpiodorus, were ingenti, and Cassiodorus mirabili magnitudine, of a^
huge and wonderful bigness: Ammianus is more particular, Lib: 16:
Lavacra in modum Provinciarum extructa, Bathes built in the manner of
Provinces; the Antoninian, or rather Dioclesian Bathes alone, were so
capacious, as they contained for the use of washing, Sellas mill sexcentas,
easque e marmore polito factas, one thousand six hundred several seats,
Olympio^rus in Excerptis.
and those all of polished marble.

Neither was the ornament and beauty of these bathing places unsuitable to their
number and largeness; which Seneca in his eighty sixth Epistle has most
elegantly expressed, and withal bitterly censured, where speaking of the
meanness of the Bath which Scipio Africanus used, while he lived in banisnment,
where Seneca wrote that Epistle, he thus goes on: At nunc quis est qui sic
lavari sustineat, pauper sibi videtur ac sordidus nisi parietes magnis and
pretiosis orbibus praefulserint, nisi Alexandrina marmora numidicis crustis
distincta sint, nisi illis vndique operosa and in picturae modum variata
circumlitio praetexatur, nisi vitro condatur Camera, nisi Thasius lapis quondam
rarum in aliquo spectaculum templo, piscinas nostras circumdederit, nisi aquam
argentea epistomia fuderint, and adhuc plebeias fistulas loquor: Quid cum ad
Balnea libertinorum pervenero? quantum statuarum? quantum Columnarum and nihil
sustinentium, sed in ornamentum positarum and impensae causa? eo deliciarum
venimus vt nisi gemmas calcare nolimus: But who is there now, who would be
content to wash as he did, he seems to himself poor and base, whose walls
do not shine with great and precious circles, unless between the marble of
Alexandria, be inlaid the shavings of that of Numedia, unless they have a
border round about it with diverse colors in manner of pictures, unless their
arched roof be covered over with glass, unless the Thasian stone, heretofore
a rare sight in some Temple, compass our ponds; unless silver cocks power us
forth water; and as yet have I spoken but of the ordinary and common pipes, how
much beyond all this are the Bathes of freed men? how many statues, how many
pillars have you there, for none other use, but only for ornament and expense?
we are now come to that delicacie, that we can tread upon nothing but jewels.
By which lively description a man should think, he rather spoke of the
palaces of some great Princes, then of their common Bathing rooms, ordained
for none other use, then the washing off of the swet and filth of their bodies.
Yet with Seneca in some parts of his description Statius accords.

Nil ibi plebeium nunquam Temesaea notabis In bal^o ^trusci.

Era, sed argento foelix propellitur vnda
Argentoque cadit, labrisque nitentibus instat,
Delicias mir^ta suas.
There Is nothing vulgar, there is no Temesaean brass,
But happy waters there through silver conduits pass,
From silver fall, and into glistering cisterns run,
(Admiring their delights) with expedition,
Thereby signifying, that not only the pipes, through which the water ran, and
the cocks and conduites, out of which it ran, but the cisterns too, into
which it fell were all of pure silver. And touching the glass, he touches that
too.

Effulgent Camerae, vario fastigia vitro,
In species animosque nitent.
The arched roofes do shine and glister gloriously,
Of diverse glass composed, both to the mind and eye.
Pliny goes farther, and tells us, that not only the sides of the cisterns, in
Lib. 33. 12:
which they bathed were of silver, but the seats and footing or the botto^e, so
as they could hardly stand for sliding upon it, vt eadem materia and probris
serviat and cibis, so as the same matter, says he, is made to serve both at
our tables, and for base unworthy offices.

SECT. 6. Of the endless masses of treasure which they powered out in the
erecting and adorning of Temples, for the worship of those images which they
forged to themselves, or at leastwise knew well enough were no Gods.
BEfore we enter into their private houses, it shall not be amiss in passing
from their Bathes by the way, to cast a glance upon their Temples and Statues.
Had their temples been consecrated to the honor and service of the true God,
I should have highly commended their great expense in the building and
beautifying of them, as a work of piety and devotion: But being dedicated to
Idols and Devils, and such 1 Cor. 10. 20.
as themselves, at leastwise the wiser sort amongst them, either laughed at, or
believed not, the excessive charge which that way they were at, was not only
excessive vanity and folly, but most profane and impious both superstition and
superfluity. The number of their Temples only in the city of Rome, was four
hundred twenty four, the greatest part of Notitia Imper^:
which was no doubt very magnificent, shining with gold, and jeat, and marble,
as appears by that of Rutilius.

Confunduntque vagos delubra micantia visus
Ipsos crediderim sic habitare Deos.
And glistering temples wandering eyes confound,
So dwell the Gods I think on heavenly ground.
And these chiefly, as I conceive does Claudian intend speaking of Rome.

-- Quae luce metalli,
Aemula vicinis fastigia conserit astris.
Who with her mettalls light does shine;
And with the neighbor stars her tops confine.
But most elegantly and fully has Arnobius expressed it: Sint ergo haec licet
ex molibus marmoreis structa, laquearibus aut renideant aureis, splendeant De
Templis.
hic gemmae, and sydereos evomant variata interstitione fulgores, terra sunt
haec omnia and ex (...) vilioris materiae concreta: Though they be built with
piles of marble, and their vautes shine with gold; though they glister with
precious stone, which dart forth and sparkle abroad beams like the stars in
a various distance, yet all these things are but earth, made of the dregs of
the basest matter.

Amongst them all, that of the Capitol was most eminent and stately, it took
its name, as witnesses Arnobius, a Capite Toli, from the head of a man so
named, which at the laying of the foundation was dug up: It was four times
ruined, and three times again reedified: It was first built by the Tarquines,
Secondly by Sylla, but dedicated by Lutatius Catulus; in which. Augustus
bestowed upon the seat of Jupiter Sedecem Dio, 55.
millia pondo auri and quingenties Sestertium in gemmis, sixteen thousand
weight of gold, and five hundred times an hundred thousand Sesterces in jewels:
Thirdly by Vespasian; fourthly and lastly, by Domitian. The height whereof was
such, that Silius brings in Jupiter, thus prophesying of Domitians raising it.

Aurea Tarpeia ponet Capitolia rupe,
Et junget nostro templorum culmina coelo.
He on Tarpeian rock shall place the golden Capitole,
Andshall advance his Temples top as high as heavenly pole.
With whom Tertullian fully agrees in sense, and almost in words: Nam etsi a
Numa concepta relligio est, nondum tamen aut simulachris aut templis I^
Apologetico.
res divina apud Romanos constabat, and nulla Capitolia coelo certantia, sed
temeraria de Cespite altaria: Though religion were first brought in by Numa,
yet then had the Romans neither images nor temples for divine service, no
Capitol contending with heaven for height, but altars were set up of the turfe
that came next to hand. And no doubt but the length and breadth were every way
answereable to the height; the excessive charge that Domitian was at in the
building hereof, Martial after his flattering manner has wittily described,
telling him, that thereby he Lib. 9: Ep: 4.
had so fa^re obliged Jupiter and all the Gods, that if they should empty their
coffers and make sale of all they had, they could never make him sufficient
recompense, but would be forced to turn ^anke-rupts.

Q^antum iam superis Caesar coeloque dedisti,
Si repetes, and si Creditor esse ve^is?
Grandis in Aetherio licet anctio fiat Olympo,
Coganturque Dei vendere quicquid habe^t
Conturbabit Atlas, and non erit ^cia tota
Decid^t tecum qua pater ipse deum.
Pro Capitolinis quid enim tibi solvere templis
Quid pro Tarpeiae frondis honor potest? etc.
Expectes and (...) Auguste necesse est,
Nam tibi quod solvat non habet Arca Iovis
If Caesar, wh^t on Gods and heaven thou have bestowed,
Thou should as Creditour call in, and all that is owed,
Though in the Etheriall skies portsale of all were made,
And all the Gods were forced to sell what ere they had,
Atlas would bankerupt prove, and to the prince of heaven
Not one ounce would remain to make all reckonings even.
For for the Capitols great temples how can he,
Or for Ta^peian oaks and laurels satisfy? etc.
Thou must, o Caesar, needs a while forbear and stay,
For why, Io^es coffers yet have not wherewith to pay.
By which it appears what account they made of the Gods, to whom they
dedicated these Temples: Nay Domitian himself the founder of the Capitol, is
so bold with them, as if they had indeed been his debtours, or at leastwise
his companions to style himself in his edicts, Dominus and Deus noster sic
fieri iubet, our Lord and God so commands, vnde Sue^on. (...) (...).
institutum posthac vt nec scripto quidem nec sermon cuiusquam appellaretur
aliter: And from thence forth was it ordained, that no man should give him
other title either in writing or speech. Now for the riches and ornament of the
Capitol, we may in part give a guess at it by this, that there was spent only
upon the gilding of it supra duodecem millia talentorum, above twelve thousand
tallents: It was gilded all over, not the inner roof only, but the utter
covering which was of brass or copper, but the doors were laid over with
thick plates of gold, which remained till Honorius his reign, and then in a
dearth of coin, Stilicho mandasse per hibetur (says Zozimus) vt fores in
Capitolio Romano quae auro magni ponderis erant obductae laminis ijs
spoliarentur: Cum autem qui hoc facere iussi erant, idagerent, in part for^um
scriptum reppererant, [infoelici Regi servantur:] Quod eventus docuit: nam
Stilicho paulo post infoeliciter perijt. (...) is said to have given command,
that the doors of the Capitol, which were laid over with massy gold, should
be robbed of those plates, and when they who had it in charge put it in
execution, they found engraven upon a part of the door these words, [They are
reserved for an unfortunate King] which the event proved to be true, for
Stiliche within a while after perished unfortunately.

Next to the Capitol was the Pantheon, the Temple of honor, of Fortune, of
the City, strange Idols, and that of Peace inferior to none. It was built by
Vespastan, three hundred foot in length it was, and in breadth two hundredth;
so as Herodian defervedly calls it, Maximum and pulcherimum omnium in vrbe
operum* the greatest and fairest of all the works in the city: Whereunto he
adds, ditissimum, ornamentis auri and argenti excultum, the most sumptuous in
ornaments of gold and filver: of which Josephus thus writes, Omnia in hoc
templum collata and disposita sunt ob quae homines videndi cupiditate antea per
totum orbem vagabantur. Upon Lib. 7. Excid^.
this temple were bestowed all the rarities which men before traveiled through
the world to see. And Pliny, ex omnibus quae retuli clarissima Lib. 34. 8.
quaeque in vrbe, jam sunt dicata a Vespasiano Principe in te^plo Pacis, of all
the choice pieces that I have spoken of, the most excellent are laid up and
dedicated by Vespasian the Emperor in the temple of Peace: Thus they made
Idols to themselves, which the simplest of them could not but discern were no
Gods, and then without measure or reason, powered out infinite masses of
treasure in the serving and worshipping of them.

SECT. 7. Of their wonderful vanity in erecting infinite numbers of statues,
and those very chargeable, and that to themselves.
YEt in this was some pretense of Religion, but in their Statues they
worshipped themselves, vainly imagining thereby to aeternize their names.
Quidam aeternitati secommendari posse per statuas aestimantes eas ardenter
affectant, atque auro curant inbracteari, says Ammianus Marcellinus, some
hoping to recommend themselves to eternity by Lib: 16:
statues, infinitely affect them, causing them to be overlaid with gold. This
itching humor of theirs, pene parem vrbi populum dedit quam natura procreavit:
in time begat almost as many inhabitants to the city as nature Cass^dorus. l: 7.
brought forth, meaning that the number of their statues, did in a manner
equal their citizens: And no marveile, they being sine numero, without number,
in so much as they filled every corner, pestered their Victor:
streets and straightned their ways, which gave occasion to that Edict of
Claudius, whereby private men were inhibited the erecting of statues (...) lib.
^ltimo.
to themselves, but by leave first obtained from the Senate, such only excepted
as had done some public service.

For the prize of the stuff whereof they were made, the most common and basest
of them were of Marble, the rest of yvorie, and silver, and gold, and those
solid and ma^sie, Statuas sibi in Capitolio non nisi aureas argenteasque poni
permisit, ac ponderis certi, they be the words of Sutonius Cap: 13:
touching Domitian, he forbad any statues to be erected to him in the Capitol,
save only of gold and silver, and those of a certain weight, which weight
perchance those verses of Statius express,

Da Capitolinis aeternum sedibus aurum,
Quo niteant sacri centeno pondere vultus.
Grant to the Capitol eternal gold, wherein
Those sacred faces of one hundred weight may shine.
But that of Commodus fare exceeded this weight, Statuam mill librarum Dion in
Compendio.
auream habuit* he had a Statue erected to him of a thousand pound weight. Now
as they were at this great charge in the making and erecting of their Statues:
So were they likewise in the guarding of them. They were kept with no less
caution, then they were set up with care and cost: And to this purpose
maintained they an Officer of great honor who had the title of Comes Romanus
given him. This man with his soldiers Cassi^dorus l. 7.
walked through the streets of the city in the night to see good order: but
chiefly to provide that no wrong should be offered to the Statues* thus
prodigally careful they were of their own shadows, and as prodigally
careless of the lives of others: so as I cannot easily determine whether their
cruelty were greater in the one, or their folly in the other.

SECT. 8. Their prodigal sumptuousness in their private buildings, in regard
of their largeness and height of their houses, as also in regard of their
marble pillars, walls, roofes, beams, and pavement full of Art and cost.
NOw for their dwelling houses and private buildings. Claudian speaking of Rome
thus sets them out in general.

Qua nihil in terris complectitur altius ether
Cujus nec spatium visus, nec corda decorem,
Nec laudem vox vlla capit.
On earth naught higher do the Heavens embrace:
Her largeness sight, her beauty hearts, her praise
Tongue comprehends not --
It was the vaunt of Augustus, marmoream se relinquere quam lateritiam
accepisset; that he left the City of marble having found it of brick: but S.
Hieroms complaint, Vivimus quasi altero die morituri, and aedificamus quasi
Epist. ad Gaudentium.
semper in hoc seculo victuri, we so feed as if we were to die to morrow, and
so build as if we were here to live for ever. The largeness of their houses
was strange, and such as a man would wonder what use they could have of it: The
words of Valerius are to this purpose very pertinent, where speaking of
Quintius Cincinnatus, to whom the Dictatorship was offered, though he plowed
but four acres of land, with some indignation he adds, anguste se habitare
nunc putat cuius domus tantum patet quantum Lib. 4. c. 6.
Cincinnati rura patuerunt; he thinks he is straightned in his dwelling, whose
house is no larger then were all Cincinnatus his grounds. Some of Neroes slaves
had Kitchins that took up above two acres of Plin. 18. 2
ground; and the Lands of those who laid the ground of their Empire were of
less extent then the Cellars of some that came after* so that 36. 15.
by this proportion their houses came almost to the greatness of Cities, domos
atque villas cognover is in vrbium modum exaedificatas, they be the words of
Salust we may understand their houses and farms to be built in the manner of
Cities. Nay they went beyond them: aedificia privata laxitatem vrbium magnarum
vincentia, private men's houses exceeded Sen^ de Beues. 7. 10.
the largeness of great Cities. And of these sometimes they joined two or
three together, as Catiline in his Oration to his Soldiers vpbraides his
enemies; and in this sense it seems is Martial to be understood.

Et docti Senecae ter numeranda domus. Lib. 4. epig. 40.

And leerned Seneca's thrice to be numbered house.
Neither was the height of their houses disproportionable to the largeness.

Aedificant auro sedesque ad sydera mittunt.
They build with gold and raise their seats unto the stars.
There were of them who built to the height of their chiefest Temples that of
Hercules and Fortune, nay exceeded the Capitol it self.

Aedificator erat Centronius, and modo curvo
Littore Caietae summa nunc Tyberis arce. Iuven. Sat. 14

Nunc Praenestinis in montibus alta parabat
Culmina villarum, Graecis longeque petitis
Marmoribus, Vincens Fortunae atque Herculis aedem.
Vt spado vincebat Capitolia nostra Posides.
Centronius was a builder, sometimes on
Crooked Caietas shore, sometimes upon
Tiburs high top raising his palaces,
And on Praenestine hills fetching from Greece
And far away his marbles, to control
(As th'Eunuch Posid did our Capitol)
The Church of Fortune and of Hercules.
Yet to this height they farther added somewhat by planting gardens and
orchards and groves upon their house tops: therein like Antipodes running a
contrary course to nature, as Seneca truly and justly taxes them. Non vivunt
contra naturam qui pomaria in summis turribus serunt, quorum Epist. 122.
sylvae in tectis domorum ac fastigijs nutant, inde ortis radicibus quo
improbae cacumina egissent? Do they not live contrary to the rules of Nature,
who make themselves orchards upon their highest towers, whose woods shake upon
the tops of their houses, their roots there springing up where the top should
have reached?

Neither was the riches and ornament unsuitable either to the largenes or height
of their building. Thither they called to their great expense the most skillful
Architects from Greece and Asia, and all the parts of the known world, Quibus
ingenium and audacia erat, etiam quae natura denegavisset, Tacit. Annal. 15. 10.
per artem tentare, whose wit and daring was such, that by art they attempted
to effect that, which Nature seemed to deny. Among the rest of their ornaments,
their infinite number of marveilous high pillars, and those of diverse sorts of
the choicest kinds of marble was not the least. The height of some of them was
38 foot, and to their height was their beauty and greatness every way
answerable. Pueros reperti in (...). 36. 2. S^ec. ep. 115.
littore calculi leves, and aliquid habentes varietatis delectant, nos
ingentium (...) columnar^m sive ex Aegyptijs arenis, sive ex Afric^
solitudinibus ad(...) porticu^ aliquam vel capacem populi coenationem ferunt.
Children are delighted wit^ pebble stones or shells of diverse colors taken up
from the shore, and we with diverse spots of huge marble pillars, drawn hi^her
from the sands of Egypt, and the deserts of Afri^a, for the supporting of a
gallery or some spacious dining room. Their number was likewise very great,

Pendent innumeris fastigia nixa columnis. Statius in Epithalam (...) St^lla

Whose roof does rest on pillars numberless.
Sometimes an hundred of them stood together

At tua ^entenis incumbunt tecta columnis. Martial. 5. 13.

Thy roof upon an hundred pillars stays*
Sometimes as many more, as in the house built by Gordianus in the Prenestine
Capitolinus in Gordiano 3.
way, ducentas columnas vno peristylo habens, having in one entry or gallery
two hundred pillars distinguished by fifties from diverse countrves, and all of
an equal height. And if we desire to know the price of some one of these,
Crassus tells us ^ecem column^ centum millibus nummum Valerius 9. 1:
emi, I bought ten pillars for one hundred thousand Sesterces. And as their
pillars were of solid marble, so their walls were artificially crusted over
with pieces of diverse colors Miram^ parietes tenui marmore Sen^a Ep. 116
inductos, cum fciamus quale sit quod absconditur, (...) nostris imponimu^* We
stand wondering at the walls laid over with thin crusts of marble, though we
know well enough what lies under them, we are content to cosen our own eyes
To this Lucan alludes,

Nec summis crustatadomus, sectisque nitebat
Marmoribus.
Nor was the house with crusts of marble lined,
Nor with hewn stones of precious marble shined.
And Fabianus Papyrius, In hos igitur exitus varius ille secator lapis, vt
tenui Seneca Contr^vers. 2: 1.
front parietem tegat: To this purpose is that diversely colored stone sawed
into diverse pieces, that with a thin surface it may cover the wall. The
first inventor or setter up of this device was Mamurra, as witnesses Pliny out
of Cornelius Nepos. Lib. 36. c: 6*


But their beams exceedes these walls being all gilded over. Statius in
Ti(...) Majlij Vopisci.


Auratasne trabes an mauros vndique posts
Mirer?
But whereat should I wonder most,
The golden beams or yvorie post?
Non tanarijs domus est mihi ful^a columnis* Propertius.

Nec Camera auratas inter eburna trabes.
Nor is my house on Spartan pillars placed,
Nor yvory roof with gilded beams is graced.
And they were laid over either with thick guilding or plates of gold. Lucanus.


-- Crassumque trabes absconder at aurum*
Thick gold did hide the beams.
As were likewise their roofes.

-- Crasso laquearia fulta metallo.
-- Thick metal lined the roofes. Statius.

This their best Authors euery-where testify and censure. Quo pertinent haec
atria columnata? quo variae istae colorationes? quo aurata lacunaria? to what
use are their entries set with rows of pillars of diverse colors? to what end
are their roofes gilded? they be the words of M^sonius in Stobaeus. The roof
of the Capitol, says Pliny, was not gilded till 33. 3.
the razing of Carthage, Quae nunc and in privatis domibus auro teguntur* which
now a days even in private men's houses are covered with gold* Nay he goes
farther and tells us, that this practice passed from the roofs and beams, to
their chambers and walls, Qui and ipsi jam tanquam vasa inaurantur, which are
now gilded as well as our drinking vessels. With whom S. Hierome accords, Auro
parietes, auro laquearia, ^uro fulgent. capita Ep. ad Gaudentium.
columnarum, with gold their walls, with gold their roofes, with gold the heads
of their pillars shine. And herein they had diverse shapes artificially
expressed, as it appears by Statius, and precious stones here and there
glistering among.

Vidi arts veterumque manus varijsque metalla In (...).

Viva modis, labor est auri memorare figuras,
Aut ebur, aut dignas digitis contingere gemmas.
Their ancient works their living metals I
Of sundry forts did see, a labor it were
To tell the shapes of gold, the yvory,
The precious stones on fingers fit to wear.
But that which I think was more costly then gold, was their admirable variety
and change of roofes, withdrawing one face, and exhibiting another at their
pleasure, Versatilia Coenationum laquearia ita coagmentant, vt subinde alia
facies, atque alia succedat, and toties tecta quoties fercula mutentur. They so
framed the moveable roofes of their dining rooms Senec. ep. 90
that one face succeedes another, which they vary as often as they serve in a
new course. And it should seem by Rutilius that in these they sometime
represented groves with birds singing in them.

Quid loqu^r inclus^s inter laquearia sylvas
Vernul^ qua vario carmine ludit avis.
They pleasant groves within their rooofes do shut,
Where birds do chant and vary many a note.
And from these sometimes they cast down flowers in such abundance that they
buried men under them Oppressit in triclinijs versatilibus parasitos suos
violis and floribus, sic vt animam aliqui efflaverint, cum eripi ad summam non
possent, says Lampridius of Heliogabalus, He so ouer-loaded his jesters in his
dining rooms that had changeable roofes, with violets and other flowers, that
some of them died upon the place, being brought to that pass as at last they
could not be rescued. Nay so curious they were, that the very floor which they
trod upon must answer the roof, Impenditur cura vt lacunaribus pavimentorum
respondeat Senec. ep. 115.
nitor, a special care must be had, that the shining of the floor must be
answereable to the roof. And in another place, domus etiam qua calcatur De
Tranq. c. 1.
pretiosa, divitijs per omnes angulos dissipatis: precious things are spread
there even where men tread, riches being scattered through every corner of the
house. And this excessive curiosity Statius glances at.

Dum vagor aspectu vultusque per omnia duco,
Calcabam nec opinus opes: Nani splendour ab alto
Defluus, and nitid^m referentes aiera testae
Monstravere solum, varias vbi picta per arts
Gaudet humus, suberant que novis Asarota figuris.
Whilst to and fro my wandering eyes survaid
All things, unawares on riches did I tread,
Down from above came light, the roof the air
Reflecting on the soil, showed what lay there,
The artificial pavement seemed to smile,
And figures new were pictured on the tile.
SECT. 9. The profuse expenses of Domitian and Nero in their buildings, as also
of Caligula in his mad works.
NOw as the greatest part of these was ordinary even in private men's houses, so
we may well conceive that the palaces of the Emperors far exceeded them. I
will instance only in two, those of Domitian and Nero. Touching the former,
Plutarch treating of the sumptuous furniture of the Capitol, thus writes. Quod
si quis hu^ Capitolij magnificum instructum miretur, idem si Domitiani in aula
vnam porticum vel basilicam, vel balneum, vel pellicum dietam viderit, exclamet
cum epicharmo.

Non liberalis aut benignus tu clues,
Pro^ustone gaudes.
Not bountiful nor liberal
Art thou, but plainly prodigal.
If any wonder at this magnificent structure of the Capitol, the same man if
in Domitians palace he should behold but one gallery, or hall, or bath; or
parlour for his Con^ubines, he would presently cry out with Epicharmus, etc.
where he makes all the glory of the Capitol, which we have in part opened
before, to be but as a triflle or toy, in comparison of Domitians own house.

The other was that of Nero, which himself named domum auream, a golden house;
and Suetonius in his life thus describes it. Vestibulum eius fui^, in quo
Colossus centum viginti pedum staret ipsius effigy, tanta laxitas Cap. 31.
vt porticus triplices milliarias haberet. Item stagnum maris instar,
circumseptum aedificijs ad vrbium speciem. Rura insuper arvis atque vinetis and
pascuis sylvisque varia cum multitudine omnis generis pecudum ac ferarum, in
caeteris partibus cuncta auro lita distincta gemmis vnionumque conchis erant.
Caenationes laqueatae tabulis eburneis versatilibus vt flores, and fistulatis
vt vnguenta desuper spargerentur, praecipua Caenationum rotunda quae perpetuo
diebus ac noctibus vice mundi circumageretur: Ejusmodi domum cum absolutam
Algentem rapiat Coenatio Solemn. Iuvenal. Sat. 7.
dedicaret, hactenus comprobavit, vt se diceret quasi hominem tandem habitare
caepisse. In the porch was set a Colossus shaped like himself of one hundred
and twenty foot high, the spaciousnes of the house was such, that it had in it
three galleries, each of them a mile long, a standing poole like a sea, beset
with buildings in the manner of a city; fields, in which were areable grounds,
pastures, vineyards, and woods, with a various multitude of tame and wild
beasts of all kinds. In the other parts thereof, all things were covered with
gold, and distinguished with precious stones or mother of pearl. The supping
rooms were roofed with yvorie plankes, that were moveable for the casting
down of flowers, and had pipes in them for the sprinkling of ointments. The
roof of the principal supping room was round, which like the heaven
perpetually day and night wheeled about. This house when he had See Tacitus of
this house, Annal. 15. c. 10.
thus finished and dedicated, he so far forth approved of it, that he said,
he had began to dwell like a man.

I had thought nothing could be added to this extreme madness of Nero and
Domitian, which made me resolve here to conclude this chapter; but I know not
whether that Caligula, though perchance in somewhat a different kind exceed
them both Fabricavit and de Cedris liburnicas Suet. c: 37^
gemmatis puppibus versicoloribus velis magna thermarum, and porticuum, and
tricliniorum laxitate, magnaque etiam vitium and pomiferarum arborum varietate:
quibus discumbens de die inter choros at Symphonias littora Campaniae perag^et.
In extructionibus Praetoriorum atque villarum omni ratione posthabita, ni il
tam efficere concupiscebat quam quod posse effici negaretur, Contracta p^sces
aequora sentiunt ^actis in al^um molibus: ^orat.
and jactae itaque moles infesto ac profundo mari excisae rupes durissimi
Silicis, and Campi montibus aggere aquati, and complana^a fossuris (...) iuga,
incredibili quidem celeri^ate, cum morae culpa capite lueretur. He buil^ of
Cedar, barges or gallifoists, their sternes being set with pearl and precious
stone, carrying sails of diverse colors, having in them bathes, galleries,
and parlours of great largeness, with great variety of vines and trees
bearing fruit, lying along in these amid his music of voices and
instruments, he was carried up and down upon the coast of Campania. In the
building of his country or manor houses, setting aside all reason, he
desired nothing so much to be done, as that which was denied could be done: so
as that he would lay huge mighty piles in the deep sea, to stop the course of
it, he would cut through rocks of the hardest flint, equal the Champian to the
mountains, and level the tops of high hills; and all this he did with speed
incredible, the least delay being presently punished with death.

SECT. 10. That the Romans luxurious excess in their housholdstuffe and the
ornaments of their houses, was suitable to that of their buildings.
WE may add as an appendix to their luxury in buildings, that in their
household stuff, and the ornaments of their houses; their excess in their
tables, and dishes, and cups I have already touched, as being appurtenances of
their luxury in diet, passing by these then we may take a survey of the rest.
And first of their beds: These were either Tricliniares or Cubiculares, such as
they used for diet, or lodging, in their supping rooms, or their chambers.
These by degrees came to be of silver, then were they gilded, and lastly of
pure massy gold: which Carvilius Pollio first brought in use: And Suetonius
reports of Julius Caesar, in aureo lecto vest purpuria decubuisse, that he
laid Plin. 33. 11. c. 49.
him down in a bed of gold with a purple covering. And Gellius of more ancient
times out of Favorinus Stratus; auro, argento, purpura, amplior 15. 8.
aliquot hominibus quam Dijs immortalibus adornatur: a bed for some men is
furnished more magnificently with gold, and silver, and purple, then for the
Gods immortal. These they likewise perfumed with rich and precious odours,
which the Epigrammatist deservedly laughs at.

Quid thorus a Nilo? quid Sindone tectus olenti?
Ostendit stultas quid nisi morbus opes. Martial. 2. 16.

What means thy bed from Nile, and quilt perfumed so?
What does thy sickness but thy foolish riches show?
Next their beds we may set their Chariots, which were in a manner running
beds, as their beds were a kind of standing chariots. These Heliogabalus had
not only of gold, but set with pearl and precious stone. Lampridius.
And such a one belike was that whereof Martial speaks,

Aurea quod fundi pretio carruca paratur. Martial: 3. 62.

That for a mannours price thou boughtst a golden coach.
So as that which the Poet fained of the Chariot of the Sun, might indeed be
verified of theirs.

Aureus axis erat, temo aureus, aurea summae, Ovid. Met: 2:

Curvatura rotae, radiorum argenteus ordo.
The axel-tree was gold. the beam, the wheel,
The spokes of silver were --
Their harness belonging to these was likewise very costly, and the Caparizons
of their horses and mules imbroidered with gold and silver. Of these Nero when
he journied had never less then a thousand; his mules Sueton: c. 30:
being shod with silver, and his muleters richly apparelled: but Poppaeia his
wife therein exceeded him, causing the choicest of her traveiling Plin: 33: 11:
beasts to be shod with gold: Yet Heliogabalus went a strain farther, and put
it to a baser use; as he made water in Myrrinis and Onichinis, in Murrin
vessels and of the Onix stone, so made he his stool pans of gold: Lampridius.
Which Pliny out of Messala likewise reports of Anthony, in contumeliam naturae
vilitatem auro fecit opus proscriptione dignum, to the reproach of nature Lib:
33: 3.
he used gold to the basest offices, a work even worthy proscription. And the
same does Martial vpbraid Bassa with:

Ventris onus misero nec te pudet excipis auro, Lib: 1: 37:

Bassa.
Thy bellies load thou do exonerate,
O Basse, in gold, yet shamest not thereat.
Their caldrons, their seething pots, their gridirons, and frying-pans were
usually of silver, as witnesses Vlpian, and Pliny, vasa coquinaria ex argento
L. cum aurum. Plin: 33: 11:
fieri queritur; Calvus the Orator complains, that our very kitching vessels
are all of plate. The same Pliny affirms, that the price of a candelsticke was
the salarie or stipend of a Tribune, which was fifty thousand Sesterces: Nay a
little hatchet or axe, if we may credit Martial, 14. 35.
was sold for four hundred thousand.

Cum sieret tristis solvendis auctio nummis,
Haec quadringentis millibus empta fnit.
When sale was made that debts might be defraid,
Four hundred thousand for this was well paid.
Now for ornament of their houses, they bought them pictures of excessive
prices: the counterfeit taken from a table made by Pausias, wherein was
represented his mistress Glycera with a chaplet of flowers in her hand,
curiously plaited and twisted; Lucius Lucullus bought of Dyonisius a Painter of
Athens, and it cost him two talents of silver. Cydias Pl: 35: 11:
in a table, represented the Argonautes, for which Hortensius the Orator was
content to pay one hundred forty four thousand Sesterces. And what difference
is there herein between us and children, says Seneca, who value counterfeit
rings, and jewels, and bracelets at high Ep. 115.
prizes, nisi quod nos circa tabulas and statuas insanimus charius inepti, save
that we dote about statues and pictures, playing the fool at a deerer rate.

But as they were luxurious in the price, so were they likewise in the work it
self, which many times was lascivious and beastly.

Quae manus obscaenas depinxit prima tabellas,
Et posuit casta turpia visa domo Propertius.

Illa puellarum ingenuos corrupit ocellos
Nequitiaeque suae noluit esse rudes.
The hand that first lascivious picture drew,
And filthy sights in houses chaste did show
He maids chaste eyes did first corrupt, and he
Would have them traind up in their lechery.
Thus did Tyberius adorn his chambers, Cubicula plarifariam disposita Sueton.
43.
tabellis ac sigillis lascivissimarum picturarum ac figurarum adornavit. So did
Hor. Speculato cubiculo scorta dicitur habuisse disposita, etc. They had
likewise Idem in vita Horati^.
for ornament the shells of Tortoisses artificially wrought, and ingentibus
emptas, bought at wonderful high rates. But I leave their houses, Seneca de
beneficiis pretiis 7. 9.
together with the stuff and ornament thereof, and come to their apparel and
ornament of their bodies, in which they exceeded as much or more then in their
houses.

CAP. 9. Of the Romans exessiue Luxury in their dressing and apparel.
SECT. 1. How effoeminate they were in regard of their bodies, specially about
their hair.
THeir effoeminate softnes and nicenes in regard of their bodies, Seneca has
well both observed and censured: Adhuc quicquid Not. quaest. 7. 31.
est boni moris extinguimus levitate and politura corporum, muliebres munditias
antecessimus, colores meretricios matronis quidem non induendos viri sumimus,
tenero and molli ingress^ suspendimus gradum, non ambulamus, sed repimus:
whatsoever is yet left of good fashion we extinguish it by the decking and
trimming of our bodies, we have exceeded the neatness of women, even we men
wear light and whorish colors, not becoming matrons, we fashion our gate to
a wanton and mincing pace, we do not walk but creep. And of the same he
grievously complains in the proeme to the first book of his Controversies:
Capillum frangere, and ad muliebres munditias vocem extenuare, mollitie
corporum certare cum foeminis, and immunditijs se excolere munditijs nostrorum
adolescentium specimen est: it is now held the accomplished gallentry of our
youth to frisle their hair like women, to speak with an affected smalnes of
voice, and in tenderness of body to match them, and to bedeck themselves with
most indecent trimmings. But their extreme curiosity in plaiting and folding
their hair, he in another place most lively describes, and as sharply, but
justly reprooues: Quomodo irascuntur, si tonsor paulo negligentior De brevitate
vitae cap. 1^.
fuit tanquam virum tonderet? quomodo excandescunt si quid ex juba sua decisum
est? si quid extra ordinem jacuit, nisi omnia in annulos suos recideru^t? Quis
est istorum qui non malit Remp. turbati, quam comam? Qui non solicitior sit de
capitis sui decore, qua^ de salute? qui non comptior esse malit, qua^
honestior? How do they chafe if the harbor be never so little negligent, as
if he were trimming a man? How do they take on if any thing belopped off of
their feakes or fore-tops? if any thing lie out of order, if every thing fall
not even into their rings or curles, which of these would not rather choose
that the state whereof he is a member should be in combustion then his hair
should be displatted? who is not much more sollicitous of the grace of his
head then of his health? who makes not more account to be fine then honest?
Even Julius Caesar himself was Suetonius c. 45
this way too too nice, Circa corporis curam morosior, vt non solum to^deretur
diligenter ac raderetur, sed velleretur etiam, vt quidem exprobraverunt: He was
too studious about the care of his body, so as he was not only curiously cut,
but shaven, nay had his hairs plucked off with pincers, which some vpbraided
him with. No marveile then if Nero exceeded this way: Circa cultum habitumque
adeo pudendus, so shameful was he in Suetonius c. 51
the dressing of himself, that he always wore his hair after the Greek
fashion plaited behind. These plaitings they likewise besmeered with ointments
and perfumes,

Et matutino sudaus crispinus amomo Iuven. Sat. 4

Quantum vix redolent duo funera.
And Crispin sweating with his ointments and perfume,
Two funerals scarce smell so much I dare presume.
And for the face they used so much slibber-sauce, such dawbing and painting,
that a man could not well tell,

-- facies dicatur an vlcus. Iuven: Sat. 6

May it a face or else a botch be called?
Suetonius reports it of Otho, that he shaved every day, and rubbed his Cap. 12.
face over with moistened bread, idque instituisse a prima lanugiue, ne barbatus
vnquam esset, and that this he practiced from the time of his first appearance
of the hairs on his chinne, that he might never have a beard. Neither were
these things only practiced by them, but Schools they Senec. ep. 91.
had to teach them, and open shoppes to sell what they had in this kind.

SECT. 2. Of the prefsing, plaiting, store, die, and prize of their garments,
as also of their rings and jewels of inestimable value.
NOw as they were thus effoeminate and curious about their Bodies, so were they
likewise about the apparelling of them, Their garments were artificially
pressed; ponderibus ac mill tormentis splendere cogentibus, with waights and a
thousand rackings and tortures Senec. de tranquil. c. 1.
to make them shine the brighter.

Sic tua suppositis perlucent praela lacernis. Martial 2* 46

So do thy presses shine with garments vnder-laid.
And as they were thus artificially pressed, so were they most curiously
plaited, as appears by this, that Hortensius having one day with much ado
composed himself to the looking-glass, he commenced a suit against his fellow
in office, for that meeting him by chance in a narrow way, he had disordered
the plaites of his Robe, and capitale putavit quod Macrob. Satur. 3. 13.
in humero suo locum ruga mutasset, he held it a capital matter that a fold
upon his shoulder was displaced. And therefore Tertullian alluding heereunto
accounts it among the commodities of his cloak, that it De Pallio c. 5
needed no Artificer, qui pridie ^ugas ab exordio formet, who the day before he
wore it, should set in due form and order the plaites thereof: and a while
after, etiam cum reponitur nulli cippo in crastinum demandatur: when it is laid
aside, it is not committed to the stocks till the morrow. Of these they had
such variety and store, that Nero was never seen twice in the Suelonius c. 30.
same garment, and when a Praetor intending to set forth the most sumptuous and
magnifice^t shows he could devise, came to Lucullus to borrow of him some
store of short clokes; his answer was, that he would take a time to see if he
had so many as the Praetor desired; and the next day sending to know what
number would serve the turn, it being told him an hundred, Plutarchus in
Lucullo.
ducentas accipere jussit, he bid them take two hundred. But Horace speaks of
a far greater number, no less then five thousand. Epist* 6.


-- Chlamydes Lucullus vt aiunt
Si posset centum scenae praebere rogatus,
Qui possum tot? ait tamen and quaeram, and quot habebo
Mittam. Post paulo scribit sibi millia quinque
Esse domi chlamydum, partem vel tolleret omnes,
Lucullus asked once, if he could lend
Unto the stage one hundred cloakes, replied
How can I man, so many? yet I Will send
As many as I have when I have tried,
Soon after writes, five thousand cloaks I have,
Take all, or part, as many as you crave.
Sic micat innumeris arcula synthesibus Martial. lib. 2 epig 46.

Atque vnam vestire tribum tua Candida possint
Apula non vno quae grege terra tulit.
The chest with supper garments infinite,
Shines in like manner, and thy fleeces white
From more then one flock in Apulia shorn
By one whole tribe suffice well to be worn.
When they went to the public Bathes, they had of these so many M^rcellinus
lib. 28.
brought after them as might well suffice a dozen men; At their public feasts
they changed often only for ostentation to show their variety, at least so
often as several courses were served in:

Vndecies vna surrexti Zoile coena Martial. lib. 5. epig. 81.

Et mutata tibi est Synthesis vndecies.
Eleven times at one supper thou
O Zoilus did arise:
As many times thou did I trow
Thy mantle change likewise.
Neither was the price unsuitable to their store, they dared to lay down for a
cloak ten thousand Sesterces.

Millibus december dixti Epig. l. 4. ep. 61.

Emptas lacernas munus esse Pompillae.
Pompilla gave thee thou did boast,
A cloak that might ten thousand cost.
And in another Epigram,

Emit lacernas millibus december Bassus. 8. 10.

Ten thousand Bassus for a cloak did pay.
Now that which principally hoised up the price of the garments to this
immoderat hight, was the rich dye which they borrowed from shelfish Quibus
eadem matter luxuria paria paene etiam margaritis pretia fecit, which our
Luxury, says Pliny, has brought to prizes almost equal to those of pearls.
A pound of violet purple in the time of Augustus, as witnesses Lib. 9. c 35.
Cornelius Nepos, who lived and wrote during his reign, was sold for an
hundred pence, in steed whereof the Tyrian double dye grew in use, Lib. 9. c.
39.
which could not be bought for a thousand.

Their lightness farther appeared in the light apparel which they wore; This
is the making of that fine say, whereof silk cloth is made, says Pliny)
which men also are not abashed to pvt on and use, because in summer time they
would go light and thin. And so far do men Lib. 11. c. 23.
draw back now a days from carrying a good corslet and armor on their backs,
that they think their ordinary apparel does over-loade them. And these
transparent garments the Satyrist thus deservedly inveighs against.

-- Sed quid
Non facient alij cum tu multitiasumas
Cretice, and hanc vestem populo mirante perores
In Proculas and Pollineas? Est maecha Labulla,
Damnetur si vis, etiam Carfinia: talem
Non sumet damnata togam. Sed Julius ardet,
Aestuo, Nudus agas, minus est insania turpis.
En habitum quo te leges acjura ferentem
Vulneribus crudis populus modo victor, and illud
Montanum positis audiret vulgus aratris.
Quid non proclames in corpore judicis ista
Si videas? quaero an deceant multitia testem?
Acer and indomitus, libertatisque magister
Cretice pelluces?
What will not others do, since Creticus does use
Light garments, and therein Pollineas does accuse
And Proculas, while as the vulgar sort therefore
Both game and wonder makes. Labulla plays the whore
Condemn her if thou will, condemn Carfinia too,
Yet will she not condemned wear such a gown I trow.
But July scaldeth, and I fry. Plead naked then,
Less shame it is to be mad. Behold the weed wherein
The conquering people yet fresh bleeding from the war
And hardy mountainer leaving both plough and share
May hear thee talk of law and right, did thou but see
A judge in such attire, what outcries would there be?
Would lawne a witness fit? Thou Creticus so sad,
So fierce, so free, art in transparent garments clad.
Heereunto they added rings and jewels of inestimable value at the battle of
Cannae the Carthaginians gathered from the fingers of the slaughtered Plin. 33.
1.
Romans who died in that battle threc modii, which by Hannibal were sent to
Carthage as a token of the greatness of his victory. Nonnius the Senator, being
proscribed by Anthony, betook himself to flight, and of all his goods carried
with him only one ring, wherein was set an opall Quem certum est, seftertiis
viginti millibus aestimatum, which it is Plin. l. 37. c. 6.
certain was valued at twenty thousand sesterces. Rings they wore upon every
finger,

Per cujus digitos currit levis annulus omnes,
On whose each finger was a gold ring set. Martial. 5 63.

Nay for every joint they had a ring, and that set with a precious stone,
exornamus annulis digitos, and in omni articulo gemma disponitur, we garnish
Senec: Not. Quaest. l: 7: 31:
our fingers with rings, and upon every joint shines a precious stone, says
Seneca; and Pliny some will have the little finger laden with three rings; nay
now adays, the middle finger only excepted, all the rest are charged with
them, atque etiam privatim articuli minoribus alijs, yea and every joint by
themselves must have some lesser rings and gemmals to fit them. 33. 1.
And if as all this had bin too little, they wore upon one joint precious stones.

Sardonichas, Smaragdos, Adamantas, Iaspidas vno. Martial. 5. 11:

Versat in articulo Stella Severe meus.
Sardonyx, Smaragd, Jasper, Diamond,
My Stella wears on one joint of his hand.
Parum scilicet fuerit in gulas condi maria, nisi manibus, auribus, capite,
totoque corpore a foeminis juxta virisque gestarentur: forsooth it was too
little that the seas were made for our gluttony, unless we also wore them upon
our hands, in our ears, upon our heads, and over our body, says Pliny, Lib.
9: c: 35:
speaking of the great abundance of pearl and purple, that was worn as well by
men as women. To this luxury of theirs in the use of rings may not unfitly be
added, that the rings which they wore in summer, in winter they laid aside, and
instead of them used others, distinguishing them into summer and winter rings.
Luxuria (says Probus) invenerat alios annulos aestivos alios vero hyemales.
And Iuvenal. Sat. 1.

-- Cum verna Canopi
Crispinus Tyrias humero revocante lacernas,
Ventilet aestivum digitis sudantibus aurum,
Nec sufferre queat major is pondera gemmae.
-- When an Egyptian slave
Crispin, a Tyrian cloak shall on his shoulders have,
And summer gold-ring on his sweating fingers wear,
Nor can endure the weight of greater gemme to bear.
SECT. 3. The great excess and immodesty of their women in the same kind.
NOw if their men were herein thus effoeminate, we may well conceive their
women exceeded more: Video sericas vestes, si vestes vocandae sunt, in quibus
nihil est quo defendi aut corpus, aut denique Sen. de Benes: 7: 9:
pudor possit. Quibus sumptis, mulier parum liquido nudam se non esse jurabit.
Haec ingenti summa ab ignotis etiam ad commercium gentibus accersuntur, vt
Matronae nostrae, ne adulteris quidem, plus sui in cubiculo quam in publico
ostendunt. I see their silken clothes, if they may be called clothes, wherewith
neither their bodies nor shame are covered; which a woman wearing, cannot
safely swear that she is not naked: Yet are these at huge prizes, fet from
Nations with whom we have no traffic, that our women may expose no less to
the public view, when they come abroad, then they do to their Paramours in
the bed. This immodesty of the women is thus also taxed by Horace.

Cois tibi paene videre est
Vt nudam.
In her lawne she does appear
Almost, as if she naked were.
Now besides this, they were so laden with costly ornaments, that one Poet
tells us.

Pars minima est ipsa puella sui,
The least part of her self a maiden is. Ovid.

And another,

Matrona incedit census induta Nepotum.
The Matron jets attired in all her heirs estate. Propert. l: 3: Eleg. 11:

And a third.

Perque caput ducti lapides, per colla manusque, Manilius, l: 5:

Et pedibus niveis fulserunt aurea vincla.
The head, the neck, the hands were decked with precious stone,
And chains of gold did shine their snowie feet upon.
I my self have seen, says Pliny, Lollia Paulina, late wife and after widow
to Caius Caligula the Emperor, when she was dressed and set out, Lib: 9: 35:
not in stately wise, nor of purpose for some great solemnity, but only when
she was to go to a wedding supper, or rather to a feast when the assurance
was made, and great persons they were not that made the said feast; I have
seen her, I say, so beset and bedeckt all over with emerauls and pearls
ranged in rewes one by another round about the tire of her head, her cawle, her
borders, her perruke of heir, her bungrace and chaplet at her ears pendant,
about her neck a carcanet, upon her wrests in bracelets; and upon her fingers
in rings, that she glistered and shone again as she went. The value of these
ornaments she esteemed and rated at four hundred hundred thousand Sesterces,
and offered openly to prove it out of hand; by her books of accounts and
reckonings. Their ropes of pearl were so rich, that S. Hierome tells us, vno
filo villarum insunt In vita Pauli (...).
pretia, upon one rope hang the prizes of diverse Lordships. And Tertullian,
vno lino decies Sestertium inseritur, upon one twine were threaded up ten
hundred thousand Sesterces. And again, saltus and insulas De habitu muliebri:
cap: 9:
tenera cervix fert, the tender neck carries woods and Islands upon it; nay,
one pearl which Julius Caesar bought for Servilia the mother of Brutus,
Sexagies Sestertio mercatus est, cost him sixty hundred thousand Sesterces:
But specially they exceeded in the jewels they wore in their Sueton: cap: 50:
ears. Quare vxor tua locupletis domus censum auribus gerit, says Seneca, why
does thy wife wear in her ears the revenewes of a rich family: De vita
beata, cap. 17: De benef. 7: 9.
And in another place, Video unions, non singulos singulis auribus comparatos:
iam enim exercitatae aures oneri ferendo sunt. Iunguntur inter se and insuper
alij binis supponuntur. Non satis muliebris insania viros subiecerat, nisi bina
ac terna patrimonia auribus singulis pependissent. I see their pearls not
fitted single to their ears, which are now invred to the bearing of weight;
they are coupled together, and others are added to the two first, the madness
of our women had not sufficiently brought men into subjection, did they not
hang two or three patrimonies at each ear. And with him Pliny accords, Binos
ac ternos auribus suspendere foeminarum gloria est, to hang these by couples or
more in each ear, is the pride of our women. And their luxury (says he) has
found out a name for this, calling it Crotalia, as if they gloried in the sound
and striking of the pearl each against other. Nay he goes farther,
affectantque iam and pauperes lictorem foeminae in publico vnionem esse
dictitantes: It is come to that pass, that even the poorer sort affect the
same fashion. Their common saying being, that a pearl is the woman's sergeant
to wait upon her when she shows her self abroad. But their extreme folly
herein, has Tertullian after his African manner wittily expressed, Graciles
aurium De habitu muliebri, cap 9.
cutes Kalendarium expendunt, the tender libbets of their ears consume their
Calendar, that is says the learned Iunius in his notes on that passage,
vniversum domus censum qui praescribitur in Kalendario: the whole revenew or
expense of their house, which was set down in their Calendar, or rentrole, or
count-booke: Yet had this been more tolerable, had they not worn them upon
their feet too. Pliny can hardly speak of this with patience; Let our women,
(says he) have their Lib. 33. 3.
pearl and precious stones upon every finger, about their necks, in their
ears, upon their chaplets and treases, etiamne pedibus induitur? must they
needs wear them upon their feet? And in another place, but not without some
indignation too, Quin and pedibus nec crepidarum tantum obstragulis, Lib. 9. 35:
sed totis soculis addunt: neque enim gestare iam margaritas nisi calcent ac
per unions etiam ambulent satis est: Nay, they garnish their feet with them,
and not only the higher, but the lower part of their slippers; so as now it is
not held sufficient to wear pearl, unless we tread and walk upon it. And
the same has Tertullian likewise observed, in peronibus De habitu muliebri. 7.
cap:
unions emergere de luto cupiunt, the pearl in their shoes labors to keep
it self out of the mire. But Lampridius tells us of Heliogabalus, that he wore
jewels curiously engraven on his feet, which (says he) moved laughter to all
men, quasi possent sculpturae nobilium artificum videri in gemmis quae pedibus
adhaererent, as if the gravings of famous Artificers could be discerned in
jewels that were set on his feet.

SEC. 4. More of the excessive nicenes of their women, as also of Caligula his
monstrous phantasticalnesse in his apparel, together with their extreme
vanity in the multitude of their servants and slaves waiting on them.
BEsides all this excess in apparel, their niceness was such, that if but an
hair were amiss, they called a council about them, for the reforming of it.

-- Tanquam famae discrimen agatur Iuvenall.

Aut animae. --
As if their credit or their life in question were.
Nay, if but tenuis radiolus, the least beam pierced through any little hole of
their fan, or a fly chanced to sit upon it, queruntur quod non sint apud
Cymmerios natae, says Ammianus Marcellinus, they presently complain, Lib. 28.
that they were not borne among the Cymmerians. Their looking-glasses were in
height and breadth answereable to their bodies, ingraeven in their borders with
gold and silver, and embossed with precious stone: Et pluris vnum ex his
foeminae constitit quam antiquarum dos fuit illa Sen Not: Quaest. l. 1. 17.
quae public dabatur imperatorum pauperum filiabus: Some one of these has
stood a woman more then was the dowry of the Ancients: Yea that which by
public allowance was give^ the daughters of the poorer Emperors. And within
a while after, jam libertinorum virgunculis in vnum speculum non sufficit illa
dos quam dedit Populus Romanus filiae Scipionis: Now adays that dowry, which
the people of Rome gave with Scipio his daughter, will not suffice to buy a
glass for the daughter of a manu-missed slave. Now that dowry was vndecem
millia aeris, eleven thousand asses: what then shall we think of the daughters
of their freeborne Citizens, of their Knights, of their Sen^tours: Surely
these, as they were superior in means and rank, so were they likewise in
expense.

I will conclude this discourse of apparel with Caligula his monstrous
phantasticallnesse therein, described by Suetonius, Vestitu neque patrio neque
civili, ac ne virili quidem aut denique humano semper vsus est. He used Cap:
52:
not the apparel of his country, nor that which was civil or manlike, and
sometimes not so much as humane: for at times would he imitate Deorum insignia,
the ensigns of the Gods: And at other times again, would he come abroad and
sit in judgment, in socco muliebri in women's slippers, wherein Suetonius
seems to allude to that story, which is by Seneca reported more at large.
Caesar (says he) gave to Pompeius Poenus De benef. l. 2. 12
his life, if he give it who takes it not away: But being acquitted and giving
thanks, he reached forth his left foot for him to kiss: Now they who go
about to excuse him herein, as being not done out of insolency, aiunt,
socculum auratum imo aureum margaritis distinctum ostendere eum voluisse, say
for him that it was but to make show of his gilded, nay golden slipper set with
pearl.

To their excess in apparel, may not unfitly be added the extreme vanity in
the multitude of their servants and slaves waiting on them. Ammianus speaks of
fifty attending, when they went to the public Bath: Lib. 28.
And in another place he calls them familiarum agmina, troops of household
servants: and Pliny, mancipiorum legiones, legions of slaves, which Lib. 14.
as a train they drew after them. Horace tells us, that Tigellius had often
two hundred that followed him at heels: But Athenaeus much Lib. 1. Satyr. 3.
exceedes him, december ^mo viginti mill, and plures quoque servos habent, non
Lib. 6.
quaestus causa vt ille Graecorum ditissimus Nicias, sed plerosque in publico
comitantes^. They have ten, nay twenty thousand servants and more, not so much
to make again of them as did Nicias, the richest of the Graecians, but the
greatest part to wait on them when they went abroad. And me thinks, Seneca
again outvies Athenaeus, Familia bellicosis nationibus De ben. 7: 10:
mayor, a family more populous then some warlike Nations. Nelther were the
women in this excess inferior to the men, but rather went beyond them.
Marcellinus describes the order of ranging their servants Lib. 14:
when they went abroad, as it had been an army marching in the field: And S.
Hierome calls one part of them, an army, noli ad publicum subinde procedere and
spadonum exercitu praeeunte viduarum circumferri liberate: Ep. ad Furiam.
Do not walk abroad with an army of Eunuchs, marching before you after the
manner of licentious widows: insomuch as they were driven to have their
Nomenclatores, controllers or remembrancers to tell them the names of their
servants and people about them, so many they were. Many of these they bought at
a dear rate, and clad richly: They usually paid for a slave six thousand
Sesterces: And Julius Caesar laid down such incredible prizes for some of
them, that himself was ashamed thereof: Sic vt rationibus vetarct inferri, so
as he gave special Sue ton. c. 47.
charge it should not be brought into his accounts. But their Ieasters were
commonly the dearest:

Morio dictus erat viginti millibus emi, Martial. l. 8, epig. 13.

Read mihi nummos Gargiliane: sapit.
A fool I bought for twenty thousand price:
Restore it back, Gargilian, he is wise.
And for the rich apparelling of them at times, we have a memorable place in
Seneca, diligentius quam intra privatum larem vestita and De Tranq. c. 1
auro culta mancipia, and agmen servorum nitentium; their slaves are more
carefully apparelled and decked with gold when they appear in public, then
within doors, and the troops of their Servants shining and glittering.

SECT. 5. Of their prodigal, or rather prodigious gifts of their Emperors,
and the extreme unthriftiness of private men.
I May happily seem to some to have been tedious in dwelling too long upon
the excessive Luxury of this people: but surely their extreme folly and
madness therein have made me so: And if not the rarity, yet the variety of the
matter has been such as I presume it cannot quickly cloy the appetite of an
attentive Reader. And though much has been said, yet much more might be
added, specially touching their prodigal, or rather prodigious gifts, which
their great Patron Iustus Lypsius thus censures. Si quis Midas fuisse fingatur
qui omnia tacta De Magn. Romans 2. 12.
faciat aurea defecerit inaurare quantum isti sunt largiti: If we could feign a
Midas that should turn all he touched into gold, surely he would be weary to
make the gold they gave. And again, Vbi estis qui novum orbem and novas in eo
divitias reperist^? huc ite, ostendent and effundent eas Duumviri isti vna
largitione: where are you that speak of a new world, and the great treasure
that is there to be found? Come hither and behold two Duumviri (meaning Anthony
and Octavius) that will empty it all at one gift: And would you know to what
great good purpose all these profuse largitions were? the same Author shall
tell you, though somewhat against his will, vt ad imperium veniant, imperium
paene ipsum donant: They in a manner give away the Empire, that they may come
unto it. Quid? donant? perdunt certe, and quomodo tot isti pecuniar^ cumuli
sine aperta pernitie Provinciarum, Civiumque colligi potuere: What said I, they
give away? nay they rob and spoil the Empire, in as much as so great masses of
treasure could not possibly be gathered without the evident ruin as well of
the Citizens as of the Provincials. Caligula in less then a year scattered
and consumed those infinite heaps of gold and silver which Tiberius his
Predecessor had laid up, vicies ac septies millies sestertium, Suetonius. 37.
seven and twenty hundred millions of Sesterces. Of Vitellius, Josephus yeeldes
this testimony, Octo menses ac dies quinque potitus imperio Debello Iudai col.
5.
jugulatur in media vrbe, quam si vivere diutius contigisset, ejus luxuriae
satis esse imperium non potuisset; having reigned eight months and five days
he was slain in the midst of the City, whose luxury should he have lived
longer, the Empire could not have satisfied: And lest we should think
Josephus passionate herein, as being a Jew and oppressed by the Romans,
against the testimony of Tacitus himself a Roman and partial for his
Country we cannot except: let us then hear his evidence touching the same
Vitellius: Ipse abunde ratus si praesentibus frueretur, nec Histor. 2. 27
in longum consultans novies millies sestertium paucissimis mensibus
intervertisse creditur, he holding it fully sufficient if he enjoyed the
present, and not caring for the future, within the compass of a few months,
is said to have set going nine hundred millions of Sesterces; which sum
Budoeus casting up, thus pronounces of it, hanc ego summam non minorem Lib. 4.
ducenties vicies quinquies centenis millibus esse dico, I affirm that this
sum is no less then twenty five hundred thousand Crowns. And for Nero,
divitiarum ac pecuniae fructum non alium putabat quam profusionem, he thought
there was no other end of money and riches but to cast them Sueton. c 30
away. Those he held base fellows, who took any account of their expenses,
but gallant and noble spirits, if they wasted and lavished it out: He in
nothing so much commended and admired his Uncle Caius, as for that in so short
a space he brought going the infinite masses of treasures which Tiberius had
hoarded up, Quare nec largiendi nec absumendi modum tenuit, so as he never
ended giving and wasting:

-- Velut exhausta redivivus pullulet arca Iuven. l. 2. sat. 6

Nummus.
As if when naught did in the chest remain,
Moneys would grow there and revive again.
When once he had given so unreasonable a sum, that his mother Agrippina In
Dionis Compendio.
thought it fit to restrain his boundless prodigality, she caused the whole
sum to be laid before him on a table as he was to pass by, that so the
sight of it might work in him a sense of his folly; but he suspecting it
belike to be his Mothers device, commands presently so much more to be added
thereunto, and withal was heard to say aloud, Nesciebam me tam exiguum
dedisse, I knew not that I gave so little. To Terridates (which scarce seems
credible to Suetonius himself) during his abode in Italy by the space of nine
months he allowed daily octingenta nummum millia, eight hundred thousand
Sesterces: And besides at his parting for a farewell, bestowed on him
Sestertium millies, no less then an hundred millions; the rest of his
prodigal gifts were not disproportionall thereunto, so that in the whole, bis
and vicies millies sestertium Tacit. Hist. l. 1. c. 0.
donationibus Nero effuderat, he cast away in prodigal needless gifts two and
twenty hundred millions of Sesterces. Menecrates a fiddler, and Suetonius c. 30
Specillus a fencer, triumphalium virorum patrimonijs aedibusque donavit, he
Suetonius c. 30
rewarded with the patrimonies and houses of Triumphers: Nay Luxuriae tam
effraenatae fuit, says Orosius, so luxuriously wastefull he was, beyond all
reason and measure, vt piscaretur retibus aureis quae purpureis funibus
extr^bebantur, that he would not fish but with nets of gold drawn with purple
colored coards. Neither was his gaming vnanswereable to his giving,
Quadringenis in punctum sestertijs aleam lusi:, he adventured four hundred
Sesterces upon every pick of the dice. Suetonius.


But yet all this might perchance seem more tolerable in their Emperors, had
not their private men according to the proportion of their means gone beyond
them in these mad monstrous prodigalities. Pyramides Regum miramur, says
Pliny, cum P. Clodius quem Milo occidit Sestertium centies and quadragies
octies domo empta habitaverit, quod non secus ac Lib. 36. 15.
regum insaniam miror. Do we wonder at the Pyramides of the Egyptian Kings,
since Clodius whom Milo slew dwelt in an house which cost one hundred forty
eight hundred thousand Sesterces, which truly I as much admire as the madness
of those Kings. And going on, touches Milo himself upon the same vein: Itaque
and ipsum Milonem sestertium septingenties aeris alieni debuisse inter prodigia
animi humani duco: And Milo himself to have been indebted seven hundred
hundred thousand Sesterces, I cannot but rank it among the prodigies of humane
wit. Curio the son ran in debt, as witnesses Valerius, Sestertium sex centies,
six hundred hundred thousand Sesterces, Lib. 9. 1.


-- Decies centena dedisses Hor. l. 1. Sat. 3

Huic parco paucis contento, quinque diebus
Nilerat in loculis.
Ten hundred thousand were you pleased to give
Unto the sparing man, so well content
With little, yet might he but five days live,
In five days all would be consumed and spent.
Says Horace of Tigellus. And Martial of Cinna.

Bis quartum decies non toto tabuit anno,
Di^ mi^i non hoc est Cinna perire cito? Lib. 9. epig. (...)

An hundred thousand eighteen times
Less then one year did spend:
Tell me, O Cinna, is not this
To come soon to an end.
CAP. 10. Of the Romans extreme arrogancy and confidence in admiring and
commending themselves together with their gross and base flattery, specially
to their Emperors: and lastly their impudent, nay impious vainglory and
boasting of their own Nation and City.
SECT. 1. Of their extreme arrogance in admiring and commending, and even
deifying themselves.
THus have we seen the Covetousnes and Cruelty, but specially the prodigious
Luxury of this Nation (so renowned in History for their Vertucs, as if they had
been the only patterns and Masters of morality) in part displayed: Neither
were these three vices the only ones which they were generally and notoriously
subject unto, I might instance in many more, but will only touch by the way
their extreme arrogance and confidence admiring and commending themselves and
their own personal abilities, their gross and base flattery to others,
specially their Emperors both living and dead; and lastly their impudent, nay
impious vainglory and boasting of their own Nation and City. For the first of
those, so far they were from humility, that their greatest Moralists, no not
the Stoics themselves any where in their writings remember it as a virtue, it
being indeed the proper virtue of Christian Religion; Nay so far they were
from ranging it among the Virtues, that they held it a Vice,

-- Faciunt animos humiles formidine Divum.
To fear the gods does much abase the mind.
No marvel then that whereas we find the penmen of holy Scripture
publishing to the world, and registring to posterity their own infirmities,
those men on the other side vaunt euery-where of their worth and sufficiency.
Martial, if he have nothing else to brag of, will stand upon his singular gift
in trifling.

Ille ego sum nulli nugarum laud secundus.
In praise for toys I second am to none. Ad Avitum 6. 1

Ovid thus boldly concludes his Metamorphosis.

Iamque opus exegi quod nec Iovis ira, nec ignis
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.
Now have I finished the work, which nor Jove's ire,
Nor sword abolish shall, nor ravening time, nor fire.
And in another place:

Mantua Virgilium laudet, Verona Catullum,
Romanae gentis gloria dicar ego.
Let Mantua Virgill praise, Catull Veron
But glory of Rome let me be termed alone.
And Horace is no way behind him.

Exegi monumentum are perennius Carm, l: 3: od: 30

Regalique situ Pyramidum altius,
Quod non imber edax, non Aquilo impotens
Possit diruere, aut innumerabilis
Annorum series and fuga temporum.
A monument then brass more lasting, I,
Then Princely Pyramids in site more high,
Have finished, which neither fretting showers,
Nor blustering winds, nor flight of years and hours,
Though numberless can raze.
And though it be true that they divined aright, yet doubtless, such arrogant
confidence, or rather confident arrogancy touching the fruits of their own
brains, would better have sounded out of other men's mouths, and more modesty
(the very grace and crown of other virtues and gifts) have much better
beseemed them. What a vaineglorious unsavory verse was that of Tullies own
making, touching the good government of the state during his Consulship.

O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam.
O happy Rome and fortunate
Through me, and through my Consulate.
But their Emperors went farther; Dioclesian calling himself the brother of
the Sun and Moon, and in salutations, not admitting any to farther
familiarity then the kissing of his toe. Nay Augustus, so much magnified by
them, made a supper, in which Suetonius witnesses, Deorum Dearumque habitu
discubuisse convivas, and ipsum pro Apolline Cap: 70.
ornatum, that his guests sat down in the habit of Gods and Goddesses, and
himself attired like Apollo: But this was but a play, though such as Augustus
himself blushed to hear of. Domitian (as before has been touched) went to
it in good earnest, sending out his writes with this form, Dominus and Deus
noster sic fieri jubet, Our Lord and God so commands it to be: vnde institutum
posthac vt ne scripto quidem ac sermon Sueton. cap: 13.
cujusquam appellaretur aliter, from thence forth it was ordained, that he
should neither by the writing nor speech of any man be otherwise named: Yet
these were but words, Caligula proceeded to deeds.

-- Divumque sibi poscebat honores, Suetou cap. 22

Assuming and challenging to himself, not the name only but the honors due to
the Gods: He caused the statues of the Gods, among which was that of Jupiter
Olympicus, to be brought out of Greece, and taking off their heads, commanded
his own to be set on instead thereof, and standing between Castor and Pollux,
exhibited himself to be worshipped of such as resorted thither, Templum etiam
numini suo proprium and Sacerdotes and excogitatissimas hostias instituit, he
farther erected a Temple; and instituted both Priests, and most exquisite
sacrifices to the service of himself. In his temple stood his image of gold
taken to life, which every day was clad with the same attire as was himself,
his sacri fices were phaenicopters, peacockes, bustards, turkeyes, pheasants,
and all these were daily offered, and at nights in case the moon shined out
full and bright, he invited her to imbracements and to lie with him, but the
day he would spend in private conference with Jupiter Capitolinus, sometimes
whispering and laying his ear close to him, and sometimes again talking aloud
as if he had been chiding: Nay being angry with heaven, because his interludes
were hindered by claps of thunder, and his banqueting by flashes of lightning,
ad pugnam provocavit Iovem, he Senec. de Ira. l. 1: c: 16:
challenged Jupiter to fight with him, and quidem sine intermissione Homericum
illum exclamans versum, and without ceasing roared out that verse of Homer.

(...),
None is, o Jupiter, more mischievous then thou.
Instead of which verse of Homer, some copies have this Hemistichium,

(...),
Dispatch thou me
Or I will thee.
Whereupon Seneca inferres (as well he might) Quanta dementia fuit? putavit aut
sibi noceri, ne a Jove quidem posse; aut se nocere etiam Iovi posse: what
extreme madness was that, to think that either Jupiter could not hurt him,
or that himself could hurt Jupiter? Good God? who would imagine that pride and
self-love should so far intoxicateand infatuate a man (captivated to sin
and sensuality) as to make him utterly to forget himself to be a man, and
command others to worship him as a God, or which is more, above God! But
surely herein I must confess, they be somewhat the more to be pitied, and
the rather to be pardoned, for that the Gods whom they worshipped, had not only
bin men, but like themselves, too notoriously wicked: And withal I am
persuaded, the gross flattery of their subjects, but specially the Poets, drew
them on to the acting of that, which perchance of themselves they were
inclinable enough unto.

SECT. 2. Of their gross and base flattery, specially toward their Emperors
both living and dead.
HOw notable does Martial play the Parasite with Domitian, telling him, that
if the Gods should sell all they had, they would not be able to satisfy their
debt to him, but would be forced to turn bancke-rupts.

Grandis in Aetherio licet auctio fiat Olympo
Coganturque Dei vendere quicquid habent These verses of Mariell are upon
another occasion, formerly alleged and englished.

Conturbabit Atlas, etc.
And again,

Exspectes and sustineas Auguste necesse est,
Nam tibi quod reddat non habet arca Iovis.
But this in Martial a professed flatterer, is more tolerable then in Virgill
and Lucan, who carry the name of grave and sad Poets, yet the one divides the
Empire between Jupiter and Augustus.

Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
'Twixt Jove and Caesar The Empire shared is.
And the other professes, that all the outrages committed in their civil
wars, were nothing displeasing unto them, but rather acceptable and
advantageous, in regard they holpt to prepare a way for Nero's coming to the
Empire.

His Caesar Perusina fames mutinaeque labores, Lib: 1:

Accedant fatis, aut si quid durius istis:
Multum Roma tamen debet civilibus armis
Quod tibi res acta est.
Add Caesar to these fates Modena broiles,
Perusin famine, or else harder toiles:
Yet Rome to civil arms thou art in debt
Since all this works to thy benefit.
And again

Quod si non aliam venturo fata Neroni
Invenere viam, Ibid.

Iam nihil o Superi querimur scelera ista nefasque
Hac mercede placent.
If other way the fates could not invent
For Nero's coming, then we rest content,
This villainy, o Gods, this foul offense
Mislikes us not with so great recompense.
And when Domitian challenged to himself divine worship, how ready were they
to sooth him in it. Magisteria Sacerdotij ditissimus quisque and ambitione and
licitatione maxima vicibus comparabant, Every one as he was richest by great
suits and bribes, got him a turn in the Magistracy of the Priesthood; nay
quidam eum latialem Iovem consalutarunt, there wanted not some among them, who
saluted him by the name of Jupiter Latialis. But this I must acknowledge, as it
was foul in the highest degree, so was it unusual: For though, as notes
Prosper in their petitions In ^imidio Temporis: cap: 7:
to their Princes, they usually styled them, Numini vestro, Perennitati
vestrae, to your divine power, to your eternity: Quae vanitas non veritas
tradidit atque execrabilia sunt, which vanity not verity has found out, and
are indeed abominable. Nay the Emperors themselves in their Rescripts, shamed
not to write, Perennitas nostra, aeternitas nostra, numen nostrum, etc. And we
sometimes read, oracula Augusti for Edicta. Yet Deorum honor Principi non ante
habetur quam agere inter homines desierat, says Tacitus: We do not commonly
give the honor of the Gods to Annal. l. 15:
our Princes as long as they live; thereby implying, that as soon as they were
deceased, they did it. Though Augustus, while he was yet living was worshipped
as a God, not in Rome perchance and Italy (for that he refused) yet abroad in
the Provinces: Whereupon temples were erected unto him, and a College of
Priests both men and women: and coins were stamped with rays or beams about
his head: whence the Poet:

Praesenti tibi maturos largimur honores.
To thee while thou do live
Honors divine we give.
Now the Ceremonies of the Apotheosis or deifying their Emperors, (as appears
in Herodian and others) was briefly thus. After the Lib: 4:
Princes death, the body being sumptuously and honorablely interred, they
framed an image of wax, resembling in all respects the party deceased, but
palish and wanne as a sick man; and so being laid at the entry of the palace
in an yvory bed, covered with cloth of gold the Senate and Ladies assisting in
mourning attire; the Physicians daily, resorted to him to touch his pulse and
consider in college of his disease, doctorally at their departure, resolving
that he grew in worse and worse terms and hardly would escape it. At the end
of seven days (during which time, says Xiphilinus, there stood a page with a
fan of peacockes feathers to keep off the flies from the face, as if he had
been but asleep) they opened and found by their learning, (the crisis belike
being badde) that the patient was departed. Whereupon some of the Senate
appointed for that purpose, and principal gentlemen taking up the bed upon
their shoulders, carried it through Via sacra into the Forum, where a company of
young Gentlemen of greatest birth standing on the one side and maids of the
other, sung hymns and sonnets the one to the other in commendation of the dead
Prince, entuned in a solemn and mournful note, with all kind of other music
and melody, as indeed the whole ceremony was a mixed action of mourning and
mirth, as appears by Seneca at the consecration of Claudius: who thus floutes
at it. Et erat omnium formosissimum (funus Claudij) and impensa curaplenum, In
ludo de mort^:
vt scires Deum efferri, tibicinum, Cornicinum, omnisque generis aeneatorum
tanta turba, tantus Conventus, vt etiam Claudius audire possit. It was the
goodliest show and the fullest of sollicitous curiosity, that you might know a
God was to be buried; so great was the rabble of trumpetters, cornetters and
other Musicians, that even Claudius himself might have heard them. After this,
they carried the hearse out of the city into Campus Martius, where a square
tower was built of timber, large at the bottom, and of competent height to
receive wood and faggots sufficiently, outwardly bedeckt and hung with cloth
of gold, imagerie work, and curious pictures. Upon that tower stood a second
turret in figure and furniture like to the first, but somewhat less, with
windows and doors standing open, wherein the hearse was placed, and all kind
of spiceries and odours, which the whole world could yield, heaped therein: And
so a third and fourth turret, and so forth, growing less and less toward the
top: The whole building representing the form of a lantern or watchtower,
which gives light in the night. Thus all being placed in order, the Gentlemen
first rode about P^arus:
it, marching in a certain measure: then followed others in open coaches with
robes of honor, and upon their faces vizards of the good Princes, and
honorable personages of ancient times. All these Ceremonies thus being
performed; the Prince which succeeded takes a torch, and first puts to the
fire himself, and after him all the rest of the company, and by and by as the
fire was kindled out of the top top of the highest turret, an Eagle was let
fly to carry up his soul into heaven, and so he was afterward reputed, and by
the Romans adored among the rest of the Gods* Marry; before the consecration
it was usual, that some Gentlemen at least, should bestow an oath to prove
their Deity, Nec defuit vir Praetorius quise efligiem cremati euntem in coelum
vid^sse iurasset, says Suetonius of Augustus: neither was there wanting Cap.
100.
one who had been Praetor (Dion names him Numerius Atticus) to swear, that he
saw his Effigies mounting into heaven. The like was testified of Drusilla,
sister and wife to Caius, by one Livius Geminius a Senator, of which Dio thus
writes. One Livius Geminius a Senator Lib: 59:
swore, that he saw Drusilla ascending up into heaven, and conversing with the
Gods, wishing to himself and his children utter destruction if he spoke an
untruth, calling to witness both sundry other Gods, and specially the Goddess
her self of whom he spoke. For which oath he received a million of Sesterces,
which makes 7812l 10s Sterling. What a deal of fopperie and impiety was here
mixed together. Yet this lesson, as Sir Henry Savill from whom I have borrowed
the greatest part of Annot. in T^* l. hist: 1. c: 1:
this last narration (conjectures, they may seem to have learned of Proculus
Julius, who took an oath not much otherwise for Romulus deity, who^ the Senate
murdered and made a God; from whence this race of the Roman Gods may seem to
have taken beginning. And I doubt not, but many of the wiser sort of the
Romans themselves secretly laughed at this folly, sure I am that Lucan durst
openly scoff at it.

-- Cladis tamen huius habemus
Vindictam quantum terris dare numina fas est Lib. 7.

Bella pares Superis facient civilia divos:
Fulminibus manes, radijsque ornabit and astris,
Inque Deum templis jurabit Roma per vmbras.
Yet of this slaughter such revenge we have
As heavenly powers may give, or earth can crave:
Gods like to those above these civil wars
Shall make, and Rome with lightning, beams, and stars
Shall them adorn, and in the temples where
The Gods do dwell shall by their shadows swear.
It is true, that in our time after the death of the late Charles in France,
his image was laid in a rich bed, in triumphant attire, with the Crown upon
his head, and the collar of the order about his neck, and forty days at
ordinary hours, dinner and supper was served in with all accustomed
ceremonies, as sewing, water, grace, carving, say taking, etc. all the
Cardinals, Prelates, Lords, Gentlemen, and Officers attending in far greater
solemnity, then if he had been alive. Now this I confess, was a pe^ce of
flattery more then needed, but not comparable to that of the Romans, in making
their Emperors Gods, which they might well have conceived, was neither in the
power of the one to give, nor of the other to receive. Yet was not this honor
conferred upon their Emperors alone; Tully, as wise as he would be held, would
needs have his daughters deified, and the same did Adrian by Antinous his
minion, which no doubt might as well be justified as Caligula's, making his
horse a Priest, or the same Adrians erecting monuments to his dead dogs.

SECT. 3. Of their impudent, nay impious vainglory, and boasting of their
own nation and city.
YEt their inordinate preposterous Zeal in extolling every where their Empire
and city beyond measure, and modesty, and truth, seems to have exceeded this
toward their Emperors; and from hence I believe has chiefly grown in the
world so great an admiration of them in many things beyond all succeeding ages,
and their deserts: But certain it is, that never any people under the Sun,
more daringly challenged to themselves the top of all perfection. Nulla vnquam
Respub. nec mayor nec sanctior, nec bonis exemplis ditior fuit, says Livie,
Never was there any commonwealth more ample or holy, or Lib. 1.
rich in good examples. Gentiu^ in toto orb praestantissima vna and in omni
virtute haud dubie Romana exstitit, says Pliny: The Roman Nation has been
doubtless of all others in all kind of virtue the most excellent. Nulla Gens
est quae non aut ita subacta sit, vt vix exstet; aut ita domita, vt quiescat;
aut ita pacata, vt victoria nostra imperioque laetatur, says Tully: There is
no Nation which either is not so utterly vanquished, as it is extinguished; or
so mastered, as it is quieted; or so pacified, that it rejoices in our
victory and Empire and Claudian,

Haec est exiguis quae finibus orta tetendit
In geminos axes, parvaque a sede profecta
Dispersit cum sole manus.
Small were her confines when she first begun,
Now stretches to both poles; small her first seat,
Yet now her hands she spreads with the Sun.
This seemed not enough unto Caecilius, against whom Arnobius writes, for he
says, that the Romans did, Imperiu^ suum, vltra solis vias, prapagare: They
enlarged their dominion beyond the course of the Sun. And Ovid, he comes not
a step behind them in this their exaggerated amplification. For he says,
that if God should look down from heaven upon the earth, he could see nothing
there without the power of the Romans.

Jupiter, arce sua, totum cum spectet in orbem,
Nil, nisi Romanum, quod tueatur, habet. Fast.

Yea, and (as Egesippus records) there were many that thought the Roman
Empire so great, and so largely diffused over the face of the whole earth, that
they called orbem terrarum, orbem Romanum, the globe of the earth, the globe of
the Romans, the whole world, the Roman world. Hyperbolicall speeches, which
though Lypsius put off with an animosemagis quam superbe dicta, as arguing
rather magnanimity then ostentation; yet Dyonisius Halicarnassaeus somewhat
more warily limits them thus: Romana vrbs imperat toti terrae quae quidem
inaccessa non sit, the city of Rome commands the whole earth, where it is not
inaccessible: But Lypsius himself more truly, quicquid oportunum aut dignum
vinci videbatur vicit, it overcame whatsoever it could well overcome, or
thought worthy the ouercomming. And Macrobius (though himself a Roman
ingenuously De Somn. Sc^p. 2. 10.
acknowledges Gangem transnare aut Caucasum transcendere Romani nominis fama
non valuit The fame of the Romans as great as it was, yet was never so great as
to be able to swim over the River Ganges, or climb over the mountain
Caucasus, so that even their fame came short of their swelling amplifications
used by their Orators and Poets, but their Dominion came much shorter, as is
expressly affirmed by the same Author, Totius terrae quae ad coelum puncti
locum obtinet, minima quaedam Ibid.
particula a nostri generis hominibus possidetur. Though the whole Earth
compared with the Heavens be no bigger then a Center in the midst of a Circle,
yet scarce the least parcel of this little earth, did ever come into the hands
of the Romans.

Yet how could a man well devise to say more then Propertius has said of that
City.

Omnia Romanae cedant miracula terrae
Natura hic posuit quicquid vbique fuit.
All miracles to Rome must yield, for here,
Nature has treasured all what is euery-where.
Except Martial perchance out-vy him.

Terrarum Dea gentiumque Roma
Cui par est nihil and nihil secundum. Lib. 12. (...).

Of Lands and Nations Goddess, Rome, and Queen,
To whom novght peer, naught second yet has been.
Which Frontinus seems to borrow from him, but with some addition Libro de
aquae ^uctibus.
of his own, Romana vrbs indiges terrarumque Dea, cui par est nihil and nihil
secundum. Now says Crinitus, alleging those words of Frontinus, Eos De hon.
disc. l. 1. c. vlt.
dicimus fere indigetes, qui nullius rei egeant, id enim est tantum Deorum, we
usually call those indigites, which want nothing, for that is proper to the
Gods. Hubertus Golzius in his treasure of Antiquity has effigiated two Cap. 1:
and 3.
pieces of coin, the one with a Greek Inscription (...), the other with this
in Latin, ROMA DEA, the meaning of both being that Rome was a Goddess, neither
was this figuratively, but properly understood, she having advanced her self
into the number of the Gods, as witnesses Dion in Augustus; nay erected
Temples, and addressed sacrifices to her self, as testify Victor and
Onuphrius in their descriptions of Rome, which Prudentius a Christian Poet both
glances at, and deservedly derides,

-- Colitur nam sanguine and ipsa Lib. 1. cont. Symmachum.

More Deae, nomenque loci se^ numen habetur,
Atque Vrbis Venerisque pari se culmine tollunt
Templa, simul geminis adolentur thure deabus.
She Goddesse-like is worshipped with blood,
A places name is hallowed for a god:
As high as Venus Cities Church does rise,
And joint to both they incense sacrifice.
And Lucan, as to a Goddess, directs his prayer solemnly unto her,

-- summique o numinis instar
Roma save c^ptis. Lib. 1.

-- And thou as greatest power divine,
Favor, O Rome, this enterprise of mine.
Her Temple was situate upon mount Palatine, as appears by that of Claudian,
bringing in the Provinces as suppliants to visit the Goddess.

Convenient ad tecta Deae, quae candida lucent
Monte Palatino. Lib. 2.

They meet at th'Goddesse Temple which does shine
So white and glorious on mount Palatine.
But this was in truth such a mad drunkenness with pride and self-loue, that
Lypsius himself cannot hold from crying out, O insaniam aedificijs De Mag^.
Romans 3. 6.
and inanimato corpori non vitam solum attribuere, sed numen. O strange
madness, to ascribe unto houses and stones and a dead body not life only, but
a deity: And being now a Goddess, she might well take to her self that of
old Babylon, a type of her pride, I sit as a Queen, and am no widow, Isay 47.
8. Revel. 18. 7
and shall see no sorrow, and challenge to her self aeternity as most
blasphemously she did, as is to be seen in the coin of the Emperor Probus,
Hubert^ Golzius rerum Antiq. c. 4.
in which we have Rome set forth sitting in her Temple in a victorious
triumphant manner, having on the one side this inscription, Conserv: vrbis
suae, and on the other, Romae aeternae, and so is it expressly named both by
Apud (...). ep. 30.
Symmachus, and Lib. 15. c. 6. and 16. 6.
Ammianus Marcellinus. And Suetonius testifies in the life of Nero (cap. 11)
that of all their several kinds of plays, pro aeternitate imperij susceptos
appellari maximos voluit, those which were exhibited for the aeternity of the
Empire should be had in greatest state, in which persons of all orders and
sexes played their parts. Whereby S. Hierome, not without good reason expounds
Ep. ad Algasia^ q. 11.
those words in the Revelation, I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored
beast, full of names of blasphemy, and so does Prosper Aquitanicus, aeterna cum
dicitur quae temporalis est vtique nomen est blasphemiae, in that she is called
In dimidio temporis c. 7.
eternal, being transitory, it is doubtless a name of blasphemy.

CAP. 11. Wherein the objections brought in behalf of the Romans touching
their pretended Justice, prudence and fortitude are examined and fully answered.
SECT. 1. The first objection touching the pretended Justice of the Romans
answered out of Lactantius.
But happily it may be said, that as fertile grounds abound as well in weeds
as wholesome herbs: so the Romans had many virtues no less commendable,
then odious and detestable vices, which to be ignorant of were childish
simplicity, to dissemble or suppress, envious partiality. The principal of
these virtues are pretended to be their justice, their prudence, and their
fortitude. But if there be a chain of all the Virtues, (as both Aristotle and
their own great Orator have taught) so that he who truly possesses one, is
owner of all, and he that wants but one, upon the matter has none at all, but
shadows instead of substances, then certainly the Romans, whom we have prooved
to be excessiuely cruel, covetous, luxurious, ambitious and vainglorious,
could not properly be said to be either just, wise, or valiant, but rather
formal then just, crafty or cunning then wise, adventurous or daring then
valiant. And I would willingly learn, how they who with such an insatiable
thirst of gain and glory (as has been showed) robbed, spoiled, oppressed,
not the provincials only, but their own fellow Citizens, can be said to be
just, or how they who admitted so many so base Gods and Goddesses, and honored
them with such beastly profane services, can be said to be wise; or lastly how
they who were wholly drowned in softnes and in delicacy, could be truly
valiant; And I will never do that wrong to Christian Religion, as not to
believe, but that it has yealded more just, more wise, more valiant, then
Pagan Rome ever did. And therein if Tertullian in his Apologetique, Cyprian
against Demetrianus, Lactantius in his Institutions, and Augustine in his books
de Civitate dei err not, I am sure I am right.

I will first then take a view of their justice, Nec est difficile dicere, cur
Lactant. Instit. l. 5. c. 10.
Deorum cultores justi and boni esse non possint (says Lactantius, striking
indeed at the very root of their injustice) it is not hard to say why the
worshippers of such Gods cannot be either just or good, he goes on and
particularizeth in the several branches of their injustice. Quomodo enim
sanguine abstinebunt qui colunt cruentos Deos Marte^ atque Bellonam? quomodo
aut parentibus parcent qui expulsorem patris sui Iovem, aut natis ex se
infantibus qui colunt Saturnum? quomodo pudicitiam tuebuntur qui colunt Deam
nudam and adulteram, and quasi apud Deos prostitutam? quomodo se a rapinis and
fra^dibus abstinebunt qui Mercurij furta noverunt, docentis non fraudis esse
decipere sed astutiae? quomodo libidine coercebunt qui Iovem, Herculem,
Liberum, Apollinem, caeterosque venerantur quorum adulteria and stupra in mares
and faminas non tantum doctis nota sunt, sed exprimuntur etiam in Theatris,
atque cantantur vt sint omnibus notiora. Possuntne inter haec justi esse
homines, qui etiamsi natura sint boni ab ipsis tamen Dijs erudiantur ad
injustitiam? ad placandum enim Deum quem colas, iis rebus opus est quibus illum
gaudere ac delectari scias, sic fit vt vitam colentium Deus pro qualitate
numinis sui formet: quoniam religiosissimus est cultus imitari. How should they
abstain from blood who worship bloody Gods as Mars and Bellona? how should
they either spare their Parents who worship Jupiter, or their children who
worship Saturn? How should they have a care of their chastity who worship a
naked and adulterous Goddess, as it were the prostituted strumpet of the Gods?
How should they abstain from rapine and cosenage who are acquainted with the
thefts of Mercury teaching, that to deceive was not fraud but wiliness? how
should they bridle their lust who adore Jupiter, Hercules, Bacchus, Apollo and
the rest, whose adulteries and incontinencies both with males and females are
not only known to the learned, but are acted and sung in their Theaters, that
so they may be known to all. Is it possible for men in this case to be just?
who though they were naturally well disposed, yet by the examples of their very
Gods are they taught injustice. For to please the God you worship. it is
requisite you do such things as you know he is delighted with, and may give
him content: so as according to his own quality and condition he forms and
conformes the lives of such as worship him, in as much as imitation is the most
religious kind of worship.

Yet notwithstanding all this, it seems by the same godly Father that they
stood much upon their own just and upright dealing, reproaching the Christians
with the contrary, which gives him occasion in another place thus to
expostulate the ^atter with them. Audent igitur homines Lib. 5. c. 9.
improbissimi justitiae facere mentionem qui fer as immanitate vincunt,

-- Lupi ceu
Raptores atra in nebula quos improba ventris
Exegit caecos rabies.
Like ravening wolves whom in a gloomie day,
Their bellies rage drives forth to seek their pray.
Verum hos non ventris, sed cordis rabies efferavit, nec atra in nebula, sed
aperta praedatione grassantur: nec eos vnquam conscientia scelerum revocat, ne
sanct^ac pium nomen justitiae ore illo violent, quod cr^ore innocentium tanquam
rictus bestiarum madet. Do these most dishonest men dare mention justice who
exceed the savage Beasts in cruelty, etc. But these not so much the
fierceness of their stomachs, as of their own wicked hearts has enraged,
neither do they slinke in the dark, but make havocke and lay waste by open
violence. Neither are they ever touched with any remorse of Conscience for
profaning the holy and divine name of justice with those mouths which like
the chapps of beasts are died with the blood of Innocents. And lest we should
conceive he thus speaks by reason of their cruelty toward the Christians, he
goes on in the same Chapter, and tells us, Non de nostro sed ex illorum numero
semper existunt qui vias obsideant armati maria praedentur, vel si palam
grassari non licuit, venena clam temperent, qui vxores necent vt dotes earum
lucrentur, aut maritos vt adulteris nubant: qui natos ex se pueros aut
strangulent, aut si nimium pij fuerint exponant: qui libidines incestas, nec a
filia, nec a sorore, nec a matre, nec a sacerdote contineant; qui adversus
cives suos, patria ^que conjurent. Qui denique sacrilegia committant and Deorum
quos colunt, templa dispolient. They are not of ours, but yours, who rob by the
high ways, and turn pirates by Sea. Or if open violence will not serve the
turn, they prepare poison, who make away their wives, that they may gain
their dowries, or their husbands, that they may marry with their Adulterers,
who either strangle their infants, or if they be very devout, expose them, who
forbear not incestuous lusts with their own daughters, their sisters, their
mothers, no nor with their consecrated Priests, who treacherously conspire
against their own Country; Lastly, who commit sacrilege, and rob the
Temples of those very Gods whom they worship.

And least we should imagine, that he speaks of the Gentiles in general, and
not rather of the Romans in particular, he referres us to the testimonies of
Seneca and Lucilius. Qui volent scire plura, Senecae libros in manum sumant,
qui morum vitiorumque publicorum, and descriptor verissimus, and accusator
acerrimus fuit. They who desire to understand more hereof, let them take into
their hands Seneca's books, who both most truly describes, and most sharply
censures the public manners and vices. And to the testimony of Seneca, he
adds that of Lucilius: Sed and Lucilius tenebrosam istam vitam circumscripte
breviterque depinxit his versibus: Lucilius also has briefly and pithily
painted out that base kind of life.

Nunc vero a mane ad noctem f^sto atque profesto,
Totus item pariterque die populusque patresque
Iactare, indufori se omnes, decedere nusquam
Vni se, atque eidem studio omnes dedere, and arti,
Verba dare vt caute possint, pugnare, dolose
Blan^iri, certare, bonum simulare virum se,
Insidias facere, vt si hosts sint omnibus omnes.
From morn to night on days profane or festival,
They meet at th'common place commons and fathers all,
There they bestirre themselves, thence will they not depart,
One self same study all attending and one art..
How closely they may cheat, strive, flatter cunningly,
Contend, and as good men pretend sincerity,
Yet undermine, as each were others enemy.
Nostro autem populo quid tale potest obijci? Cuius omnis religio est sine
scelere and sine macula vivere? But now unto those of our profession what can
be objected in this kind? whose religion consists wholly in this, to live
without wickedness and pollution? Nay so much he stands upon the powerfulnes of
Christian Religion, that he makes it beyond all the rules of Moral Philosophy,
strongly effectual to expel vice, and plant in men all kind of virtue: Da
mihi virum qui sit iracundus, maledicus, effraenatus: paucissimis Dei verbis
tam placidum quam ovem, reddam. Da cupidum, avarum, tenacem, jam tibi eum
liberalem dabo, and pecuniam suam proprijs Lib: 3: c: 26:
plenisque manibus largientem. Da timidum doloris ac mortis: jam cruces and
ignes and Phalaridis taurum contemnet. Da libidinosum, adulterum, ganeonem; jam
sobrium, castum, continentem videbis. Da crudelem, and sanguinis appetentem;
jam in veram clementiam furor ille mutabitur. Da injustum, insipientem,
peccatorem; continuo and aequus, and prudens, and innocens erit. Ad quod
efficiendum non mercede, non libris, non lucubrationibus opus est. Gratis ista
siunt, facile, cito: pateant modo aures, and pectus sapientiam sitiat. Give me
a man that is wrathful, foule-mouthed, unruly, with a few words of Gods book,
I will make him as gentle as a lamb. Give me one that is close-fisted*
covetous, greedy of money: I will send him back unto thee, liberal,
bountifully distributing his money with his own hands Give me one that is
fearful of torment and death, he shall soon des pise crosses, and fires, and
Phalaris his bull. Give me a lecher, an adul terer, a haunter of brothell
houses; you shall see him sober, chaste, continent. Give me one that is cruelly
disposed, and thirsting after blood, that fury of his shall be changed into
true clemency. Give me one who is unjust, unwise, a sinner; he quickly shall
be just, wise, upright. For the effecting whereof, there is no need of a
reward, of books, of watchings, those things are done gratis, easily,
suddenly: only let the ears be open, and the heart long for wisdom. Thus
writes Lactantius, and much more to this purpose, attributing a quickening
efficacy to the divine oracles of Gods word, in the reformation of manners,
which was not to be found in the writings of any of the Heathen.

SECT. 2. The same answer farther confirmed by the testimony of Saint
Augustine.
St Augustine presses them farther, that their Gods never taught them to be
good, or at leastwise, that their Priests never published any precepts tending
that way in the name of their Gods. Dicatur in quibus locis haec docentium
Deorum solebant precepta recitari, and a Cultoribus De Civ. Dei: lib: 2: c. 6:
eorum populis frequenter audiri; sicut ostendimus ad hoc Ecclesias institutas,
quaquaversum religio Christiana diffunditur. Let it be showed in what places
such precepts, given by direction of their Gods, were wont to be read and heard
of the people, who came frequently to worship them, as we show that among us,
temples are to that purpose erected, as far^e as Christian Religion is spread:
Where (says he in another place) out of the Prophets, the Gospells, the Acts
of the Apostles, the Epistles, many Cap: 19:
things are read to the people being assembled, against covetousnes and luxury,
so excellent, so divine, as if they were rather thundrings from heaven, then
wranglings from the Philosophers Schools. And for the particular point in
matter of justice, he floutes at Salust for saying, that jus bonumque apud eos
non legibus magis quam natura valebat, right and Cap: 17:
equity did as much prevail with them, through the goodness of their Nature, as
by the force of the Laws, Ex hoc jure ac bono credo raptas esse Sabinas; quid
enim justius and melius quam filias alienas fraud spectaculi inductas raptas
sieve more Sabinas, Vir: an. 8:
non a parentibus accipi, sed vi vt quisque poterat a^ferri: From this love of
right I trow it was that the Sabin women were ravished. For what can be more
just, then not to receive from their parents hands, but to take and carry away
by violence other men's daughters, drawn on under the pretense of beholding a
spectacle. From the same love of this right too belike Iunius Brutus being
Consul, caused Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, husband to Lucretia, an innocent
and good man and his Colleague to quite both his office and the city, only
because he bore the name and was of kin to the Tarquins: Quod scelus favente
vel patiente populo fecit a quo populo consulatum idem Collatinus sicut etiam
ipse Brutus acceperat: And this most unjust act he did by the favor or
connivence of the people, from whom Collatinus had received his Consulship as
well as Brutus. From the love of this right, it likewise came to pass that
Marcus Camillus, who had done his country so great service, being questioned
through the insolency of the Tribunes and the envy of his great virtues, tam
ingratam sensit quam liberaverat Civitatem, vt de sua damnatione certissimus in
exilium sponte discederet, and december millibus aeris absens etiam damnaretur,
mox iterum a Gallis vindex patriae futurus ingratae: He found that city which
he had saved so ungrateful, that being fully assured, he should have
sentence pass against him, he put himself into voluntary banishment, and
being absent, they laid a mulct upon his head of 10000 asses, though he were
afterward recalled to free his unthankful country from the forces of the
Gauls. To these examples of injustice in other places he adds the unjust
putting to death of Rhemus by his brother Romulus, their unjust war upon the
Albans the mother of Rome, Lib: 3: c. 21.
the unjust exile of Scipio Affricanus at Linternum in Campania, where he ended
his days, giving straight charge, ne saltem mortuo in ingrata patria he that
desires to see more of their monstrous ingratitude toward their best deserving
citizens, let him read Valerius. lib. 5. c. 3.
funus fieret, that being dead, his funerals should not be solemnized in his
ungrateful Country. Nay Salust himself he confutes by testimonies drawn
from his own writings, where he tells us, that discord, covetousnes, ambition,
and other mischiefs which were wont to wait upon prosperity, post Carthaginis
excidium maxim aucta, after the fall of Carthage mightily increased, and from
that time, Majorum mores non paulatim vt antea sed torrentis modo praecipitati,
the ancient manners 2. 18:
not by degrees as before, but like a torrent were carried down headlong. By
which confession of Salust, it appears, that it was not so much the goodness
of their Nature, as the aemulation and fear of Carthage that bridled them, and
kept them in order. S. Augustines conclusion in the fore alleged chapter is:
Multa commemor are jam piget foeda and injusta 2. 17:
quibus agitabatur illa Civitas: Cum potentes plebem sibi subdere conarentur,
plebsque illis subdi recusarent and vtriusque partis defensores magis studiis
agerent amore vincendi quam aequum and bonum quicquam cogitarent. So many were
the foul and unjust acts with which this City was burdened, that it grieveth
me to recount them whiles the Nobility sought to trample upon the Commons, and
these again refused to obey them, and the chief abettours on both sides were
rather carried with faction then louc of justice.

Nusquam tuta fides, --
Faith is no where to be found, Virgill.

is the complaint of one of their Poets; and of another,

-- Qua terra patet fera regnat Erinnys, Ovid.

Infacinus jurasse putes.
As far as land does reach does fierce Erinnys rage,
A man would think they sworn had to all outrage:
And of a third,

Simplicitas, cujus non audeo dicere nomen: (...).

Simplicity, whose name
I dare not speak for shame.
SEC. 3. Another answer, that none can be truly just which are not truly
religious, nor any truly religious which profess not the Christian Religion.
ANd to speak a truth, so natural is the union of true religion with justice,
that we may boldly deem there is neither, where both are not: For how should
they be unfeignedly just, whom Religion Hooker: 5. 1.
does not cause to be such, or they religious, who are not found such by the
proof of their just actions? If they which employ their labor and travail
about the public administration of Justice, follow it only as a trade with
unquenchable and unconscionable thirst of gain, being not in heart persuaded
that Justice is Gods own work, and themselves his Agents in the business;
the sentence of right, Gods 2: Chron. 19. 6.
own verdict, and themselves his Priests to deliver it: formalities of justice
do but serve to smoother right, and that which was necessarily ordained for
the common good is through shameful abuse, made the cause of common misery. It
is moreover the proper effect of true Religion, to qualify all sorts of men,
and to make them in public affairs the more serviceable, Governors the more
apter to rule with conscience, inferiors for conscience sake the willinger to
obey. Gaudere and gloriari ex fide semper volumus (says the good Emperor
Theodosius C: Tb. l. 16. tit. 2
) scientes magis religionibus quam officijs and labor corporis, vel sudore
Rempub. nostram contineri: We will always rejoice and glory in our faith,
as well knowing that our Empire consists rather by Religion, then any other
means. And doubtless the Christian Religion has herein the start of all
others, that it strikes so much upon the soul, whereby it is brought to pass,
that men fearing God, are thereby a great deal more effectually then by
positive laws restrained from doing evil, in as much as those laws have no
farther power then over our outward actions only, whereas unto men's inward
cogitations, unto the privy intents and motions of their hearts, Christian
Religion serves for a bridle. What more savage, wild, and cruel then man, if
he see himself able, either by fraud to overreach, or by power to over-beare
the laws whereunto he should be subject. Wherefore in so great boldness to
offend; it behooveth that men should be held in awe, not by a vain surmise,
but by a true apprehension of that which no man may think himself able to
withstand. Summum praesidium regni est justitia ob apertos tumultus, and
religio ob occultos: The chief safeguard of a kingdom Cardan desapient. lib.
3.
is justice against open disorders, and religion against secret. And our best
writers of the Primitive Church forgot not to press this against the Ethnicks,
Vos scelera admissa punitis, apud nos and cogitare peccare est; vos conscios
time it is nos etiam conscientiam solam, sine qua esse non possumus, says
Minutius Faelix: You punish wicked acts committed, with us to think wickedly
is a sin; you fear to be convinced of guiltiness, we In Octau.
fear the guiltiness of our conscience, which we always carry about with us,
and without which we cannot be. But above all, Tertullian notably urges this
point. Tanta est prudentia hominis ad de^onstrandum Apolog. adoe^. Gente^. 45.
bonum quanta authoritas ad exigendum, tam illa falli facilis quam ista
contemni. Age ideo quid plenis dicere, non occides, aut docere, ne irascaris
quidem? quid perfectius prohibere adulterium an etiam ab oculorum solitaria
concupiscentia arcere? quid eruditius de maleficio, an et de maleloquio
interdicere? quid instructius injuriam non permittere an nec vicem injuriae
sinere? Such is the wisdom of man to direct what is good, as is his authority
to exact it, the one may as easily be deceived, as the other contemned. Which
commands more fully? either he who says, thou shall not kill, or he who
charges not to be angry: which of the two is more perfect, to forbid adultery,
or to restrain the eyes from concupiscence? whether more wisely done, to
forbid evil deeds, or evil words? whether more like to do good, the not
permitting of injuries, or the not suffering the revenge of them? And besides
all this, the Ethnickes only threatened the death of the body to malefactors,
but we (says the same Tertullian) fear to offend God, and pro scientiae
plenitudine, and pro latebrarum difficultate, and pro magnitudine cruciatus,
non duiturni, verum sempiterni: in regard of the fulness of his knowledge, the
difficulty of being hid, and the greatness of the punishment, not for a long
time, but for ever. And thus have we seen that the ancient Romans, neither
were, nor indeed had the means to be so just as is pretended; or as the
Christians were, whom they persecuted. But it will be said, that howsoever they
might be defective in matter of justice, yet they excelled in wisdom and
courage: Let us then take a view of these, and first of their wisdom.

SECT. 4. The second objection touching the pretended wisdom of the Romans,
answered by taking a brief view of of their courses, but specially by the
testimony of Pliny.
IF we should speak of true wisdom, it is only that which serves to make us
wise unto salvation, which without true Religion can never be attained, as
Lactantius most divinely: Omnis sapientia hominis in Lib: 3
hoc vno est, vt Deum cognoscat and colat, hoc nostrum dogma, haec sententia
est: quanta itaque voce possum testificor, proclamo, denuntio, hoc est illud
quod Philosophi omnes in tota sua vita quaes^erunt, nec vnquam tame^
investigare, comprehendere, aut tenere valuerunt, quia religionem aut pravam
retinuerunt, aut totam penitus sustulerunt: All the wisdom of man consists
only in this, that he know and worship God, this is our doctrine, this our
opinion, and this with as loud voice as I can, I testify, profess, proclaim:
This is it which all the Philosophers during their whole life have sought, and
yet could never find out, comprehend, or attain unto, because they either
retained a corrupt religion, or wholly extinguished it. I would willingly learn
how they, who (as has already been proved) worshipped stocks and stones, the
works of their own hands, or such a rabble of filthy, wicked, odious Gods,
and that in such a beastly or cruel manner like men void of common reason,
could be said to be wise? Or how they, who suffered the most notorious vices of
their Gods to be described by their Poets, acted by their Players, drawn to
life by their Painters, whom they highly applauded and rewarded, as if thereby
they meant to instruct their youth in virtue, could be said to be wise? Or how
they, who wasted such infinite masses of treasure in such vain buildings,
banquettings, and spectacles could be said to be wise? Or they, who by their
sword-playe^ or wild beasts (only to satisfy their beastly pleasure) devoured
so many millions of men, as might have served to enlarge or preserve their
Empire, could be said to be wise? Or how they, who gave way to men to make
themselves away upon all occasions as they thought fit, nay exhorted them to
it, and commended them for it (which must needs be a means to weaken their
state) could be said to be wise? Lastly, how they, who professed that they most
desired to train up their citizens to a military course of life, and yet
suff^red them to wallow in all kind of luxury, could be said to be wise? What
great piece of wisdom did they ever show in the making of their Laws, or in
their stratagems of war, which has not bin exceeded, or at leastwise
equalled by the Christians in latter ages. But the notable folly of the whole
body of this state, notoriously appeared in one action of theirs, which I find
thus at large described and censured by pli^y their Countryman, and a great
admirer of his own Nation. Certes, when I consider and behold the monstrous
humors of Lib: 36: cap: 15:
these prodigal spirits, my mind is drawn away still from the progress of
mine intended journey, and forced I am to digress out of my way, and to annexe
unto this vanity of Scaurus as great folly of another, not in Masonry and
marble, but in Carpentry and timber: And C. Curio it was, he who in the civil
wars between Caesar and Pompey lost his life in the quarrel of Caesar. This
Gentleman desirous to show pleasure unto the people of Rome, at the funerals
of his father deceased, as the manner then was; and seeing that he could not
out-goe Scaurus in rich and sumptuous furniture, was put to his shifts, and
devised to surpass him in wit, since he could not come near him in wealth.
And what might his invention be? Certes it is worth the knowledge; if it were
no more but this, that we may have joy of our own conceits and fashions, and
call our selves worthily as our manner is Majores, that is to say superior
every way to all others. This Curio then in aemulation of Scaurus caused two
Theaters to be framed of timber and those exceeding big, howbeit so as they
might be turned about as a man would have the^; approach near one to the
other, or be removed farther asunder as one would desire; and all by the
means of one hook apeece that they hung by, which bare the weight of the
whole frame; the counterpoise was so even, and all the whole fabrique thereof
sure and firm. Now he ordered the matter thus, that to behold the several
stage plays and shows in the fore-noone before dinner, they should be set
back to back, to the end, that the stages should not trouble one another; and
when the people had taken their pleasure that way, he turned the Theaters about
in a trice against the afternoon, that they affronted one another, and toward
the latter end of the day, and namely when the fencers and sword-players were
come in place, he brought both the Theaters nearer together (and yet every man
sat still and kept his place according to his rank and order) in so much as
that by the meeting of the horns or corners of them both together in compass,
he made a fair round Amphitheater of it, and there in the middst between he
exhibited indeed unto them all jointly a sight and spectacle of sword-fencers,
fighting at sharp, whom he had hired for that purpose. But in truth a man may
say more truly, that he carried the whole people of Rome round about at his
pleasure, bound sure enough for stirring or removing.

Now let us come to the point and consider a little better of this thing. what
should a man wonder at most therein, the deviser or the devise it self? The
workman of this fabrique, or the Master that set him a work? Whether of the
twain is more admirable, either the verturous head of him that devised it, or
the bold heart of him that undertook it? To command such a thing to be done,
or to obey, and yield, and go in hand with it? But when we have said all that
we can, the folly of the blind and bold people of Rome went beyond all, who
trusted such a ticklish frame, and durst sit there in a seat so moveable* lo
where a man might have seen the body of that people, which is Commander and
ruler of the whole earth, the Conqueror of the world, the disposer of kingdoms
and Realms at their pleasure, the divider of countries and Nations at their
wills, the giver of laws to foreign states, the vicegerent of the immortal
Gods under heaven, and representing their image unto all mankind, hanging in
the air within a frame at the mercy of one only hook, rejoicing, and ready
to clap hands at their own danger: What a cheap market of men's lives was
here toward? what was the loss at Cannae to this hazard? how near unto a
mischief were they, which might have happened hereby in the turning of a hand?
Certes, when there is news come of a city swallowed up by a wide chink, and
opening of the earth, all men generally in a public commiseration do grieve
thereat, and there is not one but his heart does yearne; and yet behold the
Universal state and people of Rome, as if they were put into a couple of
barks, supported between heaven and earth, and sitting at the devotion only
of two pinnes or hooks. And what spectacle do they behold? a number of
Fencers trying it out with vnrebated swords? Nay ywis but even themselves
rather entered into a most desperate fight, and at the point to break their
necks every mothers son, if the scaffold failed never so little and the
frame went out of joint.

SECT. 5. The third objection touching the pretended fortitude of the Romans
answered, in as much as their Empire is by their own writers in a great part
ascribed to Fortune, and by Christians may be referred to Gods special
providence for the effecting of his own purposes, rather then to any
extraordinary worth in them.
NOw that which is most of all stood upon, as well by the Romans themselves, as
by their Proctours and Patrons is their great fortitude and courage, as
appears in their subduing the greatest part of the known world: and in truth,
placing their chief happiness in the honor and glory of their names; and
withal, supposing that there was for the purchasing thereof no readier means,
then the sacryficing of their lives for the enlarging and advancement of their
Empire; they were in this regard for the most part, even prodigal of their
blood: But shall we call that fortitude, which neither aimed at justice, nor
was guided by true wisdom, or rather obstinacy and adventurous boldness? It
is very true, that they were often in their wars very successful: but

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
May that man's actions never well succeed,
Who by the event does censure of the deed.
By the confession of their own writers they owed as much to Fortun^ as their
valor, whom therefore they made a Goddess and placed in heaven.

Te facimus Fortuna Deam coeloque locamus.
Thee, Fortune, we a Goddess make,
And grant thee place in heaven to take.
These two Fortune and Fortitude, Ammianus so chayneth and linketh together, as
neither of them could well be wanting in the raising of their Empire: Roma vt
augeretur sublimibus incrementis foedere pacis aeternae virtus convenit atque
fortuna, quarum si altera defuisset ad perfectam non venerat summitatem: That
Rome should rise to that height and greatness, Fortitude and Fortune made a
league of eternal peace, so as had either of them been wanting, it could
never have risen to that perfection. Both of them performed their parts
herein, seeming to strive which should precede the other, which Plutarch
disputes at large in his book de fortuna Romanorum, and Florus has briefly,
but roundly and clearly expressed. Ad constituendum Romanum imperium virtutem
ac Fortunam contendisse videri, that to the stablishing of the Roman Empire,
Fortitude and Fortune seemed to contend which should be most forward. Now if
themselves attributed as much to fortune as to their fortitude we may well
conceive that the latter was short of the former rather then otherwise.

And surely, if by Fortune we should understand Gods Providence, we may safely
say, that for the effecting of his own purposes (though happily unknown to
the^r) ather then for any extraordinary worth or merit in them, he conferred
upon them the Empire of the world. As Augustus Caesar was by Gods special
providence directed in taxing the world, Luc. 2.
that so every man repairing to his own City, Christ by that means might be
borne in Bethleem, as was foretold by the Prophet Micah: so 5. 2.
likewise was he by the same hand and power settled in the Empire, that he
might through the world settle an universal peace, when the Prince of Peace was
to be borne into it, as was foretold by another Prophet, They Esaias 2. 4.
shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning
hooks. And may we not well conceive that the world was therefore by the divine
Providence brought under the yoke of the Roman government, made subject to
their Laws, and acquainted with their language, that so when the Emperors
themselves should become Christians, as afterward they did, the propagation of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ might find an easier passage. The Romans then
perchance might challenge, that as due to their own worth in the conquering
of the world, which is rather to be ascribed to the hand of Heaven, disposing
these earthly Monarchies for the good of his Church, or for the chastising of
his enemies: ^r. 43. 10.
To which purpose he gave to Nebuchadnezzar such great victories and large
Dominions. Thou O King art a King of Kings, for the God Dan. 2. 37.
of heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory, which
was not for any extraordinary worth or virtue that we read of in
Nebuchadnezzar, but only to make him as a staff or a rod in his hands for the
scourging of other rebellious nations, an instrument for the accomplishment of
his own designs. Answerable whereunto is that memorable speech of S. Augustine.
Non tribuamus dandi regni atque imperij potestate^ nisi Deo vero qui dat
faelicitate^ in regno coeloru^ solis piis, regnum vero terraru^ De civ. dei. 5.
21
and piis and impiis, sicut ei placet cui nihil injuste placet; Let us not
refer the power of conferring Kingdoms, but only to the true God, who gives
happiness in the kingdom of heaven only to the godly, but these earthly
kingdoms, both to the godly and ungodly, as pleases him who^ nothing pleases
that is unjust. I conclude this point with that of Solomon, The Ecclesiastes 9.
11.
race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread to
the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill,
but time and chance happens to them all. The meaning is, that the success of
these outward things is not always carried by desert, but by chance in regard
of us, though by providence in regard of God.

SECT. 6. Secondly, the Romans having no right or just title to those Nations
they subdued, we cannot rightly term their strength in conquering them
fortitude.
SEcondly, sicut non martyrem poena, sic non fortem pugna, sed causa facit, as
the torture does not make a martyr, so does not the conquest, but the justness
of the cause make a valiant man, if the Romans then cannot show us by what
right they conquered the world, we will never call their strength in
conquering it, Fortitude, or crown it with the name of Virtue, unless w^hall,
we shall call the outrage of robbers and cutthroats who with fire and sword
spoil and lay waste all they can, Courage and Valor. Remota itaque justitia
quid sunt regna nisi magna latrocinia, says S. Augustine, take away the
justness of the cause, and tell me what is the acquisition of Kingdoms, but
great robberies; De Civ. de^ 4. 4.
unless we should say, that the killing and robbing of one is a sin, but of
many a virtue, as S. Cyprian wittily speaks, homicidium cum admittunt Ad
Donatum.
singuli crimen est, virtus vocatur cum public geritur, impunitatem sceleribus
acquirit, non innocentiae ratio, sed saevitia magnitudo: when one single man
commits a single murder that is a grievous offense, when it is commonly and
publicly done, that is a virtue: They purchase impunity not by reason of their
innocence, but the greatness of their Cruelty. When a Pyrate was convented
before the great Alexander for robbing upon Nonius Marcellus ex Cicero^ lib. de
Repub. 3.
the Seas, and demanded what he meant so to do, or by what right he did it,
his answer to that Emperor was by way of recrimination; by the same right
(says he) as you rob the world, which was eleganter and veraciter responsum,
(they be the words of S. Augustine) a trim and true answer: For what was
Alexander, if we should term him aright, but

Faelix terrarum praedo non vtile mundo
Editus exemplar.
A robber of the world, yet prosperous,
And to mankind example dangerous.
Or rather as the same Poet speaks,

Terrarum fatale malum fulmenque quod omnes
Percuteret populos pariterque and sydus iniquum
Gentibus.
Earths fatal evil, a thunderbolt of war,
Striking all Nations, an unlucky star.
And Seneca professes both of him and his father Philip, that they were Not.
quaest. praes. lib. 3.
to mankind no less plagues, quam invndatio qua planum perfusum est, quam
conflagratio qua magna pars animantium exaruit, then a land flood which drownes
all the champian, or a burning drought wherewith the greatest part of cattle
perish.

Now that which has been spoken of Alexander, the Romans may as properly be
applied to themselves, Foelix scelus virtus vocatur, unjust attempts if they be
fortunate in the event are called virtues: and some actions there are of that
nature, quae nunquam laudantur nisi peracta, which are never commended till
they are ended; and surely so it was with the Romans, and for proof that their
attempts were indeed for the most part unjust, we need go no farther then that
of Mithridates in Salust, Romani Epist. ad Reg^ Arsocen.
arma in omnes habent, in eos acerrima quibus victis spolia maxima sunt, the
Romans make war upon all, and that upon them most fiercely, from whom being
conquered they hope for the greatest booty. And again, Romany cum nationibus
populis Regibus cunctis vna and vetus bellandi Causa est Cupido profunda
imperii and divitiarum. The Romans have one old and common quarrel with all
Nations, people, kings, an unquenchable thirst of Empire and riches, with whom
Galgacus in Tacitus fully accords, In vita Iulij Agricola.
Raptores orbis postquam cnncta vastantibus defuere terrae, and mare
scrutantur: si locuples est hostis avari, si pauper ambitiosi, quos non oriens
non occidens satiaverit; Robbers of the world they are, and after that they
have laid all places waste, land wanting for them to spoil, they search into
the Sea, if the enemy be rich, their covetousness mooues them to invade him,
if poor their ambition, so as neither East nor West can satisfy their
insatiable appetite. And though we should perchance suspect the testimonies
of Mithridates and Galgacus, as being their enemies, yet against that of
Lactantius we cannot well accept. Isti qui eversiones Lib. 1: c. 18.
vrbium, populorumque summam gloriam computant, otium publicum non ferent,
rapient, saevient, and injuriis insolenter illatis humanae societatis faedus
irrumpent, vt habere hostem possint, quem sceleratius deleant, quam
lacessierint: But they who account the subversion of cities and states their
greatest glory, will not endure the public peace, they will rob and spoil,
and most insolently offering wrongs, will violate the league of humane society,
that they may have an enemy whom they may more injuriously vanquish then they
have injustly provoked.

I am not ignorant that Cicero in defense of his own Nation tells us, noster
populus socijs defendendis terrarum omniu^ potitusest, our people by defending
their associats, became Masters of the world: but I would willingly be informed
whether or no they did not often set their associates to complain without a
cause, or abet them in unjust quarrels; and I desire that Cicero or any other
Roman should tell me truly what just reason of warring they had upon the
Carthaginians in the first Punick war. I know there is a pretense coined that
it was undertaken in defense of the Mamertins whom the Carthagineans and
Syracusians intended to chastise for their villainous treachery committed upon
Messana a City in Sicily where they lay in garrison, putting to the sword all
the Inhabitents, and dividing the spoil among themselves, and Decius Campanus
a Roman Prefect with his Legion consisting of 4000 Soldiers being received
into Rhegium for the safeguard thereof against Pyrrhus, by the example and
assistance of the Mamertins did the like. Now it is true the Romans at the
instance of the people of Rhegium did justice upon their own Countrymen; yet
the Mamertins guilty of the same foul fact, and that in a higher degree, they
took into their protection, and made it the pretense of their first war upon
the Carthaginians, their ancient friends and allies. But it is certain that no
company of Pirates* Thieves, Outlawes, Murderers, or other such Malefactors, can
by any good success of their villainy obtain the privilege of Civil Societies
to make league or truce, yea or to require fair war, but are by all means
as most pernicious vermin to be rooted out of the world. Wherefore we may
safely esteem this action of the Romans so far from being justifiable by any
color of confederacy made with them, as that contrariwise by admitting this
nest of murderers and thieves into their protection, they justly deserved to
be warred upon themselves: Yet after this war ended, and a peace solemnly
concluded, when the Carthaginians made a doubtful war upon their rebellious
Mercenaries of Sardinia, the Romans perceiving that Carthage beyond their hope
had recovered her feet again, began to strike at her head: On the sudden
they denounced war against this infeebled and impoverished City under a
shameless pretense that the preparations made for Sardinia were made indeed
against Rome it self. The Carthaginians knew themselves at that time unable to
resist, and therefore yielded to the Roman demand, renouncing unto them all
their right in Sardinia: But this was not enough they would have 1200 talents
in recompense belike (for I see not what reason they could allege) of the
great fear which they had endured of an invasion from Carthage. It is indeed
plain, that they impudently sought occasion of war: but necessity taught the
Carthaginians patience, and the money was paid how hardly soever it was
raised. Let not Rome then complain of the punicke faith in the breach of
Covenants, she her self has broken the peace already which Amilcar purposed
to make her dearly repent, but what Amilcar lived not to perform, was
accomplished by Hannibal his renowned son.

SECT. 7. Thirdly, that the Christians in suffering for Religion surpassed the
Roman fortitude.
THirdly, if true fortitude consist as well in suffering, as in doing, nay
rather in suffering chearefully and constantly, then in doing valiantly, as the
Prince of Philosophers, and great Master of morality has taught us, Ex eo
fortes appellantur quod res molestas atque asperas fortiter ferant, from thence
are they termed manfull, that they manfully endure E^. 3. 12.
bitter and shatpe brunts; and from him the Poet,

Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
He it is does valiantly,
That can miserable be.
Then I will be bold to say, that the Christian Religion has yielded more
undaunted invincible spirits, then ever Pagan Rome did, nay, then all the Pagan
Religion ever did: so as I cannot sufficiently wonder what should induce
Machiavell to conceive or affirm that the Christian Religion served to make
men cowards, and that Paganism was in that Dis. l. 1. 11. 12. 13 14.
respect to be preferred before it. Surely he that shall advisedly read the
Ecclesiasticall-Story, what incredible multitudes, with what alacrity, and
what exquisite torments they endured, will soon I think be of another mind;
they were so far from shunning death, that they ran to meet it half way,
kissed it, embraced it, in what ugly terrible shape soever it appeared; in so
much that our writers of the Primitive Church dare match them, as well they
might with the most hardy and resolute of the Romans, yea and to prefer them
before these. Nostri autem (says Lactantius) (vt de viris taceam) pueri and
(...) tortores suos taciti vincunt and expromere illis gemitum nec ignis
potest. Eant Romani and Mutio glorientur aut Regulo, quorum alter necandum se
hostibus tradidit quod Captivum puduit vivere, alter ab hostibus depraehensus
Lib. 5. c. 13:
cum videret mortem se vitare non posse, manum foco in^ecit vt pro facinore suo
satisfaceret ^osti quem voluit occidere, eaque poena veniam quam meruerat
accepit: Those of our profession (not to speak of the men) even boys and
tender young women do with silence conquer their Executioners, from whom not
the fire it self can wring so much as a groan. Let the Romans go then and
boast of their Mutius and Regulus, of which the one offered himself to death
by the hand of the enemy, See for this point Laurent Valla in his 2 book de
voluptate.
for that he was ashamed to live in captivity; the other being attatched by the
enemy, when he saw he could not avoid death, burnt his hand in the fire, that
so for his wicked attempt he might make satisfaction to the enemy, whom he
sought to dispatch, and by that penance purchased he an undeserved pardon: But
with us behold those who are for their sex infirm, and weak for their age,
suffer themselves wholly to be torn in pieces, and burnt not through any
necessity, for they might avoyd' it if they would, but willingly and readily
because they trust in God. Eusebius takes a larger scope and makes a boldner
challenge, including not the Romans alone, but the Graecians, and any other
not Christians. Ex omnibus qui vnquam vel apud Graecos vel apud Barbaros
propter animi magnitudinem illustres, and hominum sermon celebrati sunt,
nullus Lib. 8: c. 6.
cum divinis and eximijs nostri temporis Martyribus Dorotheo and suis sodalibus
imperatorum ministris comparari potest: Among all those who either among tho
Graecians or Barbarians have been renowned for their magnanimity, none of
them all could be matched with those divine and heroycall Martyrs of our time
Dorotheus and his Companions the Emperors servants. After these in time but in
learning and zeal nothing inferior unto them: S. Augustine confidently
maintains the same truth: Hoc sequuti sunt Martyrs qui Scaevolas, and
Curtios, and Decios non sibi inferendo De Ciu. Dei, 5 14.
poenas, sed illatas ferendo: and virtute vera quia vera pietate and innumera
multitudine superarunt: This rule our Martyrs followed, who not by laying
violent hands on themselves, but by patiently enduring others exceeded the
Scevol^* the Curtij, the Decij both in true fortitude, because joined with true
piety, and besides in multitudes innumerable. And lastly, before a^ these,
Tertullian both saw, and publicly Apolog. 50. ad Gentes.
taught the same truth. Multi apud vos ad tolerantiam doloris and mortis
hortantur, vt Cicero in Tusculanis, vt Seneca in Fortuitis, vt Diogenes, vt
Pyrrhon, vt Callimachus, nec tamen tantos inveniunt verba discipulos quantos
Christiani factis docendo: Many among you exhort men to a constant and patient
enduring of grief and death, as Cicero in his Tusculanes, Seneca in his
remedies against fortune, Diogenes, Pyrrhon, and Callimachus; yet their
writings and words find not so many Scholars as do the Christians, teaching
by their deeds and deaths.

But because the Romans stand so much upon their valor in suffering for their
country, it were not hard to instance in many Christians, who might justly be
paralled with the chiefest of them in that kind, I will content my self only
with one example, and that of the Burgesses of Calais, as I find it reported
by Pasquier. The town of Calais during the reign of Philip de Valois being
brought to those straights, that now (...). 43.
there was no more hope left, either for succor or victuals; John Lord of
Vienna, who there commanded for the King, began to treat about the rendering
of it, desiring only that they might give it up with safety of their lives and
goods; which conditions being offered to Edward King of England, who by the
space of eleven months had straightly besieged it; he being exceedingly
enraged, that so small a town should alone stand out against him so long, and
withal calling to mind that they had often galled his subjects by sea, was so
far from accepting of their petition, that contrariwise he resolved to put
them all to the sword, had he not been diverted from that resolution by some
sage Counselors then about him, who told him, that for having been faithful
and loyal subjects to their Sovereign, they deserved not to be so sharply
dealt with: Whereupon Edward changing his first purpose into some more
clemency, promised to receive them to mercy, conditionally that six of their
principal Towensmen, should present him the keys of the Town bare-headed and
barefooted, and with halters about their necks, their lives being to be left
to his disposition: Whereof the Governor being advertised, he presently gets
him into the marketplace, commanding the bell to be sounded for the
conventing of the people; whom being assembled, he acquainted with the
articles which he had received, touching the yielding up of the town, and the
assurance of their lives which could not be granted but with the death of six
of the chief of them: With which news they being all of them exceedingly cast
down and perplexed, on the sudden there rises up one of their Company called
Stephen S. Peter, one of the richest and most sufficient men of the town, who
thus spoke alowd: Sir, I thank God for the goods he has bestowed on me, but
more that he has given me this present opportunity to make it known that I
prize the lives of my Contrymen and fellow burgesses above mine own: At the
hearing of whose speech and sight of his forwardnes, one John Daire and four
others after him made the like offers, not without great abundance of tears
and prayers from the common people, who saw them so freely and readily
sacrifice all their particular respects for the weal of the public, and
instantly without any more ado they addressed themselves to the King of
England with the keys of the town, with none other hope but of death: to
which (though they held themselves assured thereof) they went as cheerfully as
if they had bin going to a wedding. Yet it pleasing God to turn the heart of
the English King at the instance of his Queen and some of the Lords, they were
sent back again safe and sound. Now who can say that our France has not her
Horatij, Quinti; Curtij, and Decij? We have ours as well as the Romans had
theirs: but a certain kind of baseness in us more ready to apprehend and admire
the worth of strangers then of our own Nation, makes us happily not to believe
so: Now that which Pasquier writes of his Nation, and truly, as I think in
comparison with the Roman valor in suffering for their country, we may as
confidently speak of ours and others perchance of theirs.

SECT. 8. That as the Christians have surpassed the Romans in the passive part
of fortitude, so have they matched them in the active, and that the partial
overvaluing of the Roman manhood by their own Historians, is it chiefly
which has made the world to think it unmatchable.
FOurthly and lastly, as the Romans were thus surpassed in the passive part of
fortitude: so were they matched in the Active, many times meeting with those,
that either put back their forces without loss, or with victory put them to
the worst. Julius Caesar their great experienced and most renowned Captain
after all his valiant acts and triumphs, what ado did he make to do any
thing worth the remembrance upon this Island then inhabited by naked Britains,
and those divided: And though Velleius Paterculus the Court Historiographer
bear us in hand, bis penetratam Britanniam a Caesare, that Brittainy was twice
thoroughly invaded by Caesar, yet Lucan tells us another tale,

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis:
To the Britons whom he sought his coward back he turned.
And Tacitus a grave Author, Britanniam tantum ostendisse non tradidisse
Romany, that he only showed, but delivered not Britannie to the Romans. And
sure he did so little, that both Horace and Propertius agree in it that he left
them untouched, or at least unconquered:

Intactus aut Britannus vt descenderet Horat. Ep^. o^. 7.

Sacra Catenatus via:
Or that the Britons, yet untouched, may
Be led in chains along the sacred way.
Says the one: And the other.

Te manet invictus Romano Mart Britannus.
-- Unconquered Britannie,
By Roman arms reserved is for thee.
The Gauls in their contention with them they found so stout and hardy, as
Tully himself confesses, that with other Nations the Romans fought for
dominion, but with the Gauls for preservation of their own safety, who once
under the conduct of Brennus entered the city of Rome it self, sacked it and
burnt it. Pyrrhus King of the Epirots encountered them in Italy it self, and
vanquished them in two several battles, in the former of which they were
through fear stricken with such a consternation and forgetfulness of their
discipline, that they tarried not so much as to defend their camp, but ran
quite beyond it, leaving both it and the honor of the day entirely to Pyrrhus,
though the Consul himself were then in the field with a select army. But
Hanniball was indeed the man, who made the Romans know that they were but men
made of like metal as others are. Like a hail storm he came thundering down
from the Alps and Pyrrenaean mountains upon Italy. At Ticinum now called
Pavia, after a long tedious journey, having scarce refreshed his wearied army,
consisting of several Nations, and therefore the harder to be held together
and commanded, he beat Scipio the Consul, and sent him (with the loss of
almost all his horses) wounded out of the field: And within a while after
fighting with both the Consuls Scipio and Sempronius at Trebia, there escaped
of six and thirty thousand of the Romans, but ten thousand of all sorts horse
and foot. Not long after, this again he encountered with Flaminius another
Consul at the lake of Thrasymene, who was slain in the place, accompanied
with fifteen thousand dead carkases of his Contrymen. And Cetronius being
sent by Servilius the other Consul to the aid of Flaminius, his strength only
served to increase the misadventure, being charged and the greatest part of
them cut in pieces by Maharball, the rest yielding themselves to mercy. The
Romans being put to these straights, choose a Dictator that was Fabius Maximus,
who like a cloud hung upon the tops of the hills, but durst not come down
into the plains to fight with Hanniball, though he saw the country fired and
spoiled by him before his eyes. Whereupon two new Consuls are chosen Aemilius
Paulus and Terentius Varro. For the dispatch of the war great forces are
leavied, and at Cannae they come pouring upon him with assurance of victory.
The whole sum of Hanniball's army in the field this day was, ten thousand
horse and forty thousand foot; his enemies having two to one against him in
foot, and he five to three against them in horse: But here again he routed
and foiled them, in so much as the Romans were all in a manner either slain or
taken prisoners: Of men of special note there died in the great battle,
besides Paulus the Consul, two Questors or Treasurers, one and twenty
Colonells or Tribunes of the soldiers, four score Senators, or such as had
borne office; out of which they were to be chosen into the Senate, and many of
these were men of mark, as having been Aediles, Praetors or Consulls, among
whom was Servilius the last years Consul, and Minutius late Master of the
horse: besides all this, the number of the Roman Knights that lay slain on
the place, and of the common soldiers was almost incredible: Whereas on the
side of Hanniball there died but four thousand Gauls, fifteen hundred
Spaniards and Africans, and two hundred horse or there-abouts, a loss not
sensible in the joy of so great a victory, which had he pursued as Maharball
advised him, and forthwith marched away toward Rome then destitute both of men
and money, it is little doubted but that the war had presently been at an
end: But he believed not so far in his own sufficiency and good fortune,
and was therefore told that he knew how to get, not how to use a victory: Yet
had not his supplies promised and expected from Carthage, partly by the malice
of Hanno, and partly by the sloth and parsimonie of the Carthaginians, been
too long deferred, it is to be thought the Romans would never again have
recovered that blow. For after this, he performed in Italy many noble and
worthy exploits, marching home even to the gates of Rome it self; and had he
been supplied with victuals in all likelihood, had carried it.

Now that which has made the world conceive the Roman Magnanimity to be
unmatchable, is the partial overvaluing of their manhood by their own
Historians, and the too much slighting of all others in comparison with
themselves. I will instance only in two or three passages. Livie to disgrace
Hannibal writes, that a little before the striking of the battle at Cannae, de
fuga in Galliam dicitur agitasse, he is said Lib. 22.
to have bethought himself of flying into Gaul, which was in truth very
incredible, the difficulties considered which Hannibal before had passed, and
the terms he then stood in. This tale therefore Plutarch omitteth, who in the
life of Hanniball takes in a manner all his directions from Livie. My second
instance is this: Fabius an ancient Roman Historian (from whom Livie borrowes
much) says of Amilcar the father of Hanniball, and his men at Erix a town in
Sicill; that having clean spent their strength, and being broken with many
miseries, they were glad to submit themselves unto the Romans: But Polybius a
grave writer, censureth this report of Fabius, as fabulous and partial, in as
much as the Lib. 1.
contrary thereunto is to be found in the life of Amilcar, set down by
Aemilius Probus, confessing that Erix was in such sort held by the
Carthaginians, that it seemed to be in as good condition, as if in those parts
there had not been any war. Though then we may not reprehend in that worthy
Historian Livie, the tender love of his country, which made him give credit to
Fabius and others: Yet must we not for his sake believe those lies which the
impartial judgment of Polybius has condemned in the writers that gave them
original. My third, and last instance is, that the great Captain Fabius or
Livie in his person, makes an objection unto Cneus Scipio, which neither
Scipio nor Livie for Lib. 28.
him does answer, that if Asdruball the brother of Hanniball, and son of
Amilcar were vanquished, as Scipio would say, by him in Spain; strange it was,
and as little to his honor, as it had been extremely dangerous to Rome, that
the same vanquished man should invade Italy: And it is indeed an incredible
narration, that Asdruball being closed in on all sides, and not knowing how to
escape out of the battle, save only by a steep descent of rocks over a great
river that lay at his back, ran away with all his money, Elephants, and
broken troops over Tagus directly toward the Pyrenees, and so toward Italy,
upon which he fell with more then threescore thousand Soldiers. Wherefore we
can but be sorry, that all Carthaginian records of their wars with Rome (if
there were any) being utterly lost, we can know no more thereof, then what it
has pleased the Romans to tell us, unto whom it were no wisdom to give too
much credit. Albericus Gentilis, by nation an Italian, late professor of the
Civill-Lawes in the University of Oxford, well versed in the Roman story, has
written two learned books de armis Romanorum; In the former of which he
clearly proves, that the Romans got the reputation of so great justice, and
wisdom, and valor only from the testimony of their own writers, who were
in their relations most partial: notwithstanding, says he, Sunt vel in his
ipsis plura and disiecta passim, and quasi in amplo naufragio dissipata quae
per sedulam operam collecta, vincere vulgi opinionem, Consensum hominum
inveteratum superare, persuasionem de virtute Romanorum bellica tollere
possunt: Even in them are many passages to be found scattered here and there,
as it were after some great shipwreck, which being diligently collected and
put together, might serve to vanquish the vulgar opinion, to root out the
inveterate and common consent, to weaken the strong persuasion of men touching
the warlike manhood of the Romans. And alleging that place of Cicero in his
Oration for murena, virtus militaris populo Romano nomen vrbi Romae aeternam
gloriam peperit; The military virtue of the Romans wanne to themselves fame,
and to their City aeternall glory, imo non ita est M. Tulli, says he, sed
fraus, avaritia, audacia, crudelitas, illud vobis imperium pepererunt, (...)
terrae reliquum simpliciorem, justiorem, humaniorem, faciliorem, moderationem
subegerunt. Tullie, it is not so, but fraud, covetousness, impudence, cruelty
got you the Empire, and subdued the rest of the world more innocent; more just,
more courteous, more merciful, more moderate, more peaceable then yourselues:
and this he does not barely affirm, but substantially makes it good through
that book, though in the next, he seem to have spoken in the person of
another.

I will conclude this long, though I trust not tedious discourse of the Romans
with a dispute of Sir Walter Rawleigh's handling that problem, proposed and
discussed by Livie, whether the great Alexander could have prevailed against
the Romans, if after his Eastern conquest he had bent all his forces against
them. Where having delivered his opinion against Livy for Alexander, together
with his reasons, inducing him thereunto, he goes on preferring the English
both before the Macedonian and the Roman: wherein if he speak reason, let him
be heard, if not, let him be censured: But for mine own part I must confess,
I know not well how to answer his arguments, so pressing and ponderous to me
they seem, whether affection have clouded my judgment herein, I leave it to
others to judge, his words then are these:

SECT. 9. The English not inferior to the Roman in valor and magnanimity, by
the judgment of Sir Walter Rawleigh.
NOw in deciding such a controversy, says he, me thinks it were not amiss
for an Englishman to give such a sentence between Hist. of the world, l. 5:
part. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 1.
the Macedonians and Romans, as the Romans once did (being chosen Arbitrators)
between the Ardeates and Aricini that strove about a piece of land; saying,
that it belonged unto neither of them, but unto the Romans themselves. If
therefore it be demanded, whether the Macedonian or the Roman were the best
Warrior? I will answer, the Englishman. For it will soon appear to any that
shall examine the noble acts of our Nation in war, that they were performed
by no advantage of Weapon; against no savage or unmanly people; the enemy being
far superior unto us in numbers and all needful provisions, yea as well
trained as we, or commonly better, in the exercise of War.

In what sort Philip wanne his Dominion in Greece; what manner of men the
Persians and Indians were whom Alexander vanquished; as likewise of what force
the Macedonian Phalanx was, and how well appointed against such armies as it
commonly encountered: any man that has taken pains to read the foregoing
story of them, does sufficiently understand. Yet was this Phalanx never or very
seldom able to stand against the Roman Armies: which were embattailed in so
excellent a form, as I know not whether any Nations besides them have used,
either before or since. The Roman weapons likewise both offensive and defensive
were of greater use, then those with which any other Nation has served, before
the fiery instruments of gunpowder were known. As for the enemies with which
Rome had to do, we find that they who did ouer-match her in numbers, were as
far over-matched by her in weapons; and that they of whom she had little
advantage in arms, had as little advantage of her in multitude. This also (as
Plutarch well observes) was a part of her happiness, that she was never
ouer-laid with too great wars at once.

Hereby it came to pass, that having at first increased her strength by
accession of the Sabines; having won the state of Alba, against which she
adventured her own self, as it were in wager upon the heads of three
Champions; and having thereby made her self Princess of Latium, she did
afterward by long war in many ages extend her Dominion over all Italy. The
Carthaginians had well nigh oppressed her: but their soldiers were Mercenarie:
so that for want of proper strength they were easily beaten at their own
doors. The Aetolians and with them all or the most of Greece assisted her
against Philip the Macedonian: he being beaten, did lend her his help to beat
the same Aetolians. The wars against Antiochus and other Asiatiques, were
such as gave to Rome small cause of boast, though much of joy: for those
opposites were as base of courage as the lands which they held were abundant of
riches. Sicil, Spain, and all Greece fell into her hands by using her aid to
protect them against the Carthaginians and Macedonians.

I shall not need to speak of her other conquests: it was easy to get more
when she had gotten all this. It is not my purpose to disgrace the Roman valor
(which was very noble) or to blemish the reputation of so many, or so famous
victories: I am not so idle. This I say, that among all their wars, I find
not any wherein their valor has appeared comparable to the English. If my
judgment may seem ouerpartiall, our wars in France may help to make it
good.

First therefore it is well known that Rome (or perhaps all the World besides)
had never so brave a Commander in war as Julius Caesar; and that no Roman
Army was comparable unto that which served under the same Caesar. Likewise it
is apparent that this gallant Army which had given fair proof of the Roman
courage, in good performance of the Helvetian war, when it first entered into
Gaul; was nevertheless utterly disheartened when Caesar led it against the
Germans. So that we may justly impute all that was extraordinary in the valor
of Caesar's men, to their long exercise under so good a Leader, in so great a
war. Now let us in general compare with the deeds done by those best of the
Roman soldiers in their principal service, the things performed in the same
country by our common English soldiers, levied in have from following the
Cart, or sitting on the shop-stall, so shall we see the difference. Herein
will we deal fairly, and believe Caesar in relating the Acts of the Romans:
but will call the French Historians to witness what actions were performed by
the English. In Caesar's time France was inhabited by the Gauls a stout people,
but inferior to the French by whom they were subdued; even when the Romans
gave them assistance. The Country of Gaul was rent in sunder (as Caesar
witnesses) into many Lordships: Some of which were governed by petty kings,
others by the multitude, none ordered in such sort as might make it applyable
to the nearest neighbor. The factions were many and violent, not only in
general through the whole Country, but between the petty States, yea in every
City, and almost in every house. What greater advantage could a Conqueror
desire? yet there was a greater: Ariovistus with his Germans had overrun the
Country, and held much part of it in a subjection, little different from a
mere slavery: yea so often had the Germans prevailed in war upon the Gauls,
that the Gauls (who had sometimes been the better soldiers) did hold
themselves no way equal to those daily invaders. Had France been so prepared
unto our English Kings, Rome it self by this time, and long ere this time
would have been ours. But when King Edward the third began his war upon
France, he found the whole country settled in obedience to one mighty King: a
King whose reputation abroad was no less then his puissance at home, under
whose Ensign the King of Bohemia did serve in person, at whose call the
Genowayes and other neighbor States were ready to take Arms: Finally a King
unto whom one The Dolphine of Viennois.
Prince gave away his Dominion for love: The King of Maiorca.
another sold away a goodly City and Territory for money. The Country lying so
open to the Roman, and being so well fenced against the English, it is
note-worthy, not who prevailed most therein (for it were mere vanity to match
the English purchases with the Roman Conquest) but whether of the two gave the
greater proof of military virtue therein. Caesar himself does witness, that
the Gauls complained of their own ignorance in the Art of War, and that
their own hardiness was over-mastered by the skill of their enemies. Poor
men, they admired the Roman Towers and Engines of battery raised and planted
against their walls, as more then humane works. What greater wonder is it that
such a people was beaten by the Roman, then that the Caribes a naked people,
but valiant as any under the sky, are commonly put to the worse by small
numbers of Spaniards? Besides all this we are to have regard of the great
difficulty that was found in drawing all the Gauls or any part of them to one
head, that with joint forces they might oppose their assailants, as also the
much more difficulty of holding them long together: For hereby it came to pass
that they were never able to make use of opportunity: but sometimes compelled to
stay for their fellows, and sometimes driven to give or take battle upon
extreme disadvantages, for fear least their company should fall asunder: as
indeed upon any little disaster they were ready to break and return every one
to the defense of his own. All this, (and which was little less then all
this) great odds in weapon gave to the Romans the honor of many gallant
victories. What such help? or what other worldly help then the golden metal
of their soldiers had our English Kings against the French? were not the
French as well experienced in feats of war? yea did they not think
themselves therein our superiors? were they not in arms, in horse, and in all
provision exceedingly beyond us? Let us hear what a French Writer says, of
the inequality that was between the French and English, when their King John
was ready to give the onset upon the Black Prince at the battle of
Poictiers. John had all advantages John de Serres.
over Edward, both of number, force, show, country, and conceit, (the which is
commonly a consideration of no small importance in worldly affairs) and
withal, the choice of all his horsemen (esteemed then the best in Europe) with
the greatest and wisest Captains of his whole Realm. And what could he wish
more?

I think it would trouble a Roman Antiquary to find the like example in
their Histories; the example, I say, of a King, brought prisoner to Rome by an
army of eight thousand, which he had surrounded with forty thousand, better
appointed, and no less expert Warriors. This I am sure of, that neither
Syphax the Numidian, followed by a rabble of half scullions, as Livy rightly
terms them, nor those cowardly kings Perseus and Gentius, are worthy
patterns. All that have read of Cressie and Agincourt, will bear me witness,
that I do not allege the battle of Poictiers for lack of other as good
examples of the English virtue: the proof whereof has left many a hundred
better marks in all quarters of France, then ever did the valor of the
Romans. If any man impute these victories of ours to the long-Bow, as carrying
farther, piercing more strongly, and quicker of discharge then the French
Crosse-Bow: my answer is ready; that in all these respects, it is also (being
drawn with a strong arm) superior to the musket; yet is the musket a weapon
of more use. The Gun and the Crosse-bow are of like force when discharged by a
boy or woman, as when by a strong man: weakness or sickness, or a sore finger
makes the long bow unserviceable. More particularly, I say, that it was the
custom of our Ancestors to shoot for the most part, point blanck: and so
shall he perceive that will note the circumstances of almost any one battle.
This takes away all objection: for when two Armies are within the distance of a
butts length* one flight of arrows or two at the most can be delivered before
they close. Neither is it in general true, that the long-bow reaches farther,
or that it pierces more strongly then the Cross bow: but this is the rare
effect of an extraordinary arm: whereupon can be grounded no common rule. If
any man shall ask: How then it came to pass that the English wanne so many
great battles, having no advantage to help him? I may with the best
commendation of modesty, refer him to the French Historian: who relating the
victory of our men at Creuant, where they passed a bridge in face of the enemy,
uses these words; John de Serres.
The English comes with a conquering bravery, as he that was accustomed to
gain euery-where without any stay: he forces our Guard placed upon the
bridge to keep the passage. Or I may cite another place of the same Author,
where he tells how the Britons being invaded by Charles the eight, King of
France, thought it good policy to apparel a thousand and two hundred of their
own men in English Cassacks; hoping that the very sight of the English red
Cross would be enough to terrify the French. But I will not stand to borrow
of the French Historians (all which, excepting De Serres and Paulus Aemilius,
report wonders of our Nation) the proposition which first I undertook to
maintain, That the military virtue of the English prevailing against all
manner of difficulties, ought to be preferred before that of the Romans, which
was assisted with all advantages that could be desired. If it be demanded; why
then did not our Kings finish the Conquest as Caesar had done? my answer may
be (I hope without offense) that our kings were like to the race of the
Aeacidae, of whom the old Poet Ennius gave this note; Belli potentes sunt mage
quam sapienti potentes; they were more warlike then politic. Who so notes
their proceedings, may find that none of them went to work like a Conqueror,
save only King Henry the fifth, the course of whose victories it pleased God to
interrupt by his death. But this question is the more easily answered, if
another be first made: Why did not the Romans attempt the Conquest of Gaul
before the time of Caesar? why not after the Macedonian war? why not after
the third Punick, or after the Numantian? At all those times they had good
leisure, and then especially had they both leisure and fit opportunity, when
under the conduct of Marius they had newly vanquished the Cimbri and Teutones,
by whom the Country of Gaul had been piteously waste. Surely the words of
Tully were true, that with other Nations the Romans fought for Dominion with
the Gauls for the preservation of their own safety.

Therefore they attempted not the Conquest of Gaul, until they were Lords of
all other Countries to them known. We on the other side held only the one
half of our own Island; the other half being inhabited by a Nation (unless
perhaps in wealth and numbers of men somewhat inferior) every way equal to
our selves: A Nation anciently and strongly allied to our enemies the French,
and in that regard enemies to us: So that our danger lay both before and
behind us, and the greater danger at our backs, where commonly we felt,
always we feared a stronger invasion by Land then we could make upon France,
transporting our forces over Sea.

It is usual with men that have pleased themselves in admiring the matters
which they find in ancient histories, to hold it a great injury done to their
judgment, if any take upon him by way of comparison to extol the things of
latter ages. But I am well persuaded, that as the divided virtue of this our
Island has given more noble proof of it self, than under so worthy a Leader
that Roman army could do, which afterward could win Rome and all her
Empire, making Caesar a Monarch: So hereafter by Gods blessing, who has
converted our greatest hinderance into our greatest help, the enemy that
shall dare to try our forces, will find cause to wish, that avoiding us, he
had rather encountered as great a puissance as was that of the Roman Empire.
Thus far Sir Walter Rawleigh, comparing the Roman valor with the English,
and if we should compare them with the Turks, it is certain that the Romans
in the like space of time, never subdued the like quantity of land, so
excellently fertile, and abounding in warlike people as did they. In less then
three hundred years, from Ottoman to Mahomet the third, they wanne all those
goodly Countries from Tauris in Persia to Buda in Hungary, lying East, and
West, and North, and South, from Derbent near the Caspian Sea, unto Adena,
upon the gulf of Arabia, each of which contains about 3200 miles. So as all
the noise which the Roman writers have made about the unmatchable valor of
their men, is but like the huge armor which Alexander left in the Indies after
his conquering of those Nations, serving rather to amaze the world, then
rightly to inform it.

CAP. 12. Wherein the general objections touching the worlds decay in matter
of Manners, are answered at large.
SECT. 1. Two objections drawn from reason, and both answered: The one, that
since the first plantation of Christian Religion, men have from time to time
degenerated: The other, that the multitude of Laws, and Lawyers, and
Law-suites, and the multiplicitie of words in writings and convayances, argue
the great sickness and malice of the present times in regard of the former.
ANd thus I hope I have now sufficiently cleared the point, that the ancient
Romans (who are in stories most magnified of any Nation under heaven for their
moral virtues) exceeded latter ages in many foul vices, and have by latter
ages been equalled, if not exceeded even in those virtues, wherein they seemed
most to excel. And herein have I chiefly aimed at the honor of Christ and
Christian Religion; which being rightly understood and practiced, without apish
superstition on the one side, or peevish singularity on the other, serves no
doubt to make men more morally virtuous then any other religion, that either at
this day is, or since the Creation has been professed in the world; I speak,
not only in regard of Justice and temperance, but of wisdom and fortitude;
and besides, for contempt of the world, austerity of life, patience, humility,
modesty, charity, chastity, obedience, piety, and singular devotion, it has
doubtless yielded men altogether unmatchable. But it will be said, that since
the first plantation of Christian Religion, men have from time to time
degenerated, so as the farther they are removed from the Primitive Professors,
who burned in zeal and shined in good works, the worse they have grown:
Whereunto I answer, that the primitive times, as well in that they came nearer
to Christ and his Apostles, as likewise, because they were subject to the
fiery trial of persecution were indeed purer then the succeeding ages, in
which together with peace and plenty, pride and luxury, oppression and
uncharitableness crept in, till at length they, who should have been the
principal lights and guides in the Church, became in all manner of uncleanness,
cruelty, covetousness, and ambition little inferior to the worst of the Roman
Emperors. But here then, things being now come to this height, appeared the
special providence of Almighty God, in sending some zealous spirits to awaken
the world, to rouse up Christian Princes, to tell the Prelates their own: And
though thereupon followed a rent in the Church, yet withal there followed a
reformation of manners, at leastwise in regard of scandalous and notorious
vices, even among them, who refused, and still refuse reformation in matter of
doctrine; the lives of their Popes, their Cardinals, ^eir Bishops, their
Priests, are in appearance much amended, what within these two or three hundred
years, by the confession of their own writers, they were; who we may well
think, were ignorant of much, and much out of fear or favor they concealed:
But so much have they published to the view of the world, as would grieve an
honest man to read, and shame a modest to write, which they shamed not to act,
nay boasted of being acted: And for the other part, which professes and
maintains the reformation, I hope they will not say, that they are thereby
made the worse in matter of manners; God forbid but they, who profess
themselves reformed in matter of dostrine, should likewise show themselves
reformed in matter of Manners. And sure I think we may safely say, that fewer
rebellions, robberies, murders, sorceries and the like, have been heard of,
and more pious and charitable works seen in our Land since the Reformation of
Religion, then in the like compass of years since the first plantation
thereof amongst us.

It will perchance be said again, that the multitude of Laws, and Lawyers,
and Law-sutes, and the multiplicity of words in writings and convayances for
Law businesses, argue the great sickness and malice of the times in regard of
the former: To which it may truly be replied, that the multitude of Laws gives
occasion to the number of Law-suites, and that to the increase of Lawyers; and
they again serve to increase the multiplying of words in Convayances. Now that
which gives occasion to a greater multitude of Laws, is not, as I conceive, so
much the increase of vice, as of knowledge and zeal in the Lawmakers; common
swearing, simple fornication, profaning of the Lords day and the like, in
former times were scarce known to be sins; but being now by the light of the
Gospel discovered to be such, and that in an high degree, as they are
straitely forbidden by Gods Law, so is the edge of our law, turned against
them. Besides, it is certain, that no Law can be so cautelously framed for the
preventing of all inconveniences in that kind, but that the wit of man armed
with malice, will find means to wrest the letter, or frustrate the intent of
it; from whence other Laws have sprung up for the clearing of the ambiguity,
or supply of the defect of the former; it is not then so much the malice of
the present age, as the of all ages succeeding one another therein, which has
occasioned such a mass of Laws, as their burden is in a manner now as
cumbersome, as were the mischiefs they were made to prevent, prius vitijs
laboravimus nunc Legibus, Tacitus spoke it of his times, but it may well enough
be verified of ours; we formerly were burdened with vices, but now with Laws.
If then a wise choice were made out of the whole body of the Laws, of the
most useful and proper for the present times, and they severely executed, the
rest being repealed and abrogated, it would prove both easier for the subject,
and happier for the weal public. Now for the number of Law-suites, it has
always been observed, that in times of peace and plenty, as riches increase
by manufactures, and tillage, and trading, so does the number of controversies.
Our Forefathers for many ages together lived for the most part in Civil Wars
and continual alarmes; so as the sword then determined the controversy, and
not the Law; since then the sword has bin sheathed, no marveile that the Law
and Courts of Justice have bin more in request. Moreover, the fall of the
Monasteries and the alienating of their Lands into so many hands, has no doubt
bin a great means to set Lawyers a work since that fall, more then in former
ages. And what is it but the setting of men a work which sets up a trade, and
multiplies the professors thereof? And as the number of professors multiply,
so do the diversity of their conceits and inventions; many eyes seeing more
then one can, which is the cause, that both more flawes are found in
Convayances, and consequently more clauses and cautions thrust into them for
the preventing of the like.

SECT. 2. Another objection answered, taken from the Scriptures, which in
diverse places seem to say, that the last times shall be the worst.
BUt the great doubt which troubles most men, is, that the Scriptures seem in
diverse places to say, that the last times shall be the worst; and to this end
are commonly alleged these passages: Because iniquity shall abound, the love
of many shall wax cold. When the Mat. 24. 12. Luc. 18. 8. 1. Tim 4. 1.
Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Now the Spirit
speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith,
giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils. This know also, that
in 2. Tim: 3 1.
the last days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of their
own selves, covetous, boasters; and evil men and seducers shall wax worse
and worse, v. 13.
deceiving and being deceived. There shall come in the last days, scoffers
walking after their own lusts. Beloved, remember ye the words which were
spoken 2. Pet. 3. 3
before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they told you there
should be mockers in the last days, who should walk after their own ungodly
Jude. v. 17. 18.
lusts. These are all, or at leastwise the principal passages which I have
either found alleged, or can remember to that purpose. Where^to I first reply
in general, that put the case they all inferred a decay in matter of Manners
toward the end of the world, yet does not that necessarily enforce a perpetual
and universal declination since the fall of man; but men may be (as doubtless
they have been) sometimes better and sometimes worse by interchange, and at the
last worst of all. But I would demand how it can hang together, that we should
expect the subversion of Antichrist and his kingdom, and the conversion of the
whole Nation of the Jews to the saving knowledge of the truth, before the end
of the world, and yet withal affirm or believe, that the whole world still
has, and does, and shall to the end thereof grow worse and worse? For mine
own part I must profess, that I know not how to reconcile so different and
contradictorie opinions. But for the better clearing and understanding of the
passages alleged, it will be needful to consider in what sense The last days
in holy Scripture are to be taken. Some there are, who refer them to the
days of Antichrist: but others upon better warrant to the days of Christ,
from his first coming in the flesh, to his second coming to judgment. Thus
the Prophet Isayah, It shall come to pass in the last days, that the
Mountain of the Lords 2. 2.
house shall be established in the top of the mountains. And Micah to the
same purpose, and so near in the same words, as if he borrowed them 4. 1.
from Esaias. Now the days of Christ's kingdom are therefore called the last
days, not only because it set an end to the kingdom of the Jews, but
because none other Priesthood, or Sacrifice, or Sacraments, or Law are to
succeed in place thereof. As man is a little world, so the age of the world
like that of man, is distributed into diverse stops or periods. It has its
infancy, childhood, youth, perfect estate, and old age. And as in man old age
may, and sometime does last as long as all the rest, so may it fall out in
these times of the kingdom of Christ, and yet they be still the last times.
Thus the time of Job from his restitution to his death, is said to be his last
days, or latter end, though it comprehend 42. 12. 16.
one hundred and forty years, which in the life of man is a long space. And if
by the last days we should understand the times near approaching to the
worlds end, no small advantage might thereby unawares be given to the Jews,
who would bear us in hand that the Messiah is not yet come, because the last
times are not yet come: Whereas we on the other side say for our selves and
truly, that the last times are come; not therefore because they approach near
to the worlds end, but because the Messiah is come. Upon which ground the
Apostles themselves, in imitation belike of the Prophets, likewise term it
the last times. In the last times he has spoken to us by his Son, says S.
Paul. And S. John, Heb. 1. 2. 1: 2. 18.
Little children, it is the last time, and as you have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now are many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last
time. Since which time we know sixteen Centenaries of years have passed. So
as the Apostles could not well term their times the last in regard of any
near approach to the worlds end: but because they lived under the Kingdom of
Christ. And if I should thus expound those alleged passages, I should
conceive the interpretation were not unsound. Augustine I am sure in his Epist.
to Hesichius allows it. Calvin in diverse places beats (...).
upon it, Per dies extremos satis tritum est regnum Christi designari: and in
another place more fully to our present purpose, Sub extremis diebus In Epist,
Iud^. I^ 2. Tim. 3. 1.
comprehendit vniversum Christianae Ecclesiae statum, under the terms of the
last days he comprehends the universal estate of the Church of Christ.
Hereunto may be added that which some latter learned Divines touching this
point have observed, that the Hebrew word signifies either extremity or
posterioritie, as I may so speak. Whence it is sometimes rendered Last, and
sometimes Latter, both in Greek, Latin, and other Languages, and those two
promiscuously taken the one for the other. Thus the Apostle in 2 Timothy and
the 3. calls that the last times, which before in his former Epistle and 4
chapt. he had called the Latter times, and that word which in the last of S.
Mark, our former Translations 14.
rendered Finally, our last has turned Afterward: nay whereas we read in the
Prophet Joel, It shall come to pass afterward, S. Peter (by divine inspiration
2. 1^. Act. 2. 17.
no doubt) has rendered it, It shall come to pass in the last days. But very
remarkable are the words of old Jacob to this purpose when he lay a dying,
and by the spirit of Prophecy foretold what should become of his sons, I
will tell you says he, that which shall befall you in the last days, in which
prediction of his, though it be true that some things concern the Kingdom of
Christ, as that touching Judah, the Scepter shall not depart from Judah; nor a
Lawgiuer from between his feet until Shiloh come; yet is it as true that many
things in that Prophecy, both concerning Judah and the other Patriarchs and
Tribes descending from them were fulfilled long before the incarnation of
CHRIST, and not long after the death of Jacob. In like manner the same word is
used by Daniel in the Interpretation of Nebuchadnezzars dream. There is a God
in heaven 2. 28.
that reveals secrets, and makes known to the King what shall be in the
latter days or last days: Which same speech in the 45 v. following he again
repeates in these terms: The great God has made known to the King what
shall come to pass hereafter. And though it be most certain that some of
those things there fore-shewed, were none otherwise fulfilled then in the
kingdom of Christ, as namely that in the 44. v. in the days of these Kings
shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed: yet
withal it may not, it cannot be denied but the greatest part of them were
accomplished before our Saviors apparelling himself with our flesh, and some
of them, to wit, the setting up of the Persian Monarchy but 63 years after
Nebuchadnezzars dream or vision, and Daniels prediction. And hence it is that
Iunius and Tremelius render the Hebrew word in both those passages of Genesis
and Daniel; with Sequentibus, or Consequentibus temporibus, which implies
nothing else but times following and ensuing. Those Prophesies then of S. Peter
and S. Paul touching the great wickedness of the latter or last times, may
well be understood either of the Kingdom of Christ, as has been said, or of
times following theirs, and not necessarily near approaching the end of all
time.

SEC. 3. The passages of Scripture alleged to that purpose, particularly and
distinctly answered.
NOW for the particular passages: That prophecy of S. Paul touching Apostates,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats was accomplished in
Eustathius, the Encratits or Tatians, the Marcionists, the Manichaeans, the
Cathari, the Cataphrygians or Montanists, who all vented their heresies in
those two points within less then two or three hundred years of the Apostles.
And if we should with some latter Writers refer that whole prophecy to the
defection of the Roman Church, I think we should therein do her no wrong:
Howsoever it is fully agreed upon, both by them and us, that the prophecy was
long since fulfilled. The same in effect may be said of his other prophecy in
his second Epistle: Neque enim aetatem suam cum nostra comparat, sed potius
qualis futura sit regni Christi conditio docet, says judicious Calvin in his
Commentaries upon that place, He does not compare his own age with ours, but
rather teaches what the Condition of Christ's Kingdom was to be. And that which
the Apostle adds of Evil men and Seducers, that they shall wax worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived, is not sufficient to evince a perpetual
and universal declination. For though some evil men grow worse, yet others
may, and by Gods grace do grow from bad to good, and from good to better: and
even of the same men does the same Apostle tell us in the same place, They
shall proceed no farther, but their folly shall be manifest V. 9.
unto all men. As for S Peter and his prophecy touching the last days, it is
clear that it was accomplished when S. Jude wrote his Epistle in as much as he
points in a manner with his finger to that passage of S. Peter not only using
the same words, but putting us in mind that he had them expressly from the
Apostles of the Lord Jesus: the only difference betwixt S. Peter and S. Jude
is this, that the one foretells it, and the other shows how it was even then
fulfilled.

But I pass from the Scholars to the Master, from the Apostles to our Savior
himself and his prophesies touching this point, recorded by the Evangelists,
whereof the first is in Mat. 24. Because iniquity shall abound the love of many
shall wax cold. For the exposition of which words we are to know that our
Savior in that chapter speaks of the signs fore-running as well the
destruction of Jerusalem as the consummation of the World, and so twisteth as
it were, or weaueth them one within another, that it is hard to distinguish
them: yet by the consent of the best expositours, the former of these is to be
referred to the first part of the chapter, and so consequently this prophecy
was long since accomplisned: the meaning of it to be this, that such and so
cruel shall be the persecution of Christian Religion, that many who otherwise
had a good mind to embrace it, shall forsake both it and the Professors
thereof, leaving them to the malice of their Persequutors. And to this purpose
do both Maldonate and Aretius bring the Example and words of S. Paul, At my
first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me, I 1 Timothy 4. 16.
pray God it be not laid to their charge. Our Saviors second prophecy to this
purpose is recorded in the 18 of S. Luke, When the Son of man comes shall he
find faith on the earth? Which words both Calvin and Iansenius refer not
precisely to the time of Christ's coming to judgment, but extend them to the
general state of men even from his Ascension to his second Coming: Diserte
Christus a suo in Coelum ascensu vsque ad reditum homines passim incredulos
fore praedicit, says Calvin; Christ expressly teaches, that from his
ascension even till his returue, many unbelievers shall euery-where be found.
But Iansenius somewhat more clearly and fully, Non tantum significat defectum
and paucitatem fidei in hominibus qui vivi reperientur in novissimo die, sed
etiam in hominibus cuiuslibet temporis. He does not only intimate the defect
and scantnesse of faith which shall be found in men at the last day, but in
those of all ages. To these passages may be added that in the 12 of the
Revelation, Woe to the V. 12.
Inhabitants of the earth and of the sea, for the devil is come down unto you
having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time: but the
time there spoken of (as the soundest Interpreters expound it) is not called
short in respect of the end of the World (which to the devil is utterly
unknown) but of his binding up for a thousand years whereof he was
forewarned: and besides though the shorter his time be, his rage be the
fiercer, yet is not his intended and desired success always answereable to
the fierceness of his rage, the Lord holding him, as it were in a teather, or
chain, and setting him bounds, as he does to the raging waves of the sea,
hither to shall thou go, and no farther.

SECT. 4. The last doubt touching the coming of Antichrist answered.
THE last doubt is concerning Antichrist, who many think shall come near
toward the end of the World, and consequently it shall then be filled with all
kind of impiety, impurity, and misery, the attendants of his coming, and that
much beyond all former times. But if Antichrist be already come, and that long
since, then will the validity of this argument prove utterly ineffectuall. And
certainly such has been the wickedness and calamity of all ages, that as
Bellarmine speaks: Omnes veteres animadvertentes suorum temporum malitiam De
Romans Pont. 3. 3.
suspicati sunt tempora Antichristi imminere. All the Ancients considering the
malice of their times, suspected that Antichrist was at hand. Thus S. Cyprian
of his time, Scire debetis and pro certo credere and tenere pressurae diem Lib.
4. epist: 7.
super caput esse caepisse and occasumsaeculi atque Antichristi tempus
appropinquasse. Ye ought to know, and for certain to hold and believe, that
the day of pressure is even over our heads, and that the consummation of all
things, and the coming of Antichrist does approach. Lactantius of his, omnis
expectatio non amplius quam ducentorum videtur annorum, the Lib. 7. cap. 25.
end of our expectation seems not to extend beyond the space of two hundred
years at farthest. S. Hierome of his, Qui tenebat de medio fit, and Ad (...)
de Monogamia.
non intelligimus Antichristum appropinquare? he which held or withheld is
removed out of the way, and do we not understand that Antichrist is at hand?
S. Gregory of his, omnia quae praedicta sunt fiunt: rex superbiae prope Lib 4.
ep. 38.
est, all things that were foretold are accomplished, the King of Pride cannot
be far off. And lastly S. Bernard of his, Superest vt reveletur homo peccati
silius perditionis; What remains but that the man of sin, Sermon. 6. in Psalm.
9.
the son of perdition be revealed. From which, two things for our present
purpose may be gathered, the one, that extreme profaneness has reigned in the
world almost in all ages, as well as in the present, such as they, who then
lived, thought, could not well be exceeded. The other that if they looked out
for the coming of Antichrist so long since, by all likelihood he is already
come into the world, and that long agone. S. John tells us, that in his time
there were many Antichrists, 1 ep. 2. 18
forerunners no doubt and harbengers, as it were to the great Antichrist that
was to come. And S. Paul (...) even then the mystery of iniquity began to
work: if he were then conceived, in all likelihood he should be born 2 Thessalonians.
2. 7
ere now, if the egg were then laid, shall we imagine that the Cocatric^s
not yet hatched? was the seed then cast into the ground, and this cursed weed
not yet sprung up?

Credat Iudaeus Apella
Non ego.
Beleeu't who list for me indeed,
It never shall come into my creed.
SECT. 5. The argument of greatest weight to prove that Antichrist is already
come.
But among so many and strong arguments as have been, and justly may be
brought to prove that Antichrist is already come, there is one which to me has
ever seemed of greatest weight: You know, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 6. 7.
says the Apostle, speaking of the man of sin, the son of perdition, what
withholds that he might be revealed in his time: And again, only he who
now lets, will let until he be taken out of the way. So as upon the
removing of that obstacle which hindered his coming, he was then to be
revealed, as the words plainly import. Now what that hinderance should be, the
unanimous consent of the Ancients both Greek and Latins is, that it was the
Roman Empire that then flourished. So Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenius,
Ambrose, Primasius, Sedulius, and the Greek Scholiast in their several
expositions upon the place: Tertullian in his book de resurrectione carnis,
and the thirty second Chapter of his Apology. Cyrillus Hyerosolymitanus in
Catech^si 15. Hierome in his eleventh question to Algasia, in his Commentaries
upon the 25 of the Prophet Ierimy, in his Treatise to Gaudentius and Gerontia;
and lastly S. Augustine in his 20 book de civitate Dei, and 19. cap. And with
the Ancients herein agree the latter writ^rs on both sides, as well Romish as
Reformed, being warranted by the like Prophesies both of Daniell, and Saint
John in his Revelation. And in truth the Apostles Daniel 7: Revel. 17.
wariness in not naming it expressly, least thereby he should incur hatred
against the Christian Professors and Religion, shows as much. That then which
remains to be inquired into, is, whether that obstacle, which by the Apostle
is said to have hindered the revealing of Antichrist be taken out of the way or
no, that is, whether that Roman Empire which then flourished, be now dissolved.
It is then most certain, that that Empire for the west ended in Augustulus,
and the Emperor which now is, is the successor of Charlemaigne, an Emperor
of a new erection: Neither has he the dominions or the power of the former
Emperors, but only the name and title,

Stat magni nominis vmbra. Lucan. l. 1.

Of a great name he but the shadow is.
He has not the city of Rome which should denominate the Roman Emperor, nor
any part of Italy, no nor so much as a Castle, or an house, or a foot of land as
Emperor. We may then rather call him the German Emperor then the Roman; and
yet surely his command in Germany is very small too. The Romanists then in
this case seem to me to deal with him, as the Jews did with Christ, they
give him the title, but take and keep his rights from him. Or they call him
Roman Emperor perchance, because he takes, or as they pretend, should take
his Oath of allegiance to the Bishop of Rome: And that the Empire which was in
being in the Apostles time, is indeed dissolved; some of the In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Romanists themselves, though happily unawares confess. Ante adventum
Antichristi facienda erat discessio, vt Gentes discedant a Romano Imperio,
sicut jam factum cernimus, says Anselme, before the coming of Antichrist,
there was to be a falling away of the Nations from the Roman Empire, as we see
it already done. And Thomas, Quid hoc est quod jam diu gentes recesserunt a
Romano imperio, and tamen nondum venit Antichristus, what shall we say to this,
that long since the Nations fell away from the Roman Empire, and yet
Antichrist is not come. And Lyra, Romanum imperium florebat tempore Pauli, a
quo recesserunt quasi omnia regna negantia ei subijci and redditionem tributi
jam a multis annis: illud etiam imperium caruit imperatore pluribus annis: The
Roman Empire flourished in Paul's time, from which almost all kingdoms are
fallen away, denying subjection and the payment of tribute to it: And besides,
that Empire has wanted an Emperor now for the space of many years. Neither
do they only acknowledge, that the Empire which flourished in the Apostles
time, is dissolved, but that the Emperor which now is, retains rather the
shadow then the power of the ancient Empire. And this confession we have out of
the mouths even of Jesuits themselves. Quampridem Romanum imperium in eas
angustias redactum est, vt vix tenuem quandam vmbram Imperij retineat, long
since was the Roman Empire brought to those straights, that it scarce retains
a thin shadow of that Empire, says Iustinianus. And Salmeron most fully,
Imperium Romanum jam diu eversum est: Nam qui nunc est Imperator Romanus,
levissima est vmbra Imperij antiqui; vsque adeo vt ne quidem vrbem Romae
possideat, and jam per multos annos Romani Imperatores defecerunt: The Roman
Empire was long since dissolved: For he, who is now Roman Emperor, is but a
light shadow of the ancient Empire, so as he does not possess so much as the
City of Rome, and now for many years have the Roman Emperors failed. I
would demand then, whether a name, a title, a shadow can hinder the coming of
Antichrist, or be divided among ten Kings, and shared out into ten kingdoms?
if it cannot, then is Antichrist undoubtedly already come into the world.

Now what he is, or where we should find him, or when he came, I leave that to
others to dispute or demonstrate; it is for my purpose sufficient that he is
come, and that long since; yet if we should a little more narrowly search into
the matter, who I pray you, is more likely to be the man, then he, who has
specially advanced his throne upon the Emperors ruins, who has thrust
himself into the Emperors seat, the Imperial City* the head and mistress
of the Empire; then he, who has taken upon himself the Majesty, the power,
the ensigns, the robes of the Emperor, though in some what a different kind;
And that the Bishop of Rome has so done, Pasquier in his Recearches of France,
Machiavell Lib. 1. Lib. 3. Lib. 4.
in his Florentine history, Sigonius in his history of the kingdom of Italy,
and Guicciardin in his, in part declare: But Lypsius has set it down so
clearly and particularly, as we may easily guess, and need doubt no longer,
who it is, that has succeeded into the Emperors room. I will set down his
words at large as I find them in his preface to his Admiranda. Mira Dei
benignitas in hanc vrbem, cum Legionum vim eripuit, Legum attribuit, cum armis
imperare noluit, sacris indulsit: Et sic quoque fecit eam decus, tutelam,
columen rerum. Atqui Senatus ille vetus non est inquiunt, non ille sed alius,
and vide in ista purpura ex omni nostro orb selectos proceres moribus,
prudentia, annis, spectandos. Si vetus ille Cyneas redeat and hunc consessum
videat, nihil ambigat vel cum regibus iterum, vel cum heroibus comparare. Quid
tributa? non tam multa, sed magis innoxia and vltronea sunt. Quid Legationes
gentium? nec eae desunt, and ex noto ignotoque orb (tanta diffusio Majestatis
hujus est) concurritur, and jura ac leges Sacror^m hinc petunt, ipsi Reges ac
Principes adeunt and inclinantur, and obnoxia capita vni huic Capiti
submittunt: Great is the bounty of God toward this city, when he deprived it
of the strength of Legions, he strengthened it with Laws; when he would no
longer have it rule with force of arms, he armed it with holy orders: And so
likewise did he make it both the ornament and the safety of things. But you
will say, the old Senate is not there to be found, indeed not the same, but
another there is instead thereof, and there you may see clad in that purple the
choicest worthies of Christendom, and the most venerable for manners, for
wisdom, for years. If the old Cyneas were alive again and beheld this
assembly, he would nothing doubt to compare it again with Kings and Princes.
What should I speak of their tribute? indeed it is not so great, but more
innocently imposed and willingly paid. What of the Embassages from foreign
Nations? neither are they wanting: Hither they resort both from the known and
unknown parts of the world (so far is this Majesty spread) and seek for
Laws and Constitutions in religious affairs; nay Kings and Princes here
present themselves, and all bow down and submit their heads to this one head.

CAP. 13. That the world shall have an end by Fire, and by it be entirely
consumed.
SECT. 1. That the world shall have an end, is a point so clear in Christian
Religion, that it needs not to be proved from the principles thereof, neither
is he worthy the name of a Christian who makes any doubt of it.
HAving now by Gods assistance done with mine Apology of his Providence in the
preservation of the world, least I should seem thereby to undermine or weaken
the article of our faith touching the worlds end; it remains, that according
to promise I endeavor to confirm it, not so much from Scripture which no true
Christian can doubt of: And besides, the passages thereof to this purpose,
specially in the new Testament are so many and clear, as to be ignorant of
them were stupiditie no less gross, then to deny them phophane impiety. In
this chapter then I will propose three things to my self; first, to prove by
the testimony of the Gentiles, that the world shall have an end. Secondly, that
it shall have an end by fire: Thirdly and lastly, that it shall by fire be
totally and entirely consumed. That the world shall have an end is as clear in
Christianity, as that there is a Sun in the firmament: And therefore, whereas
there can hardly be named any other article of our faith, which some Heretics
have not presumed to impugn or call into question; yet to my remembrance I
never met with any who questioned this; and though at this day many and eager
be the differences among Christians in other points of Religion, yet in this
they all agree and ever did, that the world shall have an end, and that there
shall be a resurrection of the dead, and a day of judgment. And surely as by
the event of many things already fallen out, we are sure that was true which
the Prophets and Apostles foretold of them: So arc we as certain, that all
other things, and this in particular shall come to pass, which they have
likewise foretold, though happily we cannot set down the time or manner of
their event. And i^ as much as we, who now live, have seen the accomplishment of
many prophesies foretold by the penmen of holy writ, which our forefathers saw
not, if we steadfastly believe not the fulfilling of those which are yet to come
in their due time, we shall thereby be made the more guilty, and the less
excusable before God. Howsoever if we believe (as we all pretend) the
Scriptures to be the lively oracles of God, and to have bin indicted by the
divine and sacred inspiration of the holy Ghost; we cannot but withal believe
that the consu^mation of the world shall most undoubtedly in due time, though
to us most uncertain, be accomplished. Now as the clear light of this truth
has by Gods grace so brightly shined among Christians, that except they
wilfully shut their eyes against it, they cannot but apprehend and embrace it:
So did it appear to the Jews, though not in so Buxdofius Syllag. Iud. c. 1.
conspicuous a manner; yea, some sparks of this truth have been scattered
even among the Gentiles themselves, so as it were a shame unpardonable for us
Christians not to acknowledge it, or so much as once to doubt of it.

SECT. 1. That the world shall have an end, by the testimony of the Gentiles.
SEneca disputing this question, whether a wise man be so sufficiently content
with himself as he needs not the help of any fr^end; Epist. 9. circa finem.
puts the case, Qualis futura est vita sapientis, how he would live being
destitute of friends, if he were cast into prison or banished into some desert,
or cast upon some strange shore; his answer is, Qualis est Iovis cum resoluto
mundo, etc. as Jupiter shall live when the world shall be dissolved, contenting
himself with himself. And again more clearly: Quidenim mutationis periculo
exceptum? non terra, non coelum, non Epist. 71.
totus hic rerum omnium contextus quamvis Deo agente ducatur, non semper
tenebit hunc ordinem, sed illumex hoc cursu aliquis dies deijciet, certis eunt
cuncta temporibus, nasci debent, crescere, ext^ngui. Quaecunque vides supra nos
currere atque haeo quibu^ innixi atque impositi sumus velut solidissimis
carpentur (...). What is there which is prviledged from danger of change? not
the earth, not the heavens, no nor this whole frame of Creatures, though it be
guided by the finger of God, it shall not always observe this order, but some
one day at last shall turn it out of his course. For all things have a time to
be borne, to increase, and then again to die and be ^ntinguished. All those
things which thou see wheeling over our Heads, and even those upon which we
are seated and settled, as being most solid, shall be surprised and leave to
be. And in another place. Si potest tibi solatio esse commune fatum, nihil
constat loco stabili, and nihil qua sint loto stabit. Omnia sternet abducetque
secum vetustas, supprimet De consolatione ad Martia^, 26.
montes, maria sorbebit* If the common destiny of all things may any whit
comfort thee, there is nothing settled in a stable course, nothing shall always
remain in that state it now stands in; time shall carry down all things with
it, it shall level the mountains and swallow up the seas^ And lastly, in his
Natural questions, vnus humanum genus Lib. 3. cap. 19.
condet dies, one day shall bury all mankind. Yet it should seem, that
withal he held a restoring of all things again: Omne ex integro animal
generabitur dabiturque terris homo inscius scelerum and melioribus auspicijs
natus: Cap. 30.
Sed illis quoque innocentia non durabit nisi dum novi sunt, cito nequitia
subrepet. All Creatures shall be again restored, and mankind shall again be
sent to inhabit the earth; but a kind void of wickedness and borne to a better
fortune: yet shall not their innocence long endure neither, but only whiles
they are yet fresh and new, afterward ungraciousness will by degrees creep upon
them.

Aelian, as I have already touched to another purpose in the eight book of his
History, tells us, that not only the mountain Aetna (for Cap. 11.
thereof might be given some reason, because of the daily wasting and consuming
of it with fire) but Parnassus and Olympus did appear to be less and less to
such as sailed at sea, the height thereof sinking as it seemed; and thereupon
inferres, that men most skillful in the secrets of nature did affirm, that the
world it self should likewise perish and have an end. His premises I have in
another place sufficiently disproved, but his conclusion inferred thereupon, I
cannot but highly approve, and most willingly accept of, as a rich testimony
for the confirmation of our Christian doctrine (touching the end of the world)
delivered from the pen of a Gentile, nay he positiuely affirms it to have
been the opinion of the most skillful in the secrets of Nature: And certain
it is, that the greatest part of Philosophers before Aristotle, Heraclitus,
Empedocles, Oecumenius in Collectaneis super 3. post Petri
Anaxagoras, Democritus and others, as they held that the world had a beginning
in time, so did they likewise, that in time it should have an end: And since
Aristotle, the greatest part (his followers only excepted) have ever constantly
maintained the same; in so much, that the very Epicures herein accord with the
Stoickes, though in other opinions they differ as fire and water, as may
appear in Lucretius, by sect an Epicurean, and for his wit much esteemed among
the Ancients.

Principio maria* ac terris, coelumque tuere De Rerum (...)tura 3.

Hor^m naturam triplicem, tria corpora Memmi,
Tres species tam dissimiles, tria talia texta,
Vna dies dabit exitio, multosque per annos
Sustentata ruet moles and machina mundi.
Behold, O Memmi, first the earth, the sea,
The heaven, their threefold nature, bodies three,
Three shapes so far unlike, three pieces wrought
And woven so fast, one day shall bring to naught,
And the huge frame and engine of this all
Vpheld so many years, at length shall fall.
And Ovid speaking of Lucretius, seems to have borrowed from him part of these
very words,

Carmina sublimis tum sunt peritura Lucreti in Eleg.

Exitio terras cum dabit vna dies.
Lucretius lofty rimes so long shall live
Till to this earth one day destruction give.
And Lucan as he differs not much from Lucrece in name, so does he fully accord
with him in this opinion.

-- Sic cum compage soluta
Saecula tot mundi suprema coegerit hora. Lib. 1: Ph^os.

Antiquum repetens iterum Chaos omnia mixtis
Sydera Syderibus concurrent, ignea pontum
Astra petent, tellus extendere littora nolet,
Excutietque fretum, fratri contraria Phaebe,
Ibit, and obliquum bigas agitare per orbem
Indignata diem poscet sibi, totaque discors
Machina divulsi turbabit foedera mundi.
-- So When the last hour shall
So many ages end, and this disjoynted all
To Chaos back return: then all the stars shall be
Blended together, then those burning lights on high
In sea shall drench, earth then her shores will not extend
But to the waves give way, the moon her course shall bend
Cross to her brothers, and disdaining still to drive
Her chariot wheels athward the heavenly orb shall strive
To rule the day, this frame to discord wholly bent
The worlds peace shall disturb, and all in sunder rent.
SECT. 3. That the world shall have an end by fire, proved likewise by the
testimony of the Gentiles.
ANd as they held that the world should have an end, so likewise that this end
should come to pass by fire. Exustionis hujus odor quidam etiam ad Gentes
manauit, says Ludovicus Vives, speaking of the general combustion of the
world, some sent of this burning has De ver. fid. Christ. l. 1.
spread it self even to the Gentiles. And Saint Hierome in his comment on the
51 of I say; Quae quidem and Philosophorum mundi opinio est omnia quae An^e
medium.
cernimus igni peretura, which is also the opinion of the Philosophers of this
world, that all which we behold shall perish by fire. Eusebius is more
particular, affirming it to be the doctrine of the Stoics, and namely De
prepar. Evan. 3. 15.
of Zeno, Cleanthes and Chrysippus the most ancient among them. Certain it is,
that Seneca a principal Scholar, or rather Master of that sect, both thought
it and taught it: Et Sydera Syderibus incurrent, and omni flagrante materia vn^
igne quicquid nunc ex disposito lucet ardebit: The stars De Consol. ^d Mart.
c. 26.
shall make inrodes one upon another, and all the whole world being in a flame,
whatsoever now shines in comely and decent order shall burn together in one
fire. Panaetius likewise the Stoic feared, as witnesses Cicero, ne ad
extremum mundus ignesceret, least the world at last should be Ludou. Vives. de
ver. fid. Christ. lib. 2. Lib. 7. 16.
burnt up with fire. And with the Stoics herein Pliny agrees, Consumente
vbertatem seminum exustione in cujus vices nunc vergat aevum, the heat burning
up the plentiful moisture of all seeds, to which the world is now hastening.
Nume^us also says, good souls* continue, (...), until the dissolution of all
things by fire. And with the Philosophers their Poets accord. Lucan as he held
that the world should have an end, so in special by fire, where speaking of
those whom Caesar left unburned at the battle of Pharsalia he thus goes on.

Hos Caesar populos si nunc non vsserit ignis,
Vret cum terris, vret cum gurgite ponti. Lib. 7.

Communis mundo superest rogus, ossibus astra
Misturus.
If fire may not these corpse to ashes turn,
O Caesar, now, when earth and seas shall burn,
It shall: a common fire the world shall end,
And with these bones those heavenly bodies blend.
As for Ovia he deduces it from their prophetical records.

Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus Metamorph. 1

Quo mare, quo tellus, convexaque regia coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laborat.
Besides he calls to mind how by decree
Of fates a time shall come when earth and sea,
And Heavens high Throne shall faint, and the whole frame
Of this great world shall be consumed in flame.
Which he borrowed, says Ludovicus Vives, ex fatis indubie Sybillinis,
undoubtedly from the Oracles of Sybilla. And indeed verses there are which go
under the name of Sybilla to the very same purpose.

Tunc ardens fluvius coelo manabit ab alto
Igneus atque locos consum^t funditus omnes Lib 2. or acul^rum.

Terramque, Oceanumque ingentem, and caerula ponti
Stagnaque, tum fluvios, fontes, ditemque Severum
Coelestemque polum, coeli quoque lumina in unum
Fluxa ruent, forma deleta prorsus eorum
Astra cadent etenim de coelo cuncta revulsa.
Then shall a burning flood flow from the Heavens on high,
And with its fiery streams all places utterly
Destroy, earth, ocean, lakes, rivers, fountains, hell,
And heavenly poles: the Lights in firmament that dwell,
Loosing their beauteous form shall be obscured, and all
Raught from their places down from heaven to earth shall fall.
He that yet desires farther satisfaction in this point may read Eugubinus his
tenth book de Perenni Philosophia, and Magius de exustione Mundi. And so I
pass to my third and last point proposed in the beginning of this Chapter,
which is that the whole world by fire shall totally and entirely be consumed.

SECT. 4. That the world shall be by fire totally and finally dissolved and
annihilated, prooved by Scripture.
I Am not ignorant that the opinions of Divines touching the manner of the
Consummation of the world have been as different as the greatest part of them
are strange and improbable; some imagining that all the Creatures which by
Almighty God were made at the first beginning, shall again be restored to that
perfection which they enjoyed before the fall of man. Others that the Heavens
and Elements shall only be so restored; others that the Heavens and only two
of the Elements, the Air and the Earth, others again, that the old world
shall be wholly abolished, and a new created in steed thereof; and lastly
others which I must confess, to me seems the most likely opinion and most
agreeable to scripture and reason, that the whole world with all the parts and
works thereof (only men and Angels, and Devils, and the third Heavens, the
mansion house of the Saints and blessed Angels, and the place and instruments
appointed for the tormenting of the damned, excepted) shall be totally and
finally dissolved and annihilated: As they were made out of nothing, so into
nothing shall they return again; In the prooving whereof I will first produce
mine own arguments, and then show the weakness of the adverse.

Man lies down, and rises not, says Job, till the heavens be no more. Of
old have thou laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work
of 14. 12.
thy hands, They shall perish, but thou shall endure, says the Psalmist, which
the Apostle in the first to the Hebrews, and the 10. and the 11. repeates 102.
5. 6.
almost in the same words, Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the
earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth
shall wax old as does a garment, says the Prophet Esaias: and in another 51. 6.
place: all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heaven shall be rolled
together as a scroll, and all their host shall fall down as the leaf falls
off from the vine, 34. 4.
and as a falling fig from the fig tree. To the former of which words S.
John seems to allude, And the heaven departed as a scroll which is rolled
together, Revel 6. 14.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away, says our
Savior. The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the Mat 24.
35. Mark: 13. 31.
which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat* The earth also, and the works that are therein shall
be burnt up, says S. Peter. And I saw a great white throne, and him 2. 3. 10.
Revel. 20. 11.
that sat on it from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away, and there
was found no place for them, says S. John. Now I would demand whether being
no more, as Job; perishing, as David; vanishing away like smoke, dissolving,
rolling together, falling down as a withered leaf or a dry fig from the tree,
as Esaias; passing away, as our Savior; passing away with a great noise; melting
with fervent heat, burning up as S. Peter; or lastly flying away, so as their
place be found no more, as S. John; do not include an utter abolition, or at
leastwise exclude a restitution to a perfecter estate: once Beza I am sure is
so evidently convinced by the alleged words of S. Peter, that In Romans 8. 20
he plainly confesses the dissolution the Apostle there speaks of to be a
kind of annihilation: And both De extrem^ Iudicio.
Tilenus and In Sobria Philosoph. par. 1 sect. 3. cap. 3. quaest. 5.
Meisnerus are confident, that those who hold a restitution will never be able
to reconcile their opinion with the alleged Scriptures. If we look back to
higher times before S. Hierome we shall not easily find any who maintained it.
And certain it is, that Clement in his Recognitions, or whosoever were the
Author of that work, brings in S. Peter reasoning with Simon Magus, and Lib.
2. and 3.
teaching that there were two Heavens, the one Superius and invisibile, and
aeternum quod Spiritus beati incolunt: the highest, invisible and eternal,
which bl^ssed spirits inhabit; the other inferius, visibile, varijs distinctum
syderibus, corruptibile, and in consummatione saeculi dissolvendum, and prorsus
abolendum, lower, visible, distinguished, with diverse stars, corruptible,
and at the worlds end to be dissolved and utterly abolished. Now though that
work were not Clements, yet was it doubtless very ancient being quoted by
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Origin, and remembered by S. Hierome in his
Commentaries upon Esaias, and is of sufficient authority against those who
receive it: for my self I stand not upon his authority, Cap. 14. ante medium.
but the rock of Scripture and reason drawn from thence, and the force of
natural discourse.

SECT. 5. The same farther prooved by reason.
THE first then, and as I conceive the most weighty argument is taken from the
End of the Worlds creation, which was partly and chiefly the glory of the
Creator, and partly the use of man, the Lord Deputy as it were, or Viceroy
thereof. Now for the glory of the Creator, it being by the admirable frame of
the World manifested unto man, man being removed out of the world, and no
Creature being capable of such a manifestation besides him, we cannot imagine
to what purpose the frame it self should be left and restored to a more
perfect estate. The other end being for man's use, either to supply his
necessity in matter of diet, of Physic, of building, of apparel; or for his
instruction, direction, recreation, comfort and delight; or lastly that therein
as in a looking-glass he might contemplate the wisdom, the power, and the
goodness of God; when he shall attain that blessed estate, as he shall have
no farther use of any of these, enjoying perfect happiness, and seeing God as
he is, face to face, the second or 1 Cor. 13.
subordinate end of the Worlds being must needs be likewise frustrate: And what
other end can be given or conceived for the remaining or restoring thereof,
for mine own part I must profess I cannot conceive. And to affirm that it
shall be restored, and withal to assign no end wherefore, is ridiculous and
unreasonable. An house being built for an inhabitant, as the World was for man;
If it be decreed that it shall no more be inhabited, it were but vanity to
repair, much more to adorn and beautify it farther. And therefore when
mankind shall be dislodged and remove from hence, thereupon shall instantly
ensue the Consummation or End, not the reparation or restitution, but the End
of the world. So the Scriptures call it in plain terms, and so I believe
Mat. 24. 3
it. And in truth some Divines, considering that of necessity some end must be
assigned, have fallen upon ends so absurd and unwarrantable, that the very
naming of them were sufficient to make a man believe there was no such matter
indeed. Some then, and that of our own Church, and that in published books
for the clearing of this objection, have fancied to themselves an intercourse
of the Saints (after the resurrection) betwixt heaven and earth, and that full
Dominion over the Creatures which by the fall of Adam was lost. Others are of
opinion that the Earth after the day of judgment being renewed with fire, and
Catharinus in 1 Pet. 3.
more pleasantly apparelled, shall be the mansion of such as neither by their
merits have deserved heaven, nor hell by their demerits. And lastly others,
that such as have died in their infancy without circumcision Salmeron in eundem
locum.
or Baptism might possess it. Now what mere dreams these are of idle
brains, if I should but endeavor to demonstrate, I fear I should show my
self more vain in vouchsafing them a confutation, then they in publishing
them to the World. And yet they are the best we see that Learned men by the
strength of their wits can find out.

My second reason shall be drawn from the nature of the world, and the quality
of the parts thereof, which are supposed shall be restored to their original
integrity, and so in that state everlastingly remain. I will begin with the
vegetables and Creatures endued with sense, and concerning them would willingly
learn, whether they shall be all restored, or some only, namely such as
shall be found in being at the day of Judgment: if all, where shall we find
stowage for them? Surely we may in this case properly apply that which the
Evangelist in another case uses figuratively, if they should all be restored:
eue^ the world it self could not co^tain the things which should be restored.
if some only, the^ would I gladly know why those some should be vouchsafed this
great honor and not all, or how these creatures without a miracle shall be
restrained from propagating and multiplying, and that infinitely their kinds by
a perpetual generation. Or lastly, how the several individuals of these kinds
shall contrary to their primitive natures, live and dure immortally: But to
make a good and sound answer to these demands, is a point of that difficulty,
that the greatest part of Divines rather choose to leave out the mixed bodies
and prefer only the heavens and the elements to this pretended dignity of
restitution; though about the number of the Elements to be restored they all
agree not. But here again I would demand, whether the world without the mixed
bodies, can truly be said to be more perfect and beautiful then before,
whether the inbred and inseparable qualities of the Elements, as thickenesse
and thinness, weight and lightness, heat and cold, moisture and dryness
shall remain? if they shall not, how shall they remain Elements? if they
shall, how without a miracle shall they be suspended from a mutual intercourse
of working one upon another, and a production of Meteors and mixed bodies? And
how shall the Earth disvested of the vegetables which apparelled her, and
appearing with her naked and dustie face, be said to be more amiable then
before? Finally, if the heavens according to their Essence shall remain, how
shall they naturally and without a miracle stand still, being now naturally
inclined to a circular motion? Or how without a miracle shall the light be
increased, and yet the warmth springing from thence be abated, nay wholly
abolished? Or if the warmth shall remain, how can it choose but burn up those
parts of the Earth, upon which it never ceases to dart perpendicular beams? Or
how can the Sun stand still, and yet inlighten both the Hemespheres, or the
stars of that Hemesphere which it inlightens at all appear? To these
demands, Pererius makes a short answer, and in my judgment a very strange
one, and unworthy the pen of so great a Clarke, that some of these things God
has already done, that we might be induced the more readily to believe, that
they both may, and shall be done again: And for instance, he alleges the
standing still of the Sun and Moon at the prayer of Iosuah, and the
restrayning of the burning force of the fire, in the Babylonian furnace; but
withal foreseing that those were miracles, for satisfaction thereunto he
concludes: Non agere autem inter se qualitates elementorum, nec lu em Syderum
calefacere, quamvis nunc ingens esset miraculum, tunc tamen posita semel mundi
renovatione non erunt miracula. It were now a great miracle, that the qualities
of the Elements should not mutually work each upon other, or that the light of
the stars should not produce warmth, but then the world being renewed, they
shall be no miracles. Indeed if the world were so to be renewed as the former
essence of it were to be destroyed, or the former qualities to be entinguished,
then should I happily allow of his reason as probable and passable; but now
granting that the same Identicall form and matter shall, still continue, and
that the former qualities shall not be abandoned but perfected, not altered in
kind, but only in degree; I cannot see how it should be held and termed a
great miracle heretofore, which shall not be so hereafter. And whereas it is
said, that the bodies of the Saints shall then naturally live without meat,
which now without a miracle they cannot do, we must consider, that though the
substance of their bodies shall remain, yet the qualities of them shall be
entirely changed, so far as the Apostle is bold to call it a spiritual
body. And besides, we may be 1. Cor. 15. 44.
bold to challenge a special privilege unto the bodies of the Saints, the
temples of the holy Ghost, which without special warrant cannot be yielded to
any other Corporeal substance. And withal we must remember, that for the
resurrection of the body, we have an Article in our Creed and most clear
proofs from Scripture, but for the restitution of the Creatures no one such
sufficient proof, as the mind of a Christian desirous to be truly informed,
can rest fully satisfied therein. Such as they are I will not conceal them:
These places then are to that purpose commonly alleged.

SECT. 6. The arguments commonly alleged from the Scriptures for the
renovation of the world, answered.
WHom the heavens must contain till the times of the Restitution of all
things. He laid the foundations of the earth that it should not Act. 3. 22.
Psalm. 104. 5.
be removed for ever, says David. And Solomon, one generation passes and
another comes, but the earth abides for ever. Eccles. 1. 4.


Behold I create new heavens and a new earth, and the former shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind. To which words of the Prophet, S. John Esaias. 65:
17.
seems to allude, And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven
Revel: 21. 1: and S. Peter: 2: 3: 13:
and the first earth passed away, and there was no more Sea. And for the
increase of the light of the Planets and other stars, that passage of the
same Prophet is usually alleged: The light of the Moon shall be as the light
of the Sun, and the light of the Sun seven fold: But the pretended 30. 26.
proofs most stood upon, are drawn from S. Paul's Epistles, The fashion 1.
Cor: 7: 31.
of this world passes away; the fashion not the substance. And again, The
Creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God. And lastly, hereunto they add Romans
8: 21.
the words of the Psalmist, Thou shall change them, and they shall be changed:
Psalm: 102. 26:
not abolished but changed: Which words are again by the Apostle taken up and
repeated, Heb. 1. 12. These are, I am sure, the strongest, if not all the
pretented proofs that are commonly drawn from the holy Scripture and pressed
for the maintenance of the adverse opinion; the strength of which, I think I
shall so put back, as it shall appear to any indifferent Judge, that it is in
truth but forced and wrested. The passages I will consider in order as they are
alleged, and severally examine their validity to the purpose they are urged.
First then whereas we out of the Greek read the Restitution of all things,
the Syriake Interpreter has it vsque ad Complementum temporum omnium, to the
end of all times, whereby none other thing can be understood then the final
consummation of the world; but to take the words as we find them, The times of
restitution are undoubtedly the same, which Saint Peter in the next verse save
one going before, had termed times of refreshing, and by them is meant the
actual fullness and perfection of our redemption, quoniam restitutio illa
adhuc in cursu est adeoque redemptio quando adhuc sub onere servitutis gemimus,
says Calvin, because our restitution and consequently our redemption as yet is
but imperfect, whiles we groan under the burden of servitude. To the second it
may be said, that in the course of nature, the earth should remain for ever
without decay or diminution, had not the Creator of it decreed by his almighty
power to abolish it: But I rather choose to answer with Iunius, who upon the
first place taken out of the Psalm, gives this note, tantisper dum saeculum
duraturum est, as long as time shall endure: and upon the second this, hominis
vani comparatione, in comparison of the vanishing estate of man. The earth then
is said to remain for ever, as Circumcision and the Leviticall Law are said
to be perpetual, not absolutely, but comparatively. Now for the new heavens
and the new earth: it should seem by the places alleged, that if it be
literally to be understood of the material heavens, they shall not be renewed
as the common opinion is, but new Created, (creation being a production of some
new thing out of nothing: So as it shall not be a restitution of the old, but a
substitution of new, in as much as the Prophet Esaias adds, the former shall not
be remembered, nor come into mind: And Saint John, the first heaven and the
first earth passed away, and there was no more Sea. And Saint Peter, The
heavens shall pass away with v. 10.
a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works
that are therein shall be burnt up. And of this opinion, Beza in one place In
Romans 8. v. 20:
seems to have been: Promittuntur novi Coeli ac nova terra, non priorum
restitutio, sive in eundem sive in meliorem statum, nec ijs possum assentiri,
qui hanc dissolutionem ad solas qualitates referendam censent. There are
promised new heavens and a new earth, not the restitution of the old either
unto their former or a better state, neither can I assent unto them, who
refer this dissolution to the qualities alone. But seeing belike the
singularity and absurdity of this opinion, he recalls himself in his
annotations upon the very next verse. But the truth is that by new heavens v:
21.
and a new earth is to be understood in the Prophet Esaias, the state of the
Church during the kingdom of Christ: and in Saint Peter and S. John, the state
of the Saints in the heavenly Jerusalem. For the Prophet, that which I affirm
will easily appear to any understanding Reader that pleases to pervse that
Chapter; specially if thereunto we add the latter part of the next touching
the same point. For as the new heavens and the new earth which I will make,
shall remain before me, says the Lord: so shall your Cap. 66. v. 22. 23.
seed and your name continue, and from month to month, and from sabbath to
sabbath shall all flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord. Upon the
alleged passage of the former chapter Iunius and Tremelius give this note,
Omnia instauraturus sum in Christo, I will restore all things in Christ:
Referring us for the farther illustration thereof to that of the same Prophet
in his 25 chapter at the 8 verse. And for the exposition of the latter passage
in the 66 chapter, referres us to that in the 65 going before. So that as well
by the drift and coherence of the text, as by the judgment of sound
Interpreters, material heavens and earth are not there understood. Which some
of our English Translatours well perceiving, have to the first passage affixed
this note, I will so alter and change the state of the Church that it shall
seem to dwell in a new world: And to the second this, Hereby he signifies
the kingdom of Christ, wherein his Church shall be renewed. Yet I will not
deny but that the Prophet may in those words likewise allude to the state of
the Saints in the heavenly Jerusalem. To which purpose, S. Peter seems to
apply them, according to his promise, says he, we look for new heavens and a
new earth wherein dwells Righteousness, that is, by the consent of the best
expositours, righteous and just men, who after the day of judgment shall dwell
no longer upon the Earth, but in the heavenly Jerusalem. Which Saint John more
lively describes in the 21 of the Revelation; for having said in the first
verse, And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, he presently adds in the
second, as it were by way of Exposition of the former: And I John saw the holy
City new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride
adorned for her husband; and by the sequel of that Chapter and the latter part
of the precedent, it clearly appears (whatsoever Bright-man dream to the
contrary) that he there describes the state of the Saints after the day of
judgment, and the glory of that place which they are eternally to inhabit;
being such, that it had no need of the Sun nor of the Moon to shine in it,
the glory of God inlightning it, and the Lamb being v 23.
the light thereof: And Iunius thus begins his Annotations on that chapter:
Nunc sequitur historiae propheticae pars secunda de statu futuro Ecclesiae
coelestis post Iudicium vltimum: Now follows the second part of this
prophetical history of the future state of the Church triumphant after the day
of Judgment: And with him therein accord the greatest part of the soundest and
most judicious Interpreters.

The other passage alleged of the Prophet Esaias touching the increase of light
in the Sun and Moon is likewise undoubtedly to be understood of the
restoration of his Church, according to the tenor of the 30.
chapter, and the annotation of Iunius annexed thereunto, Illustrissima erunt
and gloriosissima omnia in restitutione Ecclesiae, all things shall then be
more beautifulll and glorious in the restitution of the Church. And with him
fully accord our English notes, when the Church shall be restored, the glory
thereof shall pass seven times the brightness of the Sun. For by the Sun
and Moon which are two excellent Creatures, he shows what shall be the
glory of the Children of God in the kingdom of Christ.

Now for the words of the Apostle, The fashion of this world passes away, what
other thing intends he, but that in these wordly things, there 1. Cor. 7. 31.
is nothing durable and solid, elegantly thereby expressing the vanity of
them, in which exposition, both Iunius and Calvin agree.

That of the same Apostle in the 8 to the Romans, touching the delivering of
the Creature from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty v. 21.
of the Sons of God, is I confess in appearance more pressing. But this
passage the great wit of Saint Augustine found to be very obscure in lib. 83.
quest. 67.
and perplexed, in so much as not a few understand those words of Saint Peter of
this particular, that in Saint Paul's Epistles some things are hard to be
understood. It were then in my judgment no small presumption upon 2. ep. 3. 16.
a place so intricate and difficult peremptorily to build so uncertain a
doctrine. But because it is so hotly urged as a testimony vnanswereable, let us
a little examine the parts and sense thereof. First then it is clear, that the
Creature may be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and yet not restored
to a more perfect and beautiful estate, in as much as being annihilated, it is
thereby freed from that abuse of wicked and ungrateful men, which here it is
of necessity still subject unto. But all the doubt is, how the Creature shall
be made partaker of the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. I hope no man
will dare to affirm that they shall be with them Coheires of eternal
blessedness, as the words seem to import; how then are they made partakers of
this glorious liberty? But in as much as when the sons of God shall be made
partakers thereof, the Creature shall be altogether freed from the bondage of
corruption: So as that, into the liberty of the sons of God, is no more then
together with the liberty of the Sons of God, or, by reason of the liberty of
the Sons of God, as Saint Chrysostom has expounded it. They which maintain
any other future liberty in the Creature by way of restitution or bettering it,
are bound soundly to answer all the arguments before alleged, and withal to
yield a sufficient reason why some Creatures are to be restored and not all,
since the name of Creature is equally attributed to all and not to some only.
Surely S. Ambrose in his Expositions upon that place, durst go no farther then
we do, habet enim in labor posita Creatura hoc solatium quoniam habebit
requiem, cum crediderint omnes quos scit Deus credituros: the Creature
traveling in pain has this comfort, that it shall rest from labor, when
they shall all believe, whom God knows are to believe. And in truth this is as
much as we need believe, and as the words being favourablely interpreted do
enforce.

The last testimony mustered against us was taken from the Psalmist, Thou shall
change them and they shall be changed: But since in the same Psalm. 102. 26.
verse he likewise tells us, They shall perish; what change shall we there
understand? Surely for the same thing to be said to be changed into a better
and more perfect estate, and yet withal at the same time to perish, cannot
properly be verified. We are to know then that a thing may be changed, not
only by alteration, which is a change in the quality, but by augmentation or
diminution, which is a change in the quantity; by corruption, which is a
change in the substance; or lastly, (though in a larger, and perchance
somewhat unusual acceptance) by annihilation, which is a total abolishing of
the substance: And this in truth is the greatest change that may be, it being
ab ente ad non ens simpliciter, from a being to a not being wholly. And of such
a change must the Psalmist of force be understood, if we will reconcile him
with himself, and the passages before alleged; or (if this satisfy not) we
may say (as some do) that the heavens shall be changed in regard of us;
instead of visible and material heavens, (the use of which we now enjoy) we
shall be translated to an heaven immateriall and invisible, the Celestial
Paradise, the heavenly Jerusalem, which in holy Scriptures is likewise termed
a new heaven. Notwithstanding all this (for the reverence I bear antiquity) I
will not be peremptory in the point: But truly me thinks, that a few obscure
places should rather be expounded by many clear, then the clear wrested to
the obscure.

CAP. 14. Of the Uses we are to make of the Consummation of the world, and of
the day of Judgment.
SECT. 1. That the day of the worlds end shall likewise be the day of the
general judgment thereof, and that then there shall be such a judgment, is
proved as well by reason as the testimony of the Gentiles.
WHatsoever be the manner of the worlds end, most certain it is, an end it
shall have, and as certain that then we shall all appear before the Judgment
seat of Christ, that every man may receive according to that which he has
done in his body, whether it be good or evil. 2. Cor. 5. 10.
If we yield that there is a God, and that this God is Almighty and just (which
of necessity he must be, or otherwise he may not be God) it cannot be avoided,
but that after this life ended, he administer justice unto men, by punishing
the wicked and rewarding the righteous: Since in this world the one commonly
live in ease and prosperity, and the other in misery and persecution. Shall not
then the Judge of all the world do right? doubtless he shall and will. Some
therefore he punishes exemplarily Genesis 18. 25.
in this world, that we might from thence have a taste or glimce of his present
justice: And others he reserveth to the next, that from thence we might have an
assurance of a future judgment, which is either particular, as we are single
persons at the day of the separation of the soul from the body, which we may
call the Privy Sessions of the soul; or universal, as we are parcels of
mankind, at the last day, which we may call the general Assise both of soul
and body.

And that there shall be such a general judgment, beside the particular, we
have these reasons to induce us to believe it. First, that the body of man
rising from his sepulcher at that day may be partaker of eternal See Raimundus
Sebundus his natural Theology. and Raymundus Lullius in demonst. art. fidei.
punishment or glory with the soul, even as in this life it was participant of
the virtues or vices which the soul did execute; as they either sinned
together, or served God together: So is it most fit that they should receive
the sentence of eternal life or death together. Yet because the soul both
may, and often does, either sin or serve God without the body, but the body
of it self can do neither without the soul; therefore is it as requisite,
that the separated soul should either suffer pain or enjoy bliss, whiles the
body rests in the grave: And being reunited and married again unto the body,
should partake more either of bliss or pain then it.

As this first reason is taken from the Essential parts, so the second reason,
that there shall be an universal and public judgment, is drawn from the
Actions of the persons to be judged and their rewards. Though it be true then,
that if men were rewarded in secret both in soul and in in body according to
their actions the justice of God might by that means be preserved, yet could
it not be sufficiently manifested, unless this judgment were acted in the
public view of the whole world. Many good men have here been openly
oppressed and trodden under foot; and on the other side, the wicked have
flourished in abundance of outward peace and temporal felicity, which has
made the best of Gods servants at times to stagger and stand amazed thereat:
But then shall they and all the world clearly see, and confid^ntly profess to
the honor of Divine justice, Verily there is a reward for the righteous,
doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth. And in regard of this
conspicuous Psalm. 58: 11:
manifestation of Gods justice and full accomplishment thereof at the last day,
not a few of the Greek and Latin Fathers, as also the holy Scriptures
themselves in sundry places seem to say, the retribution of our works in the
flesh shall be differred till then. Now besides this honor which shall accrue
to the justice of God, both wicked sinners and the blessed Saints of God shall
then receive their rewards and final paiments openly in the sight and hearing
of each other, to the end, that the grief and shame of the impious, and the
triumphant joy of the virtuous and religious, might thereby be the more
increased. For what greater heartbreaking and confusion can there be to the
one, then to have all their secret faults laid open, and the sentence of
Condemnation passed upon them in the presence of them whom they derided and
vilified; or what greater comfort and content to the other, then to be
justified and rewarded in the view of them, who were their professed enemies.

Lastly, as our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (who shall then appear
as Judge) at his first coming into this world was contemptible in the eye of
wordlings, and dishonored publicly both in his life and death: So was it
convenient, that once in this world he should show his power, and Majesty, and
that in the sight of all his Creatures, but specially of his wicked enemies,
who after that day are never to see or behold him more.

To these reasons may be added the testimony of the very Gentiles, of
Hydaspes, Hermes, and Sybilla; whereof the first having described the iniquity
Eusebius de p^aeparati ne 11. 18. 20. and 123.
of the last age, says that the godly and righteous men being severed from the
vntighteous, shall with tears and groans lift up their hands to heaven
imploring the help of Jupiter, and that thereupon Jupiter shall regard the
earth, hear their prayers and destroy the wicked: Quae omnia vera sunt praeter
vnum quod Iovem dixit illa facturum quae Deus faciet, says Lactantius, all
which things are true, save one, which is, that Lactan. 7. 1^.
he ascribes that to Jupiter which God shall do. And besides (says he) it was
not without the cunning suggestion of Satan left out that then the Son of
God shall be sent from the father, who destroying the wicked, shall set the
righteous at liberty. Which Hermes notwithstan ding dissembled not. Part of
Sybilla's verses alleged by Lactantius in Greek, may thus be rendered in
Latin and English:

Huic luci finem imponent cum fata supremum,
Iudicium aethereus Pater exercebit in omnes,
Iudicium humano generi imperiumque verendum.
When God shall to this world its fatal period send
The Immortal, mortal men in judgment shall arraigne,
Great shall his judgment be, his Kingdom without end.
And again,

Tartareumque chaos tellure hiscente patebit
Regesque aetherij sistentur judicis omnes
Ante thronum.
Tartarean Chaos then Earth opening wide shall show,
And then all kings before Gods judgment seat shall bow.
And in another place.

Coelum ego convolvens penetralia caeca recludam
Telluris, functique and fati lege soluti
Et mortis stimulo exurgent, cunctosque tribunal
Ante meum Iudex statuam, reprobosque, probosque.
Rolling up Heaven I will Earths secret vaults disclose,
Deaths sting also and bonds of fate will I unloose:
Then shall the dead arise, and all both small and great,
Both good and bad shall stand before my judgment seat.
Over and above these Prophets and men of learning, Peru the South part of
America does yield to us an ignorant people, who by the light Surius in com.
an. 1558.
of Nature and a general apprehension (for God knows they have nothing else)
do believe that the World shall end, and that there shall be then a reward for
the good and for the evil according to their desert.

SECT. 2. The consideration of this day may first serve for terror to the
wicked, whether they regard the dreadfulnesse of the day it self, or the
quality of the Judge by whom they are to be tried.
THe certainty then of this universal Judgment at the last day being thus
clearly proved, not only by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, but
by the light of Reason and the testimonies of the Gentiles, the consideration
thereof may justly serve for terror to the wicked, it being to them a day of
wrath and vengeance; for Comfort to the Godly, it being to them a day of
refreshing and full redemption; and lastly for admonition and instruction to
both. First then it may justly serve for matter of extreme terror to the
wicked, whether they regard the dreadfulnes of the day in which they shall be
tried, or the quality of the Judge by whom they are to be tried, or the nature
and number of their accusers that shall bring in evidence against them, or the
presence of such an assembly of men and Angels before whom they shall be
arraigned, or their own guiltiness and astonishment, or lastly the sharpness
and severity of the sentence that shall pass upon them. The very face and
countenance of that day shall be hideous and dismal to look to, it shall be
apparelled with horror and affrightment on every side: That day is a day of
Zephany 1. 15. 16.
wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of destruction and desolation, a
day of gloominesse and darkness, a day of clouds, storms and blackness, a
day of the trumpet and alarm against the strong cities and against the high
towers. Then shall the Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall be turned into
blood, and the stars shall fall from heaven as it were withered leaves from
their trees, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken, and the graves shall
vomit up their dead bodies, the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and
shriuel together like scorched parchment, the elements shall melt and dissolve
with heat, the sea and floods shall roar, and the Earth with the works that
are therein shall be burnt up, there shall be horrible clapps of thunder and
flashes of lightning, voices and earthquakes, such as never were since men
dwelt upon the earth: such howling, such lamentations, such skriches shall be
heard in every corner, that the hearts of men shall tremble and wither for very
fear and expectation of those things which at that day shall befall them. And
now tell me what mortal heart can choose but ache and quake at the remembrance
of these unspeakable incomprehensible terrors. The Law was given with thunder
and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, with an exceeding loud and
shrill sound of the trumpet, so that all the people were afraid, yea so
terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I fear and quake. Now if Moses Exodus
19.
the servant of the Lord quaked to hear the first trumpet at the giving of the
Law, how shall the wicked, condemned in their own Conscience, tremble and
quake to hear the second at the execution thereof?

Specially being arraigned at the bar of such a Judge, apparelled with Robes
of Majesty, and attended with millions of Angels: A Judge so sovereign as
there lies no appeal from him; so wise as nothing can escape his knowledge; so
mighty as nothing can resist his power, so upright as nothing can pervert his
justice, who neither can be deceived with sophistry, nor blinded with gifts,
nor terrified with threats. They shall look upon him whom they have wounded
and gored with the spear of their blasphemies, with the nails of their
cursings and cursed oaths; who^ they have buffeted and spit upon with their
impiety and profaneness; who^ they have again crucified to themselves by their
divelish and damnable actions, trampling his precious Blood under foot by their
impenitencie, putting him to open shame by their infidelity, making a mock of
him by their obstinacy, and turning his grace into wantonness by their
presumption. Holy Augustine in one of his Sermons of the last Judgment, brings
in this glorious Judge thus expostulating the matter with these miscreants at
that Day. O man with mine own hands Sermon. 67.
did I fashion thee out of the slime of the earth: into thy earthly members did
I infuse a spirit: I vouchsafed to bestow upon thee mine own Image: I placed
thee among the delights of Paradise: but thou contemning the vital efficacy of
my Commandments, choosedst rather to listen to the tempter, then thy God. And
when being expelled out of Paradise by reason of sin thou were held in the
chains of death, I was enclosed in the Virgins womb, I was laid in the
cratch, I was wrapped in swathing clothes, I endured the scorn of infancy and
the grief of manhood, that so being like unto thee, I might make thee like
unto my self. I bore the buffetings and spittings of scorners, I drank
vinegar mixed with gall, I was scourged with whippes, crowned with thorns,
nailed to the cross, gored with a spear, and that thou might be freed from
death, in torments I parted with my life: Look upon the print of the nails,
behold the skarres of my wounds: I took upon me thine infirmities, that I might
impart unto thee my glory. I underwent the death due to thee, that thou might
live for ever. I was buried in a sepulcher, that thou might reign in
Heaven. Why have thou wilfully lost that which I by my sufferings purchased for
thee? Why have thou spurned at the gracious gift of thy Redemption. I complain
not of my death, only render unto me that life for which I gave mine. Render me
that life which by the wounds of thy sins thou daily killest. Why have thou
polluted with more then beastly sensuality that Temple which in thee I
consecrated to my self? Why have thou stained my body with filthy
provocations? Why have thou tormented me with a more grievous cross of thy
sins, then that upon which I sometimes hung: for the cross of thy sins is
more grievous (in as much as unwillingly I hang upon it) then that other which
taking pity upon thee, and to kill thy death I willingly mounted. I being
impassible in my self vouchsafed to suffer for thee: but thou have despised
God in man, salvation in mine infirmity, pardon from thy Judge, life from my
cross, and wholesome medicine from my sufferings. Now what flinty or steely
heart in the world could choose but resolve it self into tears of blood upon
such an expostulation were it moistened with any drop of grace? But hereunto
might be added, that thou have often joined with his enemies against him,
turned the deaf ear to the ministry of his Word, jested at his threatenings,
neglected his gracious invitations, quenched his holy inspirations, abused his
Sacraments and his patience, which being long abused at length is turned into
fury. This Lamb of God therefore shall then show himself as a Lion, he shall
then put on righteousness for a breast plate, and take true judgment in steed
of an helmet, then shall he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and
be clad with zeal as with a cloak; Then shall he come in strength as a
storm of hail, and as a whirlewinde breaking and throwing down whatsoever
stands in his way, as a rage of many waters that flow and rush together. The
mountains shall melt and fly away at his presence, a burning fire shall run
before him, and on every side of him a violent tempest. And if Felix himself a
Judge trembled to hear Paul (who as a prisoner was arraigned before him)
disputing of this Last Judgment, how shall the guilty prisoners tremble before
the face of this Judge, being both the Judge and the party offended? If the
Jews who came to attach him fell backward at the hearing of his voice in the
days of his humility, how shall the wicked stand amazed and confounded at his
presence when he comes to judge them in glory and Majesty? Surely for them to
endure the fiercenes of his angry countenance will be intolerable, and yet to
fly from it impossible, and the more intolerable will it be in regard of the
nature and number of their accusers.

SECT. 3. Of the nature and number of their accusers.
THe Creatures shall accuse them whom they have abused to vanity, to luxury, to
drunkenness, to gluttony; to covetousness, to ambition, to revenge, and being
then freed from their bondage, they shall freely co^plain of this unjust
usurpation. Good men shall accuse them, as having bin most disdainfully
scorned, wronged, oppressed, and trodden underfoot by them. Their Companions
shall accuse them, as having been drawn into sin by their wicked intisements
and examples. Their Teachers and Governors shall accuse them, as having been
irreverent toward their persons, and rebellious against their instructions and
commands. Their Children and Servants shall accuse them, as having been
negligent in their education in virtue and piety. The Prophets and Apostles
shall accuse them as having been careless in the observation of their
writings. The good Angels shall accuse them whose directions they have refused
to follow. The Devils shall accuse them in that they have betrayed their Lord
and Captain to march under their banners. Their own Consciences shall
bitterly accuse and vpbraid them: the body shall accuse the soul as being the
principal agent, and the soul the body as being a ready instrument: The
appetite shall accuse reason as being too sensual and indulgent; and reason
the appetite, as being irregular and inordinate: all the faculties of the
Soul, all the senses and members of the body shall accuse each other: nay
which is worst of all, the Judge himself shall be thy accuser, representing
those transgressions to thy memory, and laying them close to thy charge which
either thou had forgotten and cast behind thee, or did perchance not
know, or not acknowledge to be sins, Sweet JESUS, which way will the poor
Sinner turn himself in the midst of all these accusers and accusations. To
confess the^ then will serve but to increase his shame; to deny them, but to
aggravate his fault, and consequently his punishment: nay deny them he cannot,
being convinced by two evidences against which there can be no exception, the
book of the Law, and the book of his own Conscience, the one shall show him
what he should have done, and the other what he has done; against the book
of the Law; he shall be able to speak nothing, his Conscience telling him that
the commandments of the Lord are pure and righteous altogether: and for the
book of Conscience, against that he cannot possibly except, it being always in
his own keeping, so as it could not be falsified, and whatsoever shall then be
found written therein, he shall freely acknowledge to have been written with
his own hand: Silence then shall be his safest plea, and astonishment his best
Apology.

The rather, for that all these accusations shall be brought in and laid against
him in the presence of the blessed Saints and glorious Angels which shall then
be unto him a terrible and fearful spectacle, as well in regard of their
infinite number, as their inresistable strength. We read of diverse holy men,
who upon the sight of an Angel have been cast into such pitiful fits, that
their spirits have failed them, their breath has forsaken them, their joints
have bin loosed and for the time they have bin as dead bodies without all
appearance of sense or life. Now if holy men have been so much moved with the
sight of one Angel bringing them good tidings and conversing familiarly with
them, into what inconceiueable gulfes of horror shall the reprobate be plunged
upon the sight of so many millions, all armed with indignation against them,
and desire of the full and final execution of their Creators will? If an army
of men marching with banners displayed be terrible to behold, how dreadful
shall those innumerable hoaste of heavenly soldiers appear to the face of
their enemies? and if one of them slew four score and five thousand in one
night, what mortal weight shall conceive any hope of standing before such
multitudes, who as they are now sent forch to minister for their sakes that are
heirs of salvation: so then shall they separate the just from the unjust, and
shall execute vengeance upon them that shall be heirs of damnation, casting
them into a furnace of fire, where shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth. So
as they shall not be bare Spectatours, but principal Act^urs in that
lamentable tragedy. We find, that when but one of them descended to role away
the stone from our Saviors Sepulcher, there was a great Earthquake, and for
fear of him, the keepers of the Sepulcher were astonished, and became as dead
men: Into what extremity then of confusion and perplexity shall the wicked be
driven, when they shall perceive such troops of these mighty and glorious
Creatures assembled, not only to be witnesses of their shame and just
condemnation, but agents in their execution? Besides all this, it shall be
acted in the presence of those blessed Saints whom they always held their
greatest enemies; and what greater bitterness can be imagined, then to be laid
open and reproached in the sight of a man's enemies, and to see them in the
mean time advanced to honor, triumphing and insulting upon his miseries, as
the Saints then shall do upon impenitent sinners, admiring and applauding the
justice of their Creat^r, and as assistants, approving the equity of that
sentence which he shall pronounce, and which the Condemned themselves likewise
cannot but justify.

In as much as then in an instant shall be represented unto themselves, and
discovered in the open view of the whole world, all the horrible, foul,
bloody, crying, roaring sins that ever they committed, together with all the
circumstances of time, and place, and persons, and manner, and measure. Then
shall they give a particular strict account of all the blessings, of all the
gifts and graces which God has bestowed upon them, of all the faculties of
their souls, of all the senses and members of their bodies, as it were of so
many talents committed to their charge, how they have used, or rather abused
them. Then shall they give an account, how they have profited by all those
wholesome lessons they have heard, and fatherly chastisements they have been
corrected with, how they have entertained those good motions that God has put
into their hearts; how they have withstood the Suggestions of Satan, and the
temptations of the world and the flesh. Then shall they give an account, not
only of their grievous heinous sins of presumption and malice, committed
against the light of their Conscience wittingly, willingly, and wilfully, with
an high hand and striffe neck, but of filthy rotten speeches, profane
writings, unsavory jests, nay of every idle word, nay of every loose and lewd
thought; not only of outward, public, notorious transgressions, but of secret
practices, mischievous plots and projects, known only to God and their own
souls. Lastly, not only of sins of Commission, but of the omission of good
duties, and of their precious time misspent, passing the greatest part thereof
in eating, and drinking, and sleeping, and dancing, and gaming, in haunting
taverns, and play houses, and dicing-houses, and brothell-houses, which should
have been spent in the works of Charity, of Piety, or those of their private
calling. Good God, what shall the poor sinner now say, what shall he do for
the levelling and clearing of these accounts? shall he call for mercy? he has
already shut that door against himself. Shall he fly to his Savior? he is
now become his Judge. Shall he implore the intercession of the Saints and
Angels? neither will they intercede if they might be heard, nor shall they be
heard, though they would intercede. O hard distress, says devoute Anselme, on
the one side will be his sins accusing him, on the other side justice
terrifying him, under him the gulf of hell gaping, above him the Judge
frowning, within him a Conscience stinging, without him the world burning.
Finding no way then to releive or excuse himself, he shall seek to hide
himself in dens and among the clefts of the rocks, and shall say unto the
hills and mountains, fall upon me and cover me from the presence of him that
sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of
his wrath is come, and who can stand? and if the righteous be hardly saved,
where shall the impenitent sinner appear? Yet no remedy, stand forth and
appear they must at the open bar or Gods justice, and there receive their
last doom; Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.

SECT. 4. Or lastly, the dreadfulnes of the sentence which shall then be
pronounced upon them.
O Merciful Lord, what a doleful, what as dreadful sentence is this? Depart
from thee O Christ? why thou art all things, and therefore the loss of thee is
an universal loss of all things. Thou art the greatest good, and therefore to
be deprived of thee is the greatest evil. Thou art the very Center and perfect
rest of the soul, and therefore to be pulled from thee is the most cruel
separation that can be. It was the richest promise that thou could make to
the penitent thief, and the sweetest voice that he could hear, This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise. Lord whither shall we go from thee, says one of
thine Apostles, and the other only wishes to be dissolved, that he may be with
thee. The Wisards of the East when they recovered the sight of the star that
but led unto thee, being yet in the state of infirmity and humility, rejoiced
with an exceeding great joy: and thy forerunner the Baptist at the voice of thy
blessed mother sprang for joy, being yet in the womb; how then would they have
been replenished and ravished with joy to have seen thee in thy Kingdom of
glory, and tormented with grief to have bin commanded out of thy presence?
specially considering, that with thee is the well of life, in thy presence is
the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. By
parting from thee then, we part from the blisfull vision of the face of God,
from the fruition of the happy fellowship of the holy Angels and society of
Saints, and consequently from happiness it self. What remains then, but that
parting from happiness, we should indeed become most miserable and accursed
Caitifs. Depart from me ye Cursed. Men sometimes curse where God blesses, and
bless where God curses: They can only pronounce a man cursed, they cannot make
him so: but here it is otherwise: for with this powerful and righteous Judge,
to pronounce is to make: when he cursed the fig tree, it instantly withered:
And as these impenitent Sinners loved cursing, so shall it come unto them; and
as they loved not blessing, so shall it be far from them. As they clothed
themselves with cursing like a raiment, so shall it come into their bowels like
water, and like oil into their bones; it shall be unto them as a garment to
cover them, and for a girdle wherewith they shall be always girded. Cursed shall
be the day of their conception, and cursed the day of their birth: Cursed they
shall be in their souls, and cursed in their bodies; Cursed in their thoughts,
and cursed in their desires; cursed in their speeches, and cursed in their
actions; Cursed in the haynousnes of their sin, and cursed in the
grievousnesse of their punishment: cursed in their punishment of loss, for
their aversion from the Creator, Depart from me; and cursed in their punishment
of sense, for their conversion to the Creature, Depart from me into everlasting
Fire. Of all the Creatures appointed by Almighty God, to be instruments for the
execution of his vengeance, water and fire are noted to have the least mercy:
And therefore with fire and brimstone consumed he the filthy Sodomites, a type
of this hellish fire, as Sodom was of hell it self. If creating an element
here for our comfort, I mean the fire, he made the same so insufferable as it
is, in such sort, as a man would not hold his only hand therein one day to
gain a kingdom; what a fire think you has he provided for hell, which is
not created for comfort, but only for torment? Our fire has many differences
from that, and therefore is truly said of the holy Fathers, to be but as a
painted or fained fire in respect of that. For first our fire was made to
comfort, as I have said, and* that only to afflict and torment: Our fire has
need to be fed continually with wood and fuel, or else it goes out, that
burns eternally without feeding, and is unquenchable; for that the breath of
the Lords own mouth does blow and nourish it. Our fire works only upon the
body, immediately upon the soul being a spirit it cannot work, that works
upon the soul separated from the body, as it likewise does upon the Apostate
Angels, and upon both soul and body rejoyned. Our fire gives light which of
it self is comfortable, that admits none, but is full of dismal
darkness. Our fire may be extinguished, or the rage of it abated with water,
that cannot. Ours breeds weeping, that not only weeping but gnashing of
teeth, the ordinary effect of cold. Such a strange and incredible fire it is,
that it implies contraries, and so terrible is this Judge to his enemies, that
he has devised a wonderful way, how to torment them with burning heat and
chilling cold both at once. Lastly, our fire consumes the food that is cast
into it, and thereby in short space dispatcheth the pains, whereas that
afflicts and tormenteth, but consumes not, to the end, the pains may be
Everlasting as is the fire.

O deadly life, O immortal death, what shall I term thee? Life? and
wherefore then do thou kill? Death? and wherefore then do thou endure?
There is neither Life nor Death but has something good in it. For in life
there is some ease, and in death an end, but thou have neither ease nor end:
What shall I term thee? even the bitterness of both. For of death thou have
torment without any end, and of life the continuance without any ease, so long
as God shall live, so long shall the damned die; and when he shall cease to be
happy, then shall they also cease to be miserable. A star which is far
greater then the earth, appears to be a small spot in comparison of the
heavens, much less shall the age of man seem; yea much less the age and
continuance of the whole world in regard of this perpetuity of pains. The
least moment of time if it be compared with ten thousand millions of years,
because both terms are finite, and the one a part of the other, bears,
although a very small, yet some proportion: but this or any other number of
years in respect of endless eternity is nothing, less then just nothing: For
all things that are finite may be compared together, but between that which
is finite, and that which is infinite, there stands no comparison. O says
one holy Father in a godly meditation, if a sinner damned in hell did know that
he had to suffer those torments no more thousand years then there be sands in
the sea or grass leaves on the ground, or no more thousand millions of ages
then there be Creatures in heaven, hell, and in earth, he would greatly
rejoice, for that he would comfort himself at the leastwise with this
cogitation, that once yet the matter would have an end: But now, says this
good man, this word never breaks his heart, considering that after an hundred
thousand millions of worlds (if there might be so many) he has as far to his
journeyes end, as he had the first day of his entrance into those torments.
And surely if a man that is sharply pinched with the gout, or the stone, or
but with thetoothach, and that they hold him but by fits, giving him some
respite betweene-whiles, notwithstanding do think one night exceeding long
although he lie in a soft bed, well applied and cared for; how tedious do we
think eternity will seem to those that shall be universally in all their
parts continually without intermission, perpetually without end or hope of end
schorched in those hellish flames, which besides that they are everlasting,
have this likewise added, that they are prepared for the Devil and his Angels?

Prepared, by whom? surely by the Judge himself, who gives the sentence. Now
if but mortal Judges should set and search their wits to devise and prepare a
punishment for some notorious malefactor, what grievous tortures do they
often find out? able to make a man tremble at the very mentioning of them,
what kind of punishment then shall we conceive this to be which this
immortal King of Heaven and Earth, this Judge both of the quick and dead has
prepared? Surely his invention this way is as far beyond the reach of all
mortal wits (were they all united in one brain) as is his power. It must
needs be then a torment insufferable, unspeakable and incomprehensible which
he has set himself to prepare: But for whom? for the Devil and his Angels,
that is, for the Arch-traitour, the chief rebel that stands out against him,
and has stood out against him since the first Creation of the World. How art
thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer son of the morning! thou saydst in thine
heart, I will exalt my throne above, beside the stars of God, and I will be
like unto the most high: Therefore has he cast thee down to the bottomless
pit of hell, there te be imprisoned in everlasting chains under darkness to
the judgment of this great day of the general assise, then and there shall
thou receive thy complete and final sentence: and then shall those miscreants
who have chosen rather to hearken to thy intisements, to yield to thy
temptations, to march under thy banner, and with thee and thine Angels to stand
out in open rebellion against their Liege Lord, then to yield their due
obedience to him, who by so many obligations might deservedly challenge it from
them: Then I say, shall they who have thus sinned with thee, suffer likewise
with thee: and as thou labouredst by all means to make them like thy self
insin: so shall thouthen as earnestly labor to make them like thy self, as in
the kind, so likewise in the degree of thy punishment: that as the Saints
shall resemble the blessed Angels in heaven, so they may in all respects
resemble thee and thy cursed Angels in hell. And thus have we in part heard
the terror of this last day in regard of the obstinately wicked; Let us now
hear what Comforts the remembrance and meditation thereof may justly afford
the righteous, that is, such as by Gods grace endeavor to live a virtuous and
religious life.

SECT. 5. Secondly, the consideration of this day may serve for a special
comfort to the godly, whether they meditate upon the name and nature of the day
it self in regard of them, or the assurance of Gods love and favor toward
them, and the gracious promises made unto them.
THese Comforts then arise first from the name and nature of the day in regard
of them: Secondly, from the assurance of Gods love and favor toward them, and
from the gracious promises made unto them: Thirdly, from the quality and
condition of the Judge by whom they are to be tried: and lastly, from the
sweetness of the sentence which shall be pronounced on their behalf. First then,
this day howbeit it shall be very tert rible to impenitent sinners, yet to the
Servants of God shall it be a day of joy and triumph, a day of Iubilee and
exultation, or as the Scriptures term it a day of refreshing and redemption.
Neither ought this to seem strange, since the same Sun which melts the wax,
hardneth the clay, the same beams exhale both stinking vapors out of the
dunghilis and sweet savours out of flowers, the beam is every way the same
which works upon them, only the difference of the subjects which it works
upon, is it that thus diversifies the effects. When the Judges in their Assizes
come to the bench or place of judgment apparelled in skarlet robes, environed
with holdbards, attended on with great troops, assisted by the principal
knights and gentlemen of the Country, all this is a pleasing sight to the
innocent prisoner, because he hopes that now his innocence shall appear in the
face of the Country, and that the day of his deliverance is come: whereas to
the guilty it is a dreadful sight, because he knows that the day of his
trial, and consequently of his condemnation and execution cannot be far off:
in like manner when the gibbet or gallows is set up, the ladder, the halter,
the hangman and all in readiness for the execution, this to the good subject and
true man is a pleasing spectacle, because it is for their peace and safeguard:
but a spectacle full of horror to the condemned thief or murderer who are
there instantly to be executed. To such as are straightly besieged in a Castle or
City, when a powerful Army is raised to rescue them, and draws near to the
place, and is come within sight, the neighing and trampling of the horses, the
glittering of the armor, the clashing of weapons, the beating of the drum,
the sounding of the trumpet, yea the roaring of the cannon to them are as swe^t
music, because they know all this to be for their succor and relief: but to
the besiegers the noise is terrible, because they know it is to assault, remove
and vanquish them: and this surely shall be the difference betwixt the
faithful and the unrighteous at the day of judgment. The Majesty and Glory of
Christ, the train of innumerable Angels attending on him, the shrill sound of
the trumpet summoning all flesh to appear before his Tribu-nall at this great
and general Assizes, and all other solemnities belonging to the pomp and
magnificence thereof, as it shall utterly daunt and confound the one, in as
much as they know themselves guilty of all those enormities and outrages
wherewith they shall be charged, so shall it cheer up the other, for that they
are the^ fully to be cleared in the presence of men and Angels from those
unjust aspersions and imputations whichtheir enemies have cast upon them, they
are to be freed from all those wrongs and oppressions they have sustained, they
are to be rescued from that narrow siege, that fierce assault, that long and
strong battery which by sin, the world, the flesh, and the Devil has been
laid to their souls; so as all those fearful signs fore-running the last
end, as the trembling of the earth, and the shaking of the powers of heaven,
shall be unto them as the Earthquake was to Paul and Silas, which served to
loose their fetters and manicles, and to open unto them the prison doors and
set them at liberty.

Neither can it in truth be otherwise, considering the love and favor which
Almighty God bears them. He has redeemed them with the precious Blood of his
dear Son, he has begotten them by the incorruptible seed of his word, he
has illuminated and sanctified them with his Spirit, he has sealed them by
his Sacraments, he has pacified their guilty Consciences with his grace,
delivered them out of dangers, supported them in their temptations, relieved
them in their distresses, resolved them in their doubts, made all things work
together for the best unto them; and will he forsake them at this last trial?
no, no, herein he sets out his love toward them, seeing, that while they
were yet sinners; Christ died for them, much more being now justified by his
Blood, shall they be saved from wrath through him. For if when they were
enemies they were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more being
reconciled shall they be saved by his life: if they were pardoned through his
death when they were enemies, they shall much more be saved by his life now
that they are friends. For how incredible is it, nay how impossible, that he
who pardons an enemy should condemn a friend. He loved them whiles they yet
bore the image of the Devil, and will he not much more love them now, since he
has in part repaired his own Image in them. They were dear unto him when
there was in them no goodness, and can he now abandon them being made
partakers of that goodness which himself has wrought in them. Being then
plucked out of the power of darkness, let them never fear to be rejected by
the Father of lights; having the blessed Angels sent forth to minister for
their sakes, let them never fear to be delivered over unto, or in the final
sentence to be joined with the Devil and his Angels. What shall we then say to
these things? if God be on our side who can be against us, who spared not his
own Son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us
all things also? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God
that justifies: who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, or rather
which is risen again. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? nay in all these things we are more then conquerours through him that
loved us. And we are persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And as the love and favor of God in Christ does thus arm his children
against the terror of the day of judgment, so do likewise the gracious
promises made unto them, which imbolden them to say again with the blessed
Apostle, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, from henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righteousness which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but
unto all them also that love that his appearing. If I shall then receive a
Crown of righteousness I need not fear hell fire: if the righteous Judge
himself will give it me, I need not stand in awe of his severity: if he shall
give it to all those who love that his appearing, I need not tremble at the
thought thereof; nay I have rather great reason to be glad and rejoice thereat,
and when I see those things come to pass, to look up and lift up mine head,
as being well assured that my redemption draws near. And not only my
redemption, but mine advancement to honor, even in that very act of Judgment:
the bench rather then the bar being my place there, and my self being
ordained not to stand forth as a prisoner, but to sit as a Judge. Verily I say
unto you, that when the Son of man shall sit in the Throne of his Majesty,
ye which followed me in the regeneration shall sit also upon twelve thrones,
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel, says Truth it self. Which privilege
lest we should think to be restrained only to his Apostles, one of them by
good warrant extends it to all the faithful. Do ye not know says he, that
the Saints shall judge the world? that is, wicked men who have oppressed us:
And again, Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? that is, wicked spirits
who have tempted or assaulted us. Now what folly is it to be afraid of that
judgment where we our selves shall be Judges, and that of our greatest enemies?
nay what encouragement should it be to receive if need were, the sentence of
death for Christ's sake, since it is certain that as Christ himself shall
judge Pilate before whom he was arraigned, and by whom he was wrongfully
condemned: so also shall we in some sort at leastwise as Assessors with him and
approouers of his sentence, judge our Judges. For although Christ our Head
principally and properly shall be the Judge, yet we that are his members shall
have a branch of his authority, and shall be as it were joined in commission
with him.

SECT. 6. Or the quality and condition of the Judge in respect of them by whom
they are to be tried: or lastly, the sweetness of the sentence which shall
then be pronounced on their behalf.
But setting this Commission aside, what a comfort will it be to the Godly to
be summoned, to be assembled, to be separated from the goats by the ministry
of those very Angels who were appointed to be their guardians, to pitch their
tents round about them; and to bear them up with their hands that they might
not dash their foot against a stone? nay what joy unutterable, with their eyes
to behold and look upon that Savior of theirs (appearing in Majesty as a
Judge) who redeemed them with his heart blood, and gave his life as a ransom
for them, in whom they have trusted, on whom they have believed, to whom they
have prayed, for whom they have suffered, with whom they shall be glorified?
Their Father, their Husband, their Master, their Head, their Physician, their
Advocate and Intercessour: and can the father condemn the son, the husband
the wife, the Master his faithful servant, the head his members, the Physician
his patient, the Advocate his Client? How happy is our case then, that he must
be our Judge that was himself judged for us* and our assurance is, that he
will not condemn us, that has already be^ne condemned for us: No, he will be
so far from condemning us, that then and there he will fully acquit us in
the sight of the whole world, and pronounce that favorable sentence on our
behalf, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit a kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world.

A judicial sentence shall I call it, or rather a brotherly and gracious
invitation? Come ye blessed of my Father: Come, that where the husband is,
there may the wife be; that where the father is, there may the sons be; that
where the Master is, there may the servants be; that where the Captain is,
there may the soldiers be; that where the king is, there may the subjects be,
that where the head is, there may the members be. Come, it was thy voice sweet
Savior whiles thou were yet in the state of humility, Come unto me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden and I will refresh you: and do thou still retain
the same sweetness and familiality, being now in glory, and that whiles thou art
sitting upon the throne of justice? Good Lord, how do thou at the same
instant show thy self terrible as a Lion to thine enemies, and yet gentle as a
Lamb to thy friends? frowning upon the one, and yet smiling on the other,
commanding the one out of thy presence with an Ite, Go; and inviting the
other to approach near with a Venite, Come. Come, come my dear hearts, now is
the time that you must rest from your labors, that your tears must be wiped
off, that your long expectation and longing hope must be turned into fruitio^:
your race is at an end, you must now receive the prize; your wrestling at an
end, you must now receive the garland, your combating at an end, you must now
receive the Crown, Come ye Blessed of my Father. Blessed in your lives, and
blessed in your deaths; blessed in your election, blessed in your vocation,
blessed in your adoption, blessed in your justification, blessed in your
sanctification, and now for accomplishment of all, most blessed in your
glorification: And the fountain of all this your blessedness, is none other
then the very Father of blessings, my Father and your Father, mine by nature,
yours by grace, mine by eternal generation, and yours by spiritual
regeneration: And whom the Father blesses, the Son cannot but most lovingly and
tenderly embrace. Come ye blessed of my Father. what to do? to inherit a
Kingdom. Least my words should seem to be but wind, least my promises should
seem to be vain, and your patience and believing vain; Come and receive that
which I have promised, and you have believed; Come and take actual possession
of it; yet not as a purchase of your own, but as an inheritance; not as wages,
but as a reward; not as bought by the value of your merits, but conferred upon
you by the virtue of my sufferings, and the benediction of my Father as the
cause, and your sonne-shippe and obedience as the condition. Your title is
good, your evidence fair, so as no exception can be taken to your right,
nothing so much as pretended or pleaded to disinherit you. Come on then
chearefully, make have and enter upon it, my self will lead you the way,
follow me. But what may it be gracious Lord that we shall possess? surely no
less then a Kingdom. This reward is sometimes set forth unto us under the
name of a pleasant garden or Paradise of delight; sometime of a stately
magnificent palace; sometime of a large and beautiful City: but here of a
Kingdom, a glorious, a spacious, a secure, a durable Kingdom, whose King is
the Trinity, whose Law is Divinity, whose measure aternity, as far beyond
all the kingdoms of this world, and all the gilded pomp, the glittering
power and riches of them, as the greatest earthly Monarch is beyond the King in
a play. Earthly Monarchs have their secret pressures and pinches, they have
their fears, and cares, and griefs, and envy, and anger, and sickness mixed
with their joys and contents, or at least by turns succeeding them: Somewhat
is ever wanting to their desires, and full of doubts and jealousies they are
that their dominions may be either impaired or invaded: And if they were free
from the possibility of all those, yet may they in a moment, and that by a
thousand ways be arrested by death, and then all their honor lies in the
dust, all their thoughts perish: But now with them that inherit this heavenly
Kingdom it is not so: they have joy and content at full without the least
intermission or diminutio^, without the least mixture of any fear, or care, or
grief, or envy, or anger, or any other troublesome passion whatsoever. They
are out of all doubt and jealousy of loosing that which they possess, either
in whole or in part; they are confident and secure that neither this Kingdom
can be taken from them by rebellion or invasion, nor they from it by death or
deposition. And herein again does this Kingdom excel all other kingdoms,
that it is of Gods special preparing. And such happiness he has prepared in
it for them that shall possess it, as eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
tongue cannot utter, neither has at any time entered into the heart of man.
Such as his imagination cannot apprehend, nor his understanding possiblely
conceive. O my Lord, if thou for this vile body of ours have given us so great
and innumerable benefits from the firmament, from the air, from the earth,
from the sea; by light, by darkness, by heat, by shadow, by dewes, by
showers, by winds, by raines, by fishes, by beasts, by birds, by multitude of
herbs, and variety of plants, and by the ministry of all thy Creatures: O
sweet Lord, what manner of things, how great, how good, and how innumerable
are those which thou have prepared for us in our heavenly Kingdom, where we
shall see thee face to face, and reign with thee eternally? If thou do so
great things for us in our prison, what will thou give us in our palace? If
thou give so many things in this world to good and evil men together, what
have thou laid up for only good men in the world to come? If thine enemies and
friends together are so well provided for in this life, what shall thy only
friends receive in the life to come? If there be so great solaces in these
days of tears, what joy shall there be in that day of marriage? If our jayle
and prison contain so great matters, what shall our Kingdom do? O my Lord
and God, thou art a great God, and great is the multitude of thy magnificence
and sweetness; and as there is none end of thy greatness, nor number of thy
mercies, nor bottom of thy wisdom, nor measure of thy beauty: So is there no
end, number, or measure of thy rewards to them that love and serve thee.

SECT. 7. Thirdly, the consideration of this day may serve for admonition to
all.
Seeing then that all these things must be dossolved, what manner persons ought
we to be in holy conversation and godliness? looking for, and hasting unto the
coming of that day, in which we all shall appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, that every man may receive according to that he has done in his
body, whether it be good or evil. Truly I know not (says S. Chrysostom) what
others do think of it, for my self, it makes me often tremble when I
consider it. And holy Hierome, whatsoever I am doing, says he, whether I be
eating, or drinking, or sleeping, or waking, or alone, or in company, or
reading, or writing, me thinks I ever hear the shrill sound of the Archangels
trumpet, summoning all flesh to appear, and crying aloud, Surgite mortui and
venite ad judicium, arise ye dead and come away to judgment. The remembrance
hereof is like a bitter pill to purge out the malignitie of many wanton and
vain humors, or like a strainer, all our thoughts, and speeches, and actions
which pass through it, are thereby cleansed and purified. As the bird guides
her body with her train, and the ship is steered with the rudder, so the
course of a man's life is best directed with a continual recourse unto his last
end. It is hard for a man to think of that and to think evil, or not to
think of it and think well. Therefore when Solomon had spoken of all the
vanities of men, at last he opposes this memorandum as a counterpoise against
them all, Remember for all these things thou shall come to judgment: as if he
should say, men would never speak as they speak, nor do as they do, if they
did but think that these speeches and deeds of theirs should one day come to
judgment. Whatsoever thou take in hand then, remember the end, and that
final account which thou art to make, and thou shall never do amiss. S.
Augustine I remember in the entrance of one of his sermons touching the day of
Judgment, makes a kind of Apology for himself, that he treated in their
hearing so often of that subject, telling them, that he did it for the
discharge of his own duty, and for their good: it being better (says he)
hereto endure a little bitterness, and hereafter to enjoy eternal sweetness,
then here to be fed with false joys, and there to endure real and eternal
punishments: But he might have justly excused himself (had any excuse needed
in such a case) by the example of our blessed Savior, who in his Gospells; and
his Apostles, who in their Epistles, beat upon this point no one more
frequently: The knowledge and publishing whereof to the world has in all ages
been held so necessary, that not the Prophets alone, whose writings are read
in our assemblies at this day, plainly foretold it, but Enoch the seventh
from Adam prophesied thereof; nay Adam himself, if we may believe Josephus.
And that no man might plead ignorance herein; the light of this truth (as has
already Antiq. l. 1. c. 4.
been touched) shined among the very Gentiles before the incarnation of Christ.

A great shame were it then for us Christians not to believe it, but a greater
shame to our selves, and to our profession, a disgrace, and a scandal to
infidels, to profess that we believe it, and yet to live worse then Infidels.
Mahometans, and Jews, and Pagans shall rise in judgemens against a number of
Christians and shall condemn them, for that standing up in the Congregation,
and with their mouths openly professing this article, that they believe that
Christ shall come again to judge both the quick and dead; yet their thoughts,
their desires, their passions, their actions, their words are such and so
foul, as it evide^tly shows they believe not, or they understand not, or they
remember not what they profess. Shall I think that the common drunkard and
glutton does believe and remember, that at this day he must give an account of
the abuse of Gods Creatures, of making his belly his God, his kitchen his
Chapel, and his Cook his Priest? Shall I think that the profane swearer
and blasphemer does believe and remember, that at this day he must give an
account of every idle word, much more then of his hellish oaths and damnable
blasphemies, wherewith he tears in pieces the name of God, and infects the
very air he breaths in? shall I think that the Hypocrite, who seeks to
bleare the eyes of the world, does believe and remember, that at this day he
must give an account of his glozing and shifting, and that then his hypocrisy
shall be uncased and laid open to the view of the world? shall I think that
the Parasite does believe and remember, that at this day he must give an
account of preferring the favor of men before the love and service of God?
Shall I think the Slanderer does believe and remember, that at this day he
must give an account of wounding and killing his brother in his good name by
his tongue, or pen, or both? Shall I think the Adulterer does believe and
remember, that at this day he must give an account of giving the reins to his
unbridled appetite without any check or control? Lastly, does the malicious
man believe and remember, that at this day he must give an account of his
bloody practices or plots; the ambitious man, of making his honor his Idol;
the covetous, of his oppression and extortion? Let themselves a little consider
of the matter, and they will easily grant it to be unreasonable, that any man
should believe it to be a part of their belief.

SECT. 8. As likewise for instruction.
LEt us then either strike it out of the articles of our Creed, or let us so
endeavor to live, as it may appear, that we do not only profess it with our
mouths, but assuredly believe it with our hearts. Let the civil Magistrate
show that he believes it, by forbearing to make his will a law, and by a
conscionable care in the governing of those who are committed to his charge,
and providing that they may live under him a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. Let the Divine, the Messenger of the Lord, who preaches
it to others, show that he believes it himself, by forbearing base and
indirect means to rise to honor, (which he is most uncertain how long, or
with what content he shall hold) and by feeding the flock of God which depends
upon him, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind, not as Lording it over Gods heritage, but as being
a pattern to the flock, and when that chief shepherd shall appear, he
shall receive an incorruptible Crown of glory; Let that severe call ever ring
in his ears, Come give an account of thy stewardship. There shall Andrew come
in with Achaia by him converted, to the saving knowledge of the truth: John
with Asia, Thomas with India, Peter with the Jews, and Paul with the Gentiles;
and what shall we then say for our selves, if we cannot bring forth so much as
one soul converted by us in the whole course of our ministry? Let the
Counselors show that he believes, it by giving counsel rather wholesome then
pleasing, not for faction but for conscience, and by forbearing to make the
good of the state the stalking horse of his private ends. For though he dig
never so deep, yet he who now searches and shall then judge his heart digs
deeper. Let the Courtier show he believes it by using his favor to the
countenancing and advancing of virtue and suppressing of vice, and by
forbearing to varnish and guild over foul projects or smother honest motions
with fair semblances, looking rather to the worths and necessities of
petitioners, then to their purse and power. Let the military man show that he
believes it by forbearing to think, that a profane oath is an ornament of
speech, or that violence, rapine, and outrage, are the best Characters of a
soldier; or that unjust effusion of blood and Duells shall then pass for
manhood, or that his stout looks and brave resolution shall then any thing
avail him. Let the Nobility and Gentry show that they believe it, by
forbearing to make merchandise of Church livings committed to their care only
in trust, to strippe the backs of the poor, that they may apparel their
walls, and to snatch their meat from their mouths, that they may give it to
their hawks and dogs. For if they shall stand among the goats on the left
hand and hear that doleful sentence, Go y^ cursed, who clothed not the
naked and fed not the hungry, tell me what shall become of them, who by
extortion and oppression, by unconscionable racking of rents and wresting from
them excessive fines, make them naked and hunger-starved; nay grind the face
of the poor, and eat their flesh to the bare bones? Let the Judges show that
they believe it, by forbearing to give sentence for fear or favor, much less
for gold or gifts, as well knowing and remembering, that themselves must one day
give a strict account to this supreme Judge, from whose sentence lies no
appeal. Let the Lawyer show that he believes it, by forbearing to spin out the
suites of his Clients, to whip him about from Court to Court, and to set his
tongue to sale for the bolstering out of unjust causes, which his own
Conscience tells him to be such, least that cause which here perchance he
gained to his Client and got credit by, prove there to be his greatest shame
and utter ruin, where all his sophistry and subtle quirks will not serve his
turn. Let the merchant show that he believes, it by for bearing lies as well as
oaths, by putting his confidence in God, not in his wedge of gold, and by
often calling to mind, that whither soever he travel, or what bargain soever
he make, He stands by him as a witness who shall hereafter be his Judge. And
what folly were it for a thief to steal in the presence of the Judge before
whom he must be arraigned? Let the Farmer and Countryman show that he believes
it by their just laying out of the Lords portions to his Ministers, as knowing
that though they happily deceive his Ministers, yet the Lord himself they cannot
deceive, and that the double damages the^ of their bodies and souls will be
infinitely more grievous the^ their treble damages here. Finally, let all sorts
make it appear, that they indeed do not profess it only but believe it by
showing that reverence and respect to the word, to the Sacraments, to the
Ambassadors to the house, to the day, to the servants, to the members of him
who then shall be the reiudge, that they may with comfort and confidence
appear in his presence. The least good work now done for his sake and to his
honor, shall then steed us more then the treasure of both the Indies, then all
the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them. Then our indignation and
revenge upon our selves, our compunction and contrition for our sins committed
against this Judge, shall refresh us and cheer us. For if we would judge our
selves we should not be judged. Then shall our resisting of alluring
temptations, our patient enduring bitter afflictions and chastisements, our
sufferings, losses, disgraces, banishments for the Truths sake serve unto us as
so many sovereign and precious Cordials: for when we are judged we are
chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the world. Let
us hear the end of all, Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is
the whole duty of man: For God will bring every work unto judgment with every
secret thing, whether it be good or evil. Even so, come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. How long Lord, how long, holy and true?

Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory.

BOETHIVS lib. 1 metr. 7. -- Tu quoque si vis
Lumine claro cernere verum,
Tramite recto carpere coelum
Gaudia pelle, pelle timorem,
Spemque fugato, Nec dolor adsit,
Nubila men's est, Vinctaque frenis
Haec vbi regnant.
If with clear eye thou will see
Truth, and in the right way tread,
Joy and hope chase far from thee,
Banish sorrow, banish dread.
Cloudy, fettered fast with chains,
Is the mind where passion reign.

Whatsoever I have written in this or any other book, I humbly submit to the
censure of the Church of England.
FINIS.
A REVISE.
WHen my book was almost past the press, I met with one Johannes Fredericus
L^nius, a Netherlander, de extremo dei judicio and Indorum vocatione, who lib.
2. cap. 19. indevouring to prove the vicinity of the last judgment by the
worlds decay, makes this a maine argument thereof: Constat (says he) illos qui
supra annos viginti prodierunt in lucem non pauciores habuisse dentes quam 32
cum iam in eis qui infra decennium nati sunt non nisi- 20 aut 24 inveniantur. A
bold assertion of a grave divine, that man kind should so speedily decrease as
in the compass of ten years, to loose 12 or 8 teeth of 32, and his book
being printed in the year 1567, had the like measure of decay gone on in
proportion since that time, no man long before this day should have had a tooth
left in his head to chew his meat. But I wonder he durst so confidently
publish that to the world which daily experience, and the writings of modern
Anatomists so evidently convince of falsehood; and in truth I think there
cannot lightly a better argument be brought for the confirmation of the
contrary opinion against himself in that point; in as much as according to
Hippocrates, longaevi plurimos dentes habent; and Aristotle, quibus pauciores
and rariores, hi brevioris sunt vitae: so that the full number being a sign of
longaevity, and that of natural strength, if it appear (as undoubtedly it
does) that men now adays have ordinarily the same number of teeth as anciently
they had; then must it consequently follow, that likewise ordinarily they are
as strong and long-lived as anciently they were: yet herein are we beholding
to the same Author, that what he takes from the age and strength of men, he
adds to their wits: Sed quod humanorum corporum decedit conditionibus, hoc
ingenijs accedit, quod de membrorum robore perit, hoc accumulatur intellectus
acumine and sagacitate.

Page 45. is a great mistake, about a pound of blood being printed, for almost
half a pound of blood, notwithstanding which abatement yet is the proportion
there mentioned altogether incredible, for if Galen usually drew six pounds of
blood, and we usually stop at six ouuces, as Sir Walter Rawleigh would have
it, and we allow for every pound twelve ounces, then in reason should men in
Galens time, be ordinarily twelve times as strong and tall as now they are; so
that if men be now ordinarily five foot high, they must then have bin three
score, and (allowing the like proportionable decrease since the Creation) in
the like distance of time before Galen they must have been above seven
hundred foot high, and if we should thus rise upward to the Creation it self,
we must then measure men by miles and not by feet; which I wonder the great
wit of Sir Walter Rawleigh foresaw not.

Page 47. In the Section of the revolution and circulation of all things in
their times and turns may properly be inserted these excellent verses of
Manilius.

Percipe nunc etiam, quae sunt Ecliptica Graio Lib. 4.

Nomine, quae certos quasi delassata per annos
Nonnunquam cessant sterili torpentia motu.
Scilicet immenso nihil est aequale sub aevo,
Perpetuosque tenet flores, vnumque colorem
Tutatur: Sed cuncta diu variantur in orb,
Et foecunda suis subsistunt frugibus arva,
Continuosque negant partus eff^ta creando.
Rur sus quaefuerant steriles ad semina terrae,
Post nova sufficient, nullo mandante, tributa.
Concutitur varijs tellus compagibus haerens,
Subducitque solum pedibus, natat orbis in ipso,
Et vomit Oceanus pontum, sitiensque resorbet,
Necsese ipse capit, sic quondam mer ser at vrbes,
Humani generis cum solus constitit haeres
Deucalion, scopuloque orbem possedit in vno.
Nec non cum patrias Phaet^on tentavit habenas,
Arserunt gentes, timuitque incendia coelum,
^geruntque nov as ardentia sydera flammas,
Atque vno timuit condi natura sepulchro:
In tantum longo mutantur tempora cursu,
Atque iterum in semet redeunt: sic tempora certo
Signa quoque ^mittunt vires, sumuntque receptas.
Page 163. Vndevicesimo is translated twenty one, whereas it should be
nineteen, which makes more for my purpose, it being spoken of the wise of
Quintilian, who by his own testimony was not full nineteen when she died,
yet had she then borne him two sons.

Page 170. I doubt mine information touching prescriptions is not sufficient,
but my meaning is, that 60 years ad minimum are required to make a
prescription good, which I conceived to have bin law with us and I think by
the Civil Laws, an interest may be gotten by sixty years quiet possession or
less, howsoever the same space of years is now allotted which anciently was:
And in the same place, that which I have delivered touching a lease of three
lives, compared with a lease of twenty one years, is not perchance clearly
enough expressed in law terms, but so as a man may easily understand what I
intend

Page 243. Speaking of Grammarians, I have not sufficiently insisted upon the
exquisite help of Dictionaries, Lexicons, and Grammars in this latter age
beyond the precedent, not only for the easier learning of the Western
languages, Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, but specially of the Eastern,
the Hebrew, the Chalde, the Syriake, the Arabique, and (which is worth the
observing) of all the ancient fathers, so renowned for their singular learning,
but only two, among the Latins Saint Hierome, and Origin among the Graecians,
are found to have excelled in the oriental languages, this last centenary
having afforded more skillful me^ that way, then the other fifteen since
Christ.

To Grammar may likewise be referred the useful art of Brachygraphie, or
writing by short marks, which though it were practiced among the Romans, as
appears by that epigram of Martial, Lib 14. epig. 208.


Current verba licet manus est velocior illis,
Nondum lingua suum, dextra peregit opus.
And another of Ausonius,

Puer notarum praepetum
Solers minister advola: etc. Epig. 138.

Yet Dio referres the invention thereof to Maecaenas, and by Manilius it should
seem that in his time it was new: Lib. 55.


Hic and Scriptor erit foelix cui littera verbum est,
Quique notis linguam superet, cursumque loquentis, Lib. 4.

Excipiet long as nova per compendia voces.
So as we have no certainty that either the Graecians, or the Hebrews, or any
of those Eastern Nations had before the Romans the use or knowledge of it
(whatsoever Lorinus and Raderus out of those words of the Psalmist, my tongue
is the pen of a ready writer; and those written on the In Psalm: 44. Dan. 5.
25.
wall which Daniell interpreted, pretend to the contrary) and besides, this
invention of the Romans for ought we find, was lost in succeeding ages, but in
these latter recovered again, or at leastwise somewhat aequivalent thereunto.

And to Brachygraphie may be added, the writing by Zifers, or nota furtivae,
secret marks for the hiding of the writers mind from others save him to whom
he writes it: Now how far latter ages have excelled the former in this
invention, shall appear by the words of Hermannus Hugo, Mire sibi
gratulabantur veteres, insigni seilicet, vt ipsi putabant, invento, epistolarum
occulte scribendarum per transpositas literas, sed De prim^ scribendi origi^.
cap. 17.
profecto id artificium facillime a quovis sagaciore deprehendi potest, vt non
injuria Julius Scaliger Exercitat. 327. id vocet delirium, and imposturam
Referam tamen paucula ejus exempla veneratione solius antiquitatis. Recentiores
omnes id genus technas relinquo apud Neapolitanum quaerendas, lib. 1. De notis
furtivis: quamquam Amplissimus consiliarius Puteanus epistola quadam ad
Plouvierium de (...), rationem ostendit occultissimam scribendi per
transpositionem, quam nec Oedipus divinare possit. De qua ita nunqaum locuturus
fuisset Scaliger, vt de veterum facili commento. Julius Caesar, inquit, Dio,
lib. 39 consueverat si quid secreti cuiquam per liter as significaret quartum
semper elementum in soribendo, pro eo quod sumi debebat, sumere: ne obvia
literarum lectio cuivis esset. Augustus autem (verba sunt Suetonij, cap. 88.)
quoties per notam scribit, ponit B pro A. C. pro B; ac deinceps eadem ratione
sequentes litteras; pro X autem duplex AA. And herein does Salmuth fully accord
in opinion with him. Abeant igitur cum sua vetustate tam copiosa and frivola
veterum commenta. Long alios astus, long aliam vafritiem aetas haec videtur
exposcere: in qua vel infantes cum balbutiunt adhuc, and quaedam subdolae
mentis signa veluti primitiae illius ingeruntur, quasi a nutricis vberibus
simul cum lacte illam suxisse imo a matris vtero contraxisse videantur. Neither
have the Ancients been excelled by the modernes, only in the witty invention
of Zifring and secret characters, but also by the testimony of Pancirollus in
dezifring and discovering the most difficult: Brixianus quidam typis vulgavit
modum quendam, quem intellecta credit impossibilem, nisi quis contra exemplar
istius habeat. Quod tamen falsum est, quandoquidem scripturam istam ipsemet
explicari audivi; and quod dici solet, quasi cum manu tetigi, nullas essenotas
adeo difficiles and obscuras, quae non intelligantur abijs qui in hoc scribendi
genere exercitati sunt: quorum multi Venetijs reperiuntur. Atque ipsemet domi
meae habui Hieronymum Dn. Francisci Nani, nobilis Veneti filium, iuvenem
doctissimum, and artis huius imprimis gnarum: cui nullum Notarum genus, quam
difficile etiam id esset, ^fferebatur, quin ab ipso intelligeretur.

Page 245. Among the late profitable inventions in the mathematiques, the
Mirificus Logarithmorum Canon found out by the Lord Neper Baron of Merchiston
in Scotland, may deservedly challe^dge a place, the book so entitled he
dedicates to his Majesty that now is, then Prince, and in his epistle
dedicatorie gives this testimony of the invention: Cum novae haec Logarithmorum
me^dus omnem illam pristinae matheseos in calculo difficultatem penitus e medio
^ollat, and ad fublevandam memoriae imbecillitatem it a se accommodet, vt
illius adminiculo facile sit plures quaestiones mathematicas vnius spacio, quam
pristina and communiter recepta forma sinuum, tangentium, and secantium, vel
integro die absolvere. But because this testimony may perchance by some be
thought partial touching an invention of his own; I will thereunto add the
grave judgment of Master ^igges, professor in the Mathematiques at Oxford,
who has with great diligence much illustrated and enlarged it: Praesertim cum
deo visum fucrit (post Epist dedicat. Car: prin.
evangelij lucem, qua orbem hunc nostrum illustrari voluit) plurimae humanae
vitae vtiliter inventa, quorum nullum vtique apud antiquos extiterit vestigium,
nobis communicare. Atque in his vt arts Mathematicae primarium tenent locum,
ita in illis Logarithmorum ratio caeteris partibus precellit, sive inventionis
spectemus acumen, sive vsus praestantiam.

Whereunto may not improperly be annexed the invention of Petiscus, prefixed in
these words in the front of his Trigonometrie. Inventio subtensae, tertiae vel
quintae, vel cujuscunque imparis partis alicujus arcus; ex data sola subtensa
illius arcus; etiam per communem Arithmeticam, and sine omni adminiculo
Algebrae: Quae inventio hactenus credita fuit impossibilis. This invention by
the help of Algebra was found out not long since; but those who are not
skilled in Algebra, for the doing of it by common Arithmetique, are beholding
to Petiscus.

In the same page, mention is made of Scaligers finding out of the quadrature
of a circle, but since the writing thereof, I understand that Adrianus Romanus
has written an apology for Archimede against Scaliger, wherein he labors to
prove, that he has not found out the conclusion he pretends, which is answered
by Scaliger, and again replied upon by Romanus, but which of them has the
best, I refer to the determination of the professors in that faculty.


