A SERMON PREACHED AT BARSTAPLE; Upon occasion of the late happy success of
Gods Church in foreign parts.

By G. H. D. D.



LONDON, Printed for R. Allot, and are to be sold at the sign of the Bear in
Paul's Churchyard, 1632.

A SERMON PREACHED AT BARSTAPLE UPON OCCASION OF THE LATE HAPPY SVCCESSE OF
GODS CHVRCH IN FOREIGN PARTS.
Judges Cap. 5. Ver. 31. So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: But let them
that love him be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might.
THere are few I presume that hear me this day but some what they have heard
of the great victories which it has pleased Almighty God lately to give to
those of the reformed Churches in foreign parts, professing our religion; in
which regard that we might in some sort express our mindfulnesse of them our
well-wishing to them, our thankfulness for them, and our rejoicing with them:
I have made choice of these words at this time by Gods gracious assistance to
be opened unto you.

In the Chapter going before we read of a wonderful great defeat by Barak the
son of Abinoam, and Deborah the Prophetess (who at that time judged Israel
though a woman) given to the forces of Iabin King of Canaan, which were utterly
routed, pursued and put to the sword by the Israelites not so much as a man
left alive all the way from the river Kishon even to Harosheth of the Gentiles,
being sprinkled with blood and bestrewed with dead carkases, and for Sisera the
General of the Army under Iabin, the day being thus lost he forsakes his
chariot and flies for his life, and in his flight at the motion of Iael the
wife of Heber the Kenite turns aside into her tent, where being courteously
entertained, and tired with weariness, giving himself to his rest, he fell so
soundly asleep that Iael taking the opportunity stole upon him, and with a
hammer in her hand fastened a nail in his temples, so fully home that he
never rose again from the place.

Hereupon Deborah and Barak, and by their example all the people take up a song
of triumph, a sacred and solemn hymn, to the Lord of Hosts the Author of the
victory, which takes up this whole Chapter, in imitation of Moses and the men
of Israel on the one side, and Miriam the sister of Moses with the women on the
other, who after their deliverance from the cruel oppression of the
Egyptians, and the overwhelming of Pharaoh and his horsemen in the red Sea,
thus sing unto the Lord (which it should seem was the burden of their song,)
For Exo. 15: 1.
he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and the rider has he thrown into the
Sea. And such a song was that which the daughters of Israel took up (perchance
in imitation of this) after the vanquishing of the Philistines; they go forth
to meet Saul and David in their return from that slaughter with tabrets and
instruments of music, singing, and dancing, and as they played they answered
one another and said, Saul has slain his thousands and David his 1 Samuel 18. 7.
ten-thousands; Nay the very Gentiles after victory obtained, they had their
(...) too, or songs of triumph which they called a Poean, Poeana canamus; and
again, dicite Io Poean, and Io bis dicite Poean: and if they did thus to their
heathenish gods which indeed were no gods but Idols, how much more should we
do the like to the true and everliving God.

This Song (as it is thought) was composed by Deborah, which I am the rather
induced to believe, not only because she was a woman of singular gifts and
graces, and above all endued with a prophetical Spirit, because she stirred
up and spurred forward Barak, assisting and encouraging him with her presence
and counsel in the whole action, but chiefly because in the 12 ver: she thus
rouzeth up her self, Awake, awake Deborah; awake, awake, utter a song: but by
whom-soever it is composed it is certainly a most excellent divine hymn, and
of a mavelous lofty high strain, as will easily appear to any man that
reads it with attention and judgment.

The words of my Text they are the very upshot and close of the song, and in
that respect no doubt the more considerable. They contain in them a prayer, a
double prayer, spreading it self into two branches, whereof the one is an
Imprecation against Gods enemies, so let all thine enemies perish O Lord; the
other a Petition, but let them that love him be as the sun when he goes
forth in his might; the Imprecation is for the perishing of Gods enemies; the
Petition for the flourishing of his friends, because first his enemies must
perish before his friends can flourish, as darkness must first be dispelled
before light come in place, and sickness expelled before health be recovered:
these two being like the two buckets of a well, or the two scales of a
balance, the falling of the one is the rising of the other, as the house of
David grew stronger by the weakening of Saul's house, and Rome erected her
trophies in the ruins of Alba.

Now the Imprecation being thus delivered by a Prophetess, contains a
Prediction, as the Petition does likewise a position, and in some translations
is so rendered. In the Imprecation we are first to consider, whether or no it be
lawful and how far to pray against others; Secondly, what these enemies of
God are; Thirdly, by whose hand they are to fall and to perish; and lastly, the
manner of their perishing out of this word, So: so let all thine enemies perish
O Lord.

That which gives occasion to this doubt in the Math. 5. 44.
first place, is the words of our Savior, Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you and persecute you. We are to know then, that we must pray for our
enemies, but against Gods enemies; this was the practice of the Prophet David,
Psalm. 35. 13.
when he speaks of his own enemies when they were sick (says he) my
clothing was sackcloth, I humbled my soul with fasting, I behaved my self as
though he had been my friend or brother, I bowed down heavily as one that
mourns for his mother: but when he speaks of Gods enemies who had taken to
themselves the houses of God in possession, then he changes his note; O my God
Psalm 83. ver. 12.
make them like a wheel as the stubble before the wind, as the fire burns a
wood, and as the flame sets the mountains on fire, so persecute them with
thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. It was the usual form of
the Priests at the removing of the Arc, specially in time of war, and we ^^
Nm. 10. ver. 35.
have it taken up by the Psalmist, Let God arise and Psalm. 68. ver. 1.
let his enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him flee before him, let
his, not our enemies be scattered, or if they be both ours and his, we are to
pray for them as they are ours, but against them as they are his.

We may lawfully pray against their designs though not against their persons,
as David prayed 2 Samuel 15. 31.
against the plots and policy of Achitophel, O Lord, I pray thee turn the
counsel of Achitophel into foolishness; or we may pray against their persons
indefinitely, though not particularly, as thus let them be confounded (what ere
they be) and turned back that Psa. 129. ver. 5.
hate Sion, let them be as the grass upon the house tops, which withers
before it grows up, wherewith the mower fills not his hand, nor he that
binds sheaves his bosom; or lastly, we may pray against their persons in
particular, conditionally, though not absolutely; first, we are to pray for
their conversion, and then if maliciously and wilfully they persist in their
obstinacy, in the second place for their confusion; Psalm 83 ver. 16.
This was David's method, fill their faces with shame that they they may seek
thy name, O Lord, that is, that they may be converted unto thee; but in case
they will not be converted but stand out in their rebellion, and go on still
with an hard heart, ahigh hand, a stiff neck and a brazen forehead, then it
follows, Let them be confounded and troubled for Verse 17.
ever, yea let them boe put to shame and perish; if by shame they will not be
wrought to conversion, from shame let them be brought to confusion; but then we
must here remember, that we do not so much rejoice because they perish, as
because by their perishing the Church of God is delivered, and the glory of God
advanced in the manifestation of his justice: and for that reason the same
Prophet Verse 18.
presently adds, That men may know that thou whose name is only Jehovah, art
the most high over all the earth: that thou art the supreme Judge of the world
and sit in the throne that judges right; to which very purpose is that in
another Psalm, The righteous Psalm. 58. 10. 11.
shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash or bathe his feet
in the blood of the wicked, so that a man shall say, verily there is a reward
for the righteous, verily he is a God that judges in the earth; therefore
shall the righteous rejoice in the vengeance and blood of the wicked, not
because their blood is shed, but because by the shedding of their blood, men
are brought to know and acknowledge that he is the God that judges the earth
with righteous judgment; for shall not the Judge of all the earth do Genesis 18.
25.
right? finally hereunto likewise accords that song of triumph, Rev. 19.
after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying;
Alleluja, salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God,
for true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great whore
which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of
his servants at her hand: and again they said Alleluja.

This rub being thus remooved, I now come to the second part of this first
branch, which is what these enemies of God are. The enemies of God either
acknowledge no God, as professed Atheists, or acknowledge a God but not the
true God, as Idolaters, or the true God but go not to him the true way, that
is, by JESUS CHRIST, as Mahometans and Jews; or go to him by JESUS CHRIST,
but not by him alone, as Romanists; or go by him alone, but (withal) fancy
to themselves, and obstinately maintain some erroneous opinion in fundamental
points, as Heretics; or are sound enough in fundamental points, but out of an
affectation of singularity separate themselves from the congregation, as
schismatics; or lastly, join themselves to the congregation, but either with
false hearts as hypocrites, or foul hands as profane persons, having both of
them a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: these may all of
them in some sense, though in a diverse manner, and in a different degree, be
termed the enemies of God. And again, to speak generally, they are all Gods
enemies who blaspheme Gods name, who with hold Gods right, who profane Gods
day, who dishonor Gods house, who abuse Gods word, whou nreverently or
unworthi ly receive Gods Sacraments, who despise Gods ordinances, who neglect
Gods commandments, who disgrace or disesteeme Gods ambassadors.

But by the enemies of God here in this place undoubtedly are to be understood
the enemies of his Church, that is, such as persecute it, or for professions
sake oppose themselves against it: such an indissoluble link and reciprocal
connection there is betwixt God and his Church, that it cannot be but that the
enemies of the one should be the enemies of the other. The reproaches of them
that reproched Psalm. 69 9.
thee are fallen upon me, says the Psalmist as a member of the Church; and
again, Do I not hate them O Lord that hate thee? and am I not grieved with
Ps. 139. 21. 22.
those that rise up against thee? I hate them, with a perfect hatred, I count
them mine enemies. And as Gods enemies are the Churches enemies, so the enemies
of the Church, are Gods enemies, and therefore they are Gods enemies because
they are the Churches enemies; Lo thine enemies make a tumult, and they Psalm.
83. 2.
that hate thee have lift up the head: and why were they thine enemies? the
reason is there immediately added, They have taken crafty counsel against thy
people, and consulted against thy hidden ones; because they took counsel
against his people, and consulted against his Church, therefore were they his
enemies: Remember Lord (says the same Prophet) the reproach Psalm. 89. 49.
of thy servants, wherewith thine enemies have reproched them, therefore they
were His enemies because they reproched his servants, that is, his Church; and
in this very Chapter, Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord) curse
bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not up to the help of the
Lord against the mighty: whereby he intitles the Churches quarrels to the
Lord. But above all we have to this purpose in the ninth of the Acts a singular
testimony from the mouth of the Lord himself, as it were an oracle speaking to
us from heaven, where we read that when Saul (who afterward was called Paul)
was breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord
(that is, the Church) and to that end was upon his journey to Damascus, being
amazed with an exceeding bright light, which shone round about him, he heard a
voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? and he said, Who
art thou Lord? and the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks; Jesus whom thou persecutest? why Jesus
was then in heaven and Saul on earth; Saul clothed with misery and mortality
here below and Jesus above sitting at the right hand of God in glory and
majesty far enough out of Saul's reach, how then could Saul persecute Jesus?
surely none otherwise but because he persecuted the members of his Church,
which Jesus takes to heart as if himself had been persecuted in his own
person.

The reason here of is apparent, the Church is the spouse, and he the husband
of this spouse, the Church the body and he the head of this body, the Church
the family and he the father of this family, the Church the army and he the
General of this army, the Church the kingdom and he the Sovereign of this
kingdom; and if the spouse suffer can the husband be insensible of it? if the
body suffer can the head be insensible of it? if the family suffer can the
father of the family be insensible of it? if the army suffer can the general
be insensible of it? if the kingdom suffer can the sovereign be insensible of
it? nay a far neereunion there is betwixt Christ and his Church than betwixt
the husband and the spouse, for this cause shall a man leave father and mother
and shall cleave to his wife and they two shall be one flesh: one flesh they
are, but the wife lives not by the soul of the husband, as the Church does by
the spirit of Christ the wife feeds not upon the flesh of the husband as the
Church does upon the flesh of Christ, the wife is not bought with the blood of
the husband as the Church is redeemed by the blood of Christ, and by this
means becomes nearer unto him than his own right hand, dearer than the apple
of his eye.

Here is our comfort then, there being so many obligatory relations and mutual
engagements between God and his Church, the enemies of the Church are thereby
made his enemies, and if God be on our side who shall be against us? To fight
against God is as if a man should spit against the wind which carries it back
in his own face; the fury of Gods enemies against his Church is but as the
rattling of a violent haile-storm upon the tiles, which makes a great noise for
the time as if it would beat down the house, but is cast off as soon as it
comes on and then lies on the ground, and within a while melts away; or as the
proud surges of the sea which come swelling and roaring toward the rock, as
if they would rend it in pieces and carry all before them, but the issue is
that they dash themselves against the rock and so turn into froth, but the
rock being only washed remains where it was; so is it with the Church which
is built upon the rock, the winds may blow and the floods arise, and the rain
beat upon it, but it falls not, because it is, built upon a rock, and the gates
of hell shall never be able to prevail against it.

The third considerable point in this Imprecation is the hand by whose power
the enemies of God shall perish, that is, by the hand and power of him whose
enemies they are, and therefore does Deborah (as we see) by an apostrophe turn
her to the Lord and directs her speech to him, So let, or so shall all thine
enemies perish O Lord, that is, they shall thus perish by thy hand; and hence
it is that in so many passages she ascribes the victory wholly to the Lord;
Deborah said unto Barak, Up, Judges 4. 14.
for this day wherein the Lord has delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not
the Lord gone out before thee? and in the next verse immediately following, The
Lord Ver. 15.
discomfited Sisera and all his charriots, and all his host, with the edge of
the sword before Barak: it is not said, that Barak discomfited them before the
Lord, but the Lord before Barak: and again in the 23. of the same Chapter, So
God subdued on that day Iabin the King of Canaan before the children of Israel.

Though Barak signify lightning, yet was he but as a thunderbolt in the hand
of God against Sisera, and though Deborah signify a Be, yet no doubt but her
diligence and providence in assisting Barak was overruled and guided by the
providence of God; and so much her self upon the matter confesses in this
very song: they fought from heaven, the stars in their courses or paths
fought against Sisera: they fought from Ver. 20.
heaven, who was that but he Lord of heaven and Antiq. l. 5. c. 6.
earth? which Josephus thut expresses; There suddenly fell a storm. (says
he) of rain mixed with hail, which the wind drove against the faces of the
Canaonites, and took away their sight, making those that carried darts, and
such as served with the sling unprofitable in their service, the Targetiers
likewise having their hands benumbed with cold could scarcely weild their
swords, but the tempest beating on the backs of the Israelites, not only
wrought them less offense, but made them also more forward, being whetted
thereunto by the manifest sign of Gods favor and presence, whereupon
disarraying and breaking through their enemies battle, they made a great
slaughter of them, so as a part of them fell by the weapons of the Israelites,
the rest were overrunne by their own horsemen and chariots: Hitherto Josephus:
much like whereunto is that story which Eusebius (out of Apollinarius and
Tertullian) reports that the army of Marcus Aurelius warring upon the
Marcomannians, being in sore distress for want of water, and having at that
time in his pay a legion of Christians which served under him, they all with
one consent (the sign being given) fell upon their knees, and earnestly prayed
God for relief, who instantly thereupon sent such a storm of thunder and
lightning and rain and hail, as it amazed their enemies, driving full in
their faces, but refreshed them to the utter discomfiture of the one, and
victorious triumph of the other; and thus the Emperor himself (though by
religion a Pagan) by his letters signified to the Senate, and thereupon gave
not only that legion the name of fulminatrix, but strait charge that none
should be put to death or punished for being Christians.

All which considered great reason had Gideon in the cry of his soldiers to
prefer the sword of the Lord before his own, as it is in the seventh Chapter
of this book; The sword of the Lord and of Gideon; not the sword of Gideon
without the sword of the Lord, nor the sword of Gideon in the first place, and
then the sword of the Lord; but first, the sword of the Lord, and then the
sword of Gideon; the sword of the Lord to direct, and the sword of Gideon to
execute; the sword of the Lord as the primarie esficient, and the sword of
Gideon as the subordinate instrument, the sword of the Lord without the sword
of Gideon in the ordinary course, will do nothing, and the sword of Gideon
without the sword of the LORD at all can do nothing. Navies of ships, troops
of horse, regiments of foot, fortresses, ramparts, artillery, munition and
all military provision without him availes nothing; he it is who directs the
bullet and the arrow to the mark, who sharpens the sword that it may enter in
to glut it self with flesh and make it self drunk with blood, who gives
wisdom to the captain and courage to the soldier, who strengthens his arm
and teaches his fingers to fight, and covers his head in the day of battle;
Through God we shall Ps. 13.
do valiantly, for he it is that shall tread down our enemies: no King can be
saved by a multitude of men, and a horse is but a vain thing to deliver a man:
vain is the help of man without the help of the Lord, therefore King David
(who wanted neither valor, nor experience, nor provision for the wars)
professes of himself, I will not trust in Psalm. 44. 6.
my bow, it is not my sword that shall save me: he does not say I will break my
bow, or I will cast away my sword, but I will not trust in my bow, it is not my
sword that shall save me, but it is thou Lord that savest, and put them to
confusion that hate us; it is thou, and thou alone, that refrainest the spirit
of Princes, and art terrible among the Kings of the earth, that knappest the
spear in sunder and burnest the chariots in the fire, that bluntest the head
of the arrow that it cannot pierce, and take off the edge of the sword that
it cannot wound, that take away the wisdom of the Captain and the courage
of the soldier, that pullest down the thickest walls, batterest the strongest
forts, and levellest the highest towers with the ground. It is thou and only
thou, who raisest and turnest the winds at thy pleasure, and by them make
use of rain and snow and hail and dust and smoke and of the winds
themselves, to the annoiance of thine enemies and relief of thy friends. Thus
as S. Ambrose in his book against Symmachus reports it, he assisted the good
Emperor Theodosius being now in great danger by raising on the sudden a
mighty wind, which carried back the darts of his enemies upon their own
heads, and withal caused the darts of his soldiers to pierce the deeper into
their bodies, which no doubt gave occasion to those verses of Claudian,

O nimium dilecte Deo, cui fundit ab antris
Aeolus armatas acies, cui militat ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.
O Gods great favorite, to whom is sent
From Aeole's vaults a warlike regiment;
Under whose ensign heaven above bears arms,
And the winds, sworn his soldiers, wait alarms.
To whom then shall we go with a song of triumph for victory received? Not
unto Mars, as did the old Romans, but for us our help stands in the name of
the Lord who has made both heaven and earth, some put their trust in chariots
and some in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God; his name
we will remember by flying to him for succor, and his name we will remember
by returning to him with praise and thanksgiving* Not unto us Lord, not unto
us, but untothy name give the praise; and herein we are sure we cannot err,
except Moses erred, who after his victory obtained upon the Amalekites built
Exodus 17. 15.
an altar and called the name of it Jehovah Nisi; the Lord my banner; except
the Prophet David erred Psa. 1^ 9, 10.
who professed of himself, I will sing a new song unto thee O God; upon a
Psalterie and an instrument often strings will I sing praises unto thee. It is
he, it is he that gives victory unto Kings and delivers David his servant
from the peril of the sword, or from the hurtful sword; lastly, except
Deborah the Prophetess erred, I am sure we cannot err in this point, who in
the very entrance of her song dedicates it to the Lord; Praise ye the Lord for
the avenging of Israel, hear O Ye Kings, and give ear (...)
O Ye Princes, I, even I, will sing unto the Lord, I will sing praise to the
LORD GOD of Israel.

The fourth and last observation in this first branch is, the manner of
perishing of Gods enemies, out of the word, So, So let all thine enemies perish
O Lord. So, as did Sisera with his army; suddenly, and when they least expect
it, as did Sisera; shamefully, and with dishonor, as did Sisera; utterly, and
without recovery, as did Sisera; So let all thine enemies perish O Lord. First
then, let them perish suddenly and when they least expect, as did Sisera.
Sisera was now in the height of his pride and confidence, in the very top of
his jollity and bravery; his master had now by the space of twenty years
mightily oppressed and harrowed the children of Israel, whereby they became
both unarmed and dishartened, Cap. 4. 3.
he had now drawn out into the field, as witnesses Josephus 300000 foot,
10000 horse, and 3000 chariots, whereof 900 of them were of iron, whereupon
himself and his adherents were so assured of the victory, that as we read in
the three verses here immediately before going in Ver. 3. and 13.
my text, His mother looking out at a window and earnestly expecting every
moment (as it should seem) the return of her son in his triumphant chariot,
she wondered what should stay him there, he was so long a coming* whereunto her
wise ladies answered her, or rather she prevented them and answered her self,
that the reason no doubt of his long stay could be none other than the dividing
of the prey taken from the vanquished enemy, and the lading of themselves with
abundance of rich and pleasant spoils: but behold, while she thus expected and
reasoned the matter in her self, woeful tidings was suddenly brought her, not
only of the death of her dearest son, but of the miserable defeat and slaughter
of the whole army by him conducted, and then presently follow the words of my
text, So, even so let all thine enemies perish O Lord.

Nay, so they shall perish, when the wicked spring as the Psalm. 7.
grass, and when all the workers of iniquity did flourish, then it is that
they shall be destroyed for ever; then, even Psalm 7.
then shall God shoot at them with a swift arrow, Suddenly shall they be
wounded; when they 17 ^ 3.
shall say peace and safety, then Sudden destruction shall come upon them
unawares, as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape that
which the Psalmist speaks of the wicked in general, may truly be verifyed in
particular, of those enemies of the Lord, who lately perished, I have seen Psa
35.
the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green Laurel: yet
(for all his great power and pomp) he passed away, and lo he was not; yea I
sought him but he could not be found, he was suddenly gone in the turn of an
hand: as it was fore told of Julian, Nubecula est and cito transibit, he is but
a thin cloud and will quickly vanish, and so indeed it fell out. Such a flash
was that Spanish bravado in the year 1588, predictions had every where run and
were verily believed, that some great conversions of kingdoms would fall out
in that year, and the Spaniards for the invasion of this kingdom covered the
seas with such a navy, as for ships, men, munition and provision in all kinds
it was (as our Annalist speaks) omnium quas Oceanus unquam vidit
instructissima, the best furnished and most accomplished of any that the Ocean
ever saw, it was more like a moving forest than a fleet, three whole years in
preparing, and cost the King of Spain by their own report thirty thousand
ducats every day; inso much as themselvesin the pride of their heart, and
assurance of victory called it the invincible Armado, and Bernardinus, Mendoza,
then ambassador in France, caused books to be published of their conquest of
England; but notwithstanding all their vain braggs and confidence, they passed
away and were not, we sought them but they could not be found.

Quam been te ambitio mersit vanissima ventus?
Et tumidos tumidae vos superastis aquae?
Justly the wind windy ambition drowned,
And swelling waves did swelling hearts confound.
In memory of which sudden discomfiture money was coined with this inscription,
stamped on the one side, Venit, Vidit, Fugit, and on the other, Dux femina
facti; So let all thine enemies perish O Lord.

Let them also perish So, that is, shamefully and with dishonor, as Sisera
did. He was for his person and qualities, a Captain of great fame and long
experience, trained up in the wars and military affairs from his very
childhood: whereas Barak on the other side was but a raw commander, of little
experience and less courage as it should seem by his answer to Deborah, that
he would not march into the field nor encounter Sisera without her, and
besides, that his soldiers were taken up in haste, undisciplind, unexercised
and unfurnished, their spirits had been broken by long servitude under the
Canaanites, and their number very small, but ten thousand men in the whole,
scarce matchable with Sisera*s horsemen; yet by this handful of men was
Sisera*s huge host cut in pieces, and himself flying shamefully out of the
battle, as shamefully by the hand of a woman, as did Holophernes by the hand
of Judith, and Abimelech should have done having his scull broken by a piece of
a millstone thrown down from a tower from the hand of a woman, had not he to
prevent the shame commanded his armor-bearer to thrust him through with his
sword, as we may read in the ninth Chap. of this very book. Thus Sisera (as
Ver. 53.
Guicciardin speaks of Charles the eight his expedition to Naples and return
from thence) came into the field like thunder and lightning, but went out like
a snuff, more than a man at first, and less than a woman at last. Thus
perished Herod a grievous 12.
persecutour of the Church too, who sitting in Majesty upon his throne of
estate, and glistering in his royal apparel as an Angel, making an eloquent
oration unto the people, so that they gave a shout crying out and saying, It is
the voice of God, and not of man; but immediately the Angel of the Lord smote
him, and he was eaten up of worms, and gave up the ghost, and so perished both
suddenly and shamefully. And thus Goliath who was of a mighty stature, whereunto
^.
his strength was every way answerable, and his armor, his helmet, his coat
of male, his greaves, his target, his spear proportionable to his strength and
stature, upon which he was so confident that he disdained David, making account
and threatening him, out of hand, to give his flesh to the fowls of the air
and to the beasts of the field; but it fell out otherwise, this great Giant
thus swelling with pride quickly falls by the cast of a stone thrown out of
the sling of a poor silly boy in comparison of him; and this God does that the
plumes of man's presumption may thereby be taken down, and the greatness of
his own power may appear in the weakness of the means. And so let all
thine enemies perish O Lord. Lastly, let them perish So, that is, utterly,
without all hope of recovery, as Sisera did; not so much as a man left to Cap.
4. 16.
carry tidings of the success to Iabin King of Canaan; whose forces they were:
nay more than so, Josephus Antiq. 5. 8.
assures us that Barak having now gotten to himself more spirit by this
victory, he made use of it, and stayed not here, but marched forward leading
his army even to the gates of Azor, the Imperial City of all Canaan, slew
Iabin that came out against him, and having slain the King levelled the City
with the ground; with which relation of Josephus the last verse of the Chapter
immediately going before seems to accord, where we read that the hand of the
Children of Israel prospered and prevailed against Iabin the King of Canaan
until they had destroyed him: and so much does the Psalmist intimate Psalm 83.
9.
where he makes this victory as a president or pattern to all succeeding
ages. Do unto them (says he, praying against the professed enemies of God and
his Church) as unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to Iabin at the brook of
Kison which perished at Endor, they became as the dung of the earth: And so let
all thine enemies perish O Lord. Yea, so sha^ al thine enemies perish O Lord
(this imprecation being likewise a prediction) thou shall break them with a rod
of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a potters vessel; thou shall
Psalm. 2. 9.
so dash them as they shall be broken to shivers; thou shall so break them to
shivers, as there shall not be left so Revel. 2 27.
much as a sheard to take fire withal from the hearth, or water out of the
pit: from hence it is that their perishing Esaias 30. 14.
is compared to the vanishing of smoke, which mounts and dilates it self for
a time, but instantly is so clean Psalm. 68 2.
gone as no man knows what is become of it; and to the burning of stubble
which in a moment is turned into ashes: The house of Jacob shall be a fire, and
the house of Obadiah 18.
Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in
them and devour them, and there shall not be any remaining of the house of
Esau for the Lord has spoken it. Such a promise we have of the utter perishing
of the whore of Babylon. The ten horns which thou saw upon the beasts,
these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and hsall
Rev. 17. 16.
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: and in the very next Chapter of the
total and final destruction of the City Babylon (by which Rome is meant, and
that even by the testimonies of the Jesuits themselves Vega and Ribera) And a
mighty Angel took up a Rev 18. 21.
great millstone and cast it into the Sea, saying: Thus with violence shall that
great City Babylon be thrown down and shall be found no more at all; shall
be found no more, there is her final; no more at all, there is her total
destruction. And s, oeven so, let all thine enemies perish O Lord; suddenly,
shamefully, irrecoverably.

And so I pass from the malediction to the benedi ction, from mount Ebal, the
mountain of cursing, to mount Gerazin the mountain of blessing, from the
imprecation against Gods enemies, to the deprecation for his friends. But let
them that love him be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might: upon which
I shall insist the less, because I have already dwelt so long upon the former.
In the handling thereof I will first treat of that kind of divine love which is
here to be understood, and of the several degreestherof; secondly of the
semblance of such as are therewith inflamed to the sun; thirdly, of their
resemblance to the sun when he goes forth in his might.

Love is a passion of the mind, or that point of the soul by which it longs
to be united to the thing it loves; Amor meus pondus meum, eo feror quocunque
feror says Saint Augustine, my love is to me my weight, by it am I carried,
whithersoever I am carried: so that look what wings are to a bird, sails to a
ship, legs to a man, wheels to a cart, and weight to heavy bodies, to the
drawing of them down to the center from whence they came; the same is love to
the soul for the uniting of it to the object it affects; Anima est non tam ubi
animat quam ubi amat, the soul being not so much where it lives as where it
loves.

Again, love is as it were prima mensura, the principal and primarie measure
of all the other passions of the soul; as our love is, so is our hatred, our
hope, our joy, our fear, our grief; proportionable to the measure of our
love, to the thing we affect is our hatred to that which opposes against it,
our hope of attaining it if we have it not, our joy in possessing it if we have
it, our fear of losing it even when we possess it, and lastly, our grief
for the loss when we are deprived of it.

Now for the general kinds of love; it is either unlawful as immoderate,
self love, irregular carnal love, inordinate worldly love; or lawful, and
that either natural, between those of the same blood, or moral, between
those of the same virtuous qualities, or civil between those of the same
City and Corporation, or Spiritual, between those of the same mystical body
of JESUS CHRIST; and yet a more transcendent than all these is Divine love,
which first reflects upon God, and then from God and for Gods sake upon other
things and persons: Qui aliquid amat praeter Deum and non propter Deum, non
amat Deum; he that loves any thing or person beside GOD, and not in reference
to God, loves not God. God then we are all to love, because he is God, most
beautiful and glorious, most wise, most powerful, most holy, most just, most
true in himself; we are likewise to love him, because he is Good to all his
creatures in general, and to us in particular; and for Gods sake we are to
love those things which belong unto him, but specially his Church, than which
nothing in this world is to him more precious, or more properly his; and this
love do I take to be understood here in this place, let those that love him be
as the sun; for as by Gods enemies in the former part of the verse are to be
understood the enemies of his Church, so by his friends in this latter part are
undoubtedly to be understood the friends of his Church, and of that Gospel and
truth which by that Church is professed.

Of this love there are different degrees; whereof the first is to wish well
unto it, and to pray for it, that GOD would be pleased to raise up Kings and
Queens to be nursing fathers and nursing mothers unto it, that he would stir
up the Princes of the earth to be a protection to it, and to shroud it under
the wings of their authority, that the vinyard which his own right hand has
planted, be not devoured either by cunning of wily Foxes, or by the rage of the
wild Bore out of the forest.

A second degree of this love is, to prefer the peace, the liberty, the
prosperity of the Church before our own private concernements, as the arm
offers it self to the blow for the preservation of the head wherein consists
the safety of the body, and the elements forsake their proper motions for the
good of the Universe; thus did Vriah that worth soldier and faithful servant
of the Lord and o^ David, being advised by the King to go home and refresh
himself with the comforts of his own. ^ Sam. 11. 11.
house; what was his answer? The arc (says he and Israel and Judah dwell in
tents, and my Lord Ioab an^ the servants of my Lord abide in the open fields:
shall then go into mine own house to eat and to drink and lie with my wife?
by thy life and the life of thy soul, I will not do this thing: a memorable
speech, an admirable resolution to be in a manner careless of himself, till
he saw the state of the Church (the prosperity whereof then depended upon the
preservation of the Arc) to be in safety. To like purpose was that noble
answer of Terentius a renowned captain under Valens the Emperor, an Arrian by
profession, who returning with victory from Armenia, and being thereupon
willed by the Emperor to demand some recompense for his good service,
presented this petition that the Orthodox Christians might have the liberty of
a Church by themselves, wherein to worship God apart from the Arrians (whose
heresy had then spread it self exceedingly;) he asked not (says Theodoret)
gold or Lib 4. 28.
silver, lands or houses, but sued only in the Churches behalf: yet the
Emperor upon the reading of his supplication being much displeased, tare it in
pieces, threw it away and bid him ask somewhat else: but Terentius modestly
gathering up the pieces again, professed to him, that if he could not be
heard in Gods cause, he would make no suit for himself; Sanctus and arduus hic
amor est dignusque notari, this I confess was a very high strain and great
measure of love to God his truth and the distressed Church.

But the third and last and highest pitch of love to Gods Church is, when a
man, but specially a Prince, a King adventures and indangers his crown, his
kingdom, his life, and all to deliver the Church from oppression and
persecution; and surely greater love than this has no man, than to hazard all
he has for the good of the Church, whereof he professes himself a member;
and great reason it is that the members of the same Church (though far
distant in place yet linked together by the same faith) should assist such an
one with their persons or purses, or both (if they be able;) or if with
neither, yet at leastwise with their prayers, that God would give him the heart
of David, the head of Solomon, the hand of Gideon, in a word that he may be as
the Sun: Let them that love him (that draw their swords and display their
banners in his cause) be as the sun.

The sun (says Syracides) is vas admirable, a marvailous instrument; and well
might he so call it, it being next to man himself the greatest wonder among
all the works of God, and in a manner visibilis mundi Deus, the visible God of
the world; in so much that Socrates (judged by the Oracle the wisest man then
living) would spend whole days in gazing upon it as a man transported and
ravished in admiration of it, and truly were it not our inbred disposition
magis nova quam magna mir ari, rather to wonder at things new and strange than
great in themselves, it is certain there is no one thing we should so much
admire as the sun in regard of the greatness, the glory, the regularity, the
swiftness, but above all the wonderful virtue and efficacy thereof in working
upon these inferior bodies; Let them then that love him, and so love him Pro.
4. 18.
as to fight his battles for the Churches sake be as the Sun.

Regular and constant in their religious purposes as the sun is uniforme and
invariable in his course from the East to the West, and from the West to the
East again, from the North to the South, and from the South to the North
again, not missing the least jot in all his points and periods, turns and
returns, but performing his office so duly, so exactly, so precisely, as if he
were indeed a reasonable creature and perfectly understood what he did
according to that of the Psalmist: he appointed the Moon for seasons, and the
Sun knows his going down.

Safe and secure in their persons, as from conspiracy and rebelion at home, so
from foreign machinations and Jesuitical Assassinates, as the sun is
placed out of gunne-shot far enough above the reach of all malicious and
forcible attempts, free not only from danger but from all fear and
possibility of danger.

Unwearied and indeficient in their pious enterprises, as the sun, which
though it has now lasted by the space of so many thousand years, yet since
the first creation thereof has it lost nothing of that primitive vigor and
original perfection which by Almighty God was bestowed upon it.

Swift and speedy in their prosperous success as the sun, which (as
Astronomers assure us) runs above a thousand miles within the compass of
every minute; and this incredible swiftness was it which gave occasion to
Copernicus and others to conceive, that the globe of the earth did rather ^^ove
and the sun stand still.

Lastly, Let them be as the sun when he goes forth in his might, which the
Prophet David has excellently described: In them has he set a tabernacle for
the sun, which as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a
strong man to run a race, his going forth is from the end of the heaven, and
his circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat
thereof. Let them that love him be as the sun when he thus goes forth in his
might. Let them be acceptable and glorious, powerful and vigorous as the sun
when he rises in the morning, and so by degrees mounts up to the vertical
point at high noone, chasing away the darkness, dissolving the frost,
dispelling the mist, and cheering up the spirits both of men and beasts, partly
with its warmth, and part ly with its light.

Let their ways be as the path of the just, Pro. 4. 18.
which Solomon compares to the shining light increasing more and more unto the
perfect day. So let them go on and still march forward from strength to
strength, from courage to courage, from victory to victory, till they have
brought their noble and worthy designs to a blessed end. So let all thine
enemies perish O Lord, but let them that love him be as the sun when he
goes forth in (...) might. Grant this good Lord we beseech thee (...) thy
mercies sake, for thy promise sake, for thy sons sake, to whom with thee and
the holy spirit, three persons and one God invisible, eternal, only wise, we
ascribe, and desire to be ascribed all power, Majesty and dominion now and for
ever.

PSALM. 45 Ver. 3, 4, 5. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh O most mighty, with thy
glory and thy Majesty.

And in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because of truth, and meekness, and
righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.

Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies, whereby the people
fall under thee.

Deo soli gloria.
FINIS.

