A Consultorie for all Christians. Most godly and ernestly warnyng al people,
to beware least they bear the name of christians in vain. Now first
imprinted, the.xxx day of January.

Anno. M.D.xlix.

At Worceter by John Oswen, Cum priuilegio (...) ad imprimendum ^ol^m. Per
septem (...)

Ephesians the.iiij. ii I, beseech you bretheen, bound in the lord, that you
walk worthily in the vocation wherein you be called, with all humylitie and
gentleness, with patience supporting one an other in love, being dilygent to
keep the unity of the spyrite in the hand of peace, being one body and one
spirit, as you be called in one hope of your vocation. There is one lord, one
faith, one baptism, one god and father of all, which is above all, and through
all, and in all us: for to every one of us is there grace given, after the
measure of the gift of Christ.



The copy of the Kings Majesty's most gracious privilege.
Edward the sixth by the grace of God, king of England, France and Irelande,
defender of the faith, and of the church of England, and also of Ireland, in
earth the supreme head. To all manner of Printers, book sellers, and other our
officers, ministers and subjects, gretyng: We late you were, that of our
especial grace, we renderyng the godly edifiyng and ease of our loving
subjects, within our Principality of Wales, and marches of the same, by
thaduise and consent of our most dear uncle Edward Duke of Somerset, Governor
of our person, and Protector of all our realms dominions and subjects, and
other our counsailours, have granted and given privilege and license, and by
thies presents do grant and give privilege and license, unto our well-beloved
subject John Oswen, of our city of Worceter Printer, and to his factours and
assigns, to print, reprint, utter and sell, or cause to be printed, reprinted,
uttered, and sold, so many of every kind of book or books, which have or
shall be set forth by us, by thaduise aforesaid, for service to be used in our
Churches, minystration of Sacraments, and instruction of our said subjects,
as shall only suffice for the Churches and our subjects within our said
Principality and marches, any other license or privilege to the contrary in
any wise notwtstanding.

AND also, of our especial grace by thaduise and consent aforesaid, we have
granted and given privilege and license, and by thies presents do grant and
give privilege and license, unto the said John Oswen, and to his factours and
assigns, to print, utter and sell, or cause to be printed, uttered and sold,
to all person and persons of whatsoever estate, degree, or condition they be,
al manner of books conteinyng any storye or exposition of Gods holy scripture,
or of any part thereof, being not contrary or against ye same, which at any
time heretofore have been, or hereafter shall be made translated or co^piled, by
the same John Oswen, or by his means, instigatio^, industry or procureme^t,
and at his costs and charges, of whatsoever quality or sort the said books
or any of the^ shall be, so yt the true copies of every such books be first
diligently seen, perused and allowed, by such person or persons as we shall
from time to time thereunto assign and apoint, before they be put to any sale
or vtteraunce. And further our mind and pleasure is, and by thies presents we
do straightly charge and inhibite, that no person or persons of whatsoever
estate degree or condition he or they be, do at any time hereafter print, or
reprint, or cause to be printed or reprinted privily or appertly any of the
books aforesaid, or any part or parcel of the^, during the space of.vii.
years, next after the printing or reprintyng of the same books by the said
John Oswen, his factours or assigns: so that the same John his factours and
assigns, shall and may have the profitte and advantage coming and growyng of
the printyng and reprintyng of such books in recompense and alleinatio^ of his
industry pains and charges in that behalf to be sustained. Wherefore we will
and straightly charge and command al and singular our subjects, as well
printers and bokesellers, as al other persons within al our dominions, that
they or any of the^ do not presume to print utter or sell, or cause to be
printed uttered or sold within any our dominions, any of the books aforesaid,
by ye said John made co^piled, or translated, or any parcel of the^ contrary
to the true meaning of this our present lyce^ce and privilege, upon pain that
every offe^der therein shall forfait to our use al such books and every of the^,
where soever they shall be found. Willing therefore and co^maundyng all our
officers ministers and subjects as they te^dre our favor and will avoid our
high indignation, that they and every of the^ if need shall require, do aid and
assist ye same John Oswen his factours and assigns in the due exercisyng and
execution of this our present ^^e^ce and privilege with effect according to
the true meaning of ye same. In witness whereof we have caused these our letters
to be made patentes. Witness our self, at Westminster the sixth day of January,
the second year of our Reign.

A Consultorie for all Christians.
GOD in times paste, Heb. i. a
diversely and many ways spoke to the fathers by prophets, but in these last
days has he spoken unto us, as S. Paul says, by his son, who^ he has
made heir of al things, and by him has he now declared his most godly will
unto us, that we might obtain life in him: whose most excellent clear
brightness has long time been darkened, Apoc. 6.
and as S. John says, hid as with a sackeclothe made with hear, yt is to say
with a feigned ryghtuousenes grounded upon natural wisdom and carnal reason,
invented and set fourth by man: So that the bright shynyng beams of gods
truth contained in the holy scriptures might in no wise appear (by reason of
that dark veil or cloud) to the eyes or mind of men, which is not yet with
all men taken away. 1. Cor. 3. c
Nevertheless, when they turn to the lord (says Paul) the veil shall be
taken away, for no doubt, says he, ye lord is a spirit, and where the
spirit of the lord is, there is liberty. And seeing that god which is rich
in mercy, has once again put down ye great power of the enenemy, broken
down his brazen gates, and by vyolence taken the pray (as a spoil) from out
of the mouth of the Lyo^, yea victoryously has he delivered his truth ye long
time has of his enemies be holde^ in bondage and captivity, and we have herd
and seen these things, obeyed and do believe. Therefore am I not ashamed to
testyfye the truth unto the world because it is the pour of God unto
salvation, Roma. i.
to all them that do deleue. And as Saint Iho^ says, Ihon. i. i. Ihon. i.
the only true light which lyghteneth all men that come into the world,
our hands have handeled of the word of life, for life has apered, says he,
and we have seen and bear witness, and show unto you life, that is everlasting
which was with the father, and has now apered also unto us. And ye tidyngs
which we have heard of him (as Ihon says) declare we unto you, that ye may
have fellowship with us, and our fellowship may be with the father and with his
son Jesus Christ etc.

For as much as, it has pleased the eternal god, which separated me from my
mothers womb, to lighten the inward eyes of my mind with his grace, and
through the knoweledge of his word and working of his holy spirit, to work a
perfect repentance in me, and amendmente of my formoure life, love
constraynethe me too will you (good brethren) to be partakers of this great
benefyte. And for this cause, I have thought it necessary, as well to declare
unto you the daungerouse harms that sin brings to such as delight and
continue therein, as also the unspeakable reward of the righteouse which god
has prepared for those that with their h^le hearts turn from their sins
and walk with their god in the way of rightuousenesse. I will not withhold
from you, good brethren, that which god has wrought in me, to encourage the
weak stomakes, of them that now wax faynte herted and shrynke back, that I
may say with the Prophet David. Psalm. 39.
Lord I do not hide thy righteousenes in my heart, but my talking is of thy
truth and saving health, all ye day long. Therefore tourn not thou thy mercy
from me (o lord) but let thy loving kyndnes and truth always preserve me. etc.

Ezec. 3.
For it is written, when I speak unto the, then open thou thy mouth, says the
lord, and say who hereth, let him here, who so will not, let him leave, for it
is a froward household. etc

For as much as I perceive that the earth makes haste to bring fourth her
children, and the time draws fast toward the end, and all flesh seems very
desirouse and as it were gredy, to accomplish the thing with much haste,
which it takes in hand, be it good or evil, my desire is also to occupy my
talente according to ye will of the geuer, wherebye I may please my lord,
which is my desire above all things, and not only thereby to gather tresure
for my self, but also to provoke as well my brethren and natural contrymenne
of this realm of England / as al other nations and named Christians to bring
fourth their fruits redyly according to their nature that they may be ripe
against the day of harvest, Named cristians.
when ye lord shall reward every man according to his deades. Therefore beloved
fathers and brethren, seeing ye have taken the name of holiness upon you, being
called Christians of Christ, and do in word profess the same, estemynge your
selves the true church and espouse of God upon earth, as all that live godly
doubtless be, See that ye be dilygente to obey to the word of truth which our
heavenly father has now sent and set abroad by his beloved messengers, as
well within this reame of England, as in all other regions on the earth, as it
is written in the eyghtenth Psalm. Psalm. 18 Romans 16
Their sownde is gone owte into all lands: And their words into the ends of
ye world. If ye accept the voice of the shepeherde, then will he know you for
his own, and lead you in and out, where ye shall all ways find rich
pasture. Godde has made day and night, Ihon. 10
light and darkness, summer and winter, to the intent that all things
myght-haue as well place and time as sufficient occasion to show forth and
declare them selves, either good or evil. Repent and turn from your evil
ways with your whole hertes, that ye may believe, and set your faith on a
sure ground, Psalm. 65 Gala. 6.
build it on ye sure foundation of gods holy word and promises, and then will
it always abide the violence of the storms, but if ye go by groopyng and
work at adventure, be ye sure, ye shall not go right, for true faith is lively,
and no uncertain thing, it is surely grounded and stablished upon the sure
rock of Gods word and promise, as it is written. Abraham believed God in his
promise, Gene. 13.
and none opinion of his own imaginacion, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, but if your faith be without the word, then is it carnal and
fleshely, being builte upon natural reason, and therefore it is vain and of
no valor, Eccle. i.
for true faith is accoumpanyed with godly love, who has the wiisdome of god
for her governor, she teaches her children (as a right good nourice)
knowledge and nurture, and leads them safely in the way of life, i. Ihon.
and with doctrine she purges their hertes from all filthe and corruption,
eue^ as god himself is pure. She shyneth from and out of the bosom of ye
highest, for her clearenes does far excede the brightness of the son, which
lights the whole earth with her shine. Therefore O ye ignoraunte, give a
dilligent ear to the voice of wisdom, which daily cries unto you in ye high
places streets, and ways, and before the holy city, and in the gates where
me^ go out and in. It is you, O ye men, says she, whom I call, unto you, (O
ye children of men, lift I up my voice: Take heed unto knowledge, says she,
O ye ignorant, be wise in heart. O ye fools, give ear, says she, for I
will speak of great matters, and open my lyppes, to tell things that be
right, for my throat shall be talkyng of the truth, my lips abhor
ungodliness, all the words of my mouth are righteousness, there is no frowardnes
nor falshode therein. They are all plain, says she, to such as will
understand, and right to them that find knowledge receive my doctrine, says
she, and not silver, and knowledge, more then fine gold, Prou. 3. c
for wisdom is more worth then preciouse stones, yea all the things that
thou can desire, are not to be compared unto it etc.

Wherefore if ye will seek wisdom and dwell with her, she will make you the
very friends of god, for the highest has given her a commandment, and he
that made herre has appointed her a tabernacle saying. Let thy dwelling be in
Jacob, and thine inheritance in Israel, rote thy self among my chosen, for
the congregation of the rightuouse, are the Children of wisdom, and the lord
dwells among them in his holy Sinay. An utter enemy to wisdom is the
froward sinner, for he hates to be reformed, and because he will not refuse
things which he knows to be evil; he can come in no good way, brethern
consider this most excellent benefit of god, daily offered unto you. Refuse
not his word which teaches you al wisdom Come to her brokes, and drink of
her cu^duite, for wisdom has cast out floudes, I am, Eccle. 24.
says she as a great water broke out of the river etc.

And as a water cu^duite am I come out of the gardeine of pleasure, I said, I
will water the gardeine of my young plants, and fill ye fruit of my birth, so
my water brook, became exceadinge great says she, and my River aprocheth
unto the Sea, for I make doctrine to be to all men as light as the fair
morning and I shall make it, says she, ever the clearer, I will perse through
all the lower parts of the earth, I will look upon such as be a sleep, and
lighten all them that put their trust in the Lord, I shall yet pour out
doctrine like a prophecy, and lean unto such as seek after wisdom, and
their generations shall I never fail unto ye holy everlasting world.

Obey unto the loving voice of God, and accept this gentle doctrine of
wisdom, slumber not to long in thine own way (O thou named Christian) least
the lord be angry, least thou fall a sleep again in sin, and so perish
utterly by thine own folly. How can theye be made hole that will not know they
be sick, or how can such obtain that refuse ye right way? Thou think thy
self well al ready, because thou have a name that thou live. O thou named
Christian, therefore thou saiste in thy self. Apoca. ^
Tushe I am rich and incresed with goods, and have need of nothing, and
know not how thou art wretched and miserable, poor, blind, and naked: thou
haste a name that thou live, but thou art dead, for by sin art thou
subdued, and thrust down by thine enemies even to the brinke of hell. O named
Christianytie, thou waft rolde up in extreme darkness and mysery, yea sold and
sold again wast thou for thine offenses, to be a bond servant whereof thou
art not yet delivered, for ignorance holds the in captivity, and brings
the a sleep, that thou neither see nor felest thye harm, Esaye 29.
but like an hongry man dremyng that he is eating, and waking has nothing,
or like a thyrsty man yt dreameth that he is drinkyng, but when he waketh he
fyndeth nothing to refresh him self, so does sin deceive the, and thou not
ware. Awake awake out of thy heavy sleep thou Christianity, harken to ye loud
voice and trompe of god which in these last days is now blown amongst you. I
mean the preaching of the gloryouse gospel of Christ, which is daily preached
unto you, and yet sounds in your ears. O folysh people, why stop you your
ears so long from the truth: and as it were, still give your selves to
vanity? Why seek ye such frendshyp of the world, which has nothing to
recompense, but extreme myserye? Why sekeste thou rest, where none is?
Treasure up such things as are godly, then shalt you be recompensed.vij.
fold: but who so seeks rest in worldly things, his labor is in vain.
Consider O man, thy life in this world, how short, how uncertain, and
daungerouse it is it is like a vapor or breathe, says the Apostle S. James,
James. 4
yt appears for a little season, and then vanissheth away, therefore trust not
to the world, for he is disceitfull, he promyseth rest, but pays trouble, he
promyseth joy and paieth sorrow he promyseth long life, and pays short,
totally, he promyseth good and pays evil, for nature and fortune be much
variable, and change as the wind and therefore do they suffer no thing here
certain. O folysh man would you then be thought wise, and yet delytest and
set thy hole heart and pleasure in this vain transitory world. what
frendshippe would thou have of him that can do you no good, neither cares he
longer for the then thou may do him pleasure, for in sorrow poverty or pain,
will he utterly despise the, and laugh the to scorn in the anguysh of thy
soul. So ungodly does this miserable world recompense his lovers that the
nighe friend, O bestes ungodly and very unnatural.
so called of nature, the wife that lies in the bosom, or the Children whom
with busy pain and study some bring up, intending by them to have their
kindness after recompensed, do nothing at all regard them, but flateryngly from
the teth outward thinkyng every day three, till they be gone, that they might
receive the worldely goods which their friends do posses. O mysery of all
myseries, thus the world which many so inordinately love, and set such store
by, for all his great bragges, and flateryng face of friendship (if nature
withdraw her self) will not only think him much burdened by them, but also
disdainfully abhor and deteste their presence. Therefore as Christ says, Mat.
6. d
seek ye first ye kingdom of god, and the righteousenes there of, and all
these things shall be mynistred unto you. And also Crist says, give not over
your members to serve the flesh, seeing the beutie thereof fadethe away, for he
that sows in the flesh, Gal. 6.
shall of the flesh repe corruption, says Saint Paul, but he that sows in
the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. Again the apostle
Jude says. Hate the filthy vesture of the flesh, for doubtless it is subject
to corruption, it is also, the very gate and mean whereby Satan our great
adversary, and mortal enemy corrupts both body and soul, and draws man
to utter destruction. Wherefore see that ye furnish the house in time with an
honest exercise of virtue, that perfect repentance make a ready way, for faith
and godly love with all her noble companions, to dwell with you: for if the
enemy find you unprepared, he will busily seek to enter with his soudears, for
as much as, man is by ye transgression of Adam, set at liberty in ye knowledge
of good and evil, the enemy first moves man by consent, to chose the evil
and refuse the good, which consent being coupled to the thought of man's
knowledge, By the fall of Adam, the inward eye of man was opened in the
knouledge of good and evil, Iam. 1 c. Mat. 5. c Christ says, who so looks
on a wife lustynge, has committed adultry with her. Exody. 20 Deutro. 5
is sin. As witnesses S. James saying. When lust has conceived, she
brings fourth sin, by this means wins the enemy yt gate or first ward,
then procedinge forth in his wicked purpose, he te^pteth man during his life in
ye time of youth, by wa^to^nes delectatio^, pleasure and redynes of mind, to
spend the time of this life, either idely or vainly, that he should labor in
nothing that is good, and when nature has some what done with these, he
brings in place every carnal concupisce^ce, riot, natural wisdom, and
worldly honor and riches: and in age he brings coueteousenes, impatient
poverty, childyshe dotage, and such like. For sone after xxx. years are
spent,, as age increases, the things of nature dimynishe, and begin to fade
as a flower, but the enemy always during the time of this life, cease not to
assault man by sin, which is most agreeing to the nature and age of the
person so tempted. And by such ungodly means he seeks to fill and keep the
mind of man so busied, that it ca^ have no respect to the word and will of
god, nor seek after things yt please him. But saying the reward of these is
naught else but plain mysery and destruction both of body and soul, what
folysh blyndnes is it, for men to set their love so inordinatelye upon such
things wherein is never rest nor peace? and to seek the service of such
masters as be very Aucthors of all trouble and mysery, and the bond servants
of sin, and corruption, that serve the^. Wherefore, strive daily against your
lusts, and mortyfie your affections, compel your flesh to be ruled and
ordered, by the rules of Christ, prescrybed in the sacred word of god, unto
you. Then doubtless our heavenly father will not only love us, and take us
for his dear children, but also for Christ's sake (so that we yet, continue in
faith) bear our imperfection during the time of this life, clearelye forgive
and forget our sins. And make us partakers with our savior Christ, of his
eternal kyngedome and glory. Therefore O ye Christined nations call to
remembrance the long time of your captivity and blyndnes of mind, which
has very far exceded the time of the captyuitie of the Hebrews, the children
of Israel, or of any other congregations, professyng the truth before you:
nevertheless, the mighty lord of powers, ye only God of Israel, has now
remembered his promyses, and according to his oulde wont has he looked
mercyfully upon us, for his names sake, yea, he has now herd thy mornyngs O
Israel, and he is come down to deliver Jacob his chosen with a myghtie hand, and
a stretched out arm. Romans ^.
But as S. Paul says. I speak not these things (...) ceyued not ye love of
the truth, says he, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe lies, that all they might be dampened (says he) which believe not the
truth but had pleasure in vnrighteousenes. etc.

Nevertheless, god has now remembered Israel his elect, for he will always have
compassion upon Jacob his chosen: therefore, is he now minded to show mercy,
and to deliver his people, for our Lords Ieloussy is waxen great, to see his
truth daily thus traiterousely trodden under foot of his enemies, and clean
defaced under a color of truth, and with a counterfaicte dysguised holiness
and outward pretense of virtue, whereby the simple ignoraunte sinners be
disceiued, for because the paths of christ be so trodden out, many can find
nothing of the way. Thus the mystery of iniquity, as Paul says, workth in
his place, whereby the sinful man is opened, and the son of perdition, which
is an adversary, is exalted above all that is called God, or of God, for the
vain glory of man apereth on earth to have the upper hand. In earth worldly
wisdom has gotten the chair, or upper seat
Is not natural, or carnal reason and worldly wisdom, most hyghliest
esteemed? Who amongeste men knows any thing like, or that may be compared
unto it? Where is the wisdom of God become? Is it not utterly despised of the
blind world, and set at naught, and not regarded. When ye se ye
abhomynation, Apoca. 12. Esaias. 14. Daniel. 9 Mat. 24, Mat. 13. The man of sin
is exalted, he sits in the estimation of men. wheare god ought to sit for
chief. 2 Thessalonians. 2 Esaias. 11. Daniel. 8. God fights alwai against the man of
sin to ouerco^e and to subdue him. 1. Corr. 1, Esa. 18.37 4. Reg. 5.
that betokens desolation, spoken of, by Danyel the Prophet (says Christ)
stand in ye holy place, or (as S. Mark says) where it ought not: Let him that
readethe it, understand it. Thus is flesh and blood, that is to say, the
man of sin, exalted, extolled, and praised, which shows him self as god,
and as though there were no power above him And sytteth in the holy temple whom
the lord neuetthelesse shall consume with the spirit and breath of his mouth.
And with the apparaunce of his coming, even him says Paul whose coming that
is exalting, or setting up, is says he, by the workyng of Satan with all
lyinge power, signs, and wonders, and in all deceiueablenes of vnrighteousenes
etc.

Nevertheless, our god has taken part against flesh and blood, because it is
become his very enemy, and he has said. I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and cast away the understanding of the prudent that no flesh should
rejoice in his presence, for the lord shall step fourth, as he did upon the
mount Pirazim, says Esaye, and shall take on, as he did in the dale of
Gibion, that he may bring fourth his device, yea, his strong deuyce, and
fulfill his work / therefore make no mockes at it, says the Prophet, that
your captiuytie or blyndenes increase not, for I have heard the lord of hosts
say, that there shall fall a soden destruction, and plage, upon the hole earth
(says Esaias) therefore, take head, and hear my voice, ponder and mark mye
words well, Iere. 13. c
for the lord shall fight against all them that muster them selves against
the hill of Sion, The heathen are such as do not believe.
says the prophet. And with his myghtie two edged sword, shall he smite the
Heathen, they shall be at their wits end, they shall be abashed, stacker
and reele to and froo etc.

Therefore, thus says the lord, against all them that call them selves of
the congregation of god, and yet are not (because they live ungodly, Esai. 29.
and are the bond servants of syn ye shall be dronken, but not with wine, ye
shall fall, but not through dronkennes, for the Lord shall give you an hard
slepyng spirit / and hold down your eyes namely of your prophets and heads
which should see, them shall he cover, so that al visions shall be unto you, as
the words that stand in a sealed lettre etc.

For, thus says the lord, for so much as, these people drawnie me with their
mouths, and praise me holly with their lyppes (where as their hearts
nevertheless be far from me) and the fear that they owe unto me, Abdi. 1.
that turn they unto men's laws and doctrines: therefore, will I show unto this
people, a maruelouse terryble, and great thing (says the lord) namelye this,
I will destroy: the wisdom of the wise, and the under standing of the
learned men shall perysh. Therefore woe be to them that seek so deep to hyde their
ymaginations before the lord, which rehearse their counsels in the darkness, and
say, tush, who sees us, The church of god in name, but not in dead, must
perysshe,
or who knows us. Therefore, must Jerusalem and Judah decay says the lord,
because their words and counsels are against ye lord, they provoke ye presence
of his majesty unto anger ye changyng of their countenance (says ye
prophet) bewrateth them, Esaias. 3.
yea they declare their own sins them selves as the Sodomites, and hide
them not. Woo be to their souls, for they shall be heauely rewarded, says the
lord, then shall they say, O happy are the godly, for they may enjoy the
fruits of their studies, but woe be unto the ungodly and unrighteous, for they
shall be rewarded after their works. O my people, rybauldes oppress thee, and
women have rule over thee: O my people thy leaders deceive thee (says ye lord)
and tread out the way of thy footsteps. The lord is here to common of the
matter, says Esai, and stands to give judgment with the people, for ye lord
shall come forth to reason with the princes and Senators, and shall say thus
unto them, says Esaias. It is ye that have burned up my vyneyarde, and the
robberye of the poor in your house, wherefore do ye oppress my people, and
mar the faces of the innocents? And thus says the prophet, shall ye lord
of hosts revile the^ therefore.





the deades of false deceyuers, seruyng their own lusts, and yet say, do as
we bid you, and all is forgeuen.

Woe be to those Ipocrites, and

Woo be to those deceytefull

Woe be to those painted to^bes and stinking sepulchers full of all filth and
corrupcio^, which oftentimes spoke of faith, penance and love, and yet consume
the time of their lives in vanity and idleness, keepyng their belyes from
hungre, and their throtes from thryst.

Ezeche. 13 Esaias. 5. Miche. 3.
as the prophet says, under the armeholes of the people, to to the intent
they may bring them a sleep in blindness and sin, that they might suspecte
none of their doings.

and amendment of life is laughed to skorne and not regarded.

Woe be to those filthye spots

Woo be to those serpents and Vene^ and poison is false doctrine, and
ensamples of naughty living.
which most grievously corrupt the inhabyters of the earth with their venem
and deadly poison, and to mainteyn ambition / pride / couetousenes, voluptuous
and beastly living / pervert al things, and preposterously turn it out of
frame.

Woe be to the ungodly / the maliciously do evil, and fight continually
against the lord of powers and all his true soldiers.

and thereby we are known to be his people. Nevertheless be thou of good
cumfort, Esai. 1.
O thou little worm Jacob, and thou despised Israel, for thy redemer lives:
fear neither ye proud boastyng nor threatenynge of thine ennemies, for the
Lord stands by thee to defend and deliver thee, Esai. 11.
for the mighty god of hosts will now take in hand to conquer the re^naunt
of his people, which are left alive, from the Assirians, Egipcians, Arabians,
Morians, Elamites, Caldees, Antiochia^s, and Islands of the sea: for the the
earth shall be full of ye knowledge of the Lord (says Esaias) Even as though the
water of the sea flowed over the earth: Esai. 11. Abac. 2.6.
And then shall the Gentyles which are unbelievers, know that our God has
mercifully heard the lamentable complaint of the poor oppressed, and remembered
his covenant made with Abraham, Exody. 2.
Isaac, and Jacob his choosen. Therefore the Lord commands you to let his
people go, ye Heathen nations and ennemies of righteousness, that we may
sacrifice unto the Lord our god, for the lord has now seen the heavy
burdens, wherewith ye dailye oppress his people, and therefore is he come to
deliver the^ with a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm, Esai, 11. Nylus,
signifies the Sea of trobles and adversity
ye ye Lord shall cleave the tongue of the Egipcians. Se says Esaias, and with a
mighty wind shall he lift up his hand over Nylus, and he shall smite his
seven streams, and make men go over dry shod, and thus shall he make a way for
his people ye remains from the Assirians like as it happened to the
Israelites, what time they departed out of Egipte etc.

But if you will not let his people goo (O ye enemies of righteousenes) yt
they may serve him, after his will, then will he pour his plages upon you, as
he did upon Egipte, and upon other nations, among whom he scatered his people
for their offenses: to the intent they might teach you righteousenes, that ye
might repent and turn from your evil ways, and learn to know the name of the
lord, which is great in Israel, and myghtie in Sion: for as touching Israel
and Judah (thus says the Lord) they shall not be forsaken of their God, Ier.
51.50
of the Lord of hoostes, of the holy one of Israel, no though theye have
filled all their land full of sin etc. For I will not consume the, but
chasteine ye, and correct the, and yt with descretion, says the lord neither
will I spare the as one that were faultlesse, for thus says the lord: O Jacob
and Israel, Iere. 46. and 30. Esai. 44. and 43. d
thou art my servant, I have made the, yt thou might serve me. O Israel
forgete me not (says the Lord) as for thine offenses, I drive them a way
like the clouds, and thy sins as the myste: turn yt again unto me, and I
will deliver the, says the lord. Therefore, turn again O thou dispysed
people unto the lord, forsake thy syns, leave thine own wylful ways, the^
shalt you be delivered in the lands of thy captyuitie, and be taken as a
spoil from, and out of the mouth of the deuourer, which seeks to fill him
always of the. Cry to god from the very heart, to deliver the from the violente
hand of thine oppresser, pour down thy tears daily before him, and say, A
prayer
O everlasting god and my father, I beseech ye remember the poor oppressed,
deal fauourablye with us, for thine own sake, for thou art our only
surgion. Show mercy upon us O father, for Christ's sake, show mercy upon us,
the work of thine own hands. Have compassion upon thy people, O lord, that
greuousely have sinned against the, for by reason of our sins, have we long
time been thus exyled and kept from the: and the enemy has sore prevailed
against us. O be thou merciful and take away our sins, and let our
iniquities no more displease the. O Lord forget not thine own accustomed
mercyes. Is our hurt so great that it may no more be heled? Turn our hertes
unto the, that we may seek thy will, praise thy name, and walk in thy ways.
O lord, we know that thou only art our god, whose nature and property is,
to show mercy, yea, and that thou art alwai ready (O lord) but our syn
lies heavy upon us, and presses us sore down, quicken us with thy holy
spirit (O lord) and lift us up, we beseech the with thy holy hand, and
strengthen us daily with thine arm, that we may praise the with joyful
lyppes, and magnify the, O eternal God, our only savior, father, Son and
holy ghost. etc.

Refuse not thou thy health, O thou English nation, seeing god has loved the
above many other, and has sent his word, the son of god, the very true
patron and image of his most godly substance, unto the too call the from
thine own ways that thou might be made his own people, too serve him
according to his will, with reverence and godly fear. Apoca. 3.
Say not in thine heart I am rich and increased with goods, and have neade of
nothing, least thou be reproved: but anointe thine eyes with eye salve (says
the verity of God) that thou maiste see, and know how thou art wretched,
poor, blind, and naked. I counsel the, says Christ, bie of me gold tried
in the fire, that you may be rich, and white raymente, that thou may be
cloothed, that thy filthy nakedness do not apeare etc.

Therefore, although thou haste gotten a name that thou live, let it not
disceiue the: but obey to the word of god, turn from your Ignorance, and
knowledge your sins, cast your selves down, Luke. 1.
that the lord may lift you up and show mercy upon you: for he casts down
the proud, and exalts the lowly. If ye think your selves heirs with Christ
and gods children: where is your love and ready obedience, toward his will?
Where is the victory which ye have gotten against your flesh, sin and the
devil: the extreme enemies of virtue and godlynes, against who^ at the time
of your profession and baptism, ye promised manfully to fight, during the
time of your lives: and to renounce and utterly forsake Satan, and all his
works. Boast not of the name only (O ye christened nations) but show your
deades, for that it is that must testify with you. Remember therefore, from
whence thou art fallen, O thou blind and ignoraunte people, turn to the
lord that thou may be healed, knowledge thye sin which is great, then
shall it be forgeuen the. How long write thou mock with thy god, and bear a
double heart, that goes two ways: ye pretend in face to have a great zeal,
and too be very fervent in the way of the lord, but your hertes run after
your couetouse lucre, and daily ye walk in your own ways and live after
your own lusts, and yet ye say, tusshe we be well inou^^he. When will thou
leave of O thou wilful nation and why will ye thus perish through your own
folly. Truly except ye do repent, and tourn from your evil ways (what name
of holiness so ever ye have) ye cannot be made the sons or Children of god,
because ye have refused ye way of life, nor yet receive any inheritance in his
everlasting kingdom: Ezec. 44.
for this says ye lord our merciful god, of all the strangers that dwell
among ye children of Israel. No stranger, whose heart and flesh is not
circumcysed, shall come with in my sainctuary. Therefore, dear lie beloved and
longed for, at my heart, I pray you, cut away your carnal desires and fight
against your fleshly lusts, too subdu them: that ye dwell with in ye holy
sainctuarye and receive enheritaunce among sons, and daughtours. Esai. 1.
Again, this says the lord, wash you, make you clean, put away your evil
thoughts out of my sight, cease from doing evil and violence, learn to do
right, apply your selves to equity, deliver the oppressed, help the fatherles
to his right, let the widows complaint come before you etc. And is it not so
then says the lord, though your sins, be as red as scarlet, shall they not
be whiter then snow. And though they were like purple, shall they not be like
white wol? Is it so? If you belouinge and obedyent, ye shall enjoy the best
things that grow in ye land, but if ye be obstinate and rebelliouse ye shall
be devoured with the sword, Leuiti. 26
for thus the lord has promised with his own mouth O ye named christians,
consider ye time paste, present and to come look your own ways, and wander no
longer astray, refuse not the light of the gloriouse gospel of God, for it is
the life of your souls. Remember ye long time of your captivity, which
doubtless happened for your offenses: surely it passes far the bondage and
captivity of ye Hebrews, or children of Israel in ye days of Helyas,
Helizeus, and Jeremy, and other prophets, Josias, Ezechias, and many other
kings of Israel and Judah, in whose time the people with their princes and
priests forsook the law of ye lord, and went a whoringe after strange
gods, and because of their sins, god gave them up to their own lusts, and
let them follow their blind Imagination, yet was not their fall like unto
thine, O Christianity nor their hurt to be compared with thine: for thou haste
not only exceaded in thy fall, but much more in the long time of thy miserable
captivity: and although thou be daily called, yet have thou no mind to rise
and come to be made hole: ye hold the name of ye people of god (as they did)
but few do ye deeds: ye hold ye sacraments signs, The sacraments be kept,
but the virtue is gone.
and ceremonies appointed in the church of God (as they say) but ye have
lost the strength and virtue of them. For not with standing, your daily
ministration, both your selves and the people, to whom ye minister, yea, Much
labor lost.
both ye and they abide still in your own lusts, which declare plainly
that your sins be another forgeuen, nor taken away. Is it not because ye are
wicked, that your prayers be not heard, as perfect and holy men's have been
before time? For wheare they prayed and laid on their hands, Acts. 8
god affirmed their doings, with his holy spirit: so that they received
knowledge and their vnderstanstyng was opened, and their minds were obediente
to the will of God. If the doings of the Apostles had been so uncertain that
no thing thereof had appeared outewardelye, save only words, all remayninge
as before every man in his own ways: think ye they should have been so well
beloved, or if Christ at the marriage in Cana of Galile, Ihon. 2.
had sent the gouernoure of the feast, water to give his gestes, in the stead
of wine (although he had told them it had been good wine) and that they must
under pain of damp nation so have believed, think ye it would have been so
well accepted at his hand? Where Christ, ye Prophets, or Apostles, or any
other in his name, and by his power and spirit, did any miracle, wheather it
were outward or inward, in healynge of the body, The miracles of Christ and
his apostles, were not only in face and words, but were done in verity: the
signs be kept, but the power is gone.

The sacrifice of ungodly are abhominatio^ before the lord. Gene. 4.


or soul: the thing after appeered, so to be, and it showed it self that it
was done, as theye said they set never the people to believe and wonder at
things whereof they heard, felt nor saw nothing, save only an outward token or
sign. But your doings are uncertain, eue^ to your selves, but much more to
other yet would ye have al men compelled to believe the^: thus have your sins
(ye your wilful sins) long turned ye eyes of the Lord from you, and made all
your doings as the sacryfice of Cayn. For ye have forsaken the Lord, the
only well and fountain of life, and have chosen and dygged you broken pittes
that hold no water. In every street and place, have ye burnt sweet odoures, and
offered incens before your Idolles, and have chosen you Gods after your own
imaginacion, Iere. 7. a.
and served them after your will: yea, as the Jews and Heathen nations, have
ye invented and set up brothell howses, to offer in sacrifice to your Idolles,
the unclean lusts of your bodies for many ordinances contrary to the word of
God, have ye set up, which may neither be omitted nor spoken against, but
must be continewed as things lawdable (as ye say) and for good purposes. Have
ye not also as they, Iere. 32. s.
given your seed to Moloch? and burnt your children before Idolles, in that ye
procure by power, brybes or flatterye, or by any other ungodly means, to make
them mynysters, or common officers, more regardyng the vain glory of
thoffice, the dignity, or ye worldly profit of the same, then either the
health of the souls of your selves (of the^) or of the people, whose teachers,
leaders, and governors ye make them, the common wealth, or the glory and honor
of god. Thus have ye unwisely forsaken the Lord, for ye are sick, and your
mouths out of taste, and therefore so that every rome and place be filled, ye
think it is well, although ye persons that be in them have scarce any one
point of virtue requisite and needful to the office and place they be in. Thus
have you set and appointed such to be means between god and you, and to pray
for you, as be void of all honest points of virtue, whose doings ar
hateful, and their prayer execrable and before god an abominacio^: Thus is
that wooful plage and great misery happened unto you for your offenses,
thretned of god by Esaias, Esai. 3. The named church upon earth. Sapien. 4.
who says. The lord of hosts shall take away from Jerusalem and Judah, all
possessions and power, al meat and drink, the captain and the souldyer, the
judge and ye Prophet, the wise and the aged man the worshipful of fyftye
years old, and the honorable, ye Senators and men of understanding, the
masters of crafts and orators. And I will give you children to be your
princes, says ye lord, and babes shall have ye rule of you, one shall be doing
violence and wrong to an other, ye boy shall presume against ye elder, and the
vile person against ye honorable, What an elder is by the scripture, look
Sapience 4. chapter
for both Jerusalem and Judah must decay, because both their words and councils
ar against ye lord, and they provoke the presens of his majesty to anger. etc.

And yet nevertheless they say tushe / we be safe, for we be all christians: we
have gods word and his holy Sacraments among us, and therefore ye great
plagues and threatenynges of god (declared by his prophets and Apostles)
against sinners, shall not touch us, nor come nigh our dwelling, and although
thou live more wickedlye then they (O named Christianity) yet say thou, it
is spoken against Jews, Turks, Sarasins and heretics, yt despise our holy
religion, and reprove our doings / it is they that shall peryshe (say
thou) for they are worthy, but we be safe for we are gods people. Think
thou that they shall be preserved and defended of God that continue and delight in
stune and wickedness? Or think ye to escape the punishmente of god due to
sinners, with a face or outewarde appearance of holiness? The virtue and strength
thereof is away then art thou clearly deceived for as it is right with god to
reward the just for well doing, so is it also to punish ye wicked for evil
doings. God is all good, and no evil may come me him: and although his
judgments be unsearchable, yet be they al righteouse and true. He is no
respecter of person, nation / land / time nor place: but look who does right,
him will he accept: and he that do the evil, him will he punish, of what
religion, tongue, or nation so ever he be: For God is determined (as he has
plainly declared in his word) to gather together and chose out his elect from
the four wyndes, from and out of al nations under heaven: therefore deceive not
your selves with a name but bring forth the fruits of righteousness:
forthinke your old ways, and delight no longer in vanity, but as S. Paul
says. Romans ^.
Let it suffice unto us, that we have spente the time of our life past in
vanity, as in eating, drinkyng, chaumbryng and wantonness, and lay from you
that old man which marreth himself in deceyuable lusts, and be ye renewed,
says he, in the spirit of your understanding: obey to the voice of god, do
justice and equity, hate the evil, and chose ye good, so shall ye live for
ever, for they that do these things are born of god, and are made the belouing
sons of the highest, of what relygion, tongue or nation soever they be.
Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision, says Paul, but the keeping of the
commandment of god (says he) is altogether: circumcision verily avails,
says he, if thou keep ye law, but if thou transgress, then is thy
circumcision made uncircumcision. What avails then a christen name, or
baptisyng and receiuyng of Sacraments although it be never so many, if there
follow not amendment of life / but that the heart delight in evil as before.
Have ye not the^ made your baptism, which signifies repentance, the new
regeneracion and amendment of life, toward your health, An untrue professer of
Christ, is worse then an infideele.
of no value? But it is rather an open witness against you, that ye ar false
dissembling christians and such as have mocked god, pretending one thing in
face / but the contrary in your hertes: Ezechi. 8.
if an infidel turn in his heart from his infidelity, and do ye thing that
is equal and right, although he never receive christen name nor outward
sacrament, think ye that he shall not be saved? It is the circumcision and
baptysyng of the heart, in that we are washed from an evil conscience, Peter.
3d Circumcise therefore, the fore skyn of the heart says the lord, and be no
mor stiff necked. Deutr. 10.
and the lusts of the flesh daily foughten against by the power of the
spirit, that is of value before god, whose praise is not of men but of god.
The outward face of religion and holiness only excepted: what have ye to rejoice
in, above other Hethen nations? So long as ye continue in evil, is there any
kind of sin and wickedness done in any heathen nation under heaven that is not
in the, thou named christianity? What kind of pride, vainglory, hypocrisy,
dissimulacion, hatred, malice or envy, is there in any other nacio^ that may
not be found in thee? Or what kind of dronke^nes, theft, murder, whordom or
lecherye, may there be found out or imagined, of flesh and blud / that is not
daily done, and most shamefully committed in thee: although ye compare your
selves in wisdom and knowledge to David or Solomon, and yet live wickedly, and
will not amend when ye are warned: think ye to escape unpunished? Nay, ye shall
surely perysh as other like sinners have done before you, and drink of ye
same: for think ye to escape with extollyng of Christ's holy religion in name
or words only, or with setting up of sacraments and ceremonies, although ye
extol them to the clouds, if ye regard not to leave sin nor to do that they
teach you? How can they profit you any thing at all, for god regards not
your flatteryng titles and words of holiness (neirher your sweet songs and
pleasant armonie, sweet smelles, Deades be acepted for ye man's sake that
does them, and not ye man for the goodness of the deades.
nor gloriouse sightes: but he looks unto the heart, and sercheth ye raines,
ye, his judgments be, and shall be according to equity, after ye inward
thoughts of the heart, and not after the outward apperance. For the corruption
of ye thoughts of the heart, the lord refused the offeringes and sacrifice of
the children of Israel, which he him self had befoore commanded, Ierem. 7.
saying unto him by his prophet Ieremye, ye hepe up your burnt offeringes with
your sacrifices, Deutro, 10 Esai. 43.
and eat the flesh (as though I delyted in your doings) but when I brought
your fathers out of egipte, I spoke no word unto them of burnte offeringes
and sacrifices: but this I commanded the^ saying. Harken and obey my voice,
and I will be your god / and ye shall be my people. Although they brought
nothing but that they were commanded: yet God utterly refused it at their
hands, because they thought to please him with the work, and intended not to
leave their syns, nor to forsake their own evil and crooked ways. Think ye
that god will accept yours, which are not all grounded upon the word, but
partly invented and set up by natural wisdom, and carnal reason, ye altered
and changed among your selves at your pleasure. Or will ye think that god
has such need of you, The people are co^tente to be bound to all that man
can ymagyn, so yt they might have liberty to sin, and abide still in their
own lusts: the lands that profess Christ teach the faith, and minister
sacraments and ceremonies, diversely. Esai. 1. b
that he will accept you, either for your wisdom or works sake: or yt he
has more love and favor to you, then he had to the Jews: in whose
generation he both made and fulfilled, his many-folde promyses? yet
nevertheless, when they sinned against him, he said unto them by Esaias. Hear
the word of the lord ye tirauntes of Sodoma, and herke^ unto the law of our
god, thou people of Gomorra. Why offer ye so many sacrifices unto me, says the
lord? I am discontented for the burnte offeringes of wydowes, says he, and
with the fatnes of fed beasts, I have no pleasure in the blood of Bullockes,
lambs and gootes, when ye appear before me. who requires you to tread with in
my porches? Iere. 6. Amos. 5. Mich. 6.
Offer me no more oblations for it is but lost labor (says the lord) I
abhor your incence, I may not away with your new incence, your Sabaothes
and solemn days: your fastinges are also in vain. Esai. 58.
I hate your new holy days and fastinges, Esai. 1.
even from my very heart, says the lord etc. If these (notwithstanding,
their offeringes and sacryfices, holy days, prayers, fastings, and such like
obseruaunces) could not be accepted at the hand of God, because their hertes
delyted in sin, lokest you to be accepted, God aloueth not ye deades of those
yt be evil.
and so to escape unpunished, O named Christianity? Nether except you amend
and turn from thine own ways, thou shalt not escape: but surely shalt
thou perisshe, as they. Wherefore, thus says the lord also unto you. O wicked
christians, which contynually delight in sin, hear ye word of the lord, ye
tyrants of Sodoma, and harken to the law of our god, thou people of Gomorra,
Esai. 1. c
whi offer ye so many sacrifices unto me etc. Learn obedience in ye lands of
your captiuytie, wasshe you and make you clean, put away your evil
thoughts out of my sight (says the lord) cease from doing of evil and
violence, learn to do right, apply your selves to equity, deliver ye
oppressed, help the fatherles to his right and let the widows complaint come
before you etc.

Prefer the will of God above and before all things, I say, and let that
which pleseth him be good and best, how so ever it sound or appear unto you.
Has there ever any yet that strove against God, and taken in hand to teach
him righteousenes and judgment, or to alter or change his ways, since the
beginning, 2 Pete. ^
escaped unpunished? If yt these things may not be suffered in Angel, much
les in flesh and blood, which is corrupt, whose beutie fades as a flower,
and wythereth away as hey or grass. O thou folysshe duste and ashes, dare
thou presume against thy creator and lord, Esai. 40. 1 Peter. 1. Psalm. 89.
and to reason with him of Judgment and righteousenes? O thou proud Lucifer,
Esai. 14. Apoca. 12 Carnal wisdom seeks always to exalte it self,
ag^^nste. god.
thou say in thy heart: I will clyme up into heaven, and make my seat above
the sterre of god. I will sit upon the gloriouse mount toward ye north: I will
clyme up above the clouds, and will be like the highest of all: yet dare I say
(says ye Lord) thou shall be brought down, to the depth of hell etc. your
wisdom can not prevail against god and therefore shall your glory have a
great fall, Esai. 29. 1 Corin. 1. (...). 1. Esai. 27. The lord shall destroy
all yt is in man, of des^he and blood 1 Cor. 1.
for thus says the lord. I will destroy the wisdom of ye wise, and cast
away the understanding of the prudent: for ye lord with his heavy great long
sword, shall visit Leuiathan that vnuisyble serpente (says Esai, and shall
flee the Whale fysshe in the Sea etc.

Again, S. Paul says, where are the wise? Where are ye scribes? Where are the
disputers of this world, has not God made ye wisdom of this world
folyshnes? For the folyshnes of god, says he, is wyser then me^, and the
weakness of God, is stronger then men etc. For god has chosen the folysshe
before the world, that he might confound the wise, and the weak before the
world has god chosen, says Paul, that he might confound the mighty, and
the vile and despised before ye world has god chosen, yea, and that which is
nothing says he, Nothing of flesh and blood shall rejoice before god.
yt he might destroy that which is ought, that no flesh should rejoice in
his presence etc.

Therefore, do not justify your selves as pharisees, neither exalt any thing
in flesh and blud, for ye things which men highly magnify, Luke. 16.
says ye lord, be abhomynable in ye sight of god. Lay away your high reasons,
and let gods word although it seem simple and rude, led you, seek not to ioin
your wisdom with god, lest in couetyng to clyme so high, ye take a great fall,
obedience is an acceptable offering. Therefore, put salt on your sacrifice,
that it may be well accepted at your hands, Iere. 7. Exodi. 22. zacri. 8.
Leuiti. 10
for thus has the lord promised with his own mouth. etc. If ye wicked amend
your ways and counsels, if ye will judge right betwixt a man and his
neighbor, if ye will not oppress the strannger, the fatherless and the
wydow. If ye will not shede inocent blood in this place: If ye will not cleave
unto strange gods to your own destruction, then will I let you dwell in
this place for ever etc. If ye be loving and righteouse ye shall enjoy of the
beast things that dwell in the land, says the lord, Esai. 1.
but if ye be obstinate and rebellyous ye shall be devoured with the swearde.
Wherefore, The pols or water of Siloah signifies repentance, or rather ye
lauer of regeneration. Iho^. 9 Eye salve is inward knouledge of ye truth.
convert and turn with your hole hertes, from your evil ways, O ye named
Christians: wash ye vii. times in Siloah, that ye may be cleansed from your
offenses: anointe your eyes with eye salve, that ye may see: walk in the steps
of Christ, whose religion thou haste professed, and whose name thou so well
love O thou Christianity, bring forth worthy fruictes of repentance, as
sobrenes and amendment of life, that the thick seals may fall from your
eyes, yt ye may see the perfect way of life. For except ye utterly renounce
and forsake, at the least in affection, all that is in you of flesh and
blood, yea and your own lives which ye love so well, ye can not see the
glory of god nether be partakers of his eternal kingdom. Therefore as
Christ says, enter in at the strait gate, Mat. 7.
and walk in this narrow way, for although the pathe fro the flesh, be
nothing pleasant, yet the end leads our souls unto rest. For what is he
says the lord, that gives over his heart to come unto me ye shall be my
people, and I will be your god. But behold, on ye other side, shall the wrath
of the lord break out says Ieremi as a stormy weather, as a myghtie whirle
wind, and shall fall upon the heads of the ungodly, the tetrible displeasure
of the Lord, shall not leave of, till he have done and performed the intent
of his heart which in the latter days (says the Prophet) ye shall
understand etc. Iere. 33.


For at that same time, I shall be the god of all the generations of Israel
(says the lord) and they shall be my people etc. Iere. 18.
Nevertheless says he: whom I take in hand to root out, to destroy, or to
waste away, any people or kingdom, if that people (against whom I have thus
devised) convert from their wickedness, ymediately I repent of the plage yt I
have devised to bring upon them, says the lord etc.

Our god is always merciful unto them yt prepare their hertes by obedience
and repentance, Esai. 55.
to receive his holy spyrite, for like as rain and snow comes down from
thence and turns not thither again, but waters the earth and makes it
fruitful and green, that it may give corn and bread to the sower, so the
word which comes out of my mouth, says the lord, shall not turn again
void unto me, but shall accomplish my will, and prospere in ye thing where
unto I send it etc. Therefore, seeing god will now repair the decayed places of
his temple, make your conscience clean that ye may be leaning stones, being
fastened to Christ by faith and love, which is the head corner stone, Ephesi.
2.
in whom every buildyng, coupled and joined together, says Paul, is made an
holy habitation for god, in the spirit etc. Ezechi. 2.
For God dwells with them that be of an humble spirit, and of a contrite
heart, which stand in awe of his word: yea, he has promised, to dwell and
abide with them for ever, Ezech. 36. Ieremi. 31. Esai. 51.
and to give the^ a new heart, and to write his law therein, so that they
shall not need to say one to an other, know ye lord, for they shall know me from
the lest; to the most of them says the lord, for I will forgive their
mysdeades, and will never remember their sins any more, Ihon. 1
for the son of God has appeared (says S. Ihon) to take away sins, and
in him is no sin: and who so ever abydethe in him sins not etc. Ihon. 1.
For to as many as receive him, gives he power to be the sons of god, eue^
those that believe in his name, says he, which are not born of blood, nor of
the will of man, but of god: or here now O Israel. Rejoice and be glad, for thy
redemer lives: he has seen thine oppression, and his eyes do pytie the.
Therefore, will he visit ye, and gather yt out from among all nations, where
thou art scatered and holden in captivity, for thine offenses, but yet not
forsaken: for with an everlasting love has he loved the: and therefore has he
raised up for the, Luke. 1.
ye mighty horn of health in the house of David, of whose kingdom there
shall be none end: Psalm. 113.
neither has he spared his own son, but given him yea, his life yt he loved
so well, for thy sake, to make an everlasting at tonement betwixt him and
the, for thine offenses. He has promised to lead ye safe, by his holy
spirit, and daily to defend the from and out, of all dangers. Therefore, he
calls evermore greatly unto yt, saying. Come unto me my beloved, for I am he
yt for mine own sake, pardoned thine offenses, and cast thy syns into ye
bottom of ye see. Make none excuse, neither prolong ye time, but come
immediately my beloved brethren and natural cou^treime^, to this most joyful
supper or feast, which our merciful father has of his own good will prepared
and made ready for you: yea, and of long time has he called you by his
servants and prophets: saying. Here and obey my voice, the^ shall ye be my
people, and I will be your god: it appears he has not forsaken you, for as a
most gentle and loving father has he sent his holy word ye son of god, ye
very true patron and image of his most godly substance to deliver you from al
captivity and blindness, but ye nations yt oppres the and Jacob, and hold his
servant Israel in captivity, will he judge: nevertheless ye lord has promised with
his own mouth, Leui, 19.14
yt if any stranger will turn to ye lord with his hole heart, yt the^ ye same
strangers shall have inheritance in Israel, eue^ as sons and daughters says
ye lord almighty, what can there be more done for us: The fore skynnes
signifies ye iustes of ye flesh and mind which must be cut away.
therefore, turn to ye lord with your hole hertes, circumcise your fore
skynnes, yt ye may be made right Israelites, and of ye promised sede, and
receive inheritance as natural sons in ye house of Israel the faithful
congregation: To you wicked people and malicious tirantes, All yt holds nor
ye religion of Christ indede, as well as in word, are heathen and infideles.
ye seek to spoil and devour Jacob his people, and to rote out Israel his
chose^ ye lord sends word, let Israel go, ye heathen nations, yt he may do me
sacrifice at my will, upon ye mountains: for he is my eldest son: perfect is ye
iudgeme^te of him ye flows in righteousness, Esai. 13. The elect must be tried
by trybulacion and adversity.
and perfitely shall the lord of hosts fulfill the thing that he has
determined in the mids of the world, for I will punish ye wyckednes of the
world, and ye sins of the ungodly (says the lord) ye hye stomakes of ye
proud will I take away, and lay down the boastyng of tyrauntes, ye I will make
a man dearer the^ fine gold, and a man to be more worth then a golden wedge of
Ophir, for I will shake the heaven, All that is of flesh, must be done away.
that the earth shall remove out of her place. etc.

The staff is ye word wherewith the world is smitten.
For the Lord shall smite the world with the staff of his mouth and with ye
breath of his mouth shall he slay the wicked: but mercifully will he deliver his
chosen, and divide the good from the evil: for thus says ye lord god. Behold
I will severe the fat sheep from the lean. And for so much as ye have shot
ye weak sheep upon the sides and shoulders, and run upon the^ with your
horns, Ezech. 34. Horns signyfyeth strength.
so long til ye have utterly scattered them abroad, I will help my sheep, so
yt they shall no more be spoiled: yea, I will discern one sheep from an other,
I will raise up unto the^ one only shepeheard, even my servant David, Iere
30. Miche. 5.
he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepeherd, and I the lord will be their
god / and my servant David shall be their prince, even I the lord have spoken
it. etc.

Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with the^, says the lord, and drive
all evil beasts out of the land, so that they may dwell safely in the
wilderness and sleep in the woods, good fortune and prosperity will I give
them, and unto all that be round about my hill, a prosperous shower and rain
will I send them in due season, that the trees in the wodde may bring forth
their frintes, and ye ground her increase, they shall be safe in their land, and
shall know that I am the lord, which have broken their yoke, and delivered
them out of the hands of those that held the^ in subjection they shall no more
be spoiled of the Hethen, nor devoured with the beasts of the land, but
safelye shall they dwell / and no man shall fray them. I will set up an
excellent plant for them, so yt they shall suffer no more houngre in the land,
neither bear the reprofe of the Heathen any more. Thus shall they understand
that I the Lord their god am with them, and that they (even the house of
Israel) are my people says the lord god: ye me^ ar my flock, ye are ye sheep
of my pasture, and I am your God etc.

O ye people turn from your crooked ways, and from your own froward
imaginacions, cease and leave of from your own feigned dissimulacion. Dare you
so dissemble with God, and to play the part of an infidel or unfaithful
hypocrit before him? Thynkest thou to hyde thy self under thine own shadows
from him that made thee, and put thy heart in a secret place Or will thou
think to hyde thy sins with deceit, that the highest (which searches ye
her^ and ye raynes) shall not reprove thy ways? ye come together / as god
said to the Jews, by his prophet / after the manner of a great people, Ezech.
33.
to hear his word at the mouth of the preacher or prophet, but in no wise will
ye do thereafter. In your mouths / likewise ye show you selfs as though ye
were fervent, but your hearts goo after your own covetous lucre, and as a
balade that has a sweet tune, and is pleasant to sing, so is the Preacher
unto you his words will ye hear says the lord / but ye will not do
thereafter. etc.

For vain glory and lucre, ye make crooked laws, whereby ye lay snares for
the feet of the simple: and would ye that no man should reprove your ways?
The mouth of the disceitful is right well with you allowed, but he that speaks
the truth, To deal with equity and truth men say playnelye they can not live.
shall not escape unpunished: for craft, disceyte and falshode, is such an
universal thing, that to deal with equity and truth men say playnelye they
can not live, and thus virtue is so generally contempned, that it is nigh a
common reproach, for a man to do well. O lord, as David says, when will thou
look upon this? O restore my soul from the wicked rumoure of them and my
darlynge from ye Lion, for they are stained with their own works, and run a
horinge after their own ymagination, for daily do they blaspheme thy name, and
slander ye foot steps of thine anointed, and yet will they be known for such
as know their god, hold of him, and ar fervent in his wais. For they say in
their hertes, tusshe God sees it not, the highest regards none of these
things, although god by long patience, suffer such things at their hands
loking and tariyng for thy amendmente (O Christianity) think thou yt it will
be forgoten? Has there ever any nation which committed like abominations
before ye, escaped unpunished? And do you think to escape? Nay thou shalt
surely drink of ye same, thou shall not be forgote^: but thy sins shall
truly be recompensed in the (even into thy bosom) god shall turn thy clothes
over thye head (O thou filthy herlot) yt thy filthynes may many festely appear
also: and seeing thou art a people ye runnest in thine own wilful ways, and
say, tusshe there shall no fault be found in all my doings: therefore, stom
blessed thou in the clear day, and fallest in the dark, yea, grope do ye as
blind men, after your own ymagination, but because ye let your hands deal
with wickedness, ye can not find ye right way. Psalm. 13.
For as the Psalm says, your fete are swift to shed blood, destruction and
wretchedness are in your ways, but the way of peace have ye not known. O ye
froward people hear the word of the lord, give your ears to doctrine, and
despise not good counsel, seek friendship of god by virtue, and not by flaterie,
for ye lord is always friendly to them that put their trust in him, but ye call
your selves christians, and yet commyt wickedness with your mouths, ye extolle
Christ's word, name, laws and sacraments, but in your deeds ye dishonor
him for as long verily as ye delight in evil, your deades are hated of God,
and yet say with dysceite will we escape, Esai. 28.
and with nymblenes will we defend our selves, therefore are ye cursed with
penury: ye chose ignorance for your guide, and wylfulnes too be your
governor, as for ye warninges of the Prophets, They yt trust in their own
wisdom, or in any other thing of flesh and blood shall surely err and be
disceiued. Esai. 19. Egipte signifiethe ye congregation of wylfull sinners.
ye take for wind, and the word of god for a scorn, because ye have no
lust thereto, and thus they go wrong by reason of wine (says the lord) they
fall and stacker because of strong drink: yea, the priests and Prophets
them selves go amys, they are dronken with wine, and weak brained through
strong drink. They err in seeing, and in Judgment they fail. For the lord
has made Egipte dronken with the spirit of error, says Esai, and they shall
use it in all matters, eue^ like as a dronke^ man gooeth spewinge about. For
Egipte shall lack good counsel (says he) so yt they shall not know what to
do, neither ye beginning, nor thend neither upon ye land nor water, then shall
the Egiptians be like unto women afraid and astonished at the lyftinge up of the
hand, which the lord of hoostes, Esai. 24.
says Esai, shall lift up over them etc.

Myserably shall the world be wasted and clean destroyed, for the lord has
so determined in him self etc.

For the earth is corrupt of her indwellers, for why they have offended the
laws changed their ordinances, and made the everlasting Testament of none
effects, and therefore shall the curse devour the earth: for they that dwell
thereon have sinned. And although these places come daily upon you from the
lord, for your offenses, yet ye see it not, nor regard the matter noothinge
at all: O ye blind and froward nations, Esai. 1.
therefore, though ye hold out your hands, yet tourn I mine eyes from you
says the lord, and though ye make many prayers yet here I nothing at all, for
your hands are full of blood, and ye deal always with wyckednes, because
certain sin has no outward punishment, appointed by ye rulers, for those
that do them: Think ye therfoore, that God will forgette them?

The people in Christ's time (while he raygned upon the earth) thought that
thoose Galathians whose blood Pilate myngled with their own sacrifyce, and
the.xviii. persons upon whom the tower of Siloah Luke. 13.
fell, and slew, had been much greater sinners then the other that suffered
no such punyshmente, but our savior Christ said plainly, nay and except the
other repeted, they should like wise perisshe, although they suffered no
such punishment here, therefore remember thy self, O thou named
Christianytie, repent in time, and turn to the Lord with thy hole heart.
Too you do I speak, O ye Ignorant people, get ye to moornynge quyckely,
and pour out your tears befoore him / that he may show mercy and tourn
all ways his wrath from you. etc.

O tourn you, turn you, why will ye dye, Ezech. 18. 3. Par. 3.
seeing the lord has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but wills rather
that he convert and live. etc. But if ye withdraw your ears, and will not
hear, to turn from your evil ways: then am I sorry for your sakes. Be not
wilfully blind, but search the scriptures, and ye shall see, that no people or
nation that did such abhominacions and hated to be reformed since the
beginning escaped unpunished: and would ye escape? Psalm. 33.
Then must ye refuse the evil, and choose the good: seek peace and ensue or
follow it, for the eyes of the lord are over the righteous, and his ears are
open unto their prayers: but the face of the lord beholds the^ that do evil,
to destroy the remembrance of them out of the earth. etc.

Prou. 3.
yea the curse of the lord is in the house of the ungodly, but he blesses the
righteous. Consider these things with your selves in time, lest sin by long
custom blind your understanding, so that ye judge derknes for light and good
for evil: ye know the blind are easy to lead out of the way, where they
sone fall and be made a pray for the enemy. Pro. 22.8.
Wherefore beloved give diligent ear unto wisdom which has now again
opened her flouddes and put forth her voice in the streets, she booeth call
before the congregation in the open gates, and shows her words in the city
O ye children says she, how long will ye love childishenesse? how long will
the skorners delight in skorning, and the unwise be enemies to knowledge? O
turn ye to my correccion, says she, lo I will express my mind unto you, and
make you understand my words. For who so herkeneth unto me shall dwell safely,
and have enough wtoute any fear of evil. Pro. 22.
Again she says, my son: let not these things depart from thine eyes, but
keep my law and my council so shall it be life unto thy soul and grace unto
thy mouth, the^ shalt thou walk safelye in the way, and thy foot shall not
stumble, if thou slepest thou shall not need to be afraid, but you shalt take
thy rest and sleep swetely, thou shall not need, says she, to be afraid of
any soodayne fear, neither for the violent rushyng in of the ungodly when it
comes, for the lord shall be beeside thee, Prouer. 1,
and keep thy foot that thou be not taken. O ye beloved children, harken unto
wisdom: Come no more in the paths of the ungodly, says she, and walk not in
the way of the wicked.

Take fast hold of doctrine and let her not go, keep her, for she is thy
life. And again she says, my son mark my words, for the pathe of the
rightuouse shines as the light, and is ever brighter and brighter unto the
perfect day, but the way of the ungodly is as the darkness, says she, wherein
men fall or they be aware. Prouer 4.
And moreover she says, hear ye children the fatherlye exhortacion, and take
good head that ye may learn wisdom, yea I shall give you a good reward, if ye
will not forsake my law, says wisdom. etc. The chief point of wisdom is to be
willing to attain wisdom. Therefore let thy heart receive my words (says she)
and keep my commandments, and thou shall live. Obey unto god, and then shall
ye receive a good spirit of him, which (as S. John says) will loose the
works of sin, and give you a will to love him, and to keep his
commandments: 1. Io. 3.
for they that are born of him sin not (says he) because they have the sede
remaining in them, Where ye Spirit of god is, says Paul, there is liberty.
the earnest of our salvation: I mean the spyrite of truth, the joyful
coumforter which god has promised that shall always abide with them that
love him, even unto the end of the world. This is he that losseth the works
of sin and brings a godly desire unto righteousness and a longing to fulfull
the will of god: and they that have opteined a mind to love god are begotten
and borne of him and they are known and loved of him. And herby know we says
Ihon, 1. Io. 1.
ye god abides in us even by the spirit which he gave us as it is written: To
as many as receive him gives he power to be ye sons or children of god, Io. 1.
even thoose that believe in his name, which are not born of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but of God. The ungodly are the
bond servants of sin, because they are carnally minded their hertes hate
god, He that is an enemy to virtue and goodness hates god.
though their lyppes praise him, which is all goodness, yea, the only well
and fountain there of. They lack true obedience too the word and will of god,
therefore can they not optain to that rightousnes, which before god, is allowed.
The lord will visit the^, whose fore ski^ne is vncircu^cysed.
For their hertes and ears are uncircumcised, yt they will not hear, to
learn obedience, least they should convert and be healed. And therefore,
run they astray and establysh their own righteousness, for unfaithfully have
they denied the lord in deed, and said, it is not he. Tush (say they) there
shall no misfortune come upon us we shall see neither sweard nor hunger, as for
the warnynges of the prophets, they regard it not: There is almost none,
neither that will tell the^ their sins nor give them warnyng of the plagues
that are come upon them, Iere. 6.8.
or shall happen unto the^: for from the least to the most, they hang
altogether upon covetousness, Oseas. 3.
and from ye prophet to the priest, they go altogether about with falshod and
lies. etc.

For like as a net is full of birds, so are their houses full of that which
they have gotten with falsehode and disceit, says the lord. Ieremi. 5.
Here of comes their great substance and richesse, and hereof are they fat
and welthye, and are run away fro me with shameful blasphemies, says the
lord, they minystre not the law, they make no end of the fatherles cause, they
judge not the poor according to equity: should not I punysh these things,
says the lord? That is not only on these, but as well on al other such like.
Should I not be avenged of all such people as these be? Horrible and greuouse
things are done in the land, the Prophets teach falsely, and the priests
follow the^, and my people has pleasure therein. May such things at any time
or in any people be unpunished? Therefore, repent and turn from your evil
ways, that ye may enter into the rest of God, and keep his holy Sabothes, for
they that enter into the rest of god, do cease from their own works, says
Paul as God did cease from his, the vii. day: and except ye keep the holy
feast of tabernacles yt is to say, cease from your own will, and from doing
your own works: The Lord will consume you, in his wrath, and utterly destroy
you, in his soore displeasure. For thus says the lord, I am exceeding gelouse
over Jerusalem and Sion, zacha. 1.
and am soore displeased at the careless heathen, for I was but a little angrye,
and they did their best, that I might distroy the^. Nevertheless, I will
turn me again in mercy toward Jerusalem, so that my house shall be builded
in it, says the lord of hoostes. etc.

zacha. 1.
Cry and speak, thus says the lord of hosts, my Cities shall be in good
prosperity, again the Lord shall yet comfort Sion, and choose Jerusalem.
yea Jerusalem shall be in habited with out any wall, zacha. 2.
for the multitude of the people and cattle that shall be therein, yea I my
self (says the lord) will be unto her a wall of fire, round about, and will be
honored in her. Oseas. 3.
For although the children of Israel sytte a long while without King or
Prince, without offering, and altar with out priest and reuelacion, yet shall
the children of Israel convert says the prophet Oseas, and seek the lord
their god, and David their king, and in the latter days, says he, they shall
worship the lord and his loving kindness.

Therefore, seeing that God has now called you by his grace, be not negligent
to come, and se that the heart be establyshed with grace, He that both
righteousenes is of god,
and not with ye vain pleasures of this world, which shall not profit the^
that have their pleasure and felicity in them. For who so does not
righteousness is not of God: if we say, we have fellowship with him, To walk in
darkness is to do such deades as we all did, before we knew the truth.
and yet walk in derknes / says S. John / we do lie, and do not the truth.
Therefore se that ye love not the world, neither the things that are in ye
world for the world passes away, and the lusts thereof: but he ye fulfilleth
the will of god, abides for ever, 1. Io. 3.
and hereby know we that he abides in us, even by the spirit which he has
given us. Apoca. 3.
And they that overcome shall obtain a croune of glory, and I will give to
every one of you (says the verity of god) according to his works. etc.

Babes, flee from the worshippyng of idols, I mean from seruyng of your own
lusts, and learn to serve the living god in spirit, in a clean heart /
washed from an evil conscience, with reverence and godly fear / for our god
(says Paul) is a consuming fire. To as mani as walk according to this rule,
peace, and mercy be upon them, and upon Israel of god. So be it.

The grace of our lord Jesus Christ / be with your spirits. Amen.
Give praise only to god.
yours as charity byndeth me. H. H.

Dieu et mon droit,
QVI MAL Y PENS^ HONEY SOYT



1. Peter. 2. Be ye subject to every humayn creature for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as supreme head: or to the Magistrates which be sent
by him, to the punishment of the evil dooers / but to the praise of the well
dooers: for so is the will of God.




