THE FIRM Aliance and Agreement made betvveene his Matie the King of
Svvethland on the one side, And his grace The Duke of Station and Pomerland on
the other side.

Wherein is shovvne the Cause, which moved the King of svvethland to take up
Arms to defend the said distressed Duke, and his Countries against the
horrible oppression, and violence of the Emperors Soldiers.

Translated out of Dutch into English Anno 1631.

And printed at Delph by Andrew Clouting ANNO 1631.

ARTICLES Agreed on between the Kings Matie of Svvethland on the one side, and
his grace the Duke of Pommerland on theother side, according to the Lands
Resolution, lately accorded and Concluded.
We Gustaphus Adolphus by the grace of God King of the Svvethans, Goths, and
Vandals, Great Prince of Finland, Duke of Esthonia and C^relia, and Lord of
Ingria, etc. on the one side, and we Bogis la^s by the grace of God Duke of
Stetin Pomer of the Cassubians and VVendians, Prince of Eugen, Elect Bishop of
Camm^^, Earl of Guiso^^, Lord of the Land of Lauwenburch, and (...), etc. on
the other side.

DEclare and make known for us, and our Successors, as well unto our Kingdoms
Duke domes and Principalities, as to every one whom this may Concern. That we
Gustavus Adolphus King of Swethland have out of compassion taken to heart, the
un heard of grevous Oppression and miserable distress into which the present
Duke of Statine and Pomer is feign, and which he has suffered in body, country
and people those three years last past, whereby we are not only, moved and
bound thereunto, in regard of consanguinitie, fidelity, and amity, but also
by reason of that especial faithfulness, which time out of mind has bin
found, between the Crown of Swethen and the Pomerish Countries and
inhabitants by a settled Commerce, which hitherto has bin continually kept and
mainteyned betwixt them: as also when we call to mind the deep Obligations,
Contracts, Alliances, and Treaties, made by our pious Predecessors, between
the Crown of Swethland, and the Duke of Pomer his Lands States and
Territories, concluded at Old Statin Anno 1570. Having taken also into our
consideration how greatly we are interressed in the keeping and possession of
the Baltike sea, how and in what manner to our great prejudice the pomerish
countries (the cause af all these troubles) are not only possessed: But also
all free tradeing expulsed, and dryven out of them to annoy us and our
Kingdoms, using our name as a pretext to this horrible oppression. All which
being duly wayed, (thongh not by the instigation of the Duke of Pomer and his
Countries) it concerns us most nearly not to abandon and forsake these
Dukedomes and lands of Pomer, to the end, that the love and Neutralitie, which
they have shown to us may be settled upon a suit foundation. And that by the
help of God, by our power and assistance, we may clear his innocence, and
deliver them from this unjust violence, and oppression, and out of their
manifold adversities and intolerable compulsions, committed against all human
laws and rights. And by our means, to vindicate their vnproclamed undeserved,
and unlooked for hostile attempts and surprisalls. The cause which made us
arrive here in Pomerland which a reasonable Army, having by Gods assistance
not oonely taken in the principality of Rugen, and have made such a progress
into it, that almost without any blows or resistance, we have turned out
those, who gave themselves out for the defendors of the Land: but also have
possessed the Islands, Towns Ports, and forts which lay as a Bulwark before the
chief City of Pomer, and though against the Duke of Pomers will, took
occasion to beseige the City of Statin, and to make our selves Master thereof.

And for our Part we Bogis Laus Dukes of Pomer and Statin, call to mind
these Agrevances.
1. That we were left desolate, and Comfortles without the help and assistance
of any man.

2. That we were not strong enough to resist the great power, which was
brought against us.

3. That our subjects of the Land, and those which should have help to defend
it, were disarmed.

4. All ability which was yet remaining, was taken from us, and we drawn so
dry, that we scarely had any means for the sustena^ce of life, much less to
make any defe^cefor us.

5. After these three years oppression, in which we were so unchristianlike
entreated, our people had a greater desire to deliver themselves, and theirs
out of it then to plung themselves deeper into it, with the loss of life and
goods.

6. Especially, seeing they could promise themselves noe hope of help and
comfort, but found rather that all which was assured them by so manifold
Capitulations, and which was signed unto and promised them so holily, little or
nothing heitherto was kept and observed.

7. For the helping whereof his Royal Ma. was forced to betake himself to
these Christian means.

8. Though his Ma. is loath to meddle which his Imperial Majesty, and the
Empire.

9. But only to restrain the insolency of the destroyers of this Land (to
our great prejudice against all right and equity) who have fallen upon it, and
possessed these Countries, by declaring themselves as enemies.

10. And therefore it is needful, that these Countries should be freed from
these oppressions, vyolences, and distresses, by reducing and re establishing
them in their ancient state and liberty, and in so doing to secure the
safety of the Kingdom off Sweathland. Moreover his Matie has likewise
protested before us in the behalff of the City of Stralsound, and the
recovered principality of Rugen, to show, unto them henceforward as well, as
unto all other places all love and freindship both in deed and word. And
therefore we had much rather the same should be possessed by him, then that
hereafter we should excuse our selves with the extreme loss and danger of our
Countries. It is so therefore, that we the before said King of Sweathland, and
Duke of Pomerland, for us our Kingdom, Dukedomes, and Principalities have on
both sides, for the honor of God, the comfort, security, and prosperity of
our people Kingdom, Dukedomes, lands and principalities, entered into this
Treaty, made this agreement, have jointly consented unto it, and concluded it
in this manner following.

1. That we on both sides henceforward with our Lands, States, and People,
shall live together in a firm, neighborlike amity, peace, and affiance one
of an other attempting no hostile Act, or enmity the one against the other, or
suffer any to be plotted, or practiced secretly by any others, but do bind
our selves in a strickt league, and alliance in all our rights, dignities,
States, and public liberties, against all wrong, vyolence, oppression,
invasion, devastation assaults pressures and contribution whatsoever. In
joining our selves to geather Muius armis and Auxilijs. That is, by help of
Arms mutually to preserve and defend our selves on both sides. It no wise
forsaking one an other, much less by attempting any hostile act, one against
the other. But by all means to seek the welfare and good of each other. By
settling a free Commerce out of the Kingdoms of Sweathland into Pomerland, and
out of the Duke dome of Pomerland into Sweathland, with out any hinderance or
molestation whatsoever: But to advance and further the same in every place to
the utter most of our powers.

In Conformity whereof, we for us and our Posterities, and States above
mentioned, do make this league. Amity and neighborlike unity and affiance
between us our Kingdom, Dukedomes, and Principalities. And all what soever
depends on them, which is not only hereby renewed. But also by virtue hereof
renforced and reestablished and shall continue for ever. And this union every
tenth year shall be renewed again.

2. This renewed union made at this present, aims only at a defensive war,
and the preservation of our selves, against all unjust violence oppressions and
attempts, and in noe wise to go offensively. Unless these Compacts, and this
renewed Conservation force us thereunto of necessity. In such a case the one
shall help and assist the other, as we are bound to the uttermost of our
abillitie.

3. Moreover this union is not made Contra m^iestatem Imperatoris and Imperij.
That is, against his Imperial Majesty, and the Empire, but rather respective
pro imperij stat^, for the good of the State of the Empire, and to keep and
reestablish it in the Ancient form, liberty, peace, and the preservation of
the public Religion against all the Insolent disturbers of the public peace.
Seeing also hereby is intented the continuation of the friendship, which we
Bogis Laus Dukes off Statin and Pomerland do owe unto the Romish imperial
Majesty, the holy Empire, and the upper Territory of Sarony may not be
abolished, but rather according to our bounden duty continewe the same; upon
condition the like be don on their part, and not by suffering any thing to be
attempted, which shall be prejudicial to these contents. And declare further,
that we together with our principalities, Countries and people continewe by
the Romish Empire, Imperial laws and Institutions, nether will suffer our
Lands and States to sever and alter from them, neither shall our Lands,
principalities, Soveraignities Regalities Rights, and jurisdictions: as
likewise the Pomerish Countries Subjects and States, as Prelates, Nobility,
Gentry, and Towns, either in their general or special privileges
immunities, rights, public laws, and statutes, and legibus fundamentalibus,
as well in their Iuribus singularibus as their common rights, and immunities be
once abrogated, disannulled or infringed thereby.

4. But seeing this union is cheefely made to this end, that we the Duke of
Pomer, considering the unchristianlike usage and oppression, wherewith we have
bin afflicted these three years, against the wholesome Imperial laws, and
institutions wholly impugning them. The public institutions and the many
Capitulations, made for the lands peace. Yea against the Imperial
syncerationis mandata, and public declarations, that our innocence, and
constant fidelity to them might appear, that the Pomerish lands being thus
surprised, might be reduced and preserved in their former State, that our
Frontiers, passages, sea ports, and Towns may not be damnified, but
henceforward, may be secured from all innovation, oppression and peril: It is
agreed on on both sides with an vnanimie consent, that we bind our selves
faithfully together, that what befalls the one, shall befall the other, for the
procuring of the public good, and peace of the Religion in the holy Empire,
and to resist and oppugn the contrary, in joining our forces together and to
prevent and divert the same to the uttermost of our powers.

5. Likewise the Pomerish Provinces, Towns and places, which are or shall be
taken in by us the King of Sweathland, shall be faithfully redeliuered and
restored again to L. D. Duke of Pomer to his Allegiance and obedience, with
all Regalties and rights there unto belonging (none excepted) without any
denial, or demanding of military charges to take them again into his
possession. As also the City of Stralsonnd shall be restored likewise into the
hands of L. D. Duke of Pomerland. And we the said Duke of Pomer do not
hereby separate and alienate the same from our other Pomerishlands, especially
the Principallitie of Rugen, to be given over into the hands of strangers,
provided that they use all diligence, for the accommodating of the King of
Sweathlands his Commissaries with all things necessary whatsoeuermay further
the public defense of the land, in showing them all love, and good affection,
and that above all the City of Stralsound, shall hold and keep their own
priueleges. in holding a special alyance, with the Kings Ma. off Sweathland
and in time shallbe cased of their agreeuances as is fitting.

6. Seeing also that the Bishopric of Cammin is not comprehended under the
Pomerish lands and Countries: Notwihstanding that Pomer may dispose of all
things in this agreement to their good: it is so that the said Diocese, and
State, shallenioy prorato the benefit eand fruit thereof, and for the taking
away of all jealousy and suspicion, it is agreed on for future time, that the
said Dyocesse, and their Cathederall Chapter, shall not be troubled or forced
to any thing against their ancient privileges, Statutes, and other
fundamental laws in electing a Bishops. and his Coadin tours in any manor
whatsoever. Therefore the said King of Sweathland, together with the Duke of
Pomer. Do hereby promise faithfully not only to prevent and cross any such
thing: But also to mainteyne this Chapter and diocese in their free election,
Dignities, State, and rights, against any violence which shall be intended, or
attempted against them.

7. Without the others foreknowledge and consent, neither party shall go out
of this alliance, much less we the Duke of Pomer by this present Act, will
permit none to enter into this alliance, and agreement without his Ma consent,
and his Royal Ma. does like wise promise, that he will not treat or conclude
of any good for us, and our Pomerishlands, but will before communicate the same
unto us in due manner, that we and our Countries be not excluded thereout.

8. And if any Christian Potentate will join with us in this union, and come
in aequis conditionibus upon equal conditions it shall be free for them to do
so: Provided that thereby no part of the Country shall be put in duriorem
conditionem, that is, into harder terms and conditions.

9. All things which may concern this particular, and all rights for the
conservation of the public peace of Pomerland, no further confederations shall
come into considerations, much less be made, which may in anyway be
preiudicall or repugnant to this union, and for our part we the Duke of Pomer
hoe hereby promise to make no league or confederacy with any other whosoever,
against the will and consent of his Royal Ma.

10. If the said Duke of Pomer his Countriesand Subjects should by reason of
this aliance, be assaulted, surprised or persecuted by any whosoever it be,
we the said King of Sweathland for our part and our Kingdom, do not
ononely take into our faithful protection the said Duke and all his Countries
of Pomer, But will endeavor to draw all other Confederate Potentates into this
league and conjunction with us. And so by media defensionis strengthen our
selves so much the more. And we the Duke of Pomer for us and our lands and
subjects; do promise the like, that if the Crown of Sweathland should be
invaded and assaulted in regard of his assistance to us, to discharge the same
obligation.

11. Likewise in the union and iuncture privilegium indigenatus, even as the
inhabitants enjoy them in that which concerns the subjects of the Crown of
Sweathland, and the principality of Pomerland shabe (mutu^ conferet) mutualy
conferred to the Swetish nation, as to the Pomerish, and to the Pomerish, as to
the Sweatish in bello ac pace salvo tamen iure superioritatis, salvisque
privilegijs and immunitatibus vtriusque nationis. That is, in peace and war,
yet so as reserving their supreme rights on both sids, not extenuating their
privileges, but rather furthering and respecting them

12. That trading and Commerce shall be better observed maintained and kept, that
the King of Swethlands Coin shall go current in Pomerland, and the Pomerish
in Swethland, according to the Valuation of the place.

14. If any discord, strife, or mis understanding should hereafter arise
between the Kings Ma. of Sweathland, and the Duke of Pomer, or on both sides
between them their Countries and people, the same shall not be decided by war
and the dint of the sword, but according to the Agreement made at Statin Anno
1570. shall be appeased and ended by selected Commissioners, and deputies in
all love and friendship.

14. Lastly we the said King of Sweathland have expreslie conditioned, that
if any sudden blow or death should befall us, or that the abouesand Duke of
Pomer should happen to depart this world without any lawful male Issue or
Inheritour, Before the Prince Electour Brandenburch shall eventualiter be
invested to the Dukedom he shall ratify and confirm this union, ere the land
be cleared and dispossessed by his Ma. And in case the said prince Electour
should be oppugned, or his title questioned by others touching his sucession.
We the King of Swethland and our Successors of the Crown, will keep these
lands in sequestratoria clientelari protectione, in our possession so long
until punctus successarijs be absolutely decided, and till we by the
successors thereof, be fully paid the military charge, of war, yet so, as
without laying any burden, charge or taxation upon the the land of Pomer, or
the States and countries thereunto belonging, and till this conionction and
union be duly ratyfyed confirmed and accomplished. All which is done in the
faith, and promise of a christian without all fraud.

In witness whereof, and for the constant and inviolable observation and
keeping hereof: We the King of Swethland for us and our successors, Kingdom,
and Lands. And we the Duke of Pomerland for our Dukedomes, principalities,
Lands and posterity, have jointly ratifyed and confirmed this alliance, and
Aggreement with our Royal and princely seals, and signed it with our own
knowledge and hands. Given at old Statin the tenth of this present month of
June old style, According to the Nativity of our Redeemer Jesus Christ 1630.

An Appendix, or Memorial of the heads and chief Aggrevances, which was
presented by his grace the Duke of Statin and Pomerland, unto the Lord Julian
the King of Swethlands Commissarie General Anno 1630.
1. THat in many Quarters, and large Countries, the church of God is so
disperced, that they can perform noe religious excersices, not be suffered to
administer the Lords holy Sacraments, so that, the poor people run up and
down together in flocks, without any Consolation for their souls; yea their
children dying without receiving the holy seal of Baptism.

2. That these Countries by reason of these two last years and a half
oppression, and the quartering of soldiers in them, are reduced into the
uttermost extremity, yea, and are brought into sucha case, that the sustenance
of life will come to late, neither can they get any food, because the summer
seed is distroyed, and cannot be brought in, in so much, that whole Countries
lies wast, and untilled, as every place can sufficiently witness.

3. That all provision of money and money-worth, as Tynne, Copper, and other
Mettle, together with all manner, of malts, and provisions for the kitchen,
linen and Bedding are given in Contribution: yea, we conceal how the good
Inhabitants of these Countries are forced for helping of themselves, to lay
their credit and goods to pawn, to take up moneys to pay this Contribution,
to the end, that the rigourous execution (not by a few, but by a great number
of soldiers, yea of whole companies in committing all manner of insolences, as
bursting open of doors, scoffing and geering the magistrates of Towns, and
vnfurnishing the inhabitants of necessaries without respect of persons, by
forcing and constrayning from the people, might once cease and not be committed.

4. That the people by reason of the soldiers marchings too and fro, and their
continual compulsions, being deprived of means, were not only driven to Eat
hoggswash, the bark of trees, and other unnatural things; yea dead men's
fleesh, and to eat their own parents, for the satisfying their hunger, in
such sort, that of late time some fresh tragical spectacles have bin seen
hereof. For in his graces Jurisdiction of Wolgast, there were diverse people
found dead with grass in their mouths, And a woman in the village of Dandum,
murdered her own child, dressed it, and eat it, and therewith satisfied her
hunger of which there are many credible proofs. I conceal how many have made
an end of themselves out of desperation, and by poy sonmg them selves, to
escape from the threatened tourments of the soldiers, requiring that from them,
which they had not, so that the most part dyed miserably, and perished with
hunger.

5. And though for the taking away of horses, many ordinances have bin
published, yet they are so little regarded, that there is scarce now a soldier
goes afoote, but must ride a cock horse, which causes that the seed is not
only sown, but also noe horse can be got upon the highways, or for his
Imperial majesty's service.

6. And albeit the officers are furnished with horses, and forage provided for
them, yet never thelesse the poor people, when the officers journey a horse
back, or have any thing brought unto them, they take their horses from them, or
the soldiers rides them dead.

7. When that the poor people for want of horses cannot furnish them to put
into their wagons and karrs, as they require, and at the officers pleasure,
that then the magistrates in the Towns, yea likewise his graces own officers
and Council if they refuse, against the Lord Generalles order, where there lie
special Safe-gards, presentby to vex them they are taken from them, and they
send them soldiers to lie upon them, and thus are plagued and terrified with
them. Therefore it is good reason, that they ought to be protected and defended
against these insolences of the Emperors armies, and such unanswerable
enormities ought to be severely punished.

8. That the officers are not contented with their usual billet-moneys and
fyring, but hew down the growing woods, cut down whole groves, and will not
be contented unless they have variety of dishes.

9. It is therefore needful to take such order therein, that this land in all
places (in stead of their subjection, and dutiful devotion) be not brought
into a vast wilderness and that the one be not constrained to pay for the
other.

10. That the people be not prost to send many wagons, show vels, spades,
pickaxes for the ordinance, and such like materials: and yet not with standing
by sharp exactions are forced to send great sommes of money, yea sometimes a
thousand Rix-dallers upon a wagon, beside the daily furnishing the^ with
victuals, and munitious. Therefore the necessity requires that not only such,
but also such other like innovations, and committed exactions, which are
against the lands welfare should be severely prohibited.

11. That his graces customs and Toles against the Lord Generals ordinance
notwith standing they be in the midst of the land are nevertheless taken from
him.

12. That besides the manifold huntings (yea which are so common by the under
officiers) in shooting of Dear and game and spoiling of chases continue still.

13. That the many out-flyings of the soldiers, and out rydings of horsemen
into villages, which gives an evil exsample to others, and emboldens them the
more are not forbidden.

14. When the poor people complain of these insolences, they cannot be heard,
but are sent away with geering and threatenings, or whensoener his grace or his
graces Officers interceeds for them, they disdain to give them an answer.

15. That they will not abate the charge of contribution, but the officers and
soldiers though not withstanding they be maintained by the quartiers will
press the exaction of what is required to a penny, therefore they entreat,
that what they have had to much may be deducted from them.

16. That the Cattle and Mettails (seeing there are but a little left,) may be
received upon a due price, and the usual worth, and though a certain price is
set thereupon. yet the fame in their exactions are not kept and observed.

17. That for diverse Churches, which are broken down and althings plundered
out of them, as was committed lately by the Gotrish horsemen in Rughen, it is
exceeding need full they should be punished there fore, and an exsample be made
thereof.

18. Robing in the highways is so frequent and common in diverse places, that
the poor people cannot bring up their grevous taxation, and after it is taken
from them must pay it once again.

19. Besides, whatsoever is conditioned and promissed them, nothing is
performed, but first one end then an other is threatened with execution.

20. That others comprehended in the last dispatched ordinances, not a point
thereof is kept, nor the violaters there of once punished, but the more the
complaints are, the less remedy is for them.

To conclude then, according as the prince himself must acknowledge, and the
testimony of all the provinces, the Emperors soldiers do not perform and
keep any thing of that which they have promissed, and therefore all their
treaties and Contracts, which we take upon trust, and the steadfastnesse which
one ought to rely upon them, is rather to be avoided, then to be entered into
with them.

FINIS.
A Letter of Ferdinand the Roman Emperor to the most Illustrious King of
Svvethen Gustavus Adolphus, etc. translated out of Latin into English.
Together with his Majesty's an svvere concerning the present German War.
Caesar's Letter.
We Ferdinand the second, by the grace of God, Emperor of the Romans, etc.
Declare to the most Illustrious King of the Swethens Goths, and Vandales, our
friendship love, and much health.

Most Illustrious Prince, most dear friend, it is related to us from places
deserving credit, that your Majesty has this year gathered a strong Army of
horse and foot, and against expectation set forth a part thereof, first upon
the Isles of the Sacred Roman Empire, and next upon the rest of the Territories
thereof, that you have also not only de facto seized upon some places, Forts,
and Cities of great moment in the Duchy of Pomer, and usurped to yourself in
them the right of impost, which as regal does properly belong to us: but also
you have determined moreover, to in vade us, and the Empire with further
hostility.

But forasmuch as we do nowaies remember, that in all the time, that the
weighty burden of the Empire has bin sustained by us, any adverse or
sinistrous accident has happened, either betwixt us, or betwixt the Empire, and
your Ma. or that we, or the Empire (for ought we know) have given any occasion
of any troubles, or dissentions, much less of such open hostility: it seems
very wonderful to us, that for controversies arisen, concerning the town of
Stralesound, of which your Ma. needed not have feared any hurt, your Ma. has
now de facto begun a war, hurtful perhaps to both sides against us, and the
Empire: seeing therefore all these things are done, within our and the Empires
bounds, and concerns the laws and privileges of the Empire, in the which
your Ma. may limit us noe further, then your Majesty would not disdain in
such kind of controversies to be limited by others, within the Kingdom of
Swethen: especially, seeing that in our opinion the said controversies might
without all doubt upon just conditions have altogether bin composed, and set at
rest, without these hostilities, and untimely profusion of blood, by the
mediation of the King of Denmark (which being by excellent advice propounded
unto him, he did with noe less readiness embrace) if your Ma. had with the
like zeal with us inclined to the said composition, and sent your officers at
the time appointed with sufficient instruction to the said Treaties, but
certainly howsoever the matter were, it had bin expedient by the laws of all
nations, if your Ma. had not thought, that breaking of amity with us, you had
sufficient reason to invade us by war, that your Majesty should first have
lawfully denounceed that war against us, and not against all law and equity
invaded the Empire: Surely we certify and assure your Majesty, that these our
preparations of war upon the Balticke sea, as also the rest, did never tend
to the offense of your Ma. nor do they as yet, tend thereunto; but that we
were always ready and prompt to continue that mutual friendship, and
neighborhood, which is between us, your Ma. and the Kingdom of Swethen, and
that this is yet still our mind if your Ma. give us noe further cause to
change our resolution, but will break off this unnecessary war. Wherefore
we friendly exhort your Ma. not to meddle noe further with the state of the
Empire, and the rest of the members thereof, forasmuch as we have given your
Ma. noe cause at all, but that leaving the places, which your Ma. has seized
upon, your Ma. do without delay withdraw your army from the Isles and lands
of the Empire, that with your Ships, ye do not hinder navigation, trading,
and commerce, and that neither by Sea, nor by land ye be not offensive to us,
or to the Empire in the rights thereof. But if the contrary hereof shall
appear, your Ma. may assure your self, that in contemning, and despising this
out imperial declaration, and that your Ma. with a confident security shall
attempt and go on in this your begun hostility, and will not yield to restore
these places (which ye have de facto, either by warlike force, or by slight
possessed your self off) we will according to our might by the unanimous aid
of the Electours of the Empire, prepare our selves speedily to recover the
same, and will also chiefly take to heart our own, and the Empires
reputation, the preservation, and tuition of our obedient states, as also how
any further calamity may be diverted. But we hope your Ma. will not suffer
the matter to come into these extremities, and according as this our Imperial
letter takes effect with your Ma. we shall be ready to do you all friendship
and whatsoever else may be acceptable to your Ma* Given at our and the sacred
Empires city of Ratis bona the 18. of August Anno 1630.

To the most illustrious prince, Lord Gustavus Adolphus King of the Sw^, Goths
and Vandales our most dear friend and Cousin. Your Ma. Cousine ready to all
duty.

The King of Svvethen his answer.
MOst Illustrious and most Mighty Emperor, most dear friend, and Cousin: we
have, not without admiration, understood by your Imperial Mas. letter, sent to
us the 18. of August last past, and delivered to us in our Camp at Ribnits the
6, of this month, that your Imp. Ma. does much wonder, that we have this last
summer passed over with an army into Germany; and would so turn over the
Fault, both of making this war, as also of the neglect of denouncing it upon
us. certainly, we did not think your Imp. Ma. to have been so unmindful of
matters past, that you should doubt, which of us did first offend the other by
arms; and we have all ways promised our selves more of your Imp. Mas.
equanimity, then that he would have that imputed to the one, which is committed
by the other. That the Mareshall of your Imp. Mas. army, did the last year,
without any proclamation of war, bring (in greatness) a reasonable army,
together with the hostile Imperial enseignes against us into Prussia (that we
may pass by the long and greevous train of other hostilities and injuries
heaped the one upon the other) it is as well known to all men, as it is
certain, that we have now sufficiently proved the hostile mind and invasion
of those Imperial forces, which neither our innocence, not the most,
equitable requests of our Counsel by their message was able to stay or revoke.
Wherefore all reasons being well and diligently discussed, we can scarcely see,
by what title or right, the cause of this war can be attributed to us, or by
what color or pretext of equity your Imp. Ma. does require of us (not making,
but repelling war) a denounciation of war, neglected by yourselff, and does
inthat behalff accuse us of violating the law of Nations; for as much, as it
is manifest, that it is no less agreeable to the law of Nations, that those
wars, which are undertaken for the repelling of force, are not proclaimed by a
Heralde, but by nature it selff: Neither have we nothwithstanding altogether
omitted all denunciation (howbeit in this case noewayes-necessarie on our part)
but we have been very careful, and wary, that no man, might by any right
complain, that being deceived by hope of Peace, he suffered hostility
unawares; by two letters, we sent to the Electors of the Roman Empire, as also
by signifying to the General of your Imp. Ma. army, by the Legate of our
Counsel, that unless the errors already committed by the other side, were in
time amended, a necessity should be laid upon us, by the iniquity of the
neglecters of our most just complaints, by other means to provide for our
security and dignity. Moreover, your Imp. Ma. does affirm that while he has
governed the raines of the Empire, nothing has been done by him, either
injuriously, or maliciously against us, nor that his preparations of watt both
by sea and land did tend to any such thing, whereby we and our states needed to
fear any danger. and finally, that all matters controverted betwixt your Imp.
Ma. and us, might be easily set at rest, by other means, and that they were not
of such importance, that therefore presently arms were to be taken against the
Roman Empire. But, we do not, on the contrary, search and inquire so
diligently, whether these protestations be not contrary to the deed it selff,
all which we confidently leave to be judged of by the world? Whether your Imp.
Ma. had any intention in any kind to offend us, we do not know, as being
unable to dive into the most inward and hidden secrets of your mind: but, that
under the shadow and authority of the high imperial name (and that either by
your Imp. Ma. command, or at least, connivence) many and diverse indignities,
hostilities, and injuries were done unto us, is so clear, that to attempt to
deduce it more at large, were all one, as to pres to add light to the sun,
neither do we fear to appeal to your Imp. Mas. own conscience, either as
witness, or judge in this matter. What we ought likewise to have promised our
selves of your Imp. Mas. preparations of war, we will not so much declare, as
his officers and ministers actions, endeavors, and devyces, not only ambiguous
and suspected, but manifest, do sufficiently utter and signify: all which, if
they be silent, let Pomer speak, which together with the adjacent Provinces,
has these years bygone been miserably vexed, exhausted and brought to naught
by your Imp. Mas. forces, in malice against us, and under no other color, then
under the pretext of war against Swethen. More over, we do not deny but the
controversies, which were arisen, might have been decided more commodiously by
other means, then by arms, and it were to be wished, that your Imp. Ma. had
esteemed as equitably of that supply wherewith we (with no damage to the Roman
Empire, but rather to the benefit thereof) did most justly succor the City of
Stralsound; as we did constantly, with a mind resolutely bent to patience, for
the good and tranquillity of common Christianity pardon that hostility, which
(together with many more injuries) the Duke of Holsatia did exercise against
us, most unjustly, under the very Colors and Enseignes: of your Imp. Ma. for
we should hardly doubt, but that then, whatsoever diffidence and discord had
arisen betwixt your Imp. Ma. and us, might easily have been composed by a
friendly transaction, neither should perhaps a necessity have been laid upon
us; to have leavied an army, at so great a charge, and to place our colors
upon the confines of the Roman Empire, to the end we might maturely prevent the
imminent evil, least it should spread itself further. But since it has
otherwise seemed good to your Imp. Ma. and that your commissioners have,
contrary to the statutes of all Nations, refused to admit our embassage, sent
to Lub^c chiefly, to decide the cause and controversy of the Sound, seeing also
your Imp, Ma. armies have declared themselves so open enemies to us, and have
exercised all hostility against us, offending us with all manner of hostile
attemps: every lover of equity, and indifferent arbitratour in this cause,
will say, that not we, but rather your Imp. Ma. vilipending other equitable and
lawful means, has at the first attempted extremities: how beit therefore, that
(being so many ways unworthily provoked, and almost dejected from all hope of
any friendly composition) we might, without all note or suspicion of any unjust
attempt, rather have been solicited for other means thencefoorth, then for
proffers of any farther peace: yet nothwithstanding, that we might testify to
all the Christian world our fervent desire, and endeavor for common
tranquillity, we would no wise cast of our resolution of peace, but did, by our
earnest and frequent calling bring the most Gracious King of Denmarck this last
winter so far, that interposing himselff for peace, we prepared the way for
appointing a friendly treaty betwixt our and your Imp. Ma. commissaries at
Dantfike then did we also furnish and provide our Chancelour, with the rest
adjoined to him, with full commission to enter into that treaty: and finally,
lest the motions of war should any wise disturb the deliberations of peace,
we suffered our military expedition (not without loss both of time and means)
to be differred for a long time. of this our care and solicitude for the
common quietness, and tranquillity of Christian contreyes, this was the trust
we gained, that our best deliberations, being shifted of by diverse slights and
subtilities, did not only evanish without taking any effect; but that now also
your Imp. Ma. does make no scruple to ascribe the cause to us, why that business
had no prosperous success: whereas it had been more agreeable to equity, rather
to have examined the doings of your Imp. Ma. Commissarie, who did with earnest
endeavor hinder the mediators from visiting our Ambassadors, residing at
Dantsike, and from laying the foundation of the future treaty, according to
the due and accustomed manner and it had been altogether more expedient, that
your Imp. Ma. should have pondered with your selff, whether this often
aforesaid treaty ought so strictly to have been tied to the town of Dantsike
that (that place being, by reason of what happened afterward, in respect of
some seed of variance, which was then sown betwixt our officers, and the town
of Dantsike made incommodious and suspected to those of our side) it might not
have been celebrated elsewhere, but was to the hurt of the common tranquillity,
for that cause only, to be altogether broken off, because our Deputies (though
for reasons urgent and pregnant enough) could not precisely appear in the said
place. All and each of these, being weighed in a just balance, let any man,
who does sincerely esteem of matters, judge which of us has juster cause to
complain of the other, yea we commit this to be examined and discussed by your
Imp. Ma. his own secret thoughts, in the which we do fully persuade
ourselves, that we art clearly purged. Now your I. M, does indeed affirm,
that ye will maintain inviolable friendship with us, and our Kingdom of
Swethen, if so be, that we restrain, yea altogether lay down our arms. but
for as much, as the matter is not now any more entire and the danger hanging
over the heads of our States, cannot be said to be imaginary, but has often
really and effectually shown it selff, and since that we have been wronged and
offended both by sea and land, not in word, but by arms, and other hostile
enterprises; we desire your I. M. to pardon us, that we can not admit of such
caution and provision for our security, and that, being beyond words offended,
we cannot in this manner be satisfied, but have determined to maintain these
arms, which we necessarily and justly have put on, until such time, as that
we have either this way sufficiently provided for our security and dignity; or
then, the just fear, and real imminent danger as also the offenses, and
injuries really inferred upon us, be redrest by sufficient provision, and real
satisfaction: and commending the whole matter to the goodness of God, and to the
equity of the cause, we do not refuse to abide whatsoever may befall us, in
this our most equitable, and constant resolution, but if in the mean time your
I. M. think that the ship of the Christian world, which has now this long
time been vehemently tossed by the huge and violent waves of war, is rather to
be brought into the desired and calm haven of peace, then any longer to be
committed to the stormy sea of contention and arms, and for this cause, does
incline to any farther treaty, your Imp. Ma. shall see, that we shall nowayes
be avers from so safe and pious a resolution, and so soon as your Imp. Ma.
shall suffer yourselff to be induced so far, that we may see the Princes and
Common wealths of Germany, our respective allies, Kinsmen, friends, and most
dear neighbors so restored to that former estate, wherein they were, before
this German war did begin to wax or increase, that our States may
thencefoorth be duly secured, and mutual trust and friendship may again be
renewed betwixt our Kingdom and these people, as also, that by experience we
may try and perceave these unusual preparations of navies and arms upon these
coasts, partly justly to be suspected of us, and partly nowayes to be
tolerated, in respect of the defense of the Balthik sea, which does belong to
us, to have ceased, and a due consideration to be had of the injuries inferred
upon us, as also of the noe small charges which we have been forced to bestow
for this our defense: verily, no sooner shall any man see these things
accomplished on your Imp. Ma. his part, but he shall really and ipso facto find
it made manifest by us, that our greatest desire does most tend, to keep
inviolated friendship with your Imp. Ma. no les, then with the rest of our
neighbors, and mutual trust and confidence being renewed, and all other
contention being laid a side) only to contend with your Imp. Ma. in good will,
and all other kind of duties whatsoever. Mattors standing in this condition,
we should also scarcely give occasion to any man justly to complain, that we
did to curiously prye into other men's affairs: for, as we are not accustomed to
intermix our selves with other men's matters except other men's affairs be so
mingled with ours, that the one does involve the other; and as in all this
time, that Germany has been burning in the flame of war, we, being contented
with the care of our own Kingdom, did not involve our selves, in the affairs
of Germany, until such time, as the iniquity of other men did bring the
matter to that pas, that other men's affairs did also concern us, so should we
also be found to be of the same mind then, neither should we in any kind
trouble your Imp. Ma. by making the affairs of Germany to be ours. But
howsoever the matter fall out, and whether it appoint us peace or war, we do
religiously protest that we do foster no hostility in our mind against the
Roman Empire (whereto your Imp. Ma. would seem to draw and wrest the poynct of
the bussines) and that we are so far from desyring any thing to be attempted
to the prejudice thereof, that we have rather determined to keep inviolated and
sound frindship with the same, so long as it does abstain from all manner of
hostility against us, and does not wrest out of us, though unwilling, a just
retaliation, either by favoring our enemies, or by associating it selff unto
them. Having by all these ingenuously declared our mind concerning the matter
in hand, we friendly recommend your Imp. Ma. to the protection of God. Given at
Stralsound the last of October, 1630.

Your Imp. Mas. most ready Consin GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS.
To the Most Illustrious, and Most Potent Prince, Lord FERDINAND the second of
that name, elected Emperor of the Romans, King of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia,
Dalmatia, Croatia and Slavonia, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Stirid,
Carinthia, Carniola and VVurtemberg, Earl of Habsburg and Tirol, our Most deer
friend and Cousin.

