A sight of the Portugal Pearl, that is, THE AVNSVVERE OF D. Haddon Master
of the requests unto our sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God queen of
England France and Irelande, defendour of the faith. etc. against the epistle
of Hieronimus Osorius a Portugal, entitled a Pearl for a Prince.

Translated out of lattyn into english by Abraham Hartwell, Student in the
kings college in Cambridge.

Ad amicum P. Sextum.
A. H.

QVod me (Sexte) rogasdu^ conor dicere, ludu^:
Paparu^que (puto) fulmen inane putas.
Priscis papicolis plus an minus Anglolouani,
Deteriora ferant an meliora rogas.
Cum dico, meliora: negas ridesque. papismo
Qui meliore valet deteriore valet.
Tuque idem rides cum dico, deteriora:
Tam spurcis peius deteriusque nihil.
Plus nonuis (quamuis corradant omnia) posse,
Nonuis (cum rapiant omnia) posse minus.
Ergo eadem scribunt, pucris irrisa fabrisque,
Quaeque omnis passim nouit and odit homo.
Cur eadem scribunt, Latijque opprobria cultus,
Anglo ter mittunt proijcienda solo?
Cur modo pulsa recens mittu^t pellenda, Latini,
Ac non omniloqui, dogmata vana Petri?
Esurit externus praelus, praelique magister:
Haec, inquis, lucri (Sexte) repertavia est.
To Master Shacklock.
BEfore I open my mouth unto you (M. Shacklocke) I may do right well to
aduertyse the godly reader in any wise not to be ignorant of the occasion by
you ministered, Look master Shaklockes preface unto his translation.
in your unadvised preface and Epistle unto master D. Haddon, that he may
duly consider your deseruinges, and also the necessity of this mine answer.
Which I would willynglye so frame that I might keep as much within the limits
of modestye as you are without. And that so much the more, because I easily
conceive, that which I willing lie and dutyfully conceive, how that these
serious mattiers, nay rather divine and heavenly misteryes, ought not by our
lewdness thus to be profaned, turned into Comicall brawles, made quarrelles
of contention, and singularity. And yet, lo, these matters of weight, this
word of power, this gospel of newenes of life is made so gamesome a thing,
that in steppeth Danus and Syrus to determine beetwene doctors. I speak not
now against the liberty of good profession, in any estate or degree, least it
might be said, I spoke against the known truth. Truth and sooth it is,
that God may be and is glorified by the rich pore, high low, young old. But
where are facings beyond reason, tauntes beside occasion, triumph without
conquest, rash claymes of prerogative, assurance of your own doings,
contempt of other not only meant but also blased in writing, in word
ungodly, in deed uncharitable, unfruitful unto your selves, unpleasant
unto your own dear friends, and commonly laughed at, the Actor though he
swear for him self, shall uneath save his honesty. Wherefore let us think it
(as it is) a piece of duetye to speak within a compass, consideringe that if
our own name and fame be by any man rashlye impugned, we accoumpt it vyolence,
we complayn that we are iniuried. Namely if I should begin with your
beginning (M. Shacklock) and call you as you call your self, a mortar maker, a
durte dawber, a carman or basketbearer, I suppose you would think I do you
small worship, yet (of a bluntnes) I can skarcelye take you otherwise then you
are. Only I marvel who is master of the works in Louayne, that suffers
every pratyng pioner and inferior labourer to use his tongue for a pytcheforke,
and to bestow such durty dealings upon men of renowned learning and worthy
authority. But that you shall not think you have cast any man into an agonye,
I send you word from Cambridge, that nothing is so heauely taken, as the whole
is unseemly in a man of your occupation. A labourer quoth you? not in all
Erasmus de copia so fit a title. Even so (as you have showed your self) for all the world, is operarius taken in Tullie 1. de oratore. There were in
Tullyes time, in tharte of Rhetorique certain vpstartes, which of that
excellent science made nothing but a vain clatteringe, and became operarii,
that is, not men of learning, but plain mechanical or handcraft Orators,
lyplabourers. When such artificers step in, they give men occasion to scowre
old rusty proverbs such as these: A sow gave a leap, a popyniay pyped, an
ass braied, a match made between an Egle and a Iackedawe, a Sowrer above his
latchet. etc. And this I speak not for your translation, which had it not been
(as it is) hemde in with your vngentil and loueles additions, might have less
displayed ye imbecillitie of your invention. Me thynks, being both an Orator
and a Poet, you should not have been ignorante that plain dunstable raising
is the sclenderest shyfte in all Rhetorique. This your blind boldenes with so
worthy a man (without all good proportion as I may say) makes many men muse
who appointed you for a Captain, and withal puts them in mind of the
old proverb: Multitudo imperatorum Cariam perdidit. While every peasaunt
matched him self with pieces, the whole land of Caria went to wrecke. And yet
this is the vain and preposterous practice of our masters, Louainers. Vain
in that they think a mattier singulerly handled when it is well craked,
preposterous in defaminge those persons whose puissance they inespecially dread
and fear. Turn your self unto better mattier master Shacklocke, and as for
Osorius his nerte ishew, do not so preiudiciallye forspeake it, least you lay
to much upon the man's shoulders. And if you love to stick in comparisons,
look ix. degrees lower, and there seek you a playfellow. As for your
lauishing Epistles, if you sent them for a taste of your wit, I will say no
more, but they have been considered. Only (of modesty) sytte not an uncalled
judge between D. Haddon and Osorius, not that you are unworthy, but for
inclination. To be short, understand (I pray you) that you are wyshed to go
too some mattier, or if you have none other faculty but that is already showed,
to stay your self until your muse be better schooled. Surely sir, to say none
otherwise then your own catorcozins say, you have taken neither the best way
nor the wysest. And the most mylde excuse that can be made for you is, that
in this doing, you do but savor of the soil, and feed ye natural vain of
your au^cientes, Louainers. Whose people bli^ding plays and stratage^mes in
sowyng of rumors, defaming of the persons, hastninge of prynted papers, might
not (of reason) so well like them, in that they are but crepitacula, childrens
toies. But (by gods good grace) they shall be seen one by one, and such a
view is already taken of some of them, that none need be deceived, no not the
little ones. As for those your darts in your Preface, or rather presumptio^s
of the Religion not yet revealed unto you (such as these, the smoke of
ignorance in England, great flames of heresies burning men's souls, furyous
fyeres, mistye vales of heresies, false doctrine, cockryng bote of sismaticall
noysomnes, waueryng fantasyes, sydewinde of deuelyshe suggestion, cold
northwinde of dyssention or discord. etc.) with such other largises of your
pleasure, and tauntes some of a foot and an half long, joined with so small
show of learning and aduysemente, have (I assure you) encroched very little or
nothing unto you, but rather make men now doubt of your knoweledge, and enquire
of your manners. As for your learned comparison, I will leave it (in the next
leaf) to the discrete judgment of the reader learned and unlearned, praising
god for this sweet little treatise, and (notwithstanding your ungentle
dealinges) requiring nothing but the fruit of reasonable and godly judgment.
Which that it may not (after your example) be builded upon vain words or
any private inclynation, more then an orderlye and due conference of both
authors. D. Haddon and Osorius, I have used in mine epistle unto the reader a
plain and evident way, such as seemed meet and pertinent in my simple
judgment, and that (I trust) no man can (without suspytion) defame. Which my
doing so indifferente and by you forced, I trust D. Haddon will pardon, and
consider the necessitye. Who because he has been absent about our Englysh
affairs in Bruges above the date of your doings, I doubt first whether he
have hard of you, then whether he would have you ones looked after, or your
melancholy any more provoked. But I trust (even for gods sake and the simple
professors) he will be content to se how your great words now (as from
time to time) in the trial will be consumed. Fare you well, from Cambridge

A. H.

THE PREFACE.
IT IS FVLL WELL known, that Hieronimus Osorius of Portugal, by the help of
Shacklocke, speaks now as plain English as we our selves, and thincketh to
prevail by course, as much now with the unlearned, as before with the learned.
And so does he. He deceyueth now his dear frindes on both sides, as well the
learned as thunlearned. But it could not otherwise be, and his epistle was not
either at the first compiled, or at the last translated so much for argument as
for eloquence. Forsoothe in the virtue of the seven sciences, they will openly
vanquish and confou^de this new found art of gospellinge. They first found
out the holly land of Rome by geometry, Look in m. Shacklockes preface his
nedelesse auauncing of his own parti, with the imbacyng of the contrary.
they laid syege unto the whole world by Cosmography, they tied together
their service by Arithmetry, fensed it with bulwarks of logic. etc. And now
in Retorique they only pass, even in master Ri. Shacklocks own judgment. As
for Diuynitie, I will tell you what. it is so handled of.ii. men, in.ii.
books, within these.ii. years, that better it had been the gospel had never
peped out, so many thousands of protestants books had never been borne, so
many hundredth martyrs had never cast away them selves in England, the Bible
had never spoken inglyshe word, S. Paul had never uttered his mind so
bluntly, the.x. Commandments had never perked in the pixis place, the
communion table had never been so waueringe and moveable, the church or temple
of god had never ben so profane for lack of censyng and sparginge. Yea it had been better for S. Peter to have been Pope of Rome, and to have left good
testimonye thereof. For it shall be proved unto his face, Vain bostynge rumors
commonly sown by Papysts among the people.
yea though it wear never so. you will not think, you can not ymagine what
shall be proved, more then ever was proved, yea x. times more then ever was
true. And all this shall come De profundis. Yet there is more, and that I guess
by master Shacklocks nedeles translation. No lattin writer a Papyst but shall be
Englished shortly, no English writer a protestant but shall be confuted, no
proof but shall be reproved, no reproof but shall be proved. Nothing so sone
imprinted but shall be matched with a contrary printe, nothing wag but it shall be
seasoned on, nothing so soon set out, but it shall have an onset. And all in
haste, in speed: or else were all disgraced. Then must the gospel needs
fall down, Papistry be hoysed up and restored again, rowme made for Idolators
througheout all Inglande, letters fly in haste from the M. of the Posts, the
sincportes all be spread open, ships pressed, As had Ulysses, saylinge
toward Ithaca.
and a side wind knytte fast in a woolsack to be ready at an hour. All this
may be. For, I tell you, an impossybylitee with a Papyst is no strange thing.
That is, is not: and that is not, is. And that cannot be, shall be. And many
things are there, that pass our simple wits. As for example: the Popish
Bishops wear endewed with byshoprikes, and were thereof lawfullye defeated,
and our Bishops are now in possession, by as good authority royal
warranted, and yet are the Papisticall Bishops the dew owners, yea no man
may say, nay: and it has been pleaded by the common law. For example again:
one Papyst fyndethe deep fault with the mouinge and remouinge of the
Communion table, and cries out upon thinconstancy of these protestants: and
yet another for the proof of his Pyx, may without spotte of inconstancy
allege, that here it was hanged up, there it was harbored in a Chapel,
in some place it was clasped up in a little ship of silver or gold, M.
Shaklockes idle comparion in his preface.
and otherwhere otherwise, To the purpose nearer: Osorius has shaken all
England, Osorius has spoken enough to turn water into wine, no man goes from
the reading of Osorius without remorse. D. Haddon he passes as far as this
passes that, and nothing passes I ca^ not tell what. And yet doubt I not (by
the grace of god and patience of the reader) straight way to prove a contrary
conclusion. And for that purpose have I collected out of Osorius his whole
book many flowers of this his chiualrye, wherewith in M. Shacklockes simple
judgment he has so tryu^phed over the truth, and won unto him self the
laurel of all eloquence. Which I have severally written that every man may
take thereof a second view, and (that done) define me eloquence.

CERTAIN SENTENCES COLlected out of Osorius in English.
AFter that by the naughty persuasion, and Bedlem boldness of some, men for soke
that religion which from the Apostles time, even to our age has continued
invincible, that they might walk in that path, which with a show of
licenciousnes did draw foolish and unadvised men unto it, I say, after that
this new devised religion was spread abroad by means of many sedicious
sermons, and erroneous books, we have seen shamefastnes suddenly to be shaken
of, honestye to be chased out of the country, man his law and God his law to
be trodden under foot, holy things to be profaned, godliness to be iested at,
boldness every where to escape scotfree, unshamefastness to be maynteyned, many
opinions contrary one to the other, to be scattred abroad, the unity of Christ
to be torn with suits of diverse sects, and in every place where these mad
me^ have come, the fire of horrible discord to have been blown up.

Out of this root have sprung deadly displeasures, often vprores, perilous
dagger drawinges: hereof many bloudye battelles have been fought, many
slaughters done, many spoils committed, many men's possessions destroyed with
fire and sword.

What crueltye appeareeth in many of them, which have been the authors of these
opinions, with what disdainful arrogance do they iette up and down, with what
malipertnes and cursed speaking they rail upon good men?

Add now hereunto, the breach of laws, the contempt of rule, the hatred of
kingly authority, the unmerciful treasons which these men most diuelyshly
devise against Princes. Recke^ here also, their secret whisperings, when they
cast their heads together how to destroy and undo their kings, whylst most
shamefully they work their woe, for whose wealth and good estate, they ought to
serve and call upon God.

All these people pleasers, for so much as they te men of no wisdom or
discretion, but be led with an inordinate desire of liberty, they love not
law, they defye iusticers, they wish in their hearts that kings were at the
devil, that they without controlment might live as they list.

They covet to be set fre from law and order, that they may be bo^d slaves to
their own will and naughty affections, is there any man can deny this?

Does not every man see that they shoot all at this mark, that Princes being
dispatched out of the way, there might be none left which should once say,
black is their eye? Therefore some kings they have poisoned, some they have
attempted to kill with the sword, and have cast many mischeuous fetches, how
to pull them out of their seat.

It is the intent and meaning of this new devised religion, by hook or by
crook to seek the death of those Princes, which will not forsake the religion
in which they have been virtuously and wisely brought up, to come to the lure
of the mad people.

The end of this sect, is ouermuche liberty, which can be kept in no
order, then the which, nothing can be more contrary to the office and
regiment of kings.

The ignoraunte people, so sone as they have gotten people pleasing captains,
which with their railing sermons may puff them up as it were with windye
blastes, and raise mighty waves of folly and madness, etc.

At the last being grown to a headd, it will pull kings out of their throne,
and so when it is to late, they shall se that they have bredde their own bane,
which they shall not be able to remedy when they would.

Does not this sect every where stir up sedition? does it not break the
bands of al justice and laws? does it not resist rule and kyngely regymente?
does it not put al men in hope of to much lewd liberty? For where is rule
most despised? where are the Princes had in most derision of the common people?
surely in those places where this pestilent learning does get the upper hand.
Therefore if this mad enterprise taken mischeuously in hand of these people
pleasers, and unadvisedly winked at of Princes, shall grow to a ripenes, which
way so ever it takes, it will quite ouerturne all the defense and strength of
kyngly estate.

This sect is the undoing of common wealths, the marring of good manners, the
spoylinge of kingedomes, and the destruction of all kyngly honor.

What manner a fellow was this Luther? surely that I may speak the best of
him, he was a man neither sobre, neither dyscrete, but hedlonge, rash,
mischeuous, seditious, and of al other the greatest people pleasure, and what
manner of men were they which afterward spronge out of his schole as out of a
well? vndoughtedly, bold, standinge in their own co^ceyte, puffed up with
pride.

How comes it to pass that god now contrary to his accustomed manner, should
ouerhip simple and humple men, and show them this new and strange light,
which have no spark of shamefastnes or modesty?

How comes it to pass, that these fellows who as it appears by many
tokens, be given to worldly delights, have only most wittely spied out that
which was unknown to so holy fathers.

They which are not to be reverenced for any notable virtue, be not able to
perform that which they do pretend.

O These be men worthy to be wondered at, and with cap and knee to be worshipped.

They forsooth, have mortified all their senses with faith, they have parted the
foul from the body, neither do they only defye man his nature, but also they
despise all the authorities of holy men. For being losed from the lynkes of
nawghty desires, they be flowen up in to heaven, that they may behold none
other thing but god, and that they may make none other of their council but
the holy ghost.

If their shameful doings, do disprove their shameless sayings, shall we
believe them, so often as they make their vaunt that they follow only the word
of God? Prove your selfs by this rule.
for if in all their doings they do according to God his word, then they
follow not couetousenes, hatred, wrath, ambition, but they be al together made
perfect with virtues which spring out of the word of God. If they be not
endued with such heavenly virtues, then do they lie in saying, that they only
and altogether do frame them selves to the word of God, for wyckednes and the
word of God can not dwell together. Therefore either they direct not their
lyffe after the word of god, either they do not commyt any abominable or
shameful sin, for if they sin shamefully, and abhominably, vndoughtedly
they be not squared to the word of God.

They committ many heynouse offenses and sins, as all the world can witness,
therefore it is false to say that they be governed with God his word, and the
inspiration of the holy ghost.

Now then, I would wyllingly hear of the^ whether these many years they have
wrought any notable feate, which may enforce us to confess that they ground
only upon the word of God.

O say they, we will rushe in to those howses, in which holy virgins being
enclosed, day and night do singe hymns to the glory of god, and pray to
Christ for the good estate of kings and princes, Many fair words, where
indeed was the contrary
and for the sauegarde of the whole communaltie. We will pull down the fences
of shamfastnes, we will break open the enclosures of charity, and we will no
longer suffer well favored vyrgins to be barred of their solace and pleasures,
to lack the comfort and aid of their children, and to spend their young
years in sorrowful solytarynes, and miserable vnfrutefulnes.

We will make a law for Monks, or solitarye lyuers, whose howses we will pull
down likwyse, or let them out to hyer, it skilleth not to what lay men, and
charge them under pain of death that hereafter, none presume for religious
sake, to wrestle continually against his lecherous lusts. For why? It is an
heinous offense, and in no sauce to be borne withal.

Who does not see, when the religious rules which be contained in the Popes
constytutions, be taken away, that all fear is put to fiyght, and
lycencious living does reign with out controlment? As who would say (say they)
we shote at any other marcke, then to pull all fear out of men's minds? For
we be the patrones of perfect liberty, and it is so far of, that we will
suffer those which be our descyples, to stand in awe of any thing, that we
will quite set them free from fearing of God. For the which thing verily
our scollers are much beholdinge to us, for it was to sore an heart break day
and night to fear god, and by that means, to pine away with consuminge
carefulnes. Therefore we have commanded all those that believe in Christ, to
set cock on hoope, and cry care away. For we bear them in hand, that
faith is of such force, that laying once hand of it, though he be never so
mischeuous a lyin of the Devil, yet he may warrant himself the favor of
Christ, and bless everlasting.

I pray thee, who ever was such a people parasite, so serviceable to please
the madness of the common sort, that he durst be so bold as to encourage men
from fearing of god.

Such people pyke thanckes, have oftentimes rejected ye rule of princes, have
disanulled laws which abridged and restrained the people of their wanton
wyshes, with promising them to live as they list.

None of them all did once open his mouth, or make any proffer to persuade the
people.

These men from true religion, have fylched all fear, which might keep men
within the lystes and bowndes of their duty.

Our men, which crake that they came out of god his bosom, and know all his
secrets, do plye the box busely, that they may seal christian men a quittance
from all fear of god, and so make them like blind bayardes boldelye to leap
into the myar of all myschiefe.

They seem to have this drift in their heads, hat they may stop all the
high ways of health and salvation, that they which be shackled with any
sin, may have no safe passage or entrance. For if they have shaken of all
fear, which of them will syghe for his sins?

That faith, by persuasion of which, any man warranteth him self
everlasting bliss, setting apart sorowfulnes for his sins past, leauyng of
to do good works, and has the love of charity clean quenshed in him,
Replying upon a maisterles error.
I say that faith, is not worthy the name of faith, but rather to be called
foolish hardynes, hedlonge hastines, and proud presumptuousnes.

Moreover, all men may see that the profit of wholesome repentance, is taken
away, that the ardente love of charity is made key cold, when men take this
for a sure staff to lean on, that their sins be not forgeuen, for their
mourning, for their godly sorrowing, for any holy working, but rather that in
so doing, they heap new sins upon their old.

They take it to be a sin to lament for their sin, and they hold that no
good work can be done without sin.

What reason is it, that I for the sin which I did not of mine own accord
(for I was constrained of necessity to do it) should suffer everlasting
pains? or what right is there, that I should be rewarded with everlasting
joy, for that faith which I kept only enforced and spurred forward of god,
without any will or diligence of my part? And that which is horrible, and to
be detested, if we will lean to these ioly fellows authority, all the cause
of iniquytye is to be laid to God his charge.

They have also removed out of the way for stumblinge, all modestye and
obedience, by the which all Christyan men did stand in awe of the chief
ruler of the Church: it has made all the laws of the Church of none effect:
it has wyped away the fear of god: it has chased away sadness conceived for
sin: it has grated out the grief which the gylty concyence did smite into
men's minds for their offenses: it has made men slack to do good works.

The more any man does apply him self to this doctrine, the wurser he waxes,
the more he flowteth those which be plain and right dealing men, the more he
is set on fire with hatred against common peace and quietness, and is puffed
up with most fantastycall vanities. For he takes that wisdom upon him
which never man could yet obtain. And so standing in his own conceit, what
so ever toy takes him in the head, that he so ernestlye does defend, as if
he should allege any word coming out of God his own mouth, with so hedlong
boldenes he disquieteth all things, as in deed he should seem to covet
nothing more the^ to see an hochepoche made of all the world.

They make all things in worse case then they found them: they banishe
shamefastness, and let carnality raunge lose abroad, and taking away the
fear of God, without punishmente they give men leave to live so wickedly as
they list.

So it comes to pass, that wilfulnes does more vehemently burst out, that
lecherous life does more soon consume men's riches, that boldenes does more
brag, and goes about more heinous enterpryses. For what shall I speak,
how dangerous trtuaylinge it is by the high ways for fear of robbing? what
shall I reckon the disagreinges and furyous fallinges out which raygne every
where? what shall I set out the conspiracies, treasons, and murders
enterprised against Princes?

The more this religion increases, the greter offenses are committed, and more
unshamefastly attempted even of those which desire to be called the disciples
of such masters.

These men leaning to their own wytt and invention, take upon them to be
doctors and teachers.

These men with their naughty example and lycencious doctrine, do set men's
teeth more on edge to all kind of unhappiness.

These men for the most part do teach their scollers, pride, crueltye,
scolding and cursed speakinge.

These men inioyning no penance or penaltye to them which are ioden with
sin, do harten and encourage them to all unshamefastness.

These men do surrender their scollers fast bound to bodily delyghtes, to
the intent they may wait, and give attendaunce upon their lecherous lusts.

These men, for so much as every one according to his own fyckle fancye,
does blab out and tell for truth what so ever he does dream of, and by
means of that are dispersed into diverse and innumerable sects, they break
peace, they raise up debaytes, and procure bloodye battayles.

They put out all shamefastnes and religion, and they enter no sooner into any
place, butte straight way contempt of laws buddeth out, wantonness,
wilfulnes, madness, crueltye, and other myschiefes do corrupt good manners, and
raise vprores and hurly burlyes among men, have they such brazen faces, that
they dare once open their mouth, and speak of the Gospel?

What other way is their into heaven, but that which is opened with good
works, and with excelent innocencye of life.

He which under the name of godlynes, does strive against the exercise of
godlynes, and deeds of charity, does not lead us to everlasting life, but
blows the cooles of unquenchable fire, intendinge to make us roste meat for
the dyuell.

They quite them from of all fear, which be defiled with soul sins, and
they warrante all them which be at dagger drawing with godliness, that all
things shall chance well and luckely unto them.

Which of them to the intent he might turn away the destruction hanginge over
his dear friends, has with many tears bowed god to take mercy?

Which of them did ever burn so with charytie, that for the life of other he
would offer him self to death?

Neither the Prophets, neither the Apostles, neither other most holy men, whom
God did make partakers of his councels, have come to that degree of most high
perfection, with leadinge their life in such pleasures, as these deintie
toothed and sugresop gentlemen be delighted with all, but rather in marvelous
and excellent holiness of manners, in incredible sharpenes of life, in many
labors, watchinges, prayers, wepinges, in such egre desire of heavenly
things, in such feruente charity, that they desired to be killed, and to be
tormented with most grievous peines, so that other might be saved. Of the which
virtues, where as these men have not one sparcle, but live so, that it may
appear by many tokens, that they take delight in those pleasures which the
common sort of men do covet, and that they be given to those entisementes, and
prouocations, which natural appetite does greatly desire. etc.

If by means of this religion, rashenes, unshamefastness, vnclenlines of life,
does more boldly fly round about, if intolerable pride and arrogancy be
much more established then it was before, if seditions, contentions, and
fallynges out, be more easily stirred up, if traitors be more ventrouse to
lay violent hands upon their Kings, and to lay wait how to murder their
princes, if neither shame, neither fear, neither awe of God his displeasure,
can hold them from doing of mischief, which have yielded them selves up to
this new doctrine.

This learning, suffers the lusts to run at riot, and that which is next
door to it, provoke hedlonge to all kind of wyckednes.

This puffs up men's hearts with pride, and teaches them to despise all
antiquity, ancient religion, and holiness of old time.

This learning does break peace, and teareth the body of Christ his churceh,
with inwardly consuminge and wasting sedition.

They disagree with them selves most inconstantly, they to day hold one
opinion, In moui^g and removing the Communion table.
to morrow an other, clean contrary one to an other, and can not rest long in
one mind, and that is the deuylles duty, to scatter and pull a sundre, those
which agree well together, and to break the band of all faithful and fryndly
fellowshippe,

Seeing the doctrine of these goodly Gospellers, does raise vpprores, does
break peace, does spread one sect into innumerable sects, and causes one
sect to be at defiaunce with the other, is it not plain that their religion
is not drawn by Christ his rule, but all together is invented according to
the crafty devise of subtle Satan.

What greater argument can we have, then their deadly hatredes, their
contencions, their stamblinge by the ears, their tauntinges and ribauldry
raylinges,

They have this fetch, that they may quyte take away all the knowledge of god.

They so far leap over the lines of ungodliness, that they not only hate
the Cross of Christ, and in stead of God worship their own lusts and
wickedness, but also believe that the lord and Creator of all things, whose
power and right judgments, even the deuelles in hell and damned souls do
fear, either not to be, or else not to rule and govern the whole world?

Alas, they are so far gone in madness, and tumbled heedlong into all folly,
that so often as it takes them in the head, with wicked words, they scoff
and mock those things, which be written of god his judgments, as though they
were but Canterbury tales and grym visardes only devised to fray young children.

Certainly that religion which causes pride, provoke anger, lets the
lusts lose, defyleth the soul with sin, takes away shamefastness,
remoueth the fear of God, works treason against kings, troubles common
peace, blows the cole of hatred, thrusts our minds down to the earth
ward, and drowneth them in the seas of worldely troubles, is no religyon, but
false, pestilent, and damnable.

Alluring the people with a iolye show of to much lyberty, it armeth them
against officers, against their kings authority and regiment, and hardenth the
hearts of the multitude with a false persuasion of Religion.

If it did only procure destruction of kings, so that it brought no danger and
damnation to the soul, and by all means did not overthrow the law of God,
it were some thing to be wrne wythal. But this is greatly to be lamented, it
puts out the love of virtue, the brightness of honesty, the light of most
true religion and devotion, defiles all commendable comlines with vnpure
living, and utterly stops us for entering into everlasting glory.

There is no more sworn enemy to Princes, then that is: besibe thae, it does
undo ye people which covet it, and spoyleth them of all lyberty.

I have plainlye proved, that by means of this religion, men be entised to
wantonness, to unshamefastness, to unlawful lusts, that troublesome tumults
and dissentions be stirred up, that many naughtye enterprises be taken in
hand, that inumerable mischiefs be forged, and last of all, that the
remembrance of godliness is quite blotted out.

They have not only left the Christtan common weal vnheled, but also
wheresoever they came, they have bestowed their travel to this end, (chat if
there were any health in it) to take it away, and to infect all the members of
Christ his Church with most incurable diseases and maladies.

The Preface.
THus, reading M. Shacklockes triumph in the behalf of Osorius and other his
leaguelowlers, joined with so universal disabling of all gospellers and namely
D. Haddon, I thought good to make this search, which I have here set before all
men's eyes, taking the beginning thereof at Osorius his first proposition or
entrance unto his mattier, and so continuinge the chase unto his pytyfull
conclusion. Which collections run so much on one figure called Rixa or
Conuicium, and are such declamatorie and general stuff, that a man may
truly say, they have one especial property, that is, they may serve more
martyrs then one. For even so, as he in these his centons or fragmentes
impugneth our religion, might he thunder against Herostrotus for burning the
Temple of Diana, even so against the wilful murder of Orestes, Nero,
Mithridates, Cambises: even so against the sensualitye of Xerxes or
Sardanapalus: against whom and what he pleased, even so. besides that in diverse
places he merueilously mistaketh our doctrine, beating down manfullye that we
never set up, like a counterfeyt Hercules, making monsters unto him self
which he may easily vanquish, and so losing his days labor to the great
pity and compassion of the godly reader. thus much (and what so ever else)
whether it may be truly said or no, let other men judge. This I dare depose,
that there is not half so much here uttered, as is forced by thimportunity of
his Subscriptor M. Shacklock. In the whole what I have pretermitted (that
excepted which you shall here find by D. Haddon confuted) let every man look.
few Doctors (I warrant you) or scriptures, which in Osorius his Epistle are
very strange gestes (and as they stick not commonly to say, in that engyne
of pollycy needed not. Which his Epistle so trusting (as you would say) unto a
mother strength, al good helps of Scriptures, Doctors, or cou^celles set
aparte, for eloquence so well thought of, by the tra^slatour so priced, and
that syngeth in the ears of all Papists so incomparable harmony, (for so much
thereof as I have laid together in my preface) I dare avouch it to co^teine so
nedeles braules, idle and frivolous replies, co^trarietye with gods holy
word.iii. foul faults, regardinge either the man or the martyer, that (as
you may see in the margin,) I thought them worthy to be poynted at.
Which.iii. whether they be there to be found or no, I beseech the reader to
look, freelye deposinge that I have in those collections used plain dealing,
not changing or adding one jot, only here and there pretermitting that I
thought needelesse. What I have done is all for Master Shacklockes sake. I
will not go far, nor utter that which I hardelye conteyne, only for
Master Shackelocke a little curtesye. Now in good faith, have I not for his
good comparison, very good occasion to take one of his funeral verses, The
beginning of a brainsicke verse of in. Shacklockes. of the burial of b. Scot,
in Louain.
and sing Hei mihi ridiculis? What no comparison? not of charity? not so much
as a wide comparison? no favor? no bowelles of mercy, but stark naught in
comparison of you and yours? I fear me I see your face and facyng even through
your vysard. I se how all men see, that at Louaine it has been agreed on, not
to stick for craking, I se, (that is, is not) a proverb that will never fail
in them. Yet have we one vein of comfortable blood, that they shall never
persuade al, never shall the devil go further then his cheine. They may do
what they will and can. Their books and bodies have they and must have at scope
under Antichrists banner, according unto the Prophecyes, and wide wounds both
in word and deed must we bear for a time. Yet of modesty, let not M. Rich.
Shacklock so churlishlye set him self against M. D, Haddon, every peasant
against every Peer, every iangler against every sage, every shackled Papist
against every good Gospeller. O, this is a secure persuasion, and the high way
to blind bussardly boldness, some thing to say and to think well of them selves.
And this rule (I may say) is now well taken up. Else would not such a man as M.
Shacklock, having seen such streams of bloodshed in his native country, of
poor pined Protestants, An other of Master Shacklockes funeral verses,
lacki^g nothing but wit and mattier.
have crossed over the seas, and there have piped up: Haeresis effuso nondu^
satiata cruore. That is: Haeresy has not yet droncken blood enough. Neither
would Osorius ever have wasted wind with this vain question, which of us
ever offered him self unto death. Osorius I say, always ignorant in our
English affairs, M. Dorman that for lack of great fyndeth small faults in D.
Haddons book.
although a feere and friend of his will take stomach if he be so termed.
Wherein I remember who leaped at a fly, and catched nothing fast in his teeth.
Even that young Caluinist and old Papist that vouchsafed to call the History of
their own late tyranny, a dou^ghill of stinking martyrs. A thing soon said.
And yet is that notable cronicle (so lightly termed) such a monument as shall
unto the worlds end, not with words, but lively records of torments,
imprisonment and horrible murder of good persons and virtuous refute all their
lyppe labor. Auaunt with this your barkynge after your bloudye bittes, you
monstrous howlyng wolves. You have by your accursed crueltye given mattyer
unto that hystory which now makes you to yerne, which causes your teeth to
grate and chatter in your mouths. You your selves made those Antychristian
fyers, you beheld the naked bodies burning so long as the synewes would
contein them, and now they are all lies, or else you are liars. Which
registers and rowles of your Cains acts, require and challenge, by strong
reason, to be believed, because they babble not Romyshe bastard miracles
coming after the date, but testifye unto all generations to come
thaccusations, tormenting and tossing of good men by the hand of their
stepmother the flesh and the world, from pillar to post, from pain and agon^
unto death. Which things are such as daily happen, and are commonly
practiced of the evil against the simple and just. Whereof also are witnesses
yet lyuinge infinite, and partlye that were partakers of the same in their
flesh and blood, having set aparte all will and vanitye of lying and
fablinge, much used in times past of the wanton and idle Cloisterers. Who
being always warm and quiet, nor hearing of any such blusteringes and
tempests, turned them selves unto lewed and light inventions, the right
fruits of munkishe ydlenes. Now sir, what bitchfox was it that bibbed up all
the blood? heresy. heresy? what mean you by that, papystry? no mary, but the
gospel so called. Fie, M. Shacklock, for pure shame. Mentiris egregie^. the
gospel (I dare say) has been a sower maistres: Haec vapulando illa
verbarando, vsque, amhae defessae sunt. Charm your rauing muse until she be
sober and utter truths. Play not the hypocrite thus both to byte and whine.
As for cruor (that is blood) it is the papists peculier and lineal badge.
Popelinges they are of whom it is written: Effuderunt sanguinem sanctoru^ et in
eo inebriati sunt: They shede the blood of saints, and sucked thereof, until
they wear droncken. We sillye souls on the other side always suffering, and ever
forbearing, the sword now put into our hands, strike not one stroke, being
content to bear in our banner the fish called Gladiolus, a sword fish,
which has growing in his forehede a long sword, but he lacks a heart, he
wou^deth not, he strikes not, ne profereth one blow. But let go the rest, and
wink we at the rest of that licencious style. I beseech thee (good reader) to
accept this my translation of M. D. Haddon against M. Hieronimus Osorius, and
to gather by dew conference of every percell, all dew and Christian fruit.
Consideringe that all pain either of wrytinge or translating is employed to
quench thy thirst, and to give the a deep taste of that sweet word which must
be thine endeles comfort. And let it not come to pass, that when the
incessante pain and travail of godly learned men desyryng even to sweat
their blood for thy sake, tends all unto thine edifying and instruction,
thou still continue deaf and blind, tarying nothing but gods vengeance and
wrath perpetual. So both read and hear, that thou keep one eis fixed on the
word of god, who is thy best father and will not beguile thee. the sons of
men are deceitful, but god is truth. Neither attend unto the preachinge
Papist, that monstrous Sphynx, which has already beaten and bou^ced thee with
the stone in one hand, and now offreth bread with the other. Take heed, I say,
of that bread. it is offered with the left hand. Repose thy trust in god, and
take unto thy souls use that parcel of his divine pleasure, that is contained
in this little treatise. Fare well and remember to worship in spyrite and
truth. Dat. at Cambridge the.xxvij. of May. 1565.

Abraham Hartwell.

GVALTER HADdon English unto Hieronimus Ossorius a Portugal wysheth health.
I Have perused your epistle, master Hieronimus, which is directed
principally unto the Queen's most excellent Majesty, but (in that it is in
prynte and walks commonly in every man's hand) towcheth all universally. You
are (I confess) in words and sentences a lykely workman, and thereupon have
presumed accordyngly, that you a pryuate man, disneighboured from us by sea and
land, and in our affairs vnacqueynted, have so homelily opened your mouth
unto the Queen's highness, streyned the authority of our laws, and charged our
whole realm with a certain ungodly and lothed newnes. Wherefore you must of
reason pardon me, that I an English man borne, one of the queen's majesty's
suppliauntes, and enfourmed in my country fashions, do make you answer, and
use my pen somewhat franckely, not so much upon an angry pange, or a bitter
contentious heart, as to correct this your mistaki^g of the english state,
spro^ge of false surmises, and to restore the truethe unto them, who^
peradventure this your letter has perverted. And to give you plain
understanding that I am not blown up with anger, but of duty moved, I
confess your kind of writing worthy singular commendation, and besides give
you thanks that (being so well endewed) you have extolled our renowned Queen,
whose excellency although it far surmount the heaps of your praise, yet a
foreign testymonie beautyfied with eloquence, no doubt is very plausible. Of
thestate of a Monarchy you play the Philosopher handsomely within the ba^des of
knowledge, and reason deeply of the choice of Religion, but sir, in both you
have a foul fault, that is, ouercharging and beatinge our ears with things
vulgarely known, and plenty of proofs where no doubt is. This way first
taken, your pen by stealthe crepeth on to the purpose, namely to rifle such
religion as (by your saying) we have received. And, lo, how in the very
entrance you wittingely trippe, or rather take a clean fall through gross
ignorance of our English customs, fatherynge upon the multitude and common
people the ratefyinge of our Religion authorized by public decree, and feyning
the exclusion of the Royal estate from affairs of the Church. Where as with
us it is an vnfallyble custom, that no law come forth whereunto the whole
common wealth shall stand bound, bu^ the people first give their voices
thereunto, secondely as well the temporal nobility as the clergy do
subscribe, and last of all the prince confyrmeth it. The contrary if any man
have whispered in your ear, then are you both in fault, he for his loud lie,
and you for swift credit. But if you have builded this out of your own brain,
to disfygure our laws as raw and halting, invented of peasauntes, I may say
it was done of small courtesy, before you have given us half a taste of your
matter, to blow out upon our english laws so heinous a slander. Then
follows a weyghty and strong supplication to the queen's grace, that if you
can by sound reason and open proof lay before hereies in religion what is pure
and unleavened, that then her grace would not be so stif and immovable, but
yield her self, acknowledge the blasing light of the truth, and be contented
of you to be guided out of the wyndinge by walks of error. Herein you speak
reason, and therefore I require the like of you, that if I try this your
accusacion to co^teine more wrangling then good argument, less truth then
stomach, double malice for syngle reason, no fryndely conference grounded on
religion, but a plain taunt co^pounded of slanderous words, hereof when I
have made a solemn proof, that then I may give free sentence of you, that you
are too busy a seruitour in a foreign Realm, unadvisedly carpynge, where no
man knows less then you. You step in with a deadly complaint, exaggerate
with most select and precious words, how certain routes of men (God knows
who, and where they be) have revolted from the apostolic truth, and fetched
in a new faith, a stranger unto us, craking of liberty, yea such a one, as
is most pestilente, swelling with the waves of mischifes out of all number.
Then fall you upon the authors thereof, over whom you thunder and lyghten with
such thick flasshes and taunting terrible clappes, as though they were in
earth of all other most detestable. Where are these your monstrous babes of
Religion? which be they? how long have they continued? or how might I come
to the knowledge of them: where are such wonders to be found under the shape
of me^? what do they, how do they? how did you first know them? Certify us
of the things, point to the persons, subscribe the time leave not out one
circumstance, that we may have some sure ground to pitche upon, and so to
sustain your encountringe. You hallowe as loud as you can against religion,
with her capitaines you will fight, you speak bitterly unto both, and are
content to show us neither of them, what it is, where it is. This your
accusation is to be pitied, which if I dashe in the teethe with one contrary
word, must needs commend it felfe unto silence. You cry, nay you make an
outcrie, and that full ruthfully, that there is a fourine of religion newely
admitted, accursable, detestable, abominable, whose authors are unhallowed
persons, ruffyans, sorcerers, vndoers of common wealths, and professed enemies
of mankind. I on the other side do depose that there is nothing less, I
credit you not, I demand your proof. Now what say you? what prove you?
You cry with open mouth, there is no wyckednes but you have ye terms of it,
which (I smell) you had gathered together, therewith to deface your imagined
Religion, and to wound such persons as no man knowethe but your self. Now
surely, to disquiete with such change of tauntes, even to the princes face,
the most famous Isle in Christendom, to you unknown, upon the false ianglyng
either of our ilwillers or your parasites, and not to determine either the
crime or persons, argues in a man small aduisemente, and foul mispending of
time in belyinge of other. But to go further: you term this our Sect by the
name of a people pleaser, cauilling that they do not subdue vices, but set men
on fire with sensuality, yea with madness, and that there are examples enough
of their sorcerie and treason against princes. A horrible allegation, yea a
detestable kind of men, if there be any such living. If there be no such at
all, then great is the rashness of thaccuser, in an estate wholsomly settled, to
raise such vpperores. Mary (to speak a truth) now that you have uncovered
unto me this platte of poysoninge and conspiracies, looking a little back
unto the records and hystories of our predecessors, I begin to call to
mind Henry the fourth of that name, Emperor, unto whom a Moncke of monstrous
and wicked monckysh cruelty, even in their late godefyed Eucharist ministered
poison, whereupon he died, and whose counsel was intermedled herein, the
hystories do tell. By the like accursed enterprise of the like ghostlye person,
was king John of England murdered, as our Chronicles do testify. But to
stick in the recital of particulers, especially unto you, is nedeles, who
borderynge nearer upon such practices then I, may of likelyhod, with more
speed learn out of the Registers of your near neighbors, what poisoned
drafts have walked too and fro, between the supernatural demigods and proud
patrones of the Romish church, and how or by whom the pryncypall seed of
wars have been sown throughout all Realms christened. But I will not proceed
in accusatio^s as you do, nor urge you with suspicions, but in most humble
sort will lift up my hands unto the everliving god, sou^dinge out unto him all
thanks possible, that has vouchesafed to put a side the deep mistes of the
former times, with the sonnlyght of his gospel risen up among us, through
thignoraunce whereof, and former affiaunce in blind superstition we wallowed
in the syncke of sin without any remorse, thinking all to be raunsomed, what
so ever we did in our life wickedlye, by a leaden charter of popish pardon, and
the muttringe of prayers which we understood not. Then came the authority of
the holy scriptures, thundrynge at the door of our ears, and sent into our
consciences such shiuering and fear, that now we fix our whole trust and
ankerholde in the free mercy of God, all human inventions rejected and set a
part, always having an eye to the counsel of the Prophet, to fashyon and
shape our conversation unto holiness and righteousness. Which being so, I
marvel what should be the end of your tedious discourse unto the Queen
wherein you wyshe all Princes to provide and to be in continual watch, least
through this new borne sect (not yet by you well expressed) they tread
awry. Doubt you not but that our Royal Queen is surely enough planted in all
prosperity, and loving her people is eftsoon loved, felinge not one breath of
these storms which you harp upon. Other common welthes have taken their rest,
and presentlye I trust are in quiet. I know nothing unto the contrary,
unless you obiecte the late broyle in France, which now is appeased, and
whence the first blaste thereof came it is a thing sone toulde. but sith you
name nothing, let it go. There ensues in your treatise a vulgar and old
beaten quarrel of the frailetie of this present life, which your advise is to
contempne, and to make a way up into heaven, to set the world far from us, to
the end we may attain unto everlasting felicity. Then fall you into
admiration, that herein we will cleave unto new shepeheardes, where as in your
mind, the old may suffice. yet are you content to suspende your verdicte, and
that inquiraunce be made of our grene Pastors newely chopped in, which will in
no wise be counted newfangled, taking upon them (the schooleme^s drowsy
dregs wyped away) to scour and cleanse the Church, and to trymme it up
according to thinstitutio^ of the apostles, so to represente unto all
Christendom the verity founded in the gospel of Jesus Christ, this long time
ouermaistered by couetise and ambition, to blase with the starry brightness of
holy scripture gods glory so darkened with man's dreams and fancies, to undo
the yoke of superstition, and finally to reedifie the sincere worship of god
after thauncient rule and discipline of ye primitive church. These men's
profession you so well like, that you loute and scorn their enterprise: these
be they whom you vex and toss at will, one while scoffing, another while
fuming, now cryinge, and then yellyng out. Very well. Now at length I see what
new sect you mean, against whom you have so busylye discharged and let fly
all this eloquence. I have now espied your adversaries, who^ you must needs
have pruned of, and cast on the dounghill, as the very poison of a common
wealth. Me thinckes on the contrary side, that these preachers of the gospel
are the servants of the highest god, sent even of God him self, to quicken our
assedlike sloth in these slyppery times and latter cast of the world, to
spur our loytring, to refute our falshode, and to check and taunte our
wickedness. And therefore such men ought to be serched out of the prince, and had
in estimation througheout the common wealth. Se what difference is between your
opinion and mine. Wherefore we must march on, and consider what you, (a graunde
doctor for a prince forsothe) can either allege truly, or untruly forge
against gods reverend ministers and servants. And although (as it may be,)
this slander proceed of some other: yet shall you bear double blame for rash
credit, and more rash puttyng of the same in writing. I will not trauise all
the corners of your accusation, which almost powers out nothing but an
unfruitful ringing in peinted words. Only I will run over your chief
points, and, if I be able, shake the very pillars of this your accusation.
First you say there must be note taken of the persons, because they promise
franckely, and trial made what their ability is, what pith they have, what
is their virtue and integrity of lyuinge. Then you demand whether in godly
life they be more absolute then Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose, Hierome, and
Augustine wear. I wis there are many of them of incomparable learning and most
godly demeanor, and I see nothing you bring, why they may not be equal with
these ancient sages. But to bring you out of your odyous comparisons, me
think you move an unreasonable question in an unfit place. For I avouch that
these our preachers wholly agree with those reverend fathers, tread in the
same pathe, and exhibit all one tenor of Religion. If this be so, then make
you a vain comparyson between them that be friends, if it be otherwise,
enfourme us wherein they disagree. S. Austine lame^teth that his time was so
drowned with flouddes of ceremonies, that christians were the^ in worse case
the^ were the jews before them. Saint Hierome wyssheth that the sacred
scriptures, which were in your church so locked up and smoothered, should be
learned by heart both of weomen and children. S. Basil employed all possible
leisure upon that good work of learning and also teachinge the gospel. And
if the pampered Monckes of our time had lived in saint Basiles order, they
had not ben once touched. Athanasius his creed stands in full estimation, and
between him and our men no squarynge. But I think I may be boulde to keep
these our ancients in reverence, until you bring contrary evidence. Of those
ancient fathers of the church, saying your self able to bring nothing but
their naked names, remembryng your self, you pass over unto the men of our
age, and leaping first upon Luther, you tear the dead man in pieces, first
calling him blind hassard, then a people pleaser, and last (for your pleasure)
starck staring mad. This man of god whom you so falselie charge with
frenseie, in open auditorie and in presence of Charles the emperor, exhibited a
sober and discrete soome of his faith. This frantic fellow in spite of all
the wyseste of your Church, stood all salfe and hail the space of.xxx.
year, they notwithstanding all raginge and cauing for his death. Erasmus
gives this lunatike man no base record of innocence in these words: Luthers
doctrine many do defame, his life al men extol with one consent. You say
moreover he was popular. How expound ye that? If you call him popular that
carketh and cares for the peoples health, then no man is more. If you mean a
prycker of rash lightness among the communaltie, read his book wherein he
controuleth and taunteth the vprores in Germany, and leave your slaundering.
And that men may not think you have played this naughty part only in
Luther, you recite other as though, after you have spoken the word, they were
straighte way transformed out of pereles godly me^ into most vile vyllaines.
Among other I will name you two principal professors of the gospel, Martine
Bucer, and Peter Martyr, which of gods good gift, arrived in this Island:
Let all our cankerd enemies lay together their heads. Let se what one thing
even malice it self can note in these reverend graves amiss. O golden couple
of greyheadded fathers of most happy memory, of whose learning right good
witness we have, even the books by them compiled. whose pure conversation so
many commend, as ever happened into their company. Wherefore (if you be wise)
temper your tongue, and stay your style, and take heed of inconvenience. Deem
not them so largely to be presumptuous persons, unadvised, and lofty, sith
there is a number of them well known, then whom nothing can be found, more
mild, sober, and advised. Two I have named, the like testimony might I give
of whole hundrethes. But the sobre conversation of two persons, bruted far
and nere, may plentifullye refell one particular man's rash and shameless
cauillation. Then again you make transition unto our men's doctrine, mislykinge
therein that they urge nothing but scripture, they call to counsel nothing
but the holy ghost, reiectynge and abandoning all human authorytie. who if
they did as you say, they should therein tread in the very steps of our
savior Christ, thapostels, and old fathers that were in the infancy of the
church. But it is far otherwise. They do sort and choose out the assertions
of al approved interpretours of all ages, as declare their books, which are
able unto all the world to detecte this your falsehood. You scoff
graciousely, and (in your own fancy) prosecute an invincible reason against
such perfectnes of living, as our men take upon them selves, which you say by
their abhominatio^ is hourly reproved. Untrue it is that they presume any jot
beyond manns strength, and the other is an old slanderous cast, to defame
men, not opening any one spot of their uncleanness. Name it if you can, what so
ever it be, worthy this your stormy and vehement reply. If you can not, leave
for shame, so pestilently to tatle against the reputation of most grave
persons. You require to have it specifyed, in what one point our men have
reformed thestate of the church. I need not tell you* you name enough your
self, saving that we differ in meaning. You lay unto our charge that Nuns
and Monks cloystered to attend the service of God, and to continue in
chastity, are now let out and fully licenced to all will: that their palaices
are openly cried to sale, and how laws are come forth, that unto lust there
be no let in Religion. O hoorishe impudency in lyeng, and will lawles beyond
measure. We grant, and that freely, that upon advertisement of our pastors,
we let fall unto the ground those dens of stinking poison, wherein were
pestered up young wenches and syllie boys, to such ruin of virtue in them,
as for shame I can not discover. What was there in those shameful shoppes of
sin, but only a pharisaicall length of service in a strange tongue? as for
other their mysteries they most liuelily resembled unto us the droncken hollie
days of Bacchus. Whereupon God (no doubt) stirred up the minds of our
countrymen, that these infynite routes and swarms shrowdynge in secret
corners of abomination should be rowsed, by their exhortations, from sleep to
work, from vice to virtue, and from their horrible practyses of fornication
unto lawful wedlock. Not that we enioin any co^straint of marriage, but plucking
our consience out of the yoke of man's traditions, we restore the liberty of
ye gospel, wherein the authority of Jesus christ has planted us, by the
warrant of his word. Of their howses there were bestowed to good and godly
use of schools, universities and hospitals. with the rest lawful order was
taken, lest the swynishe generation should once again tumble in their durtie
dunghilles. This was a worthy and singular blessing of god, whereby there is
more abbridged of the hellishe tyranny of Satan, then by all your canons,
layinge them all together. You weep over the pluckinge down of ymagerie and
tableworke, which monumentes once displaced, you affirm that there is nothing
left to inflame our spirits unto the contemplacion of heavenly things. We
on the other side remembering the gross ignorance even of late times, sorely
mistrust dotage in idolatry, against the which there are plain textes, yea
the gospel gives us a watch word concerning images. Which were it not to be
passed upon, yet among Christians ought the written word of our lord Jesus
Christ, to bear great sway, which pronounces that God is a spirit, and that
they stand in the right way of prayer that worship in spirit and trwethe, and
such beadmen the Lord loves. This is the most wholesome way of praying, if
we consider either the original or end of it, which needs not
thundersettinge of these outward ceremonial things, so to clime up unto the
throne of God the father. Nay while our outward Adam is to much occupied, about
these superficial stuff, the inward man waxes keiecold, drincketh in the
venomous ioice of a basterdlie Religion, forgoeth the sound fruit of heavenly
meditation. Let us bind up al with examples: The former ancient church of
apostles and martirs had none of these your costly iewelles, and yet was there
most whot zeal burning in their breasts. In baser times of religion, by foot
and foot in stepped peintrie, and so died in the former love of gods service
yt was so kendled in men's hearts. At last rushed in the scholemens divinity by
whole cartloades, a bird of an other nest, ouglie misshapen with superstition:
anon all places were stuffed with peinted stocks and idols, which being every
where risely worshipped, the true and spiritual honor of God was trodden under
foot. Now power out your Philosophy concerning the weakness of our
capacity, extol your holy blocks until you sweat withal, yet is this
deeply grounded in the scriptures, that the undoubted knowledge of god is in
his word, and sincere worshyppinge in spyrite. As for your pyctures, where the
spyrite is present they need not, where that wants they avail not. It were
a tedious matter for you to make of every thing a several discourse, and
therefore with one breath you say that all holly service, ceremonies, and
sacraments ar by us clean sacked and destroyed. What is it that I hear? Is
there living any such brood of diuynes, that spoyleth and destroys all holly
service, al ceremonies, all sacraments? Either it is so, orels must this be,
as it is in deed, a shameful excess in lying. For foreign Churches I can gage
nothing, but I have a good opinion of them? Of our orders in divine affairs I
will make you a brief account, not suffering you either to be ignorant your
self, or to bewytche other. First (because faith comes by hearing) we send
into al coasts of the Realm Preachers to edifye the people in their duties
toward God, and to enstructe them in the true worshipping of ye same. The^ have
we an order of common prayer collected out of Scriptures, by Parliament (for so
we term the consent of the three estates of our Realm) authorized, from the
which we suffer no man to wander, forseing (with all diligence) two points,
first the holy ghost to be obeyed, warning that whosoever open his mouth in the
congregation, speak the word of God, secondly that in all things be found an
unity without dyscorde. The sacraments we cause to be ministered very precisely
after the prescript of holy writ, and the lively pattern of the former Church,
wherein the Lord Jesus Christ first in his own person instituted them with his
Apostles. And all these are propounded in ye vulgar tongue, for that it is a
brutish folly and plainly excepted in the testament, in the presence of God to
clatter out that we understand not our selves. The giving of orders,
hallowing of wedlock, churching of childwiues, visitynge of the feeble, and
burying of the dead corses, we execute with solemn and public rites according
to ye veritye in the Gospel, which we spice with ceremonies so far forth as al
things may proceed in order and decently within our Churches, as we are
certainly advertised out of the gospel. Of ye times, places, days and other
circumstances, we have made no alteration, neither in the whole body of
religion innouated any thing, but yt either abhorred from all reason, or was
stained with open impiety. Thus have I rypped up unto you the rites and
manners of our Church, which you see is clean strypped neither of holy
service, sacraments nor traditions, but of each sort has reserved so much,
that who so charge us to be void of all, wantinge in deed no parcel
requisite unto the peculier anauncement of Gods honor, shall shall offer us
unreasonable injury. You say we have shyfted of the yoke of the imperial
Bishop, and you say well. It was to heavy and broosyng, for either us or our
fathers before us, any longer to sustain. Neither acknowledge we any one high
superintendent, but only our lord Jesus Christ, which honor the scriptures
assign unto him alone. And herein do we not part Christ's coat (as you guess)
but we touse and hale the Popes gaberdine, neither unlock we the door unto
sedicion, but stop the high way, wherein upon his lawless bulls of lead
we rode stepe down into perdicion. You rake together many unities, and thereof
pack up an argument, that in any wise there must be in the Church one
spiritual sovereign or high regent. What needs that? since even in the
soundest age of the Church there was one God, one faith, and yet
notwithstanding had Peter one province, Paul another, and James another, and
diverse other had several charge, whereas the seuering of the persons was no
breach to the unity in faith. In sequel of time, diverse prelates of Rome were
holy Martirs, put to death by heathen Princes, usurping no other crown but the
crown of martyrdom. As for this extraordinary popish regalty, they knew it
not, and S. Gregorye by name does defy it. Wherefore if the most floryshinge
time of the Church were void of this your Monarchy, we also may wesleaue if
out, nay we ought so to do, not only for the straight charge of ye scripture,
but also the suggestion of all good reason. We cannot abide to have the head so
far distant from the body, especially having this sovereign power (for the
which you labor so hard) here at home in England, that no need it is to seek
any abroad. We have the full authority of a regal power, containing the whole
virtue of king lie jurisdiction over the whole Realm. But this, this is it
that you cry away withal, this has set you in such a glowinge, that unto
Princes you impute sacrilege, because they extend their authority over the
Ecclesiastical laws, and dare adventure to touch things consecrate. What I
pray you, M. Hieronimus, come out of this trance, fie upon this impacience,
in a professed wise man, let in a littell breath, and chere up your spirits,
you shall se al things in a clear case. The Queen's majesty reygneth over all
her subjects of England. And reason it is. So have the Frenchmen their French
king, and the Scotts their scottish sovereign. Yea, but she presses in unto
church matters. Not a whytte. Al politic affairs, ar governed by civil
magistrates, and spiritual matters by bishops. In spiritual exploites if any
public order be to be taken, the divines determine the same, whose
determination is by the Queen's Majesty authorized. Now what mislyke you? under
these ordinances did the kings of Israel (in those days) govern the proper
and peculier people of God. Then ensued the gospel, which also making in powers
a distinction, first hoyseth up the Regal estate, and subdueth thereunto al
other degrees, by the mouth of Peter and Paul, whose names and titles by false
vsurpacio^ you derive unto thestablishing of your Romish Seignory. As for you,
you bid battle not only in behalf of the Romish Scepter, but also for the
holy holy decretalles, whose abolishinge you think has been the utter decay of
godly fear within men's hearts. Certes I always deemed that the fear of
GOD had sprung by ye virtue of holy scriptures, and not by the Romish decrees,
by whose Canons I hear say whole routes have been enriched, but a scle^der
sort trained to dread God rightlye. Well, to yield you so much, that diverse of
your Canons teach reasonable good and wholesome moral doctrine (as I confess
they do) what vau^tage you thereby? we admit both decrees and decretals in our
Ecclesiastical consistories and courts, and of neither sort disanull any
poinct saving thauthor, and him reject we not as bishop of Rome, but as King of
Bishops, and supreme head of our church. We yield unto no supreme head within
England, but unto the Queen's highness, and out of foreign monumentes, we borrow
whatsoever may serve for the enhauncing of godliness and virtue, yea whence
soever it be. Not knowing this our custom, you bewail the ruin and decay of
the decrees, which (so far forth as they vary not from Gods word) stand with
us in full virtue and force. You vpbrayde our preachers as the very fountains
of unbridled and wanton liberty, and father upon them such a dissolute and
wilful kind of talk, as the like never was in Epicurus or Diagoras. Whom being
thus disguised in new colors of your invention, you lout and flout al at
pleasure. Call to mind, I beseech you, how your good master Cicero (he yt lent
you al your eloquence) says it is il dealing of iestes with god, whether it
be in sport or good sooth. If very nature did teach the gentilles this,
then had you need being a Christian, to look with both eyes, what it is like
a sycophant with scoffinge to triumph against Christ. But to the purpose, we
are content (with Saint Paul) to build upon that liberty wherein Christ has
planted us. And this liberty of the spirit we qualifye in such sort, that
we make exception against the liberty of the flesh, as S. Paul again
teaches. We believe in ye gospel, that everlasting death is far from them
which are graffed in Christ Jesus (addinge also that follows in the same
treatise) whose walkinge is not after the flesh, but after the spirit. I do
not roue out of the very letter, to take away al suspicion of treachery or
iuglinge. S. Paul after long and serious disputations, concludes yt we are
justified by faith, without the works of ye law. Let us subscribe hereunto,
and in no wise let us derogate from the gospel one jot: mary this is to be
learned out of the same leaf, by a lively and charytable faith. These two thus
linked together if we do hold and maintain, (as no doubt we do) you ought
not to divorce them, and reply upon a maisterles error, which has no Patron
except it be your self. It is no gentleman's practice (that I may use the
terms of the Civil law) to catch the one end of a statute, and there by to
judge the whole matter.

Mangle not our doctrine thus, but repete it as it is. Which done, there shall
ye see good worckes standing in their due reputation, and store or grave
exhortacions unto penitence, and last of all prove that (for lack of an
aduersarye) you have made a very wise conflicte with your own shadow. Forth
ye go in your lycencyous style, horriblye cryinge out, that through this
dulnes, nai madness of our men, all man's reason is clogged and tied up, free
will has no scope nor liberty, and all mankind made so bare and so blind, that
there is little dyfference between a man and a stone, that they make god
thauthour of sin, and bring al things to confusion and distemperaunce.
Finally that it argues injustice in god, to take vengeance of the^ whom he
him self has depraved. Suerelie I do not commonly yield to any pange: But
this once I must needs be bold with you. You have vttred not only a
dissardlye and unskillful cauillation, but blasphemous withal, and such one,
as the very stones whereof you talk, if they could speak, would not cast out
against our preachers. Dippe your wit and understanding in a little
scripture, and reclaim your error. God the father chose us in Christ before the
foundations of the world were laid, that we might be hollie and blameles in
his sight. You hear recyted out of the gospel this divine election, which you
in words so greuousely detest, and you hear the time also. Neither is that
any necessary fruit of thelectio^, to break down the pale unto all lusts
and abomination (as you scoff most irreverently) but to make us appear
hollye and irreprehensible before the face of god by charity, as is word by
word expressed in the gospel. God it is that works in us both ye good will
and the work of good will. In few words has S. Paul clogged and captyuated
all our strength and power. How now? is there no difference between us and
stones or stocks. O headde made of a block that so would gather. S. Paul
again calls us ioynct workers with Christ, and commands us to labor
about our own sowles health in fear and trembling. How can that be (will
you say) sith we leave all in gods hands: Learn how in.iii. words. I can
do all things in Christ which does fortify me. And S. Austine in other words
compriseth the self same sentence very eloquentely. God crowns in us his own
works. Now sir. Marck ye well the holly and twice holly purpose of god, surely
fensed with the bulwarks and rampires of the Scripture? And can ye yet
conceive how we make the prouydence of God not the mother of synn, but the
nurce of all obedience? Let us have recourse unto the very fountaynes, which
not withstanding that they flow with streams as sweet as honny, yet are your
heart stringes so intoxicate, that you have sucked therout the black poison of
adders and vypers. And that I may have inevitable process against you, I will
recite the very word of the gospel. The children being yet unborn, when they
had done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of god by electyon might
stand, not by reason of their works but by grace of the caller, it was said,
the elder shall serve the younger, as it is written. Jacob have I loved, Esau
have I hated. What says your wisdom unto this? Behold once again the
purpose of god, which is by election: note the time, that is, the children
being yet unborn. What shall we say in this case? Is there any vnrightuousenes
with god? that does S. Paul defye, Hieronimus Ossorius will abide by it. God
by his own mouth said unto Moises: I will have pity upon whosoever I take
pytie, and will have compassion upon whom so ever I take compassion. Whereunto
S. Paul adds that it is neither in man's will nor cunning, but in the free
mercy of God. and this does he stablish with the example of Pharao, and makes
final evidence, that god where he will takes pity, and whom he will he
makes hard hearted. What say we hereunto? forsothe we let down the sail of
our own judgment, and bow unto theternall providence of god lying so open in
the scripture, and taking S. Paul's counsel by the way, remember that we are
creatures. Neither do we chop logique with our creator, but walk in our
vocation, betake our selves unto our bounden duty, day by day crave with
submission the grace of the hollie ghost, permytt the residue unto ye botomles
mercy of god, and in his mysteries wade no further, then we have placket. What
says Hieronimus Ossorius? Suerly (says he) if human reason be so clasped
up, al free deliberation forspoken, and our will has from everlasting been gods
prisoner, it must needs follow that the whole man is clean shriuen of all
judgment, yea of his senses, that he is no better then a stone, yea god is
made the author of synn. and that against all good reason it is, that we should
be punyshed for that sin which wyllingly we never committed. Do I belie one
syllable of your words, do I misalleage one hear? do ye recognize the words
of your own lips, other stark false orelles blasphemous? you are he, that
proud pecocke, checkemate with god, whose sollen stomach saint Paul
bitterly taunteth and beats down, you being but an earthen vessel lately
purtraited out of moulde and claye, will know of the potter to what use he
has tempered you. Down, I say down with this presumption (if ye will be
wiser then erst ye were) less of this arrogancy, remember ye are the handye
work of your GOD, as we are all, leave at home your own awarde, and cast
down before the footestole of god your self and all that is yours in poorenes
of spirit. Or if you have purchased at gods hand any privy seal, or
extraordinarye faculty, which ye can by no means give over, keep it to your
self to have and to hold, suffer us with quietness whyning wretches and pulyng
souls swathed in sins, unburdened of all humayne affyaunce, or hope of
drowsy deseruinges, wholly to clinge unto the immortal providence and free
offered mercy of our good god. At length after a volume of raylynge and
uncharitable checkes, you knyt up a kind of conclusion, making a collection of
those things, which our men have toppled down, the remembrance whereof
makes you to yerne, demanding what is set up in their place. Both which
things I have already vnwrapped unto you, but I will not stick for a word,
In steed of leysie loytringe of miscreant hippocrytes under the mistie cloak of
superstition, is substitute the dutiful labouryng in christian profession: for
raunging lecherye, the honorable state of wedlock: for the dreaming driftes
of man's brain, the written will of god the father, and our Savior Jesus
christ, and ye therein comprised treasures of christian perfection. Here I
would you had dated your reprochefull and loueles letter. For although you are
never weried in darting out whole quiuers full of sleueles slaundering and
hedlesse hatred, yet yrketh it me to recyte them. To what end or purpose is
it, thus without proof, pythe, or likelyhode to iterate in the ears of the
Queens highness, nay in the face of all Christendom to auouche so importune
and so hedles errors. But I perceive you are inspired with that point of
raging Retorique whereof Tullie makes mention, that is, after one shameless
shyfte to be clean shifte of all shame. Wherefore seeing you so myldelye
minded, I will hereafter tread in your own steps, and as I have already set my
foot against your mysreportes, so will I fight against them unto the end.
You give fierce assault with fresh words, but all your puissau^ce leans
unto old and stale vices, such as be common unto all sorts of men. You chyde
their pride, you bid auaunt with their impudency, you find them guilty of
robberies, poysonynges, high treason, you bring upon the^ so long rowles of
enditement as never did Cicero upon Verres, and in thend you frame a reason,
that the good virtue of their doctrine shows it self unto all men's eyes in
their execrable conversation. For (say you) of wholesome doctrine buddeth out
amendme^t of manners, which rule because now it fails, this fruitles and dry
divinity of right should be rooted out. False is this your presumption of
their loose living, which if it were true, yet should it never be gathered of
your premises. There has ever ben darnel mingled with the wheat, never was
there seed sown but it has had diverse success, some choked up with
thorns, some parched with the heat of ye son. The Prophets were gain said
by false prophets. Our savior Jesus Christ found a cruel Cayphas. the
apostles were never free from the tyranny of Nero, no more were the Martyrs of
latter years salf from deuilishe Decians. But these proofs are too auncyente.
Com home I pray you unto your own church. In your own church is there not
trippinge commonly? Nay is there not frailty openly? yes, (say you,) then,
say I, repeat your own reasons, which are either as weak as water, orels
prejudicial unto your self, and your pretensed church. This thus agreed on,
if you ask where is the perfection of Aungelles, if you exact innocence as
white as snow, in vain seek you in this vale of myserie, the spirit without
flesh. But if you will stand to the comparison of the lyuinge of our men and
yours, or way their learning and knowledge in equal balances, we are at your
beck, go too, compare them from the top unto the toe. And for a breathing
while charm your tau^ting tongue, so like a wanton lauysheinge braineles
brawles, dumme and mum in grave argument, nothing tastinge of Scriptures, not
ones smellyng of doctors, only runninge in main streams of reasonable good
words, but of sente^tious pithines welnigh destitute. Of the same stamp is
that counterpoi^t of yours, which you have so curiously framed. On the one side
whereof you reckon up in a rank thapostles, whose renowned virtue and
doctrine (as reason is) you have garnyshed with pretty pearls of words and
sentences. On the other side have you placed our spirituality, whose outrageous
naughtines you curse as low as hell pit. Which peinted pageauntes of your
eloquence (had you ben as wise as you are taken) you should have hurded up
until some other seasonable weather, for at this present you have lost a
fair long tale. As for us although we may without prick of conscience
affirm that the doctrine of our church comes lineally from the apostles,
and also the scryptures bear record that thapostles them selves sometimes
stombled, and showed them selves to be but men, yet grant we that in each
respect they far ouerwent the common frailty of man's nature. They were
scholemasters picked out by gods own wisdom, they had our savior Christ
among them even in their daily conversation, they were first possessed of the
holy ghost, and therefore are their names unto us as names of dignity and
reputation. Come unto latter times, one degree lower. Let your church show
her face, and there let truth try whether of both is nearer cosyn unto the
apostles church, be it for integrity of life or doctrine. This bargain made,
we will forthwith, sewe our process with you, and therein give you a large lice^s
to make the rewes of your comparisons (if ye will) one hundredth fold. But I
avail not, I find you nothing reasonable, you die if you be barred bytyng and
backbityng, outragiously stretching your wyndepipe against our gospellynge, and
therein settinge abroche all your sower eloquence. Storm until you stare,
cry out while your jaws will hold, yet shall you not by importunity prove
any other sede sown by our preachers, save only the lively ancient and
sincere gospel. In the which point except your Romish See bethink it self,
by calamity and fatal desolation it shall once learn, at the time when we
shall all appear at the dreadful assise of gods judgment, and in our own
person give an heavy account of our faith, not out of decrees or decretalles,
which be your own sweet darlinges, neither out of Julius or Bonifacius his
popish pedlerye, (whose authority so pleases you) but even out of this
golden gospel, which you so sawcely deride, which you so long while pestered
in your dark dungeons, which is by gods good inspiration, and the chivalry
of our soldiers restored again unto all Christen Realms. At that doleful
day what will betide you, which have set your teeth so deep in us, which have
laid violent hold upon the Prophet Jeremy, and by force of arms, after much
strugglynge and kicking, brought him to give evidence against our men. Let us
here that man of god whom you have cyted, and upon his prophecy examine the
truethe: beware, says he, how you give care unto Prophets preaching
pleasant things and beguiling you, uttering the fancy of their own heart,
and not brynginge their message from gods mouth, for so they speak which
dyshonor me, peace shall be with you, and unto those which walk after their own
hearts lusts, they have said, no harm shall befall you. Here you triu^ph like a
conqueroure, here you cry we are taken half out half in. And I cry again
as loud that herein your visardes are pulled of your faces, and how it may so
be, I will discrie it to all the world. In your temples reignethe this reastie
peace, in your synagoges, and in none else, encampeth and keeps sleeping
holliday this deuelishe drowsynge, wherein you have so hushed and rocked up all
other, and then laid your selves down by them, that neither you see the point
of the sword leueled at your own heart, neither cry unto other to eschew the
deadly stroke. The office of public preachinge, so straightly required in the
gospel, you have wholly bequeathed to certain silly and fruitles friars, who
on prescript days declaime within their compass, further forth they speak
not one word. In their exhortatio^s they use such a length, with so small
suite and change, that they much sooner seal up their eyes which be wakinge,
then stir them up that are on sleep. O how quiet they be at their service
and sacraments. First the people must stand without the rayles of their
roodeloftes, then sir priest whippeth up all in a tongue that no man
understands. How shall the people know to address the^ selves to battle,
when no man knows the sound of the trump. These are the words of s. Paul.
Look unto the mass, that natural and sweet marrowe of all your hollines. No
man has any part in that play but the priest, as for the poor people they
may see for their love. The Scripture does not there ouercharge any manne with
hearing, but husheth on sleep all her exhortations. Ones in a year is the
lords supper celebrated, well censed with ceremonies, God knows with what
troubled conscience. And there lacks one chyefe point which christ's
institution requires, namely that his death should be had in remembrance
until his coming* What maladyes of sin soever have poisoned your foldes,
you apply no open soul sa^^e Private satisfaction is made by whisperinge in the
priests ear, and if it be more then a venial trespass, the popes leade^ bull
must be wayed down with silver. Of ceremonies there are so many, so suitable,
so pompouse shows, that to the outward manne there can be no such paradise,
but for the sowles slender edefyinge, nay nothing but staruinge cheer. Thus
are your hollye orders displayed and laid open. Now may it please you to
hear ours. First have we according to the very vein of the gospel daily
preachinges, whose authority either with the threats and menacynges of the
law breaks our stubburne synnefull hearts, or for the precious treasure of
gods promises, does allure us unto virtue. Which if any lewd persons more
rechles then the rest, do contemn or set light by, the^ does the Magistrate by
co^straint drive unto divine service, there to attend, not unto man's glosses,
but unto the certain voice of god the father and our Savior Christ, one while
terrefying us and putting in fear the vile leprousye of our sinful flesh,
another while spreading vpen unto us the wide gates of mercy. Here unto are
added so many Psalms and Himnes, and such variety of readinges out of both
Testamentes, that whosoever among so heavenly peales of solace and comfort,
cannot convey away one line for his own learning, is to be thought of all
other most unhappy. The^ follows the last supper of our lord, of most worthy
and unspeakable reverence, from no festival day excluded. There does the
minister with an audyble voice call forth al such as have deuoutlye prepared
them selves unto so heavenly a Table. Forth come the thereunto minded,
humblinge them selves on their knees severally, in the face of the
congregation, and at a moment by public confession renownce all ungodly
ways, and in unity of prayer betake them selves unto gods mercy. The
minister pronounces unto them certain principal and chosen sentences of
scripture, either shootinge at them the thunderboltes of gods vengeance for
their polluted ways, or opening the flowinge fountaynes of gods clemencye,
that the communicantes of that heavenly table may oftentimes quake and
tremble, and at the last refreshed again with hope of pardon, receive a
sweet comfort. If there be any whose defamed life may show a perilous
example of parcialitye, or whose wickedness may no longer be borne, those do we
excommunicate, that shame and destitution may reclayme them unto their
duetye. Here have I good occasion to frame a counterpoint, as you did before,
which if I would do, I could have as good store of words to polishe and adourne
the same. Lastly I would move a question whether of both divine services more
pricketh and galleth all wickedness. Where is that husshinge at open impietye,
yt the prophet speaks of, where is that deep silence and mumming? and on
the other side what galling is to be seen of polluted consciences? with what
nippinge words are they wounded unto the heart? what percing sentences are
there to stir up their slow blouddes? But I will leave all undone, I have
proffered a taste of the matter, let him be judge that will. This (to conclude) I
will be bold to say, that in one assemble at the holy Communion, there are
deeper syghes and sobbes, then in six hundredth of your riotous Massinges.
Wherefore it was labor more then neded, out of the Prophet once again to
inculcate, that no earthly man has been of gods counsel, that no man has
seen or hard him open his mouth. But this pride is a bird of your own
bosom, as I declared before. you it is yt labors to be one of gods pryuie
councillors. As for this controversy, whether tells his tale out of gods
book, you or we, the lykelyhood surely enclineth to us ward, which be
continually serching and tourning the scrptures. Your champions waueringe with
the wyndes upon the wide seas of glosses and interpretacions, and totterynge
as it were in a slyppery ground, walk in the wide deserts in great peril of
loosing their way. Well ones again you make bold with Jeremy, not permitting
the reverend prophet to rest. First you allege these words of his: If they
had walked in my ways or had declared my will unto my people, surely they had
revoked them from their evil ways, and from their wicked ymaginatio^s. Very
well. Let us begin with Jeremy, who was a famous Prophet, and no man will say
the contrary. Did he scare all the Jews from their vices: did he bow their
backs, and win them all unto virtue? wey and consider the whole time of his
prophecienge, and ponder wythal the mourneful gronings and wailing of his
lamentacio^s. with the forechose^ people of god, this man of god easily
prevailed, (for my sheep here my voice says the gospel) as for the residue
they were hardened. Did not Paul prove the like in the Romans and the
Corinthians? Peter in the churches of Asia, and our Savior Christ in infynite
numbers of the Jews, and namely in the Capernaites? Wherefore let Jeremy go,
and leave your trifling. Paul planteth, Apollo watreth, but God gives
thencrease. And (as s. Paul witnesses) this shall be an infallyble rule: God
knows his own. We must labor with all intent, but what good gift so ever
befalls us, it comes from above, and desce^deth down unto us, from the
father and god of light. But you still follow the chase, inculcating the
lewdness unmeasurable of our men, that is, you inculcate your own cankred
charity, and that which has done you so much good service in this Epistle,
a singular sprite of slaundering. I say slaundering, sithe the most part of our
men walks in most perfect ways, and associateth unto the true worshypping of
god many thousa^des, and as much abhors that accursed conversation of you
pretended, as this your talk is void of all shame and modesty. And if you will
do that is chiefly to be done, confer with the light of our gospel the
palpable mistes of your times, and consider what difference there is. Your
last benevolence is, yt our whole co^federacy swimmeth in sects, and has made
unlawful conspiracies to pull in pieces all due worshipping of God. But
notwythstandinge your cauil, they are linked in perfect unity, which if you
doubt, I betake you unto thapologie set forth in the face of all Christendom,
as an open and undoubted pledge of our Religion, disgrace it if you can. But
you can not for your life, nor any of all your accomplices and adherents,
howsoever within these few days one good man has made his barkynge brags. Our
men (God wotteth) entend no overthrow of religion, believing certainly in
thimmortalytie of our souls. If there be any realm christian not thoroughly
persuaded therein, turn your tale unto them: and if ye be not thus satysfied,
call to mind that our men have given earneste of their profession, not
alonely with their tongues and pens, but with exyle, nakedness, pyning, yea
with spe^ding their blood and life. Which suerly they would not have done, if
the grim terrors of this present life could have foiled them, or crased their
constancye in maineteining the known truth. But you say you have made longer
discourse the^ you minded. Yea truly much longer then beseemed you, especially
in the heari^g of a most learned and prudent Pryncesse. Whose subtilitye in
judgment might have put you in some honest fear if you had considered ye
ground of her good gifts. Whose highness continually is addict unto the reading
of scriptures, the comparyng of the most approved expositors, and drawyng out
of the opinions of ye best deuines, whose grace has atteyned an excellency in
the tounges, ioygned with readiness and quicknes of reason, and all this she so
governs with Princely wisdom, as in a woman uneath is credible. She gladly
frequenteth public sermons and by continual reading and hearing is so well
applied, that her grace is no less able to instruct you then she needs your
instruction. Were you ever in hope that such a princess, of al other most
godly and prudent, might by your smooth tale be corrupted, or with sugared words
beguiled? It is nothing so, it is far otherwise, and they have fowly abused
this your kindness, whosoever sent you in for an open accuser, especially unto
the queens presens. But now have at your conclusion, wherein I think you will
never conclude any thing. One flinge more you must have at the fruits of our
doctrine. As for the persons themselves, those you require to be looked on, and
by them must the religion be valued. What fruits (in Gods name) misseth
your church in us, that sinagoge of all other most fruitelesse. But we refuse
no challenge, your will be done. Compare England in what case it now is, feeding
on the sweet Mannah of Gods word, with that which was so monstrous to behold
before, with ougly deformityes of humain tradicions. Let us search the
chronicles, let us discuss ye Chronographie of our times, let the Queen's
highness sit in judgment, and, conferring both times, give sentence
accordinglye. This offer if you refuse, then learn at my hands the present
estate of England, and here after seal up your ears at the dishonest
babbling of our enemies. A Princess we have of absolute power royal, in all
points incomparable. Whose court is destitute of no ornament, touching either
the honor of thestate sovereign, or the saulfegarde of the common wealth. The
Archbishops and Bishops in their own persons perform the office of
preaching, and lay their own hands unto the government of their Churches,
always reside^t in them. No variance is there among the nobility, no breach of
duty in subjects, peace and tranquillitye through out the whole Realm. In
these things perchance you have been misenfourmed. But your fre^d Cicero
puts you in mind, that every man speaks his pleasure, but nedeles it is
to credit every man. These our fell friends love well to blow out not that
they know to be true, but that they wish to be true, because our good
success and felicity is unto them a grievous eyesore. Therefore sir, cheer
your self, and set a part this sorrow so depely prynted in you breast for our
sake. Take heed you stryde not out of all patience, cast not your self down I
say. If all be well in Portugal, care not for England. But it is no meruail
that you take these pains, sith we are of alyaunce and kynred. Surely what
knot of kindred so ever is between our kingdom and yours we gladly embrace it,
and desire hartilye to be nearer cosins, knit even in an heavenly league. But
(I pray you sir) if we be so dear friends, as you say, and I believe you,
what toye of friendship is it, thus unto the very crown to heap us up with
accusatio^s. How dare ye say that through us men are divorced from that right
ancient and pure religion which was ratifyed by christ's bloudeshed and ever
sense has continued until these days, and led aside unto an other kind of
relygion both execrable and horrible. Do you think as you say? without doubt
you do not. For in those ancient and flourishing times their was no Papacy or
Popes holiness, no leaden graces, no purgatory martes, no worshippi^g of Images,
no gadding pilgrimages, no sacrifyces for the quick and the dead in Masses,
nor any such trumpery. These misshapes of religion what time they spronge, and
who begat them you cannot but know, but that you dissemble and speak to
please. Therefore notwithstanding the terrors that you thu^der in the Queen's
ears, with commemorations of Gods majesty and the latter judgment, your long
tale so inflammed with fierye words, has not thauthoritye that follows
truth and efficacye. For why? into a malicious heart enters no wisdom. As for
your malice how savage it is and hartbent, it is evident not only in every
leaf of your libell, but in one place beyond shame, whereas in pestilent
words you denounce sedicion and uproar, you cry to weapons, and blow up the
bloody trumpet to Civil war. You require of the Queens highness in posthast,
to tumble down the religion by common consent erected, and to make place for
yours. The way thereunto (you say) is easy and ready trodden, for that the
greater number enclineth unto you, yt she shall purchase everlasting renown,
and all the world will clap their hands for joy. This is your exhortation unto
the Queen, a wicked and witles exhortation. What? no remedy, but forth with must
we throw from us the heavenly doctrine of the gospel, wherein, saving one six
years te^pestuous rage, we have continued above xxx years, wherein the Queens
grace has led all her life, wherein god has given her a blisfull and peasible
reygne of five years, which was by consent of all estates publyshed, whereof
have ishued decrees and laws of inestimable policy? This inculpable state of
religion, ye true pattern of gods due honor, on every side so circumspectly
fensed and trenched by the Queen's majesty, shall one word even of one
Portugal riue in pieces? shall the epistle of Hieronimus Osorius break the
rank of it? were you ever in this hope your self, or they that craved your
helping hand? believe me you were unwise when you settled your self unto this
enterprise, and they were not well provided in wit yt first moved you to so
high mattiers. Write as many thousand inuectiues as you please, call to
counsel al our adversaries and ill willers, who^ (as it seems) you have learned
by heart. God will preserve our Queen out of their mouths, eue^ that God that
has before often times been her deliverer. God will strengthen her in the
verity of the gospel, even god that gives her hourly strength, and for the
auauncemente of the testamente and last will of his son our savior christ,
will endew her with honor that shall never perish. As for this your costly
guarded theater, with vau^ting words piled up as high as heaven, neither is it
so precious a pearl for a prince, or so well tuned a song as to move her to
turn away from the truth evangelical, revealed unto her and her kingedome,
and to set up new stages for your Popish bravery. Therefore you do like a
natural orator, in the latter wing to place a whyning conclusion, fetched from
the depth of your faculty, wherein for the love of all holiness, and all hallowed
things, you cry out and adjure our Queen to exterminate these new Apostles,
and to retire unto your mother church, wherein you painte and set out the
blessed beauye of virtues, with all fine and far fetched elegancy of speech,
and yet (the more pity) all is not worth one half penny. Forsooth yt you term
vpstert error, the Queen certeinelye knows it to be old furrowfaced
veritye, and for the same offers up in humble wise her orysons and prayers,
fullye minded not to forsake it until death, no not at the hour of death,
perfectlye knowing that she shall out of the holy gospel of our savior
christ, render straight account of her government. And you she deemeth but a
smatterer in gods word, if these things be strange unto you, or (if you
will not know them) a deep dissembler, which fault was wont to be far
from a Philosopher. Wherefore in my mind (good master Hierome) you may do much
better in these religious matters, to see what diuynes can do, and to take
up your place again among Philosophers and orators, whose misteryes you
have better tasted of. Your style runs in a good vein, and (to all
appearaunce) nature has done her part in you. Hereunto is added art, which
has set forward the dexteritee of nature. These good aids of your studies
employed upon your usual and acquaynted matters, wonderful may be your
commendation. I have seen your book entitled of nobilitye, fine with the
fynest. God grant you to reserve your self unto such monume^tes, which breed
none offense openly, but commodity and profit universally. Hereafter if you
fall unto bostinge, and mind too give fresh assault, take it as a
forewarninge, to come better fensed. What mortalitye so ever betyde me, you
shall find a number in England not alonelye in the churches and universities,
but also in the Queen's maiestyes Court, far surmountynge me in science and
knoweledge, with you in all things co^parable.

()

God be glorified in all things.
A fault escaped.
In C. leaf. 8. page 2. line. 9. for eloquentlye, read elegantly.

Imprinted at London by Wyllyam Seres dwelling at the west end of Paul's
Church, at the sign of the Hedgehogge.


