AN ORATION containing an Expostulation As Well with the Queens Highness
faithful Subjects for their want of due consideration of Gods blessings
enjoyed by means of her Majesty: As also with the unnatural english for
their disloyalty and unkindness toward the same their Soueraygne.

At the first pronounced upon the Queens Majesty's Birthday in the Guyldhall
of the Burrowe of New Windsore, by Edward Hake of Grayes Inn Gent. then Mayer
of the same Burrowe: And now newly imprinted this xvij. day of November, in the
xxx. year of the Queens Highness most happy Reign.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London for Edward Aggas.

To the right Noble and virtuous his singular good Lady, the Lady Anne
Countess of Warwick.
THE time being now grown long (right noble Countess) since J first
endeavored to show my self unto my honorable good Lord and your Ladyship in
some acceptable course of service, and finding always some one or other unkind
let thereunto: I have now at length, as one over wearyed with the fruitless
expectation of my hopeless mind (even to the vpbrayding as it were of mine ill
hap) desperately attempted to present your Honor with this slight and slender
book: not that I reckon it a sufficient supplye of the thing I want and
desired, but rather as an occasion to show how greatly grieved J remain that
my hap has not been all this while to do better, especially unto such and
so noble a (...) it self under the respect of my zeal and dutiful meaning:
protesting that it has not proceeded from me as the fruit of an idle brain,
but as the true effect of a most zealous mind and well affected heart. And so
hoping your Honor will conceive of it, J forbear the further lengthening of
this my rude Epistle.

From London this joyful xvij. day of November, beginning the xxx. year of
her Majesty's most happy Reign. Your Honorable La. in all humble service:
Edward Hake.

To the Reader.
AVT quam minima aut quam dulcissima. Either the fewest or the sweetest words
thou can use. It was the saying of Aesope to Solon wherewith he enfourmed
Solon how he should frame and order his speech to King Croesus. I assure thee
(gentle Reader) the consideration of this speech of Aesope somewhat for a while
withdrewe me from the printing of this my Oration, as knowing how much I had
therein swarued from the said two prescripts of Aesope, namely of shortness
and sweetness. But being again persuaded that inasmuch as the same my Oration
(not being made unto a Prince but of a Prince) had received allowance amongst
the hearers in speaking, it could not but receive some allowance also in
reading, I was contented to yield it to the press, and the rather to satisfy
therein the earnest solicitations of such my good friends, whom I knew to be
well affected both to the person and the cause. I know there is a people
amongst us, whom in no wise the matter of this my Oration will content, as whom
neither the admyrable blessings of God toward us, our Prince and Country can
move, nor the excelling mercies of our gracious Sovereign allure: but of these
I seek no allowance at all, but rather content my self to be seen herein an
utter enemy to their disloyal and undutiful dealings. And touching their
auouchment of such unnatural Treasons and Conspyracies as have been heretofore
intended against this our well prospering government and State, whereof this
little book discourses: If I should speak (as taking upon me to answer them
therein in few) I would say with the Athenian Cleon: If these men have had
cause to conspire or rebel against us as they have done, Thucid. lib. 3. cap.
6*
then must it be confessed that we have ruled unjustly. And again, if when
they have conspyred, they shall yet think that mercy belongs unto them: I
say with the same Cleon, that mercy should be used to them that do the like,
and not to them that have it not, but rather have brought themselves into
necessity to be our perpetual enemies. But for these, I leave them as I found
them, and to our selves I wish as much in thankfulness and obedience of life,
as we have received in benefits at the hand of the almighty.

An Oration. etc.
SUch is the state of our times (right Honorable and beloved) that whiles every
man ordreth himself after his particular occasions, and every man plotteth out
his own purposes to the pretense of his calling, God the high orderer and wise
disposer of all things, looks down from his holy seat, calls unto us and
expostulateth with us ye great cause of our ingratitude toward him, and (in
his wonderful works as it were) does thus say unto us: O ye men of the earth,
why are ye so earthly? Why see you not that even in these earthly descending
bodies there are implanted heavenly ascending minds, wherewith you might look
up to your maker and give glory to the highest? Why rather draw you down the
height of the Spirit to the baseness of the flesh? O ye unthankful, why, why
have you so abandoned the sense of your Souls and the feeling of your
Spirits, that therewith you may neither contemplate nor consider the wonders
that I work, the wonders I say, which I your Iehoua in whom you live and have
your being, have wrought and brought to pass as this day, in the midst of
your land and habitations?

Brethren and friends: This vii. day of September witnesses unto us that
there is a Heaven. This day tells us there is a God: This day, I mean the
Birthday of our Elizabeth (whom the highest has vpholden to see therein the
approaching day that changes the year of her most happy reign) this day I
say, has offered to assure our senses that from God not from man, from heaven,
not from earth, has been our defense.

The power of man has been against us: The strength of the earth has
attempted to invade us: Princes have conspyred, Nations have combyned, Subjects
have become Traitors, have rebelled, but God has protected. If Princes, if
forrayne Princes have fretted themselves against us, he the Iehoua has tamed
them. If they have devised to hurt us, he has bridled them. If their devises
have been secret, he has revealed them. And what more? If Princes, if
forrayne Princes have been wise, he has made us and our Prince wiser: If rich,
our riches have not bin small, but rather have abounded.

O good God, what heart can behold these things and wonder not? What eye can
look upon England and marvel not? But what English Subject can partake these
so rare blessings of our GOD, and still remain unthankful? By what heavy
judgment it is come to pass that men enjoying so great and so manifold
benefits, feel them not, or feeling them, are so grossly blind, that they
know not at whose hands they receive them: this surely, to me is so strange
and intrycate, that following the rule of reason, I conceive it not: Nay,
Reason is therein so reasonlesse, that Rule it yields none whereby these
things should be measured or the mystery thereof disclosed. If we look upon
the Paganes, we shall see how upon every particular benefit they took
occasion not only to fill their Temples with Sacrifices, and to adorn their
Princes with tytles, but also to promise, nay, in truth to perform all
possible obedience to their laws, and that in such sort, I mean with such
sincerity of heart and abundance of affection, as I protest I have bin moved
oftentimes to think that either there was no such people at all in the world
(but that they are set forth as Ideaes unto us, what by their pattern we
should be) Or if there were any such, that the people of this Age are so
degenerate from the virtues and imitation of that Age: nay rather, are so void
not only of all godliness and good graces, but of common sense and
understanding, as to commemorate the present blessings of our GOD, that by
means of her Majesty they ^nioye, they think it mere foolishness: to offer
up thanks for his benefits that thus they continually receive, they acompte
it superfluous: but to frame their lives to the dutyfull obedience of Gods or
man's good laws, they detest that as a thraldom and servitude unmeet and
importable. What should I stand longer to set forth unto you the
performance of these or the like of the premises in the worneoute ages, the
Stories thereof being so rife, as that no man almost of any quality can be
ignorant therein? What in explicable joy brake there forth throughout all the
Roman Empire upon the death of cruel Domitian and the succession of mild
Nerua? And in the succession; (from good to better) of Traiane that followed
him, how wonderful was the applause of all the people and the conformity of
all nations to the obedience of his government? As for Antoninus Pius the
successor of Adrian, it is almost incredible how the people, not of Rome only,
but of the whole Empire, with joy and ardent affection, continually, during al
his life, submytted themselves, as it were with a holy devotion and cherefull
alacritye, to obey in all things whatsoever that holy Emperor should
command them. I will not speak of these, nor of Alexander Seuerus the
renowned Emperor. That which may be said, is this. That as these Emperors
were (no doubt) for their times, the Lamps of the world: So the people and
Nations whom they governed, were so thankful, so joyful, so devout in
obeying them, so careful to please them, so heedefull not to do any thing
that might offend them: as truly it is hard to say whither the world were
then more happy in the renown of those just Emperors, or those Emperors
more renowned in the obedyence of that good people.

But I will let pass these examples of Paganes, and will turn myself to
that one only example in the time of Constantine the great, the first Christian
Emperor of the world, I mean the first that publicly established the
profession of Christianity in the world. The story by Eusebius is thus
recorded. After the fiery clouds of persecution raised by the tyrannies of
Maximianus, Seuerus, Maxentius, Lycinius, and the rest of the persecuting
Heathen Emperors were dispersed, and the horrible Seas of Paganishe Idolatryes
were every where dried up, the Church being then prepared by that holy Emperor
Constantine for service of the true God and of his son Jesus Christ: Then
(says the story) the wished and desired sightes were seen of us, Eusebius. lib.
10. ca. 3.
to weete, the celebrating of the dedications throughout the City and the
Consecrations of oratoryes lately builded, the meeting of Bishops, and the
cominge together of them, which being far severed a sonder aboade in foreyne
Countries, the love of Nation toward Nation, the knitting together of the
members of Christ combyned or united into one harmony, so that according to
the foreshewing of the Prophet, bone was joined to bone and ioynte to ioynte
etc. And after wards in the same story: All the fear of them by whom they
were aforetime oppressed, was taken away and wyped from of the face of the
earth. They celebrated solemn and royal feasts. All was replenished with
the brighte beams of joy and gladness, and they which aforetime full sadly
beheld each other, now they did it with gladsome countenance and cheereful
eyes: They honored before all things the supreme King; the God of Heaven.
Next to him, the godly Emperor with songs and dawnses throughoute Towns and
Countries. Moreover, all old Iniuryes were clean forgotten, neither was
there mention of any man's impiety at al, but all that every man stoade upon,
was the enioyeing of present prosperity and the expectation of goodness to come.

Which notable example as an Introduction to all Christian posterity being laid
before us, the point that I now mind to set forth unto you is made
manifest: Namely, how for benefits received, the good people of former ages
have always been joyful and thanckfull to God and their Princes, expressing
the one, to wete, their joy, by the solempnity of their assemblyes and drawing
together for the praysinge of God, and the other, by the obedyence of their
lives effectually yielded, as might more at large be handled if the time would
permit. If I should hear draw you to the consideration of the people of
Israel, Gods own chosen, as there would be no end in the view of Gods
mercyes toward them: so it were a long matter to deliver you the manner and
great varieties of their joys and thanksgiving for the same. The Stories of
their delyuerance out of Egipte, out of the red Sea, and out of the
captiuityes of sundry foreyne Nations, do set forth the one and the other
expressly and fully: But above all, the Psalms of the Royal Prophet David
are so habundant in this behalf, that neither old nor young can be ignorant
thereof.

I have hitherto but summarily considered how God the Author and disposer of
all things, for his benefits bestowed, requires thankefulnes at the hands
of the receivers, and is grieved and highly offended when he sees his graces
contemned and his bowntie not regarded. It has also in brief been touched
what thanckfulnes has proceeded even from the heathen, not for spyrituall but
for earthly benefits, and what obedience of life has ensewed thereupon. And
amongste Christians though not of the first age, yet of the first open
Countenance and appearing of the Churches enlarging her bounds and settling
her self in quiet state, what Joy, what thanksgiving, what reformation of
life in all sorts has followed the receiving of the mystery of our faith and
the first planting of the open profession with peaceable possession of the
same?

Now then, if it may be set down and manyfested to our understandings,
that the blessings which our English Nation, which England, I say, has
received at the hands of our God by the ministry of our sovereign his
servant, have not bine less then any, but equivalent with the most and the
greatest here before: Nay, if we Englishmen in the view thereof shall be able to
say unto our selves, that not with any Nation under the Cope of heaven at this
day, God has so dealt as with us, good Lord, what should follow hereupon but
that our very souls should break forth with thanksgiving and our hearts be
for ever resolved to continewe and resounde his praises to the end of our
lives, yea if we could (as we hope we shall) without ending.

But what shall I begin with Where there has kin no stinte nor measure of
receiving, how can there be any entrance or choice of beginning? If to set
forth the joy, I should first begin with the sorrow that overwhelmed the
face of this Land: If to set forth the blessing I should begin (as I may
say) with the curse that before did threaten us. Or if to descipher the good
things that this our Elizabeth our souueraigne brought with her to the Crown
of England, I should first deliver unto you what Seas of miseries possessed and
well near ouerflowed this little but most noble Island: As both these I must
needs say, in opposition were not unneedful to be spoken of: so yet least
the dilating of the one might be cause of the abridging of the other, I will
for the help of a just proportion in the one of these, namely, in the Churches
persecution, pray in aid of the most famous Historiographer of our time, who
briefly handling the miseries that imediatly preceded the reign of our
souueraigne, after this sort compendiously reports them: Now (says he)
after these so great afflictions falling upon this Realm from the first
beginning of Queen Maryes reign, wherein so many men, women and Children
were burned, so many imprisoned and in prison starued, diverse exiled, some
spoiled of goods and possessions, a great number driven from house and home,
so many weeping eyes, so many sobbing hearts, so many Children made
fatherless, so many fathers bereft of their wives and Children, so many vexed
in Conseyence, and diu^rs against Conscience constrained to recante, and in
conclusion, never a good man almost but suffered something during the time of
this bloody persecution: After all this (says the Historien) there was rest
to the persecuted members of Christ.

Thus you see one way, what an heap and general deluge of woeful miseries
had pitifully overtaken, nay rather overwhelmed a chief portion of this Realm
of England, I mean the Church of England: Religion defaced, Godlynes hated,
Truth oppressed, True professors persecuted, Persecution blody: To be short,
none spared, all pursued even to the death, in whom there was any Conscience
of the Faith, or regard of holy profession.

And as it fared with the Church of England, so alas it fared with the common
wealth of England. The land possessed of strangers, those strangers most
turbulent, most proud, most insolent, most aspyring, and (as England and the
bordering peoples about us at this day, have cause to say, nay rather by
their lamentable experience, to complain) strangers most cruel, most
blodie, most insufferable: as by whom, the sweet peace of this Realm was so
interrupted, so mangled, so defaced, that besides the daily and continual
threatened tumultes at home, our wealth of England, the men of England, the
munition and forces of England were wholly employed, nay constrained to wait
upon the wars, I say upon the unnecessary wars of these so dangerous
strangers, yea, to be wasted and consumed even about the quarelles and
ambytions of these so pernytious guests: so that truly, it was then, and is
yet to be affirmed that England which at that time had no cause of wars or
breach of league with other Nations, was enforced or rather violently haled to
bear arms against them, even against France (if I may speak it) for the
ambytious service of Spain.

And whiles these things were thus sorted, whiles men, money, munition and
Armor were in this wise expended, what was the sequel thereof I pray you? what
was the prosperity and success of the same? Caleys was lost, Caleys the Kaye
of England: Caleys, the very Door and passage into France: Caleys, the honor
of this Realm and the ouerlooker of the french Nation, with the wealth and
habundance of England, which 216. years together had bine in the quiet
possession of England: I say, Caleys, with all this, altogether, all at one
instant: at the least with in the compass of iiij days, was miserably lost
and utterly forgone.

To conclude; Caleys being lost, what ensewed thereupon? After the loss of
Caleys, the loss of all security and freedom, the loss of all prosperity
and welfare came russhing upon this little Island, even as it had bine an armed
man upon him that is naked and despoyled of comfort. Such Impositions, such
loanes, such taxes, new Inventions and devises to draw away the remaynder of
the particular wealth of England (the common Treasury thereof being wholly
exhausted and consumed) to the maintenance of the unprosperous wars of King
Philippe, as surely, if you will but look into the Chronicles of that time,
you shall see and say that if God of his myraculous and extraordinary power
and great mercy had not shortened those days, there had wanted very little of
utter desolation to this our Country, this, I say, our ancient and
flourishing Country of England then, even then at the instant to fall into such
miserable servitude and bondage as all those Countries are oppressed with all,
that in times past have bine famous Kingdoms and other flourishing estates and
are now languishing and spoiled Provinces subdued to the thraldom of the
Spaniards.

But of all that ever happened, or which in those days was devised, suffered,
or neglected against the safety of this Realm, there was never mischief so
desperate, or Treason so vile, or villainy so great or so deep, as was the
platte, purpose and intention to make away and destroy the sacred person of
our Elizabeth, now our happy souueraigne, who then and in those days, in that
most miserable and perilous time, was reckened and accounted (as spes alit
miseros) the only creatur of the earth, by whom and through whom God had
reserved us any hope of restoration, or comfort of recouerye to that
desolation then approaching.

This then shall be sufficient for the former part of my present purpose,
namely, to have touched unto you after a plain and brief manner, what
miseries, what troubles and pitiful calamities occupied the whole state of
this Realm, both Church and Common wealth, at such time as our most gracious
sovereign her Maistie that now is, took upon her the possession of the
Crown thereof: at such time I say, as God in his great mercy, looked upon us
as he did upon the Israelites in Egipte and their Captiuities sending unto us
in high time, this his holy handmayden, as it were another Moses, (saved from
the same waters of affliction that we were plunged in) to be our helper, and
advanced her (and that by just title) to the Scepter and Dyadem of this (then a
most woeful) Realm, whose princely person before had tasted of so great
danger, that the very walls do yet record her doleful posie, sicut ouis
etc. The God of heaven whose only hand was then and yet is her helper and ours
be for ever and ever extolled and the name of his mercy be never forgotten
amongste us.

But now, when I should rest my self in the performance of this portion,
namely, in the delyueraunce from thraldom, and the proclaiming of peace to the
whole land: outward, in the repose of the Land, inward, in the freedom of
Conscience: whereas from the woe, I should pass on to the welfare, and from
the mournful face of calamity I should descend or rather ascend to the
joyful apparaunce of our blessed felicitye: miserably, Nay deuilishly, nay
dampnably am I interrupted with the oppositions of Traitors, the
ouerthwartinges of Rebels, the enchaunting of Witches, the charmings of
Sorcerers, the presagings and foretellings of Sooth sayers, the seducings of
Jesuits and Seminaries, the conspyrings of domestical Hypocrites and
Traitors, the bandings of popish foreyne Princes and the cursings of the Pope
himself that Antychrist most accursed. What should I say? Sweet peace had no
sooner discovered the bountye of her glorious face, and the blossoms of godly
tranquillity were no sooner seen sprouting forth to the gladding of the hearts of
true Christians, but presently and anon these Caterpillars were engendered,
presently and anon these Cockaatrices were hatched, presently and anon these
Tyrants were provoked, yea presently and anon this Antichriste of Rome the
father of all mischief and son of Perdition was furiously enraged: so that
now I say, when as by the order of my division, I should speak unto you of
Joy and of nothing else but joy, these enemies of our joy and these enuiers
of our happiness (as much as in them lies) have so ministered matter to the
clogging up of my passage, that thereby they have interrupted my proceeding,
and not a little hindered my discourse. But thancks be to God, for he again of
his abundant mercies and endless favor has so leuelled my way by the ruin
of their inventions, and so smoothed my passage by the total confusion of their
Stratagemmicall platts as on I may go, and on I will go (by the goodness of
God and your attention) to deliver unto you some taste of the blessed exchange
that by and through our Elizabeth has bin wrought and brought to pass within
this land since her Majesty's government.

And to begin withal: what greater object of our joy can I take unto me, then
that which the common enemy has intended to be the matter and only object
of our confusion? namely and especially, the divine, but yet express and
visible deliverances of our sovereign from time to time since her coming to
the Crown as before, from all the devices, all the Treasons and all and every
the plats, practizes and attempts whatsoever, murtherously, nay, traitorously
intended against her royal person: so as yet in sauety she lives, and as
yet, (to the eternal praises of our omnypotent God) she sits a Queen, a
prepotent Queen, mighty and preuayling, I say, preuayling against all and
singular the attempts and attemptates that either have bine or are at this
present, within the Realm or without, at home or abroad. And that long may
she so sit the Lord of his glorious mercy grant we beseech him.

To reckon up unto you the particulers of the manifold discovered attempts
against her majesty with the particular overthrows of the same since her
first coming to the Crown, time as now will not suffer me. What open
Rebellions there have bine begone, who were the ringleaders thereof, what were
their pretenses, what their power, how far they proceeded, and in what sort
they were stopped (and that for the most part) without effusion of blood,
and finally how and in what manner the chief attemptaes thereof have bine
surprised, namely, and notably, in the Rebellion of the North, where the one of
the two Leaders was put (as I may say) into her Majesty's hands to receive
the due reward of his Treason, and the other when as he thought by his escape
out of the Realm, to have escaped also the punishment of his most vile and
traiterous offense, was by the just hand of God taken hold of, and even in
the place of his hoped security, (as I have heard) brought to penury and want.
Again, to deliver unto you how often and often, and even now of late the
murdering of her Majesty's person, (my heart trembles and abhors to
express the term) and the deuesting of her from her royal possession, has
not only been contrived, but even in the instant also dessigned to have been
performed: By whom and in what sort, when and in what place, and thereuppon
also the most miraculous discoueries thereof, sometimes by the parties
themselves, sometimes by the discovery of others, but always and from time to
time by the extraordinary and very express hand of God: These things I say,
to stand upon them in discourse, and to reckon up unto you the particulers
thereof so far forth as to us may be known considering the time is well spent
and the general knowledge thereof is rife and common to all: I should but
lengthen the time therein beyond compass, and over largely presume of your
borrowed patience. I will now therefore briefly proceed to other benefits.

By the blessing of this so blessed and miraculous preservation of her
Majesty's royal person, how great and inestimable the blessings are, which
we have received and do enjoy by the same, would now in a word be
considered, First therefore and above all, we have and enjoy by her Majesty, the
most glorious of all glorious Jewels, the true and sincere word of God, with
the free, open, and universal preaching and professing thereof: By the which,
the errors of man's life are disclosed, the affections of mankind relieved, the
knowledge of sin procured, the forgiveness of sin proclaimed, and against all
sin and error whatsoever, the assurance of faith ingendered and confirmed, as
by the which and through the which, come death, come life, come what will or can
come in the world, the pledge and earnest of our salvation in Christ Ihesus is
surely settled and sealed up in our souls even until the day of Jesus Christ
and of our redemption. And let all the Justiciaries of works in the earth
magnify to the uttermost of their power and skill, the virtue of whatsoever
they can or do blasphemously imagine to be propitiatory for sin: I appeal
unto the Consciences of all that have tasted in any measure of the good word of
God and how sweet the lord is, whether one dram of true faith in Christ his
death and bloodsheading, rightly grounded upon the promise of his word (this
word which I speak of) be or have not bin found unto them more available to
the pacifying of their afflicted souls and consciences, then any thing in
Heaven or earth that could be offered unto them: In which behalf I will
require no further witness then the adversaries themselves, who have bin often
known in the instant of their death, to have left all and to have flyne only
to the Lord Jesus, esteeming all other propitiations to be helpelesse and
vain. And thus much for the blessing of the word of God, which by her
Majesty's means and propugnation we enjoy.

The next blessing (as the effect of Faith and of Gods word) that falls
out in order to be spoken to, is worldly and external peace. From which well
used, springs plenty. And where the abuse of these has wrought among us,
namely in disordered persons, Pride and dissolution, these things have
notwithstanding by a great blessing of godly government bin so moderated with
such mixture of those four chief and cardinal virtues, Prudence, Fortitude,
Justice and Clemency, besides all other Heroical virtues shining in her
Majesty, and upholding unto us the former spiritual and temporal blessings,
that of them all severally both I should and would have spoken: but how I am
overtaken with the short proportion of time, you see and I perceive it. And
therefore for this instant (drawing to a conclusion,) I will bend my speech
(and that but in few) to the domestical enemies of our peace, I mean the
enemies of her Majesty (by whom God has powered all those blessings upon us)
the most peaceful mild and gentle Sovereign that ever reigned in this land.

Against which enemies me, thinks I see how every of you that love Gods truth
and her Majesty's safety, do with me even rowse your selves, and in the just
indignation of your minds vpbraid and challenge them with this Expostulation: O
you unkind of all unkind Subjects that ever were, (but why should you be
called Subjects, who as one truly says of you, suppose your selves not to
live under her Majesty as Subjects, but to be holden as Captives, and so you
yield her a servile and involuntary reverence) you english Aliens therefore I
term you, you Italienated English, Tell me I pray you, what has your
english Sovereign, what has our gracious Elizabeth so much offended you,
except your selves be the cause of your offense? Has she dispossessed you of
your goods? Has she disinherited you of your lands? Has she taken from you
your dwellinges? Have you sowed and she reaped? Have you planted and she
gathered the fruit? Does she deny you the protection of her writtes, or do
you not enjoy the benefit of her laws? Surely surely, her hands, yea I may
say her heart (most gracious of all Princes living) are clean and innocent of
all these things in the presence of the Lord and of his people. You sow and
reap the croppe, you plant and eat the fruit: You build and inhabit the
houses: you purchase and enjoy the lands. What is it, what is it amongst the
faithfullest Subjects of the Realm that you participate not with equal
benefit, or do not enjoy with the utmost freedom of a Subject, unless in
wilful manner and in the malice of your hearts you will deprive your selves of
the same.

O good god, and will you yet conspire against the life and health of so benign
and merciful a Sovereign? Will you take from her a Crown, will you deueste
from her a dyadem, who takes not from you any the least Jot or portion of your
possessions? O hearts, not of men but of Tygres: O hands, not of true Subjects
to defend, but of rank Traitors to destroy: O brood of vipers, O inhumane,
o pestylent, o viperous generation. Is not even the Sex that you so violently
conspire against, atender Sex? Is not the person whom you would so
Traiterouslie murder, unto this your Country and ours, a Princely Parent? Is
not this Parent a Queen? And is not this Queen your Queen and lawful
Sovereign? Has not this your Sovereign and ours even to this day, bin
roially and really, justly and fully possessed in this her Kingdom? Has not
her highness prosperously reigned? Has not all the Realm (except your selves
only and such as you are) faithfully acknowledged and dutifullie obaied her?
And, has not god himself confirmed and established, yea and from time to time
mightily blessed her? I might say more: Has not this your Sovereign and
ours the most rare ornaments, and Princely excellencies that ever had King or
Queen within this Realm? And what then will you answer me? Let me reason
with you a little as heretofore you have bin reasoned with: Tell me (I pray
you) to conspire against this our most gracious sovereign, is it as if you
conspired against an usurper, a Nero, a Commodus, a despoiler of his people
and Country? No no: no such matter, but a Conspiracy against a most lawful and
righteous Prince, against our Queen Elizabeth, a Prince (considering the
infirmities of her Sex) so far above all praises, as England had never a
more happy governor among all that have bine Princes of this land, nor whole
Christendom matcheth her at this day.

And to auouche these things in particular: look upon this Lady, behold
this your own dear Sovereign (whom you would destroy) withdraw your
sight I instantly entreat you, for a little season, from beholding that
glorious Hierarchy of Rome and from fixing your eyes to deeply upon the
partialities of foreyne Princes. See if you find not in this your Princely
Sovereign, a life both known and seen to be void of all enormious abuses?
See if there be not in this her gracious Majesty, a mirror of excelling virtues
and (as it were) a lodge of heavenly graces, Constant firmnes, innocent hands
from corruption, high equity, clement and merciful behavior, faithfulness of
mind, zeal and tender heart, Princely Magnanimity, and in brief, a nature
enritched with all admirable ornaments of divine and heavenly blessings?

And touching the thing you would most of al bear the world in hand with, to
the deceauing of your own souls, namely, with the note of severe execution in
her Majesty (I would to God your terms were no worse): Take an account of
the multitudes that have offended against her royal person: See if of an
hundred, ten have bin taken hold off: If often that have been brought to
trial, three have received the reward of their offense? And albeit upon
ten or more at any one time upon high and dangerous respects, Execution
has bin done, Yet way therwithall, how many participants have escaped, how
few familiers have been sifted, and how great and heinous purposes have
been left without prosecution, and in a manner wholly past over. The good
Emperor Nerua, as pitiful as he was, yet when he felt himself but touched,
and that with the only contempt of his Subjects, he took pen in hand and
wrote this reuengefull Poesy to Traiane that should succeed him; Phoebe,
tuis telis, lachrimas vlciscere nostras.

And the holy Emperor Constantine, as mild as he was, and as zealous in
Christian profession, yet when he saw the tirannous behavior of Licinnius
likewise a crowned Emperor, with him, I say of Licinnius his copartner in the
Empire and his brother in law, as having married his Sister Constantia: First
upon the taking of him at Chrisopolis a City of Bithynia, he deposed him
from the Crown enioyning him to lead a private life in Thessalonica: And
afterward when as he saw the same Licinnius to endeavor by fighting to
revenge his former foil, he commanded that he should be put to death, and so
he was with the good conformity of all his true hearted Subjects and people.

But touching our Elizabeth: the whole Realm of England sees, Nay, god
himself witnesses that for the very treasons that have bin most traitorously
intended against her roial person, Crown and life, her highness has bin more
seen to sorrow the ruin of the offenders, yea even of those Capital
offenders, for whose cause, and with whose consent the greatest treasons that
have bin, have bin complotted, then to fear or be dismaide at the daily and
howrely hazardes of her own life.

The case then standing thus between our Prince and you (you cruel and
unkind English) that as on the one part, your Treasons have ouermatched the
Treasons of all Treasonfull Subjects that ever were: so, on the other part,
her highness compassion has equalled, if not excelled the compassion of all
Princes, Chrstian or Heathen: What can there be possibly alleged on your
behalf, that (so much as in color) may serve to shrowde the deapth of your
disloyalty?

If you will now say the freedom of your consciences (whereby I know you
mean the free use of your popish Religion) is the matter you seek after, and
being thereof restrained, you are thereuppon thus drawn to the extremity of
these so outrageous and violent attemptes: Good Lord, and can it be possible
that any profession in the world, taking unto it the name and title of
religion, should enable the professors thereof to arm themselves against their
sovereign, and that, for not permitting unto them the free use of a contrary
Religion? Tell me (you religious, or rather Irreligious professors) was there
ever any profession of Christianity under the Heathen and persecuting
Emperors, which by any other means sought to prevail in their Religion,
then by prayers and tears? Was there ever any resistance in the primitive
Church other then by preaching or open professing of the Truth, and thervppon,
by yielding up the body to persecution? True it is that Heretics (and none
but Heretics) have sought to prevail by Stratagems and devises.

But you will say perhaps (for what is it you will not say to the sclaunder
of this blessed government?) that her Majesty's laws made for the ponishing of
Recusants, are so sharp and over sharp for the tender case of a Religious and
resolved Conscience, that hereupon for your contentment, you are Religiously
and resoluedly drawn to the participation of high and most desperate
Treasons. Well, leaving to call you herein to the consideration of these her
Majesty's laws (which you so term to be sharp and over sharp) by comparing
them with your own burning and bloody laws, by which your laws, not the
purse but the person, not ponishing but destroying, not of old but of old
and young, not of men or women, but of men women and Children, yea of Infants
newly borne, nay (I might say) scarsely borne, not for preaching or open
professing, but for believing only, have bine so heavily known and felt
within this land: leaving I say, to deal with you in the behalf of her
Majesty's most godly and just laws after any such sort, I only ask of you
a question or two and so I will leave you.

Taking view of her Majesty's dispensation of Justice from the begnining of her
reign hitherto, what find you therein (allowing unto her highness her
sovereign power to establish Religion within the land) what find you I say
therein, that any Subject of any Sect or profession in the world may not
tolerate and endure without either loss or hazard of life or of living? Is
the difference of opinion in matters of Religion, or the private mistakinges in
controversies of Religion, in any, of what sort or quality so ever, (not
participating matter of treason or of flat recusancie) any cause to him or them
to fear either loss of life, or impeachement of Honor or credit, be it
either in office or in dignity, or in whatsoever else within this Realm that
may be said to be of profit or countenance unto the same? I suppose no: Nay,
you your selves must needs answer me no.

Go to then (you religious Catholics, or rather you Catholic
Conspiratours,) what is it in this our government that makes you so wayward, so
treasonfull, so discontented? Would you have her Majesty and the state
permit and allow unto you Churches within this Realm for the free exercise
of your Popish Religion, and so maintain two religions in opposition within
the Land? It is a Proverb of great antiquity, Multitudo Imperatorum, Cariam
perdidit. And I would ask you this question: admitting you had so far
prevailed in the graceless prosecution of some dangerous and abortiue Title,
that you had already brought to pass to advance within this Realm, a
banefull companion with her Majesty in her Kingdom (which the Lord for ever
forbid) say the truth herein, would you think it safe that these two thus
consorted, should continewe and remain together in this kind of
partnershippe? Clearly, you would not, naie, you could not. And feeling the
mislike thereof, is it not apparent to the world, which of these too you would
soonest and speediliest remove? Quisquis amat Ranam, Ranam put at esse Dianam.
And as for love and Lordshippe (you know) they will have no fellowship:
Bassianus the bloody Tyrant may not long endure good Geta the gentle Caesar,
no, though Bassianus might enioie more then half the Empire for his share.

And stand these things thus (you Catholics) in the consideration of earthly
Kingdoms, and are you able to conceive that in this kind of government, your
state would become unsafe by the rule of two Princes atonce, the one altogether
different from the other in conditions? And alas, are you so grosely blind
that you cannot consider the like respects to be in the Empire and Kingdom of
Chrsst? Who is it that says that Light and darcknes cannot dwell together?
And whose saying is it that there is but one God, one father etc?

To conclude then: As the abomination and detestation hereof would be high
and heinous in the eyes of the Lord, so no doubt, the events that would
ensewe thereupon, namely, by displeasing of so high a Majesty, could be no
less in effect, then the total confusion both of Prince and of people. And
for a mean sequel of permitting the use of too contrary religions, take the
Massacres of France, look into them, way them, and so conclude with your
selves that from the like causes, the like effects would speedily fall out:
Nulla namque fides affectus eorum, quorum est diuersa fides. I hasten to an
end with you (you Catholics) what is there now then I pray you, that may
further be thought of, or devised for the pacification of your malcontented
stomachs? Would you wish that her Majesty (inasmuche as now perhaps, you
are ashamed to require of her in flat terms, to abandon her own profession
for thr advancement of yours, and forasmuch also as you are or may be
stopped to say there is sauetie in permitting two contrary Religions within
this her land: would you now wish I say, that her highness contenting herself
with her own particular choice in Religion, and that, for her own gracious
person only, should establish a contrary Religion wholly and all-only amongst
her Subjects? Most deuilish would that be to be wisshed, but most graceless to
be thought that ever her Majesty would be so unnaturally inclined toward her
so dear and loving people. Has her most gracious Majesty so many years in
the highest care of her Subjects sauety (and that, chiefly in the regard of
their Souls health) exposed herself to perilles beyond the compass and
proportion of man's account, and has she for the general mainteyning of the
Gospel of Christ amongst al her whole people throughout her dominions, from
year to year, nay, almost from month to month, endured the succession of so
many, so horrible, so determined, and so imminent attempts of Treason against
her royal person, her Crown, her life: and would she now (think you) be so
satisfied with the love of her Subjects, or rather with loving her Subjects
(whom her highness seeith most insatiable in the love of her and of her life
and reign) that now loving, or rather seeming to love her self only, she
should so highly neglect (in this principal degree of love and care) the
sauety of the Souls of her so loving and true hearted people? The lord forbid
there should be any so wicked as in this sort to think of her Majesty.

But I will abruptly turn my self from you (you irreligious of the land) for
you have turned your selves from the Lord, and have lifted up your Horns
against his anointed your Prince and Sovereign. Not I therefore, but the
Lord shall further expostulate with you the cause of your Ingratitude: Of
which sort of unnatural english, I hope there is none here present, and yet
this spech to them as present, is not unnecessary that if any light in company
of any such, they may the better arm them selves in thus challenging and
reproving them. And now to you my loving brethren, who rejoice to see ye days,
even this present day of her Majesty's prosperity and Peace: The chief
exhortation I have to commend unto you, is the same of the Apostle. Rejoice in
the Lord, and again I say rejoice: Let your softnes be known unto all men.
The Lord is even at hand, be careful for nothing, but in all prayers and
supplications, let your petitions be manifest unto god with giving of thanks.
The time is spent and it is more then time I had ended. And yet if I durst
farther presume of your Honorable and worshipful patience, I would speak
something more that should not altogether be unprofitable for your hearing: and
since your cou^tenances do promise me attention, I will go to it as briefly as I
can. For as much as it stands clear unto the view of the whole world that
this long continued peace of ours with all the other blessings whatsoever
wherewith our English state and government has for so many years now passed,
bin established and (as I might say) amply enriched, has had none other
existencie but in the great power and hand of our God, openly manifesting it
self in the Ministry of her Majesty and of her prudent and most faithful
Counsailers: How great an indignity therefore would it be unto us the Subjects
of this Land, if that whereas her Majesty with her most honorable privy
Counsel, even from the beginning of her reign to this day, has governed us
by none other rule then by the rule of Gods most holy word, nor by any other
law then by the law of this land, nor by any other order or manner of
administration then as may best serve to sustain and bear up the common with
the particular and the particular with the common, in a mutual regard and
reciprocation the one to the other: We again for our parts, should be so
far from a dutiful acknowledgment hereof, as that in stead of our readiness
and zeal toward her Majesty and those her most honorable Counsaylours, we
should yield them murmuring and repining, and in stead of our thanckfulnes we
should yield them hard speaking, misconceiuing, and (which worse is) bitter
detraction. O my brethren, how hard a case would this be?

And least any man being misled either by the error of his own judgment or by
the secret insinuation of the malicious malecontented, in these troblesome
times (and yet hitherto, thanks be to God, more troublesome to our ears then
to our eyes) when as they see that by the deep foresight of our grave and
godly governors, actions are otherwhiles to be undertaken (whether it be for
repelling and resisting of known attempts, or for the holding far of, or
keeping aloof from us the troubles abroad which otherwise would approach
us,) and that for the performance hereof, some charge more then ordinary is
betwixt while to be raised: They either little considering or of purpose not
acknowledging, how (in a manner) miraculous a thing it is that while the whole
world (as I might say) even the kingdoms, and Countries round about us (to
us a world) stand at this day garboiled and oppressed with troubles and
sturres: we, even we alone here in this our England (as it were in a little
Goshen) neither feeling dint of sword, nor hearing sound of droomme, nor
fearing either slaughter or depilation of the oppressor, sit us still every
man in his own home, having freedom at the full to praise God in his
Sanctuary, and safety at the full to follow our affairs in the common wealth:
I say, least any ignorant or seduced Subject, not so sufficiently pondering
these blessings as he ought to do (and as I would to God every one of us did)
should in the unjust coffeehouse of his mind, either murmr and repine, or
otherwise speak evil of such as be in authority, for some charge that may
happen unto him for the continuance hereof: I would have such a one to be
taught, that as he is unable (with all the Substance he has) to procure peace
unto himself, if war should come upon him: So to prevent war is not ye wroke
of a Subject, it is the only work of a Soueraign and that, by the alone
deliberation of a prudent and Honorable Counsel, (which may often fall out
to be with the very purchase of peace) wherein as a Subject stands no
further interested but to obey, and to be ready (if need be) with body and
goods: So how much greater I pray you, shall his safety be in obeying, then if
he should repiningly resist (if so to do were in his power) or grudgingly
hinder by the withholding of some usual contribution, the good that might be
devised unto him? Again, how foolish a thing is it for a Subject to think
that when as the very being of a Prince, does consist in the having of
Subjects, and the having of Subjects weak and depressed, is in effect not to
have Subjects: It would be safe for a natural Prince by unnecessary
impositions laid upon his natural Subjects, so to weaken and impouerish them,
as howsoever happily they might retain the hearts of true Subjects, they should
yet in the power and hability of a Subject, be unfit for the service either of
Prince or of Country? And whereas it may fall out otherwhiles, that for the
procuring of Peace, war must be undertaken, and war cannot be undertaken
(with any hope of success) without large provisions of money, how injurious
would that Subject be unto himself, if whiles he would seem to be a lover
of Peace and a hater of war, he should by the fast holding of that he has,
from the maintenance of a necessary war, bring war thereby unto his door
and spoil unto his cofers?

And because herein the name and title of Peace (being indeed a precious
thing) is used oftentimes by many to the hinderance of necessary war, more
for the avoiding of charges that war brings with it, then upon any just or
reasonable respect: Therefore it is meet this lesson be learned: That we ought
not to think those charges burdenous unto us that we spend and employ for our
own safety, but rather those burdenous, which we are sure to abide if we shall
neglect this, and omit to devise to keep our Country in peace by assigning of
portions out of our substance in time, for the defense of the whole.

But admitting again, that in this point we were faultlesse, what were this
yet to the purpose, if together with our money, we should not also yield our
good and honorable speeches of those good and honorable personages, who either
abroad or at home, have any way adventured themselves for our safety?

It is the saying of Pericles the Athenian Ruler upon like respect: If when
that happens hardly (says he) which you looked not for, you will then speak
evil of your Rulers, Thucid. lib. 2. cap 9.
it is a great unright that you do them, unless when any prosperity
happens which you would not have thought of, you do likewise attribute the
same unto them. Whereas indeed and in truth, both Prosperity and adversity are
at the only disposition of the highest and he sends the one and the other as
best pleases his divine Majesty to dispose it. And this (Right Honorable and
beloved) is that part of my speech wherewith I have presumed (after your great
wearines) to detain you.

Now last of all, to you my brethren and neighbors the Inhabitants of this
Town of Windesor: If it be an universal benefit far passing other
temporal b^nefites, even to all the people of her highness dominions, that her
Majesty in the midst of these evil days, sits prosperously and peceably
in the seat of her royal Kingdom, preserving the same from all annoyance, to
the no less admiration then high commendation thereof in all foreyne
Countries: Again, if not only the participation of so high a benefit in
common with others, but also to ourselves ward, an assured hope to stand free
from her Majesty's displeasure, and in lieu thereof, a settled perswation of her
Princely favor toward us be now seen amongst us by means of her gracious
presense: O how much have we to rejoice, and in the Lord to boast, we I say,
the Inhabitants of this Burrowe, the rather, for that, whiles many thousands of
her Majesty's dear Subjects can only say and speak by the report of others,
of the prosperous health of their most natural and loving Prince, we can say
and see the same to our unspeakable comfort? Whiles others do hear her
Majesty (I must say most lovingly) speaking unto them by her laws only, we
have not only the fruition of her Laws, but also her most amyable and royal
person at this time, as at sundry other times, graciously speaking unto us.

And therefore my good Brethren and my dear neighbors, let us all be thankful
to God for this benefit, pray for the continuance thereof: And in our prayers
forget not, forget not least we prove unkind, the good estate of that Noble
Lord the Earl of Leicester now in her Majesty's service in the Low
Countries. To the protection of the highest with prayers and hearty well wishing
I comme^d his good Lordship. And of great duty, to the same protection I
commend the good estate of the right Honorable the Lords and others of her
Majesty's privy Counsel: By name and particular duty, the right honorable
the Earl of Warwick, with the Noble and right virtuous Lady the Countess his
wife: And especially, for this present Birth day of her Majesty, which is now
the occasion of our assembly and joy, let us with the rest that are hear
present, crave and importunatly entreat at the hands of our God, that we may
often, from year to year, even for many years, renew and celebrate the
Commemoration thereof. That in our celebration there may be joy: in our joy
thanksgiving, and that from our joy and from our thanksgiving, there may
follow the establishment and increase of Gods truth, obedience of life and
reformation of manners: Finally, that now, and then, even so long as we shall
live, there may be heard sownding in our streates by old and young, by men
women and Children, God save our Queen Elizabeth, God save Elizabeth our
Queen. Amen. Amen.

A short speech of the same Mayor unto her Majesty when he received her
Highness at Windesore and presented her with the Mace. the 10. day of August.
1586.
WIth that sincere and faithful obedience (most renowned Queen) not which law
has commanded, but which love has procured, we your poor Townsmen,
inhabiting this your ancient Burrow of Windsor, do here present ou^selues
before your highness, offering up unto the same, not only this small piece of
government which we sustain and exercise under your Majesty, but ourselves
also and all that we have, freely, not coarctedly, joyfully, not grudgingly,
to be for ever at your gracious disposing: wishing and from our hearts praieng
the King of Kings, that your Majesty may long live a Queen to enjoy the
same, and that we your Subjects may never live a people to deny the same.

Which being said, the said Mayor presented her highness with a petition in
writing in the behalf of the said Town of new Windesor. And at her departure
from Windsor (which was xi. weeks after) her Highness sent to him her gracious
thanks not only for this, but also for his other speech upon her Birthday.


