THE Enemy of Security OR

A daily exercise of godly meditations, drawn out of the pure fountains of
the holy Scriptures, and published for the profit of al persons of any state
or calling, in the German and Latin tongues, by the right reverend Master
John Auenar, public Professor of the Hebrew tongue, in the famous University
of VViteberge*

In English by Thomas Rogers Master of Arts and student in Divinity.

Newly corrected and augmented.

Mark. 13, 33. Watch and Pray. I say unto al watch. Pray continually.
Mark. 13, 37. 1. These. 5, 17. 1. These. 5, 18. In all things give thanks. Seen
and allowed according to the Queens, Majesty's Injunctions.

1579.

To the Reader.
BEsides what has bin added to this Book, which is apparent, you shall find
two faults especialie amended by this impression. One is the confusion of
number. For in a prayer sometime the person of one, sometime of many praieng
was used: which thing, in my judgment, caused some iar. For the avoiding
whereof I have thought it best to amend that fault, and, I trust with the good
liking both of the Author, and as many as shall read them, henceforth to use
altogether the plural number in those prayers which are for every day of the
week: albeit the rest are in the singular number, forasmuch as they are
prayers for some special persons.

The other is the difficulty properly to apply diverse of those textes of
scripture placed in the margins. For many times the places of Scripture were
falselie quoted. But now, how soever the Compositor have set them, if you mark
the letters of the Alphabet a, b, c, d, etc. used both in every prayer, and
margin, they will rightly direct thee to the textes.

Other things besides these are amended, which are needeles to be uttered in
this place.

Some perhaps will mislike the applieng of prayers unto certain days: but for
that a better some do both like well enough thereof, and laud God for this
daily exercise of their faith prescribed; and also because it is not done (as
again in the table to this book I protest) to tie thee superstitiouslie to
our order, I have nothing varied from the former and first impression in that
point, doubting not but thou can, and wilt use this book to thy profit, and
be thankeful, Farewell.

T. R.

To the honorable Sir Frances Walsingham Knight, one of her Majesty's chief
Secretaries, of the right honorable privy Counsel, and Chancelar of the
Order, Grace and peace in our Savior Christ.
THAT THE world was made for man, even Lactantius de diuino praemio. cap. 4.
Cicero lib, 2 de Natura Deorum.
Philosophers, through the instinct of humane reason could, and the carnal
worldlinges through the often hearing of Gods holy word can confess: that man
is created for God Gene. 1, 6. Psalm. 8, 6.
me thinks there should be none so barbarously ignorant, or Causes why daily
prayer is necessary.
in this clear light of the glorious Gospel, so desperately secure, as to
doubt. A notable cause, 1. From the end of man's creation.
were there no mo but that, why daily, and evermore we should extol, and with
divine praises, celebrate the most sacred Name of almighty God: but many
ways besides are we bound to do the same. For consider we, either the
commandments of God; or his benefits; or the frailenes of our corrupt nature;
or Satan's snares; or the miseries as well public as private; or our covenant
made with God in baptism; or the uncertainty of the day either of our death
or general judgment, and we shall find that the least of these things offers
sufficient occasion continually to pray, and to praise God.

For touching the commandments, 2. From the commandementes of God.
God says, by the Prophet David, Psa. 50, 15.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, so will I hear thee, and thou shall praise
me; by his Son our Savior, Mark. 13, verse, 33.
Watch and pray; by Saint Paul the Apostle, Colos. 4, 2.
Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving. Yea, not 3. From
the promise of God to here our petitio^s
only he commands so to do, which proves the excellency of the
exercise, but also promises to hear our petitions, which declares how
surpassinglie sweet, are devout Meditations, in the ears of God. As in that
before mentioned Psalm of David, Call upon me, etc. Again, Luke 11, 9.
Seek and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you: and again
for all, John. 16, verse, 23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.

His benefits are for number infinite, 4. From the greatness of Gods benefits.
for greatness wonderful, excellent for their worthiness, whether we respect the
gifts of the mind or the goods of the body, spiritual or corporal, bestowed
upon some particularly, or generalie upon al men. Who can declare the goodness
of God (that I may ouerpasse the temporal benefits, either common to us with all
men, or specialie bestowed upon us before al) who can I say, declare the
goodness of God sufficiently for creating us Genesis 1, 26. Colos. 3, 10.
after his own image; for revealing himself unto us; for redeming us 1. Pet.
1, 19 Heb. 9, 14.
by his dear Son; for choosing us before the foundations of the world were
laid; for enduing us with his holy spirit; and for exalting us to eternal
life? What therefore shall we render unto the Lord for all these things? Psalm.
116, ver. 12. etc.
Let us take up the cup of salvation, and celebrate the name of our God.

If we consider the frailenes of 5. From the weakness of our nature.
our nature we shall find, that continualie we are subject to sinning, to
offending, to erring, and to conceauing amiss of the will of our God to our
certain condemnation. Bernarde sermon. 7, de aduentu Domini.
There is none of us al which stands not in need of counsel, of props, and
of help. The general misery of mankind is triple, etc. For both we are easy
to be seduced, and unable to do well, and weak to resist. If we would discern
between good and evil, we are deceived; if we go about to do good, we quickly
faint; If we endeavor to resist evil, we cannot endure, but are easily
overcome. The consideration of this frailetie of ours, made our Savior Christ
graciously to admonish his Disciples, saying, Matt. 26. verse, 41.
Watch and pray, least ye enter into tentation.

Again, the tyranny and rage of 6. From the fury and rage of Satan.
the devil is unspeakable, and his power mighty, being the Prince Ephe. 2, 2.
John. 12, 31.
of this world. We wrestle not Ephesians. 6, verse. 12.
against blood and flesh, but against rule, against powers, against worldly
governors of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in
heavenly places. It behooves us therefore, according to the counsel of Saint
Peter, 1. Pet. 5, 8.
to watch and pray. For our adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, rangeth
about seeking whom he may devour. But Gaudentius Merula de memorabilibus,
lib. 2, cap. 9.
as the Lion at the sight of a Cock is discomforted, and at his crowing
betaketh him to his heels: so does Satan both stand in fear of a godly man,
and fly at his prayer. As Lactantius notes, Lactantius de Origin erroris*
cap. 16.
Devils do hurt but the faint hearted, such as the great and mighty hand of
God does not protect, which are profane from the Sacrament of truth, but the
just, that is, the true worshippers of God, do the Devils fear.

What should I speak of the tyranny 7. From the miseries both private and
public.
of mighty men; of the misery of poor; how wickedness does abound, and
heresies ouerflowe? Wherefore well may I say, as did Nestor unto his Nestor.
children, Pray, for unless that God help us we al perish.

Furthermore our covenant made 8. From our covenant made with God at our
Baptism.
with God at our Baptism, whereby we promised to forsake the Devil and al his
works, etc. to believe all the articles of the Christian faith; and to keep
Gods holy will and commandment, etc. should drive us thereunto. For neither
can Satan be resisted; 9. From the uncertain time of the day either of our
death, or judgment.
nor our faith manifested; nor GOD duly honored without prayer.

Finally, omitting al other reasons, which are infinite, the shortness of our
life, the suddaines of Christ's coming, his seuerenes in judgment when he is
come, should make us not slightlie to ouerpasse this noble exercise. For what
avails it, though in this world Mat. 16, 26.
we abound in wealth, excel in honor, have al things according to our hearts
desire, and then when Christ shall return we are found unready, and so lose
our souls? Happy therefore Matt. 24, verse. 46.
is that servant whom the Lord at his coming shall find watchful: and Matt.
25, verse. 4.
happy are those Virgins which expect the bridegroom with oil in their
lamps. But that evil servant Matthew. 24, verse. 48. Luke 12, 45.
which shall say in his heart, my Lord will long be a coming, and so begin to
smite his fellows, yea, and to eat and drink with the dronken, his Lord will
come in a day, when he looks not for him, and in an hour when he is not
aware of, and shall hew him in pieces, and give him his portion with hypocrites,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; and those virgins which are
careless and secure Matt. 25, verse. 10, etc.
, accompany not the bridegroom to his wedding, but are excluded out of the
gates, and hear, I know ye not.

The waightines of these reasons, The occasion of publishing this Book.
Honorable, have especialie moved me, through the earnest request of some
which for their godly zeal I love unfeignedly, and reverence, did greatly
prick me forward, to bring these divine Meditations (I call them divine,
partly because they are of divine matters, and concern the glory of God;
partly for that they proceed from a divine spirit; but in this respect
chiefly, because they are wholly, as few or no other prayer Book is that I
know, taken out of the pure fountains of the divine Scriptures) of the right
learned and virtuous of famous memory Master John Auenar, into our English
tongue. A book certes most necessary in respect of the extreme security
wherein we live. Gratefully it has bin accepted hitherto in the Latin and
Germane tongues; and now by the working How he must be qualified y^ in praieng
would please God, and use this Book to his profit.
of Gods holy spirit, shall profit very much, if it be used as it should be,
that is, if the vser thereof pray, Religiously in faith; charitablie being
void of rancor and malice; zealouslie with an ardent affection of the mind;
and humbly without pride.

1 Faith is necessary. For Heb. 11, 6.
without 1. Faith.
faith it is impossible to please God. Therefore only the faithful do pray.
For Romans 10, verse. 14*
how can men call upon him in whom they have not believed? Romans 14, verse. 23.
It is sin whatsoever is not done through faith. Therefore the prayer of
infidels is no prayer but hypocrisy, and a damnable abuse of good words;
neither can it obtain any thing at the hands of God, according to that of
Saint James, James. 1, verse. 7.
He which wauereth let him not think that he can obtain any thing from God.

2 Charity is necessary. For we must 2. Charity.
James. 5, verse. 16.
pray one for another; and for our enemies, Matthew. 6, verse. 14. Matthew. 5, 44*
Mark. 11, 25 Luke 23, 34.
as our Savior does counsel us, saying, When ye stand praieng, forgive, if
ye have ought against any man, that your Father also which is in Heaven, may
forgive you your trespasses, etc, Again the spirit of God says, Eccle. 28,
verse 3, etc.
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done thee, and so shall thy sins
be forgiven thee also when thou praiest. A man that bears hatred against
another, how dare he ask forgiveness of God. He that shows no mercy to a man
which is like himself, how dare he ask forgiveness of his sins? etc. and for all men, as may appear 1. Tim. 2, 8
in the first Epistle of Saint Paul unto Timothy.

3 Zeal is necessary. For what is 3. Zeal.
prayer without the same, but a very babbling, and vain multiplication of
words? yea there is no prayer, where this affection is not. For prayer is a
Prayer what;
vehement desire of the heart to obtain something at the hands of God. God
looks not upon the face as man does, but beholds the heart; neither does he
listen to the sound of the mouth, but to the sighs of the mind. After this
manner do Christians pray, their affections are bent toward God, they
always Matt. 5, 6.
hunger and thirst after righteousness.

4. Humility is necessary. For upon 4. Humility.
whom shall my spirit abide, says the Lord, Esai. 66, 2.
but upon him which is of a lowly spirit? The prayer of him which humbles
himself Eccle. 35, verse 17.
goes through the clouds. Much better is it for a sinner, to be humble, than
for a righteous man to be arrogant, as may appear in the Pharisie and
Publicane Luke 18, 10.
.

It remains now, that, as the Auctor of this Book choase for patron
thereof, not for any defense that it needed, but because others the more
willingly would read and accept the same, being dedicated unto an honorable
person gracious in the eyes both of the Nobility and baser sort, the mighty
Prince, Lord Augustus, Duke of Saxony, etc. so moved thereunto by the
singular fame of your honors most virtuous inclination, I present the same now
translated (for what other pains I have taken I spare upon good
considerations, to utter) unto your honor, beseeching you to accept this my
doing in good part, as my hope is you will: and then I doubt not, being
graciously received of so worthy a person, but gratefully it will be used of
the better sort, for whose sake I have published the same.

God almighty, which is the father of lights Jam. 1, 17.
, mercy 2. Cor. 1, 3
and consolation, from whom every good gift, and every perfect gift does
proceed, bless your honor, as with access of temporal benefits: so
especially and above all, with increase of his heavenly blessings, that long
you may live a godly Counsailer, to our virtuous Queen, a profitable member
to this Realm of England, a special fauorer of the Church of Christ, and a
famous aduancer of his truth and glory, to your everlasting comfort, and
felicity. Amen.

At London the tenth of October. An. D. 1579. Your honors to command Thomas
Rogers.

A Preface of Master John Auenar, Doctor of Divinity, and Public Professor
of the Hebrew tongue in the University of Witeberge, taken out of his Epistle
before his Book of daily Prayers, dedicated to the most mighty Prince, and
Duke, Augustus, High marshal of the Roman Empire, etc.
THe chosen vessel of God, Saint Paul in his former Epistle unto Timothy,
does exhort, 1. Timo. 2, verse. 1. etc.
that first of al, deprecations, supplications, intercessions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men: For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Likewise
unto the Philippians he says Philip. 4. verse. 6.
, be careful for nothing but in all things let your petition be manifest unto
God in prayer and supplication, with giving of thanks.

By which words we are not only Kinds of prayer.
pricked forward unto the Godly exercise of prayer, but admonished besides,
that there be four kinds thereof, al necessary to be used every day. The first
are Deprecations, whereby 1. Deprecations what;
we beg at the hands of Almighty God, either altogether to turn away his
heavy displeasure conceived through our sins, or at the least to mitigate
the punishments due for our offenses. Supplications 2 Supplications what;
are called requests, whereby we crave such things as are necessary either for
the sustentation of this present life, or for our everlasting comfort in the
world to come. Intercessions 3. Intercessions what;
are prayers made in the behalf of others. By thanksgiving we praise 4.
Thanksgiving what;
God, and celebrate his holy name for all benefits conferred both upon our
souls and bodies.

In this my Book I have had special The Order of this Book.
regard unto these four kinds of prayer. For first, for every day of 1
the week I have made a morning prayer, containing both a thanksgiving for
the blessed rest received, and a deprecation for the escaping of al evils which
may happen in the day time. Afterward follows a 2*
thanksgiving for some singular benefit received. Then two supplications 3, 4.
or petitions, for blessings as well eternal as temporal. Next unto 5, 6.
them are placed two intercessions for men of every state or degree. After
them ensues a prayer against 7
the sondrie enemies of Christ's Church. And last of al, an evening 8
prayer, containing a thanksgiving unto God for his preserving of us in the
day time, a deprecation that no evil hurt us in the night, and a petition of
his fatherly protection, is annexed.

And this manner I have observed Daily prayer is inioined us.
in distinguishing the prayers for every day. For it is our parts daily in all
our necessities to cry unto God, as our Savior teaches to this purpose, Luke
18, 1.
Pray always, and be not weary, And Saint Paul wills the same, saying,
Pray 1. These. 5, verse. 17.
continually, in all things giving thanks. For this is the will of God through
Jesus Christ toward you. Again, Eccles. 18, verse. 21.
be not let to pray always, and be not let unto the death to exercise thy
self in righteousness. Thus did the kingly prophet David, which of himself
says, Psalm. 119, verse. 164.
seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments.

And certes it is a goodly work to A noble exercise to pray.
call upon God in prayer, and to enjoy his familiar speech: The which also Saint
Ambrose witnesses, saying, Ambrose.
To pray much and often is a work grateful to God. How excellent a thing it
is for man to intermingle Prayer joins us to the blessed company of the
Angels in heaven.
his talk with God, no man is ignorant, and that excellency is attained by
prayer only, which ioineth us to the society of Angels, through ascribing due
praise and glory unto Almighty God, as their office does bind them. Hence
does the Psalmist say: Psalm. 138. verse. 1.
In the sight of Angels will ^ sing praise unto thee, I will worship toward thy
holy temple, and extol thy name. For in other To pray, and to praise God, a
thing common to men with Angels.
things there is much difference between their condition and ours, whether we
respect their nature, or their kind of life; their wisdom, or their
understanding, but to pray is a work common both to Angels and men. For
prayer does separate us from brute beasts, and associate us with Angels, Yea,
an easy matter is it, for one to attain to their nature, dignity, wisdom,
and understanding, if al his life time, he give himself wholly unto prayer, and
the The comoditie which the daily exercise of prayer does bring.
service of God. For if they which frequent the company of wise men, by reason
of their continual meetings, in short space are so changed, that they represent
the wisdom of such as they company withal: what shall we say of them which
daily talk with God in prayer? Wherefore it behooves us, obeieng the will of
our Heavenly Father, to spend our life time in the lauding of God, and in
devout meditations. But he which neither will pray, nor The state of him which
uses not to pray.
praise God, neither yet delight in this divine communication, surely living
he is dead without life, without ^ense or understanding, as witnesses Saint
Chrysostom.

The fruit and profit coming by The fruit and profit of faithful prayer.
godly prayers does Saint James express on this manner: The prayer of faith
Iam. 5, 15.
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed
sins they shall be forgiven him, etc. Again, James. 5, verse. 16. etc.
The fervent prayer, of a righteous man avails much, Elias was a man under 1.
Kings. 17. verse. 1. Eccle, 48, 1. Luke. 4, 25.
infirmities, even as we are, and he prayed in his prayer that it might not
rain, and it rained not on the earth, by the space of three years and six
months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought
forth her fruit.

By these words it appears that The force of faithful prayer.
the prayer of faith can obtain, and bring to pass al things, belonging
either to the safety of the body, or salvation of the soul. As 1. Sam. 30,
verse. 4. 2. Sam. 5, 19
that king and Prophet David by prayer repelled the horrible crewe of his
mortal enemies. So in like manner 4. kings. 19 verse. 15.
Ezechias the King of Judah, Jerusalem being besieged by Sennacherib King of 2.
Chro. 32, verse. 20.
the Assirians, gathered not a company of soldiers, but only went against
Eccles. 48, verse. 20.
his enemies in prayer, prevailed against them, and preserved the 2. Kings. 20
verse. 3, and 5. Esaie. 38, verse. 2, and 5. 2. Chro. 32, verse. 24.
City with the utter overthrow of his adversaries: Likewise by his humble
prayer he escaped death, and faithful supplication prolonged his days. This
made Saint Augustine to say, Augustine. Nothing should dismaie a christian from
praieng unto God.
The prayer of the righteous is the keie of heaven, The prayer of the godly
does ascend, and the mercy of God does come down.

So that knowing the dignity of Though of our selves we are unworthy to open
our mouths in the presence of God* yet through the grace of Gods holy
Spirit, we are emboldened so to do.
this familiar talk with God, and considering the commodity which comes
thereby, me thinks nothing should dismay a Christian from calling upon God.
For notwithstanding it exceed the power of man to reason with God: yet does
the holy spirit dwelling in the faithful help our weakness, and not only
emboldeneth us to approach before his Majesty, but also makes intercession
for us Romans 8, verse. 26.
with groans unspeakable. As we read that women being of nature weak
vessels, oftentimes by prayer have apprehended God, and detained him, Matt. 15,
verse. 22. etc.
as may appear in the woman of Canaan.

Finally so many occasions are The necessity of daily and continual prayer.
there to move, and stir us daily unto prayer, that sufficiently they cannot
be expressed. And if at any Other causes moving unto prayer you shall find in
the Epistle dedicatorie.
time often prayer were needeful, I persuade my self, that now in this last
and old age of this doting world, wherein as more grievous and woeful
wickedness does reign than at any time: so it is to be feared that in the
Church more horrible punishments, and in commonweals more miserable confusion
will ensue, than ever did, it should be practiced; which evils can by no other
means be avoided, but only by daily, earnest, and faithful prayer.

The fountain of al true wisdom and learning God almighty, continue among
us for his Sons sake the purity of his word together with the study of
good letters, maintain peace and concord in his Church, and make us al
continually to addict our selves to advance his glory both in deed and word,
and to benefit his Church to the uttermost of our power, that living always
in his fear, we may die in his favor, and rise again to everlasting
blessedness.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said at the coming into the Temple.
O ALMIGHTY God, and heavenly Father, Psalm. 5, 7.
in the multitude of thy mercy we will come into thine house: and in thy fear
will we Psa. 138, 2.
worship toward thine holy Temple.

Direct our step^ in thy word Psalm. 119, verse. 133.
. Bring us into the path of thy commandments Ps. 119, 35
. For Psa. 19, 46.
thou art the God of our salvation.

Lord, Psalm. 26, 8.
we have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place where thine honor
dwells.

O Lord of hosts Psalm. 84, 1.
how amiable are thy Tabernacles? Our souls Psalm. 84, 2.
long, yea and pine away (through the desire) to come unto thy court.

We will acknowledge thee in a great Congregation Psa. 35, 18
: we will praise thee among much people.

Come Psalm. 95, 6.
let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker. For he is
our God, and we are Psalm. 95, 7.
the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand.

Exalt the Lord our God, Psalm. 99, 5.
and fall down before his footestoole, for he is holy.

We will go unto the altar of God Psalm. 43, 4.
, even unto the God, which comfort our souls: and Psa. 69, 13.
in an acceptable time do we make our prayer, even in the multitude of thy
mercy: O God, hear us in the truth of thy salvation,

Amen.
An earnest petition for the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, that our prayers
may be zealous and effectual.
O Almighty and merciful God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, forasmuch as
it is thy will and pleasure that in all our necessities Psa. 50, 15. Psalm. 91, 15.
we should call upon thee our God, worship thee, and with yielding hearty
thanks extol thine holy Name, and therwithal have promised Psa. 50, 15. Psa.
145, 18. John. 16, 23.
to hear our petitions, we are emboldened to direct our prayers unto thy
divine Majesty.

But considering the weakness of our nature to be such, that we know not To.
8, 26.
how to ask as we should, and thou alone both wisely do know, and
effectually can grant, not only what we do desire, but a great deal more
Ephesians. 3, 20.
than we can think upon, our prayer shall be unto thee our God, that, according
to thy promise, thou will pour upon us Zac. 12, 10.
the Spirit of grace, and prayer, which may with unspeakable groanings Romans 8,
26.
make intercession for us, that, not with lips only Esa. 29, 13. Matthew. 15, 8.
, our hearts being far from thee, but with mind and mouth together, we may
unfeignedly, as becomes true worshippers Ioh. 4, 23.
in spirit and truth, with a burning affection of the heart call upon thee, which
art the true and eternal God, and offer the grateful sacrifice Psa. 50, 14.
Psalm. 116, 17.
of thanksgiving.

Prepare thou our minds to prayer Eccle. 18, verse. 22.
, make them zealous, least otherwise we be like such as praieng tempt God.
Therefore Matt. 6, 5.
in our prayers, let us not dissemble like Hypocrites, neither boast of our well
doing like Pharisees, to be seen of men, but only set forth thy glory, and
advance thine holy Name.

Turn our hearts from beholding Deuteronomy. 5, 9.
either images, or strange Gods, or else dead Saints, but let us worship (...)
Mat. 4, 10.
only serve thee in our prayers, which art our Lord God, Creator 4. Es. 6, 45.
of al things, sercher of the heart, and Ier. 17, 10. Revel. 2, 23 1. Sam. 16, 7.
rich toward all that call upon thee To. 10, 12.
.

Instruct our minds Mat. 20, 21
that we desire not foolishlie vain, and transitory things. But let us alwaie
crave corporal things, according to thy will, with this condition, If they bring
none hurt unto our souls: and evermore prefer celestial things, which are to
be asked without al exception, before worldelie, that our joy may be perfect
in the heavens Ioh. 16, 24.
.

Grant therefore, almighty Father, that we may certainly persuade our selves,
Mar. 11, 24 Matthew. 7, 7. Mat. 21, 22. James. 1, 6.
that whatsoever we shall ask at thine hands through faith, we shall obtain the
same; and let us never doubt of thy fatherly affection toward us, or bring
thy willingness to grant our petitions into question, but through a lively
faith, and firm confidence let us constantly believe, that our prayers shall
effectually be heard through and for thy Christ's sake Ioh. 14, 13. John. 16,
23.
, in whom al thy promises are yea, 2. Cor. 1, verse. 20.
and are in him, Amen.

Furthermore if at any time our prayers be not granted speedily according to
our wish, give us a strong faith, that we faint not, but may through patience
Romans 8, 25.
expect thine aid, knowing Abac. 2, 3.
that coming it will come, and thy truth will not linger. Govern therefore our
hearts by thine holy spirit, that we appoint not a time, manner, or limits of
helping us, but may in all things submit our selves to thy most heavenly
pleasure, and commend our prayers unto thee in hope and silence Esa. 30, 15.
, for John. 2, 4.
thou will not miss an hour, but wilt come at a time convenient.

Likewise illustrate our minds with thy light, that we cast not forth our
prayers trusting Psalm. 32, 5*
in our own righteousness, but in thy manifold mercies, through Christ, by
whom Ephesians. 3, 12.
we have boldness by faith, to approach unto thy throne, Romans 8, 15 Galath. 4, 6.
and to call thee, Abba Father.

Couerne our hearts and minds, that in praieng we neither presume Luke 18, 9.
nor trust upon our own worthiness, and so through pride contemn others, but
let us humbly, and lovingly like brethren Iam. 5, 16.
pray one for another, that we al may be saved.

Take away from us al babbling Matt. 6, 7.
and superfluity of words, that we be not as Ethnikes, which for their long
speech, think to be heard.

Assist us also, that the sight and remembrance of our own unworthiness, do
not terrify us from prayer, and that we be not let by other causes, from
ernest crieng unto thee night and day, that the will of thy servants, and
revenge Luke 18, 7.
of thine elect may be fulfilled.

Now therefore, heavenly Father, and eternal God, give grace, that in all
places we may pray, lifting up pure hands 1. Tim. 2, 8.
without wrath, or doubting, and say, Mat. 6, 12. Mark. 11, 25
Forgive us our trespasses, and with deep sighings, and sure confidence
continually persist 1. Tim. 2, 1.
in making of supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks for all men, that, according to thy promise, we may receive as well temporal, as
heavenly benefits. For this is the confidence which we have in thee, that
whatsoever we shall ask 1. John. 5, verse. 14. Matthew. 7, 7. Matt 21, 22. 1.
Ioh. 3, 22.
according to thy will thou will grant unto us.

And hearing al our petitions, we doubt not, but that our requests which at
this time we have made unto thee by Christ our Lord; shall in like manner be
granted: who lives, and reigns with thee in the unity of the holy Spirit,
a God now and for evermore,

*Amen.
A daily prayer for the perpetual happiness of our sacred, and most gracious
Sovereign, and Queen Elizabeth.
OAlmightie GOD, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, in thine hands is al power
both in heaven and earth, Sirach. 10, verse. 4, 15.
thou confirmest kingdoms, and again do alter them according to thine
heavenly pleasure, We praise thee, we magnify thee, we extol thine holy
Name, for that it has pleased thee to appoint over us, a good and gracious
Queen which does govern with counsel, and rule with wisdom.

Grant her, we beseech thee, Psalm. 4, verse. 1, etc.
continual peace, long life, and much happiness: and deliver not her Majesty
into the hands of her enemies.

Rule thou her mind and will, that she may Psalm. 2, 11.
serve thee always in fear, and rejoice in trembling.

Let her maintain and embrace 12.
pure religion, and defend her people in the profession of Christ's Gospel
against al errors and superstition whatsoever.

Give her wisdom and understanding to do such things as are grateful in thy
sight, profitable for us her subjects, and hurtful to none.

O God, eternal Father, Psalm. 20, 1.
hear the petitions of our Queen in all her trobles; the Name of Christ our
Savior glorify her, and the comfortable aid of the holy Spirit uphold her
now and evermore.

Be mindeful of her grace for her good, Psa. 20, 4.
give to her according to her hearts desire, and prosper al her purposes, that
we may rejoice in thy salvation, and triumph in the Name of 5.
our God.

Bless her, Lord, evermore, that we may know that her protector is in the
clouds.

Harken unto her Psalm. 20, 6.
from thine holy heavens by thy mighty right hand which brings salvation.

For though some trust in horses, 7.
and others in chariots: yet will we remember the Name of our God.

They shall fall, and be overcome, 8.
but we courageously will persist.

O Lord protect her Majesty, hear 9.
us when we call upon thee.

That in thy strength she may rejoice, Psalm. 21, 1.
and mightily triumph in thy salvation.

Grant her the desire of her heart: 2.
and deny not the petitions of her lips.

For thou have prevented her with 3.
notable blessings, and put a crown of pure gold upon her head.

She has asked life of thee, and thou 4.
wilt give her a long life.

Great is her glory in thy salvation; 5.
honor and fame have thou put upon her.

Thou have ordained her for exceeding 6.
blessedness, and do comfort her heart with thy cheereful countenance.

And why? Because she delights 7.
in thy Christ, and doubts not of thine everlasting mercy.

Let thine hand, O Lord, light upon Psalm. 21, 8.
her enemies, and thy right hand find out al such as hate thee, and envy her
prosperity.

Put them into a burning furnace 9.
in the time of thy displeasure: the Lord in his anger shall consume, and fire
shall devour them.

Their fruit shall thou destroy from 10.
the earth, and their seed from the sons of men.

Because they intended evil against 11.
thee, and imagined mischief against the innocent, which they could not bring
to pass.

Therefore will thou turn them into 12.
flight, and bend thy bows against their faces.

Triumph, O Lord, in thy virtue, 13.
and we will sing out, and commend thy power.

Save our Queen, O merciful God, in despite of al her enemies, which either
secretly or openly go about to bring her life to the grave, and her glory to
the dust.

Give thy judgment, O Lord, unto her grace Psalm. 72, 1.
and thy righteousness unto her Counsel; that they may Psalm. 72, 2.
judge thy people with justice, and thy poor with equity.

Let the mountains bring peace, 3.
and the little hills righteousness unto thy people.

Let them judge the afflicted among 4.
the people, and save the sons of the poor:

Make them to destroy the backbyter, that he persist not to afflict the
miserable, and such as trust in thy mercy and protection.

So shall quietness and peace abound among us like the hillockes on the earth.

Lord, shield our Sovereign Psa. 89, 21.
exalt thine Anointed, let thine hand assist, and thine arm strengthen her:

Never let her foes prevail against 22.
her, nor the child of wickedness bring her to destruction.

Banish from her Court al her privy 23.
enemies, and preserve her evermore from dissembling friends.

Grant this, O most merciful Father, for thy dear Son our Savior Christ his
sake,

Amen.
1. Morning prayer on the Lords day.
O Almighty and merciful God, eternal Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three in
persons, one in substance, God in very deed and from everlasting:

We extol thy sacred Majesty, we praise thine unspeakable mercy, thy divine
truth we exceedingly comend, for that of thy fatherly and wonderful goodness,
thou have protected us this night under the shadow Psalm. 17, 8.
of thy wings: yea, thou also have made us quietly to take our rest
notwithstanding the dangerous snares of our deadly enemy the devil.

Thou art the God Psalm. 9, 13.
, which exaltest us from the gates of the shadow of death; and from the power
of darkness thou deliuerest us.

Therefore Psa. 107, 8.
we will acknowledge thee for thy goodness, and for the wonderful things which
thou do among the sons of men.

We will magnify thee in the great Congregation Psalm. 35, 18
, and among much people will we praise thee.

Our hearts be ready, Psalm. 57, 7.
O our God, our hearts be ready: We will praise thee Psa. 57, 9. Psalm. 108, 3.
, O Lord, among the people, and sing to thee among the nations. For Ps. 108, 4.
thy mercy is great above the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.

We will not hide Psalm. 40, 10
thy mercy and truth in the great Congregation; Because Psalm. 92, 1.
it is a good thing to praise the Lord, and to sing to thee, O thou most High,
To declare thy loving 2.
kindness in the morning, and thy truth in the night.

Bless the Lord, O our souls, Psa. 103, 1.
and all that is within us praise his holy Name:

Which forgiueth al our iniquities, 3.
and heals al our infirmities:

Which redeemeth our lives from 4.
destruction, and crowns us with mercy and compassion:

Which satisfies our longing with 5.
good things, and protecteth us from our youth:

Which also Psa. 34, 20
has kept al our bones this night, Not one of them is broken.

To thee 1. Tim. 1, verse. 17.
King everlasting, immortal invisible, and only, wise God, be honor, and glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

Unto thee Psalm. 25, 1.
, O Lord, do we lift up our souls.

O God Psalm. 63, 1.
earelie will we seek thee; our souls thirst for thee, our flesh lusts after
thee in a barren and dry land, where no water is, to see thy strength and
glory.

O eternal God which have brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us
with thy mighty power, that this day we fall into no sin, but let al our
cogitations, words and works, tend to the setting forth of thy righteousness.

Lighten our minds this morning with the shining and clearenes of thy wisdom,
that in our hearts, that true day star 2. Pet. 1, 19
may rise and shine, as it were a candle burning in a dark place.

Give us thy Spirit of wisdom Ephesians. 1, 17.
and revelation in the knowledge of thee, And Ephesians. 1, 18.
lighten the eyes of our understanding, that we may know what our hope is, how
great the glory of our inheritance, and Psa. 18, 19.
what the excelent greatness of thy power toward us.

Fill us Psa. 90, 14.
with thy mercy in the morning so shall we be glad and rejoice al our life long.

Merciful God, endue us with thine holy Spirit, that we may neither think,
speak, or do any thing this day, but that which may please thee, and tend to
the advancement of thy glory, and health of our souls.

Govern thou our understanding and will, and so direct all the cogitations of
our heart, that we may wholly be thine, and savor of nothing besides thee our
God and Redeemer.

Teach us the way of thy Commandments, Psa. 119, 33
O Lord, and we will keep it unto the end. Give us understanding Ps. 119, 34.
to keep thy laws, and to love thee Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Matt. 22, 37. Luke 10, 27.
our Lord and God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our
strength: and let al thy restimonies Psalm. 119, verse. 24.
be our delight and Counselers.

Comfort the souls Psalm. 86, 4.
of thy servants, for unto thee, O Lord, have we lifted up our souls. For thou
Lord Psa. 86, 5.
art good and gentle, and of great kindness to as many as call upon thee.

Behold God, earelie now this Morning we do offer our selves a Morning
sacrifice unto thee, a trobled spirit Psa. 51, 17.
a broken and an humble heart, O Lord thou will not despise.

Make us fit, that we may likewise

(...)We see the workmanship of thine Psalm. 8, 3.
hands, the Moon and Stars, which thou have ordained; and we will signify thy
glory Psalm. 96, 3.
unto al nations, and among al people will we declare thy wonderful things. For
thou art mighty Ecc. 43, 29
, 4.
O Lord, and worthy to be praised, great is thy virtue, and thy power
wonderful.

We thank thee, holy Father, God of heaven, because thou have created by thy
word of power the universal world Genes. 1, verse 1. etc. Hebru. 1, 2. Psalm.
104, verse. 1, etc.
with all the creatures, and whatsoever is, lives, or moves in the same. By
thy wisdom thou do govern, and by sending of thy Spirit, as yet do
uphold, and cherish the same.

For all woods Genesis 1, 11. Psalm. 104. verse. 14. 15.
, fruteful trees, stones, grain, flowers, herbs, and all the grass of the
field have thou ordained for the use of man.

We magnify thee, O God most wise, Genesis 1, 6. 20. 21. Psa. 104, 25 10.
for creating the sea, and springs of water by the power of thy word, and for
giving them virtue to bring forth fishes of al kind to be eaten of man.

We bless thee, O eternal God, Genesis 1, 6. 2. Esd. 6, 41.
for making the superior and lower regions of the aier, with all birds, and
fethered fowls of sondrie kinds for the food of man.

We glorify thee, for giving the whole frame of this earth, with all the
creatures in the same unto mankind, and setting man Psalm. 8, 6.
over the works of thine hands, have subjected al things under his feet,

Al sheep and oxen Psalm. 8, 7. 8.
, yea, and all the beasts of the field, The fowls of the air, and the fish of
the sea, which walk through the paths of the sea.

Especially we praise thee, our Lord and maker, for making us thy creatures
Genesis 1, 26. 5, 1. 9, 6. 1. Cor* 11, 7. Coloss. 3, 10
reasonable men according to thine own similitude; for giving us reason and all the senses; and for preserving us hitherto.

Thou did nourish us Psalm. 22, 9.
, and that wonderfully being within our mothers womb, and out thereof Psalm.
71, 6.
have thou brought us sound in all parts without imperfection; and yet
continuest thy favor, and do keep us against al dangers, and deliuerest us
from al evil: and al these things do thou of thy fatherly and divine goodness
without any merit or desert of ours: for all which we are bound to thank thee,
to praise thee, to serve, honor, and obey thee.

We extol thy sacred Name, O God most high, for separating from the rest Eccl.
33, 9. Genes. 2, 3. Exodus 20, 11. Deuteronomy. 5, 14.
a Sabbath day, that so men, cessing from their handie labor, the better
might serve, and celebrate thine honor.

Who is he Psa. 106, 2. Eccl. 43, 30.
that can recite all the power of the Lord? or declare al his works? who can
number out al his praises? No man can utter al his benefits.

Notwithstanding, although we be miserable men, and wretched sinners, and
therefore most unmeet to extol thee according to thy deserts: yet will we not
be still, we will praise thee evermore to the uttermost of our power. We will
declare thy justice and mercy: and while we live will we remember thy goodness;
and at no time forget thy benefits.

O our souls Psa. 146, 1.
praise the Lord, we will praise the Lord during our life; we 2.
will sing to the Lord while we have breath.

We will be mindful of our maker even from our youth Eccl. 13, 15
and seek him evermore: yea, even unto our old age Psa. 71, 18.
and graie head, O God, forsake us not, until we have declared thy power unto
al nations that are to come.

Praise the Lord Psa. 117, 1.
, al ye nations; praise him al ye people.

For his loving kindness is great toward 2.
us; and his truth endures for ever.

Praise ye the Lord in his sanctuary Psa. 150, 1.
, praise him in the firmament of his power.

Praise him in his mighty acts: 2.
praise him according to his excellent greatness.

Let every thing that has breath, 6.
praise the Lord.

Praise ye the Lord.
3. A prayer for the remission of sins.
RIghteous and merciful God, which art clear from spot and sin, al thy ways
Psa. 25, 10.
are mercy and truth.

We miserable folks, and wretched sinners acknowledge the horrible corruption
of our nature; and with humble and sorrowful hearts bewail our filthiness,
whereby we have polluted that image imprinted within us at our first creation.

We openly confess, that many and great are our sins; our offenses
wonderful; our transgressions are infinite, even as the sand of the Sea, which
cannot be numbered. For all the cogitations of man's heart Genesis 6, 5. 8, 21. Matt.
15, 19.
are prone to evil evermore.

O Lord, Psa. 19, 12.
who knows his sins? or who can recite all the transgressions of man?

Behold we confess our offenses, and our sin Psalm. 51, 3,
is always before us.

Against thee only we have sinned, 4.
and done evil in thine eyes, that thou may be just when thou speak, and
pure when thou iudgest.

Behold, we were borne in iniquity, 5.
and in sin did our mothers conceive us; and those our sins have we
multiplied in our daily transgressions: and therefore have deserved thy just
displeasure with pains eternal.

Notwithstanding we appeal unto thy mercy, O Lord, beseeching thee not to
enter into judgment with thy servants Psa. 143, 2
, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. For if thou Psa. 130, 3.
streitlie obseruest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? If thou will contend
with m^n Job. 9, 3.
he shall not be able to answer thee one for a thousand.

For Job. 15, 14.
what is man that he shoul be clean; and he that is borne of a woman, that he
should be just? Behold, 15.
thou foundest no stedfastnes in thy Saints: yea, the heavens are not clear in
thy sight. How much more 16.
is man abominable and filthy, which drinks iniquity like water?

Behold, Esai. 64, 6.
Lord, we are al become unclean, and al our righteousness is like a filthy
cloute.

Wherefore we humbly beseech thee Psalm. 51, 1.
have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy, and according to the
multitude of thy compassions do away our iniquities. Wash us Psalm. 51, 2.
thoroughly from our iniquities, and cleanse us from our sin.

For thy Name sake Psa. 25, 11
, O Lord, be merciful unto our iniquity, for it is great.

Remember not the sins of our 7.
youth, nor our rebellions, but according to thy kindness remember thou us, even
for thy goodness sake, O Lord.

Remember thy tender mercies, and 6.
loving kindness, which have bin for ever.

Remember also Psa. 78, 39 Psa. 103, 14.
that we are flesh, a wind that passes and comes not again.

Therefore, leave thy displeasure against us; be not angry for ever Psalm. 103,
9.
, neither do thou threaten us perpetually.

Deal not with us according to our 10.
sins, neither reward us after our iniquities: but convert us, O our God of
salvation, and turn away thy displeasure against us.

Show us thy mercy, O Lord Psalm. 85, 7.
, and grant us thy salvation, for thy Name sake.

O most merciful God, we confess in deed that it lies not in our power to put
away, and purge our sins, and to purchase thy favor: but only it is the
passion and most innocent death of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, the
immaculate lamb, which is a sufficient reco^ciliation for our sins 1. Ioh. 2,
2.
, and yet not for ours alone, but for the sins also of the whole world.

For his blood 1. Ioh. 1, 7.
which was shed for us does cleanse us from al sin. And, if we confess our
sins, thou art faithful 9.
and just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from al unrighteousness.

Wherefore through confidence of this thy mercy promised by thy Son, we are
bold with deep sighs from heart to cry, Lord Psalm. 32, 1.
forgive our offenses; remit our iniquities; cover our sins; and impute not
our faults unto us. Purge us, O Lord, from our secret faults Psa. 19, 12. 13.
. Keep thy servants also from presumptuous sins; let them not reign over
us: so shall we be upright, and purged from our greatest wickedness, that tasting
the sweetness of thy benignity, we may be secure and certain of the remission
of our sins.

Give the knowledge Luke 1, 77. 78.
of salvation to thy people by the remission of their sins, through the
bowels of thy mercy, whereby the day spring from on high has visited us: that
we may perceive in our minds, both comfort, peace, and gladness of the holy
Spirit, which may begin a new life in us pleasing thee; quench all the motions
of our minds striving with thy divine pleasure; and restore in us the image of
thy divine light which was lost, that being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, we may serve thee in fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our life through Christ, in whom thou art well pleased Mat. 3, 17. Matthew. 1,
9. Luke. 3, 22.
, and for whose sake al our works, howsoever imperfect, are acceptable in thine
eyes,

Amen.
4. A prayer for the preservation of the Church.
OCelestial God, and Father of infinite mercy and compassion, which not only
gatherest to thy self an holy Church in this world John. 17, verse. 6. etc.
out of mankind through the operation of the holy Ghost, and preaching of thy
word, but also preseruest the same being gathered, and adornest it with all kind
of temporal things, and, which more is, with eternal bliss:

We humbly beseech thee, gracious Lord, that of thy goodness thou would
vouchsafe evermore to maintain this thy little flock Luke. 12, verse. 32.
, embracing, preaching, and professing thy word, through thine especial grace;
continue thy favor toward the same; keep it in sound doctrine, constant
confessing, in the lawful use of thine holy Sacraments, and in pureness of
life, that neither the gates of hell Mat. 16, 18
, the rage of Satan, nor yet the rigorousnes and tyranny of this world
oppress the same.

Protect, and keep this Mat 8, 26.
thy boate^ and little Bark tossed among many perilous tempests, and miserable
surges in the raging Sea of this troblesome world, that it perish not being
overwhelmed.

Uphold thy Church, which Mat. 16, 18
is builded upon a sure rock, and depends upon Christ a sound, and
immovable foundation.

O Lord of hosts, return Psa. 80, 14.
, look down from heaven and behold, visit 15.
thy vine, and make it perfect, which thy right hand has planted, and thou
have chosen to thy self. Hedge the 16.
same about with thy strong defense, that the branches thereof being spread out,
and pruned may bring forth abundance of fruit.

Raise up thy power, Come God, and save us Psalm. 80, 7.
. Convert us show forth thy countenance, and we shall be saved. Enclose thy
sheep within thine hardles: so shall we be quiet from al invasion and
scatterings, neither Ioh. 10, 28
can any draw us by force out of thine hands.

Defend us from al such, as seek the utter overthrow of pure religion; and in
place thereof labor to bring in the shameful instauration of blasphemous
Idolatry.

Suffer not thy word, that most clear and unchangeable light to be corrupted,
or put out by our means, but gather to thy self through the sound of the
Gospel such a Church, as may harken unto thee; honor, and sanctify thy Name,
as well in word, as in honest conversation, that so thou may have a righteous
and holy generation, celebrating thy goodness for evermore.

Join us Esai. 6, 13.
unto that company which does worship thee continually; that we may be
Citizens of thy kingdom among thy Saints.

Grant that we err not from the foundation of wholesome doctrine, answering to
the rules of the sacred Scripture: and that we offend not against our
conscience; but separate us from the company of ungodly ones, and from the
damned crewe of the reprobate.

Let us not so much as take their names into our mouths Psalm. 16, 4. Exodus 23,
13
which pour out heaps of blasphemies to thy great dishonor, and defacing of
the truth: unto whom thy Son is a destruction Luke 2, 34. Romans 9, 33.
and stone of offense. For they despise his base estate, and the foolish
preaching 1. Co. 1, 18
of thy Gospel, and the deformed show of the Church, placed in the mids of al
kind of miseries, they loath and abhor, preferring uncertain riches, lordly
authority, and the vain pleasures of this transitory world, before the
profession of the truth: and so, making war with thy Son, they do purchase
everlasting destruction unto themselves.

Keep us evermore, that we may abide in that Church, which is truly
Catholic, consisting of members of many nations, but linked unto thee in one,
and the same confession.

Sanctify us with thine holy Spirit, that, our sins being forgiven, we may
take another trade of life, in acknowledging thee Ioh. 17, 3.
to be the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Give unto thy Church resting places, and nestes where they may sound thy
sacred Gospel purelie without corruption.

Suppress the devil which spreads blasphemies against thy doctrine: that so
neither feined Gods may be erected, nor superstitious inuocations confirmed,
nor thy glory defaced.

Weaken the power of thine enemies, which boil in hatred against thy truth,
and conspire the death of thine elect: so neither shall stables of woolues be
made, nor dens of thieves established.

O Lord God Psalm. 85, 6.
, return and quicken us: so shall thy people rejoice in thee. Let al such Psalm.
5, 11.
as trust in thee rejoice, and triumph for ever: dwell thou in them, and let
those which love thy Name, rejoice in thee.

O Lord, remember not our offenses, thou which wast Psalm. 85, 1.
sometimes merciful; And forgauedst the wickedness 2.
of the people, and hidedst al their sins; Which with drewedst al thine 3.
anger, and turnedst from the fiercenes of thine indignation: Be mindful Psalm.
85, 4.
of thy woonted mercy, and receive us into thy favor.

For we depend upon thee alone, being destitute of al worldly aid, our trust
wholly is in thee, and al our confidence rests in thy stretched out arm.

O Lord, Psalm. 5, 11.
cover us with thy grace, as it were with a shield, that so we may be blessed;
and abiding Ps. 84, 9, 11.
in the house of thy congregation, may acknowledge, and call upon thee according
to thy word revealed, and praise thee evermore, through our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
5. A prayer for the Preachers of Gods word.
O Almighty, and merciful GOD, which through thy Son our Lord and Savior
Christ, have commanded us to pray Mat 9, 38. Luke. 10, 2. John. 4, 35.
that laborers may be thrust into thine harvest: we beseech thee by the same
thy Son, that thou will send into thy Church faithful ministers, and sincere
Preachers of thy word, and those in number many, and in operation woonderful.

Give unto us such teachers, as are both in thy mysteries Matthew. 13, verse. 11.
learned, and for their conversation, commended. Direct them being illuminated
with thine heavenly light, that they may rightly deliver and divide 1. Tim. 2,
verse. 15.
unto us the principles of true doctrine, the word of truth, and the Gospel of
life; and open the difference between the Law and the Gospel; and preach
those things which are agreeable unto the rules of faith; and can strengthen us
to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees Mat. 1^, 6.
, and the contagious doctrine of man's traditions.

Give unto us evermore sincere Preachers, and sound interpreters, and arm
them 1 Cor. 12, verse. 10.
with the gift of tongues for the propagation of thy doctrine, that many
through their labors and diligence may be converted to the true knowledge of
thy divine pleasure. For Romans 10, verse. 14.
how should we hear without a Preacher? And how should men preach 15.
except they be sent?

Wherefore send into thy Church Ephesians. 4, 7. Esai. 54, 13. Matt. 9, 36.
, O most loving Father, Bishops of thine own instructing, good shepherdes,
sound Preachers, faithful workmen, and godly ministers, which may faithfully
ouersee Act. 20, 28 Ephesians. 1, 7.
and by thy word of salvation Romans 1, 16. Acts. 13, 26. 1. Cor. 1, 21.
luckily govern thy Church, being dearly bought with the precious blood of
thine only Son: So shall the Gospel, thy pure word to the praise and glory
of thy Name; to the salvation and profit of many men with good success
fruitefully be declared, and Joel. 2, 28.
universally preached throughout all the world.

Give unto us, Lord eternal God, teachers of righteousness, which 2. Timo. 1,
verse. 13.
reteining the form of wholesome doctrine may inform us in all spiritual
wisdom of thine essence and divine pleasure; and through thy Spirit and word
bring us unto perfection, whereby we may be blameles Col. 1, 10. 1. These. 2, 12
Ephesians. 4, 1.
both in Christian religion, and in behauior: that they may reduce sinners into
the way of truth; strengthen the weak in faith; and comfort the afflicted and
wounded consciences against all the darts of our deadly enemy:

Which may be able Titus. 1, 9. 1. Tim. 4, 6.
to exhort by sound doctrine; whereby the hearts of men, being terrefied
through the sense of Gods indignation, and oppressed with cares, may find true
consolation: and which are able to convince the gainesaiers of the truth, and
stop the mouth of the impudent; which may be examples for the faithful both in
speech and conversation, and may become 1. Cor. 9, verse. 22.
al in all to gain many unto thee our eternal God:

And may rejoice Romans 5, 3. James. 1, 3.
in affliction fearing neither the hatred, nor the ingratitude of this world;
but may persist unto the death constantly in the confession of the truth: so
shall both offenses be shunned, thy most holy name glorified Romans 2, verse. 24.
; and thy ministry which thou have instituted Act. 20, 28
for the safety of our souls which believe, notably made of, and maintained.

Make them perfect therefore, that they may prove the vessels of thy mercy, and
1. Cor. 15, ve. 10, and 58.
profitable instruments of thy Church: let not their labors be in vain, but
take good success in the Lord.

Grant likewise, holy God, that all the Preachers of thy word may be blameles
Titus. 1, verse. 6, etc. 1. Tim. 3, etc
not subject to manifest impiety, but the husbands of one wife; shunning
extrauagant and filthy lusts, also be they watchful over the flock committed
unto them, least the Devil privily make a pray of thy silly sheep. Be they
sober and temperate, looking to their charge with great discretion: Modest and
of good behauior, endued with all gravity; liberal toward exiles, and al such
as are persecuted for the confession of thy word; apt to teach; no quarelers;
not given to filthy gaming; patient sufferers of injury, void of contention
and covetousness; wise governors of their own houses, having children in
subjection with all reverence:

Not puffed up; no giuers of occasion of offense 2. Co. 6, 3.
either in word or deed, whereby any may justly be offended, and carpe at the
ministry: But in all things let them show out themselves, 1. Cor. 4, 1.
as the ministers of God in much suffering, in affliction, in extremities and
trobles, and never forsake their calling either through persecution, or the
manifold ingratitude of the world.

Keep us, loving Father, John. 10, verse. 1, etc.
from evil workmen in thy vineyard, from unfaithful hirelings, which preach and
feed themselves 2. Cor. 4, 5 Galat. 1, 10.
studieng to please men, and to get popular credit, turning religion according
to the will of men for their own gain, making merchandise 2. Cor. 2, verse. 17.
of the word by transforming the Gospel into an external pomp and means to
live by. For these men can never continue constant in the confession of true
doctrine, but are like reeds Luke 7, 24
tossed by the wind, and are easelie broken through the fear of perils which
accompany the ministry,

Amen.
6. A prayer for the hearers of the word of God.
O Most gracious GOD, which of thy mere compassion, and divine pity, have
purelie and plainly delivered unto us thy healthful word, which is Ioh. 6,
27, and 48.
the food of our souls. For the Gospel is Romans 1, 16 1. Cor. 1, 18.
the power of God unto salvation to al believers; even as thy Son does say
Luke 11, 28
, Blessed are they which hear the word of God and keep it: Again John. 8, 51.
, He that keeps my word shall not die eternally:

We humbly beseech thee on the behalf of al hearers of thy word, Open our
hearts Act. 16, 14.
, unlock the ears of our understanding, that hearing thy word profitablie, we
may observe, learn, and embrace such things, as are necessary to the
confirming of our faith, and amendment of life.

Let thy word therefore Col. 3, 16.
abide plentifully among us in all wisdom; give us thine holy spirit, that we
may hear Sermons, not as the words of men 1. These. 2, verse. 13.
, but as they are in deed the word of God; and 1. These. 2, verse. 12.
walking worthy the same, as becomes the Sons of God, may live in all
godliness 1. Ioh. 3, 10.
and honesty, using thy word preached unto the edification of our consciences;
to our instruction, to the comfort of our minds, and to the kindling of good
motions, for the better serving of thee in Christian patience: that we be not
idle hearers only Iam. 1, 22. Matthew. 7, 21. Romans 2, 13.
but ernest fulfillers of thy word.

Bring to pass we beseech thee, O Lord, that the word thy seed Matthew. 13,
ver. 8, and 23. Luke. 8, 8, and 15.
may stick in our hearts, and take deep root: and that the dunging of our
cold, and unfruitful ground may become profitable, let us both outwardly
embrace thy doctrine with a care, and inwardly feel the operation thereof in
our minds: and so, rushing out of the bowels of the earth, and delivered from
tentation, bring out plentiful fruit to the glory of thine holy Name.

Work so within us, that the Devil Mar. 4, 15.
take not away the seed of thy word sown in our hearts: let it not wax
barren, neither let us be forgetful Iam. 1, 23.
, nor like unfruitful hearers, which hear thy word to their judgment, and
greater condemnation.

Furthermore, keep us in thy faith and fear, that come what crosses Mat. 13,
21.
and adversities there can, we may continually stick unto thee in all our
miseries.

Likewise aid us, O God of our salvation, that the seed of thy word be not
choked among us through cares, Luke 8, 14.
riches, and pleasures of this world.

And finally assist us, that we be never found in the company of mockers 2.
Pet. 3, 3 1. Tim. 4, 1.
into whom the Devil has entered, and blinded their minds Ephesians. 4, 17. Romans 1,
24, and 26.
, and therefore make a so of at the preaching of thy word, which Jude. 1, 4,
and 18.
walking after the lusts and desires of their own flesh, do wrap themselves
in the horrible confusion of their own desires, and shameful wickedness,
whereby like mad men they cast themselves headlong into everlasting destruction.

O Christ, Son of God, fountain of al mercy and compassion, which art the
Lord of the whole flock, and 1. Pet. 2, 2^
chief Bishop of our souls, work thou effectually by thy ministers, speak
within us unto our hearts the voice of thy Father: grant that we may truly
discern the same, and distinguish it from the howling of woolues. For Psalm.
19, 7.
thy doctrine is pure, converting the souls; the testimony of the Lord is
sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

Grant therefore, that al of us hearing thy word may receive the same to our
learning, amendment, comfort, and instruction, which is in righteousness 2. Tim.
2, verse. 22.
and in an honest, and good conscience, that having heard the same we may keep
it Luke 8, 15.
bringing forth fruit with patience, and Matthew. 10, verse. 22.
continue in the same al our life time, and never be tossed Ephesians. 4, 14.
or carried about with every wind of doctrine.

And thou holy Spirit, eternal God, kindle our cold hearts with the fire of thy
love, cherish us with thine healthful heat, and purge the filthiness of our
corrupted nature: keep us in thy lap, and work within us righteousness, and a
life acceptable in thy sight.

Regenerate, and transform us into new men; make us diligent in the study of
thy word; beat into our minds a true fear, and love of thy name, that al
uncleanness, and superfluity Iam. 1, 21.
of malice being cast off, we may receive with meekenes thy word ingrafted,
which is able to save our souls, in this world by inchoation, hereafter in full
perfection,

Amen.
7. A prayer against false Prophets.
MErciful GOD, lover of mankind, which have forewarned us of thine
unspeakable goodness to take heed Mat. 7, 15.
of false Prophets, coming unto us in sheep clothing, being for all that
inwardly ravening woolues: And forasmuch 2. Tim. 3, ^*
as in the latter days, wherein we live, it was prophesied there should be
perilous times, wherein the Devil 2. Cor. 11, verse. 14.
does transfigure himself into an Angel of light: and false teachers with
subtle workmen, having put on the person of Christ and of his Apostles 2.
Cor. 11, verse. 13. 15.
do transform themselves into the ministers of righteousness, carrieng 2. Tim.
3, 5*
the show of godliness, but deny the power thereof: And besides, since by thine
holy Spirit thou have foretold that the wicked man 2 Thessalonians. 2, verse. 3.
the son of perdition, should come and carry away many unto eternal death,
and perpetual damnation:

Grant, merciful God, that embracing the love of thy truth we may shun al
spirits of lieng Col. 2, 8.
together with all errors and show of falsehood, and at no time be carried away
Mat. 24, 4.
from the true sense of thy word, neither wander from the scope of our
salvation; but perseuering constantly and firmly unto the end in thy word,
may abide in the unity of the true catholic faith, and Christian religion;
and be never deceived any way, neither by signs, nor miracles, nor lies,
neither 2. These. 2, verse. 10.
by any deceaueablenes of unrighteousness through the craft and subtlety of
men Ephesians. 4, 14.
, whereby they beset us, but, following thy truth simply in love, may continue
salfe from al corruption, 15.
and constant in the profession of the truth.

Keep us, omnipotent and eternal God, from al fanatical opinions; from
seducing spirits, which sow errors, and deadly contentions in thy Church; from
false teachers, which privily bring in pernicious heresies 2. Pet. 2, 1.
and deny even the Lord which has dearly bought them; By whom the way of
the Lord is 2.
il spoken of; and which make sale 3.
of their hearers through covetousness.

Keep us Acts. 20, verse. 29.
from grievous and greedy wolves, which spare not the flock, but cruelly
devour thy beloved sheep, through the poison of their lives, and erroneous
doctrine:

From men speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them, and to
engender schisms to the tearing in pieces the unity of the Church:

From men of wicked and corrupt opinions raising dissentions and sondrie
offenses:

From tares Matthew. 13, verse. 24.
which the envious man, which is the Devil, sows and scatters among good
wheat*

From false Prophets Mat. 7, 15. Ierem. 23, 1. Exech. 34, 2*
which speak the visions of their own heart; not from the mouth of the Lord;
which preach their own dreams and fancies, seducing the people with lies:

From thieves Ioh. 10, 1.
and robbers of souls; which kill both body and soul, and cast them headlong
into hell fire.

Deliver us from the rage of the Devils thine enemies, which in their members
utter out most horrible outcries against the truth; and departing from the rule
of thy doctrine, propose the fained opinions of their own inventions
manifestly repugnant to thy Commandments.

Keep thine elect in this most wicked world, that being seduced into foul
errors, they swerve not from the truth.

Shorten the evil days Matthew. 24, verse. 22. Mar. 13, 20.
of this dangerous and troblesome time.

Dispatch 2 Thessalonians. 2, verse 8. Esaie. 11, 4.
that son of iniquity by the breath of thy mouth, and cut him of through the
brightness of thy coming.

Cause thy word, O God, to sound in our ears purelie and syncerelie; and make
us to follow the same with our whole heart; true faith; and Christian obedience!
and thoroughly to understand the manifold precepts of thy pure word: that so
approving the good, we may shun the ways of strangers John. 10, 5.
leading from the right way.

Be thou our shepherd, O eternal God Psalm. 23, 1. 2.
so shall we want nothing: put us in the places of thy green pasture, and bring
us unto the waters of comfort; lead us in the paths 3.
of righteousness for thy Name sake, that we may have hope, and not be
confounded in that day when thy Son our Lord shall appear, which lives with
thee and reigns in the unity of the holy Spirit, a God for evermore,

Amen.
8. Evening prayer, on the Lords day.
O Almighty, and eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which together
with thy Son and the holy Ghost, did create man 1. Cor. 11, 7
after thine own likeness, and breath Genesis 2, 7.
into him the breath of life, the which through thy goodness continues at thy
pleasure:

Thou have made Act. 17, 26
of one blood al mankind, and assigned times, and length of our life in this
world:

Thou give life to the people on the earth, and breath to the walkers therein
Psalm. 104, verse. 29.
which if thou take away they shall depart, and be turned into dust:

We bless thee heavenly Father, and with all our hearts give thee thanks not
only for saving us this day from dangers: but also from our cradels for
defending both our souls and bodies from death.

Wherefore magnify the Lord, O our souls Luke 1, 46. 47. 48.
, and our spirits rejoice in God our Savior. For he has looked upon the
baseness and affliction of his servants. He that is mighty 49.
has done for us great things; and holy is his Name. Wherefore we will 50.
praise the Lord for evermore, because his mercy endures from generation to
generation on such as fear him.

We will show forth his power in the evening, and when we go to bed we will
remember his mercy.

Arise now Lam. 2, 19.
our souls, in the night praise your God: In the beginning of the watches
pour out your hearts like water before the face of the Lord.

The Saints will be ioieful with glory Ps. 149, 5.
, and sing loud upon their beds.

We will praise thee continually Psalm. 44, 8.
, and will confess thy name for evermore: for thou art the God which delights
our hearts, and makes merry our souls. Therefore in the night we will think
upon thy benefits; and our spirits shall consider of them.

For thou have commanded that thy mercy be celebrated in the day time, and thy
truth in the night.

O our Lord, and God of mercy Exodus, 34, 6 Psalm. 103, verse. 2. etc.
, gentleness, patience, pity, and truth, which show mercy unto thousands,
and blottest out al our offenses: we lift up our souls unto thee, and from our
hearts we pray, put not before thine eyes the horrible confusion, uncleanness,
and wickedness of our minds, being replenished with loathsome darkness and
ignorance, full of doubtings and errors; our hearts and will are turned from thee
our God; and all the powers and strength both of our souls and bodies are
defiled, and filthilie weakened:

But Lord, of thy great mercy blot out our offenses, look upon the trobles,
and dolor of our hearts, and forgive al our sins. For lo, our souls are
wounded, and can not be helped but only through mercy.

There is no health in our flesh Psalm. 38, 3.
because of thine anger: neither is there rest in our bones, because of our
sins. For our iniquities have 4.
gone over our heads, and as an heavy burden have pressed us down. Our wounds
are putrified, and corrupt 5.
because of our foolishnes.

Assuage thine anger Psalm. 37, 8.
and turn from thine indignation; pardon our faults; remit al punishment; and
restore in us the light of thy goodness, which was lost.

O Lord, hear Dan. 9, 19.
, O Lord, forgive, harken, O our God; for thine own sake: for thy Name is
called upon by us.

O God of heaven and earth, in this evening tide do we call unto thee, that
remitting our sins, thou would receive us into thy protection, and keep
us this night, that the devil have no power over us.

Be thou watchful over us, O eternal Savior, least the subtle tempter apprehend
us. For thou art made for us an everlasting protector.

For behold, whether we sleep or wake; whether we live or die, we are thine:
thou art our creator and redeemer.

Stand therefore on our behalf in the watch with the army of thy celestial
warriers thine Angels, which, being filled with perfect goodness, and perpetual
integrity, behold Matthew. 18, verse. 10.
thy face always in the heavens.

Expel from us and our houses wicked spirits, which be our mortal enemies, that
they damage us in no case: and deliver us from persecutors, Ps. 143, 3.
which lay snares for our destruction. Turn not away thy mercy and truth
from us.

O God assist us, that peaceably we may rest, and sleep in quiet. We will lay
us down in peace Psalm. 4, 8.
and sleep: for thou Lord alone make us to dwell in safety without danger.

Hide us Psa. 27, 5.
in thy Tabernacle, O Lord, that sitting in thy secret place, and abiding under
the shadow of thy wings, we may say unto thee, Lord thou art our keeper, and
our refuge; O God we will trust in thee, and will fear no danger. And although
we were in extreme darkness: yet will we not fear. Though we should walk Psalm.
23, 4.
in the mids of the shadow of death: yet will we dread none evil. For thou art
with us: thy rod and thy staff they do comfort us.

Let thy mercy, O God, follow us all the days of our life, that we may dwell in
thine House in longnes of days; praising thee evermore with the Son, and
holy Ghost one true God reigning worlds without end,

Amen.
1. On Mondaie, Morning prayer.
BLESSED Psa. 72, 18.
be the Lord God, which alone does woonderous things; and blessed be the 19.
name of his Majesty for evermore, which has set Genesis. ^, verse. 14, etc.
Psalm. 136, 8. Iere. 31, 35.
the Sun to lighten the day, and ordained the Moon, with the course of
stars to go before the night.

O most hie God Ps. 74, 16.
the day is thine, and the night is thine: thou have framed the light and the
Sun. By thine unspeakable wisdom thou have distinguished the day and the
night; and so have thou decreed, that while the world shall last, this course of
times and days shall never have an end: so that man in the night may rest, and
again when day comes, go about his business, and labor Psalm. 104, verse. 23.
until the evening.

O Lord Psalm. 119, verse. 90.
thy truth endures for ever; thou laiedst the foundation of the earth, and it
endures; by thine appointment the day does last: for all are thy servants.

For these and al other thy benefits we praise thee greatly; and give thee
thanks for thy exceeding glory: even as it becomes us every day Wis. 16, 28
to prevent the Sun rising, to bless thine holy Name, and to worship thee
at the appearing of the day star.

We extol thine infinite goodness in like sort for keeping us this night past
both from the power and tyranny of Satan; from the snares and subtlety of al
our enemies; and finally from dangers both of soul, and body. For of thy
singular goodness and fatherly care Esa. 38, 16.
thou have made us quietly to sleep and rest this night; again thou have
suffered us to awake, and opened our eyes, giving them power to see, and behold
the morning light Psa. 59, 16.
which now appears.

Therefore we will sing of thy power; and praise thy mercy in the morning: for
thou art our defense, and refuge in the day of our troble.

O our helper Psa. 86, 12.
we will praise thee with all our hearts, and glorify thy Name for ever. For
great is thy 13,
mercy toward us; thou have delivered our souls from the lowest grave.

Hadest not thou bin our defense, innumerable evils had overwhelmed us: so that
we should not have risen to praise thy Name. Had not thy word Ps. 119, 92.
bin our comfort we had without doubt perished in our affliction: Wherefore we
will not for 93.
ever be forgetful of thy iustifications: for they have revived us.

Unto thee Psa. 121, 1.
Lord will we list up our eyes on hie from whence our help shall come. Betimes
Ps. 59, 16.
in the morning do we call upon thee, that thy mercy Psa. 79, 8.
may prevent us, and thy goodness overtake us quickly.

Let thy favor prevent us Eccl. 42, 2
as does the Sun, which rising spreads his beams over all the parts of the
earth; and as the light of the morning 2. Sam. 23, verse. 4.
when the Sun appears, earelie when it shines without the clouds. After
the same sort give us thy cleerenes, and show thy countenance over us; that
lightened by thy word, we may walk all this day long circumspectly and warelie
in the ways of thy commandments, that, being blinded in the day time, we
run not into darkness, neither grope Job. 5, 14.
at noone day as in the night wandering from the paths of thy judgments.

O God Psalm. 67, 1.
, be merciful unto us, and bless us, show us the light of thy countenance, and
be gracious unto us: That we may know thy way upon 2.
earth, and thy saving health among al nations.

O most merciful GOD Psa. 69, 17.
turn thine eyes of compassion upon us and have mercy on us. Look upon us
Psa. 31, 18.
with thy favorable countenance, and turn not thy face from thy servants. Open
our eyes Ps. 119, 18.
that we may consider the wonderful things in thy Law; and make us in the
morning Exo. 16, 7.
to behold thy glory.

O God, guider of our life Eccles. 23, verse. 4, etc.
forsake us not; neither give us a proud look, and turn from us the filthiness
of desire. Remove from our hearts al concupiscence, and take from thy servants
too ouerbolde a stomach; suffer us not to run headlong into riotousnes, and
bellichere; let not unlawful love overcome us, and give not thy servants over
into impudent minds. Turn our eyes Ps. 119, 37.
that they behold no vanity, and strengthen us in thy way; and grant that the
offenses in this world overthrow us not.

Behold, Lord, Ps. 119, 81.
our souls lust after thy salvation, and we long for thy word;

We beseech thee, O Lord, with a most ernest affection, and humbly crave at thy
merciful hands, that this day, and evermore thou will keep us, and al ours
Psalm. 9, 5.
from the arrow flieng in the day, from the pestilence and plague that
destroieth at noone tide. Hide us under thy 6.
wings, and under thy feathers we will have hope.

Blind the eyes Ps. 69, 23.
of our enemies that they see not; and make their loins alwaie to tremble. But
open thine eyes over us, and be thou unto us a mighty protector this day, a
firmament of strength, a covering against heat and parching, a shadow at
noone tide, a defense from offending, an assister from falling, a comforter of
our souls, a lightener of our minds, and a giver of health and happiness in
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
2. A thanksgiving for our redemption.
O Jesus Christ, Son Mat. 16, 16 Matt. 14, 33.
of the living God, which art the eternal word John. 1, 1.
that was in the beginning: the true and substantial image 2. Cor. 4, 4 Colos.
1, 15. Hebru. 1, 3.
of thine eternal Father; the character and brightness of his glory: begotten of
him before al worlds, of one undivided essence, of like majesty, and equal
glory:

We worship thee, light of lights, very God of very God, begotten not made,
of one substance with the Father by whom Col. 1, 16. Hebr. 1, 10.
al things were made.

We thank thee for all thy benefits generally, and specially for that at an
appointed time Galat. 4, 4.
according to the eternal counsel, and decree of the Father, thou did
voluntarily for us men, and for our salvation descend from heaven; and was
incarnate by the holy Ghost, borne of the unspotted and pure virgin Marie;
and truly took our flesh upon thee; and saved us miserable, wretched, and
damned sinners; and delivered us from death, and power of Satan, 1. Pet 1, 18.
not with gold and silver; but by thine holy and precious blood, and by thine
undeserved passion 19.
and death, and that of thine infinite goodness and mercy without any merits,
or worthiness of ours.

For all which we yield thee most hearty thanks, as we are bound. For thou
alone being just have satisfied by thine obedience the judgment of the Father;
and, on our behalf offering the sacrifice of thy body, have delivered us from
the tyranny of death, whereby we were held captives. For so great was the
displeasure of thy Father against our sins, that no creature could assuage
the same, but thou alone, O only begotten Son of God.

O Christ most merciful God, how inestimable is thy love toward al mankind;
how infinite and unspeakable thy goodness; how woonderful thine humility. For
Romans 5, verse. 6. etc. 1. Pet. 3, 18.
thou being just did die and suffer for the unjust. A greater love Ioh. 15,
13.
can no man have, than to give his life for his friend: but thou commendest
thine abundant, and most burning affection toward us, in that, being void 1.
Pe. 2, 22. 2. Cor. 5, 21. Romans 5, 6.
of al fault, thou would suffer death for our sakes, being as yet strangers
Col. 1, 21.
, and thine enemies, and have reconciled us by thy death unto thy Father, and
appeased his most heavy displeasure, forgiving al our sins, and cancelling
the hand writing Col. 2, 14.
which was against us, which was contrary unto us have taken it out of the
way, and fastened it upon the cross: And have spoiled principalities and
powers, 15.
and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them by thy self, and by thy
profitable arising again from the dead have repared our true righteousness
which consists in the forgiving of our sins: and have made us acceptable to
thy Father, whereby we please him through our reconciliation: thou do
comfort our hearts by the preaching of thy Gospel, which works in us the
beginning of eternal life, and by thine holy Spirit thou kindlest in us like
motions unto thy self, whereby we please thy Father through thee and thine
obedience.

O Lord Jesus Christ, lamb of God Ioh. 1, 29.
which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us; thou which
sauest us through thine own merit and virtue, grant us thy grace, that the
fruit of thy most sacred passion, may work effectually and profitablie within
us; let not the labor which thou have taken, and the pain that thou have
suffered for our redemption be in vain through our unthankfulness.

O thou eternal intercessor, word of God, and 1. Cor. 1, verse. 23. etc.
his wisdom, which outwardly speak unto us by the preaching of the
Gospel, instruct inwardly our troubled hearts by thy lively word, and effectual
consolation, that being mindful of thy sacrifice and suffering for our sins,
we may feel true comfort and peace of the holy Spirit in our hearts.

Kindle in our breasts a lively faith depending upon thy benefits, that being
delivered from the fear of hell, we may find 1. Cor. 1, verse. 30.
righteousness in thee, and eternal life. For thou did suffer Romans 4, 25
for our sins, and rise again for our justification, that living we should
her after not live to our selves, but to thee which diedst, and rosest again
for us.

Grant therefore 2 Cor. 5, verse. 15. Roman. 6, verse. 4, etc.
that likewise being quickened we may rise again from al our sins, and live
in thee; and may be thine properly abiding in thy kingdom, and serve thee
with a willing mind in righteousness and true holiness: so that at length 1. Pe.
3, 21.
in the latter day we may rise again with our bodies unto a blessed life, and
so both in body and soul being redeemed from al evils, in perpetual bliss
and happiness may triumph with all thine holy Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, and
al thine elect, and endued with unspeakable and everlasting joy, may praise
thee our Savior, which have ascended above all the heavens, and sit at the
right hand of God the Father almighty, with whom thou live and reignest for
evermore,

Amen.
3. A prayer for Faith.
O Eternal God, and heavenly Father, which Reave. 1, 8.
art Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and the ending: thou art the cause, and
absolute perfection of our life and salvation: the everlasting and infinite
good, from whom proceeds every I am. 1, 17.
good giving and every perfect gift, to wit from the Father of lights, with
whom is no variablenes, neither shadowing by turning:

We beseech thee in the Name of our Savior Christ thy Son, that through thine
holy Spirit thou will plant in our hearts a true knowledge of the same thy
Son, and keep us therein evermore; and make it plentiful and prosper every
day, that replenished with the knowledge of thy will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding, we may walk Philipp. 1. verse. 27. Colos. 1, 10.
Ephesians. 4, 1. 1. These. 2, 10 1. Cor. 1, 5.
worthy the Lord, pleasing thee in all things, being fruitful in all good
works, and increasing in thy knowledge: Col. 1, 11.
strengthened in all might through his glorious power unto al patience, and long
suffering with ioiefulnes: and may 2. Cor. 8, 7
abound in faith, and word, and knowledge, and al diligence.

For this cause we bow our knees Ephesians. 3, 14.
unto thee Father of our Lord Jesus Christ (of whom is named the 15.
whole family in heaven and in earth) Ephesians. 3, 16.
that thou will grant us according to the riches of thy glory, that we may be
strengthened by thine holy Spirit into new men; that Christ may 17.
dwell in our hearts by faith; being rooted and grounded in love, may 18.
be able with all Saints to comprehend the true knowledge of thine essence and
will, according unto thy word revealed.

No man 1. John. 4, verse. 12. 1 Timothy 6, 16. Exo. 33, 20.
has seen thee, O God, at any time; neither has any beheld the
countenance of thy Majesty. For Mat. 11, 27
no man knows the Son which is of thy very substance, but thou the Father
alone; neither has any known thee but the Son, and he to whom he does
reveal thee.

Wherefore we beseech thee of thine infinite goodness and mercy Ioh. 6, 44.
draw us unto him, and let him bring us unto thee. Give the knowledge Luke 1,
77.
of salvation to thy people, by the remission of their sins through thy
tender mercy: that in thy Son Ephesians. 1, 7.
we may find righteousness, even remission of sins, reconciliation, and newnes
of our minds through the holy Spirit, whereby we may become heirs of eternal
life, being justified Titus. 3, 5
by the grace of Christ, in whom we believe, which was offered for our sins.
For he taking our punishment upon himself, did satisfy thy justice fully,
and washed us by his precious blood Revel. 1, 5.
from al our iniquities; and reconciled us Col. 1, 21.
in the body of his flesh through death, to make us holy, and blameles, 22.
and without fault in thy sight.

Make us therefore strong in faith, and constant to resist all the ingins of
Satan; and proceeding from faith to faith to attain that righteousness which is
available before thee by the redemption Romans 3, 24* 25.
which is in Christ Jesus, whom thou have appointed to be a reconciliation
through faith in his blood, that justified by his grace we may have peace of
conscience, and free access unto the Father.

Holy, and merciful God, we humbly beseech thee, which have raised in us the
sparkles of true faith, make perfect this good which thou have begone in us
Philip. 1, 6
, and bring it until the day of our Lord Jesus Christ; whereby abounding more
and more in 9.
knowledge and in all judgment, we may allow the better, and be pure Philip. 1,
10.
without offense until that day, filled with the, fruit of righteousness 11.
which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory, and praise of God.

Wherefore Psa. 68, 28.
appoint thy strength, establish, O God, which thou have wrought in us: that
fighting 1. Tim. 1, 18
a good fight we may retain faith and a good conscience, least under
persecution 19.
and adversities being tossed, we make shipwreck of our faith.

Help our weak and feeble faith, which is like the grain of mustard seed
within us Mat. 17, 20. Luke. 17, 6.
, that increasing daily more and more, it may take deep root, and remain
firm always and immovable: and never vanish away among so many sects and
divisions in this world.

Extinguish all the doubtings of thy will sticking in our corrupt nature; let us
not mistrust thy promises of eternal and temporal benefits, but applieng thy
promises unto our selves, always give credit unto thy word; and so depending
wholly thereupon, contrary to al sense of humane reason, we shall obtain a
crown of immortal glory.

Grant likewise, heavenly Father, Iam. 2, 14.
that our faith be not barren, vain, or dead without good works, and fruits
Gal. 5, 22.
of the Spirit, but effectual working by charity, that we may receive 1. Pet.
1, 9.
the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls; and behold thee,
whom we now see by faith as it were in a glass darkly 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
, in another world, looking upon thy Majesty face to face in Christ our
Savior, our Lord, and God,

Amen.
4. A prayer for the Kingdom of God.
MErciful, and gracious God, which have called us 1. These. 2, verse. 12.
unto thy kingdom and glory; and of thy fatherly and good pleasure enioined
us this care, that first Mat. 6, 33.
and before al things we should seek thy Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof:

We beseech thee through, and for thy Son our Lord, and Savior Christ his
sake, teach our weak minds; govern our will and hearts, that, without inuerting
this thine appointed order, we may first seek that thou may shine within
us; apprehende thy righteousness by a true and lively faith, and be united unto
thee our eternal King.

Grant therefore that thy word may be preached every where plainly and
purelie without fraud, and that 2. Cor. 10, verse. 5.
we may cast down al our imaginations, and every hie thing that is exalted
against thy knowledge; and lead our understanding captive to the obedience of
the word which thou have delivered: and obey thy Gospel in all simplicity of
faith, according to the good pleasure of thy will Ephesians. 1, 6.
to the praise of the glory of thy grace.

Assist us, O our Father which art in heaven, that both thy word may be purely
and sincerely preached, and we thereby, as becomes the sons of God, reformed
in our lives.

Give us thine holy Spirit, that we may believe thy word through thy grace,
and so lead a godly and virtuous life in this world, and live hereafter with
thy son in eternal bliss.

Break thou of, and hinder all the consultations and devises, both of the
devil, the world, and the flesh, which do neither sanctify thine holy Name,
nor suffer thy kingdom to be brought unto us.

Comfort, and keep us strongly in thy word, and faith, even til our lives
end: that so both thy good and gracious will may be done in our hearts, and they
which as yet believe not thy word, by our good conversation 1. Pet. 2, 12 1
Pet. 3, 16. Matthew. 5, 16.
, may be won to thy Gospel, and glorify thee our God to the increase of thy
celestial kingdom.

Make us meet Col. 1, 12.
to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light; Thou which have
delivered us 13.
from the power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of thy beloved
son Mat. 3, 17. Matthew. 17, 5. Hebru. 1, 5.
in whom Col. 1, 14. 23.
we have redemption through his blood, that is the remission of sins; that we
may be grounded and stablished in faith, and not moved away from the hope of
the Gospel, but may walk 1. Cor. 1, 8. Ephesians. 1, 4. Colos. 1, 22.
unblameable, and without fault in thy sight as it becomes the children of
light 1. Tim. 2, 2
in all godliness and honesty.

And forasmuch as thy kingdom Romans 14, verse. 17.
is not meat nor drink, neither consists in ceremonies and traditions,
which are invented by man, neither comes it with observations Luke. 17,
verse. 20.
; neither is it in word 1. Cor. 4, verse. 20.
but in righteousness Romans 14, verse. 17.
, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, and 1. These. 1, 5
in power: Grant, O eternal God, that we, being borne anew 1. Pe. 1, 23.
by thy word and holy Spirit, may attain the inheritance 1. Pet. 1, 4.
of eternal life; and lifting up our hearts on hie Coloss. 3. verse. 1, and 2.
where Christ sits at thy right hand, may set our affections on things
which are above, and not on things on the earth.

Therefore be thou present with us in these latter days of the world and begin
thy kingdom in us; prosper the same with thy divine assistance, that we may be
conformable unto thy godly pleasure, purchasing thy favor in this world, and
afterward in thy new kingdom, in the kingdom of glory, where thou God art
al in all, may ioiefullie remain with thee for evermore.

Grant therefore that we may be Matthew. 5, verse. 3, etc. Luke. 6, 20.
poor in spirit, in heart humble, sorrowful in mind for our offenses; and may
with all our hearts hunger Matthew. 5, verse. 6, etc.
and thirst after righteousness: Make us lowly and courteous; liberal, and
pitiful, pure in heart and peacemakers, likewise in persecutions and trobles
patient, that we neither take nor give offense unto any; but may exercise our
selves in the works of charity, and of mercy, feeding the hungry Matthew. 25,
verse. 35, etc.
giving drink to the thirsty, clothing the naked Esai. 58, 7. Ezec. 18. 7.
, lodging strangers, comforting the weak, and visiting the imprisoned.

Finally, of thine abundant mercy, grant, that in thy last judgment we may
hear that ioieful, and most comfortable voice of thy well-beloved Son, saying
Matthew. 25, verse. 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundations of the world,

Amen.
5. A prayer for Magistrates.
OMost mighty GOD, King of all the world, which by thine holy Spirit have
commanded 1. Tim. 2, 1.
that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings and for all that are in authority, 1. Tim. 2, 2.
which thou have placed Eccl. 10, 4.
to be rulers of the earth according to thy good wisdom, and set in
government at thy good pleasure. For thou exaltest some unto the top of honor
Job. 36, 7.
and protectest their dignity (thou castest not down the mighty which art
mighty thy self) and placest Kings in their throne. For all power Romans 13, 1.
Wisdo. 6, 3.
is from thee.

We beseech thee therefore even with deep sighs of heart, O Lord of Lords,
that forgiving our sins thou would give good Rulers; and also maintain
their authority. For among men there is no place for Law and justice, where
the rulers and princes whom thou have appointed are not feared.

Uphold all the states, and governors of this realm; and protect them from
destruction in these grievous calamities, and miserable disorder of these latter
days.

Especially preserve our Noble Queen, and her godly Counsel: grant them a
long, healthful, and good life; that they may devoutly serve thee, and justly
do their office.

Lighten their minds with the knowledge of thy sacred word, that they may deal
wisely Psalm. 2, 10.
and be learned which judge the earth; serving 11.
thee in fear, and reioicing in trembling. Let them embrace discipline 12.
and kiss the Son the Savior of the world: least happily he be angry, and
they perish in the way.

Bless them, O God, that they may always hope in thee, Esa. 49, 23.
nourish thy ministers, give relief unto thy Gospel; and open their gates
Psalm. 24, 7.
that the King of glory may come in, the 8.
Lord of power, which is mighty in battle.

Give them a care of godliness, that they may give their goods to the erecting
and cherishing of the church; and show themselves Patrones and defenders of the
same. Make them diligent in rooting out superstition, and in promoting thy
Kingdom; in maintaining the purity of doctrine; in remoouing al offenses; and
finally in wyping away al filthiness which both defile thy religion, and
deface thy glory: that the comers after us have none occasion of transgressing.

Bless them with sober counsel, wisdom, industry and courage of mind.
Give them good success in all their enterprises, and prosper their doings. Let
them consider that they are placed to defend the good and innocent; and with
severe punishment Romans 13, 4
to correct the wicked and rebellious: so shall wickedness Deu. 13, 11. Deuteronomy. 17,
13.
be taken from among us, and the public state remain in safety, to the
preservation of mankind, and continuance both of common and Christian peace to
the glory of thy sacred Majesty, and the commodity of their subjects; to the
rooting out of ignorance and error; and to the furtherance of good arts,
honest trades, and liberal studies.

And forasmuch Prou. 21, 1.
as the hearts of Kings, Queens, and of al men are in thine hands, so that
thou can turn them at thy pleasure, we beseech thee, almighty and merciful
God, that it would please thee to turn from cruelty to clemency the minds of
al Tyrans and unmerciful Princes, that they move not war against thee rashly,
whereby the course of thy divine word may be hindered; worldly substance
wickedlie consumed; and their subjects polled unreasonably and devoured:

But give unto al in authority quiet hearts, desirous of christian concord,
that they may remember they are the ministers of God to maintain his glory,
and to keep their people from injury and oppression; and bear the sword Romans
13, 4.
to take vengance on them which do evil on the behalf of God. For they rule
not for their own cause, but for the public welfare; neither may they do
what they list, but are bound to seek the profit of their subjects, and to
set forth the glory of God.

Let them not therefore abuse their authority and power: but grant them grace
to remember continually that they are mortal men, whose Lord is in heaven,
which respects no person Ephesians. 6, 9.
; and before whose judgment seat Psalm. 9, 7. 2. Cor. 5, 10. Romans 14, 10. Wisd.
6, 5.
they must al appear, and give an account unto thee the true and righteous
God, judge both of the quick and dead, which raignest and rulest for evermore,

Amen.
6. A prayer for Subjects.
O Most merciful God, at thy beck do al things bow, both in heaven, and in
earth; at thy voice do both wind Mat. 8, 26.
and seas obey, confessing thy Majesty.

Every knee Phili. 2, 10 Romans 14, 11. Esai. 45, 23.
boweth unto thee both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth: meet it is also that we obeie thee, which have commanded al
Subjects to give due obedience Romans 13, 1. 1. Pet. 2, 13.
and reverence unto their lawful Magistrates, which subjection thou have
inioined unto us not only to avoid punishment, but especially to keep and
retain a good conscience. For all authority is ordained by thee Romans 13, 2
, that the world every where may be godly and quietly governed. For much
more safely do we live under laws and judgment, than if every man had the
bridle at will to roaue as he list.

We beseech thee therefore, O eternal God, that first of al in every thing,
and in all things, we may obey thee 1. Tim. 1, 17
our most high and mighty God, King of the whole world before any creature,
and that in true faith, and godly fear.

Next Ephesians. 6, 5.
that al Subjects, and private persons with all singlenes of heart, in all
things, which are not contrary to thy word, may obeie their public
Magistrate having power and authority over them; and submit themselves 1. Pet.
2, 13
to every civil ordinance, for thy sake, not to the King only as to the
chief, but to 14.
other inferior officers sent from him, for the punishment of evil doers, and
for the praise of the good. Let them always remember that this subjection and
obedience thou requirest to be showen as to thine own ordinance, whereby the
safety of mankind is maintained.

Wherefore bend thou our hearts, and guide them, that we envy not the honor due
to our Superiors; neither obraie, nor backbyte them, but rather, honoring them
most dutifullie, may both pray 1. Tim. 2, 1.
for them, and pay with willing minds whatsoever by the civil law, and by
nature we are bound to do.

Be it far from us, O Almighty God, that any of us should despise, rail Exo.
22, 28 Acts. 23, 5.
or in his heart wish evil unto his Prince, or Superiors. For thou have
vouchsafed them the title of Gods Psalm. 82, 6.
in the holy Scriptures: because they rule in thy steed here on the earth.
Hence it is, that whosoever resist their Superiors Romans 13, 2
, and forsake the yoke of obedience, are said to resist thine ordinance, and
shall receive to themselves judgment, running into the foul crime of treson
against thy sacred person; and staining their conscience with the filthy spot
of obstinacy and disobedience, giving an occasion unto the wicked to slander
thy Gospel.

Grant also that inferiors, and subjects be not burdened with over great and
new exactions, unlawful paiments, and intolerable tributes, neither oppressed
with grievous servitude, or pilled by any other violence, or tyranny. And if
in any place Lions and woolues show their cruelty toward thy servants, their
godly Subjects, plucking their skins Mica. 3, 2.
from them, breaking their bones, and devouring thy people none otherwise than
if they should eat bread Psalm. 14, 4.
give patience unto thine afflicted members, that they may quietly sustain
their miserable servitude, as a cross sent from thee 1. Pet. 1, 7. Wisd. 3, 5.
Deuteronomy. 8, 2. Eccles. 2, 5. Prou. 17, 3.
for a trial of their faith and patience.

Aid us with thy comfort, whereby we may with patient minds suffer the trobles
which in this last and doting age of this world more and more increase;
remembering that thou God, have prepared thy throne Psalm. 9, 7. 8.
in judgment to judge the world in equity, and thy people with righteousness;
to be a refuge for the poor, and an helper in due time, 9.
even in affliction. For Psalm. 9, 18.
the poor shall not alwaie be forgotten: the hope of the afflicted shall not
perish for ever.

Wherefore listen thou unto the prayer and sighs of thy servants which cry
unto thee, and aid them, as thou did the children of Israel, whose misery,
calamity, and bondage thou did behold, Ezod. 3, 7. 8.
delivering them from the grievous servitude of Egypt; and bringing them out of
the iron furnace Deu. 4, 20.
of Pharao, through thy mighty and stretched out arm.

Keep us also from ungodly and idolatrous Magistrates, that we be not under
the yoke, and government of Infidels and Ethnikes, which will be unto us and
our posterity in steed of thorns and pricks Joshua. 23, verse. 13.
offering continual occasions of Apostasy, and reuolting from true religion.

Suffer not the rod of the wicked Psa. 125, 3
to rest upon the lot of the righteous, least the righteous put forth their
hand unto wickedness.

Break in pieces the scepters of the wicked: and Romans 6, 12
deliver us from the yoke of sin, that we offer not our members as
instruments of unrighteousness, and that wickedness rage not in our mortal bodies
to the suppressing of the soul and body, which live and raignest in all
eternity,

Amen.
7. A prayer against the enemies of Gods truth.
O God most hie, whose dwelling is above the clouds, and rulest al things both
in heaven and earth; Psalm. 2, 1.
Why do

(...)guard the works of thine hands: therefore destroy and overthrow them,
so that they never be able to arise again.

O God of Sabbath, fight thou against them Psalm. 35, 1.
that fight against us; lay hand upon thy shield and buckler, 2.
and stand up for our help; bring out also the spear, and encounter 3.
with them which persecute us, that we may know thy salvation on the earth.

Give the victory over thine enemies unto our Magistrates, capitaines, and
conductors of thy people. Blessed be the Lord Ps. 144, 1.
our strength which teaches the hands of our soldiors to fight; and their
fingers to war. For thou art our aid, 2.
and the defense in whom we trust; thou destroiest al our enemies. For 1. Match.
3, verse. 19. 2. Chr. 20, 6
the victory comes from heaven, and is not gotten by the multitude of an
host. The King is not saved Psa. 33, 16.
by the multitude of warriers; neither is the mighty man delivered by his
great strength. An horse 17.
is a vain thing; and shall not deliver any by his mighty bones. But Iudit.
9, 11. Judges. 7, 2.
thine, O Lord, is the power. Thou can as well save by a few 2. Chro. 14
verse. 11. 2. Chr. 16, 8.
as by many. Salvation belongs unto the Lord Psalm. 3, 8.
, and his blessing is upon the people.

Wherefore Psa. 10, 15.
break thou the arm of the ungodly; weaken their strength; bring al their
counsels to naught; destroy them which trust in their multitudes Iudit. 9, 7.
and in their chariots, and in their spears, shields, and arrows. For thou
art our God which breakest the battles; the Lord is thy Name. Lift up thine 8.
arm as thou did in the beginning, and break their strength with thy power.
Overthrow their force 9.
in thy displeasure, which vow to violate thy sanctuary, and to pollute the
Tabernacle of thy most glorious Name. Grant Lord that with 10.
their own sword their pride may be cut of.

Let them al be confounded Psalm. 6, 10.
which hate thee; let the^ Psalm. 35, 4.
be brought to shame which deal wickedlie. Let them be as chafe Psalm. 1, 4.
Psalm. 35, 5.
before the wind, and let thine Angel scatter them. Let the enemies of thy
Chuch blush and be trobled greatly; let them be turned back and brought to
speedy confusion, that thy Name be not blasphemed among the Gentiles,

Amen.
8. Evening prayer, on Mondaie.
O ALMIGHTY, and merciful God, thou have made the Moon for certain seasons
Ps. 104, 19.
; the Sun, which thou have created, knows his going down; Thou make
darkness, and 20.
it is night, wherein men betake them to rest, cease from their work, and
recreate their wearied members through sleep. Thou art the God Esai. 45, 7.
forming light, and creating darkness.

Therefore in the evening we will praise thee, and going to bed will give thee
thanks, because thou have kept us this day of thine only mercy without any
merit of ours from al danger and hurt.

When we are in troble we call upon thee, and in the evening will we remember thy
mercy and truth, which thou have showed unto us abundantly.

Our eyes prevent Ps. 119, 148
the night watches to meditate upon thy wonderful things; and our studies shall
be always of the excellency of thy Name. For Psalm. 57, 3.
thou have sent from heaven and delivered us; and have brought them to shame
that troade upon us. O God, thou have sent thy 4.
mercy and truth, and taken our souls from the mids of them which compassed
us about.

Therefore Psalm. 54, 6.
we will sacrifice freely unto thee, and praise thy most glorious Name. For
thou have delivered 7.
us from al troble, and our eyes have seen our desire upon our enemies.

O Lord, God of our salvation Psalm. 88, 1.
, day and night do we cry before thee; when our eyes are trobled through
grief and bitterness of our souls, we pour out our tears before thee, and in
this place we humbly beseech thee, cover and put out al our offenses; that as
the Sun of this day is now down and hidden: so thou would also hide al
our iniquities, and drown al our offenses Mica. 7, 19.
in the bottom of the sea, that they never be seen with eyes, nor come forth
into judgment.

O our God, we blush, and are ashamed to lift up our eyes unto thee. For we are
not worthy to lift up our eyes unto Heaven, because Psa. 40, 11.
our sins are mo than the hears of our head. Our offenses have taken such
hold on us that we are unable to look up.

We have sinned, O Lord, we have sinned Dan. 9, 5.
and have committed iniquity, yea, we have rebelled, and departed from thy
precepts, and from thy judgments; We have not obeyed 6.
thy servants which spoke in thy Name to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our
Fathers, and to all the people of the land.

O Lord, righteousness belongs 7.
unto thee; but unto us open shame and confusion.

O Lord Tob. 3, 2.
thou art just, and al thy works, and al thy ways are mercy and truth; thou
iudgest truly and rightly for ever. Remember us, and 3.
look upon us according to the multitude of thy mercies, neither punish us for
our sins, nor remember our offenses, nor our forefathers, which have not
obeyed thy commandments.

We faint Psalm. 6, 6.
in our mourning, we will cause our bed to swim, and water our coutch with
tears. Our eyes 7.
be trobled through the grief of our wickedness, and our faces be withered.

O Lord, God of hosts, Psa. 84, 8. 9.
hear our prayer; O God our protector behold and look upon the face of Christ
thine only begotten Son making intercession for us, and wink at our
offenses.

Hide thy face from our sins Psa 51, 9.
and blot out al our iniquities. Create in us clean hearts, O God, and renew 10.
right spirits within us. Cast us not away from thy presence, and take 11.
not thine holy spirit from us. Restore to us the joy of thy salvation and 12.
stablish us with thy free Spirit, that we may do al things according to thy
will, and serve thee always with a willing mind.

O Christ King of glory, we beseech thee blessed Lord, defend us this night;
let our rest be in thee, grant us thy grace that neither much sleep
ouerwhelme us, nor Satan invade us; nor the flesh betraie us unto him and make
us guilty in thy sight.

Let our eyes sleep, but let our hearts wake, and cause thy right hand to
protect such as trust in thee. O Lord, lighten our eyes that we sleep not in
death, that Satan hurt us not, and our enemy say, Psalm. 13, 4.
I have prevailed against them.

Watch over us, O eternal Savior, least the subtle tempter overtake us, and we
sleep a perpetual sleep Ierem. 51, ve. 39, and 57.
, and wake no more. For thou art made our everlasting helper.

Keep us as the apple of thine eye, Psalm. 17, 8.
hide us under the shadow of thy wings, O Lord, that neither ouglie visions,
nor horrible dreams, nor sightes and monsterous apparitions Wisd. 17, 4
troble us in the dark.

In thy Name, O sweet Jesus, will we go to bed, and give sleep to our eyes, and
slomber to our eye lids, compass us about, and raise us again to the ioieful
sight of tomorrow light; and after this miserable life bring us to the
beholding of eternal happiness, that in thy light Psalm. 36, 9.
we may see light, and evermore praise thee reigning worlds without end,

Amen.
1. On Tuesdaie, Morning prayer.
O Almighty, everliving, true, and merciful God, eternal Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which together Ephe. 3, 9.
with thy Son and the holy Ghost have created the frame of this world
withal things therein contained, and preseruest the same as yet according to thy
free pleasure: al creatures without ceassing evermore should extol and praise
thee, and that do even the very fowls of the air Wis. 17, 17 Psalm. 104, 12.
which earelie in the morning among the thick branches of trees, and from the
mids of rocks, giving out their sound and flieng about in the air with most
pleasant tunes do magnify thee the eternal God, Lord, and Creator of al
things.

And therefore we men also earelie in the morning should praise thee for thy
benefits, and evermore extol thy mercy with divine commendations.

Thou have preserved us this night passed, and from our cradles to this present
hour have thou kept us safe. Thou have caused us to come from sleep and
darkness unto the light of this day: and from our beds through thy benignity
we do arise in safety.

Had not thou, O Lord, bin present with us, and watched us, the insatiable
cruelty of Satan had devoured us. Had not thou kept our houses and us Psa.
127, 1.
the keeper of the City had watched in vain.

If the Lord had not bin on our side Psa. 124, 1.
when men rose up against us, they had then swallowed us up 3.
quick, when their wrath was kindled against us: then had the waters Psalm.
1(...), 4.
(of troble) drowned us, and the stream (of miseries) had gone over our
souls; yea the swelling and merciles 5.
waters had gone over our souls. Blessed be the Lord which 6.
has not given us a pray for their teeth. Our souls are escaped, even 7.
as a bird out of the snare of the foulers, the snare is broken, and we are
delivered. Our help is in the 8.
Name of the Lord which has made both heaven and earth.

Now harken therefore unto our words, O Lord, Psalm. 5, 2.
mark our cry, understand the voice of our prayer, our King and our God. For
unto 3.
thee, Lord we will pray, hear our voice in the morning.

Earelie will we stand before thee, and behold thy fortitude and Majesty,
looking for thine assistance with a woonderful desire.

O God and governor, raise us up earelie Esai. 50, 4.
earelie we say li^t up our ears to the hearing of thee our instructor. Open
thou our ears Prou. 2, 2.
that we rebel not against thee, neither yet go backwarde; but let thy voice
sound in our ears: make them obedient unto thee Psalm. 40, 6.
that we be not obstinate like the serpent, neither hardened like the deaf
adder Psalm. 58, 4.
which stops his ears: but let them be open Esai. 8, 20.
to hear thy Laws and testimonies: and harken always unto the cry of the
poor Pro. 21, 13.
; that the morning light may rise unto us, and our light break forth as the
day, and our health spring up sodeinlie.

Again, Eccle. 28, verse. 24.
shut up our ears, hedge them in with thorns, and put bars upon them, that
they neither admit nor allow false doctrine, and that they turn not 2. Tim.
4, verse. 4.
from the truth to fables, and other follies.

But thou, O our God and Creator, which did plant the ear Psa. 94, 9.
and hear al things, make the same with a willing and ready mind to obeie
thee our maker and Redeemer.

Hear us, Lord, for thy loving kindness is good Psa. 69, 16.
turn unto us according to the multitude of thy tender mercies: and Lam. 3, 56*
stop not thine ear from our sighing and from our cry.

Incline thine ear Psalm. 86, 1.
, O Lord, and hear us, for we are poor and needy. Have mercy on us, O Lord,
because we cry unto thee all the day long. Let us hear thy loving kindness
Psa. 143, 8.
in the morning, which is better than al riches, yea, than life it self; make
us to hear joy Psalm. 51, 8.
and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

We beseech thee, O eternal God, by the incarnation and nativity of thy Son
Jesus Christ, that through thy word entering into our ears, and minds, thou will transform us into new men, and be borne of thee, and as newborn babes
1. Pet. 2, 2.
may desire that milk not of body, but of the mind which knows no deceit:
whereby we may grow, and 3.
taste how sweet thy promise is unto the godly; which embrace the same
through faith: and that laieng aside 1. Pet. 2, 1.
al malitiousnes, and guile, and al dissimulation and envy, we may walk as
children, 1. Cor. 14, verse. 20.
but in understanding, may be perfect.

And being thus regenerated, keep us, O eternal God, both this day and at al
times from evil tidings Psa. 112, 7.
that our ears hear no rumors of wars, nor be terrefied by any grievous
chance. Fill us in this hour with thy favor, that all this day reioicing
together, we may delight in thy praises, through our Lord Jesus Christ which
lives and reigns with thee for evermore,

Amen.
2. A thanksgiving unto God for our Sanctification.
O God the holy Ghost which proceedest Ioh. 15, 26.
from the Father and the Son, and with them art worshipped and glorified in
the unity 1. Ioh. 5, 7.
of the true and eternal Deity, and art also the substantial amity between
the Father and the Son:

We worship thee, we praise and glorify thee, and with our whole heart we
thank thee for all thy benefits: especially for calling us by the voice of the
Gospel 2. Timo. ^, verse. 7, etc.
unto the Christian congregation; for illuminating us with thy gifts; for
sanctifieng us with a steadfast faith, and for keeping us hitherto in the same.
For by the font of the wholesome lauor, that is, by the water of holy
baptism, being poured into us, thou do continually work in us regeneration
Titus. 3, 5.
and renewing of the inward man.

Harken we beseech thee, unto our supplication, and teach us miserable men,
which by the proper strength of our only reason ca^ by no means trust in, or
approach to Christ our Lord and Savior, teach us, O our God, what thy pleasure
is, and lead us Ioh. 16, 13.
into al truth. For 1. Cor. 12, 3
without thine assistance none can say that Jesus is the Lord.

O blessed light, fill the inward parts of thy faithful; without thy grace
nothing is within man, which is not hurtful. Wash that is filthy; water that
is dry; heal that is wounded; bow the obstinate; cherish the frozen; and
reclame them which wander. Give to thy faithful trusting in thee, the reward of
well doing; the entrance into happiness, and everlasting comfort.

Thou in thy gifts Esal. 11, 2.
seuenfold, which art the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength; the spirit of knowledge, and
of the fear of the Lord: inspire into us through the preaching of the Gospel,
thine heavenly wisdom about thine essence and divine pleasure, which is hid
from the world.

Grant that we may know the Father and the Son by thee, and may always
believe that thou art the spirit of them both: and so worship one God in
trinity, and the trinity in unity: whose will is, that not one should perish
Eze. 33, 11. Ezech. 3, 21.
but be converted and live; and Ioh. 6, 40.
that as many as believe in the Son should have everlasting life. For Ioh. 3,
17. John. 9, 39. John. 12, 47.
the Father sent the Son not to condemn the world: but that the world
through him might be saved.

O Lightener of the mind, pour upon us thy new light, and purge the horrible
darkness of our minds, so that we may see and know our chief Father, whom
Matt. 5, 8.
pure eyes only do behold.

O thou heavenly comforter John. 15, verse. 26. John. 14, 26.
give unto us a testimony; and grant unto our minds a token of the certainty
of our belief, so that we doubt not, neither waver about thy divine goodness
toward us.

Make our hearts quiet and secure, that with a full trust and confidence Heb. 4,
16.
we may approach to the throne of thine heavenly grace, receiving Galat. 4, 5.
by adoption the right of children; and inflamed with spiritual joy in all
boldness and liberty Romans 8, 15
may cry, Abba Father.

Thou which art the earnest Ephesians. 1, ve. 13, and 14. 2. Cor. 5, 5.
of our inheritance to the redemption of the promise, and art effectual by thy
word and Sacraments; sign our hearts with the seal 2. Cor. 1, 22 Ephesians. 4, 3.
of thy promise, whereby we may have the same, and retain it surely in our
hearts, through thy deed.

Thou most faithful Advocate John. 16, 7.
strengthen us against all the assaults and tentations of Satan: so that we may
never doubt of thy divine providence and predestination, whereby we are chosen
and called in Christ unto everlasting life, and never, being stricken with a
servile fear, and oppressed with dreadful doubtings, may in a rage fly and
forsake our God.

O surpassing comforter, leave us not destitute of thine aid, and patronage,
but vouchsafe evermore to be present with us in our crosses and trobles; least
otherwise we faint. But rather make us to rejoice in tribulations, knowing Iam.
1, 12.
that a crown of life is laid up for such as love him.

O thou teacher of men instruct us how, and what we ought to pray for Romans 8,
26
according to thy will, that we may be heard 1. Ioh. 5, 14.
and make thou intercession for us, with sighs that cannot be expressed.

O thou clenser of the heart, give unto us the simplicity of mind without gal
and bitterness, which descendedst Matt. 3, 16. Mark. 1, 10.
in Jordan upon our Lord and Savior Christ in the likeness of a dove Luke 3, 22.
that we may be void of Iam. 3, 14.
bitter envy, and contention in our hearts; and have no root Deu. 29, 18
Acts. 8, 23.
among us, that brings forth gal and wormwood.

O thou substantial flame proceeding from the breast of the Father and his
eternal Son, lighten our hearts with the fire of chaste and burning love: thou
which apperedst at the feast of Pentecost unto the Apostles in cloven tongues
Acts. 2, 3.
like fire; see unto our coldness, and comfort us with thy quickening heat and
breathings, that we may receive thy chrisme 1. John, 2, ve. 20, and 27.
and annointment.

O thou ghest of the soul, make thee a mansion place within the secret parts
of our hearts; that we may be an house for thy divinity 1. Cor. 3, 16 1. Cor.
6, 19.
which may dwell perpetually in our members, and never depart from us, through
our Lord and Savior Christ,

Amen.
3. A prayer for a steadfast hope.
BLessed be God 2. Cor. 1, 3. Ephesians 1, 3.
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ which according to his abundant
mercy 1. Pet. 1, 3.
has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of his Son
from the dead to an inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and 4.
that vadeth not away, reserved in heaven for such as believe on him, through
the confession of the truth, which is according to godliness Titus. 1, 1.
under the hope of eternal life, which God, Nom. 23, verse. 19.
that cannot lie, has promised, before the world began.

For Romans 8, 24
we are saved by hope. But hope that is seen is no hope. For how can a man
hope for that which he sees? But if we hope for that we 25.
see not, we do with patience abide for it.

For such is the will of almighty God, that we shall not have salvation as long
as we are here in this world, but only in hope, nourishing the same as it
were clasped in our arms: but then we shall perceive the same in deed, when we
depart from hence one day.

For hope is the inseperable companion of Faith. For how can that be hoped for,
which is not believed? And this hope depending upon the promise of God is so
certain, as if the thing it self were present. For God which has promised to
us salvation, is truth John. 14, ve. 6, 16, 26.
; and can neither deceive, nor be deceived.

Wherefore we beseech thee, O eternal Father, author Romans 15, verse. 13.
of hope and comfort, fill us with all joy and peace in believing, that we may
abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost, and above hope Romans 4,
18.
in hope believing may never doubt of thy promises, but in a sure confidence of
heart apply to our selves the remission of sins, and verily believe that we
please thee through Christ, looking in a certain and strong hope, through
sufferance for the salvation of our souls in the life to come.

And albeit the helps of our happiness appear not in this world, yet let us
retain a steadfast hope among all the terrors and fears of conscience; and
never suffer the same to be taken from us by any snares of Satan: but expecting
Titus. 2, 13.
that blessed appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior
Christ, which has given himself for us, always fasten the same upon the good
things absent and to come.

O thou only begotten Son of God which have loved us 2. These. 2, verse. 16.
, and given us everlasting comfort and hope through grace, comfort our hearts,
and establish us in every word and good 17.
work; that we stick not uncertain, neither be tossed between hope and
fear, but may hold fast Hebr. 3, 6.
the confidence.

(...)gedst thy self down from the hiest top of glory to utter shame,
putting on our flesh, thy Majesty being hid and dissembled for a time. And so
becamest thou obedient unto thy Father not only in obeieng him with greater
reverence than any other creature else did: but also in offering up thy self
a sacrifice for sins, thereby to redeem us being bondslaues through pride
unto sin and death, and to exalt us to an hope of eternal life; and withal by
thine example to teach us, and to propose an example of true lowlines, and
humility, saying Matthew 11, verse. 29.
, Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in heart:

We beseech thee through thine humility and passion, give unto us a contrite
spirit, a Psa. 51, 17.
contrite and an humbled heart, which thou despisest not, O Lord. For thou art
near unto al them Psa. 34, 18.
which are of a trobled heart, and wilt save such as are humble in spirit. Thou
regardest their prayers, and give to them thy grace, and thy secrets Eccl. 3,
20.
are revealed unto the lowly.

Grant therefore that we following thy footesteps may humble our selves from the
heart without hypocrisy.

Turn our hearts that they be not wickedlie humbled, Ecc. 19, 25
after the manner of hypocrites, which bow themselves, and are sad casting down
their faces toward the earth, whose inward parts notwithstanding are full of
deceit.

O God, holy Ghost, which art the ruler of our minds, and the giver of good
gifts; which not only commendest, but also command us to have benignity
Col. 3, 12.
, lowlines, modesty, and patience that being clothed therewithal we may
endeavor to facion our selves after thee, thinking modestly and soberlie of
our selves:

Govern thou our minds, that we may be subject one to another, not only
honoring, but also preventing Romans 12, ve. 10, and 16.
one another in doing the same; and always applieng our selves to humility,
may seek thy glory, and the profit of our neighbor.

Let neither pride Job. 4, verse. 13, etc.
nor luxuriousnes have dominion either in our sense or speech; neither let us
lift up our pecocks feathers, nor extol our eielids through arrogancy; neither
glory in proud and vain opinions Phili. 2, 3. Romans 12, 10.
: but by humblenes of mind, submitting our selves one to another, may think
others better than our selves, and consider what our condition is. For man
taken from the earth must return unto the same, and be the heir Ecc. 10, 12.
of worms and serpents.

Especially our request is, that we be not puffed up in spiritual gifts:
remove arrogancy and pride from us, that our hearts Psalm. 131, 1.
be not lifted up, nor yet our eyes exalted; neither let us wade in greater and
higher things than becomes us; cause us 2.
to frame and tame our minds like a child newly weaned, which is lowly with
his mother. Let our minds be weaned like a child Matt. 18, 3.
knowing not what pride means.

Keep the proud devil that he provoke us not to sin, nor to swel up through
a vain persuasion of fleshly righteousness, neither wickedlie to boast of thy
gifts, abusing them to our own glory, and contempt of others.

Suffer us not to seem wise Esai. 5, 21.
in our own eyes. Amend this vice ingraffed in us by nature, that no man love
or like himself too well; and in respect of himself contemn others, having not
the like, or not so excellent gift as he has.

Suffer not good wits, and teachers armed with public authority to be pricked
and tickled with the spurs of pride and curiosity to the moving of idle
questions, and disputations, either through ambition or hatred. For that is not
the wisdom descending from above: but earthly, Iam. 3, 15.
sensual, and devilish. For Iam. 3, 16.
where emulation and strife is, there is sedition and al manner of evil works.

Grant therefore that al of us being humble may be exalted to eternal life,

Amen.
5. A prayer for wedded folks.
O Most holy God, and mercisul father, which of thy singular providence, and
woonderful wisdom did ordain matrimony in Paradyse Genesis 2, 24.
, and that in the time of innocence, for the multiplieng and conservation of
mankind: thereby to gather unto thy self continually out of godly families,
an holy catholic church which may rightly acknowledge, serve, and celebrate
thine holy name for evermore, and deliver the true understanding of thee unto
posterities by one generation to another.

This thine institution did thy Son, God coequal with thee and coeternal,
confirm and adorn in Cana of Galile by turning water John. 2, 8.
into good wine. A notable honoring of marriage doubtless for Christ not only to
be present himself at the nuptial feast, but also to set out the same with the
first miracle that he wrought after his nativity.

Likewise thy holy Spirit does witness by the word delivered unto us, and
says, that Heb. 13, 4.
marriage is honorable among al. And the same thy Spirit reioiceth in three
things Eccl. 25, 1.
which are commended both before God and man, in the concord of brethren, in
the love of neighbors, and in a man and wife that agree well together For such
as be at variance can neither call upon thee as they should, nor please thee as
they ought.

O eternal God it is sufficiently apparent, with what a rage and insatiable
hatred, Satan, the most deadly enemy to al thy works, does labor and set
himself to the breaking of, and overthrow of this thy sacred ordinance.

Wherefore, we beseech thee, impart thy favor unto al married folks, that they
may acknowledge thee to be the author and institutor of this knitting together
in wedlock; and know and believe steadfastly that they are in a good estate,
wherein they may please thee through christ thy Son.

For having this comfort they will more willingly and cheerfully discharge the
duties of their calling in true confidence, and calling upon thy Name. But such
as doubt of their kind of life, having their conscience wounded, and trobled
minds, can neither call upon thee truly, nor cheerefullie go about, and finish
their affairs.

Grant therefore unto al and every married body, that in true faith and
confession they may retain the indissoluble chain of wedded state, and the
strong bonds of godly fellowship: that they may love one another, and in the
sweat of their brows Genesis 3, 19.
eat their bread; and bring up their children Ephesians. 6, 4.
in all godliness, through instruction, and information of the Lord, and never
fear the cross which accompanies this kind of life.

Work so that Satan by no means weaken and overthrow this thine ordinance;
nor that married folks, wearied with the trobles of wedded life, raise mortal
hatred among themselves, and so detest and abhor this thine holy institution,
and seek unlawful diuorcements. For by this engine of incredulity, and snare
of mistrust being comprehended, they will easily rush headlong into enormous
offenses by casting of the yoke of the Lord, and be carried through dissension
into horrible co^fusions of concupiscence, to adultery, whoredom, wicked
forsakings, so long, til polluted with filthy spots, and defiled with most
horrible stains they bring themselves hedlong into everlasting torments. Grant
therefore, O most merciful God, that al at debate may come to amity, and be
reconciled in thy Name, and, being mindful of the knot of marriage, and mutual
bond between them, may dwell and live peaceably together in true faith, and
fear of thy Name:

That husbands 1. Cor. 7, 3.
, abusing their authority, do not exercise tyranny over their wives, but
rather love them, and dwell with them according to knowledge 1. Pet. 3, 7.
, giving honor unto them as unto the weaker vessels, even as to them which are
also heirs of grace and life:

Likewise that matrones contemn not their husbands, denieng subjection, but
rather study by chaste obedience, and holy conversation and lowlines to
overcome them.

Let neither hate other extremely, and so violate the state of marriage, and
bring themselves out of thy favor, through their discord and contention,
whereby their prayers be interrupted. For where neither part do their duty,
there must needs ensue first poverty, subtlety, lieng, and al impiety:
afterward a wounded conscience; and last of al utter despair.

O most chaste God, which did therefore institute the order of matrimony,
that by the same both the weak nature of mankind might live purelie in lawful
wedlock, and an holy Church be gathered unto thy self: give thy blessing to
al which are married, that they may have godly children, and their wives Psa.
128, 3.
prove like the fruiteful vine, and their children appear like the olive
branches round about their table, and may see their childers children, 6.
the peace and safety of the Church, the which, Christ thy Son repairer of
mankind by taking our flesh upon him, has copled to himself, which lives and
reigns with thee in the unity of the holy Spirit a God for evermore,

Amen.
6. A prayer for young folks.
OMost merciful God, and eternal Father, which out of the mouth of babes Psalm.
8, 2.
and sucklings have ordained strength of thy praise; and wilt also Ps. 148, 12.
that young men and maidens, old men and children should praise thee the eternal
God, in true confessing, inuocating, and celebrating of thy divine majesty
through al generations for evermore:

Thou have enioined unto children that they show Exo. 20, 12 Deutr. 5, 16.
Matthew. 15, 4. Ephesians. 6, 2. Colos. 3, 20. Mark. 7, 10. Eccles. 3, 9.
due honor, subjection, and reverence to their parents, and obeie them
willingly in all good and lawful things:

We beseech thee, on the behalf of al infants, children, and younger sort, as
well maidens, as of the malekind, implant in them a true fear o^ thy Name, that
from their youth they may confess thee Ioh. 17, 3.
to be the only true God, and Jesus whom thou have sent to be Christ; and
increase daily in this wholeso^e knowledge, profiting as in years Luke 2, 52.
so in favor both before thee and men.

Let them not cast of the yoke of obedience and subjection, neither yet abuse
the gentleness of their parents and elders unto liberty of sinning, nor by
their hardness and austeritie conceive an hatred against them, and refuse their
correction: but make them pacientlie to take the warnings and discipline of
their parents in good part, to the glory of thy Name, and salvation of their
own souls.

O Christ, lover of mankind, which co^mandest children Luke 18. 16 Matt. 19,
14. Mark. 10, ve. 14, and 16.
to be brought unto thee, and receiving them into thine arms, in token of a
singular and dear good will, laieng thine hands upon them did bless them:

We beseech thee, which for our sakes wast borne an infant, and did shed thy
most innocent blood upon the altar of the cross, as well for infants as for
elder folks; bless thou al infants, and children; impart thy grace upon them,
that they may fear thee, and have their parents in great reverence, according
to thy will, which is a most certain rule of al justice and vprightnes.

Keep them therefore that they be not infected with false doctrine, and
superstitious service; neither yet seduced from true religion through wicked
and ungodly behauior.

Preserve them from wicked company, and filthy fellowship, which as contagion
and leaven 1. Cor. 5, 6. Galat. 5, 9.
ouercometh and pearceth the whole lump; keep them from riotousnes and
dronkennes; from wandering concupiscence; from idleness, which ministers matter
and nourishment unto al vices.

Remove away al shameful examples, and take away al offenses Matt. 18, 6.
Mark. 9, 42. Luke. 17, 2.
that the younger sort beholding the multitude of sinners, follow not the steps
of the wicked, and without fear enter into their most abominable ways.

Give unto al young scholars a good wit to conceive, a good capacity to
understand, and a good memory to bear away good lessons, and to learn from
their infancy those things, which may instruct them to salvation 2. Tim. 2, 10
by faith which is in Christ Jesus. For every scripture 2. Tim. 3, verse. 16.
given by the inspiration of God, is profitable to teach, to reprove, to
correct, and to instruct in righteousness that the man of God may be absolute
being instructed to al good works. The entrance into thy words Psalm. 119,
verse. 130.
gives light to the blind, and understanding to the simple.

Grant therefore that from their youth Ps. 119, 9*
they may exercise themselves in thy commandments. For the first institution
does much good, yea, Pro. 22, 6.
the whole race of their life afterward depends upon the same.

O God the holy Ghost, which workest by thy word and sacraments, and thereby
gatherest unto thy self a Church, not only from the elder sort, but also
from the younger, we beseech thee maintain schools and scholars, which are the
seed of thy Church, and direct their studies unto the honor of thy glorious
Name.

Turn the hearts of youth to the love of true doctrine and virtue: whereby they
may come to good behauior in manners, and to sound learning of mind.

Maintain the schools wherein the tongues and sciences are taught, which thou
have revealed unto mankind as necessary helps to teach withal; that so the
pure sound of thine heavenly doctrine may be heard and retained in the true
and right Congregation.

And forasmuch as the very cogitations Genesis 6, 5. Genes. 8, 21. Matt. 15, 19.
of man's heart are evil even from his youth; and our nature, through the fall of
our first parents even from our young years is corrupted, and prone to al
wickedness, that easily it cannot be brought under the subjection of another.
For Pro. 22, 5.
foolishnes is bound in the heart of a child:

Give them wisdom and learning, that they do not delight in wicked
affections, and so grow on in malice and stubbornes, waxing wild and resisting
godly and honest admonitions, and that, being become unbridled, savage,
vntrectable, and past learning, they prove not obstinate in wickedness and
disobedience; but make them through thine instinct to learn and embrace thy
commandments, and to bind thy law Pro. 6, 21.
continually about their hearts, and tie it about their necks, that thy grace
and gift may increase by grace, until, growing to man's estate, they become
profitable instruments of thy Church, and teachers of righteousness, and abide
conioined unto thee, which live and raignest a God worlds without end,

Amen.
7. A prayer against the dominion of Satan.
O Lord IESV Christ, Son of the almighty God: great is the rage Reu. 12, 12.
John. 14, 30.
and tyranny of the Devil, which being strong and armed Luke 11, 21. Reave. 16,
14.
keeps his court to possess the same in peace, and to augment his kingdom
of darkness, wherein reigns horrible Idolatry, hatred of thy truth, and
diverse abominable worshipings, with all kind of shameful transgressions, and
most outrageous wickedness.

Lamentable also is the wretched blindness, and obstinate malice of those men,
which suffer themselves to be ruled by Satan, and follow the beast Reu. 13, 3.
unto al kind of impiety. In whom the God of this world 2. Cor. 4, 4
has blinded the minds of Infidels, that the light of thy glorious Gospel,
which is the image of God, should not shine in them. But are held captive 2.
Timo. ^, verse. 26. Romans. 1, verse. 24. etc.
at the Devils pleasure, whose hearts he does possess, and is mighty in the
children of darkness, so that subduing the natural powers, he carries them
into horrible wickedness; which indeed, after such a beastly rage, and so
furiously would not rush into al filthy and vile wickedness, were they not
driven thereunto through the force of Satan, which carries them hither and
thither as he list like bondslaues, until at length they fall unto blaspheming
of thy most holy Name: so that convicted of their own conscience they
impugn, and mortallie pursue thy word of purpose committing thereby the sin
against the holy Ghost.

For when wittinglie and of purpose they deny the manifest and known truth of
God through obstinate malice and voluntary stubbornes, and persist impenitent,
they become blasphemers of God. Because wittinglie and maliciously, even
against their conscience, they call Esai. 5, 20.
good, evil, and evil they affirm to be good, putting light for darkness, and
darkness for light.

There is none hope of the forgiveness of this sin. Such sacrilege is not
forgiven Mat. 12, 31 Mark. 3, 29. Luke 12, 10. 1. Ioh. 5, 16.
neither in this world nor in the world to come. Because they convert the
only remedy of salvation into deadly poison, and with an affected ignorance
they continue in manifest impiety against their conscience.

And therefore they cannotlaie the fault of their wickedness upon others:
because not against, but with their wills they prostitute themselves before the
Devil, and obeie the Prince of darkness with all redines of mind; and study
without repentance to draw others unto everlasting perdition by the example of
their wicked life.

O Christ, King of glory, which art stronger Luke 11, 22
than the Devil, and have spoiled him of al his armor wherein he trusted. Thou
have bruised in pieces that monstrous Leuiathan Job. 40, 20
of an huge and woonderful bigness; and brought under feet the mighty and
strong Goliath 1. Sam. 17, ver. 4, and 10.
which obraided thine host: We beseech thee, show forth thy power and bring
the Devil under our feet Romans 16. verse. 20.
, destroy his kingdom, that we run not into the sin of blasphemy,
neither go about to extinguish in our selves the light of the holy Ghost, nor
kick against the same.

O thou mighty Gigant, which have cast headlong into hell the very Angels which
sinned 2. Pe. 2, 4.
, bound with the chains of darkness, so to take from them al power, that they
rule not over the faithful, and holy ones: take us out of the flood of
heresies, and profane opinions: and suffer us not to be drowned in the lake
Reave. 21, 8.
burning with fire and brimstone.

O Christ the leader unto life, which dieng did destroy our death, and by
rising again repair our life: take us unto thee, that being ingraffed, and
united to thy body we may be never separated from thee our head. And quicken us
being once dead Ephesians. 2, verse. 11, etc.
through sin, wherein we walked according to the custom of this world, after
him which is Prince of the air, and works in these days within the children
of unbelief, among whom we our selves also walked sometime in the
concupiscence of our flesh, doing those things which delighted our senses and
fantasies. For by nature we were the sons of wrath, even as others.

But now thou, O God, which art rich in mercy, for thy great kindness sake
wherewith thou love us: govern us by thine holy Spirit, that we never
forsake the faith which thou have given us, but perseuering in the raze
begun, may attain through thy grace to the salvation of our souls.

Take away from us that which is deformed by our corrupt nature, and continue
that which thy grace has wrought within us, that sin Romans 6, 12
reign not in our mortal bodies, neither we obeie it in the unlawful lusts
thereof. Assist us with thine aid that being delivered from sin Romans 6, 13.
, we may be the servants of righteousness, and obeie that doctrine from the heart
whereunto we are brought, giving our members, servants of righteousness unto
sanctification: so shall we serve thee our true GOD here in the kingdom of
grace, herafter in the kingdom of glory, which live with God the Father and
the holy Ghost for evermore,

Amen.
8. Evening prayer, on Tuesdaie.
BLessed GOD, and Father of our Lord Jesus christ, of thine abundant, and great
mercy have thou preserved us miserable men this day from the cruelty and
tyranny of Satan, and from sondrie perils and calamities.

Thou have showed us great trobles Psa. 71, 20.
in our life: notwithstanding thou returnedst and did revive us, and
tokedst us out from the depth of the earth. Thou have increased 21.
our honor, and returning did comfort us.

Strangers rose up against us Psalm. 54, 3.
and

(...)unto us.

Admonish our souls of miseries to come. Even as thou did arm the
Patriarchs, and Prophets by dreams, and visions Genesis 37, 5. Gene. 46, 2. Number.
12, 6. Dan. 1, 17. Dan. 10, 7. Acts. 18, 9.
in the night, when sleep came upon them from dangers nigh at hand through
thine heavenly oracles: so govern and preserve us in sleep that our souls
come not into danger, neither Job. 36, 12
fall upon the sword, and pit of perils.

Defend us this night from unclean and troblesome Spirits Wisd. 17, verse. 3,
etc.
let not their rushings, ragings, and misrule disquiet us. Keep us, good God,
from sights of Satan, from snares and illusions of the Devil.

O thou maker of al things, according to thy woonted goodness, be thou our
watchman and keeper: so shall no vain apparitions and dreams of the night
troble us, nor the Devil disquiet us.

For Esai. 26, 8.
in the way of thy judgments we do look for thee, O Lord; the desire of our
soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee. With our souls have we 9.
desired thee in the night, and with our spirits within us will we seek thee in
the morning.

Our souls wait on the Lord Psa. 130, 6.
more than the morning watch watches for the morning.

Hear our cry, O God, Psalm. 61, 1.
give ear unto our prayer.

From the ends of the earth we 2.
will cry unto thee, when our hearts be oppressed, bring us to the hie rock; for
thou art our hope, a strong 3.
tower against the face of the enemy. We will dwell in thy tabernacle 4.
for ever, we shall be protected under the covering of thy wings. Lengthen our
days and years according to thy good pleasure: for thy mercy and truth shall
keep us.

O Christ our defender, behold; repress our enemies; govern thy servants
which thou have bought with thy precious blood; be mindful of us, O Lord, in
this heavy body; thou which art the defender of the soul, be present with us.

To God the Father, and to his only Son, with the Spirit the comforter, be
al praise and glory for evermore,

Amen.
1. On VVensdaie, Morning prayer.
O Almighty, and merciful GOD, which gave the people of Israel in charge
Exo. 29, 38 Number. 28, 3. 1. Chr. 16, 37 2. Chr. 13, 11.
every day both in the morning and at night to offer unto thee a burnt
offering for a sweet savor in thine ears, that thereby they might glorify
thee and give thee thanks for the benefit of their protection both night and
day: rising this morning we offer up unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving
Psa. 50, 14. 23.
.

We glorify thee, O eternal God, for breaking the chains Ps. 116, 16.
of the darkness of this night. We will offer 17.
unto thee a sacrifice of praise, and call upon thy Name.

We will praise our God Ps. 107, 14.
which brought us out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake the bonds
wherewith we were tied this night; he has delivered our souls from perils by
bringing us safe and sound to the morning light.

Wherefore we offer before thee the calves of our lips Hose. 14, 3.
for a morning sacrifice, and with our tongues do we praise thee, O Lord.

Our mouths Psalm. 71, 8.
shall be filled with thy praise, and with thy glory every day.

Our tongues shall talk of thy righteousness Ps. 35, 28. Psalm. 71, 24.
and salvation every day.

Our lips shall speak of thy praise Psalm. 119, verse. 171.
, and our tongues shall entreat of thy word.

Our souls shall be filled as it were with fatnes Psalm. 36, 8.
; and with the lips of reioicing shall our mouth extol thee.

We will praise thy Name with songs Psa. 69, 30.
and magnify thee with thanksgiving, which please thee better than either ox
or calfe that 31.
has horns and hooues.

Wherefore let the sacrifice of our mouths Psa. 19, 14.
which we offer unto thee now this morning, and the meditations of our hares be
grateful in thy sight.

O Lord, we beseech thee Psalm. 119, verse. 108.
accept the free offerings of our mouth and teach us thy judgments, that we
may do thy will according to thy good pleasure.

Unto thee, O Lord, we will cry Psa. 88, 13.
and earelie shall our prayers come before thee.

In this morning do we beseech thee by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus
Christ thy well-beloved Son, that, as he was raised Romans 6, 4. Colos. 2, 12.
Ephesians. 1, 20.
from the dead by thy glory: so thou will raise and lift us up this morning,
that rising out of the filth of sin, and leaving the beds of unrighteousness,
we may put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge Col. 3. 10.
after the image of thee Genesis 1, 26. Genes. 5, 1. Genes. 9, 6.
which did create him, and give not over our selves to sleep and snorting.

Awake now our souls Ephe. 5, 11.
which sleep; rise from the dead, and Christ will lighten ye.

For certes it is hie time that we should arise from sleep Romans 13, 11
the hour of our watching being nigh, and our salvation nearer than when we
believed. The night is passed, and the 12.
day is at hand. Grant therefore merciful God, that casting of the works 13.
of darkness, and putting on the armor of light we may walk honestly as in
the day, not in gluttony, and drunkenness Luke 21, 34 Galat. 5, 16. 1. Pet. 2,
11. ^. Pet. 3, 16.
, neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and enuieng, but may put
on our Lord Jesus Christ by true faith, and good works which may smell of him,
that tasting of his sweetenes, at no time we may be separated from him.

Wherefore we beseech thee, O Lord, continue thy goodness toward us, and grant
that al our prayers and works may both begin from thee, and end through thee.

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin. Let thy mercy be upon
us Psa. 33, 22.
as we trust in thee.

O Lord, keep our tongues from evil Psa. 34, 13.
, and our lips that they speak no guile.

Remove from us al filthy speech 1. Pet. 3, 10. Ephesians. 5, 12. Ephesians. 4, 25.
Coloss. 3, 8. 1. Peter. 2, 1. Eccle. 23, 7.
, vanity of words, and al scurrilitie, that we blab out nothing rashly, or
vndiscreetelie to the hurt of our neighbor.

Who shall set a lock upon our mouth, and a sure seal upon our lips? that we
offend not in our speech, that our tongues do not destroy us.

Omnipotent GOD, put thou a watch upon our mouth Ecc. 28, 24 Psalm. 141, 3.
and a door upon our lips, that our mouth transgress not, neither our lips be
opened to speak that is unseemly; that our mouths may meditate upon the
truth Prouer. ^, verse. 6, etc.
and our lips abhor wickedness; that all the words of our mouths may be sincere,
and no lewdnes or frowardnes be found in them.

Grant merciful GOD, that descending into our souls we may reprehende and
condemn the spots, and vices within us, and not, forgetting our selves, judge
others, and thereby fall into thy dreadful judgments.

O Lord, deliver us from lieng lips, Ps. 120, 2.
and from a deceitful tongue, whose mouth Psa. 55, 21.
is softer than butter, and their words more gentle than oil, and are most
pearcing darts. They have sharpened their tongues like serpents Psa. 140, 3.
Romans 3, 13.
the poison of aspes is under their lips. Keep us, O Lord, both now and
evermore.

Send thy word Ps. 107, 20.
and heal us, Lord, through our Savior Christ thy beloved Son,

Amen.
2. A thanksgiving for the knowledge of God.
WE give thee thanks, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, Matthew. 11, verse. 25,
etc.
because thou have hid the mystery of thy word, which is the Gospel of our
salvation by thy Son, from the wise, and men of understanding in this world,
and have revealed the same to babes of base degree: certainly such was thy
good pleasure.

Thou have given us al things in thy Son, whom none knows but thou Father;
neither does any know thee except thy Son, and he to whom thy Son shall
reveal thee.

We worship thee, we praise thee, we glorify thee, we give thee thanks for the
hid wisdom 1. Cor. 2, 7.
which thou did determine before the world, for our glory, which was never
known to the Princes of this world, nor at any time to the sons of men, as
it is now revealed by the Spirit, to know the communion of the mystery, which
was hid from al ages Col. 1, 26. Romans 16, 25 Titus. 1, 3. 1. Pet. 1, 20.
Ephesian. 3, verse. 3, etc.
but is now opened to thy Saints, to whom thou would have made known, what
be the riches of this glorious mystery.

It is thine own working, and of thy free mercy that we are made heirs and
partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the Gospel, which brings us
tidings, and assurance of the everlasting riches of thine infinite goodness and
mercy.

Blessed be God* Ephesians. 1, 3.
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings 4.
in heavenly things by Christ, and has chosen us in him before the
foundations of the world, that we should be holy 2. Tim. 1, 9 Colos. 1, 22.
Luke. 1, 75.
and without blame before him by love, who has predestined us Ephesians. 1, 5.
to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, whereby he loves us by his 6.
beloved, in whom we have redemption by his blood, even the forgiveness 7.
of sins, according to the riches 8.
of his grace, wherein he has abounded toward us in all wisdom and
understanding, and has opened Ephesians. 1, 9.
unto us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he had
purposed in himself, even until the dispensation of the fulness 10.
of time, that he might gather in one al things, both which are in heaven and
which are in earth, even in Christ, by whom also we are chosen 11.
when we were predestined according to the purpose of him which makes al
things after the counsel of his own will, that we might be to 12.
the praise of his glory which hoping have believed in Christ when we 13.
heard the word of truth, even the Gospel of salvation.

And this grace thou did extend toward us, not by the works of righteousness
Titus. 3, 5.
which we had done, but according to thy mercy thou sauedst us, and did
call us with an holy calling, not according to our works 2. Tim. 1, 9.
but according to thine own purpose and grace, which was given to us through
Christ before al times, and is now made manifest by 10.
the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, which has abolished death, and
brought life and immortality unto light through the Gospel.

To thee therefore Romans 16, verse. 25.
which art of power to establish our hearts according to the revelation of the
mystery which was kept secret since the world began, (but now is opened, 26.
and published among al nations by the scriptures of the Prophets, at the
commandment of the everlasting GOD for the obedience of faith) to thee, we
say, God only 27.
wise, be praise through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.

We beseech thee, that according to the operation Ephesians. 1, 19. Ephesians. 3, 7.
and working of thy mighty power, we may continue constant in true faith and
wholesome doctrine, and at no time, forsaking the wisdom opened in the Gospel,
may follow the judgment of worldly reason, and fleshly understanding Mat.
16, 17.
which thou have besotted, and altogether confounded in searching thy hidden
mysteries.

For that spiritual wisdom Col. 1, 10.
does far exceed al wisdom and understanding of the creatures, whereunto
flesh cannot attain, neither can our blood reveal, nor yet the natural man 1.
Cor. 2, verse. 14.
although he be endued with great sharpnes of wit, and worldly understanding,
perceive the same.

Grant we beseech thee, that we may be thy simple, and little ones 2. Cor. 10,
verse. 5.
receiving from thee the word of truth without contradition and disputation,
and that in the articles of faith we bring not fleshly wisdom, but, being
made void of our proper understanding may bring our minds into a godly
captivity.

Let thy Son, which descending from about brought with him the eternal
wisdom of the Gospel from thy bosom, and was made a sacrifice on our behalf,
but now exalted to thy right hand bestows his gifts Ephesians. 4, 8. 1. Cor. 12,
28 Ephesians. 4, 11.
, let him, we beseech thee shine in our hearts.

Likewise cause thine holy Spirit to instill into us his divine light, and
breath upon us the new flame of thine heavenly knowledge, til departing into
the eternal life we may behold thee the only and true God face to face,
which live and raignest in perpetual glory,

Amen.
3. A prayer for the attaining of Christian Charity.
O Christ, Son of God, which art the sincere and perfect charity Ioh. 13,
34. John. 15, 12. Roman. 5, 8.
loving us even to the end, and thereby did suffer a cruel death upon the
altar of the cross to deliver us from everlasting death, and perpetual
torments, and to allure us by that thine example to amity. That as thy will was
to suffer death on our behalf: so we having the riches of this world, should
be so far from keeping back our alms and relief from the poor, 1. Ioh. 3, 17
Iame. 2, 15.
or shutting up our bowels of compassion from them, that in the case of
necessity, we should give our lives 1. Ioh 3, 16
for our brethren.

For both our profession requires the same, and it is the token whereby the
true Christians are known, according to thy word Ioh. 13, 35. 1. John. 4, 2^
, By this shall men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another. Which
love ought to be the rule of al our actions. For all things are to be examined
by the rule of charity, which being banished 1. Cor. 13, 1
al other gifts are corrupt and profit nothing.

We beseech thee by thine hot burning, and abundant love, inflame our cold
hearts with the affection of unfeigned good will, that we may love thee Deuteronomy. 6,
5. Mark. 12, 30 33. Luke 10, 27.
the Father, and the holy Spirit in one eternal and inseparable essence, above
al things with our whole heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength; and
keep that commandment which again and peculiarly thou did commend unto
us, saying Ioh. 13, 34* 1. John. 2, 8.
, A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another: as I have
loved you, that even so ye love one another. Thou likewise, O Son of God,
when thy death was nigh did beg, that the love Ioh. 17, 26.
where with the eternal Father loves thee, may be in thy servants,

Express in us the similitude of thy good will, and turn us into such a shape,
that our souls, by the light 2. Cor. 3, verse. 18.
and motion of the holy Spirit may be coupled with thine eternal Father; and
that the image of like integrity 2. Cor. 4, 6 Colos. 1, 12.
, knowledge, righteousness, and affections may shine in us, as does in thee,
which art the brightness of the eternal Father in the most pleasant and
perpetual harmony. Raise up in us a desire of brotherly and entire good will,
that every one may have a care to help his brother; even as members of one
body Romans 12, 4. 1. Cor. 12, 12.
have a mutual compassion each of other, so we may love among our selves
unfeignedly, and abound in mutual friendship one toward another, that our
hearts may be confirmed, and unblameable in holiness before God.

Give grace that our love may be perfect, wanting no part due unto the same,
not fained Romans 12, 9
false, or hypocritical, not waiward, tedious, disdainful, nor hunting after
profit.

Grant therefore that we may abhor 10.
that which is evil, and be affectioned to love one another with brotherly
love. Make us patient 1. Cor. 13. verse. 4.
, bountiful, not envious, no boasters, not puffed up, not proud, no seekers 5.
of our own, not easy to be moved unto anger, no thinkers of evil, no 6.
reioicers in wickedness but reioicers in the truth; to suffer al things,
believe 7.
al things, hope al things, and so to love one another mutuallie 1. Ioh. 3, 18
not in word and tongue only, but in deed and truth; not abusing christian
liberty Gal. 5, 13.
as an occasion unto the flesh, but by love to serve one another.

Inflame our breasts, that after thine example 1. Pet. 2, 21
we may unfeignedly love even our very enemies Mat. 5, 44.
and bless them that curse us; do good unto them which hate and hurt us,
leaving reuengement Romans 12, 19 Deu. 32, 35. Eccles. 28, 1.
always to thee.

O lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, take from us al
bitterness Ephesians. 4, 31.
and anger, and wrath, and crieng, and evil speaking with all maliciousnes. For
he which loves not his brother 1. Ioh. 3, 14 James. 3, 14.
knows not God, but abides in death, and does vainlie boast against the
truth.

Grant therefore to us which are translated 1. Ioh. 3, 14
from death to life, that retaining the study of concord Colos. 3, 8.
we may love one another, and put away bitter emulation, forgiving al 13.
men even from the heart, even as thou have forgiven us.

Let not the sun go down upon our wrath, Ephesians. 4, 26. 27.
giving place to the Devil, but let us be quiet, Colo. 3, 12.
putting on tender mercy, kindness, humblenes Coloss. 3, 14.
of mind, meekenes, and above al, charity, which is the bond of perfection,
the end of the commandment 1. Tim. 1, 5.
, and the fulfilling of the law Romans 13, verse. 10.
: so that by love our faith may be fruitful Galat. 5, 6.
, and we at no time severed from thee.

For thou art love 1. Ioh. 4, 16.
, and he that dwells in love, dwells in thee, and thou in him: so that no
creature Romans 8, 39.
can separate such a man from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, which
live and raignest with the Father and the holy Spirit, a true, and one God
in the love of the perpetual unity worlds without end,

Amen.
4. A prayer for the fruit of the earth.
O Lord, God almighty, Psalm. 47, 2.
King of heaven and earth, which of thine 7.
abundant goodness do adorn, and replenish 8.
the earth with all kind of fruit and grain, whereby the life Psa. 36, 6.
Psalm. 147, 9. Psa. 136, 26.
both of man and beast is sustained:

We beseech thee even of thy free mercy that thou would vouchsafe to bless
our fields and ground, and to make them prosperously to yield their corn and
increase. For without thy blessing and favor, neither can the earth of it
self, bring forth any whit, nor we by our pains make the same to prosper.

Wherefore grant to al things springing from the earth a meet temperature of
air, that luckily they may take and increase.

Keep our fruit upon the face of the earth from al infection of the air, from
thunder, hail Psalm. 105, verse. 32, etc. Psalm. 13 5, verse. 7, etc.
, from untimely showers, from too great drines, and overmuch heat, from
worms hurtful, and beasts devouring it before their prime; and from al other
corruption, that our land in thine anger be not desolate, and deny us fruit,
Leuit. 26, verse. 34.
enioieng her woeful Sabbath.

Shut not up the heavens 1. Kin. 8, 35 1. King. 17, 1 1. Kin. 18, 41. Deu. 28,
24.
in thine indignation for our sins, that it be not as iron Leu. 26, 19 Deu.
28, 23.
, nor our earth as brass, whereby it cannot be tilled, ploughed, nor sowed,
and so come to a very plain, and utter wilderness: but of thy goodness give us
both the earelie and latter rain Zach. 10, 1.
that we may have abundance of al fruit, and a ioieful harvest with a plentiful
vintage.

O God, send a gracious rain upon thine inheritance Psalm. 68, 9.
, and give thy blessing, that our ground may bring forth her fruit.

Cause thy rain to pour down in due season Psalm. 65, verse. 9, etc. Eze.
34, 26.
that it may be rain of blessing, whereby both trees may give their fruit, and
the ground yield forth her grain.

Grant also that the aier be pure from infection; our bodies free from
sickness; to our whole realm peace and quietness, that safely without troble
we may enioie thy gifts.

Drive away and repel from us malediction and the destroier Mala. 3, 11.
.

Give us not in steed of rain Deuteronomy. 28, verse. 24.
, dust and ashes: but open thy good treasure, and visit the land with thy
blessing; make it drunken, and enrich it abundantly.

Thy river, O Lord, is full of water Psalm. 65, 9.
, prepare our corn, and dispose our earth to prosper; water abundantly 10.
the furrows of the same, and cause the rain to descend into the valleies
thereof, make the same soft with showers, and bless our buddes. Crown the
year with thy Psalm. 65, 11.
goodness, and let thy clouds drop fatnes. Let them drop upon the pastures 12.
of the wilderness, and make the little hills rejoice on every side. Let the
plains be replenished with 13.
sheep, and the valleies with corn, that the inhabiters of the earth may
rejoice and be merry.

O Lord, thou causest grass to grow for cattle Ps. 104, 14.
and herbs for the use of man, thou bring forth bread out of the earth, and
wine to make 15.
glad the heart of man, oil to make the countenance cheereful, and bread for to
strengthen the heart.

Have therefore a care, O heavenly Father, of the seed and other things
springing from the earth; keep them both in cold, rain, ice, and snow, from
the beating of winds, and injury of weather. Preserve the^ in extreme heat,
drines, moistnes, and such like, that they perish not before their time. Root
out the destroier, that there be 1. Kin. 8, 37
neither mildew, nor grasshopper, neither caterpiller hurting the fruit of the
earth.

Keep us, O Lord, in the time of dearth Ps. 33, 19. Psalm. 37, 29.
that we perish not for hunger; nor be confounded in the perilous time. For
thou art our GOD and Creator, which satisfiest the thirsty soul Psa. 107, 9.
and fillest the hungry with goodness; which have said Heb. 13, 5. Joshua. 1, 9.
, I will not fail neither forsake thee: whereby being faithful we may say Psa.
118, 6.
; The Lord is with us, therefore we will not fear what man can do unto us.

Behold we miserable and great sinners do confess our wickedness with
groanings and grief of heart crieng unto thee which art in heaven. Hear our
prayers in thy dwelling place 1. Kings. 8, verse. 49.
and be merciful to thy people which have sinned against thee; and forgive al
our iniquities, 50.
wherein we have transgressed against thee.

By our sins we have brought al these miseries, which hang over our heads,
but blot out al our offenses, O God, after thy manifold mercies, and take away
from us the curse of our ground, that the people may praise thee Psalm. 67, 5.
, O God, yea, that all the people may praise thee, and the 6.
earth bring forth her increase, through our Lord Jesus Christ, thine only
son, which lives and reigns with thee in the unity of the holy Spirit a
God for evermore,

Amen.
5. A prayer for sinners.
O Eternal Father, maker and governor of all the world, from the bottom of our
hearts we thank thee Ephesians. 5, 20.
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, for that thou have not utterly cast away
mankind having fallen from the state of paradise by sin, into everlasting
damnation, as thou did the Devils: but of thine unspeakable goodness, through
thy secret counsel would needs that thy Son should take our flesh upon
him, be a mediator between thee and us, and be sacrificed for our sins 1.
Tim. 2, 5*
:

For, thou will not the death of a sinner, neither art thou delighted Ezech.
18, verse. 23.
in the destruction of the wicked, but that he repent and live.

Again, thy Son came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance
Mat. 9, 13.
.

We beseech thee on the behalf of al sinners; for all in bondage to Satan; and
for as many as are overwhelmed in wickedness, grant them grace, merciful God,
that they may escape the snares of the Devil, and acknowledge their offenses;
strike into them a fear of thine indignation, and pains of hell, that their
minds be not darkened Ephesians. 4, 18.
and so they become strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that
is in them, because of the hardness of their heart: and that they come not to 19.
that pass that they forsake al sorrowing, and so give themselves to commit
wantonness even with gredines.

For they which break thy precepts wilfully, and have no fear nor feeling of
thy judgments, but run on securely, pleasing themselves, and taking
pleasure in their impiety; whose consciences do soundly sleep (the fear of
thy judgment being clean extinguished in them) and prostitute themselves to
al uncleanness, they heap unto themselves the wrath of God Romans 2, 5.
according to their hardness, and hearts which cannot repent, and give themselves
over into reprobate minds Romans 1, 28
to do those things as be uncomely, being full of al unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, 29.
malice, full of envy, of murder, of debate, of deceit, corrupted in manners,
whisperers; backbyters, 30.
haters of God, dooers of wrong, proud, boasters, inuenters of evil things,
disobedient to parents, without understanding, breakers of promises, far from
al charitable affection; yea they give themselves wholly to the works of the
flesh Gala. 5, 19.
, that so, forgoing al sense of godliness, they may obstinately go forward in
wickedness to their everlasting perdition.

Bring them, merciful God, to thy truth, and give them grace unfeignedly to
repent, and to escape the snares of Satan 2. Tim. 2, 26
wherein they are entangled, and detained at his pleasure.

Take away stubbornes, hardness of their mind, and this damnable security,
that wickedness Wisd. 2, 21
do not utterly blind them.

Bestow upon them a new heart, and put a new spirit within them, take away that
stony heart out of their flesh Eze. 36, 27 Esaie. 44* 3. Iere. 32, 39.
and give them a fleshie heart, and put thy spirit within their breasts.

Merciful God, guide us with thine holy Spirit, that bewailing our sins from
the bottom of our hearts, we may fly to thine unspeakable mercy, which thou
do promise to as many as in faith turn unto thee: and laieng away (as
concerning the conversation in times past) Ephesians. 4, 22.
the old man, which is corrupt through the deceaueable lusts, may be renewed 23.
in the spirit of our minds, and put on the new man, which after 24.
God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

Assist us, O God, that putting away 25.
lieng, we may speak every one the truth to his neighbor, because we are the
members one of another; and in anger offend not. 26.


Let him that stoale, steal no 28.
more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may give unto him which needs.

Come into our hearts through thy word, and by thy Spirit begin a new and holy
life; stir up good motions agreeable to thy will, and answering to the rule of
thy word revealed in the congregation.

For thou God Romans 10, verse. 12.
art rich toward, and over all that call upon thee, and repent. Yea, it is not
thy will that any of the least should perish Mat. 18, 14
but that al be saved 1. Tim. 2, 4.
and come to the knowledge of the truth.

And for this cause, no man be he never so wicked, ought to despair. For it is
a true saying 1. Tim. 1, verse. 15.
and by all means worthy to be received, That Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners, and so very many, being sometime notable transgressors,
have attained mercy, for an example to such, as afterward 16.
should believe on him to their everlasting happiness.

Give us therefore, O most gentle God, peniten(...)arts, that we may thoroughly
examine our ways Lam. 3, 40.
, and try them, and return to thee, O Lord: lifting up our hearts with 41.
our hands unto thee which art in the heavens.

We, which have sinned and rebelled, Lam. 3, 42.
with grief and sorrow of heart acknowledge al our filthy faults, and with a
true faith approach to the throne of thy grace, trusting in the reconciliation
made by thy Son our propitiator, and raised up in his faithful and infallible
promise we purpose through thine assistance to begin a new life, to the glory
and praise of thy sacred Name,

Amen.
6. A prayer for the Sick.
O Christ, which art the virtue that is made perfect in infirmity 2. Cor. 12, 9
the strength of the weak, the salvation of al believers, an aider of the
oppressed Psalm. 9, 9.
, a refuge in the time of troble Psa. 68, 20.
, a physician for the sick, yea, our life and salfegard in the peril of death:

By all thy pains and passions (which thou did suffer for us, and whereby in
the flesh thou tookedst upon thee Heb. 4, 15.
, thou feel our infirmities) we beseech thee, that pittieng our sickness, and
diseases, thou will succor all that are sick, and especially such, as in their
agonies do encounter with many and sondrie tentations.

Give them grace to know that al sickness and miseries of the body whatsoever
come not by chance, but to be sent of thee our God; without whose will and
permission none adversity can come upon us. For Mat. 10, 30
all the hears of our heads be nombred.

Let them know that sickness is sent through thy good counsel, not for our
destruction, but for our amendment, and to call us unto repentance; and either
to keep us in our calling, or to drive us from wickedness (whereunto by nature
we are inclined) For 1 Cor. 11, verse. 32.
when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. And judgment commonly begins 1. Pet 4, 17
at the house of God.

Finally diseases be certain instruments whereby thou do exercise us to the
mortification of our flesh.

O thou most excellent curer both of souls and bodies diseased, which have
showen that sickness, and miseries of the body are the punishments of sin 1.
Cor. 11, verse. 30.
and warnings of thy displeasure against our wickedness: Spare us, O Lord,
spare thy people Joel. 2, 17.
and forgive our sins, whereby we have provoked these manifold diseases and
miseries.

Speak unto our trobled hearts in this conflict of the conscience, revive them
with the sweet and lively comfort of the free remission of our sins
purchased by Christ 1. Cor. 15, 3
, and take away the prick of sin, and stings of death, that we feel not the
gnawing worm of a guilty conscience.

Grant us quiet minds through the consolation of the scriptures Romans 15, 4.
, and working of the holy Ghost, that we may surely rest upon thee and thy
promises, never doubting of thy fatherly kindness toward us.

Heat our cold hearts, and fainting members by thy Spirit, that they may be
nimble to fulfill thy pleasure, and suffer afflictions laid upon them, with a
quiet mind; and never murmuringlie resist thy will, but always think, that
whom the Lord loves Pro. 3, 12. Hebr. 12, 6.
him he chasteneth; and scourges every son, that he receives. Therefore
strengthen us, that we may suffer thy fatherly correction with quiet minds.

O Lord, 1. Kin 8, 39
look down from heaven, from thine holy Court, and behold the humility and
affliction of al weak persons: take from them their extreme pain, or at the
least mitigate their sorrows, whereby they may feel some ease, and let thy
yoke be unto them easy, Mat. 11, 30
and thy burden light.

Restore the weak to their woonted strength, and heal their griefs according
to thy divine pleasure to their welfare.

Wype away alteares Reave. 21, 4
from their eyes, and help them on the bed of their sorrow Psalm 41, 3.
and make their beds in their weakness.

Heal and bind up their wounds, for great is thy power Psa. 147, 5.
and thine hand is not shortened Esai. 50, 2.
. For when al hope (of worldly help) does fail, that can assist. Thy mighty
right hand Psalm. 77, verse. 10, etc.
can alter every thing, yea, if thou only say the word Matthew. 8, verse. 8, etc
the weak shall be healed, and that without the means of any natural thing.

Grant likewise that al which are recovered may well use their health (least
otherwise they forgo through sin y^ which they received by grace) be thankful,
and always wary John. 5, 14.
least a worse thing happen unto them.

And concerning such as it pleases thee to take out of this miserable world
into thine everlasting kingdom, confirm those with thine holy Spirit, that
at the hour of their departure they may peaceably rest Esai. 57, 2.
, vpholden with a trust of free remission of their sins, and hope of a
ioieful resurrection of the dead, and life everlasting.

Shorten the pains which they suffer now in their mortal bodies, and turn
their sorrow into perfect and eternal joy Ioh. 16, 20
, and make them willing to be dissolved from their bodies Phili. 1, 23.
, and to be with thee, and to withdraw themselves from al such things as do
hinder the spiritual course, as are the love of this present life, the
pleasures of the world, the desires of the flesh, earthly cogirations, riches,
and vain glory.

O Christ our eternal Savior, we beseech thee, which, having overcome the sting
of death, have opened the kingdom of heaven to al believers, and according to
our faith, wilt come to be the judge of the quick and dead, have mercy on thy
servants whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood,

Amen.
7. A prayer against the tentation of Satan.
O Most heavenly Father and eternal God, unto thee do we cry, protect and
strengthen us weak and feeble ones against the tentation of Satan, which is
the sworn and extreme enemy to man's salvation, a slanderer, and our accuser,
that great Dracon Reu. 12, 3.
, the old serpent, which is called the Devil, carrieng away the whole world, a
coosener, and wicked spirit; a deceauer, which goes about like a roaring Lion
1. Pet. 5, 8.
seeking whom he may devour.

And especially in this doting age of the world, as he knows his time of
reigning is but short Reu. 12, 12.
and perceives the day of judgment to be very nigh at hand, wherein his
filthiness shall be made manifest to al creatures, to his everlasting torments:
so now he rages, and raungeth in a deadly hatred against thy flock, and by all
means seeks the destruction of al mankind, diverse ways, and by unspeakable
subtlety does he lay snares to entrap our souls; egerlie does he beset us,
and al his power and policy does he power out against us, he prieth for any
occasion, whereby he may allure us to shameful offending, and so at length
horribly to cast us headlong into extreme desperation.

For as many corporal affections as be in man, so many occasions does he take
to tempt us, thereby to wound us, or at least to hurt us with one prick or
other.

He lays snares to take us in wealth, in poverty, in pleasure, and in the
inticements of the flesh, in anguish of mind, in ambition and desire of
glory, in the wearisomnes of our calling and inferior condition, in cares both
for the back and belly; in covetousness and love of money, in lust of revenge.

He ticles some with a desire of glory and promotion; he imprinteth in others
a vain of curiosity and pride; into others he instilleth suspicions and
doubtings of thy divine will and providence; he blows into others a persuasion
of wisdom and knowledge; some he carries away in security; night and day
whether we sleep or wake he is about us, and with foming mouth, and open
jaws, neieth to devour us 2. Cor. 12, verse. 7.
that our senses may be corrupted from the simplicity, which we owe to Christ,
even as the serpent deceived Eaue by his subteltie.

O God, who is able to fly away; or to persist against so diverse strokes and
assaults of the Devil?

Unless thou, O most mighty protector, defend us, alas we perish.

For thou know we are too weak to resist, no strength is in us, no aid,
prudence, or policy is in our nature against so strong and subtle an enemy.

Behold, our nature is accursed and unclean, our flesh is weak, our life
transitory; and we, alas therefore, be cowardes and without armor, given to
sleep and slothfulnes Matthew. 26, verse. 40.
and endeavor not courageously to withstand the frauds of the Devil.

Wherefore expel from us this deep sluggishnes of ours, and open the eyes of
our minds that we may behold how great the power, endeavors, strength, and
malice of this adversary is, with whom we are to encounter.

For we wrestle not against flesh and blood Ephe. 6, 12.
but against rules, against powers, against governors, and rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in heavenly places.

O thou Son of God, which art that blessed seed Genesis 3, 15.
broozing the head* of the most subtle serpent, bring and brooze our enemy
Satan under thy feet Romans 16, verse. 20.
.

Thou which did appear 1. Ioh. 3, 5.
to destroy the works of the Devil, drive away from us lieng Spirits, that
they hurt us not.

Thou our chief champion, which of thine own accord enteredst into tentations
Matthew. 4, verse. 1, etc. Mark. 1, 12. Luke. 4, 1.
that so thou might, as it were, hand to hand wrestle with our enemy, and
purchase a triumph for us by thy victory, hold him fast bound Revel. 20,
verse. 2, etc.
that he exercise not his devises upon us, as he desires: make us partakers of
thy victory, that even as thou in thy body over came the devil Mat. 4, 10.
: so thou will utterly dispatch him in thy members.

And therefore give unto us thine whole armor Ephesians. 6, 13.
that like right soldiors we may resist in the evil day, and vanquish our
enemy. Girde us with the truth; put upon us the 14.
breast plate of righteousness; and let us be shod to the propagation of 15.
the Gospel of peace; Above al things give us the shield of faith, 16.
which can extinguish all the fiery darts of wicked spirits. Bestow upon us the
helmet of salvation, and the 17.
sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, that through thee we may
encounter valiantly, and gloriously attain the victory.

And holy Spirit, almighty God, comfort thou, and strengthen our minds
against so diverse conflicts of Satan, which besetteth us by many snares, and
especially then most of al does he seek our destruction, when we seek
deliverance by other means than by thy word revealed: grant therefore that,
leaving thy word delivered unto us, we look not after new revelations, or
violent rauishings, but may resist the Devil by thy word, so will he fly from
us,

Amen.
8. Evening prayer, on VVensdaie.
O Lord God, which art our life Deuteronomy. 30, verse. 20.
, and the length of our days, our vpholder protecting us from our youth: we
thank thee this evening, and with our lips we extol thy woonderful goodness,
because thou have defended us this day against al adversities both of body
and soul.

O Lord, unto thee do we cry Psa. 141, 1.
, hear us, harken unto our voice when we cry unto thee. Let our Psalm. 141, 2.
prayers be directed in thy sight as the incense, and let the lifting up of our
hands be an evening sacrifice.

For thou delitest not in the offering of Bulls and Rams, Psa. 50, 13.
but the sacrifice of thanksgiving shall honor 14.
thee.

Who so keeps the Law Sirac. 35, 1.
brings offerings enough; he that holds fast the commandment offers an
offering of salvation. He that is thankful to them which have well 2.
deserved, offers fine flower; and he that gives alms, sacrifices praise.

Therefore in this euening-tide do we offer unto thee the continual sacrifice
of thanksgiving, praising thy goodness for thy merciful protection and defense.

We will commend thee for thy truth, and sing of thee, O thou most Hie; Our lips
shall sing of thee, and our souls which thou have redeemed, yea and our tongues
shall daily speak of thy righteousness, because they are confounded Psa 71, 13.
and put to shame that sought after our souls.

We will give thanks unto thee Psa. 138, 1.
, O Lord, with our whole heart, because thou have heard all the words of our
mouths. In the sight of the Gods we will praise thee. We will 2.
worship toward thine holy Temple, and celebrate thy Name, because of thy great
mercy and truth. For thou have magnified thy Name, and thy word above al
things. Whenever 3.
we called upon thee thou did hear us, and enduedst our souls with much
strength.

And now we cry unto thee, O Lord, with our voice, Psa. 142, 1.
yea in thy sight do we pour out our prayers, and in our troble do we utter
them 2.
before thee, that thou may pardon al our offenses, and those especially
which we have committed this day.

Bring not into thy judgment, O Lord, al our idle and vain words Matthew. 12,
verse. 36.
, pardon our babbling, and vain speech, and impute not our foolishnes unto us.

Be merciful unto us, O Lord, for we are greatly pensive for our sins, our
hearts be trobled within us, and the fear of death is fallen upon us.
Fearefulnes and trembling are come upon us Psa. 55, 4.
and an horrible dread has overwhelmed us.

But, O Lord, absolve us from al our sins through thy word bringing unto us
the ioieful tidings of gracious deliverance.

O comfort the hearts of thy servants Psalm. 86, 4.
: for unto thee, Lord, have we lifted up our souls. For thou art 5.
mild, gentle, and of much mercy to as many as call upon thee.

Blessed be the Lord which has heard the voice of our humble petitions Psa.
28, 6. 7.
. O God thou art our strength, and our shield, our hearts trusted in thee and we
are helped, therefore our hearts do dance for joy, and in our songs we will
praise thee.

We cried unto thee, O Lord, and said Ps. 142, 5.
, Thou art our hope, and our portion in the land of the living. Consider our
complaint, for we are 6.
brought very low. O deliver us from our persecutors: for they are too strong
for us. Bring our souls 7.
out of prison, that we may give thanks unto thy Name.

O holy Trinity, and perpetual unity, protect us this night, that the Devil
have no power over us.

O Father govern us by thy power; O Son, revive us with thy wisdom; and
lighten us, O holy Ghost, with thy virtue.

O Creator be thou present with us; O Redeemer, aid us; O our Comforter abide
with us.

The Lord bless us Number. 6, 24
and keep us. The Lord make his face to shine 25.
upon us, and be merciful unto us; the Lord lift up his countenance 26.
upon us, and give us peace.

This blessing of God be this night and evermore a safety, and protection
against al enemies, both visible and invisible, that they hurt us not any way.

Even as the pillar of cloud Exo. 14, 19 20.
in the desert stood between the tents of the Egyptians, and the tents of the
children of Israel, that none hurt might come to the people of Israel: so be
thou, O Lord, the protector of our souls, and lives; be thou, we beseech thee,
an iron pillar unto us Iere. 1, 18.
that such as are our enemies prevail not against us, and be thou a brazen wall
Ier. 15, 20.
between us, and al our adversaries, that they come not nie us to our hurt.

Give us this night a good sleep, that quietly without cares and anguish of
mind we may rest this night; let not troblesome dreams, and fantasies in
which is vanity disquiet us. Let our sleep be sweet, and helthful to our
bodies, that Sirach. 31, verse. 20.
waking in the morning we may rise in good health, and delight in thee our God.

Grant also that both being in bed, a sleep, and awake we may always remember
our death, which is a passage to an immortal life, and withal our ioieful
resurrection to everlasting glory,

Amen.
1. Morning prayer on Thursdaie.
O Christ which art the light and the day dwelling 1. Tim. 6, 16
in the light that no man can attain unto, the brightness and cleerenes of the
eternal Father, the bright morning Star Reu. 22, 16
driving away the darcknes of night, and bringing the light of the day over
the face of the earth:

We will bless thee in our life time, and lift up our hands in thy Name with
thanksgiving, because thou have bin our defender Psa 63, 5.
.

Thou have beheld our miseries, and have not put us into the hands of our
enemies which did whisper against us Psalm. 41, 7.
, and imagine evil toward us; they spoke evil of us, that when we sleep we
might rise no more. But 8.
thou, O Lord, tookedst compassion upon us, and did raise us again, 9.
thou did aid us with thine arm of strength, and defend us against al our
enemies, and their invasions with thy mighty power. Under the shadow of thy
wings we rested quietly, in thy lap we lay secure and safe. We slept and took
our rest, and yet rose again. For the Lord defended us, and was our aid.

God is in the mids of us, Psalm. 46, 5.
therefore we will not be moved, God will help us and that right earelie, that
we may rejoice in his salvation.

O thou only begotten Son of God, which sit at the right hand of God
thine almighty Father, we most humbly beseech thee by thy glorious ascension
into the heavens Acts. 1, 9.
whereby thou did pierce the thick clouds, that thou might put away our
iniquities like a cloud Esaie. 44, verse. 22.
and wype away our sins, whereby thou, which art the Son of righteousness,
art hidden, that neither our souls can behold thee, neither our prayers
ascend unto thee, like a mist:

Let thy light shine over us this day (like the clear day star piercing the
thick mystes) to the expelling of the darkness of our understanding Esai. 59, 9.
.

For thou art John. 1, 9.
the true light lightning every man that comes into this world.

Clarify our hearts, and drive away the darkness of error and ignorance, that,
as at the breaking of the day darkness does vanish: so all the darkness of our
minds may be removed, that we continue not in the dongeon and shadow of death,
but may approach to thy word 2. Peter. 1, verse. 19.
as to a candle shining in a dark place, until the day dawne, and thou the
day star arise in our hearts.

Let thy work appear to thy servants Psa. 90, 16.
and thy magnificence toward the sons of men. The glorious 17.
majesty of the Lord be upon Deuteronomy. 28, 12.
us, and prosper the works of our hands upon us; O prosper the works of our
hands.

Let us not, forgetting thy commandments, Deuteronomy. 28, verse. 14. Joshua. 1, 7. 8.
decline from them either to the right hand or to the left, but make us to
meditate upon them rising out of our beds, and bind them for a sign upon our
hands Deuteronomy. 6, 7. Prou. 7, 3.
, and tie them to our fingers, and write them on the table of our hearts, that
the memory of them at no time depart out of our minds.

O Lord, we have called upon thee day by day Psa. 88, 9.
, we have stretched out our hands unto thee.

In our troble do we lift up our hands unto thee, O Lord, beseeching thee
most humbly to keep us this day, and al our life time from the place of hell
Psa. 49, 15.
, and to deliver us from the claws of the ungodly.

O Lord, be merciful unto us, we have longed for thee, be thou our help and
shield Ps. 33, 20.
, and our salvation in the time of troble. Send down thine hand from above
Psa. 144, 7.
and deliver us. Stretch forth thine arm with power, strengthen thine hand,
and lift up thy right hand to save us.

Arise now, O Lord, Psalm. 10, verse. 13, etc.
put forth thine hand, and forget not the poor. Break thou the power of the
ungodly and malicious, that we without fear of danger may confess and praise
thee.

Though we walk in the mids of troble Psa. 138, 7.
, yet will thou refresh us; and against the furiousnes of our enemies will thou
stretch forth thine hand, and thy right hand shall save us, that al may know
and understand that this is thine hand, and that thou have saved us.

Therefore we will praise the Lord which stood at the right hand of the poor
Psalm. 109. verse. 31.
to save his soul from the persecutors.

O most mighty protector, keep us likewise from al bodily harm.

Deliver us from the mire Psa. 69, 2.
that we perish not, deliver us from such as hate us, and from the deep
waters, that the fluds ouerwhelme us not, neither the deep swalow us up;
protect us with thine hand that we perish not by thy fiery darts.

Thou God rulest the virtues of the elements, which thou have created, and
guidest the raging of the sea Psalm. 89, 9.
.

For thou art the God Amo. 4, 13
which framest the mountains, and make the winds, and declarest unto man
what his thought is, thou make the morning and darkness, and walk upon the
hie places of the earth, the Lord God of Hosts is thy Name worlds without end,

Amen.
2. A thanksgiving unto God for our food.
WE thank thee, King of glory, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
from our youth to this present hour marvelously nourished us, giving us meat,
drink, and clothing with all other things pertaining to the sustentation of
this our life.

Naked and bare came we out of our mothers wombes Job. 1, 21. Eccle. 5, 14.
, we brought nothing into the world 1. Tim. 6, 7
, but whatsoever we have thou gave the same; yea, it was before we were borne;
and in our mothers womb did thou ordain things necessary for this life,
and suffer us to enioie al things abundantly.

Alwaie thou have a care of us, as a father has of his children; neither art
thou ignorant that we stand in need continually of thy blessings, and daily
are destitute of new relief: al which thou give after thy wonted, and
unspeakable goodness.

We acknowledge that whatsoever we have, or possess, it is thy gift; and
confess thee to be the fountain of al good things Iam. 1, 17.
, and perceive thy Fatherly goodness to be spread not only over al mankind,
but also over the brute creatures. Thou give meat to al flesh; thou give
fodder to the Cattle; and feedest the young ravens that call vpvpon thee Ps. 147,
9.
.

For corporal goods are not distributed among men by chance, or without thy
providence; neither be they attained by the only industry and power of man.

Thou give Ps. 104, 28.
and we gather; thou openest thine hand, and al living creatures are filled
with thy blessing. For without thee al our endeavors be in vain, and if thou
bless not our labors, we do but beat the wind and receive no profit.

Great is thy mercy, O Lord, which disdainest not to provide for sinful flesh.

O Lord our God, great are thy wondrous works Psa. 40, 6.
which thou have done for us, the which we can not so much as in thought
comprehend, much less in words express. When we would report and utter them,
we found them more than we could recite.

But notwithstanding thine infinite benefits cannot be comprehended of man: yet
will we not surcesse to set forth thy praise, nor hide thy goodness from the
sons of men, but will declare it and speak of thy truth from one generation
to another.

Blessed art thou, O our God, for ever and ever 1. Chr. 29, verse. 10. 11. 12.
, all that is either above in the heavens, or in earth beneath, is thine. Al
things come from thee, and from thine hands we receive whatsoever we possess.
And al those things of thy mere mercy without our merits or worthiness.

Therefore we will magnify the Lord, which does mighty things in all the
corners of the earth, which does nourish us from our mothers wombes Psa. 71, 6.
, and gives us al good things.

Grant us likewise quietness of mind, and peace in our time, that thy grace may
abound toward us, continue, and defend us while we live.

O Almighty and merciful Father, by thy breath we took life Acts. 17, 25
the which through thy blessing does abide in us. In thee we live Act. 17, 28.
, move, and have our being.

For man lives not by bread only Deuteronomy. 8, 3. Matthew. 4, 4. Luke. 4, 4.
, or by his own wisdom and forecast, neither art thou bound with a fatal
chain of second causes, but by thy decree and will we enioie life, and al
things created at thy beck do continue while thou think good.

Give us not only store of al things to the necessity of our life: but grant
also to our meat and drink virtue and power to relieve and strengthen our
bodies. For thou alone vpholdest al things by thy word of power Heb. 1, 3.
.

Unless thou daily did feed us with thy hidden grace, which thou do
enspire into the bread to feed us, all the heaps of our yeerelie encrese were
to small purpose. For be it, that there be abundance of wheat, wine, and of al
other things: yet unless they be watered by thy blessing quickly would al come
to naught, and we should perish for lack of food in all that abundance. For all the substance which we possess, what is it without thou prosper and
fructify the same with thy blessing.

And albeit we feed on bread Matt. 4, 4. Deutr. 8, 3.
: yet we ascribe not our life to the virtue of the bread; neither is thy power
tied to the bread; nor man's life included within the same, but altogether it
depends upon thy will and good pleasure.

We beseech thee for thy most large and bountiful liberality, cast us not of
Psalm. 71, 9.
in the time of our old age; and when our strength fails us, forsake us not.

Likewise confirm our faith that we distrust not thy promises; neither be we
driven from thee by any means, seem they never so contrary to natural
causes: but give grace that we may withdraw our eyes from al wordlie
consultations, and, as touching our food, and other necessaries for this life,
may wholly depend upon thee, and at no time go beyond the limits which thou
have prescribed, through our Lord Jesus Christ, which lives and reigns with
thee for evermore,

Amen.
3. A prayer for vni tie in Religion.
O Eternal God, which have called us to the unity of the true catholic faith,
and gathered us by thy word into the lap of the Christian congregation, that we
may be al of us one body, Ephesians 4, 4. 5. 6.
and one spirit, even as we are called in one hope of our calling. One Lord,
one faith, one baptism, one God, and Father of al, which is above al, and
through al, and in us al. For even as thou Father art in thy Son, and he in
thee Ioh* 17, 21.
: so should we also be one in thee our God.

And therefore we cry unto thee, O almighty Father, and eternal God, teach us
thy ways Psa. 86, 11.
that we may walk in thy truth; O knit our hearts unto thee that we may fear
thy Name.

Grant that al thy faithful may be like affected Philip. 2, 2. Romans 12, 16.
, and of one mind, as thou art, thinking the same thing after the ensample of
Christ our Savior, and that as well in minds Romans 15, 6.
as with mouth we may agree among our selves, both in true doctrine, and in
outward behauior of conversation. For the scope of the Churches felicity
consists in the unity of true faith and religion.

Keep us in the true understanding, and right knowledge of thy sacred
scriptures, that without strife and contention, we may speak one thing 1. Cor.
1, 10. Philip. 3, 16.
Let there be no dissentions nor schisms among us; let nothing be done through
contention, or of vain glory, but let us be one body, endued with one mind,
and judgment, according to thy word revealed, until we attain Ephe. 4, 12*
to the unity of faith and knowledge of thy 13.
Son into a perfect man, according to the measure of the age of 15.
the fulness of Christ, which is the head, by whom the whole body being copled
and knit together by every joint for the furniture thereof, 16.
(according to the effectual power, which is in the measure of every part)
receives increase of the body, unto the edifieng of it self in love.

O most holy Father, keep us by thy Name, that we may be one in thee Ioh. 17,
21.
, and that among us which are believers, there may be one heart and one mind.

O Christ our only Savior and Mediator, which before thy passion did pray
that we might be one in thee Ioh. 17, 21.
even as thou art in thy Father: grant that thy Church may be at concord, and
agree in one true faith and confession.

Let there continue among us a godly consent; let there be one agreement in
faith, one mind in prayer, that we may grow up in thee, and that al our hearts
may be copled together by the bond of the Spirit, using thy gifts, as they
should be, to the advancement of thy glory, and to the common profit both of
thy Church and Commonweal; and walking worthy our calling Ephesians. 4, 1.
whereunto we are called, with all humility and gentleness, with all lenity
forbearing 2.
one another through charity, being careful to keep the unity 3.
of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

Repress the furiousnes of Satan which sows discention among thy flock to
weaken our faith, and to hinder our prayers, whereby thy glory is defaced.

Grant therefore that we prove not desirous of vain glory Gal. 5, 26.
provoking one another, and enuieng one another, that we bite not one another
to our destruction Gal. 5, 15.
. For of emulation spring contentions which being once enflamed, boil out into
mortal divisions. And as many as maintain emulations, contentions, and
factions, are carnal 1. Cor. 3, 3.
and walk as men.

Wherefore take from us the zeal of the flesh, which is foolish. And let al
envy Ephe. 4, 31
wrath, pride, and arrogancy be far from us.

Likewise let us avoid 1. Tim. 1, 4. 1. Tim. 6, 4.
foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they engender strife and
contention, 20.
and serve for nothing but to the subuerting of the hearers, and engrafting of
errors.

Where a desire of strife is, there certainly God dwells not 1. John. 4,
verse. 16.
: and they which raise tumults of nothing, and disquiet thy flock, those will thou, O Son of God, destroy.

Come holy Spirit, replenish the hearts of the faithful, and inflame in them
the fire of thy love, which once did gather the nations into the unity of
the faith through the diversity of tongues Acts. 2, 4.
:

Join our hearts together, that we may nourish christian concord among us, and
that we al glued, as it were together in loving hearts, may be of one mind in
thee; so shall thy pure doctrine zelouslie be maintained, and no false
interpretation of the Scripture obstinately be defended.

Bring home to thy fold al such as are turned from the unity of true religion,
that there may be one pastor and one fold Ioh. 10, 16. Ezec. 37, 22
.

To such as are gone out from us, grant constancy that they may continue with
us teaching the Gospel to the salvation of the hearers.

And if it fortune that any, contrary to the doctrine which we have learned,
raise dissension and offenses, grant that we may avoid them Romans 16, verse.
17. 2. John. 10.
, least the hearts of the simple, through their sweet persuasions, and
flattery, be deceived.

O God, author of peace 1. Cor. 14, verse. 33. 2. These. 3, 16
, and concord, give grace that every of us may think the same thing
according to our Savior Christ,

Amen.
4. A prayer for peace.
O Most Hie God, and holy Father which art not the Author of dissension but of
peace 1. Cor. 14, verse. 33. 2. Cor. 13, 11
, not of confusion, nor of inordinate life, but the keeper of discipline and
quietness, from thee come holy cogitations, and good counsels, and righteous
deeds:

Give unto us thy servants that peace which the world cannot give, that both
our hearts and works may be applied to thy commandments, and that our days,
through thy protection, be always quiet from troble.

Govern thou the whole state both of the Chuch and Common weal, and rule our
life, that in our days justice may take place Psalm. 72, 7.
, and peace continue as long as the moon shall have her course.

Speak thou peace unto the common people, and over thy Saints, and likewise to
them which are converted, and turned to a better mind.

Let thy salvation be nigh them that fear thee Psalm. 85, 9.
, that glory may dwell within our land. Let mercy and truth meet together,
yea, let 10.
justice and peace embrace each other. Let truth arise out of the 11.
earth, and righteousness look down from heaven. Let the mountains Psa. 72, 3.
and the hills bring peace to thy people by justice.

Bless Lord al Countries, Cities, Towns, and places where thy word does abide
and is purelie preached.

Let them have much peace that love thy Law and doctrine, and let them be
without stones to stumble at, and offenses; let there be peace within their
walls Psa. 122, 7.
, and prosperity within their palaces.

O Lord, strengthen the locks of our ports, and bless thy children within
them, put peace for our ends, and bounds; and fill us with the fat of the
corn, that thou King of glory, and Lord of hosts may enter by our gates
Psalm. 24, 7.
, and the pure word may abide not only in our walls, but also in our wills, to
the glory of thy Name, and comfort of our souls; and that honest discipline
together with integrity of virtue, manners, and humane literature may be
maintained.

O eternal God, which have called us in peace 1. Cor. 7, 15
, grant that with all men, as much as in us lies Romans 12, verse. 18.
we may have peace; and let us account of holiness Heb. 12, 14
without which none shall see the Lord.

Assuage our hearts, that we may clean forget al injuries, and forgive each
other in many things, least by revenging our selves we take away the public
tranquillity.

Repress the Devil, the breaker of godly concord and christian peace, which
ranging throughout al regions sows every where the seed of strife and
debate.

O God of peace which make an end of war Psalm. 46, 9.
in all the world, and breakest the bow, and knappest the spears asunder, and
burnest the chariots with fire; protect us from war and slaughter; scatter the
nations Psalm. 68, 1.
that wish for war.

Break thou and hinder al evil counsels, and the purpose of such as mind and
thirst after nothing else but the shedding of innocent blood.

Confound them in their imaginations Psalm. 6, 10.
that they take none effect, let them be turned back and put to shame. Let them
come to shame, and perish through their own imaginations Psalm. 5, 10.
, that Churches and schools well ordained be not overthrown, nor Idolatry get
the dominion over us.

Ingraffe therefore into al men of what calling soever, a desire of peace;
contented minds in their vocations, and a carefulnes to advance the welfare of
that place where they do abide: so shall they, neither through a desire of
others wealth, nor by ambition or vain glory raise any tumults to our
disquietnes.

And where strife, contention, and discord is among men, there do thou, O most
mighty God, reconcile their hearts and minds that those flames, and fires may
speedily be put out. For thou can conclude a truce for us Job. 5, 23.
with the stones of the ground; and compel the beasts of the field to seek
those things as belong to our peace, and the wolf to dwell with the Lamb Esai.
11, 6.
, and the Leopard to lie down with the Kid.

Therefore make our tabernacles safe and quiet, that about them there may be a
rich tranquillity, which may abound like the stream running over his bank
Esai. 48, 18
, and our righteousness as the waves of the sea, which is never without water.

In the Lord shall we have our wished peace, and the work of righteousness shall
be peace Esai 32, 17
, and her fruit rest and quietness for ever. And thy people shall dwell in the
Innes of 18.
peace, and in sure dwellings, in safe places of comfort.

In joy shall we go forth Esai. 55, 12
and return in peace, the mountains and hills shall sing with us for joy, and
all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.

Hear us, O Lord of peace 2. These. 3, verse. 16.
, and grant that thy peace Philip. 4, 7.
which passes al understanding, may keep our hearts and minds in our Lord
Jesus Christ, which lives and reigns with thee in the unity of the holy
Spirit a God now, and for evermore,

Amen.
5. A prayer for unbelievers.
Unto thee do we cry, O Lord, Father and maker of al men, which art rich unto
all that call upon thee Romans 10, verse. 12. Ephesians. 2, 4.
, and which command the light to shine out of darkness. For thou will 1. Tim.
2, 4.
that al men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.

And therefore of thy great love thou did call us to the participation of
the lot of the Saints in light, which are by nature the children of wrath and
of death; aliens Ephe. 2, 12
and strangers from the testaments of promise, having none hope, and without
God in the world: but now are fellow Citizens with the Saints Ephe. 2, 19
and of the household of GOD, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, 20.
Jesus Christ being the head corner Ephesians. 2, 21.
stone, which sustaineth the whole building by his word of power.

Hear us thy servants making supplication for such as yet have not heard the
sound of thy Gospel; neither known thy Name, but sitting in darkness Luke 1, 79.
and in the shadow of death, have their minds darkened Ephe. 4, 18.
and are alienated from the life of God by the ignorance that is in them, and
are carried away unto dumb Idols 1. Cor. 12, verse. 2.
, and fained Gods, even as they are led, and run to worship that which is no
God.

Give grace, that thy word may be known among them Esai. 19, 21.
, and preached in every land, and the sound thereof go out into the ends of
the world Psalm. 19, 4. Romans 10, 18.
, that thou also may be found of them which sought thee not, and famous among
such as never 20.
asked after thee.

Send forth thy word that they may be healed Ps. 107, 20.
and walk no more in the vanities of their mind.

O God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, King of glory Ephe. 1, 17.
, give them the Spirit of wisdom and revelation through the confessing of
thee, lighten their minds that they Ephesians. 1, 18.
may know, what the hope is whereunto thou have called us; and how precious the
glory is of thine inheritance in the Saints, and how 19.
excellent the greatness of his power is toward us which believe according to
the working of his mighty power, which thou have wrought 20.
in him, when he was raised by thee from the dead, and placed at thy 21.
right hand in heavenly places above al principalities and powers.

Open the hearts of unbelievers, that hearing thy word they may acknowledge thee
the only true God Ioh. 17, 3.
, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; and may worship thee the Father in the
Son, and the Son in thee the Father with the holy Ghost, even as thou have
revealed thy self.

Take the vale from the hearts of the Jews 2. Cor. 3, verse. 13.
least being blinded in the reading of the old Testament, they stumble at the
stone Romans 9, 33 1. Peter. 2, 8.
and rock of offense by incredulity, and hardness of their hearts, that thy
Son Christ crucified 1. Cor. 1, 23
and preached, be not unto them a stumbling block, and thy Gospel the savor of
death unto death 2. Cor. 2, verse. 16.
: but that being converted by true faith to the knowledge of thee the Father in
the Son, their face being uncovered, they may behold thy glory, knowing by
the writings of the Prophets, the Messiah, which thou have appointed to be the
Savior of the world.

Likewise gather thou the Gentiles (to whom thy Gospel, the word of the cross
is mere foolishnes 1. Cor. 1, 23
, into thy Congregation that they may embrace thy mystery, casting of al
fleshly wisdom, and lead al their cogitations captive 2. Cor. 10, 5
to the obedience of the Gospel.

Moreover, our prayer and supplication is, not only for those above
mentioned, but also for such as, either, although they resist not thy truth,
and pure religion openly and obstinately, profess our religion, yet mingled
with many superstitions and abuses, worshipping and calling upon Saints
departed out of this life; or be addicted to outward ceremonies Colos. 2, 8.
and rudiments of this world, burdening their consciences with man's
observations, and traditions of their fathers Mat. 15, 2. 9.
; or trusting to their own righteousness, or rather to the works and deeds of
the flesh, refuse and make little account of thy righteousness Romans 10, 3
which is the true justification, and go about to establish their own
righteousness. 4.
But Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to as many as believe.
And, 1. Cor. 3, 11
an other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid in thy Son the
Messiah, which is the way, John. 14, 6.
the truth, the life, and the end of the Law.

For by his perfect obedience and fulfilling of the Law, by his innocent and
bitter death, he has restored unto us true salvation, and perfect
righteousness, that every one John. 3, 15.
which believes on him might not perish, but have everlasting life.

O God, the sight of the blind, bring them home again, which through ignorance
either are entangled in doubtful labyrinthes, and gross errors, or countenance
polluted religion, that lightened by thy spirit, they may return into the
right way.

And such as with impudent faces, and stiff necks, do obstinatlie, with an
affected ignorance withstand thine holy Spirit whose senses the God of this
world has blinded 2. Cor. 4, 4
that the light of thy glorious Gospel shine not over them, repress, and
bridle their malice, that by slaughters and persecutions they nether troble nor
destroy thy Church,

Amen.
6. A prayer for our benefactors.
O Merciful, faithful, and loving God, rewarder of al good works.

Forasmuch as ingratitude is the most odious and detestable vice of al, the
which both thou do abhor, and no wise man can abide, as a thing deserving
infinite pains and rigorous punishment. For he which renders evil for good
Pro. 17, 13.
, evil shall not depart from his house. And Wis. 16, 29
the hope of the unthankful shall melt away like the winter ice, and flow away
as unprofitable water.

We beseech thee give us grateful minds always remembering benefits received,
least forgetting the merits exhibited upon us, we fall into the filthy and
abominable fault of ingratitude.

But govern us with thine holy Spirit, that we may always give thanks unto
thee, a most bountiful God, for such benefits as thou have bestowed, not upon
us only, but upon al mankind:

For creating us after thine own image Genesis 1, 26. Colos. 3, 10.
; for redeeming us being sinners forlorn, and condemned; for delivering us
from sin, death, and hell by the most holy and precious blood of thy dear
Son 1. Pet. 1, 19 Hebr. 9, 14.
; for bestowing thy righteousness, thine holy Spirit, and everlasting life upon
us; for conseruing our souls, and bodies safe and sound; finally for giving,
and that abundantly al such things as are necessary for the sustentation of
this life; and besides, for thy merciful protection against al dangers; al
which thou do of thy mere mercy and Fatherly goodness without any merits
or worthiness of ours.

And therefore we will extol thee, O God of our life, and yield thanks to thy
Name, O most hie. For thou art gracious Psa. 136, 1.
and thy mercy endures for ever.

We will give thee thanks, O Lord, among the people; we will sing to thee among
the nations. For the greatness Psa. 57, 10.
of thy mercy reaches unto the heavens.

So infinite and great are thy benefits conferred upon us, O Lord, that we are
unable to conceive them in our minds.

Notwithstanding our mouths shall speak of thy righteousness and salvation Psa.
71, 15.
for we know none end thereof.

What recompense shall we make to the Lord for all the benefits that he has done
unto us Ps. 116, 12. 13.
? We will take up the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. We
will 14. 18.
pay our vows unto the Lord in the presence of his people.

We will never forget thy benefits and woonderous works which thou have done for
us. To thee, O God the Father, be thanks for all things Ephesians. 5, 20.
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, we think it our bounden duty to pray for our benefactors that
have begot, brought up, taught, and promoted us, that it would please thee to
repaie them, and al other for whom I am bound to pray, whose necessities are
known to thee.

These I commend to thy mercy in our prayers, that thou may bless them
both with temporal and everlasting rewards.

O celestial God, and most excellent recompencer thou have power and mercy
Psa. 62, 12. Matt. 16, 27. Romans 2, 6.
to render to every one according to their works. Do well, O Lord, Psa. 125,
4.
unto those that be good and true of heart.

Vouchsafe to reward al our benefactors; let them receive most plentiful
benefits according to the multitude of thy mercies.

Show mercy unto them, O Lord, that have comforted us; and so bless their
families, that they may find mercy with thy Son our Lord and Savior Christ
at that day 2. Tim. 1, verse. 18.
when we shall al appear before his tribunal seat Romans 14, verse. 10. 2. Cor.
5, 10.
to give an account of our works.

O Son of the living God, which do ascribe and impute the same to be done
unto thee Mat. 25, 40
which is extended unto any of thy servants; and do promise a most liberal
reward even for a cup of cold water Mat. 10, 42 Mark. 9, 41.
, requite according to thy woonted goodness, every one which have extended the
works of mercy, and the duties of humanity upon us, that they may be blessed,
and enriched mightily 2. Cor. 9, 6
with the increase of good things.

He which has consideration of the poor and needy Psalm. 41, 1*
, let him be delivered, O Lord, in the evil day; Keep him, give him life,
make him 2.
blessed in the land, and give him not up to the will of his enemies; but
comfort him when he lies sick 3.
in his bed, and in the day of troble hear his prayers. Let his alms be
alwaie in thy sight Sirac. 3, 15. 16.
, and be mindful of him for ever, that when he falls he may be vpholden.

Grant, Lord, that according to our habilities we may recompense benefits
received; and show our selves grateful in deed, that our leaves wither not,
neither that we

(...)So that al things, as it were, ouerburdened and wearied, do groan, and
travel in pain together with thine elect, and desire a deliverance Romans 8, 19.
from such and so great evils, whereunto they are subject, and made to serve to
vanity at the lust of the wicked.

Unto thee do we cry from the bottom of our hearts, Segregate us, O Lord,
from the darkness, decept, and filthiness of this world, and withdraw us from
the desire of earthly things, that being incorporated into thy congregation,
where thy Divinity does abide, we may seek after heavenly things, and
forsake earthly, which are frail and transitory.

O righteous Father, the world does not know thee Ioh. 7, 28.
, but thy Son does know thee, and they to 29.
whom thy Son does reveal thee by thine holy Spirit.

Give us the same thy Spirit, that we may know what riches we have received by
Christ, and speak not the things which man's wisdom does teach 1. Cor. 2,
verse. 13.
, but which thy Spirit shall teach comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

Keep us in the confession of thy Name, that thou in us may be glorified,
and that we favor not of terrene and wordlie things but dwelling in mind in
heaven, may seek those things that are above Colos. 3, 2.
and be made partakers of the divine nature, and fly from the corruption,
which is in the world: least in this miserable and dronken state thereof, we
enwrap our selves in worldly cares, which withdraw our minds from the exercise
of godliness, and choke the good motions of the holy Spirit.

Grant therefore that we love neither the world 1. Ioh. 2, 15
, nor the things in the world: but using this world, we may be as those which
use it not 1. Ioh. 2, 17
. For the form of this world does pass away.

Rule thou our hearts that we give not our selves to the pleasures of this
world; neither enter into the broad way, and wide gate Mat. 7, 13.
which brings to eternal destruction: but shunning all the enticements of this
world may go in at the narrow gate 14.
to the kingdom of heaven.

O Christ our Redeemer, which have chosen and severed us from this world, that,
not imitating the same, we might be saved: give grace that al which have
promised wholly to serve thee, which do overthrow the prince of this world
Ephe. 2, 2. John. 12, 31.
, may be safe from all the assaults of the subtle spirit.

For it were a shameful and traitorous deed to promise wholly to be thy
servants, and yet to favor thy mortal enemy, and to follow his works. But he
that warreth 2. Tim. 2, ^
laboreth to please him which has chosen him to be a soldior.

Guide us that we follow not the vading glory of this world, neither delight
therein. For he which will favor the world is an enemy to God. But let the
world be crucified to us Gala. 2, 19.
and we to the world, through the denial of our selves, and renouncing all the
enticements of the same.

Grant us grace, that we may walk wisely Ephesians. 5, 15. Coloss. 4, 5. 1. Peter.
4, 2.
and circumspectly in this present world, not as fools and unwise, but as
wise: and shun al occasions of falling, and redeem the time Ephesians. 5, 16.
because the days are evil.

O God the holy Ghost, pour into us thine heavenly wisdom, which is from
above Sirach. 1, 1. James. 1, 5. Prou. 2, 6.
, that in spiritual matters we may cast off altogether the wisdom of the
world, which is foolishnes with God 1. Cor. 3, 19
, and in the simplicity of mind cleave unto thy word.

Instruct us, that having renounced ungodliness Titu. 2, 12.
, we may walk vprightlie and godly in this world; looking for that blessed
hope, and 13.
appearing of the glory of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ,
which gave himself for us to redeem 14.
us from al iniquity, and to make us a pure peculiar people unto himself,
zealous of good works Phili. 2, 16 Ephesians. 2, 10. 1. Peter. 2, 9.
.

Comfort our minds, that our hearts be not trobled John. 14, 1. 27.
when the world does persecute us. For we are counted no better than the very
excrements, and of^couring of this world. And therefore make us pacientlie to
bear not only every misery incident to al men: but also the perverse and
sinister judgment of the world, the which also thou did suffer for our sakes
1. Pet. 2, 23 Psalm. 22, 6.
.

Uphold us in the mids of our afflictions, that both the world and the prince
thereof may well know, that thou have a tender care John. 3, 15. 16.
over thy poor flock, and wilt protect, and save the same everlastingly,

Amen.
8. Evening prayer, on Thursdaie.
WE thank thee, Psa. 136, 2. 3. 26.
King of heaven and earth, for protecting us this day by thy strong hand, and
stretched out arm from al perils.

The right hand of the Lord Ps. 118, 15.
brings mighty things to pass; the right hand of the Lord has exalted 16.
us; the right hand of the Lord does great things, it has kept us from al
evil; the Lord has saved our souls.

Therefore we will be mindful of thee, O Lord, upon our beds, and waking will we
meditate of thy goodness, because thou have bin our helper Psalm. 63, 7. 8.
; under the shadow of thy wings will we rejoice. Our souls cleave unto thee,
because thy right hand has vpholden us, and saved us in our extremities.

We will be mindful of the time past wherein thou marvelously did assist us,
and meditate of al thy deeds Psa. 143, 5.
. We will discourse of the works of thine hands, and will never forget thy
mightines.

For thy mercy endures for ever 1. Ezra. 3, verse. 11.
, and thou will not despise the workmanship of thine own hands.

Now bless the Lord al his servants Psa. 134, 1.
which stand in the house of the Lord in the courts of the house of our GOD; in
the night lift up 2.
your hands to his sanctuary, and bless the Lord. The Lord which 3.
made both heaven and earth, bless us from above.

Unto thee, O Lord, do we lift up our hands, and beseech thee with all
humblenes of mind, pardon al our sins, which this day we have committed
either against thee, or our neighbors.

Our hands are defiled with blood Esai. 59, 3.
, and our fingers with much iniquity. Our transgressions are before thee, and
make answer against us.

But do not thou, Lord, behold the wickedness of thy people 2. Esdr. 8,
verse. 26.
: but remember thy covenant which thou have made with us in the blood of thy
Son; neither consider thou 27.
our wicked enterprises, but have in mind that thy testimonies are pure among
us, and thy word undefiled. Think not upon those that have 28.
walked fainedlie before thee: but remember them which according to thy will do
fear thee. Neither 29.
do thou destroy them which have lived beastly: look upon them that not
only teach, but observe thy commandments. Take thou none 30.
indignation at them which are worse than beasts: but love them always that
put their trust in thy righteousness and glory. For we and our 31.
Fathers have all the same sickness: but because of us sinners thou shall be
called merciful. For if thou have 32.
mercy on us, thou shall be called merciful to us that have no works of
righteousness.

And therefore be thou merciful unto us, O Lord, for thy Name sake, and pardon
al our transgressions, whereby most infinitely we have deserved thine
everlasting displeasure. Let thine hand be ready to save us, that we may
prefer thy commandments above al things, and fulfill them with our fingers.

O Lord, Psalm. 77, 2.
in our troble do we seek thee; our hands in this night season are lifted up
to thee, Neither shall any thing be in cause, but that in this dark and
dreadful night, thou shall lighten and illustrate every dark corner of our
habitation, that our candels go not out by night.

When we sit in darkness Mica. 7, 8.
bring us into the light, save us from utter darkness Mat. 22, 13
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Thou art the God which give light to
our candle, lighten therefore our darkness, O our God, Psalm. 13, 3.
that we sleep not in death. And protect us by the shadow of thine hand Esai.
51, 16.
that none evil stick to us this night.

Deliver us from the snare of the hunter Psalm. 91, 3. 4.
, and from the noisome pestilence. Defend us under thy wings, and under thy
feathers we shall be safe. Let thy truth compass 5.
us like a shield, that we be not afraid Psalm. 91, 6.
for any terror by night, nor yet either for the pestilence that walks in
darkness, or for the sickness that destroieth at noone day. A thousand shall fall
beside us, and 7.
ten thousand on our right hand, but it shall not come nigh us.

O Lord, deliver us out of the hands of our enemies Psalm. 21, 8. Psalm. 36, 11.
, and save us from such as persecute our souls: they imagine wickedness in
their chambers, they sleep not Pro. 4, 16.
except they have done mischief, and sleep is taken from them until they have
done harm.

O Lord, keep us, O Lord, be thou our defense over our right hand, that the
sun parch us not by day Psalm. 121, 6.
, nor the moon by night.

The Lord is our light Psalm. 27, 1.
, and our salvation, whom then should we fear? The Lord is the strength of
our life, of whom then should we be afraid? Though an host of men 3.
were laid against us; yet shall not our hearts be afraid: and though the wicked
should rise up against us to devour our flesh; yet it shall be our 5.
comfort alwaie, that thou will hide us in thy tabernacle in the evil day, and
defend us in the secret place of thy dwelling through Christ our Lord,

Amen.
1. On Friedaie, Morning prayer.
BLessed is the Lord God of Sabbath which by his commandment created the
morning, and assigned Job. 38, 12. 13.
to the day spring his place, where arising every day it apprehends the
wings of the earth, and speedily runs to the uttermost parts of the world.

Who is like our God Psa. 77, 13 14.
, which does woonderous things both in heaven and earth?

O Lord, Esai. 66, 1. Acts. 7, 48. 49.
heaven is thy seat, and the earth is thy footestoole.

Unto thee do we bend our selves, yielding most humble thanks for that it
has pleased thee of thy wonted goodness to preserve us this night under thy
merciful protection.

Of thy clemency have thou delivered our souls from the mids of Lions among
whom we lay; with thy shield of salvation have thou compassed us about, like
as a shepherd Esai. 40, 11 Iere. 31, 10.
watches, and looks to his flock.

Wherefore we will sing of thy power Psa. 59, 16.
, and praise thy mercy betimes in the morning. For thou have bin our defense
and refuge in the day of our troble.

We beseech thee even for the bloody sweat of thy Son our Lord and Savior
Christ, that thou would vouchsafe this morning to moisten and mollify our
hearts, through the grace of thine holy Spirit.

As the morning dew Wis. 11, 19.
spreading it self earelie before day does wet, and fill the earth; and as the
morning rain 2. Sam. 23, verse. 4.
by drops does water dry places, whereby they do fructify and bring forth
herbs and grass: so extend thy grace toward us Psalm. 72, 6. Micah. 5, 7.
, and by thine heavenly dew besprinkle our hard and dry hearts, that we may
wholly delight Ps. 119, 14.
in the ways of thy righteousness, and walk in the paths of thy
commandments. 1.


Let thy living Spirit Ps. 143, 10
guide us forth into the land of righteousness. O Lord, for thy Name sake
quicken 11.
us in thy righteousness, that thy word may be Psalm. 119, verse. 105.
a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our steps.

Show us thy ways Psalm. 25, 4.
, O Lord, and teach us thy paths.

Order our steps according to thy word, so shall no wickedness Psalm. 119, verse.
133.
have dominion over us, neither shall we wander from the right way.

Take from us the way of lieng Ps. 119, 29.
, and grant us graciously thy law.

O would to God our ways were directed to the keeping of thy statutes, that we
might not walk Psalm. 1, 1.
in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the
seat of the scorneful, but delight in 2.
the law of the Lord, and exercise our selves therein day and night; then
should we be as a tree Psalm. 1, 3. Ierem. 17, 8.
planted by the rivers of waters, that brings forth her fruit in due season.

O Lord, in our trobles we will seek thee earelie in the morning, and return
unto thee our GOD, which art ready as the spring of the day, and wilt come
unto us as the fructifieng rain Hose. 6, 3.
, and as the timely and latter shoure which does good to the earth: be thou in
like manner a refuge unto the poor, and a timely helper in our troble.

We will love thee dearly Psalm. 18, 1.
, O Lord our strength: thou art our rock and our defense, our Savior, 2.
our God, and our might in whom we will trust, our buckler, the horn of our
salvation and our refuge.

Keep us, Lord, from the hands of the ungodly Psa. 140, 4.
; preserve us from wicked men, which are purposed to overthrow our goings. The
proud 5.
have laid a snare for us, and spread a net abroad with cords, yea, and set
traps in our way. But deliver thou our souls from death Psa. 56, 13. Psalm.
103, 4.
, and our feet from falling.

For thou art righteous, O Lord, and dwell in the mids of us Soph. 3, 5.
doing none iniquity: but earelie, earelie every morning bring thou forth
thy judgment into light, and wilt not be drawn away from saving us, that we
be not hurt of bloody fellows, of thieves and murderers, whose feet are
swift Pro. 6, 18. Prou. 1, 16. 11.
to shed blood.

In thy Name, O Christ, King of eternal glory we will tread upon the Serpents
and Scorpions Luke 10, 19
, and over the whole power of the enemy, and he shall not hurt us, for thy
word shall save us Wis. 16, 12
, which live and rulest with the Father in the unity of the holy Spirit, a
God for evermore,

Amen.
2. A thanksgiving for the passion of Christ.
WE thank thee, O Lord Jesus Christ God and man, for that of thine only and
free mercy without any works or worthiness at al of ours, thou have redeemed us
1. Pe. 2, 24. Matthew. 8, 17. Esaie. 53, 4.
and damned men through thy most innocent and holy passion.

O sweet Jesus, how bitter and great were thy pains; how horrible and cruel
thy punishment; how grievous and lamentable thine affliction; how bloody thy
wounds; thy dolors how diverse; and thy death how shameful, which thou
sufferedst for us?

How inestimable was the love, that moved thee to endure such and so great
torments to reconcile us to the Father 1. Ioh. 3, 16
?

In the mount of Olives Luke 22, 39 Matthew. 26, verse. 38, etc. Mark. 14, verse.
32.
, through our infinite sins lighting upon thee, and sense of the most heavy
displeasure of thy Father against our wickedness, that did sweat, contrary
to our common nature, blood, that the drops Luke. 22, verse. 44.
like blood trickled upon the earth, and so after a marvelous manner blood came
out of thee being expelled through the resolution of the spirits, nature being
broken and languishing by reason of thine intolerable sorrows and torments.

And therefore, thy Disciples being fled Matthew. 26, verse. 56.
, thou did voluntarily commit thy self Matthew. 26, verse. 53, etc.
into the hands of the cruel Jews, which brought thee most rigorously bound
without compassion from the presence of one corrupt Justice unto another more
cruel: where thou being falselie accused, was unjustly condemned,
contemptuously spit upon, opprobriouslie obraided, and buffeted most
injuriously. For our offenses thou wast wounded Esai. 53, 5.
, and for our wickedness broozed, for the offenses of thy people thou wast
beaten, killed, and with sharp thorns crowned, and contumeliouslie dealt
withal.

For our sins thou wast cruelly handled, a worm Psalm. 22, 6.
, not a man: a very scorn of men, and the outcast of the people.

Thy look was odious, and il favored, a man thou wast full of sorrows Esai.
53, 3. 2.
, without form or beauty, so that they had no lust unto thee.

Besides some covered thine eyes Mark. 14, verse. 65. Matthew. 27, verse. 30, etc.
John. 19, verse. 3, etc.
, and laid upon thy face with their fists, exasperating thy torments with
many scoffs, and mockes.

Thy blessed body was so mangled, and cut with stripes, that even an Ethnike
pittieng the same, uttered these words, John. 19, 5.
Behold the man.

Finally, for our enormous offenses, thou wast hanged, like an accursed wretch
Matthew. 27, verse. 38. Mark. 15, 27 28.
between two thieves; afflicted with a most odious kind of death Deu. 21, 23
Galat. 3, 13.
; pierced through the hands and the feet, whereby thou did encounter with
most extreme torments; which were so great, that for a space, thou wast after
a sort without al manner comfort Mar. 15, 34
, and so constrained through thy great sorrow and greeuousnes of pain to
drink vinegar Matthew. 27, verse. 48. Mark. 15, 36 John 19, 30.
; and so in the extremity of pain thou did give up thy Ghost, commending
the same unto thy dear Father Luke. 23, verse. 46.
, in wonderful patience, like a sheep lead to the slaughter Esai. 53, 7.
and as a lamb quiet before the shearer: thou did not open thy mouth to
rail Acts. 8, 32. 1. Pet. 2, 23.
, yea, that was so far from thee that thou praiedst for thine enemies Luke. 23,
verse. 34.
: that so by thy torments, having quited us from al guilt as well of fault as of
punishment, we might be healed.

For to this end did thou be are the burden of our sins upon the wood of
the cross 1. Pe. 2, 24.
, that thou might recover the peace of souls for such as are healed by thy
stripes, and obtain the true righteousness for as many as believe on thee,
that the wrath of thine eternal Father Psalm. 2, 12.
, which is a consuming fire, do not devour us.

O Jesus Christ, son of the living God, for these torments, and al other thy
passions, we will honor, praise, and thank thee for evermore, beseeching thee
most humbly, that thy passions may work and take effect in us, and be a
present and most wholesome medicine in all necessities; and that always being
mindful of the same, we may rejoice therein Gal. 6, 14.
; make it a comfort for our selves against all the tentations of Satan, and the
force of sin and the Law: that thy cross may be an ensample to us 1. Pet. 2,
21.
that walking in thy steps, we render not rebuke for rebuke, but may imitate
thy long suffering Luke. 23, verse. 34. Acts. 7, 60.
, and pray for such as curse us Mat. 5, 44. Luke. 6, 28. 1. Cor. 4, 13. 1.
Pet. 4, 14.
; and finally, may so think upon, and celebrate the cause of thy death, that
the consideration thereof may utterly both extinguish all the flames of
unlawful concupiscence, and bury the enticements of the flesh, and also raise
up the seed of godliness, and nourish the love of virtue within us, that so
being wholly dead unto sin, we may live unto righteousness, and serve thee
which barest our sins in thy body 1. Pet. 2, 24
upon the cross, but live now and raignest with the Father in the unity of
the holy Spirit, a God for evermore,

Amen.
3. A prayer for true repentance.
O Lord God, which artful of compassion Psa. 103, 8. Exodus 34, 6.
, and mercy, long suffering, and of great goodness, thou continuest thy mercy
for thousands Ezo. 20, 6.
, taking away iniquity, sins, and offenses; thou call us after thy
woonted mercy by thy word to repentance, and hearty conversion. For unto al,
and every one is repentance and forgiveness of sins preached Luke 24, 47
in thy Name.

Moreover, we know the riches of thy lenity Romans 2, 4. 2. Pet. 3, 9.
, patience, and long suffering in this, that thou do not suddenly at
unawares take away sinners from the earth, neither ouerwhelme them by and by,
through thy justice in their wicked deeds doing; but give them a space to
repent: which is a most notable argument, that thou will not the death of a
sinner Eze. 33, 11.
, but rather that he be converted, and live.

For thou art merciful over al, because thou can al Wis. 12, 16.
, and dissemblest the sins of men for their amendment.

Thou love al things that are Wis. 12, 13*
, and abhorrest nothing which thou have made, neither have thou ordained any
thing which thou do hate, but sparest al, because they are thine, O Lord,
lover of our souls.

Therefore do we certainly believe that the promise of free reconciliation is
universal, and belongs to al converted.

O how good and pleasant is thy Spirit, Lord, in all things, therefore do thou
many times punish such as go astraie, that being warned of their faults, they
may depart from their wickedness Wisd. 12, verse. 20.
, and believe in thee: Thou call offenders into the way by affliction, and
by iudgeing do thou by little and little give place for amendment Wis. 12, 10
knowing fulwel what the generation and corruption of man is, and how it may be
reduced.

O thou masterer of power, with great moderation do thou judge mankind, and
after this manner do thou teach thy people, that they should be righteous, and
have made them children of a good hope Wis. 12, 19
.

Moreover, for a caution, and instruction to us thou do many ways Wis. 12,
21
scourge our enemies, that thereby we may consider of thy goodness, and also
being judged may trust in thy mercy.

Unto thee, most merciful God, do we cry, which know the hardness of our
hearts, and that, through original sin our hearts being hardened, we have no
power of our selves to return and rise up:

Convert us, O Lord, Ier. 31, 18.
and we shall be converted, because thou art our God, and being converted we will
do penance.

Show us our offenses, that striking Iere. 31, 19.
our thighs we may be heartily sorry for our sins committed.

Heal us, O Lord, and we shall be whole; save us, and we shall be saved Ier. 17,
14.
: for thou art our praise.

Behold we are as a sheep Psalm. 119, verse the last.
wandering, and ready to perish, seek thy servants, O Lord, that we forget
not thy commandments. Circumcise Iere. 4, 4.
the foreskin of our understanding, that our hearts be not hardened.

O Jesus Christ, look upon us with thine eyes of pity; even as thou lookedst
back upon the sinful woman Luke. 7. verse. 37, etc.
in the banquet, which prostrating hirselfe at thy feet, bitterly did bewail
her wickedness. Likewise favor us as thou did the Publican Luke 18, 13
, standing a far of in the Temple without lifting up his eyes unto heaven for
shame, but striking his breast only said, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.

Grant that among the fears and terrors of conscience we may take hold of thee
by a lively faith (which have redeemed us from the curse of the Law Gal. 3, 13.
, and art made for us wisdom 1. Cor. 1, 30 Ier. 23, 5, 6. Ierem. 9. 24.
, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption) and may not, in the
fight of conscience, yield our selves, and despair, but vpholden by the voice
of the Gospel may fly unto thee our Mediator, and justified by faith Romans 5, 1.
may have peace with God.

Restore also in us the right of thy law, so that from our hearts we may obeie
thee our Redeemer, walking in newnes of life Romans 6, 4. 1. Cor. 6, 14.
.

Thou which have suffered for us in the flesh 1. Pet. 4, 1. 2. Coloss. 3, 5.
Romans 6, 17.
give us grace that likewise in the same mind we may be armed for the
mortification of the flesh, that henceforth we live, not after the lusts of
men, but after the will of God. For it is sufficient for us 1. Pet. 4, 3.
that we have spent the time that is past of the life after the will of the
Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, in excess of wynes, in excess of
eating, in excess of drinking, and abominable Idolatries.

Mollify our hearts Romans 2, 5. 4.
that they may repent, and esteem greatly of the riches of thy goodness.

Moreover, repress hypocrites, which flatter their affections and extenuate
the inner evils sticking in our nature, and judge falselie of thy law, not
knowing that the law is spiritual Romans 7, 14
, accusing even our inclination to be evil.

Keep the Devil under that he compel not the trobled consciences of some to
desperation, either by heaping, and reaping up their offenses, or extenuating
thy mercy: but grant that al sinners may come unto thee by hearing thy word
to repentance Luke 15, 7. 10.
, that the Angels in heaven may continually have occasion to rejoice,

Amen.
4. A prayer for Christian patience.
O Omnipotent and eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which art the
comfort of the afflicted, the joy of the trobled, of the forlorn the stay,
and our refuge in the time of troble, the God of patience Romans 15, 5.
and consolation:

Thou know the weakness of our flesh, that we are by nature fearful, and of
no courage, so that in crosses and calamities we are not able to stand of our
own strength.

Wherefore vnfaine dlie, and from the heart we cry unto thee, Keep us under
miseries and crosses in faith sound Titus. 2, 2.
, steadfast in hope, and in patience constant, that with quiet minds, and a
valiant courage we may suffer al injuries and adversity; and never, being
broken with sorrow attempt that which is contrary to thy commandments, but by
acknowledging thy will, may bear al sorts of calamities with calling for thine
assistance Psalm. 50, 15.
.

Pour into us godly cogitations, so that we imagine not, that the miseries
and afflictions in this world, light upon us by chance, and against thy will:
but that the Church is governed by thy providence, and without thy permission
that none evil Amos. 3, 6.
(of punishment) comes, but thou sendest the same.

Govern thou our minds, that we imagine at no time thee to be our enemy, when
we are pinched with adversity: but may believe that we are chastined of thy
good and fatherly purpose for the remnants of sin abiding in this corrupted
nature of ours, thereby to be stirred up, and confirmed in the exercises of
contrition, faith, confession, patience, and other like virtues.

Certes it is to be accounted for an exceeding benefit that thou suffer not
sinners to follow their own minds 2. Macc. 6, verse. 13.
; but thou withdrawest them by punishment from their impiety, least that
living after their own minds, and doing al things as they list, they perish in
their wickedness:

And therefore do not thou wink 14.
always at our sins, O GOD, as thou do at the offenses of other nations,
which thou suffer to fill the measure of their iniquities, that so afterward
at the ripenes of their offenses thou may be revenged upon them, and destroy
them utterly in the day of judgment, and of reuengement:

But our iniquities thou do visit 15.
by and by with the rod of correction, and our wickedness with the whip of
affliction.

Notwithstanding thou will not 16.
utterly take away thy mercy from us. Though thou punishest with adversity:
yet do thou not forsake thy people.

Furthermore it is expedient that our coltish flesh be humbled, and brought
under, and kept in awe. For otherwise having the head it will wax ouerlustie,
and cast of the yoke of the Lord, being of it self slow, our life frail,
and prosperity wearieng our minds, and making even the wisest, and most godly
many times sluggish and headdie.

But the trobled soul is nigh unto thee in the cross, and prayer is then most
effectual, when it is exercised in affliction.

For the mind utterly destitute of al other help of second causes whereunto
it would easily cleave, then does open it self before thee, and wholly
depends upon thee, not trusting in it self, but altogether in thee, O God,
which raisest the dead 2. Cor. 1, 9.
to life: and so our faith is found more precious than any gold that perishes
1. Pet. 1, 7.
, to the praise, and glory of thy Name.

Finally it behooves us at the length to be conformed like the body of
Christ in his passion, that suffering with him we may also reign together with
him Romans 8, 17
as his fellow heirs.

For unless we be weary of this life, we shall not easelie aspire to our
celestial country. For which cause it is thy will that by many tribulations
Act. 14, 22.
we must enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Wherefore we beseech thee give us godly minds, that we wonder not 1. Pe. 4,
12.
when we are tried by the fire, as though a strange thing did happen unto us,
but rather let us rejoice, that we are partakers of the afflictions of Christ,
that when his glory appears we may be merry and glad.

Assist us, that through patience Heb. 12, 1.
we may run to the battle that is before us looking unto Jesus the Captain,
and finisher of our faith, 2.
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the most shameful cross:

Let us bear in mind that he 3.
endured such speaking against him of sinners, that we should not be weried and
faint in our minds: but strengthened with all might Col. 1, 11.
through thy glorious power unto al patience and suffering, to continue
immovable in all tentations, never casting away our confidence Heb. 10, 35
which has a great recompense appointed.

For we have need of patience, 36.
that after we have done the will of God, we may receive the promise. For yet a
little while Hab. 2, 3.
and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

O blessed God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 2. Cor. 1, 3.
which art the Father of mercy, and God of al consolation, comfort us in all
our afflictions, that as the 5.
afflictions of Christ do abound with us, so with all by him our consolation
may abound,

Amen.
5. A prayer for women with child, and in childbed.
O Most wise God, eternal Father of thy beloved son our Lord and Savior
Christ, Creator, and keeper of al thy creatures, which through thine excellent
wisdom, and counsel, have enioined to womankind, that in pain and sorrow
they should bring forth children Genesis 3, 16.
whereby not only this world is replenished, but a Church, which does
celebrate thy Name for ever, is gathered unto thee:

And forasmuch as the pain of a woman in travel is most extreme which makes
the Prophets Esai. 13, 8. Mica. 4, 10. Esai. 26, 17.
many times to repeat the same in exaggerating the afflictions of punishment
which the holy Spirit does threaten unto the impenitent:

We beseech thee in the Name of Christ thy Son, be merciful unto al women
either with child, or in childbed: give them grace to call into mind the decree
and pleasure of thine heavenly will: let them never strive against thee through
impatience, but in true faith and invocation of thy Name suffer thy cross
quietly, knowing that by the seed of the woman, which has broken the old
serpents head Genesis 3. 15.
they are reconciled unto thee: In this seed, which is Christ, the curse is
clean taken away Galat. 3, 8. 14.
, and blessing restored to us, that we may receive the promise of the Spirit,
and the inheritance of eternal life.

O Almighty God, convert now the sorrows of women in travel into gladness, that
they remember not their pains with mourning, for joy that a man child is
borne into the world Ioh. 16, 21.
.

Comfort them in the mids of their anguish, and help as well the mother as the
babe, especialie in the danger of deliverance 2. Kin. 19, 3 Esaie. 37, 3.
.

If thou blessed God, be not present, they perish undoubtedly, all the world
cannot help them in that extremity.

O eternal God, which of the seed of man framest the living infant in the
mothers womb Wisd. 7, 2.
; and nourishest the same congealed in blood, that the flesh within the time of
ten months may take shape, drawing nourishment from the mother; we are 2.
Esd. 8, 7.
all the workmanship of thine hands.

We give thee thanks, Lord: for fearefullie Ps. 139, 14.
and wonderfully are we made: marvelous are thy works, and that our souls
know right well.

Our bones are not hid from thee, 15.
though we were secretly made, neither our substance in the inner parts of our
mothers womb.

Thine eyes did see our substance 16.
being imperfect, and in thy book were al our members written.

Thy hands have made us Job. 10, 8.
, and facioned us altogether: with skin and bones have thou covered us, 10.
and joined us together with bones and sinews; thou have given us life 12.
and grace, and thy visitation has preserved our spirits.

Grant, we beseech thee, to al infants yet unborn, that knit together with
their due veins and members, they may come forth into this world sound and
perfect without fault or deformity.

Stay the furiousnes of wicked spirits, that they show not their tyranny
upon young infants.

Keep al with child, that, no way being terrefied, or trobled extreemelie,
they be untimely delivered.

Give grace also to the babes newly borne, that, together with their outward
baptism, they may be received into the congregation of the faithful, with
wholesome water through the renewing and regeneration of the holy Spirit Titus
3, 5.
, which thou will plenteouslie pour upon them, through Jesus Christ our
Savior; that being justified by grace, 7.
they may be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life, and become new
creatures through him.

Strengthen al women delivered, that being restored to their woonted health,
they may glorify thee their helper in the time of need 2. Cor. 1, 4
, and learn afterward to repose their whole confidence in thee, which art nigh
unto all that call upon thee Ps. 145, 18.
, to al, we say, calling upon thee in truth.

And if at any time through thine unsearchable judgment, an untimely birth,
or (if, without offending thy godhead, we may say) unlucky deliverance
happen: so comfort, O merciful GOD, the mourneful and sad parents, that they
faint not with sorrow, but believe rather that the woeful chance is a trial of
their faith 1. Pet. 1, 7.
, hope, and patience.

For thou art a merciful, and gracious God, forgiving our sins. Though thou
art angry with our wickedness: yet in thy displeasure thou remembrest thy
mercy, that the trobled may take comfort Hab. 3, 16.
and the afflicted find grace.

For thus do al thy servants persuade themselves, that, if they be tried Tob.
3, 21.
, they shall be crowned; if they be trobled, they shall be delivered; and if they
be chastened, they shall be saved.

For thou have no pleasure in our 22.
damnation, which bring fair weather after storms, and gladness after
tears.

Thy Name, O Lord, be praised Tobit. 3, 23.
for ever,

Amen.
6. A prayer for captives.
O Lord our governor, thou have prepared thy seat in the heavens Ps. 103, 19
, thy kingdom Ps. 145, 13.
is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout al ages. In
thine hand is strength and authority: none can resist thy power.

We beseech thee, be merciful unto al in captivity, and oppressed with most
grievous slavery; especially unto such, as for the confession of thy Gospel,
do suffer persecution, banishment, imprisonment, perils of life, of good name,
and of goods: comfort them with thy Spirit, deliver them from cruel bonds by
thy divine power, and grant such lawful means according to thy wisdom Psa.
147, 5.
, that thy faithful may be delivered.

O Lord, bring home thy captives exiled for thy Name sake Esai. 11, 11.
, that they may confess thee, and extol thy goodness.

O that God would hear the mournings of the imprisoned Ps. 102, 20.
, and deliver the sons appointed unto death.

O that God would bring home the captivity of his people: then should we be
like such as dream Psa. 126, 1.
, and our mouths should be filled 2.
with laughter, and our tongue with joy. Then should they say among the
Gentiles, The Lord has done 3.
great things for them; yea, the Lord has dealt marvelously with us, we are
made iocond.

Turn our captivity, O Lord, as 4.
the rivers in the South. For thou alone art our assister of whom comes
salvation Psa. 68, 20
, thou deliuerest such as are bound by thy power, and despisest not the
groanings of the afflicted.

Praised be God continually Psa. 68, 19.
, which helps us, and pours out his benefits upon us, which lets loose
his captives, and that without gifts or reward Esai. 45, 13
freely for his holy Name sake.

Therefore shall the people worship thee, O Lord, and pray unto thee: for thou
say unto the bound, Come out; and to those that sit in darkness, Come to
light.

O Lord, call into mind thy manifold mercies; deal with us according to thy
woonted goodness, and give not thine inheritance into the hands of thine
enemies, least they make sale of us, and spoil our land.

Forgive our sins, and transgressions; let not aliens have dominion over us
Lament. 1, verse. 5, etc.
, neither let our houses pass unto strangers; let us not be as exiles, and
pupils without a Father; neither our mothers, as widows without husbands; let
not our old men be wanting in our ports, nor yet our country lament for the
waste which the enemy would make.

Heal the sorrows of the daughter of thy people, and be merciful to our
sins, for the glory of thy Name sake.

Break thou the chains of the imprisoned, and deliver such as are bound with
manacles and fetters; cast of their yoke that they may praise thee for ever.

Bring them out of darkness Ps. 107, 14.
and the shadow of death; Break the gates of brass, and smite the bars Psalm.
107, 16.
of iron in sunder, that they may know that thou art their Lord, when thou
have broken the bonds of their yoke Ezec. 34, verse. 27.
, and delivered them out of the hands of those that served themselves.

But if it be thy will for the trial of their faith and patience to detain some
in exile and servitude a longer time: then comfort such with thy spirit, and
mitigate their pains, that they may find favor in the sight of them Baru. 1,
12.
whom they are compelled to serve, and cast not them of for ever.

Above al, keep them in the confession of true faith, and Christian religion,
against al false worshippings, that so they may comfort themselves with the
gracious pardoning of their sins through Christ, and their hearts may be
sealed with the earnest of the holy Spirit bearing witness to their spirits
that they are delivered from perpetual captivity and bondage of hell.

O Christ our Redeemer, deliver our souls from the chains of darkness, and
snares of death, which sufferedst thy self to be bound, that thou might
unloose the most hard bands and knots of our transgressions: and wast sent of
thine eternal Father into this world to preach liberty unto captives Esai, 61,
1.
and deliverance to such as are shut up:

Grant, that being entangled with the cords of iniquity, we give not our
members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin Romans 6, 13
. Break in pieces the chains of Satan, and turn us into thy flock, that none
unrighteousness have dominion over 14.
us.

Deliver him that is in bondage unto Satan, and bring forth the bound by the
blood of thy covenant out of the pit wherein is no water Zach. 9, 11
that he* spoil and kill us not.

Give grace also, that being snarled with humane traditions Colos. 2, 8.
we entrap not our consciences by false opinions: but may serve thee our true
God in Christian liberty, and never abuse the same to the offense of any.

Take us miserable men out of the body of this death Romans 7, 24
, which makes us captives to the law of sin, which is in our members, that
delivered from sin and death we may 23.
serve thee in true vprightnes and everlasting life, which raignest for ever
one God in the trinity of persons,

Amen.
7. A prayer against the tentation of the flesh.
O Merciful God, we miserable men acknowledge and confess that in us Romans 7,
18.
that is in our flesh there dwells no good thing.

But in sin we were borne Psalm. 51, 5.
, and our mothers conceived us of corrupt seed.

For our nature is defiled, and prone unto al wickedness even from our youth
Genesis 8, 21.
: so that by the strength of our proper reason we cannot savor those things
which belong to the Spirit.

For the natural man 1. Cor. 2, 14
speaks, and favors of earthly things, and of himself is not meet so
much as to think any thing that good is without the assistance of thy power:

Unto thee do we cry with our whole hearts, that it would please thee to open
unto us by thy Spirit the true knowledge of thine essence and will, as thou have
revealed thy self in thy word, that we may not follow the sense of our flesh
in judging of spiritual things; neither by our blind baiardlie reason, measure
thine heavenly saiengs.

For blood and flesh perceive not the things which belong to the Spirit, and
the fleshly mind is enmity against God Romans 8, 7.
for it is not obedient unto the Law, neither can be. And they which are in
the flesh cannot 8.
please God.

Seeing therefore that in us abides the seed of sin, which is concupiscence;
and a proanes unto wickedness is ingraffed into us by nature, yea, and original
sin through our first parents, does oftentimes prick us unto impiety. For
every one is tempted Iam. 1, 14.
when he is drawn away, and enticed with the bait of his own concupiscence,
then when lust has conceived it brings 15.
forth sin, and sin when it is furnished, brings forth death:

Give us grace that we follow not the concupiscence of our flesh, neither
provoke our senses by unbridled liberty, but stoutly to resist them.

For unless that wicked concupiscence be driven from our minds it will never
cesse til it have brought forth deadly sin.

Wherefore assist us that we may tame these bodies of ours, and bring them into
subjection 1. Cor. 9, verse. 27.
, least our flesh being ouerlustie do offend, and ouerpasse the prescribed
limits.

Assist us, we beseech thee, to crucify our flesh Gal. 5, 24
with all the affections and desires thereof, for the better serving thee, and
walking in the Spirit.

For we are debtors Romans 8, 12
, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh, but, the deeds of the flesh being
mortified, to live renewed Ephesians. 4, 23.
after the holy Spirit in righteousness and true holiness.

Sanctify us Ioh 17, 17.
, holy Father, that we defile not our selves with carnal vices, with
riotousnes, bellicheere; nor by unlawful pleasure, casting of thine holy
Spirit, that we make our bodies the houses of filthy feends, which carry
away, and cast headlong al intemperate and secure persons into everlasting
destruction.

Be it far from us, that we make our members the members of harlots 1. Cor. 6,
verse. 15.
, whereby thy holy Spirit is banished, and man becomes a den for thieves,
and a sink of filthiness.

Govern us, that we may shun the works of the flesh Gal. 5, 19.
, and be careful to do the works of the Spirit 1. Cor. 6, 9.
, as thy chosen servants.

And forasmuch as the flesh lusts against the Spirit Gal. 5, 17.
, and the Spirit contrary to the flesh (for they are contrary, and
continually strive together): be thou merciful unto us, O God, help us with
thy divine power, that the holy Spirit (which thou did pour into us at our
baptism) may bear the rule in our members, and prevail over the flesh, and
all the affections of the same.

Extinguish the flames of carnal desires, and repress our raging lusts: so
shall we avoid enormous offenses, and shun the wicked actions of our own
inventions.

And if at any time, being subdued by flesh and blood, we shall wander from the
path, and direction of the Spirit to something unseemly for our calling,
impute not, we pray thee, that fault unto us, but remember that we are flesh,
and convert us by thy divine power.

And seeing that flesh of itself is vnbridelie, and wild, not abiding
correction, but is like a fat and wanton calfe Ier. 46, 21.
, which is not used to labor: put thy yoke upon us, and tame our flesh by thy
Spirit, that walking soberlie and modestly we may bridle the same, and humble
it under thy commandments by withdrawing of delicious fare. For with overmuch
fine fare our minds wax wanton and ouerlustie.

Aid us, that by temperance, moderation, and abstinence from superfluous meats
and drinks, we may bind our flesh to the direction of the holy Spirit, and
mortify our bodies of sin: so shall we praise and magnify thy Name, which
live in us worlds without end,

Amen.
8. Evening prayer, on Friedaie.
WE will praise thee, O eternal God, Father of our Lord IESV Christ, for
marvelous things have thou done for us; thou have delivered our souls from
death, and our feet from falling Psa. 56, 13.
.

Blessed be God which has heard our prayers Psalm 40, 1. 2.
; and brought us out of the lake of misery, out of the mire and claie: which
set our feet upon the rock, and ordered our goings, which has saved us this
day from al perils, and comforted our souls.

Wherefore we will extol thee, and celebrate thy Name every day; and at night
will we talk of thy righteousness.

We will magnify the Lord our God, and bow our selves at his footestoole Psalm.
99, 5.
, for he is holy.

We will praise thee, O Lord, because thou have set us up Psalm. 30, 1.
, and have not made our foes to triumph over us. Thou have brought our Psalm.
30, 3.
souls from hell, and saved our lives from them that go down into the pit.
Wherefore we will sing 4.
praises unto thee, and yield thee thanks, for a remembrance of thy holiness.

O most loving Father, here prostrating our selves before thy feet, we beseech
thee in the Name of thy Son, who suffered for us a most cruel death, blot out
al our transgressions, whereby we have offended thy Majesty, and especially
those which this day we have committed.

Be merciful unto us, O Lord, for thy Name sake. For greatly have we sinned A
part of the prayer of King Manasses placed immediately after the second book
of Chron. according to the Geneua translation.
, and our offenses are mo than the sand of the sea. We have provoked thee unto
anger, and done evil in thy sight. But now we bend the knees of our heart,
requiring thy mercy. O Lord, we have sinned, we acknowledge our sins with
grief and sorrow. Pardon, O pardon our sins, and destroy us not together
with our iniquities, neither reserve evil for us for ever: but of thine infinite
goodness save us miserable and most unworthy men. For thou, O Lord, according
to thy wonted mercy have promised forgiveness of sins to al repenters.
Therefore we will praise thee continually all the days of our life; all the host
of heaven praise thee worlds without end.

Who is such a God as thou Mic. 7, 18.
, that pardonest wickedness, and forgiuest the offenses of the remnant of thine
heritage? Thou keep not thy wrath for ever, for thy delight is in mercy.
Thou turnest again, 19.
and art merciful unto us; thou put down our wickedness, and castest al our
sins into the bottom of the sea.

In this evening now the Sun is gone, we pray thee, O God, depart not from
us, which art the Sun of righteousness, neither let thine aid be far from us,
but abide with us, O Lord, for it draws toward night, and the day is far
spent Luke. 24, verse. 29.
.

Forsake us not, O Lord our God Psa. 38, 21.
, neither depart from us; for tribulation is at hand Psa 22, 11.
, and there is none to help.

O GOD of our salvation, make haste to help us, have a regard to our defense,
and redeem our souls in peace Psa. 55, 18.
from those that war against us.

Deliver us from such as mark our goings. Pluck our feet out of the snare,
and lead us in the path of righteousness, that our feet slip not, and we take
a fall.

Guide us by thy wisdom, that when we walk it may lead us Pro. 6, 22.
, when we sleep it may keep our feet, and when we wake we may talk thereof.

And therefore sleeping we will not fear, but rest quietly, and our sleep
shall be sweet; we will not quake at the sudden terror, neither at the ranging
of the ungodly when it happens. The Lord shall be on our side, and protect our
feet that we be not taken, yea, the Lord shall be our light, and salvation in
darkness. He is our hope Psalm. 91, 9.
which has appointed us so high a refuge. Let none evil come unto us, neither
suffer 10.
the whip to be nigh our tabernacle.

O Lord be thou our watchman and protector that trobles and vain cogitations
do not invade us, and neither the fear of death ouerwhelme us Eccl. 40, 5.
, nor the sleep of night alter our thoughts, and understanding when we should
take our rest, and ease in our chambers, but grant us a good and quiet sleep,
and after the same to rise up in the morning and to render due thanks and
praise to thee our most merciful protector.

For Psa. 121, 2.
our help is from the Lord which has made both heaven and earth. He will not
suffer our feet to 3.
be moved: and he that keeps Israel will not sleep, to whom be praise now,
and evermore,

Amen.
1. On Saturdaie, Morning prayer.
O Lord God 2. Match. 1, verse. 24.
, maker of al things, which art fearful and strong, and righteous, and
merciful, which art only a gracious King, only liberal, only 25.
just, almighty, and everlasting; which deliuerest us from al trobles both by
day and night, which have made us thy chosen through the blood of thy Son
our Lord and Savior Christ Ephe. 5, 2.
, which was shed for us, and have sanctified us by thy Spirit given into our
hearts, that we should be a chosen generation 1. Pet. 2, 9.
, a roial priesthood, to offer acceptable sacrifices unto thee: Receive now the
sacrifice of praise from our mouths 2 Match. 1, verse. 26.
, for thy benefits conferred upon us.

We thank thee, O eternal God, not only for keeping us this night passed, but
also for defending us this whole week, yea, and al our life time from the
snares of wicked spirits, that they could not circumuent, and overthrow us.

We will praise thee, O Lord with our whole heart Psalm. 9, 1.
, we will speak of al thy marvelous works; we will be glad and rejoice in thee.
Our songs will 2.
we make of thy Name, O thou most Hie, which exaltest us from the gates of
death, that we may declare al thy praises in the ports of thy Churches, we will
exceedingly rejoice in thy salvation.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel Luke 1, 68.
, because he has visited and redeemed his people; And has raised up an horn
of salvation unto 69.
us, and delivered us from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us.
He has bin merciful unto 71.
us, in lightening those which sat in 79.
darkness and in the shadow of death to direct our feet into the way of peace.

To thee do we offer the sacrifice of praise Heb. 13, 15
, that is the fruit of lips Hose. 14, 3
, confessing thy Name. Our mouths shall praise thee, O Lord, and our tongues
declare thy righteousness.

Lo, we will not refrain our lips, O Lord, and that thou know Psa. 40, 10.
, yea, we will lift up our hands unto thy sanctuary, and with our feet will we
hasten toward thine house, and in thy Congregation we will praise thee.

We will magnify thee, O God our King Psa. 145, 1.
, and will bless thy Name for ever and ever.

Every day will we give thanks 2.
unto thee, and praise thy Name perpetually.

For great art thou, O Lord, and 3.
marvelous worthy to be praised, there is none end of thy greatness.

Al generations shall extol thy 4.
works, and speak of thy power: they shall talk of thy worship, glory, 5.
praise and wondrous works, 6.
and we will declare thy mightines.

The memorial of thine abundant 7.
kindness shall be showed, and men shall sing of thy righteousness.

The Lord is gracious and merciful, 8.
long suffering, and of great goodness.

The Lord is loving unto every 9.
man, and his mercy is over al his works.

Al thy works praise thee, O Lord, 10.
and thy Saints give thanks unto thee from one generation to another.

O God, earelie now this morning do we call for thine unspeakable mercy,
beseeching thee from the bottom of our heart, that this morning thou will
lighten our minds, so that the shining and brightness of thy knowledge may rise
in us, which are called out of darkness 1. Pet. 2, 9.
into the marvelous light of thy glory, that, being awaked out of sleep Romans
13, verse. 11.
, we may give our selves to the works of light, and walk honestly, as in the
day, not in rioting and dronkennes, neither 13.
in chambering and wantonness, neither in strife, and enuieng. For we believers
are the children of light 1. These. 5, 5
and of the day, not of night, and of darkness. Therefore give us grace, that
we sleep not, as 6.
others do, but make us to watch, and be sober, putting on the brestplate 8.
of faith and charity, and for an helmet to take the hope of salvation. 9.
For thou God have not ordained us to wrath, but to obtain salvation through
our Lord Jesus Christ which died for us.

Give us grace likewise, we beseech thee, that we abuse not this day and other
thy creatures Romans 8, 20
unto vanity, neither give our members Romans 6, 13
as instruments unto sin, by doing such deeds as fight against the soul 1.
Pet. 2, 11
, wound the conscience, and grieve the same.

Succor us, gracious God, that painefullie we may shun and avoid six
things which thou do hate Pro. 6, 16.
, yea, seven which thy soul does abhor, to wit, a proud look, a lieng tongue,
hands that shed innocent 17.
blood, an heart that goes about wicked imaginations, feet 18.
that be swift in running to mischief, a false witness which brings 19.
forth lies; and him that sows discord among brethren.

O Lord, God of our salvation, into thine hands will we deliver our hearts, that
earelie they may watch to thee our maker Eccl. 39, 5.
, and in thy sight will we pray that thou may protect us in the day of
troble.

In six calamities deliver us, O Lord, and Job. 5, 19.
in the seventh let none evil come to us; in famine save us from death; in
battle from the power 20.
of the sword; hide us from the Job. 5, 21.
scourge of the tongue; when destruction comes let us not fear; in dearth make
us merry; and let not 22.
the beasts of the earth apale our courage. Grant this, O Father, for thy dear
Son our Savior Christ's sake,

Amen.
2. A thanksgiving to God for his mercies.
O Most holy Trinity, which art the true and eternal Unity, of equal glory
and majesty, we worship thee, we praise thee, we thank thee for all thy
benefits, as it is truly meet, just, and good for us always to give thanks
unto thee.

O Lord most holy, eternal God, and Almighty Father through Christ our Lord,
by whom Angels praise thee, Kings adore thee, and powers do fear thee: the
heavens, and heaven of heavens, yea the blessed Seraphins Esaie. 6, 2. 3.
Revel. 4, 8.
with joy together do magnify thee, saying with humble confession, Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaorh, the whole earth is full of thy glory.

Especially at this time, O Father most Hie, we thank thee for thy mercy
abunding toward us, which of thy great love Ephe. 2, 4.
wherewith thou louedst us, yea, when we were dead through sin, did quicken
us together 5.
with Christ, and being raised with him have made us to sit together 6.
in heavenly things, thereby to show to al ages hereafter the exceeding 7.
riches of thy grace in thy 8.
kindness toward us through Jesus Christ. For by grace are we saved 9.
through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God, not of
works, least any man should boast. Besides, thou have by thine holy 10.
Spirit sealed and prepared us unto good works which thou did before ordeine
that we might walk in them, and please thee in new obedience.

We will declare the goodness of the Lord Esai. 63, 7.
, yea, and praise the Lord for all that he has given us.

Great is thy mercy, O Lord, and thy goodness incomparable toward us.

Who shall be able to express thy works? or who can seek out the ground of
thy noble acts Eccl. 18, 3.
? who shall declare the power of thy greatness? or take upon him to tell out thy 4.
mercy? which is such, and so infinite, 5.
that it can neither be augmented, nor diminished.

For Ps. 103, 11.
look how hie the Heaven is in comparison of the earth: so great is thy mercy
also toward them which fear thee. And as far as the East is from the West:
so far 12.
have thou set our sins from us.

For as a Father pittieth his own 13.
children: even so art thou merciful to al which fear thee.

Yea, though a Mother do forget her infant Esai. 49, 15
, and take no pity on the son of her womb, yet wilt not thou forget us;
for we are written 16.
upon thine hands.

The mercy of the Lord is unchangeable, infinite, and never fails Lam. 3,
22. 23.
, but daily arises new and fresh upon us.

The merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever Ps. 103, 17.
upon them which fear him, and his righteousness upon childers children, 18.
such as keep his covenants, and think upon his commandments to do them.

Thy mercy is on such as fear thee Luke 1, 50.
from generation to generation.

The mercy that a man has Ecc. 18, 12.
reaches unto his neighbor, but the mercy of the Lord is upon al flesh,
chastening, and teaching, and nurturing: yea, even as a shepherd turns
again his flock, so does he al them which receive chastening, nurture, and
doctrine. Merciful art thou unto al them which receive 13.
correction, and diligently seek after thy judgments.

And although for a while thou forsakest us Esai. 54, 7.
: yet afterward in much favor will thou gather us together. In the time of thy
wrath thou hidest 8.
thy face from us for a little season, but for all that thy mercy toward us is
everlasting.

Blessed be thy Name, O God of our Fathers, which when thou art angry Tob. 13,
2
show mercy, and in the time of troble forgiuest the sins of them which
call upon thee.

This thy goodness and ouerabounding mercy, which has bin from the beginning
and for ever shall continue over al which unfeignedly repent; never languishing
or failing but abiding perfect always in the highest degree, we will praise and
confess from one generation to another.

For gracious and merciful is the Lord, patient, and long suffering Exo. 34, 6.
Psalm. 103, 8.
, bent to show favor, and meruelouslie gentle toward all that call upon him.

Praise the Lord al ye heathen Psalm. 117, 1.
, and glorify him al nations. For his merciful kindness is ever more and 2.
more toward us.

We will not keep back thy loving mercy and truth from the great congregation
Psa. 40, 10 11.
: withdraw not thou thy mercies from us, O Lord; let thy kindness and truth
alwaie preserve us.

O let thy merciful kindness be our comfort Psalm. 119, verse. 76.
according to thy word unto thy servants.

O deal with thy servants according to thy great mercy Psalm. 119, verse. 124.
and teach us thy statutes, that in like manner we may be merciful toward al men
without respect of persons, or hope of gain, willingly without morositie:
that in thy judgment Matt. 5, 7. 24. 44.
we may find mercy through the passion and death of thy son Jesus Christ,
which lives and reigns with thee in the unity of the holy Spirit a God
worlds without end,

Amen.
3. A prayer for an happy departure out of this world.
O Most gracious God, thy years endure throughout al generations Ps. 102, 24
, and thy days are without end or beginning: but the days of man surely are
determined which he can not ouerpasse Job. 14, 5.
; and the number of his months are known to thee, thou have appointed him his
bounds which he cannot go beyond.

Thou have nombred our days, which vade away suddenly like the grass Psalm.
90, 5.
. For we are soon dispatched, and easelie consume.

Our days are like a shadow, Ps. 102, 11.
and wither away like grass.

A man in this world is even like a vapor that vanishes away Iam. 4, 14. 1.
Pet. 1, 24. Esaie. 40, 6. James. 1, 10. Eccl. 14, 18.
. For all flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof, as the flower of the
field, which florisheth in the morning and afterward withers and vadeth.

Behold Psalm. 39, 5.
our days are to be measured, they are as it were a spanne long, and our age
is nothing in respect of thee. And verily every man living is altogether
vanity.

Our age is folden together, and taken away from us like a shepherdes cotage
Esaie. 38, verse. 12.
, our life is cut of by our sins, like the thread of the weauer, which is
suddenly broke of.

W^ are but strangers in this wo^^de 1. Chr. 29, verse. 15.
, and soiourners, as were our fathers: our days on the earth also Psalm. 39, 7.
Wisdo. 2, 5.
are but as a shadow, and we are as nothing in respect of thee.

Our life speedily goes away like the weauers shuttle, and it abides not.

Wherefore, Lord, let us know our end Psalm. 39, 5. Psa. 119, 84.
, and the number of our days, that we may be certified how long we have to
live, and what is yet to come.

Instruct us, O Lord, that, being always mindful of our mortality we never
promise to our selves many years, nor long lives in this pilgrimage of ours,
so shall we not live securely deferring our conversion to thee from day to
day, nor yet put confidence in this frail and uncertain life, as did that
rich man, saying Luke 12, 19
, Soul, thou have much good laid up in store for many years, take thine
ease, eat, drink, and be merry: Whose soul notwithstanding was taken from
him the same night.

But give grace, that in thy fear we may daily prepare o^ selves to depart
out of this prison. for nothing is more certain than death, though nothing
more uncertain than the hour thereof.

Therefore let us have always before our eyes an image, and meditation of our
departure, the better to know the fleeting and vanity of this combersome and
uncertain life, that we may live to thee our God, being sound in faith Titus.
2, 2.
, and strong in hope, loking Titu. 2, 13.
with cherefulnes for the day of our departure, and the ioiful appearing of
thy Son Jesus Christ our Redeeemer: and as long as we abide in this
tabernacle of our bodies with all study ministering 2. Pet. 1, 5.
to our faith, virtue; to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; to
temperance, patience; 6.
to patience, godliness: until this tabernacle 2. Cor. 5, ^
being laid away, we shall pass over to our dwelling place, not made with
hand, but everlasting in the heavens, where 2.
we shall be clothed with eternal glory and immortality, when this earthly
house is put of, and destroyed.

Grant also that trusting firmly to thy promises, we may be ready 6.
and glad to return to our everlasting and celestial country: for while 7.
we are in this body, we wander from thee our God, for now we walk in faith,
not in the enioieng and possession of eternal goods: wherefore, 9.
whether we be at home, or from home, let us endeavor our selves to be
acceptable in thy sight.

Make us faithful and wise servants Matthew. 24, verse* 45.
always loking for the coming of our Lord (for we know not when he will come,
Mark. 13, verse. 35.
at the evening, or at midnight, whether at the cock crowing, or in the
dawning) least by a sudden hour of death being overtaken, and as it were
caught in the foulers trap Luke 21, 35
we be found unready: but contrariwise by prudent watching in true conversion
and repentance may continually covet to be dissolved Phili. 1, 23.
and to be with Christ our Redeemer.

Grant also, that at the point of death, having escaped al hardness and
tentations, we may triumph like conquerours, and behold the presence and power
of thine holy Spirit; and let our last words be that, which thy Son did
utter upon the altar of the Cross, saying Luke. 23, verse. 46. Psalm. 31, 5.
, Father into thine hands I commend my spirit: and when our speech is taken
from us, hear, O God, the groanings of our hearts.

And the hour of death being come, let thy servants Luke 2, 29
depart in peace, because our eyes have seen 30. 31.
thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of al people: a light
to be revealed unto the Gentiles, 32.
and the glory of thy people Israel, through our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
4. A prayer for the nourishment of this life.
OMnipotent, and eternal Father, which have given to thy Church certain
promises of corporal things: we thy children cry unto thee for our daily
bread, and else what pertaining to the sustentation of our mortal bodies.

Make our fields fertile, that the seed sown may come up, and our ground
yield us a ioieful harvest.

Prosper thou the labors of al artificers, and let their doings take good
success.

Bless, Lord, the works of our hands, our heardes of cattle Deu. 28, 4. Psa.
144, 13. 14.
, and flocks of sheep, that they may prosper, and increase, and we feel no
barennes, desolation, nor decaie.

Send thy blessing into our barnes, and storehouses Deu. 28, 8.
. For Pro. 10, 22*
it is the blessing of God that makes rich, and causes plenty.

Except the Lord build the house Psa. 127, 1.
, their labor is but lost that build it. It is but vain for us to rise
early, 2.
and late to take rest, eating the bread of sorrow. For thou Lord give to thy
beloved, sleep they, wake they, much plenty, and al kind of happiness.

Make us therefore, bountiful God, to loase our nets in thy Name Luke. 5, 5.
, and to do the works of our calling earnestly with invocation of thy divine
assistance, that by thy blessing we may have good success.

Protect al waifaring men, and trauelers, either sailing by seas to far
countries, or iorneieng by land for our common welfare, that they may safely
return home again.

Take thou the defense of Merchants with their goods and riches Ezech. 27,
verse. 27, etc.
, so shall they be secure from al misfortune. Dispose their minds and wits, that
in their trafike they may deal without fraud, couen, and abuse of thy Name,
measuring al things according to the rule of justice, and thereby retain a good
conscience Sira. 13, 25
. Make them to love virtue, to keep promise, to observe covenants, that no man
oppress or circumuent his brother 1. These. 4, verse. 6.
, for God is the revenger of al such.

Grant also to al buiers of villages, houses, land, yokes of oxen, that Luke
14. 18.
for the love and desire of earthly riches, and filthy lucre, they forget not
the kingdom of God, and so make excuse that they cannot come to thy great, and
heavenly supper, whereunto al men are called by the Gospel. Let them not
delight Ps. 62, 10.
in wrong doing, and roberie. If riches increase let not their hearts be set
upon them: but before al thing provide for themselves the treasure Mat. 13, 44.
hid in the field, and the precious jewel Matthew. 13, verse. 45.
of thy celestial kingdom.

To al workmen and laborers grant that they be faithful in their business: make
them also strong as well in body, as in judgment.

Give us good servants, upright governors, an happy state of Commonweal, a
wholesome temperature of air, health, peace, discipline, etc.

Keep our minds from covetousness, which 1. Tim. 6, verse. 10.
is the root of al evil, least being bewitched therewithal, we swerve from the
faith, and wrap our selves in many sorrows. But govern us by thy Spirit,
that al our care Mat. 6, 20. Luke 12, 33. 1. Tim. 6, 19. Psalm. 55, 23.
may be cast upon thee our Father, and we be content with daily bread.

Bless us moreover that we abuse not thy temporal benefits, neither glut our
selves with meat and drink to the ouercoming of our hearts by surfeiting, and
dronkennes Luke. 21, verse. 34.
but may use thy blessings moderately to our comfort.

Give patience to the poor that they neither murmur against thy will, and their
condition, neither envy their betters, and so offend thee, and break thy
commandments.

Let not rich men be either high minded 1. Tim. 6, verse. 17.
, or confident in uncertain riches, but in thee the living God (which give
to us abundantly al things to enioie) that they do 18.
good, and be rich in good works, that they be ready to give, glad to
distribute, and laieng up in store for 19.
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may obtain
eternal life.

Two things we do require of thee our God Prou. 30, 7 8.
deny them not before we die. Remove from us vanity and lies; give us neither
poverty nor riches, only grant us things necessary for this life: least
peradventure 9.
being full we should deny thee, and say, Who is God? or being oppressed with
poverty we fall to stealing, and take the Name of thee our God in vain,

Amen.
5. A prayer for the afflicted, and such as suffer persecution.
O Christ eternal God, which have commanded us to deny our selves Luke 9, 29.
Matt. 16, 24. Mark. 8, 34.
, and daily to take up our cross, and follow thee our captain, and master
in much patience.

For it cannot be avoided, but that al which desire to live godly 2. Tim. 3,
verse. 12.
in thee our Lord, must suffer persecution.

And we cannot be thy servants and soldiers unless we can abide the
persecution of the greater part of mankind. For Satan will never surcesse from
arming his villains with furiousnes against thy members.

And it falls out commonly in this licentious wickedness of the world, that
the godly, even through the zeal of righteousness do purchase to themselves
the hatred of the wicked.

Especially it is incident unto Christians to be abhorred of the mayor part of
mankind. For flesh in no case can away with the preaching of the Gospel, and
none welsuffer the reprehension of their vices.

Hence arise persecutions for the destruction of the godly, whereby in no
place they can be safe and secure, but their ends are sought by all kinds of
cruelty.

Wherefore we beseech thee, on the behalf of al persecuted for righteousness
sake Mat. 5, 10. 1. Pet. 3, 14. 1. Pet. 4, 14.
, against whom despiteful words are used, and lies invented: and for as many
as for thy Name sake are detained in prison, fettered, attainted before
counsels Matthew. 10, verse. 17, etc.
, whipped, brought before Kings and Princes to be tormented with exquisite and
diverse punishments for the confession of true religion: for such as are exiled
from their native soiles Hebru. 11, verse. 35, etc.
, banished, spoiled of their goods, abhorred of the world, tried by torments,
racked, hanged upon forkes, upon wheels, killed by swords, like sheep for the
slaughter murdered, and thrown out to be devoured of the ravenous and cruel
beasts for thy Gospels sake 1. Pet. 4, 14
:

Al these assist, and lay to thine hand for our strengthening, the glory and
Spirit of God may rest upon us, by whose consolation we may suffer al trobles,
and by an invincible courage get the victory in all these, and never fall from
the hope of our salvation.

Grant therefore that we may have the testimony of a good conscience, knowing
that we are punished undeservedly, not as murderers 1. Pe. 4, 15.
, or thieves, or evil doers, or busiebodies in other men's matters. And,
suffering as Christians let us 16.
not be ashamed, but glorify God on that behalf.

Give us grace to account it for exceeding joy Iame. 1, 2.
, when we fall into diverse tentations, and afflictions; and to glory therein
Romans 5, 3.
. For affliction brings forth patience; patience, 4.
experience; experience, hope; 5.
and hope makes not ashamed.

And let their example which before us did suffer the like in their bodies, be
a comfort unto us. For so did the ungodly persecute the Prophets Mat. 5, 12.
which were before us.

And especially thy steps, which are left to be followed 1. Pe. 2, 21.
are above al to be allowed of. For thou did say Ioh. 15, 20
: The servant is not greater than his master; if they have persecuted me, they
will persecute you also.

Finally give grace, that, respecting the unspeakable reward which of thine
only mercy thou did promise to al which persevere unto the end Mat. 24,
13
, by thine assistance we may overcome all the greeuousnes of affliction.

For blessed do thou pronounce them which suffer persecution for righteousness
sake Mat. 5, 10.
, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: that, when they are proved, they may
receive the crown of life Iam. 1, 12.
which thou have promised to such as love thee.

Wherefore indue al in affliction with thy fortitude from above, that with a
bold and stout courage they may rejoice Acts. 5, 41. 1. Pet. 4, 13.
that they are counted worthy to suffer shame, and al kinds of affliction for
thy Name.

Make them constant in the true confession, that through the consideration of
cruel punishment they depart not from the faith, and forsake the profession of
true religion.

Likewise show forth thine omnipotency, and with thy mighty hand deliver them
from the power of Tyrans; from the mouths of Lions Hebru. 11, verse. 33, etc.
, and violence of fire.

And as concerning such, whose bodily deliverance were not best, but are
fittest for martyrdom, those strengthen in the mids of pain, that they
fear not such as kill the body Mat. 10, 28.
, but cannot kill the soul; that being afflicted according to thy will, they may
commit the keeping of their souls to thee with well doing 1. Pet. 4, 19
, as unto a faithful Creator; and so though they leese (as may seem) their
souls in this world: yet shall they find them safe Mat. 16, 25 Luke 17, 33.
and blessed in another life which is eternal, where thou live and raignest
with the Father in the unity of the holy Spirit, a God for evermore,

Amen.
6. A prayer for Widows, and Orphans.
O Most merciful, and faithful God, father of orphans Psalm. 68, 5.
and judge of widows; Look down from heaven, thou which considerest our
labor, and sorrow, and in whose hands al our salvation does consist.

The poor is left unto thee: for thou art the helper of the fatherles Psalm.
10, verse. 14, etc.
. The Lord does hear the desire of the poor, thou preparest their hearts, and
thine ear harkeneth thereunto: to help the fatherles and widow unto their
right, that the man of the earth be no more exalted against the miserable.

We beseech thee, O most righteous auenger, have thou a consideration of al
widows and orphans, and provide for them by ministering clothes and
nourishment unto them, have pity on them in all their perils, and necessities;
stretch out thine helping hand and deliver them as thou did that widow,
whose pitcher of oil 2. King. 4* verse. 2, etc.
by the Prophet Elias thou did so increase with thy blessing, that not only
she delivered her children in bondage for debt out of the hands of her
creditors; but also of the oil she sold, had wherewith to sustain both her
self, and her children.

For thou art the Lord which carest for strangers, and relieuest the fatherles
and widows Psa. 146, ^.
, but destroiest the ways of the ungodly.

Thou art touched with a care of the afflicted, and despisest not the desires
of the fatherles, nor the widow when she pours out her prayers before thee
Sira. 35, 14 15.
. For the tears running down the cheeks of the widow ascend up into the
heavens: and her cry against him, which wringes it out.

Grant therefore, merciful God, that in the sight of al governors, and judges
they may find favor, and have equal judges and patrones of their matters: that
the judgment of the stranger and fatherles be not perverted, nor the cause of
the widow neglected Deuteronomy. 24, verse. 19. Deuteronomy. 14, 29. Esaie. 1, 17. Psalm. 82,
3.
: but that judgment may be sought according to thy law; the oppressed helped;
judgment given for the orphane; and the widow defended.

For thou have given a straight commandment unto al judges, saying Ier. 22, 3.
, Keep equity and righteousness, deliver the oppressed from the power of the
oppressor, do not grieve, nor oppress the stranger, the fatherles, nor the
widow, and shed none innocent blood.

For thou art the God which will avenge thine elect Luke 18, 7.
, that cry unto thee; thou keep truth for ever and ever Psa. 146, 6. 9.
, doing justice to the oppressed with wrong Ps. 109, 6.
.

Now deliver, O Lord, the fatherles, and widows out of the paws of ravening
thieves, which eat up the houses of widows Mat. 23, 14 Mark. 12, 40
under the pretense of godliness, and color of right.

Deliver them out of the hands of wicked judges Esai. 10, 1. 2.
, which feign and invent laws to suppress the poor, and to hurt the cause of
the base among the people, that widows Esaie. 10, 3.
may be a pray for them; and that they may^rob the fatherles: such perverse
judges, O God, in the day of their visitation and calamity from a far thou will utterly destroy.

Appoint unto orphans and widows faithful patrones which will be touched with
an earnest care of their welfare.

Also give us willing minds to pleasure widows and fatherles children,
according to our ability, to deliver the poor when he cries Job. 29, 12.
, and the fatherles, which has none to help; to help him that is ready to
fall, to comfort the 13.
widows hurt; evermore to be as fathers to the fatherles, and from our tender
years to minister instruction to the widow, and suffer them never to perish,
but in blessing to bless them, and to fill them with bread Ps. 132, 15
.

For pure religion Iam. 1, 27.
, and undefiled before thee, O God our Father, is to visit the fatherles, and
widows in their adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world.

For he which is merciful toward the orphane, as a father, and shows
himself as an husband toward his mother in taking the defense of their cause
upon him, he shall be as an obedient son of the Hiest, and thou God wilt more
favor him, than a mother can pity her son.

But they which despise the sight and tears of the widow Job. 31, 16.
, and keep back their loaf, that the fatherles 17.
eat not thereof, and suffer them to perish for want of clothing and apparel,
19.
yea, which lift up their hands to afflict them, shall greuouslie be 22.
punished, their shoulders shall fall from their ioints, and their arms be
broken from the bones of them.

O merciful God, extend thy favor upon al widows, that at al times and in all
afflictions they may trust in thee 1. Tim. 5, 5.
the living God, and continue in supplications and prayers night and day,
being diligent in all 6.
good works, not occupied in pleasures, neither wanton, idle, wandering from
house to house, no tatlers, nor busiebodies, no speakers of things uncomely,
nor giuers of occasion whereby thy word may be blasphemed.

Keep al parents, that, they being taken away either by war, or untimely
death, their wives be not widows, and their sons orphans, running here and
there a begging, be thou their helper Exo. 22, 21.
even for Christ his sake our Lord, and Savior,

Amen.
7. A prayer against desperation.
O Most merciful God, greatly have we sinned, and, alas, are guilty of
manifold crimes.

For this cause diversely is our conscience clogged: so that we are
wonderfully aghast beholding such bloody wounds of our souls.

And albeit thy Gospel daily does offer unto us in good sooth forgiveness of
our sins, through thy mere grace: yet our faith is marvelously weak by
reason of the infirmity of our flesh, and daily batterings of Satan, which by
craft endeavors to pluck us from al hope, and consolation.

Therefore unto thee do we cry, O most holy Father, and eternal God, keep
us in thy Name, that in tentations and extremities*we never faint in courage.

Moderate and mitigate our vexations, let them come to a ioieful end, that we
fall not into the most heinous sin of incredulity, and despair.

Comfort us, that in the mids of death, we may trust in thee, the God of our
life, and righteousness.

Let us never despair of thy mercy, and grace, nor think with Cain Genesis 4,
13.
that blasphemous and cursed wretch, that our sins are mo than may be
forgiven.

O stay us Lord Psalm. 119, verse. 117.
; according to thy word; and we shall be safe. Let us always believe, that where
sin abounds Romans 5, 20
grace does more abound: and as sin has reigned unto death, so that grace
does 21.
reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Christ, Savior of the world, and most gracious God, whose mercy comes
upon us like a stream, and art the eternal Orator, which both outwardly
talkest to mankind by thy Gospel, and inwardly in our hearts inflamest thy
light which is true confession, faith, and comfort in thee: we beseech thee
from the bottom of our hearts, encre^^ faith ^
, establish hope, (...) then patience within us.

For this certainly is true(...) one little drop of thy most (...) blood, shed
for us, is of more power to save us, than al our enormous, and manifold sins
to condemn us.

Wherefore look back upon us, O Savior, with thine eyes of mercy, as thou
lookedst back upon Peter Luke. verse. 6^*
in the hal of the hie Priests house after he had both renounced thee Mark. 14,
verse. 7^.
, and cursed himself; least through diffidence we fall from thy grace, as Judas
the traitor did, which hoong himself Mat. 27, 5.
, and afterward brake in the mids whereby al his bowels gushed out Acts. 1,
18.
; and so commit the like offense and sin against the holy Ghost.

O God the holy Ghost, be thou present with us at our extreme need, when the
Devils will accuse us, and our conscience bear witness against us; when the
cogitations of hell, and death will daunt us; when we shall be environed with
horrible dangers, and tentations; when the whole world will forsake us; and al
(...)ings set themselves against us, (...)n our hearts, O comforta(...) at that
time with the seal (...)stimonie, that undoubtedly (...)n believe the
forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life,
which shall be given without fail to us, and to al believers.

O blessed Trinity, and eternal God of one essence, give grace that in every
combat, and especially at the point of death, being mindful of thy covenant
made with us at our christening, and of thy most comfortable promise annexed.
He which believes, and is baptized shall be saved Mark. 16. verse. 16.
, we may never doubt either of thy merciful goodwil toward us, or of the free
remission of our sins, but, by often remembering this sign and covenant, may
daily more and more be confirmed in faith, and hope of perpetual happiness; and
apply thy benefits, which certainly thou have promised, and faithfully wilt
perform, unto our selves. For thy promises made to such as believe and trust
on thee, be not vain, and to no purpose.

Likewise uphold our souls by the Sacrament of thy Supper, that strengthened
with the seal of this new testament, we may be the more certain, and
confirmed touching our reconciliation, and everlasting righteousness, and
always bear it fixed in our minds.

For if the testament of a man Gal. 3, 15.
which is proved after the death of the testator Heb. 9, 16.
be not small accounted of; much more should the last testament, and holy
sacrament of our Savior Christ, remain pure, in continual force, and
remembrance.

O blessed Trinity, and eternal Unity, lift up our sorrowful hearts, and pour
upon us the wholesome comfort of heavenly bliss; at the point of death
refresh us with the sweet sight of thy cheereful countenance, that with
exceeding joy we may desire to depart, and to come into thine heavenly house,
where thou live and raignest a God for evermore,

Amen.
8. Evening prayer, on Saturdaie.
WE will confess thee, O Lord and King Sirac* 51, 1.
, and praise thee, O God our Savior: we give thanks unto thy Name.

For thou art our defender, and 2.
helper, and have preserved our bodies from destruction, and from the snares of
the slanderous tongues, and from the lips that are occupied with lies.

Thou have bin our helper from 3.
such as stood up against us, and delivered us after the multitude of thy
mercies; and for thine holy Name sake from the roaring of the^ which were
ready to devour us; out of the hands of such as sought after our lives; and
from the manifold 5.
afflictions which we had; from the deep of hell; from an unclean tongue; from
lieng words; from false accusations, and from unrighteous sentence.

Our souls shall praise the Lord Sirach. 51, 6.
unto the death. For our lives drew nigh unto hell downward. Evils environed us
on every side, and 7.
there was no man to help us. We looked about if there were any man to succor
us, but there was none.

Then thought we upon thy mercy, 8.
O Lord, and upon thine acts that thou ever have done of old. For thou
deliuerest al which put their trust in thee, and riddest them out of the hands
of their enemies.

Then we lifted up our prayers 9.
from the earth, and prayed for deliverance from death. We called upon 10.
the Lord, the father of our Lord, that he would not leave us without help in
the day of our truble, and in the time of the proud.

We will praise thy Name continually, 11.
yielding honor and thanks unto the same. For our prayers were 12.
heard, and thou have saved us from destruction, and from al evil.

Therefore we will acknowledge, and praise thee; we will magnify thy Name, for
keeping us from our youth until this present week, and for protecting us
always of thy gracious mercy.

Righteous, and merciful God, before thee do we sigh, beseeching thee by the
death and burial of our Lord and Savior Christ thy well-beloved Son, that thou
would vouchsafe to cover, and bury al our misdeedes, whatsoever from our
infancy until this present hour either wittinglie, or ignorantly we have
committed, and especially those which this week we have done in thought,
word, or deed, against thy divine majesty and commandments, al which to thee
alone which know al things we confess with broken hearts, and lowly
spirits, beseeching thee to pardon them, and to forgive al our sins, whereof
thou know we are guilty; and to deliver us from al evils both present and
to come.

O Lord, hear the voice of our prayer, incline thine ear unto us in the days
of our necessity, when we shall cry unto thee Psalm. 116, 1.
.

The snares of death have compassed Psalm. 116, 3.
us about, and the straightes of hell have taken hold of us; we have lighten
upon sorrow, and troble. Notwithstanding we will call upon 4.
the Lord, O Lord, deliver our souls.

Gracious is the Lord, and righteous, 5.
yea, our God is merciful.

The Lord preserves the simple; 6.
we were in troble, and he helped us.

Turn then again unto your rest, 7.
O our souls; For the Lord will bless ye.

Thou will deliver our souls 8.
from death, our eyes from tears, and our feet from falling, that we 9.
may walk before thee in the land of the living.

O Christ, God, and Savior of the world: save us, Lord, watching; keep us
sleeping; that in peace we may both rest and wake.

Be thou our light in darkness, then shall our life be as clear as the noone
day Job. 11, 17.
, and shine forth as the morning; so that with confidence, and security we may
lie down, and 18.
sleep, and none shall make us afraid, because thou art our protector.

O Son of righteousness, and brightness of perpetual charity, lead us into the
vision of thy light, where thou shall everlastingly shine upon us, and thou
God be our glory. The Sun there shall not go down, neither the Moon be hid:
but thou, Lord, shall be our everlasting light Esaie. 60, verse. 19.
, that our sorrowful days may take an end.

Grant likewise that leaving this place of darkness we may be translated into
the true, and new light, which we now look for through faith, until the
perpetual morning appear unto us, that we may behold thee in a clear light
face to face Reu. 22, 4.
, where shall be no night, and we shall need no candle, neither light of the
Sun, but thou Lord 5.
wilt lighten us.

O holy Spirit, God, be thou a light unto us. At our last gasp, when our
hearts pant Psa. 38, 10.
, our strength fails; our sight departs; our hearing is deaf; our mouth
do^me; when our feet cannot go, nor our hands feel; when al our senses
forsake us, give us some sense of eternal life, that we may taste in this world
the beginnings of thine everlasting joy: and at our departure out of this
world behold by faith thy divine presence, and so sleep quietly to eternal
life,

Amen.
Here follow certain peculiar prayers for some special persons.
A prayer for any Preacher, or Shepherd of souls.
O Eternal God, which of thy great mercy have vouchsafed to call me, a
miserable and most unworthy man, to the ministry of thy Gospel, and have
appointed me to be a feeder of souls Ephesians. 4, 11.
, and a fisher of men Luke 5, 10.
and now at the length segregated me, according to thy good pleasure, to preach
the word of salvation unto this flock, and people committed to my charge:

With lowlines of spirit, and sighs unfeigned I beseech thee, O Christ, which
art our chief shepherd 1 Pet 5, 4.
, and Archbishop, make me an able minister of the new Testament 2. Cor. 3, 6
; a chosen vessel Acts. 9, 15.
, and profitable instrument for the carrieng of thy message before the nations,
and Princes of this world, as it becomes the minister of Christ 1. Cor. 4, 1.
, and faithful dispenser of the mysteries of God, and never let me prove an
idol, or idle shepherd.

Work thou effectually through me, and grant good success unto my doings,
that fruitefullie I may utter to mine auditors the healthful 1. Cor. 15, verse.
2.
, and heavenly food of their souls, which is the sincere preaching of thy
gracious word, without al corruption, or deprauing of the same.

Take not fro my lips the word of truth Psalm. 119, verse. 43.
, and let me not speak either the imaginations of my foolish brain, or the
vain persuasions of my own heart Ier. 13, 10.
, but may utter thine heavenly word, and minister according to the virtue
which thou do grant 1. Pe. 4, 11.
, that in all things thy glory may be sought of me:

That I follow not after covetousness feeding my self Ezec. 34, 2. 1. Pet. 5, 2.
, and forsaking my flock; but give me such an earnest care of their well doing,
that without constraint cheerefullie 1. Cor. 9, verse. 16. 17.
, and gladly, being bound thereunto, I may discharge mine office:

That I be not desirous of filthy lucre 1. Pet. 5, 2.
, but with a willing mind may profit the Church; neither as an exerciser of
authority over my 3.
flock, but that, even through an hearty zeal of thine holy Name, I may
feed, and make fat, in the plentiful, and godly pastures Ezec. 34, verse. 14.
of thy pure word, thy sheep committed to my trust:

That I may retain a diligent consideration of the weaker sort Ezec. 34,
verse. 16.
, and help the feeble, heal the sick, strengthen the bruzed; that I may bring
home that which is seduced, and seek that is lost, and carefully provide for
that which is strong; that I labor not in mine office negligentlie Ier. 48, 10.
, nor accomplish the work of thee my master with deceit.

O almighty God, whose dwelling is above the clouds, which have appointed me
a keeper, and watchman for thy people Ezech. 33, verse. 2, etc.
, to forewarne the simple that they be not, through the subtlety of vain
teachers, deceived, seduced, and made a pray Ezec. 34, 5.
, and spoil for the beasts of the field; make me so watchful, and careful over
thy flock, that courageously I may withstand, and beat away those ravening
wolves Mat. 7, 15.
which tear and scatter thy flock, and, by reproving and refuting their
heresies, overcome false prophets.

Give me that utterance and wisdom Mark. 10, verse. 19.
, which none may resist, or gainesaie Luke 21, 15
.

Grant me a learned Esai. 50, 4.
, and eloquent utterance to divide thy word rightly; and wisdom distinctlie,
and in right order to propose the same, and to be able and ready to admonish
2. Tim. 3, verse. 16.
, and to comfort the weak, and, if any offend through weakness Galat. 6, 1*
to win him unto weldoing by the spirit of meekenes, and modestly to rebuke
such as may be recovered, but those, which openly do sin without blushing,
to take up before the congregation 1. Timo. 5, verse. 20.
, not regarding the person, that the rest, by their example, may fear, and
forsake their wickedness.

O Son of God, our continual Intercessor, which have ordained me to be a
voice crieng Esai. 40, 3. 9.
, endue me with the grace of thine holy Spirit, that I may exalt my voice
like a trumpet Esai. 58, 1.
, and declare their wickedness unto thy people, and never show my self as a
domme dog Esai. 56, 10
, which cannot bark: so shall I not be partaker of their sins, nor guilty of
their condemnation, neither will thou require their blood at mine hands Ezec.
3, 18. Ezech. 33, 8.
: Wherefore again, and again I beseech thee, assist me evermore that through
an open and bold reprehending of their wickedness, I may deliver my soul in the
day of wrath, and teach thy ways unto the wicked Psa. 51, 13.
, whereby the ungodly may repent.

Finally, so bless me with thy favor, that I may walk in thy fear, as it
becomes me, and be an ensample of good life unto my flock 1. Pet. 5, 3.
, least, while I preach unto others 1. Cor. 9, 17
my self prove a castawaie; that in no case through my wicked conversation
Romans 2, 24
, I give occasion to any man of blaspheming thy word; and that in trobles,
and persecutions I faint not, but may suffer patiently the reproach of this
world, and the manifold trobles that Satan stirs up to disquiet thy Church.

Grant also to as many as shall hear thy word from my mouth, that they may
firmly with me believe the same, and be the followers of me 1. Cor. 4, 16 2.
These. 3, 9.
, as I follow thee 1. Cor. 11, 1
, and have consideration of such as walk so, as becomes Christians, that
together we may continue in faith, and patience, even for thine own sake,

Amen.
A prayer for any hearer of Gods word.
I Give thee most hearty thanks, O eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
for that it has pleased thee of thine unspeakable mercy, and goodness in all
ages continually to send into the world men wonderful in thy gifts and
knowledge of thy will to be renuers, and spreaders forth of thy truth Matthew. 23,
verse. 34.
;

Like thanks I ascribe unto thy sacred Majesty for allowing us shepherds
Ephe. 4, 11
, and preachers in these our days for the gathering together of thy Church out
of al mankind 11.
to the building of the body of Christ.

Humbly I beseech thee, gracious GOD, continue alwaie among us thy pure word
through thy ministers; gather unto thy self an everlasting Congregation, and
so instruct mine heart with thy Spirit of truth, that unfeignedly I may assent
to thy wholesome word, prove a lively member of thy body, and be
incorporated into that society which both in this world does syncerelie
confess thee, and evermore extol thine holy Name.

Keep those Preachers which thou do, and wilt give in the certain knowledge
of thy blessed will, that they may from time to time both open unto us thine
intent concerning the repairing of mankind, the salvation, and redemption of
our souls through thy free mercy; and also teach us how to live in new
obedience, and to abstain from carnal desires 1. Pet. 2, 11.
which fight against the soul.

Inspire thy ministers, and preachers of thy word with thine holy Spirit, that
they may utter thy will purelie as they have received it from thine hands,
retaining the form of wholesome words 2. Timo. 1, verse. 13.
, and sounding only that doctrine which is uttered by thy Son out of thy
bosom John. 1, 18.
. For otherwise, departing from the order of faith, and the rule of thy word,
they will greatly obscure the light of thy doctrine; and obtrude upon us the
vanity of their own inventions. Wherefore let them speak thy word not
deceiptfullie 2. Cor. 4, 2.
, but syncerelie, even as from thee, and in thy sight.

Grant also, that, by transforming thy ministry into policy, they Lord not
over thine elect 1. Pet. 5, 3.
, neither contend about superiority and primacie in thy Church; but only to
seek the glory of thy Name, and the salvation both of themselves, and us.

Give them liberty of speech boldly without fear to blame and rebuke al
false doctrine, blasphemous superstition, and abuses in thy Church.

Open unto them the door of utterance Colos. 4, 3.
that they may speak the mysteries of Christ, and manifest them as they ought
to do, so shall their doings be profitable unto the godly.

Assist them also with thine especial grace, that they disgrace not their
doctrine by impuritie of life, but let their conversation answer unto the
doctrine which they teach and preach.

Especially for the shepherd of my soul, from whose mouth I learn thy
blessed will, I heartily pray, that thou will keep him in religion, sincere;
and pure from enormous offenses in outward conversation: endue him with a long
and healthful life, if it be thy good pleasure, that many a good day, and
year he may continue in preaching the gladsome voice of thy gracious Gospel
among us without contention and strife.

And, O Son of God, which art the Lord of all the flock, work thou
effectually by thy preachers, speak thou within us to our hearts the blessed
will of thine eternal Father, and confirm thy doctrine in our minds by thine
holy Spirit.

Grant that we may truly know, and discern the same from the houling of
wolves, and from the enchanted songs of seducing hirelings Ioh. 10, 12.
; and grant that we may know thee Ioh. 17, 25
even as thou know thine heavenly Father, and to walk religiously, and
righteouslie in thy sight, showing our selves to be of that holy seed which
praises thy Name for evermore.

Come holy Spirit, open mine heart and ears that I may conceive the profit of
thy wholesome doctrine, and the sweet comfort revealed in thine holy word, by
the preaching of the Gospel.

O Lord, I acknowledge with tears my sluggishnes, and carelesnes in seeking
thy truth, and bewail the wretched coldness, and hardness of mine heart,
beseeching thee to endue me with an unfeigned longing, and an ardent desire of
holy Sermons.

Grant that in this life I may worship the feet of the preachers of peace, and
reverence the true dispensors of thy mysteries, thy faithful ministers with
doble honor 1. Tim. 5, 17*
; and none otherwise to obeie their godly sermons, than I would if a voice
should sound from the heavens.

Let me not for the blemishes and imperfections of some particular men,
irreverently conceive of thine whole ministry.

Work also within me, that, despising thy word Luke. 10, verse. 16. 1. These.
4, 8.
delivered unto us, I never seek after strange revelations, or violent
rauishings both besides, and contrary to thy word, but, bearing always in
mind the order which thou have appointed, may constantly embrace thy word
manifested in the Church.

Finally impart such grace upon us, that we may imitate, and follow the good
works of holy men, casting of the old man by putting on the new which is
created after God in righteousness, and true holiness,

Amen.
A prayer for a Prince, or Magistrate.
BLessed art thou, Lord God of Sabbath. For to thee appertains al
magnificence, and power, and glory; to thee belongs al honor, and authority.

For whatsoever is either in the heavens above, or in the earth beneath it is
thine. Thine, O Lord, is the kingdom; thou art above al Princes and Kings.
Riches are thine, glory is thine, and thou art Lord over al. In thee
remains virtue, and power, greatness, and government.

O God of my Fathers Wisd. 9, 1.
, and Lord of mercy which have made al things by thy word, and by thy wisdom
2.
appointed man to rule the creatures which thou have made, and to 3.
govern the world with equity and justice, I praise thee, and extol thy
glorious Name for appointing me thy servant 1. Kin. 3, 7.
to rule and govern this thy people committed unto my charge.

Now therefore, gracious Lord, favor ablic behold me, that I may tread the
path of truth, righteousness, and synceritie of heart in thy sight.

Let me not abuse mine authority Ester. 13, 2
but govern with lenity and gentleness the people under me, that living a
godly and honest life mankind may enjoy their desired peace.

Give therefore unto thy servant an heart desirous of instructions, that I may
judge the people, and descerne between good and evil 1. Kin. 3, 9.
, and, neither declining to the right hand or to the left, stoutly, and
valiantly maintain the cause of the righteous.

Grant me counsel, and assistance to do such things as are grateful unto thee,
good for thy Church, and profitable for my people, and Commonweal.

Give me thy wisdom Wisd. 9, 4. 2. Chr. 1, 10.
, and reject me not from thy children. For Wisd. 9, 5. Psalm. 116, 16.
I thy servant, and son of thine handmaide, am a frail man, of a short time,
and full weak in the understanding of judgment, and the laws.

Thou have chosen me Wis. 9, 7. 1. Chr. 28, 5. 2. Chr. 1, 9.
a governor of thy people, and a judge of thy sons, and daughters: send me
therefore wisdom Wis. 9, 10.
from thy sacred heavens, and from the seat of thy magnificence, that it may
be with me, and labor with me, whereby I may perceive what is acceptable in
thine eyes, and learn that I have no power of my self, but from thee Romans 13,
1. Wisdo. 6, 3.
, which art almighty, and raignest over the kingdoms of men, giving them at
thy pleasure Dan. 4, 17.
.

Grant that I never conceive Sira. 10, 15.
proudly of my self, but may receive in patience the discipline of thy Law.

Make me wise and circumspect, that I neither offer* injury to any man,
neither suffer any to be iniuried; that so equity may be maintained, and
justice among men preserved.

Let me at no time under the show, and color of equity uphold, or countenance
a wicked cause: neither yet without sufficient examination and trial of both
parties, give sentence against any.

Allow me such counselers, governors, and overseers as are of courage Exodus
18, verse. 21.
, fearing God, dealing vprightlie, hating covetousness, that by them the burden,
charge, and care which I sustain, may be somewhat lightened.

Endue both me, and them with thine holy Spirit, that with earnest study, and
watchful minds we may discern between matters Deu. 1, 13.
, that no man through our negligence have the overthrow in a righteous cause,
but that sentence be rightly pronounced between a man, and his brother, and a
stranger without respect of any person Deuteronomy. 1, 17. Leuit. 19, 15. Prou. 24,
23. James. 2, 9.
in judgment.

Let us hear as well the little as the great, and fear no man. Because the
judgment is thine, which stand in the company of judges, and among the
Gods Psa. 82, 1.
thou plaiest the judge. For the judgment is not of man 2. Chr. 19, verse. 6.
but of the Lord: and, whatsoever we shall judge it will come upon us.

Wherefore, let thy fear be with us Sirach. 10, verse. 22.
that we may do al things with care and circumspection, that we prove not
children Esaie. 3, 4.
in understanding, neither give our selves to dronkennes and bellicheere, Ecc.
10, 17
but to eat our meat in due season and that for strength, not for dronkennes.

For thou will make earnest, and diligent inquiry of al our works Wisd. 6, 3.
, and search al our cogitations: because we are thy servants, and deputies to
govern; men of a very short life; and he which is to day a King Sira. 10, 11.
to morrow may be dead. For we be al mortal Psalm. 82, 7.
, and subject to one, and the same corruption.

Besides, an horrible judgment is nigh for such as walk not after the will of
thee Wisd. 6, 4* 6.
, our God. For he that is most low, shall find mercy, but the mighty shall be
mightily tormented. Wisd. 6, 7.
For thou, which art the Lord over al, regardest not the person of any Deu.
10, 17 2. Chr. 19, 7. Acts. 10, 34. Romans 2, 11. Galat. 2, 6. 1. Pet. 1, 17.
, neither do thou fear the greatness of the mighty. Because as well the great
as the small are the workmanship of thine hands; thy care is equal over al;
and give to godly Princes eternal happiness, which art the Judge both of the
quick and dead, living and reigning with thy Son in the unity of the
Spirit, a God for evermore,

Amen.
A prayer of Subjects for their Prince.
O Almighty God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, in thine hand is al power
both in heaven and earth Sira. 10, 4. 15.
, thou confirmest kingdoms, and again do alter them according to thine
heavenly pleasure, etc.

This prayer you shall find before, page 7.
A prayer for a married man.
O GOD almighty, auctor, and institutor of matrimony, which in the copling
together of male and female do offer unto us a consideration of the sacred,
and great mystery of the marriage of our Lord and Savior Christ, with his
spouse the Church Ephesians. 5, 23. 1. Cor. 11, 3.
, and with all express the most burning affection of thy son toward his
beloved Spouse.

For he offered himself upon the altar of the cross Ephesians. 5, 25.
to sanctify, and cleanse her by the washing of water through the word, and to
make her 26.
glorious for himself, without spot, 27.
or wrincle, or any such thing.

For even as the husband by an inseparable band of good will is bound to the
wife, so that both prosperity and adversity is common to them both: so is
Christ copled to his Church through suffering upon his own flesh the
punishment which was due unto her, and by making us with him fellow heirs of
eternal joy, by covering our offenses.

So that now there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus Rom 8, 1.
which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Whereby we gather that
man should love his wife Ephesians. 5, 28.
even as his own body. For no man ever yet hated his own 29.
flesh howsoever crooked, old, weak, lean, or deformed it be: but so much the
more carefully does hide and cover those faults by how much they appear the
more deformed. Yea he does nourish, and cherish that weak part, even as Christ
does love his Church though foul, and deformed with sin, which casts not
her of, though she seem il favored, but heals her griefs, dissembleth much,
forgiueth, and wypeth away her offenses.

I beseech thee, O Father, which art neither made nor begotten, marry me Hos.
2, 19.
for ever unto thy Son; marry me unto him in righteousness, and judgment, in
godliness, and mercy; marry me unto him in faith, that I may truly know
thee my Lord and God, which wilt not the death of a sinner Eze. 33, 11.
, but rather that he repent and live.

O thou only begotten Son of God, join me I beseech thee unto thy body,
that ingraffed in thee, I may draw from thee the juice of life, and of
heavenly wisdom.

Defend me, and thine whole Church against the rage of Satan, the world, and
the flesh.

Love, cherish, and comfort such as are ingraffed to thy flesh. Purge and wash
me fro my sins, filthiness, and spots through thy great mercy and merits.

Deck me with thy gifts and goodness. Wash me with water Eze. 36, 25
, and purge me with thy blood. Anoint me with thine oil of gladness Psalm. 45,
8.
put upon me thy roabes of righteousness, and cover me with thy glorious purple;
adorn me with the precious stones of virtue, and place upon mine head glory
and honor, that al mine ornament may be inward, and that I may please thee
through hoping in thy mercy. For thou art mine husband which love me; my
God whom I worship; and the head whereunto I am subject.

Give me grace that I never delight in mine own fairenes, and so play the
harlot Hose. 2, 5.
, following mine old lovers, which promise me bread and water, wol, flax,
oil, and drink.

O God the holy Ghost, which maintainest the love of married folks within our
breasts, I humbly beseech thee, inflame the heat of chaste affection between
al married folks.

Give me wisdom discreetly to dwell with my wife 1. Pet. 3, 7.
, considering always that naturally she is weak: and for that cause I must
bear with much foolishnes, and swalowe up many sorrows when I shall perceive
the weakness of her affections.

And for as much as I am the head of my wife Ephesians. 5, 23. 1. Cor. 11, 3.
, give me grace with judgment godly both to instruct her, and to bring up my
family in the knowledge and fear of thy Name.

Let me neither over nicelie bring them up, nor to roughly entreat them, but
gently use them, that they may both continue in thy fear, and yield me due
obedience, but especially live godly in thine eyes.

Bless thou my wife that she may prove a sweet companion unto me, loving me
unfeignedly from the heart without dissimulation; so that I may safely trust in
her Prou. 31, verse. 11, etc.
, and she may render unto me good for good, not evil for good.

O God, which art a chaste mind, make me with a chaste body and pure
affection to serve thee in chaste matrimony, and never with a wicked eye to
behold the wife of another man to lust after her Mat. 5, 28.
neither yet to forsake my proper bed Sirach. 23, verse. 16, etc.
with the loss of my soul.

Drive away Satan the mortal enemy to this thine ordinance, that he sow not
contentions, and braules between us.

Cut of al occasions of debate, and sinister suspicions, that so in a true
conioining together of minds we may in this world live virtuouslie, and
hereafter in the world to come reign eternally according to thy word, Amen.

Read the prayer for wedded folks before, page 108.
A prayer for children.
OEternal, and everliving God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of heaven
and earth, which have inioined unto us children that with due obedience we
honor our parents Exo. 20, 12 Deuteronomy. 5, 16. Matthew. 15, 4.
: which thing not only true religion does exact, but also natural reason does
bind us unto.

Besides, thou art marvelously delighted with such obedience of children
toward their parents for thy Sons sake our Lord.

And that the more willingly we may obeie them, thou have made a singular
promise of long life Ephesians. 6, verse. 1, etc. Sirach. 3, 7.
unto us.

And as the obedience of children which they owe, and show to their parents is
exceedingly grateful in thy sight: so contrariwise obstinacy and disobedience
is most unsavory, and displeases thee. The which may be gathered by the
horriblenes of punishment Deuteronomy. 21, verse. 18, etc.
which thou denouncest against stubborn, and disobedient children.

I beseech thee therefore most humbly even for thy Sons sake, in whom only
thou delightest Mat. 3, 17. Luke. 3, 22.
, lighten the eyes of mine understanding, that above al I may truly and
syncerelie acknowledge thee my principal Father Ephesians. 3, 14. 15.
, of whom all the family both in heaven, and earth is named; and, in true
invocation, and thanksgiving, obeie; and, in true holiness, and righteousness
serve thee my God, and heavenly Father, from whom I drew vital breath Act.
17, 25.
, my soul, and body, with all the faculties, and powers that I have.

For which cause I am bound rather to obeie thee my maker Act. 5, 29.
than men; and to be occupied in those things which belong to thee my Father
which art in heaven Luke 2, 49.
, and cheerefullie to go about that which thou have enioined me.

Secondly give me grace to honor mine earthly parents in deed, and word
Sirac. 3, 9.
, in all patience, and never to be a cause of their sorrow, and grief of mind.

And when their understanding shall fail through age Sirac 3, 14.
, be it far fro me that I do either disdain or deride them, albeit I am
beautified 15.
with never so excellent gifts of nature, but make me to bear with the 16.
weakness of their age, as I am bound both by thy word and in conscience to do,
so shall I be blessed. For Sirac. 3, 6.
he which honoreth his parents shall have joy of his own children, and when he
makes his prayer he shall be heard.

O Lord, forgive thou my sins whereby I have offended my loving parents.

O remember not the sins of my youth Psalm. 25, 6.
, nor my rebellions: but according to thy mercy remember thou me, even for thy
goodness sake, O Lord.

Let the example of thy Son my Savior Christ, which in his childhoode was
obedient unto his parents Luke 2, 51.
, be depainted, and fixed always in my mind, the better to obeie them which
begat, and have brought me up, and to relieve them being weak either through
age or sickness.

For he which forsakes his father Sira. 3, 17.
shall come to shame: and he that angreth his mother is cursed of God.

Likewise let it please thee to give me a willing heart to obeie my teachers,
and betters, and to omit no part of duty, and reverence which I owe: so that I
may always declare my self to be a decliner from evil Psa. 34, 14
, and a doer of good, a seeker of peace, and a follower of the same.

O Christ Jesus, which have given to weak years the benefit of docilitie, give
likewise to the towardnes of my nature the aid of thy grace, that I may learn
good nurture, and liberal arts serving to the advancement of thy glory, whereby
the more easily I may attain to the knowledge of thee, whom to know is
perfect happiness, and felicity John. 17, 3.
.

For thou art the fountain from whence al wisdom and understanding
proceeds Sirach. 1, 1. Prouer. 2, 6.
, without whom al our studies lack good success. Wherefore at thy hands do I
beg wisdom James. 1, 5.
, which give liberally without reproching any man.

Lighten thou mine understanding with thy grace, that, having learned the
liberal arts, and the tongues, I may apply them to those ends whereunto they
serve, that, according to thy sacred infancy, I may profit as in years, so
in wisdom and virtue both before thee, and man Luke 2, 52
.

O God the holy Ghost, purify mine heart by a lively faith, that I spend not
my time in vain pleasure cockering mine affections.

Extinguish in me the flames of doting, and filthy love, and let me never
serve the lust of the flesh like horse and mule Psa. 32, 9.
which have none understanding.

Thine hands, O Lord, have made, and fashioned me Ps. 119, 73
: O give me understanding, that I may learn thy Law.

I am small, and of no reputation, 141.
yet will I never forget thy righteousness. For thy righteousness is a perfect 142.
righteousness, and thy Law is truth, Amen.

Use the prayer for young folks, which you shall find before, page 114.
A prayer against the Turk, or any other foraine Tyrans.
O Omnipotent, and eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker, and
preserver both of heaven and earth, together with thy coeternal Son, and the
holy Ghost:

We have sinned Psa. 106, 6.
, O Lord, with our fathers, we have committed iniquity, and done wickedlie.

Therefore we openly confess that by thy righteous judgment we are justly
punished; and rightly deserve that barbarous, and ungodly nations, should
spoil us of our goods, overthrow our schools, Churches, and Commonweales;
make unmerciful havoc of the promiscuous multitude, and carry miserable men
from the sweet bosoms of thy dear friends into a slavery more grievous
than death.

O God, it is thou which repellest us, yea thou do confound us before the
nations for our sins Psalm. 44, 9.
, and go not forth with our armies to the battle.

Thou make us to turn our Psalm 44, 10.
backs upon our enemies, so that they which hate us spoil our goods.

Thou suffer us to be eaten up 11.
like sheep, and have scattered us among the Heathen.

Thou sellest thy people for 12.
naught, and take no money for them.

Therefore be the Heathen come into thine inheritance Psalm. 79, 1.
, thy holy Temple have they defiled; they have destroyed our towns, and
houses, and brought them into an heap of stones.

The dead bodies of thy servants 2.
have they given to be meat for fowls of the air, and the flesh of thy
Saints unto the beasts of the land.

Their blood have they shed like 3.
waters on every side, and there was no man to bury them.

We are become an open shame 4.
to our enemies: a very scorn and byword unto them that are round about us.

Wherefore in these mischievous wars, and in the mids of our fatal
punishments, we fly unto thee, saying Psalm. 79, 9.
, Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name; O deliver us,
and be merciful unto our sins for thy Name sake.

O deal not with us after our sins Ps. 103, 10.
, neither reward us after our iniquities.

Remember not our former sins Psalm. 79, 8.
, but let thy tender mercy prevent us. For we are in great misery.

Look upon our affliction and travel Psa. 25, 18.
, and forgive al our sins.

Behold our enemies for they are 19.
many, and they hate us with cruel hatred.

Thou which have forgiven the iniquity of thy people Psalm. 85, 2.
, and covered al their sins; and have withdrawn al thine anger, and turned 3.
back from the fiercenes of thy wrath: turn us, we humbly beseech thee, 4.
O God our Savior, and remove away thy displeasure, that in true repentance we
may please thee for thy Son his sake. Will thou be displeased 5.
with us for ever? or will thou prolong thy wrath from one generation to
another?

O let the sorrowful sighing Psalm. 79, 11.
of thy prisoners come before thee: according to the greatness of thy power
preserve those which are appointed to die.

Pour out thine indignation upon the heathen Ier 10, 25. Psalm. 79, 6.
that know thee not, and upon the kingdoms which call not upon thy Name: that
al nations 10.
may know the vengeance of the blood of thy servants that is shed.

Consider the mortal threatenings of our enemies, that they may be hindered from
exercising their tyranny upon us, saying triumphinglie, ^0*
Where is now their God?

Keep from our necks the grievous yoke of Antechristian bondage, and repress
the furiousnes of al Tyrans, which labor to spoil and make hauock of thy
Church; to abolish true doctrine, prayers, and pure religion; and to bring in
idolatry, errors, and blasphemous ceremonies.

Defend our Churches, Polities, and dwelling places.

Suffer not our towns to be reduced into dens for Tyrans, and other bloody
nations, which hate both thee, and us extreemelie.

Arm the right arm of our Gracious Queen, and her Nobles, that they may
fight for our Laws, lives, and liberty.

Teach their hands to fight Psa. 144, 1*
and their fingers to battle; increase in the^ an invincible courage of mind,
that enflamed through the zeal of thy religion, they may valiantly withstand
their, even thine, enemies.

Guide thou the hands of such as fight in the cause of religion* and grant them
happy success over al their enemies. For a King is not saved by the multitude
of an host Psa. 33, 17
, neither is the mighty man delivered by great strength, but the victory
comes from heaven 1. Match. 3, verse. 19.
.

At thy rebuke, O Lord, both the charret, and horse fall down Psalm. 76, 6.
.

Thou will take away the courage 12.
of Princes, and art terrible to the Kings of the earth.

O be thou our help in troble Psa. 60, 11.
, for vain is the help of man. Through thee we shall do valiantly; 12.
for thou will tread our enemies under our feet, and make them come to naught,
through our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A prayer to be said in the time of the plague, sickness, and mortality.
O Lord our God, great and fearful art thou Dan. 9, 4. Nehem. 1, 5. Deuteronomy. 5,
10.
, keeping covenant and mercy with the^ that love thee, and keep thy
commandments:

We have sinned, O Lord, Dan. 9, 5. Baruc. 1, 17.
and have committed iniquity, we have done wickedlie, yea we have rebelled,
and have departed from thy precepts, and from thy judgments; we have not
obeyed thy servants Dan. 9, 6.
the Prophets which spoke in thy Name to our Kings and Princes; to our
forefathers, and to all the people 7.
of the land.

O Lord righteousness belongs 8.
unto thee, but unto us open shame and confusion, as it is come to pass this
day by the plague and sickness reigning among us, and among all the dwellers of
this land, because of the sins which we have done against thee.

Unto thee our Lord and God pertains Daniel. 9, 9.
compassion and forgiveness, though we have rebelled against thee.

We have not obeyed thy voice 10.
to walk in the laws which thou have laid before us.

We have hitherto despised thy divine word Leu. 26, 15 Baruc 2, 10.
, yea, we have loathed preaching, and have loa^ed the bridle to al beastlines
of desires.

Therefore Dan. 9, 11. Leuitic. 26, verse. 16, etc. Deu. 28, 21. Exodus. 9,
verse. 9, etc.
the curse and oath which is written in the law of Moses thy servant, is poured
upon us, and we, through the plague, and corrupt aiers, with burning feauers,
and grievous sickness are lamentably consumed every day.

Yea in our knees Deu. 28, 35
and legs are we smitten with most loathsome botches, and those incurable, from
the sole of the foot unto the top of the head.

Because we repent not, neither 38.
observe all the words written in thy law, nor fear thy glorious and dreadful
name, thou do, according to thy threatenings aforetolde, increase 39.
our plagues, and the plagues of our seed; thou sendest great plagues and of
long continuance, evil sickness and of long durance, thou bring upon us
incurable diseases, al manner of sickness, and al kinds of plagues, besides
those written in the book of the law.

Al these plagues, according to thy word Baruc. 2, 7.
, are come upon us, yet have we not prayed unto thee our Lord, that we might
every man 8.
turn from his ungodly ways.

Therefore have thou bin watchful 9.
in punishing us, and in bringing these evils upon us. Thou art righteous, 10.
O Lord Psalm. 119, verse. 137.
, and true is thy judgment.

O God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou have got thee a glorious Name as
may appear this day.

O Lord our God, we have sinned Baru. 2, 12.
, we have done wickedlie, we have behaved our selves ungodly, in all thine
ordinances. Turn thy wrath 13.
from us, we beseech thee, for we are but a few left in this place.

O Lord God which have promised, that, when either pestilence is among us 1.
Kings 8, verse. 37, etc. 2. Chron. 6, verse. 28, etc. 2. Chr. 20, 9.
, or the air infected, or any other plague or sickness is hot, thou will hear
the prayers, and grant the requests of any man among the people, praieng from
the bottom of his heart, acknowledging his sins unfeignedly, and lifting up
his hands unto thee through Jesus Christ before the throne of grace Heb. 4, 16.
;

Be thou merciful 1. King. 8, verse. 39.
, give unto every man according to al his petitions. For thou alone know
the hearts of all the children of men.

Hear thou our prayers and petitions, and deliver us from this contagious, and
deadly pestilence.

Command thine Angel which strikes us, to put up his sword into the sheath
2. Sam. 24, verse. 16. 1. Chr. 21, 15
, that he strike us not to our final and utter destruction; proceed not in thy
wrath, spare us from death, and bring not our end by the plague.

Let the heavens be mild, and our dwelling places healthful, least the air
being infected Psa. 78, 50
, pour down the contagion thereof upon us to our destruction.

O Lord, turn away thine hand, it is sufficient 2. Sam. 24, verse. 16. 1.
Chr. 21, 15
, let now thine hand cease, that all the earth may know Baru. 2, 15.
how that thou Lord art our God, and that we do call upon thy name.

O Lord look down from thine 16.
holy house upon us, incline thine ear, and hear us.

Open thine eyes and behold the 17.
affliction and mortality of thy people. For the dead, whose spirits are 16.
taken away, give unto thee neither praise, nor righteousness, but the 17.
^oule that is vexed for the multitude of her sins, which goes on heavily
and weakelie, whose eyes 18.
begin to fail; yea the hungry soul is it that ascribes due praise and
righteousness unto thee, O Lord.

For we pour out our prayers before 19.
thee, and require mercy in thy sight, O Lord our God, not for any worthiness
either of our own, or of our fathers Matthew. 3, 9.
: but in the name of thy son Jesus Christ, in whom thou art well pleased Mat.
3, 17. Matthew. 17, 5.
, we beseech thee, be merciful unto us, and help us in necessity.

Turn thee again Psa. 90, 13.
, O Lord, at the last, and be merciful unto thy servants; that this poisoned
infection may be taken from us.

Notwithstanding if it be thy pleasure to visit our offenses with the rod Ps.
89, 33.
, thy blessed will be done Mat. 6, 10. Luke. 11, 2.
, and give us grace to bear thy fatherly correction laid upon us pacientlie
Prou. 3, 11. Hebr. 12, 6.
, remembering always that we are chastened of thee our Lord in this world,
that we be not condemned with the reprobate 1. Cor. 11, verse. 32.
in the world to come, Amen.

A prayer for the sick you shall find before, page 153.
A prayer to avoid both raging tempests, and unseasonable weather.
O Most wise and mighty God, thou art a glorious King in all the world, thy
woonderful majesty does shine and is known also by rain, thundering,
lightening, and other meteors ingendered in the air: thy throne is among the
clouds, thou have made darckenes thy secret place Psalm. 18, 11.
, and thy pauilion about thee even darkness of water, and clouds of the air.

At the brightness of thy presence 12.
the clouds do pass away, so do the hailestones, and fiery coals.

Thou do thunder from the heavens, Psalm. 18, 13.
and give thy voice, hailestones, and coals of fire.

Thou sendest thy arrows, and 14.
scatterest them; thou encreasest lightnings and destroiest them.

Who is so great a God Psa. 77, 13
, as thou, our God? Thou art the God which 14.
do woonders, and declarest my power among the nations.

Thou redeemest thy people with 15.
thine arm.

The waters saw thee, and were 16.
afraid; the depthes trembled.

The clouds poured out water, 17.
the air thundered, and thine arrows went abroad.

The voice of thy thunder was 18.
heard round about; the lightnings lightened the world, the earth trembled,
and shook.

The foundations of the earth were discovered at thy rebuking Psa. 18, 15.
, O Lord, at the blasting of the breath of thy nostrels.

Therefore shall the very heavens extol thy wondrous works Psalm. 89, 5.
, and the Saints set forth thy truth in the Congregation.

For who is equal to thee in heaven? Psalm. 89, 6.
and who like thee among the sons of the Gods?

Thou art very terrible in the assembly 7.
of the saints, and to be reverenced above all that are about thee.

O Lord, God of hosts, who is like 8.
unto thee? which art a mighty Lord, and thy truth is about thee.

Thou rulest the raging of the sea; 9.
thou stillest the waves thereof when they do arise.

Thou only art of power to resolve into vapors the drops of the sea by the
heat of the sun; thou take the same up being turned into airie substance,
and again turnest it into mere water, and make it to come pouring down
upon the face of the earth.

Whatsoever thou will Psa. 135, 6.
thou do in heaven and in earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places.

With thy power thou made the earth Ier. 51, 15.
; with thy wisdom thou have established the world, and with thy discretion
stretched out the heavens.

As Soon as thou let thy voice 16.
be heard the waters in the air wax fierce, thou drawest up the clouds from
the ends of the earth; thou turnest the lightening into rain, and bring
forth the wind out of thy treasures: thou couerest the heavens with clouds
Psa. 147, 8.
, and preparest rain for the earth; thou make the grass to grow upon the 9.
mountains, and prouidest herbs for the use of man; thou give to beasts
their food, and to the young ravens that cry. Behold, so great art thou Job.
36, 26.
, that thou passest our knowledge, neither can the number of thy years be
searched out. When thou restrainest the drops of water, 27.
the rain pours down by the vapors thereof, and falls abundantly upon
man.

Thou bring forth the winds out of thy treasures Psa. 135, 7. Ier^ 51, 16.
, that is from the secret places where thou did hide them in great abundance,
that they might be ready at thy commandment, and come forth when thou
think good.

Thou make the clouds to labor to give water to the earth Job. 37, 11.
, and scatterest the cloud of thy light.

Thou turnest it about by thy government, Job. 37, ^12.
that they may do whatsoever thou command them upon the whole world.

O God, mine heart is trobled very sore when I behold the immoderate showers,
and hear the terrible thunder, yea it forsakes his place, when I hear the
noise of thy voice, and the speech proceeding from thy mouth.

O God, which rulest heaven and earth, I most humbly beseech thee, mercifully
to drive away, or at least to mittigate these mighty streams, and most
raging tempests.

Restrain the thunderbolts, and thy fiery darts that they hurt us not. Keep
us, and our nestes that we perish not through lightenings, nor be destroyed by
thy thunderclaps. Protect our houses and us that we be neither consumed by thy
fiery meteor, nor be drowned by any sudden flood.

O merciful God, rain not, I beseech thee, hailestones upon the face of the
earth, neither strike such as are in the fields be they man or beast Exo. 9,
22.
.

Strike not thou therewithal the 25.
herbs of the field, neither break thou, gracious Lord, the trees of our
land.

Destroy not our corn with hailestones: nor with hailestones smite thou our
cattle Psa. 78, 48
, and deliver our flocks from the thunderbolt.

Cast not the fiercenes of thy 49.
wrath, anger, and displeasure, upon us.

Give us not hailestones for rain Ps. 105, 32 Iere. 51, 16.
neither flames of fire in our land: but of thy mercy convert the thunder
into gentle rain, whereby it may bring out fruit abundantly Ps. 145, 16.
.

Send not among us either untimely, or intemperate showers which be either
noisome to the fruit, and bring the mildewe 1. King* 8, verse. 37.
, or destroy the corn.

Restrain in like sort the winds and violent tempests, that they bring none
hurt neither to us, or our goods, even for Christ's sake our Lord, and Savior,

Amen.
A prayer for waiefaring men, and Trauelers.
O Almighty, eternal, and living God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I thank
thee with mine* whole heart for sending of thine infinite and unspeakable
goodness to manwarde, thine only Son into this world to suffer on our
behalf all the miseries of this life: which in the state of extreme baseness
traueling from one region to another, to preach the Gospel of thy kingdom,
suffered no doubt the sondrie infirmities of our mortal body.

For passing through Samaria he was weary by reason of travel, and rested
himself on Jacobs well John. 4, 6.
.

In all things he was like unto us Heb. 2, 17
. For we have not an hie Priest Heb. 4, 15.
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all
things tempted like as we are, and yet without sin.

In his Name I take my journey whose will it is that whatsoever we do either
Col. 3, 17.
in word or deed, we should do it in the Name of our Lord and Savior
Christ, giving thanks unto thee our God, and Father through him.

For his sake, which went about doing good Act. 10, 38.
, and healing all that were oppressed of Satan, I beseech thee, give thine holy
angels charge Psalm. 91, 11. Matthew. 4, 6.
to keep me in all my ways, and to guide me to and fro in my journey, even as
Tobie the younger was guided of the Angel Raphael Tobit. 5, verse. 5, etc.
unto Gabael habiting in Rages a city of the Medes.

Guide me with strength Ps. 18, 32.
and courage; and direct my steps in the course of my journey, that I wander
not out of the right way into bywaies, neither cast my self into dangers.

And therefore, holy Father, be thou the directer of my ways, and keep me
out of the claws of spoilers.

Save me from the devouring jaws of savage beasts. Compass me about with
thine heavenly protection, that I fall not into any evils either of soul, or
body.

Be thou unto me a faithful companion as thou wast to Jacob the Patriarch Genesis
28, 15
traueling into Mesopotamia, and descending into Egypt Genesis 46, 4.
.

Likewise as thou did lead the children of Israel through the red sea Exo.
14, 22
, and through the uncomfortable wilderness Deuteronomy. 8, 2.
, going before them by day in a pillar of a cloud Exo. 13, 21
, and by night in a pillar of fire Neh. 9, 12.
to lighten them in the way that they went: vouchsafe to accompany, govern,
and direct me in this my iornie.

Show me also such favor, that wheresoever I go I may find godly men, which
may entertain, lodge, and courteously entreat me Mat. 25, 35 Esaie. 58, 7.
, least otherwise I fall into perils, and be iniuried of the wicked.

Be thou with me night and day, that none hurt light upon me; protect me both
against the injury of cold, and the vehemency of heat Genesis 31, 40
, and from al enemies deliver me.

O Lord, give me bread to eat Genesis 28, 20
, and clothes to put on.

And as the wise men Matthew. 2, verse. 1, etc.
by the direction of a star in the East came ioiefullie into Jury, and
afterward being admonished in a dream so to do, returned into their country
another way: so my business being well finished bring me home again in safety,
that I may praise thee my God, and Lord, continually in the Congregation of
thy Saints.

O Lord hear my prayer Psa. 39, 13.
, and with thine ears consider my complaint; hold not thy peace at my tears.
For I am a stranger Heb. 11, 13
in this world, as al my forefathers were. Our days like a shadow upon the
earth 1. Chr. 29, verse. 15. Wisdo. 2, 5.
do pass away, and continue not.

We are strangers, and wander out of our true country Heb. 11, 15 1. Pet. 2,
11.
. For the days of our pilgrimage are but short Genesis 47, 9.
, yet be they full of misery and troble.

Give me grace that I set not my mind on this world, but to lift up mine eyes
unto heaven, and desire a better Heb. 11, 16
, that is, an heavenly country.

And as long as we are absent from the body 2. Cor. 5, verse. 6, etc.
, let us be of good courage; suffer us not through fear to faint in
afflictions, but firmly to trust that shortly we shall return unto thine
habitation, and there enjoy thy sight in deed, and everlasting life, where
thou, with thy Son, and the holy Spirit, live, and raignest one eternal
God for evermore,

Amen.
A Prayer before the receiving of the holy Communion.
O Jesus Christ, holy, and eternal God, I miserable man, and wretched sinner
acknowledge and confess, that I am not worthy the least of al thy mercies
Genesis 32, 10
, and most unworthy to receive thee under the roof Matt. 8, 8. Luke. 7, 6.
of my soul by participating of thy most blessed body and blood. For horrible
and infinite are the sins wherewith I am defiled.

Woe is me, Lord, Esaie. 6, 5.
for I am a man of polluted lips, and dwell among people that have unclean
lips. And therefore the very entrales of mine heart are trobled, and my bones
do shake, because I find my soul a most unworthy ghest for so heavenly a
supper.

And yet again mine heart is wonderfully lightened when I call into mind that
thou, the dear son of almighty God, came not into this world to call the
righteous Luke 5, 32. 1. Tim. 1, 15.
, but sinners unto repentance. For Mat. 9, 12.
they that be whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick.

Besides, I know right well, and constantly do believe, that notwithstanding
my filthiness, thou can make me worthy, which alone can make that clean,
which is conceived of unclean seed Job. 14, 4.
, and righteous men of sinners Psa. 51, 7.
, when thou forgiuest our sins of thy wonted grace, thine holy Spirit being
poured upon us.

Through which thy power and mercy, I beseech thee, grant such grace unto me a
sinner, that I may worthily 1. Cor. 11, verse. 27.
approach to this heavenly Sacrament, least otherwise by mine unworthiness I be
made guilty of thy body and blood, and so instead 29.
of life receive my judgment and condemnation.

Give grace therefore, that before I presume to come unto the participation
thereof, I may examine my self 1. Cor. 11, verse. 28. 2. Cor. 13, 5.
, by calling my sins into mind, searching out my ways Lamen 3, verse. 40.
, and by unfeigned and hearty repentance returning unto thee my Lord, least
otherwise by concealing my sins, with Judas the traitor I eat the bread of
the Lord against the Lord Augustine upon John, treatise. 59.
: and by abusing thy gentleness Romans 2, 4 5.
heap vengeance upon my self against the day of vengeance.

Make me to confess my sins, and that with hearty sobs, so thou being a
faithful and just God 1. Ioh. 1, 9.
, wilt pardon al mine offenses, and cleanse me from my sins: and wilt not
disdain to accept me into favor, when I do not refrain to acknowledge my
wickedness.

Moreover, pour into me a true and lively faith, that I never mistrust thy
word annexed to the Sacraments, which promises unto mankind the remission of
sins.

For to eat, or drink with the mouth only is to no purpose, but faith must
come thereunto, and apprehende the word with the promises annexed. For they
are the grounds and principles of this sacrament.

So that whosoever gives credit to these words, Which was given, and shed for
you, in the remission of sins Matt. 26, verse. 26, etc. Mark. 14, verse. 22.
etc. Luke. 22, verse. 19, etc. 1. Corint. 11, verse. 24, etc.
, the same man has that which is promised by them, namely, eternal life, and
salvation. For where the remission of sins is, there likewise righteousness,
life, and salvation is.

But he which doubts of these words, he without doubt is an unworthy
receiver, and comes unprepared. For the doubting man neither eats thy flesh
spirituallie, nor yet drinks thy blood, though carnally, and to our eyes he
seems to consume the sacrament of thy body and blood with his teeth and
mouth, but his damnation rather. Not because Augustine upon John, treatise. 26.
thy supper is poison, but for that an evil man takes a good thing naughtilie.

Finally, also grant, that receiving this thy Sacrament of the new Testament,
I may put of, according to the former conversation, the old man Ephesians. 4, 22.
, which is corrupt according to the lusts of error, and be renewed in the spirit
of my mind, putting on the new man Col. 3, 10. Ephe. 4, 24.
, which after God, is created in righteousness, and holiness of truth.

And albeit my nature be such, that I cannot live without spots of wickedness
Augustine concerning Ecclesi. instruc. cap. 53
: yet so bless me, that I may never offend willingly, but altogether
depending upon thy goodness, whose manner is to pardon the true penitent
sinners, may boldly approach to thine holy supper.

Especially, seeing we have liberty to enter into the holy place through the
blood Heb. 10, 19
by the new and living way which thou have prepared 20.
for us through the veil, that is, by thy flesh. And seeing we have 21.
an high Priest over the house of God, make us to draw nigh with true 22.
hearts, in assurance of faith, sprinkeled in our minds from an evil conscience,
and washed in body with pure water: cause us to hold fast 23.
the profession of our hope without wavering (for he is faithful that promised)
and let us consider one of 24.
another, to provoke unto love, and to good works, not forsaking the 25.
assembly of the faithful, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one
another, and so much the more, as we see the day approaching,

Amen.
Another prayer before the receiving of the holy Communion.
O Christ the only mediator between God and man 1. Tim. 2, 5.
, which of thine ardent and unspeakable good will 6.
tookest our flesh upon thee, to become a sacrifice and ransom for all
mankind: and for the better conceauing of that thy benefit did ordain
before thy paineful passion, a perpetual memory of thy love, and that by
erecting a covenant of the new Testament Matthew. 26, verse. 26, etc. Mark. 14,
24 Luke. 22, verse. 19, etc.
, which testifies of thy presence, merit, power, and mercy, washing away
daily the sins of believers:

And the more effectually to commend the depenes of this mystery, did
ordain this Sacrament in thy last supper being even ready to go from thy
Disciples unto thy passion, the more deeply to fix it in our hearts, that it
never slip out of our minds, but daily in faith, fear, and reverence, be
recorded; and remain according to thine holy institution, whole and perfect
without adding or diminishing from the same.

For though it be but a man's testament Gal 3, 15. Hebrews. 9, verse. 15, etc.
, yet if it be confirmed and proved by the death of the testator, no man
diminishes or adds thereunto.

Unto thee do I cry, O Son of God, which art partaker of our flesh, and
bone of our bones, beseeching thee from the bottom of mine heart, that it
would please thee to give me grace that with an earnest desire, and due
reverence I may covet to receive thy supper, and therein thirstinglie to seek
for the nourishment of my soul.

Remove from mine heart al loathing, contempt, and curiosity of profane men,
which, set themselves against thee, and proudly despise this thine
institution, like unto dogs despising holy things Matt. 7, 6.
, and unto hogs treading most precious pearls under their feet.

Lift up my mind, that in fear and trembling, in faith and spiritual comfort,
I may approach to the worthy receiving of thy precious body and blood, not as
hypocrites do, which hide and dissemble their sins; neither as epicures
despising both thee and thine holy ordinance.

And therefore stir up in me an unfeigned desire of this heavenly nourishment,
that from thee the bread of life Ioh. 6, 35. Eccl. 24, 24. Iohu. 4, 10. 14.
, and fountain of salvation, I may draw vital juice to the quickening of my
soul.

In which communion thou bestowest upon believers both the merits of thine
obedience and passion, and also thine other benefits whatsoever.

Besides inwardly thou do replenish us with new and celestial joy, in
quickening, comforting, teaching and governing us, that so we may have and get
our strength from thee even as the branches draw their juice and force to
fructify, from the vine.

Lighten therefore the eyes of mine heart, that I may know what the hope is
whereunto we are called Ephesians. 1, 18.
; and what the riches of our inheritance are in the Saints Col. 1, 27.
; and what exceeding greatness of thy power and mercy is hid in this supper,
and how unspeakable be the riches of the glory of this Sacrament, whereby thou
communicatest to al and each of thy faithful together with thy body and blood
all the treasures of thine heavenly goods to be received by faith.

For thine holy and blessed mouth has said: I am the bread of life John. 6,
35.
which came down from heaven, he which comes to me shall not hunger in any
wise, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. And the bread which I
shall give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

O most sweet bread heal thou Ambrose.
the palate of mine heart, that I may taste the sweetness of thy love; heal me
of al mine infirmities, that I delight in no fairenes besides thee.

O most heavenly whight bread containing within thee al comfort, and the
perfect sweetenes of al savor, which do always refresh us, let mine heart
eat thee, and with thy pleasant savor let all the bowels of my flesh be
replenished.

O thou bread of life, which camst down from heaven, and give life to the
world, come into mine heart, and purge me from al filthiness of the flesh and
spirit: enter thou into my soul, heal, and sanctify me both within and
without.

Be thou the buckler, and perpetual defense of my soul and dodie, that I may
come unto thy kingdom the right way, where we shall not deal with mysteries
as in this world, but shall behold thee face to face, when thou have delivered
the kingdom to God 1. Cor. 15, verse. 24. 28.
, the Father, and so God shall be al in all,

Amen.
A thanksgiving after the receiving of the holy Communion.
O Jesus, high and eternal Priest Heb. 8, 1.
, sitting on the right hand of the throne of majesty in the heavens, governor
of the Saints,

Thou art an high Priest of good things to come Heb. 9, 11,
, which by a greater and more perfect tabernacle not made with hands, that is
to say, not of this building, neither by the blood of goats, and calves Heb.
9, 12.
, but by thine own blood did enter once into the holy place, and found
eternal redemption, when through the eternal spirit, thou offeredst thy self
a pure sacrifice without spot, to God, purging our 14.
consciences from dead works, to serve the living God:

I yield thee hearty thanks for suffering upon the altar of the cross a most
shameful death, for our sins, and that of thine own accord, moved thereunto
by a singular affection of good will toward us.

I bless thee for instituting this Sacrament of thy body and blood in
remembrance of our everlasting redemption, that at no time it might slip out of
our minds, but be an holy sign, and testimony of thy perpetual friendship,
and a seal of the confirmation of the new and eternal covenant which thou
have entered into with us concerning the free remission and forgiveness of our
sins.

I magnify thee also with all reverence of mind, for bidding us miserable men,
and sinners both unto the participation of thy most holy supper, and also to
the receiving of al celestial riches; wherein thou bestowest, and appliest
particularly to every of us, all the merits and good things which by thine
obedience and death, thou have purchased on our behalf, that we may become
partners, and fellow heirs of eternal blessedness.

O sacred banquet, wherein heavenly dainties are set before us which revive the
soul: and thou lamb of God, after a wonderful and mystical manner, give thy
self to refresh the inward man.

We diminish thee not in eating thee Hierom in his agony.
, but thou endurest whole perpetually. And although the visible signs are
consumed, yet can not thou be devoured.

Thou art the meat of the soul, not of the body; and fattest our minds, not
our bellies.

Thou changest the eater into thy self, and yet art not changed into the
eater, as other corporal food is changed commonly.

So that we participate of thy divine nature 2. Pet. 1, 4.
, and thou no whit art altered into our sinful flesh.

I humbly beseech thee, Son of God, by thy most sacred blood shed for us,
give me grace, that participating of this visible Sacrament, I may withal find
and feel in mine heart the invisible working of thine heavenly grace, which is
contained in this mystery; that this supper may be, as some refreshing unto my
body, so a special medicine of my soul.

Quicken and raise up in me by this blessed Sacrament a continual remembrance
of thy bitter passion, make me to retain the same firmly and fresh in my
mind, and show it forth 1. Cor. 11, verse. 26.
, as an only and sufficient ransom of my redemption, until thou returnest.

Let me never doubt of the forgiveness of my sins, which thou assurest me of
by thy body and blood, in thine holy covenant Matthew. 26, verse. 26, etc. Luke.
22, verse. 19, etc.
, concluded in thy last supper, by the breaking of bread, and giving forth the
cup to thy chosen Disciples, and by them to as many as are incorporated into
thy Church through Baptism:

That as often as Satan assaileth us, with his deadly tentations, we may run
to our sanctuary, as it were to a strong anchor of defense, apprehending the
promise ratified by the seal of this covenant, and never give over in fight
but still be refreshed with new virtue from above; nor break our hearts through
the consideration of sundry misfortunes which the ungrateful world by the
instinct of their captain the Devil, would bring upon us, but calling into
mind thy death, into the which we are baptized, may escape from al calamities;

So that no tribulation, Romans 8, 35
nor anguish, nor persecution, neither hunger, nor nakedness, neither perils, 38.
nor sword, neither death, neither life may separate us from our head,
whereupon being made fast by this holy Sacrament received, we, as living
members do depend;

And finally may know that we are fed and refreshed by thy flesh and precious
blood, that washed therewith we should not hereafter give our selves to carnal
pleasures, nor feed upon the leaven of malice and wickedness, but resisting
them, live in all sincerity and truth 1. Cor. 5, 8.
, as it becomes such as do eat of the immaculate Paschal lamb, whose life
is hid with thee Colo. 3, 3.
, but when thou shall be revealed, then 4.
shall we also appear in glory.

For this blessed meat does truly witness that our bodies, sprinkled with the
virtue of thy quickening flesh, as it were with celestial dew, shall rise
again unto immortality, and everlasting glory.

Wherefore give grace, that al thy Saints participating of the bread of eternal
life, may be replenished with the fruition of thy blessed sight for evermore in
thy celestial paradise,

Amen.
Another thanksgiving after the receipt of the holy Communion.
I Thank thee, O Christ lamb of God, for offering thy self upon the altar of
the cross to thy father an offering Ephe. 5, 2.
and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God, for our sins to reconcile
us unto him: for certainty whereof, and confirmation of our faith, thou have
instituted on our behalf this holy Sacrament of thy supper; that as often as
we receive the same, we may celebrate thy memory 1. Cor. 11, verse. 26.
, and with thanksgiving remember the merit and fruit of thy passion.

I beseech thee by thy bitter death, stir up our minds, that by often receiving
this thine ordinance and institution, we may consider how bitter a death thou
did suffer on our behalf, and how great the love was, which drove thee to
take so cruel and shameful a death to save us: and withal continually yield,
as we are bound, hearty thanks unto thee for the same, and after the like
sort, answer to our power, that unspeakable good will by our good life, and
careful observation of thy commandments: and may, when, either through
frailetie of our flesh Galat. 6, 1.
, or by any other fault prevented, we sin, run by and by unto thee by
repentance, and, through consideration of this new and eternal covenant
touching the remission of sins, made with us, be erected and vpholden unto a
lively and constant hope.

O sweet Jesus, grant, that, being fast linked unto thee by this holy
mystery, I may receive power and strength from thee, believing thy promises,
and be wholly addicted thereunto without any doubting, that so my conscience,
in fear and trobles, may have perfect consolation.

Suffer me not to be separated from the members of thy body, which is the
Church, whereof thou art head Ephe. 1, 22. 23.
, fulfilling al in all, but grant, that abiding in thy word and kingdom, I may
be without fault in the foundation, and without sin against my conscience,
and walk worthy this Sacrament, forsaking utterly and renouncing the Devil,
and al Idolatry, al vices and carnal desires 1. Pet. 2, 11. Galat. 5, 17. Romans
13, 14.
, which fight against the soul. For we cannot be partakers of the Lords
table, and of the Devils to 1. Cor. 10, verse. 21.
.

Make me also to remember that by this sacrament I am bound to do good unto
others.

For as many grains of corn do make one loaf; and many grapes make one
wine: so being many yet are we but one loaf 1. Cor. 10, verse. 17.
, and one body, inasmuch as we al participate of one bread, and drink of one
cup.

Join us therefore together, O Savior of the world, at this common banquet
through the band of love, that we may be fastened unto thee our head. That, as
thou did die for us, so we again may not fear to suffer, and to give our
lives for the glory of thy name, that we never be separated from thee, neither
in life, nor death Romans 8, 38
.

Make us also heartily to love one another like the true and lively members of
thy body 1. Cor. 12, verse. 17, etc.
, that, if need require, we may give our lives for our brethren 1. Ioh. 3, 16
.

Suffer not concord of minds to be broken. For he that receives the mystery
of unity Augustine.
, and keeps not the bond of peace, he does not receive the mystery for
himself, but a testimony against himself.

Give grace therefore, that laieng aside al wrath Coloss. 3, verse. 8, and 13.
, fiercenes, maliciousnes, and envy, we may forgive one another, even as thou
forgiuest us; and bear one with another for the better avoiding of strife,
di^fension ^. Cor. 11, verse. 16, etc.
, sects, and pernicious heresies.

Keep this thine ordinance and right use of thy Sacrament among us evermore,
that this good work, and divine ceremony, may always be a note, and badge of
our public profession, whereby we are known from Pagans: and tokens of love,
confession, and thankefulnes.

Remove away al abuses and prophanations of this holy and sacred supper,
together with the horrible and Idolatrous adorations invented by Satan and his
members, to the shameful deforming of thy godly and goodly institution, but
maintain I humbly beseech thee, the true and unpolluted use thereof, til thy
pleasure is to return in the clouds to judgment with great power and glory
Mark. 13, verse. 26. Luke 21, 27.
, that it never be out of remembrance.

And last of al at our resurrection from death, appoint us places in thy
heavenly table, where we may taste the new wine in the kingdom of thy father
Matthew. 26, verse. 29.
, abiding with thine elect Mark. 13, verse. 20.
, Angels Mark. 8, 38
, and blessed Saints for evermore,

Amen.
A prayer for the Sick.
O Almighty and merciful God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which through
corporal diseases both put me in mind of my mortality, and also call
to repentance. For thou will not the death of a sinner Eze. 33, 11.
, but that he convert, and live:

Unto thee do I cry, O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger Psalm 6, 1.
, neither chastise me in thy wrath; have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am 2.
weak; O Lord, heal me, for my 3.
bones are vexed.

My soul is also trobled very 4.
sore; but Lord, how long will thou delaie? Return, deliver my soul; O save
me, for thy mercies sake.

Heal me, O Lord Ier. 17, 14.
, and I shall be whole; save thou me, and I shall be saved: For thou art my
praise.

Thou have wounded, and thou will heal me; thou have strooken, and thou will
cure; thou do kill, and restore to life again.

Wherefore if this my sickness be not unto the death, help me upon the bed of my
sorrow Psalm. 41, 3.
. Turn the whole palate of my weakness into joy.

May it please thee, O Lord, to deliver me out of the mire. For the grave will
not acknowledge thee, nor death confess thee: but the living, I say the
living will extol thee for evermore.

O Lord, heal me, that I may praise thee al my life long, through my Savior,

Amen.
Another prayer for the Sick.
O Christ Jesus, Son of the living God, our Redeemer, and our Mediator for
evermore, in our weak flesh thou wentest about the earth preaching Mat. 4, 23.
the glad tidings of the kingdom touching the forgiveness of our sins, and
curing every sickness, and every disease among the people.

For thou have truly taken upon thee our infirmities Esai. 53, 4.
, and borne our pains. For where sin abounded, there thy grace did more
abound Romans 5, 20
. Wherefore I pray, and most humbly beseech thee, be merciful unto me Psalm.
41, 4.
, heal my soul. For I have sinned against thee; strengthen it by the sweet
comfort of thy Gospel; and confirm my faith: then, if it be thine heavenly
pleasure, restore health unto my weak body.

If thou will, thou can make me clean; only do but speak the word Matt.
8, 8.
, and I shall be healed.

For it is not herbs Wis. 16, 12.
, nor plasters that restore health: but thy word, O Lord, which heals al
things. It is thou, Lord, which have the power 13.
both of life and death; thou leadest unto deaths door, and bring up again.

But, if it be more expedient for me to die, than to live, then deal with me
according to thy will Tob. 3, 6.
, O Lord, and command my spirit to be received in peace; the which I commend
into thine hands Ps^^* 31, 5.
, thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth, which live and raignest with
the Father, and the holy Ghost, one God for evermore,

Amen.
Another prayer for the Sick.
O Eternal God, which art full of compassion Psa 86, 15.
, and mercy, slow to anger, and great in kindness; thou forgiuest our falts
Psalm. 32, 1.
, couerest our sins, and do not impute our iniquities 2.
unto us:

Unto thee do I bend my prayer, beseeching thee to pardon al my sins Psa.
103, 3.
, and to heal al mine infirmities. Save my life from destruction, and compass
me about with 4.
mercy, and loving kindness.

For thou art the God of my salvation Psalm. 9, 10. Psalm. 28, 7.
, mine helper, in thee has mine heart trusted. Despise not the works of thine
own hands Psa. 138, 8.
, neither suffer him to perish whom thou have created, and redeemed.

O Christ, lamb of God Ioh. 1, 29.
, which take away the sins of the world, and washest us from al our offenses
by thy precious blood Revel. 1, 5.
, increase my faith Luke 17, 5.
, that firmly I may apprehende the salvation promised. Bless thou my soul
at her departure from the body, that evermore I may rejoice with thee.

And, holy Ghost, eternal God, which art the best Comforter Ioh. 14, 16.
in all extremities, be thou present, I beseech thee, at the hour of my 26.
death, and impart thy saving health upon me, that mine heart do not faint, nor
be trobled,

Amen.
Revel. 7, 12. Praise and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and
power, and might be unto our God for evermore, Amen.
A vewe of the Prayers as they orderly stand in this book.
1. A Prayer to be said at the coming into the Temple, page 1. 2. A prayer
for grace to call upon God, page 2. 3. A daily prayer for the Queens most
sacred Majesty, page 7.
On the Lords day.
1. A Morning prayer, page 12. 2. A thanksgiving for our creation, page 16. 3.
A prayer for the remission of sins, page 21. 4. A prayer for the preservation
of the Church, page 26. 5. A prayer for the Preachers of Gods word, page 31.
6. A prayer for the hearers of Gods word, page 36. 7. A prayer against false
prophets, page 41. 8. An Evening prayer, page 45.
On Mondaie.
1. A Morning prayer, page 51. 2. A thanksgiving for our redemption, page 56.
3. A prayer for faith, page 60. 4. A prayer for the kingdom of God, page 65.
5. A prayer for magistrates, pa. 69. 6. A prayer for subjects, page 74. 7. A
prayer against the enemies of Gods truth, page 78. 8. An Evening prayer, page
83.
On Tuesdaie.
1. A Morning prayer, page 88. 2. A thanksgiving for our sanctification, page
93. 3. A prayer for a steadfast hope, page 98. 4. A prayer for the attaining of
Christian humility, page 103. 5. A prayer for wedded folks, page 108. 6. A
prayer for young folks, pa. 114. 7. A prayer against the dominion of Satan, page
119. 8. An Evening prayer, page 124.
On VVensdaie.
1. A Morning prayer, page 129. 2. A thanksgiving for the knowledge of God,
page 134. 3. A prayer for the attaining of Christian charity, page 139. 4. A
prayer for the fruit of the earth, page 143. 5. A prayer for sinners, page
148. 6. A prayer for the sick, page 153. 7. A prayer against the tentation of
Satan, page 158. 8. An Evening prayer, page 163.
On Thursdaie.
1. A Morning prayer, page 169. 2. A thanksgiving unto God for our food, page
174. 3. A prayer for unity in Religion, page 179. 4. A prayer for peace, page
184. 5. A prayer for unbelievers, 189. 6. A prayer for our benefactors, page
194. 7. A prayer against the offenses of this world, page 199. 8. An Evening
prayer, page 205.
On Friedaie.
1. A Morning prayer, page 210. 2. A thanksgiving for the passion of Christ,
page 214. 3. A prayer for true repentance, page 219. 4. A prayer for Christian
patience, page 224. 5. A prayer for women with child, and in childbed. page
230. 6. A prayer for captives, page 235. 7. A prayer against the tentation of
the flesh, page 240. 8. An Evening prayer, page 245.
On Saturdaie.
1. A Morning prayer, page 250. 2. A thanksgiving for the mercy of God, page
255. 3. A prayer for an happy departure out of this world, page, 260. 4. A
prayer for nourishment, 265. 5. A prayer for such as be afflicted with
persecution, page 269. 6. A prayer for Widows and Orphans, page 274. 7. A
prayer against despair, 279. 8. An Evening prayer, page 284.
A vewe of certain other prayers for special persons.
1. A prayer for any Preacher, etc. page 289. 2. A prayer for any auditor of
Gods word, page 295. 3. A prayer for a Prince, or Magistrate, page 300. 4. A
prayer for Subjects, page 305. 5. A prayer for any married man, page 306. 6. A
prayer for children, page 311. 7. A prayer against the Turk, page 316. 8 A
prayer in the time of the plage, sickness, etc. page 321. 9. A prayer in the
time of tempests, page 326. 10. A prayer for waifaring men, page 332. 11.
Prayers before the receiving of the holy Communion, page 336, and 341. 12.
Thankesgiuings after the receiving of the holy Communion, page 345, and 350.
13. Prayers for the Sick, page 355, 356, and 358.
To the Reader.
BE it from thy mind (good Reader) to think, that, because we have applied
these prayers unto certain days, we would therefore have thee to tie thy
self always unto the (...) which we have prescribed, an(...)ever either to
violate or omit the same: to do so, we judge it foolish, superstitious, and
wicked. But we wish thee in the fear of God to use our labors to thy
spiritual comfort, and commodity: and as we have set down (as duty binds)
a daily prayer, for our dred Sovereign, and gracious Queen: so we think the
rest, or the mayor part of them, necessary to be used, if they could be,
every day. Wherefore, as occasion and time does offer, pray in the name of
Christ, and observe that order which thou know best to keep thee in the
fear, and favor of Almighty God.

VVilt thou be thankeful?

Thou have a thanksgiving
For daily benefits and blessings, page, 12, 45, (...) (...), 124, 129, 163,
16(...)5, 210, 245, 250, 284. After the receipt of the holy Communion, page
345, and 350. For our creation, page 16. For our food, page 174. For the
knowledge of God, 134. For the mercy of God. pa. 255. For the passion of
Christ, pa. 214. For our gracious Queen, page 7. For our redemption, page 56.
For our sanctification, page 93.
Stand thou in need either of eternal, or temporal benefits.
For any auditor of Gods word, page 295* For (...) page 311. For Ch(...)
charity. page 139.

