The co^futacyon of the ^st part of Frythes book, with ^sputacyon before
whether (...) be possible for any hereti^ ^o know that him self ^ne or not.
And als^ (...) other / whether it be wors to deny directely ^re or less (...)
the faith put forth by John ^p^eth clerks*

M.CCCCC.XXXUI.

The prologe.
MOst gentle and good christian readers, where it is so, that it has chanced
me not a few times, to be in companyes diverse where I have hard, among all
other, that most notable and wylye heretyke Fryth, not a little praised of some,
for learning and myche gentylnesse / of some, for very syngulare and great
pacyence / and of some not only praised and commended, but also pytied and
lamented, howbeit (as I perceive) not for his most unfortunate chance
spyrituall but for his dew and just punishment corporal / and that in such
manner, as though he had been a man utterly cast away without cause: I therefore
by the reason of this, compelled at length, so myche to wonder, remembrynge
withal, his judges to be (as I hard) no meaner persons then pears of the
reame, and that of both sorts / was streken with no small desire, if it were
possible to se his book / wherein I might perfytly perceive, ye very hole cause
of his worthy death. Not for any thing that I douted, (as I perceived sum did
more then yt) whether his judgment were just or not / but utterly because I
would thoroughly understand the matter, for ye which I though ever he was
worthyly condemned. And that to the intent I might be the more able to
satysfye, such as I should chance to find, any thing deceived in him. And to
be short, his book at length I did opteyne. The which when I did read /
questyonles if the fastness of faith, had been no more, then the reddynesse of
suffycye^t judgment I might well have said (as to many may) that I had met
with it to sone* and in an evil hour: How be it the trauth to say, after ye
first time, without fail the oftener I read it, the falser I found it.
whereof at length I made so large report that here and there, now and then, I
failed not of some, which would not stycke to tell me, that I said therein
myche more then I could prove / because they thought I did other falsely
rehearse him or else mysunderstonde him. wherein I was diverse times to this
issuy driven, other to show forth ye book it self, which I thought not best /
or to give place to an error, or else to promise the probacyon of that I said,
in writing / where frythes words and mine should both together apere: and
therefore because I would not show the book / nor any thing give way in such a
matter / I had none other answer to make but always with this promise / little
therein consyderyng then, what things I found and perceived in it afterward /
which in especyall were twain: one, that who so ever promyseth to prove such
a falshed and do it not in deed, without questyon does but therein co^fyrme and
uphold it, and nothing else. The other was / what viuacite of wit, copy of
learning and eloquence, is (all most of necessyte) requesyte, to conuynce the
tortuouse and crooked wylynesse of an heretyke. And when I perceived a great
inconueniens of the tone side. And again utterly no remedy, of the the other,
That is to wit, I saw what danger mine own promise had bound me unto if I
should not perform it. And of the the other part / when I considered, how far
I was from those things that I should aptly perform it withal / good
cryste^ readers, it is not hard to perceive whether my mind were therewith
asstonyed or not, being brought into such a streyt, where apered out no
passage / yet thither conveyed (I was sure) without fault. But then my
cogytacyon, as who say, sore wered and beten herwith, ran streygth to the
very thing it self, which first set it this a work: that is to wit, the very
bodyly presence of our most glorious savior christ in the holy sacrament.
wherein doutles is very trauth. The which trauth, because it might (as full
sure it was, to show ye only strength of it self sometime it would) be with out
the excellency of wit, the copye of learning, and the bewty of eloquence. Even
therefore did I set upon the accomplyshment of my promise, without any of them
all three / as ye shall well perceive hereafter: wherein I most heartily desire
you to have me excused / not for my sake, but for the fortheraunce of the
glorious thing it self, for the love whereof I have not shronke thus to show
my rewdenesse and little lernyng to all men.

Finis.
The fautes escaped in the pryntynge.
Chapi. Lefe. Side. Lines. Fautes Ame^dent In the ix. i. i. xxi. is in is in In
the.xi. ii. ii. i. There He. There In the.xiii. i. ii. v. denied denies And in
the xiii. failed fails In the.xvi^ i. ii. xiii. put away in. In the.xx. iii.
i. ix. to note noted And in the xi. noted note And in the viii. so larg. thus
larg. In the.xxi. vi. ii. ii. suspicions. suspicious In the xxiii. v. i. i none
one And in the vi. i. ix. does none. is none. In the.xxx. iii. ij. xiii. it is
said. is it said

The first chapter.
Catholicus. Hark I say cuntreyman, a word with the.


Hereticus. Speak ye to me sir?


Catholicus. what questyon is that, where there is no mo but thou and I?


Here. what would ye with me?


Catho. Come hither and thou shall here.


Hereti. what is the matter?


Ca. Shall I tell the?


He. That is your promise.


Ca. Now trewly, when I first se the coming this way alone / thou made me
therewith very glad


He. why so?


Ca. Dowtles because I have been a great while, very desirous to talk with the.
And yet cowde I never find the time and place: but (by the reason of company /
or one thing or other) there was always some occasyon to interrupt or let,
that I did purpose. Therefore now, while it has chanced us thus (fortunately
as I hope) to mete here in this fair and quiet place: where there be no manner
of any present impedimentes / but that we may say / thou to me / and I to the
/ what so ever shall like us best. I shall for my part therefore (if thou will
harken well to me) show the many things, perchance not a little beyond thine
expectacyon.


He. Sir, of such, would I be glad to here: but yet I marvel gretely, that ye
should be so desirous, to talk with me. For I suppose ye know me not.


Ca. yes well enough, by syghte and here say.


He. why, what have ye herd of me?


Ca. In very deed I will not long hyde it from the. Howbeit, first thou
know right well, that delyberation often times, gives a great occasyo^ of
wysdom: for that thing, which a man does sometime judge very well and mete to be
done at the first: by forther leisure and delyberatyon taken therein, he
perceyueth at length to be clean contrary: the which I do now find by
experyens.


He. How so?


Ca. I shall tell yt. when I was first moved to speak and common with the
(let hitherto as I have showed yt) I did then intend to have asked the a
certain questyon / the which I perceive now (by ye reason of a more deliberat
consyderatyo^, conceived syns in the mean space) had been but very superfluous
and vain.


He. why so?


Ca. what avails it to ask a questyon of him that can not solue it?


Here. Am not I able to assoyle it?


Ca. No trewly.


Here. yet ye can not tell.


Ca. yes very well.


He. why, what was the questyon?


Ca. I have told the a cause why, it were but void to tell the. And therefore
it should but consume the time, and nothing else.


He. yet I pray you / syns ye have gone so far withal, let me here it, and
it were but for my fantasye.


Ca. I wysse it is, as who say but a void draught. How be it, seeing thou wylt
needs have it, I will not stycke with the for more then that. And therefore the
questyon was in deed, none other but this. I had thougth then, to have asked
the / whether thou be an heretyke or not.


He. I pray you say troth.


Ca. Then must I say the same again.


He. I promise you sir, it had been a pretty questyon. Nevertheless, was this it /
which ye think, that I can not solue?


Catho. Even the very same.


He. Then who can solue it, if I can not? specially when it touches no man
else, but me only.


Ca. yet who so ever can, sure it is, that thou can not.


He. why so?


Ca. Because there is no heretyke that can tell, whether he be one or not.


The second chapyter.
Hereticus. AHa, now I perceive we have somewhat to do, ere we part. But first,
what should move you, to have any such opinion / or to think that no heretyke
can tell, whether he be one or not.


Ca. I have no such opinion / nor I do not so think another.


Here. why then did ye say so?


Ca. Not because of any opynyo^ that I have therein / nor yet by the reason of
so thinking / but because I do surely know it / and over that, by cause thou
musest at it so much / I will say to the thus myche more, that there is none of
them, ye does, or can so much as believe or think that himself is one.


He. what, can no heretic so much as think that he is one?


Ca. No dowtles, for that is my saying.


He. It is to far against reason.


Ca. Not one whyt.


He. yes with out fail / for any man may think what so ever he will.


Ca. Thou art therein much deceived. For all though it be all one, to think,
and to believe: yet is it two things* to think, and to ymagion. Thou may
ymagyon all steples to have spronge out of the ground, as trees do: and also
every thing to be otherwise, then thou know it is, if thou list. But yet
thou can not so think or believe, all though thou would. For thou can
never (if thou mark it well) believe or think any thing, again thyn own
knowledge. But for all that, thou may so ymagyen always at thy pleasure. where
of it apperyth plain, that ymagynacyon is one / and thynkyng or byleuing is an
other. Therefore though an heretyke may ymagyen him self to be one / yet (as I
said) he can never for all that, so believe or think: myche less then, is he
able to know it: and who therefore would ask him the questyon?


The.iii. chapyter.
Hereticus. YEt may he as sone believe, and also know that, as I can believe
you, that he can not / except ye show me some good reason why.


Ca. wylt thou admytte it, if I do?


Here. Or else convince me thereby.


Ca. what by reason, when thou wylt not allow it?


Here. ye, wherefore not.


Ca. which way?


He. Marry how should one be better convinced / by the reason which he will not
admyt / then to be therefore shake of / and talked no more withal? As I, for my
part, would be loath to be so served: specially in such matters, as me think ye
atempt for to treat of. whereof in deed, I have no small desire to here.
Therefore as ye shall not find me satiable without reason: so ye shall not find
me to refuse it, when it is purposed on to me.


Ca. Because thou spekest so reasonably, you shall not have me require any other
wise. Therefore to you purpose / thou must needs grant this, that there is no
man an herytyke / but because he byleueth in some part of ye faith amysse.


He. That is troth.


Ca. Therefore if he could believe, that he were an heretyke / than might he
believe that thing, which he does not believe: and that both at ones / which
were impossyble: for it is not possible for a man / to believe any thing to be
even then any other wise, then he does believe it: As by ye way of ensample.
Suppose one so wicked, which does believe our fauyour christ to be but a man
only, and not also very god to: as diverse heretics did in time past.


He. what of ye?


Ca. Then if he that so byleueth, could believe that he were therein an heretyke
/ he should then believe and think / that he did believe therein amysse. wherefore
if he did think / that he byleueth amysse / in that he does believe our savior
to be but a man only / and not also god him self: plain it is, that he does
believe him to be not only a man but also very god to when he does think
himself to believe amysse, when he byleueth ye contrary: and so should he
believe and not believe, all one thing both together. which (as I said) is
impossyble. wherefore it must needs follow, that an heretic can never believe or
think that him self is one.


He. Sir I do now, me think peceyue it very well. For if I be not deceived it
is even like, as if ye did believe and think ye great turk to be now here in
england. It were not possible for you, to believe, that ye believe therein amysse
/ when your believe is utterly, that it is so: for when ye believe that he is in
england. if ye could believe, that ye byleued therein amysse / then might ye
believe, that he were not in england, when ye believe him to be in it: and so
should ye believe, and not believe one thing (as ye said before) both at ones,
which I know, were again all reason and troth.


Ca. Doutles thou spekest very well to the purpose / and that per chance, would
yet more plainly appear by this. Believe is a thing which can never be
wyttyngly deceived. For so sone as thou do think, that thou byleuest in any
thing amysse: forthwith in the same instant, thy believe is clean altered and
changed, and is not the same, yt it was before. Therefore because heresye, is
no another but in some part of the faith, a mysse believe. when this questyon is
asked, whether an heretic can believe or think, that himself is one / it is no
more to say, but whether he can believe or think that he byleueth amysse. But
then, for so much as no man is able, what so ever he does believe, to think him
self therein, to believe amysse: it must needs follow, that no heretyke can
believe or think, that he byleueth amysse. And therefore he can never believe or
think, yt he is an heretyke.


The.iiii. chapter.
Hereticus. Sir far is this now, from the need of any more, probatyon.


Ca. ye but yet thou see not all.


He. why so?


Ca. if thou mark it well, this conclusyon does take away no small wonder from
many men.


He. what is yt I pray you.


Ca. Trewly, what should be the cause of the rare and syldome amendment of
heretykes: whereof partly has sprung this commune opinyon, that heresye,
frenesye, and ielosye, be three dyseases incurable / not because they be all
utterly so in ded but because, they be so syldome seen, to be thoroughly cured
and heled again. And as thou haste now hard, of heresye, what wonder is it
all though it be syldome or never forsaken and amended: when it is, to every
heretyke (as to one in a contynuall phrenesye) utterly unknown, and also
inopinable, that himself is any thing therewith infected: for who can expel
and put from him, the which he can not believe, that ever came nere him / who
can desire, of any infyrmyte to be heled, wherewith he can not think, that ever
he was dyseased? or who can be will lynge for to amend, wherein he can not, so
myche as think, that ever he did offend? specially, when we may daily se the
amendemet of euyls, very seldom or never brought to pass in some, when they
both believe and know themself infected with them: yet much more easyer it is
(be it never so hard) to leave and amend yt is known or thought amysse. Then
it is (be it never so light) to overcome and forsake, that is clean hyd and
incredyble: who therefore or what, can purge cure and hele, this insensyble,
imperceptyble incredyble (and therefore the more parelous pestylent and odyble)
sykenesse, but only the gentle swet and mighty mercy of him which justifies
the keytyfe? Pro. 27
But how should that most gracyoust medycyne be opteyned, if it be not
desired? And how can it be desired, when the cause why, (as thou haste herd)
another is, nor can be perceived? By this, thou may some part see, of the
lamentable state of an heretyke, which of all men, is in most daynger, and
fardyst from all good help and socour.


The.v. chapyter.
Hereticus. Sir, ye say very trauth, and that I perceive now right well.


Catholi. yet thou see not all the worst of him.


He. That were maruayle,


Ca. what wylt thou say, if it be he, whom the prophet does mean. where he
says, Psalm (...)
The folisshe man said in his heart, there is no god. That is to say, the
folysshe man, conceived such things in his heart, whereof it must needs follow,
yt there is no god.


He. There is no heretyke, that so does.


Ca. yes, that is there.


He. why, what manner of heretyke is yt?


Ca. Reken which thou wylt, thou can not chose amysse.


He. No? then by that reason, it is every one of them.


Ca. Now in good faith, thou hyttest even the very mark.


Here. what, does every heretic deny god him self?


Ca. In very deed it is non other wise but even so.


He. Sir never tell me that tale any more, for surely I will never believe it.


Ca. what soft and fair, thou have promised, to follow reason / and now thou
begynnest to flee from it, ere thou come at it.


He. Sir there is no reason yt ca^ prove this.


Ca. yes yes, in so much, yt the probacyon thereof is sone made (ye and soberly
hard) very easy also to be understood.


He. when I here it, I will tell you more.


Ca. First, thou shall not deny this / but all those deny god / which
denies christ.


He. In deed that I will grant.


Ca. And all heretykes denies christ. wherefore it must needs follow that all
heretics denies god: except thou wylt say, that christ is not god.


He. Mary sir we are much the nere, for this probacyon.


Ca. what eyleth it?


Here. why? how prove you, that all heretics denies christ.


Ca. All those denies christ: which denies all his hole faith.


He. That is a plain matter.


Ca. And all heretics denies, all his hole faith: wherefore all heretykes
denies christ.


He. I have hard in my days many probacyons, but yet never h^rd I any such.


Ca. wherefore?


He. wherefore quod a?


Ca. ye wherefore?


He, Marry we be now, even as nigh, as we were at the first.


Ca. And somewhat nere to, if thou look, well upon it.


He. Not one whyt, for who can prove, that all heretykes, denies all the hole
faith?


Ca. That can I, sone do.


He. ye may chance to be therein begyled.


Ca. No no: for it is easy enough.


He. By assaye, we shall know.


Ca. I will not assay, but I will do it in deed. And therefore mark it well:
all those denies all ye hole faith, which denies any one part of it: but
every heretyke denies at least one part of it, or else he could be no heretyke.
wherefore every heretyke, denies all the hole faith.


He. Sir I pray you, go ye not about to mock me?


Ca. I would not have the, take me, to be such a one.


He. Then will I be plain with you. I never heard man speak, so far without
reason. For when it is impossyble, to make any thing certain, by that which
is incertayne / ye would prove, that all heretykes denies almighty god, by the
reason they deny christ. when that is as incertayne, and as much needs
probacyo^, as does the other And then forthermore, to stay the matter withal,
ye would prove again, that all heretics denies christ, by this / that each of
them denies the hole faith: when that is more uncertain, and more needs
probacyon (if more may be) then all yt went before: finally to knyt up all
together, ye would prove, yt all heretykes denies all the hole faith, by ye
reason, that each of them denies some part of it. when that is not incertayne,
but so sure, and plain false, yt it can need no manner of probacyon.


Ca. And thynkest thou so?


He. Nay who can think otherwise? for who will believe that he, which denies
but a part of the faith, does therefore deny all together?


Ca. Thou peradventure shall anon, believe so thyself, for all this


He. Never speak of that.


Ca. well, first when I said, that all those denies almighty god, which
denies christ because he is very god him self: said I amysse therein?


He. No mary sir, all that is trauth.


Ca. And when I said, that all those denies christ, which denies all his
faith: said I any thing amysse in that?


He. Another.


Ca. Also when I said that all those, denies all the hole faith, which
denies any part of it: said I amysse therein?


He. Therein quod a? what can be said amysse, if that be not it?


Ca. yet, if I can prove that so true, that it shall need no forther
probacyon: is not all well, or have I said any manner of thing herin amysse
then?


He. Sir if ye can surely prove, yt who so ever denies any part of the faith,
does deny all together, ye shall then not only make all well in deed, but ye
shall also do therein, yt I will never believe, till I here it.


Ca. yet thou wylt grant me this I am sure, that who so ever denies christ,
denies all ye hole faith.


He. All that I know very well.


Ca. Therefore if I can also prove, that who so ever denies any part of the
faith, denies christ him self, have I not then clearly performed, as much as
I have promised, when it must follow thereof, yt who so ever does, denies all
together?


He. Sir fayn would I ons here it, if it would be, but it is long me think a
coming forward.


Catho. Then first to begin withal, thou shall not deny, but every part
of christ's faith is true.


He. There is no dout of that, onelesse I should say that some part of it were
false. And than were it none of his faith.


Ca. Thou spekest very well: and therefore, if every article of his faith be
true (as in deed it must needs be) of whom is the same trauth?


Here. Of whom should it be, but of him, whose faith it is?


Ca. Then it is the trauth of christ.


He. what else?


Ca. Take good head what thou say.


He. wherefore?


Ca. Perchau^ec if thou grant that, thou wotest full little what will follow.


Here. what so ever follow, I will always grant this, that the trauth of the
faith, is the trauth of christ. For if there were any article, wherein ye trauth
of christ were not. I am sure, it could be no part of his faith.


Ca. Doutles, it is very well taken: wherefore if that trauth, which is in every
syngular article of the faith, be the very trauth of christ (as there is no
fail, but it is in deed / or else were they utterly no parts of his faith, as
thou do full trewly confess thy self) thou shall be therefore well
answered, it must clearly follow, that christ is also, in every article of his
faith. For christ and his trauth, be not two things, as other men be, and
their trauth, which are often times without it: some men may, (sometime at
leest) be said to be true. But no man may (at any time) be said to be
trauth: which is proper to christ: for justly may he, and no man else, be
called trauth: for so does he call him self: Job. 1
and doutles the cause why? is this, that he and it, is all one: for as thou
consyderst no christ, when thou consyderst trauth without him: even so thou
consyderst no christ another, when thou consyderste him, without trauth: for
without trauth, what were he but no christ in deed. Therefore what so ever
things cleue so together, that they can not be separate, another in deed, nor
yet in consyderacyon, without fail again all reason it were to say, that they
be diverse. But surely even such is christ, and his trauth. wherefore it were
wickedness, to think, that they be not both one. This inevitable conclusyon
well marked, and borne in mind, shall cause ye clerly to perceive those
things, which must needs follow thereof. Now therefore while it is so, that the
trauth of christ, is in every article of his faith, and he and his trauth is
both one: it can not be avoided, but also he, which is his troth, is in every
one of them: for if he be not in them, the^ (because his trauth and he is all
one) his trauth is not i^ the^: if his truath be not in them, the^ they be not
true if they be not true / then, they be no artycles of his faith. But because
all this is false: now again to the true part: if they be articles of his
faith / then doutles his trauth is in them: if his trauth be in them then
without questyon so is he: except thou wolt make him, without his trauth, as it
must needs follow, if he be not where it is, the which were impossyble. Now is
it therefore, clearly come to light, yt christ is in every article of his faith.
whereof (as thou may perceive thy self) it can not be avoided, but who so
ever denies, any one of them (as every heretic does, at the lest) he does
also deny him in the same. And therefore what part of ye faith leuyth he
vndenyed, which denies him, in whom there is all contained? A more larger
declaracyon hereof, thou shall have a none. Take this therefore in good worth
there whiles.


The.vi. chapter.
Hereticus. NAy nay sir, I pass not upon ye greatly, for me think this all
ready, were wonders well, if it were not for one thing.


Ca. I pray the what is that?


He. if there were nothing to be said to the contrary.


Ca. ye, countreyman, art thou such a one? Now a good fellyshyp, say what thou
can, all though it be, nothing to the purpose.


He. A sir there ye would have it. Howbeit ye shall not so find it.


Ca. Go to than let me se, whether I shall or not.


He. Sir where ye say (as I now perceive it is in deed) yt christ is in every
article of his faith, because yt his trauth which is himself, is in each of
them. where upon ye conclude, yt every heretyke which denies some part of it
at leest, denies therein christ him self, and all the hole faith to, by ye
reason that it is all, contained in him. How therefore I pray you, may this
agree withal, (which is not unknown) that all heretics, does both hold and
confess, many articles of the faith, as ernestly, and as fastly as any men can
/ saying, and also thinking, themself as verily to believe them, as any men
do?


Ca. Is this all the matter?


He. Sir take this till more come.


Ca. I maruayle gretely, that thou wylt have any manner of respect, to their
saying or thynkyng other, again so manifest and inuincyble reason, as I have
showed ye. Nevertheless, be judge now thy self: do they, other say or think,
them self any surer of the trauthe, in any point, then they do in the very
same, where in they do directely err in deed. How surely do they think yt they
be not therein deceived? shall we, think so to because of that? Those which did
murder and sley thapostles (as our savior him self does testifye) thought that
they did there in, ^oh. 16.
great service to god: but yet for all their thynkyng, was it as they thought?
or did their thinking excuse their fault, because they thought it was none?
The Jews did also think, that they slew not the lord of glory, when they
slew christ, Cor. 2
as saint Paul does witness / if they had known him (he says) the lord of
glory, they would never have crucyfyed. Therefore they did think, it was not he:
but was their thinking deceived or not? or did they not put the son of god
to death, because they did, otherwise think? And even so in like manner, what
spekest thou to me, of an heretykes thinking? when (as I proved one to the
before) it is impossyble for him, to think that thing, which were of all
things, most expedye^t for him to think / that is to say, that him self is
an heretyke? yet, is he none, by cause of that? what thing might he think,
more trewly / and yet he is not able so to do? Therefore let never his
thinking, what so ever it be, stand in the way, between the and inevitable
reason.


The.vii. chap.
Hereti. Sir, I will now, tell you another thing.


Ca. Let us have it, if it be worth the herynge.


He. without fail, there be many taken for heretics / and yet, be they none
for all that.


Ca. what is this to the purpose when I speak of none such for I speak of them
that be heretykes in deed. And look therefore how their thynkyng, does fail
them in those articles, which they deny / so does it fail them to in those,
which they seem to grant.


He. Nay sir none of that, for in those articles, which they deny / they
think they have the trauth, and yet they be deceived. But in those articles,
which they hold and grant (as the articles of the creed) they think they
have the trauth, and even so they have in deed, and be not deceived: therefore
they be not deceived, both the ways.


Ca. Thou art thereni deceived, at leest one way. For how can they have the
troth of those artycles, which they think them self to confess and believe
/ when they do utterly refuse, and deny ye very same trauth, in those other
articles, which they believe not. In those artycles which they grant, thou
say they have the trauth, because they think so (which does not follow) And
in those articles, which they deny / thou art sure they have it not, because
they do not believe them. Therefore by this reason, they have ye trauth, and have
it not, which can not be: for if they have it, they have it / if they have it
not, they have it not. But to have it and not have it, both together, is
impossyble: wherefore as I said, you art herein deceived.


He. No no sir, for a man may have the trauth in one thing, all though he
lack it in an other, well enough: as it is daily seen.


Ca. A now I perceive thou art far from the thing in deed. For thou
thynkest, that the trauth of those artycles, which they deny, is an other and
not the very same trauth, that is in them, which they grant.


He. why how else?


Cat. Laughe, therefore I say: if thou knew, what properte, the trauth of
the faith were of: thou would not ask ye question.


He. why, what proprete is that?


Ca. In very deed to be no more in the hole faith, then in the leest part of
it. Nor no less in the leest part, then in all together: nor none other in
any part, then in every other. And that is surely well proved after this manner:
what so ever is more then trauth, is utterly no trauth: and what so ever is
less then trauth / doutlesse is no trauth. Also what so ever is a another then
trauth, without fail is no trauth another. Therefore as touching the first. if
ye trauth of the hole faith, were any more, then ye trauth of the lest part of
it: the^ were it more then trauth (for the trauth of the leest part is trauth)
But trauth to be more then trauth / every man knows, is impossyble. wherefore
the trauth of the hole faith, can be no more, then the trauth of ye leest part
of it. Again for the second by the same reason / if the trauth of ye leest
part, were any less, then ye trauth of the hole faith, then were it less
then trauth (for the trauth of the hole is trauth) but trauth to be less then
trauth, plain it is, can never be. Therefore the trauth of the least part of
the faith, can be no less, then the trauth of all ye hole. Thyrdely, if the
trauth of any one part, were not the very same, but a another, then the trauthe
of any other part of it: then were it a another the^ trauth (for the trauth of
each part is trauth) but trauth to be any other then trauth, can never be
possible. wherefore there is no another trauth, in any one part of the faith,
then there is in each other.


The.viii. chap.
Hereti. Sir your reasons me think can not hold.


Ca. The cause why, would I feign hear.


He. That shall ye sone do, and for example: the resurrection of christ, is one
part of the faith: and the ascension is an other.


Ca. All that is true.


He. Then if the very same trauth, no more nor less, nor none other: were in
ye tone, that is in you the other / it must needs follow, that the resurrection and
the ascension were both one: as it may this way, more plainly appear: ye will
not deny, but when I say, that christ rose from death to life, I say trauth?


Ca. what else?


He. And when ye say, that he ascended, you say also the trauth like wise.


Ca. There is no dout of that.


He. Then if these be not to distinct trauthes, but are all one, so that the
one is none other, but even ye very same that is the the other: then say you the
very same that I do.


Ca. what of that?


He. Therefore if you, when ye say that christ ascended, say the very same that
I do, when I say, that he rose from death to life: it can not be avoided, but
that his resurrection and his ascentio^ is all one.


Ca. Have thou said?


He. ye sir for this time.


Ca. Then very well concluded. As who say, because the trauth of them, must
needs be all one, ye things also where in the same trauth is, must needs be
so to: when it is ever ye contrary: for if thou wylt have the trauth of each
article to dyffer, as the articles does themself, in whom it is. Thou shall
make never a one of them true.


He. yet that would I hear.


Ca. with a good will. If ye trauth of the resurrection, and the trauth of the
ascension, were not all one: it could not be anoyded / but the one trauth must
needs dyffer from the other. And then, if the one dyffer from the other /
because that same other is trauth, the one must needs dyffer from trauth. And
(as I told the before) what so ever differth from trauth / all men knows is
impossyble to be trauth. Therefore by this reason, the one article is without
trauth. And also by ye same reason, likewise the the other, of the contrary part /
and so altogyther. Moreover again this way, if they were two trauthes / there
is no dout, but the one, were not the same, that ye other is. Then if the one,
were not the same that the other is / because the other is trauth: the one were
not ye same that is trauth. And what so ever is not the same, that is trauth,
without fail, can be no trauthe. Therefore if they be twain, the one is no
trauth nor the other another. Beside all this: the trauth of every article, is
(as I said) the trauth of christ / and byeause christ and his trauth is all
one, if there be not the very same trauth, in one article, yt is in a another,
it must needs follow, that there is not the same christ in one article, that is
in a another / but in every article a diverse christ, so that there be so many
christ's, as there be artycles: wherefore, because the falshed of these
conclusyons, is not only to odyble to be heard, but also to plain to be
douted in. The trauth therefore, of the resurrection, must needs be (as it is in
deed) the very same, all one, and none other, but even the very trauth of the
ascension. And so it is likewise to be said, and understand, of each article
from one to a another, thorough all the hole faith. Therefore when the trauthe
(as I have plainly showed the) is no more in the hole faith, then in the lest
part of it / nor no less, in the leest part, then in all the hole to gyther:
nor none other, in one part, then in any of ye other. To this it must needs
come, that the hole trauth, of the hole faith, is in each and every syngulare
part of it / no more, no less, none other, but without any dyfference, even
the very same. wherefore because it is so, and can in deed, none other wise be:
this is thereof a conclusyo^ inevitable / that who so ever denies any article
of the faith (as every heretyke does one or other at leest) he denies utterly
the hole trauth of all together: for who so ever denies a part of that, which
has no parts, denies in deed all the hole, because the very same, which
seems a part, is all the hole And such is the trauth of the faith which (all
though it be nothing so) yet seems to have parts, and all by the reason of ye
dyuersyte of things, wherein it is: that is to say, by the reason that the
faith is divided into diverse distyncte artycles, wherein the trauth of it is.
And yt is therefore ye cause why it is thought, (of such as understand it not)
that the trauth it self (which is indiuisyble) is also dyuyded and in parts
dystributed among them like wise, the which is utterly falls. Therefore fyrmely
still abides my saying, that all heretykes are deceived, not only in those
articles which they deny, but also in those which they grant and confess,
when it is surely so / that they deny ciene contrary and against their own
thynkyng, the very trauth of all together.


The.ix. chap
Hereti. Sir here have ye now declared a fair plain distynction, between
thartycles of the faith, and ye trauth that is in them. wherefore all though an
heretyke deny all ye hole trauth of ye faith, which ye say, is is every
article of it: yet he does not deny (as every man knows) all those artycles,
wherein it is.


Ca. I pray the what skyll that? when he does ones deny and take away, the
trauth of them all, without the which, what are they? And yet if thou look,
somewhat more narowly upon it / thou shall find, that he denies all them to,
like as he denies all their trauth.


He. who ca^ think that?


Ca. The same questyon thou myghtest ask, of many true things mo, as well as
of this.


He. why, how is it possible, for any man to believe, that when an heretyke,
does both say and think, that christ rose from death to life: he does deny
that article, and so of other like wise?


Ca. Thou do all way swymme above, and never dyue to the bottum. wherefore
thou see not what there is. For I pray ye, what other thing is it, for to
say of any article, that it is not true, then to say, there is no such thing?
Therefore when all the articles of ye faith does so cleue to their trauth, that
the one can not be, without the other: and also when the hole trauth of them
all, is in every one of them syngularly / it must needs follow, yt when he
denies any one of them, he denies them all / because in that one he denies
al their trauth. with out the which* it is not possible, that any one of them
should be.


He. yet all men knows, he will say, and utterly so think, that they be all
true: that part only except wherein he does not believe.


Ca. I maruayle greatly, that thou wylt yet (as I told yt before) any thing
stycke, upon his saying, or thinking other? when he will always say, that he
is as trewly in ye faith as any other man is, and utterly no heretyke at all /
nor no man can make him, so much as think the contrary: yet every man knows,
he is deceived clearly. Therefore never pass upon the saying, or thinking
other, of such a one.


He. In deed sir no more I do not, so much as I do, upon other men's, which be
no heretykes. For also they, do utterly think, that no heretyke does deny the
hole faith / nor yet any more of it, but even those points, wherein he does
dyrectely err, and dyffer from other faithful people: that is to say, they
think, he erreth in no more, but in those parts only, wherein he ought to be
co^ dempned, for an heretyke.


Ca. who be they that so think? any other but such, as are not able to
dyscerne the thing? or any other but such as judges more, as who say, by
guess, then by any order of reason, whereof little skyll they can? far it is a
sonder, to judge things, as they seem. And to judge them, as they be in deed,
which few in respect can do / specially when they be somewhat dark as this
is. Therefore what is the judgment or opyniyn of such, to be pondered in this
case?


The.x. chap.
Hereticus. Sir will ye believe me?


Ca. what is the matter?


He. Now in good faith, it will not synke in my head, for all this / that an
heretyke does deny those articles, which he does openly grant and confess,
and more over, utterly believe and think therein as he says to,


Ca. what not yet?


He. No trewly.


Ca. Then I suppose thy wit be not so good, as I took it for.


He. if it be not, I must take it in good worth. I will make it no better the^
it is.


Ca. well, I conjecture what stands in thy light, all this while.


He. Sir then I would it were taken away.


Ca. Thou shall se me go nere it by and by. Thou do not know (I perceive)
that a thing is denied, two manner of ways, dyrectely, and indyrectely: that
is to say by mean, and imedyately / by the reason whereof, a thing may seem
sometime, to be granted, when it is denied / as it does now in this case. For
by the way of ensample. One Fotyne an heretic in time past, semyd to confess
christ dyrectely, when he did so say and none other wise think. But yet he
did utterly deny the same indyrectely, when he did both say and think that
he was not very good for none other is christ, but one person, god and man
joined together. Therefore if he were not god, in very deed he were not christ.
wherefore when he denied him dyrectely to be god / he did utterly deny him
indyrectely, to be christ: that is to say, he did therein deny him to be
christ, by mean / the which is none other, but so to say, or speak such
things of him. whereof it must needs follow, that he can not be christ.
wherefore, if christ be denied, whether it be dyrectely, or indyrectely, it is
no matter, when all comes to one, before him, that can plainly perceive, and
se it / and yt is always god at least, all though there were no man else, that
could, as the most part in deed can not. Therefore as the Fotyns denied
christ to be very god. So the Maniches denied him to be very man. wherein they
both, denied him to be very christ, all though not directely: that is to say,
all though they both said and thought the contrary. But what for that / when
of each, of their sayenges, no christ must needs follow? For like as he is not
christ, if he be not very god / so he is not christ another, if he be not very
man. when christ is (as I said) none other, but one syngular parson, of both
god and man joined together. wherefore, they denied in deed, ye very same
thing, which they seemed both to grant. And did not those, which denied
christ to be a very man, deny therein, his very natiuite, deny therein, his
very resurrection, deny therein, his very ascension? what if they did not
think it? what is all that, to the purpose: which of those artycles, could be
true, if christ were not a very man? for he that denies one article, all
though with his word, and also thought, he grant an other / yet in very deed
for all that, he does deny them both together, the tone directely, and the
the other indyrectely, which makes no dyfference in the conclusyo^. For as sure
is the tone as the the other* for all though he say, and more over so think, the
tone to be true (as it is in deed) yet when the trauth of the same, is also in
the the other, which he directely denies. Clear it is, that he denies the same
to, which he seems and also weneth him self to grant: when he denies the
very trauth of it in the the other. For the thing can never abide, where the
trauth of it is denied. Therefore (as thou may now, with half an eye perceive
(it can not follow / that an heretyke has in deed, any part of the faith: other
because he does directely confess and think, very many artycles thereof to be
true, (for he does no less both say and think of that point, wherein he does
err) nor yet because the most part of true christen people, does not thynk
him to err, in any more then he does dyrectely deny. For farther then that,
little do they perceive, or consider. what must needs follow, they syldome
look after / and specially in such things. beyond the senses, few of them
does reche: any secrets of nature, they are skant able to touch. what place
therefore, can their judgment have, in things that be supernatural? wherefore,
what so ever he, or they, do say or herein thynk / or how so ever to any of
them both, it does seem and appear / take this nevertheless, for a sure
conclusyon / yt every heretyke (all though it be a thing to him self
incredyble) is, for all that, no less then out of the hole faith of christ:
that is to say, out of it, at least in part, before all men / and out of it
altogyther, at lest, before almighty god: before whom, every thing does
appear, not as it seems, but as it is utterly in deed.


The.xi. chap.
Hereti. Sir will ye now se, what of all this must needs follow?


Ca. Very gladly.


He. There can no more of the faith be denied, but all together.


Ca. Surely that is a true tale.


He. And ye say that he, which denies directely, but one article, does therein
deny all the rest.


Ca. That is my saying in deed.


He. How many festely thereof does it follow, that he which denies directly
but one article / and he which denies them directely altogyther, be both like
evil.


Ca. First my friend what inconueniens fyndest thou therein, all though it
should so follow? or what impedement should it be, to any thing yt I have said /
if they were both, as thou say, like evil in deed?


He. Then your conclusyon could not be true.


Ca. why so?


He. Because, such a falsyte, can never follow, of any true saying,


Ca. what falsyte?


He. I told ye before, that he which denies but one article / and he, which
dyrectely denies them all, should be both like evil.


Ca. And is yt false? There is no questyon thereof.


Ca. Then the tone of them is wors then ye the other.


He. who knows not that?


Ca. And which of them therefore, is the worste, say thou?


He. ye need not ask me / for doutles ye can tell as well as I.


Ca. yet would I said here it of the.


He. Marry sir if ye will needs, he yt dyrectely denies all thartycles, must
needs be much wors then he, which denies dyrectely but one of them.


Ca. I thought even as much before. Thou fyndest many fautes with my
conclusyons (which though I say it, be inuyncible) but a man may sone se,
what thine be. For where as it were not again any thing, yt I have said* all
though they were both, of an equal evil, yet so myche thou art wide of the
mark, that he is far, the worst of them both, which thou thynkest utterly,
to be lest evil.


He. what he that denies dyrectely but one article, wors then he, that denies
them all?


Ca. ye, never dout therein.


He. Nay sir no more I will not ye may be sure, nor yet believe it another: for
thereto will I never agree.


Ca. Thou can not tell, what thou shall know hereafter.


He. what so ever it be.


Ca. yet hear my mind there in, and then take it, as thou see cause.


He. Sir I may so do for your pleasure, wherewith I am content.


Ca. Then take heed what I shall say. The euylnesse of every heretyke, is other
to him self only or else to him self and other also.


He. That is plain.


Ca. Then first as touching other / there is no dout but he that denies but
one article, is a thousand fold wors, then the the other, which denies them all:
for how could his evil, that denies them all, hurt any mo but him self? if he
would, how should he be hard? I will not say, what good man, but what other
heretyke is there be side himself, that would abeyd the heryng of him? ye also
what good christen man, would not be moved with the better respect, to the good
keeping of his own faith, and with a more laud to god, for the conseruacyon
thereof, when he sees such a one, that has lost his, altogyther in every
point? so that other folk should by him, take rather good, then hurt. But the
the other, look how much it is less, that he denies: so many mo there be, that
does not perceive it: and the mo there be, that does not perceive it / the mo
be there with, the sooner deceived / and the sooner deceived, the mo be infected:
The mo that be infected, the more evil, al men knows it is. Beside this /
how has anyheresie be^ sowed multyplied, and increaced, so greatly among ye
people, as to many has been, but by him, which seemed to have, so much of the
faith, that he was long thought, to lack no whit of it / but yet he did for
all that / as the inenarrable evil, that followed thereof, more and more, did
plainly declare at length. But by him that denies directely all together /
there could never any such thing, be brought about. For such a one (as I
said) no man would hear / byleued therefore, how could he be? if he could not
be byleued / no man by him, could be deceived / if no man could be, by him
deceived: clear it is, that his evil, could hurt no mo but him self. which
therefore of them both, is worst, to other men. I think it needs no forther
declaracyon.


The.xii. chap.
Here. Sir thereof, no man douteth. For there is no questyo^ herin, which of
them both, is worst to other men. But all the matter lies in this point, which
of them both is worst to him self / and that I hold utterly (as all men does)
to be he, which denies directly all together.


Ca. And I the contrary.


He. Surely there at I maruayle much.


Ca. ye you shall maruayle at it, perchance never a whit anon, and therefore
take heed what I say: if every evil be (as it is in deed) so much wors to ye
hauer, as it is of lo^gar co^tineau^ce: then wors is the faut of him, that
directely denies but one secret article, then is his, which denies the^ all.
For how little while, should he continue, ye denies them all, over the other
should? all though ye people did not tere him to pecys, as i^ ded they would, if
he were not shortly ride, by some other mean. Forther more if every evil, be
so much less daynger, to ye hauer, as it has in it, a greater occasyon of
amendme^t. Then wors is the evil of him, eue^ to him self, that denies
dyrectely but one article, then is his, which denies the^ all: for he yt
denies the^ all / has by the reason thereof, when he perceyueth him self
therein, clean to varye and dyssent in every point / from all ye hole multitude,
of christian people, a wonders great accasyon, to reuolue well the matter in his
mind, and hyely to consider, that very wisdom, would him therein, rather in
any wise, to mystrute himself, then all them / and so to return again: where
the the other by the reason, not only, that he semyth (at lest to him self) to
agree with ye multitude, in so many points, as causes him therefore to think,
that he lacks none. But also by the reason that he fyndeth often times,
diverse, of his own opinion, who almost compellyth him, more styfly to
persyste, and put therein no manner of dout / has for these causes, not only no
such, but, as who say, none occasyon at all, of his amendment / but rather
the contrary. Beside all this: no man's euylnesse can hurt another, but yt it
does forther hurt himself also in the same / but the euylnes of him that
dyrectely denies but one article or two, hurts sometime many thousands mo /
it must therefore needs follow, that his evil, is even to him self, so much
wors then is his, which directely denies them all (whereby he hurted no man
else) except thou wylt say, that it is lest evil to the workers, which does
most myscheyfe.


The.xiii. chap.
Hereticus Sir I pray you this, he that directely denies all thartycles,
perchance is even as wyllyng to infect as many mo, as the the other does in deed
/ all though he can not so bring it to pass, because, as ye said, there is no
man, that will believe him, nor so much as hear him This therefore supposed,
what dyfference, if it were so, is there between them than.


Ca. Even as much as is between the willing of an evil, and the perfourmans
of ye same. The which thou may perceive thy self to be sumwhat, or else
were it no profit, to withdraw an evil will, before it comes to theffect.
Therefore also this way, is he that directely denied but part, wors then he,
that denies all. when he has his evil, with the defyred effect of the same /
and the the other has it not: for wors always is he, which has an evil will,
and also a power beside, to perform the same (by the reason whereof theffect
never failed) Then is he that has but an evil will only lacking a power to
perform it withal / for the which theffecte can never come to pass.


He. well sir, let it so be for that point, yet what if he, that denies
directely but one article hurt (as the the other does) no mo therewith but him
self? Then must he that directely denies all together, needs be wors then he.


Ca. Nay not so another.


He. what speak ye of it / it is not possible to be otherwise. For when they be
both, like in will and also in deed toward other men utterly toward them
self, he that directly denies all, must needs differ in evil, from the
the other which directly denies but part, and be far wors then he.


Ca. yet thou art ones again deceived. For the uttermost, that thou can make
of it that way, ca^ be no more but this, that they should be both equal and
like evil. And you shall not bring all that about another, by that time thou
have followed and tried thy case, thorouly to the end.


He. That were a strange thing to me.


Ca. Never the less so strange it is. For what forsyth it, all though they
dyscorde sumewhat in words, when they do utterly agree in deed / that is to
say: in the very conclusyon it self? what dyfferth it, to deny, directely and
distynctely, christ's natiuyte, his death, his resurrection, his ascentio^, and
so forth / and to deny directly no more but this, that he was very man (as ye
Manychees did) whereof it must needs follow, that none of those artycles could
be true: comes it not therefore all to one? or is not the tone as evil as
the the other? for all though he that directely denies every article, denies
christ, himself, and can therein deny no more. yet he that denies directely
but one of them (as I told the before) denies him also, and can therein deny
no less. And what can thou make of it, when christ is denied, but that he
is denied? whether it be therefore, in this article or in that, in one, or in
two, in two or in three / in mo or in less / in all or in part / it is no
matter, when there is no dyfference, in the final conclusyon but all one. For
if one kill a man with one strype. An other likewise an other, with such ten
strypes, what dyfference does it make in the end when it is death at the first,
as well as at last? And even so, if one deny christ, in one article, an other
in two, the third in three, and so forth what matter is it? or what does it
dyffer as touching the end, when there is as much denied in the first as there
is in the last, or in all the rest? Therefore all though they be both, like in
mind / and also in deed, toward other men. yet will it not follow, that he,
which directly denies all thartycles, is any wors then the the other: but in very
deed ye the other is yet even to himself, much wors then he. when his evil (as I
declared on to the before) is of a more quiet and longar contynuau^ce. And has
much less, ye all most none occasion at all, of amendeme^t, but wonders much
every way to ye contrary over the the other has.


The.xiiii. chap.
Hereti. YEt will I not so give it over, for all this. For the oftener yt
christ is denied ye more wyckednes I am sure it is. And he that denies him in
many artycles, denies him so many times mo, then does he, which denies him
but in one. wherefore, he that denies him in most artycles, must needs be
wors then the other.


Ca. That follows not another. For he that kylleth a man with xx. death strokes.
yet he kylleth him not lykwyse.xx. times / but in very deed, no more but even
ons. And as myche does he that kylleth him, at one stroke: so he that denies
christ in.xx. articles, denies him not.xx. times because of that / but utterly
even very ons in deed. And no less does he, that denies him as I told the
before / but in one article: for a thing is not always, so many diverse times
denied, as the negation of it, is vocally spoken and expressed. The voice
whereby the negacyon is showed forth, is not ye very negacyon it self / but
only a mean to show it by. For the negacyon it self, when the voice is
cessed and done, abides still within, all one and the very same, that it was
even then and also before. Therefore ye denieng of christ in.xx. artycles, ca^
no more make him.xx. times denied, then even one thing xx. times rehearsed /
or.xx. diverse ways expressed, does make it.xx. things, nor no more then.xx.
death strokes in one man, does make it xx. murders. For when christ is ons
denied in one article / how many so ever be denied of the^, afterward beside,
they be but so many showynges or so many rehersals of the same, and not so many
syngular denyenges of christ: as when one word is expressed and rehearsed,
again and again / the same again and again, does not sygnyfye an other
word and an other, but all way the same and the same, and none other.
Therefore the word is not diverse, but within it still remains one, another
more nor less nor none other, all though it be diverse times or never so often
rehearsed. There is in deed diuersyte in the rehersall, but yet so is there not
in the word, which is rehersyd. And even likewise, the negacyon and denyenge
of christ, is not diverse in it self, all though it be showed or as who say
often expressed in diverse and many articles. For nevertheless it remains
still in ye very same symplicyte, as when it is showed but in one alone: for
when the negacion of a thing, does consyst in the mind / and the voice but an
instrument to show it with all, and is not in deed the negacyo^ it self:
clear it is, that then the thing can never be twyse denied, except it be ons
at leest granted between: as thus / if one should deny the to be a true man,
so might he do, and speak never a word / for even so he does, when he does
ons, but so think. Therefore whether he do express it.xx. times, or never a
ons. This negacion of thy trauth is yet nevertheless all one in him / and can
not be trewly said, that he denies thy trauth any more or les, but even ons,
whether he do never so often, or never a whyt express it. For when he has ons
denied it, yt is to say, when he has ons thought the no true man, doutles that
negacyon (like as a dedly sin on repented) whether he sleep or wake whether
he think or think not of it / whether he show it or show it not, is yet all
the while in him no mo, no less, nor none other, but even the very same one
still, as it was at the first / and can never be justly said, to be twain, or
twyse made till he him self* as who say, cut it in twain, by grauntyng thy
trauth, that is to say, by thynkyng the a true man ons again, and then after
that, deny it as he did before. But the^, in very ded it may be trewly said,
that he has twyse denied thy trauth, or else not: for so many times does he
think the no true man, as he does between each time, think the contrary: but
if he never think the contrary, then is all that, how long so ever it
endures, but even one thought, and one negacyon of thy trauth. Therefore all
that while, how often so ever he do express it, or how dyuersly so ever he
does rehearse it, all is but the showynge, of a thing so long denied / and not
of a thing so often, or many times denied. For if I should say this day / thou
art no true man, and the same again to morrow, and also the next day after /
never thynkyng the contrary between: I should not therein three times deny thy
trauth / but I should therein three times show, yt I deny it: that is to say, I
should show thryes, that I deny it. As one sentence may be showed or rehearsed
thryes, yet the same thryes showyng or thryes rehersyng, does not make it three
sentences. For it is two things to show the.xx. times what I deny: and to
deny xx. times, that I show the, because in the tone, there is.xx. negacyons,
and in the the other, there is but one. It shall not be therefore again this, that
most men do think, every thing, to be so often denied, as they hear the
negacyon thereof, expressed and represented to their ears: for therein consider
not they, whether it does still continue and abide all one, as well when it is
not expressed and showed, but kept before and after within / as when it is
most manyfestely and openly disclosed. It is not also again this another, Luc.
22
that saint Peter thryes denied christ: because that negacyo^ was of an other
kind, then this is / for of that could never follow no christ, as it must needs
do of this. That was in deed but feigned, resting in words only, and not in
the mind. For all though it seemed and so be said, (as right well it may) yt
he denied christ: yet may it be trewely sumway said the contrary: for he
denied but yt he knew him. It is two things, for me to deny the, that is to
say, to deny what thou art, and to deny, that I know the. No heretyke does
deny that he knows christ (for all the maynye of them seems to confess him
and no men in manner so myche) but for all yt, they do in deed deny what he is,
which is ten times wors. Howbeit saint Peter denied but that he knew him, the
which was but a feigned negacyon / and did only consyst in words: for it was
otherwise in his mind / because he did both think and know, that he knew
him / and did for fere but feign the contrary. wherefore all such feigned
negacyons which has their beynges not in mind / but only in words, may
trewely be said all way, to be so many, as they be sundry times rehearsed and
spoken, But so may not this heretical negacyon yt we now speak of / which
does rest in the mind only, much more subtylly, much more secretly, and
therefore a thousandfolde more dayngerously, then is possible, for the
ineloquyble infyrmyte of the possessours and hauers thereof to perceive, or so
much as think for their own parts. Now therefore, all this well considered, it
is not hard to perceive, that the denyenge of christ in one article, is
(without any manner of intermyssyon) as contyne wall therein: as it is in.xx.
articles mo, or in them all / and what so ever is contyne wall, is another mo
nor fewer / another oftener, nor syldomer, but utterly all one. wherefore clean
again thyn opinion, no oftener does he deny christ, which dyrectely denies
him in all tharticles, then does he, which directely denied him but in one
alone. what dyfference therefore (because this will not serve) can thou make
else between them, but that the tone is even yet this way as evil, as is ye
the other, whom thou thynkest to be much wors.


The.xv. chap.
Hereti. Sir, be you not yet at a point?


Ca. why do thou ask.


He. I would feign have some words with you.


Ca. I pray the a good felowshyppe, spare not, say what thou list.


He. Surely then will I say, that ye shall never avoid.


Ca. In deed?


He. ye shall se.


Ca. Go to than.


He. He that denies all thartycles, does deny christ dyrectely, that is to
say, with aperte words expressly. But much wors is it, so to do, then to
deny him but indyrectely, as he does, which denies but one article. wherefore
it must of necessyte follow, yt he which denies all the articles, is myche
wors, then the other which denies but one.


Ca. Is it this, which can not be avoided?


He. I think ye shall so find it.


Ca. First if I will not admytte this, that it is wors to deny christ
directely, then indyrectely. How wylt thou prove it?


He. That is sone done, by this reason. The comune judgment of all men, does
take the denyenge of christ dyrectely, to be myche wors then the the other. And
sure it is, that the comune judgment of all men, can never be false. wherefore
the denyenge of christ dyrectely, must needs be wors then the other. Again if
need be this way. The more evil, does ever move the comune dysposytion of all
men, ye more grievously to punysshe it. But the denieng of christ directely
moves all men, more grievously to punyshe it, then the the other. wherefore the
the other is not so evil as it is.


Ca. Have thou said.


He. ye sir, and that well I suppose.


Ca. That is enough to the. All though it be nothing so / as it shall sone
appear. For it is, all most with one word, clean overthrown all to gyther.


Hereti. Trow ye so sir?


Ca. why does not the hoole pyth of all thy saying only rest in this, that
the comune judgment of all men, do take the denyenge of christ directely, to
be much wors then the other? But how falls is that, when the most part, of all
men pondereth it no fault at all? For who does any thing regard this matter,
but christen men only, which be not all men, nor yet (as it is said) the
most part another. The comune judgment of all men, were in deed a good
princyple to reason by, where it is trewely taken and may have place Then is
all chryste^ people not only in a falls judgment (because they take him so) but
also in a sinful purpose evermore, because they be always, wyllyng to punyshe
him, more then the the other. But so evil to judge of al christen people, were a
great wyckednes. wherefore there is no dout, but that he is in deed, much wors
the^ the other.


Ca. A syrre, thou styckest well to it, what so ever the trauth be.


He. Thynk you sir, that the trauth is in any other wise then I say?


Ca. ye thou may be sure thereof: for thou go about to prove by their
punyshmentes, what the degrees of their euyls be. when thou sholdest rather
clean contrary, by the degrees of their euyls prove, what the dyfference of
their punysshementes ought to be. But nevertheless, what more punyshement
see thou prepared, for the tone then the the other?


He. Sir all though that peradventure, be but because the case has not be
seen, that any such as the tone of them is, has be found or hard of: yet if
it should fortune so to come to pass. I think men would then prepare and
ordain a more grievous pain for him, then for the the other. And that would they
never do, if they thought him no wors, then ye the other is.


Ca. well, suppose the same. yet is there (I pray the) any other cause why?
but that they do apertely perceive, his hole evil all together, from the first,
as who say, to the last. And incomparyson thereof, almost nothing at all of
the tothers? for without fail, if they saw the hole evil of the tone, so open
and manifest, as they do of the the other: there is no dout but that they would
then, punysshe most, whom thou thynkest utterly lest: for in the tone, they
would surely venge the quarrel of christ / and lekewyse in the the other not
only yt, but also the quarrel of their neighbors to / of whom sometime he
sends so many to hell. But all yt not withstandyng while men does judge, for
the most part, rather by guess (as I said) then by very knowledge, and more
after as things does apere, then as they be in deed. Thou may not consider
and esteem, the qualytees and degrees of euyls, after the punyshementes,
received at their hands. Specially, when thou see many times, as much
mynistred for the stealyng of an horse, as for kylling of a man. Howbeit if thou
wylt needs perpende and way ye degrees of euyls after there punyshmentes
prepared for them, it must then be after those which are prepared of god (who
shall give to every man after his works) and not after those, Mat. 1
which are mynystred or ordained of men.


He. Sir it is now by your own saying come even to the point (as I said right
now) that if he which directely denies every article, be no wors then is the
the other, which denies but one. Plain it is then that all christen people be
in a contynewall iniquite, because they be allwaye willing and ready, to
punyshe him more then ye the other.


Ca. That will not follow, for they may justly punyshe the tone, more grievously,
then the the other. All though another of them both be any wors then other.


He. How so?


Ca. Is there any thing more worthy hell, then the denyeng of christ.


He. No, that is clear.


Ca. Then does hell plainly testyfye that there can be no punyshement in this
world, suffycyent for any of them both, when they be both denyers of christ.
And therefore of all men most worthy of hell, which far excedyth all other
paynee. wherefore what iniquyte or iniustyce ca^ it be, that men would always
more bytterly punysh the tone then the the other, when they are never able to
mynyster so much to him, whom in offendyng, thou thynkest most: as is very
dew to ye the other, whom in like manner thou thynkest lest. Therefore so long as
the punishment, does not excede the quantyte of the fault, all men knows
that utterly wrong, can it be none. But full well I wot, what trowblethe thy
cogytacyon herein. Thou do think, that if they be both like evil, the
tone has wrong, if he be punyshed any more then the the other when clean
contrary, better thou myghtest reken that the the other has rather wrong, if he
be not punyshed, as much as he / because none of them both, can have in deed,
so much as his evil, does dewly require. Therefore while thou fyndest no
fault, in the lesser punishment of the tone. And while I have proved no wrong,
in ye more punishment of the the other / yet still it stands for all yt thou
have hitherto said, that they be both, even to the^ self one at lest, as
evil as an other.


The.xvii. chap.
He. NAy sir not so. For yet yt must I needs deny.


Ca. wherefore


He. I suppose ye have not so sone forgotten, what I said unto you, eue^
almost, but right now.


Ca. what was that?


He. Such as may not be slypt over after this manner.


Ca. Let me ones then here it again.


He. with a good will. For if ye be remembered, it was even this. He that denies
al tharticles, denies christ directely, that is to say, with apert words
expressly. But much wors is it, so to do then to deny him indirectely or
conseque^tely, as he does, which denies directely but one article. wherefore it
must of necessite follow, that he which denies all thartycles, is myche wors,
then the the other, which denies directely but one.


Ca. Is this all the matter?


He. Is it not enough?


Ca. why let me hear, how thou can first prove, (as I said) that it is wors,
to deny christ directely then indirectely.


He. Marry sir it is more plain then can need any probacyon: for you said even
now your self, that no man would abide the herynge of him, that would so do.
And therefore when it aperyth of your own words, that he is far more odible
to every man, then the the other is / and that could never be, but by the reason
that his evil does much more astonyshe vex and offend their cogitacyon, then
the tothers does: it must thereof clearly follow, that he is much wors then ye
the other is.


Ca. All (as I perceive) that moves yt this to think, is no more but because
men's consyderacyon does abhor, more him then the the other. as good reason it
is, that it should so be, and yet in deed, is the the other, as evil as he. For
man's mind is grieved and troubled two manner of ways, one with the thing it
self: and an other with the man^er or cyrcumstaunce of the same. The manner
also, or the cyrcu^staunce of it, does sometime make the thing to be wors in
deed, then it is of it self, and therefore the more odyble to / and sometime it
makes it more odyble, and yet never the wors in deed, for all that: as after
this ensample, it shall more plainly appear. Murder thou know, is of it self
a thing, which gretely does offend and abhor the mind of men / but yet if
one kill a man suddenly, ere he beware of him, coming upon him preuelye by
stelth, or else train him with some falls flateryng promyses, and thereby
conuaye him, to some dayngerous place or company, where he is sure he shall
not schape him, or by any such other means, as he can make no manner of
shyfte, to soccur, help, or defend him self. This manner or circumstaunce,
does make ye murder much wors in deed, and therefore myche the more odyble to /
then if he had given him some warning or lybertye to shyfte for him self:
that is to say, that if he had kylde him (as they call it) manfully / and not
so like a coward and traytorously. Again also for the the other part / if thou
saw one kill a man before thy face / and then heard tell of an other, which
also did the same like wise in an other place / thy mind should much more
abhore the tone then the the other / and yet is there none of them both any wors
then other: therefore all that, ryseth by the reason of thonely presence of the
tone done in thy syghte, which makes a dyfference bytwen them, in thine
estymacyon / and yet is there none between them in deed. Also if thou saw
one stryke and hurt a man / and even then, an other likewise an other / whereof
the tone dies by and by / and the the other half a year after: The death of the
first, should much more grievously touch, and trouble thy mind, then should
the the other, and therefore move the to take it wors, all though there be in the
thing no such difference, nor cause why, of it self. But so comes it to
pass, by the present suddenness, of the tone, which is not in the the other,
whose propertye is always to put men (specially in odyble things) rather in a
passion then in a just judgment: by the reason whereof they do take, that
evil effect which follows his cause immedyately, and so touches their
cogytacyo^s at the first, to be much wors then the the other of the same degree,
which follows, as who say, by leysour, crepyng little and little in to their
knowledge at last: for the presence, and also the suddenness, of every grievous
evil, is of such properte, as does always cause it to seem, and so therefore
to be judged and taken, wors then when it is absent and farther of, or when it
comes to knowledge leysourly (as I said) by mean at length. And yet is the
thing it self all one: for if ye death of him, which dies half a year after,
might come with the cause thereof, so presentely and so suddenly to thy
knowledge, as the death of him does, which dies by and by, doutles thou sholdest
then take the last as grievously as the first, and none other wise be mouyd
with the tone then the the other, but indyfferently with them both / as thou art
now, while I, as it were thereof in deed, tell the the tale: for thou art I am
sure, no more moved now with the tone then the the other / and all because, they
be both from, or to thy cogitacyon, of like dystau^ce. All this therefore, well
perpended and considered. Even myche after the same manner, is the denyenge of
christ dyrectely, and the denyeng of him indirectly or consequently: which be
taken (in deed as thou say) the tone far wors then the the other, not because
it is so, but because of a certain manner of cyrcu^staunce, which causes it
but only to seem so: for when I here any one article denied (whereof it does
(as I said) of necessyte always follow, that christ is denied in the same) if my
cogytacyon could then, arreche and touch therein, the very same occult and
secret denyenge of christ, so clerly and so manyfestly, so quyckely and so
presently, as it can the the other, when he is at yt first directely and
expressly denied. Doutles I should then, take it as grievously, as odybely, and
judge it justly even as evil, as I do, when I hear him denied dyrectly with
expressed words. But now by the reason that my consyderacyon, before it can
this way, come finally to ye very thing in deed, must first make therein a
large progressyon, and (as it were) a long yourney to go. First to consider
tharticle denied / and then that the trauth of christ is denied in ye same.
Tyrdely, that christ and his trauth, are both our. Finally that it must thereof
needs follow, that he therein is denied him self / by the reason (I say) that my
consyderacyon, with this manner of mocyon and labor, half (as who say) weryed
and fatygate is (as it were) not so actyue and lustye, but more week, dull, and
unapt, to receive view and judge, the thing at length in the end, then it would
have been, if it had met, in manner, freshly withal, at the first beginning. It
does therefore much take the matter there after / and all because it is not this
way, so easy and reddy to come by, as it is the the other: for as men judge
always, those pains which be present, to be much wors, then those in every
degree, of as much grefe, or the very same in deed, when they be absent and
farther of. Even so do they judge that evil, which is directely expressed, to
be wors, then an other in every condicyon of the same degree, or the very same
it self, when it occupyeth the place of a consequent, that is to say, when it
is not directely expressed, but left to follow, and given of necessyte to be
understand: for then it is fro man's cogitacyo^, as it were a great way, and
far of, because it sounds not in the earys so presently and apertly, as
when it is directely expressed at the first. And therefore the mind can not so
take or touch it, until it may, by a dew cource of things, from one to an
other ordinatly, come to it at length. By the reason whereof it begins so
leysourly to appear to the mind a far of at ye first, and then after nere
and nere / that when it comes, it brings theyrwith, no manner of sudde^nesse,
which can cause therein any great perturbans or astonyshement, whose propertye
is always to gender diuersyte of judgment. Therefore this indyrect and
consequent denyenge of christ (which is in every syngular article) does also
lie, or behave it self to a man's co^syderacion, much as does a visyble thing
to his eye, sumwhat farther of, then is the common dew distau^ce of discernynge
thereof / or else, being in a light, sumwhat more scant and obscure, then is apt
for most men to perceive it by. For the which, it is seen, of some more, some
less, and of some never a dele. And therefore it does not draw men's judgment
thereof, so perfytly unto it, nor show it self unto them so clearly / as if it
stood nere, or in a more pure light. And even very such like is a consequens,
whereof every man's cogytacyon is not like capax / but some more, some less, and
some nothing at all, or very little: and all, by the reason it lies somewhat
beyond, ye comune journey of most men's consyderacyon / because it comes not
before in the face of the matter / but as who say, in the back side of it,
far, as it were behind, and long after. For the which, it does not so
vehemently move the mind that way, as it does the the other. And therefore men
take it not so evil; nor are so much offended withal. But if a man's
cogitacyon were of such abylyte, that it could as clearly, as perfytely, and
as swetly, ye rather as presently touch and take a consequent, that is to say,
that thing, which of an other must needs follow, (and that perchance long
after) as if it were dyrectely expressed with apert words at the first. There
is no dout, but then he that denies christ (as every heretyke does) but
consequently, should sone appear even as evil, as he, which denies him with
apert words directely: for dyfference bytwen them is there none, but only
this if any be. That the very same, which is at the first, with the tone, is
even also at the last with ye the other: for where as the words of the tone,
shows the denyeng of christ at the first / even so does the words of the
the other, show the very same, at yt last. And yt thou myghtest clearly know that
there is none other dyfference between them, but only thynsuffycyence of man's
capacyte, which is not able to arreche them both like. Thou shall not deny
me this but every thing is utterly none, otherwise the^ god does know if: and
this is also sure, that there can be no consequence or following of any thing,
in his knowledge: for what so ever is consequent and following to us, is without
fail before him no less appare^t but also as present, not only as that is,
whereof it does follow / but also as if it self were directely expressed at the
first, or as any thing else, is or may be, most present and manifest unto us.
wherein the power and concept of our minds, does (as I have largely declared)
very gretely fail, and is far of. Therefore whether christ be denied
directely or consequently, when there is, even here among us, none other
dyfference between them, but only this / that the tone, is so apers open and
manifest, that it is, at the first perceived of any man. And yt the other so
close, secret, and dark, that it can not be perceived, even at length, but of
few men. How clear is it, that there is utterly in deed no difference between
them at all, before god? where there is nothing obscure, nothing occult,
nothing hyd, nothing consequent / but all bright, all open, all manifest, and
all even very present: wherefore to plane it is to be denied yet still (for any
thing that thou have objected to the contrary) that he which denies christ
consequently, that is to say he which denies directely but the least part of
the faith, is no less evil then he, which with expressed words, directely
denies christ him self and all together. when he does the same thing as
manyfestly before god, as yt the other does it before men / except thou say,
things be otherwise in deed, then god does se them before him, which evermore
judges (as saint Poule says) according to trauth.


The.xviii. chap.
Hereticus NO no sir I will not say so / but I will say this, that it is a gay
thing to dyspute alone. For then a man may all way at his pleasure conclude,
what so ever he list.


Ca. Thou shall not need so to say, for I have none otherwise concluded, but
that thou shall have audyence with leasoure enough, to say what thou can, if
thou have any thing left thereto.


He. yes I trow I have / and that enough to dyspache all this matter withal.


Ca. Nay I pray the none of that, for thou begylest me then in deed.


He. yet such am I sure it is.


Ca. what so ever it be, I would ones hear it.


He. Hear it? why sir think you (what so ever ye say) to make me yet believe,
that he which dyrectly denies but one article, is in every respect, as evil
as he, which directly denies, with open mouth as they say, christ him self,
and all together? Nay, nay, yet am I none of that sort, which can be led by
the ear, in a thing so manifest.


Ca. Now do I well perceive, thou begylest me in deed: for I had went
(according to thy first promise) yt thou would have followed reason.


He. what sir think you, yt I will not so do?


Ca. So it semyth when thou wylt needs, dissent from the things which I have
said, and show me no reason why.


He. yes I will show you good reason why, and that such as ye have not yet
hard hitherto.


Ca. Go to then let us have it / and make no more a do.


He. Sir this is well known to all men, that when one does a fault against
his will, it can never be so evil, as when it is wylfully done.


Ca. So it seems.


He. Nay it is so in deed.


Ca. Proceed then, tey not therewith the matter any longer.


He. He therefore, which denies christ in dyrectly or consequently / denies
him again his will (for as it appears many ways, there is no man more loath
to deny him then he is) but the the other which denies him with apert words
directly, denies him even very wylfully. wherefore it is not possible, but that
he must be wors then the the other, which denies him but consequently.


Ca. ye but I say country man, I do not perceive, that the tone denies him
any more wylfully, then the the other does.


He. what it is to plain.


Ca. Not to me, for I se not the contrary, but that he which denies him
consequently, does that him self does / even as wylfully, as the the other, does
that he does: for he that denies him directely / denies him no more wylfully,
then the the other does that same article, wherein he denies him consequently.


He. No marry sir I grant ye that / but yet, he is not ware, as the the other is
what is included, in his negacyon.


Ca. Aha, he is not ware. I wot now right well, what thou menest all this
while. Thou would I perceive say this, that a fault can never be so evil,
when it is done vnwars and ignorantly / as when it is done even ware and
wyttyngly.


He. Sir the same is even it, that I mean in deed.


Ca. Some thought, and therefore show me thy mind again, with the same terms,
and perchance I will satysfye yt much more plainly by the reason thereof.


He. That can not I believe.


Ca. Assaye.


He. That will I do: he yt denies christ but consequently, doutles denies
him vnwars and ignorantly: but he yt denies him with apert words directely,
denies him full ware and wyttyngly / wherefore how is it possible, but yt he,
of necessyte must needs be much wors, then the the other, which denies him but
consequently?


Ca. The second part of thy reason, is clean falls.


He. what is it?


Ca. Even as I tell the.


He. Then we have it, if he that does a fault wyttyngly, be no wors therein,
then he, which does it ignorantly.


Ca. what my friend I say not so. For that is plain enough to all men. But I
can not find any such thing in this matter, that we speak of.


He. why does not he which denies christ directly and expressly with apert
words, deny him even ware and wyttyngly?


Ca. No no, I wyste full well, all this while, wherein thou would be clean
deceived. For be thou right well assured, that there is no man in all this
world, that would deny christ, if he were ware what he is. For so ware is he
what christ is which denies him directely: as he is ware, what his hole
faith is, which denies all that directely. And so ware is he what his hole
faith is, which denies all that dyrectely, as he is ware what one article of
it is, which denies but yt alone directly: and that alone does he utterly not
know, nor so much as believe another. For sure it is that if he did, he would
not deny it / no more therefore does he the hole faith nor yet christ him
self, which denies him and it, directly all together: what warenesse or
wyttyngnesse therefore, is there here, more in the tone then the the other? Also
there can no man be an heretyke, but because he denies at least some one
article of the faith. And that would he never do, but because he byleueth
utterly that it is none, whereof it follows clearly, that he would never deny
it, if he did know that it were one. For very much more able, is the knowledge
then the believe of any thing, to let and withstand the denyenge of it.
Therefore look what lack, both of faith and knowledge, he has in one article,
which diectly denies but it alone. Even yt very same has he in both, which
denies twain. And also in each of them likewise has he, which does deny
three / and so forth after the same manner, from one to an other, till it come to
him, which directely denies christ and them all. Therefore when he that
directly denies christ and all his hole faith, has no more faith nor
knowledge of him or it, then has he, of that one article, which directly
denies but the same one a lone. what more warely or wyttyngly does the tone
then the the other, but even like ignorauntly both? And beside this, clearly to
knyt up the matter withal. The knowledge of any thing, is (as I said) myche
more able to let and restrain the denienge thereof, then is the faith or believe
of it. But you faith of christ (as it is well known) may be so great, that it
will surely cause even this life it self, with all the comodytees thereof, to
be clean lost and forsaken, rather then to deny him in any case. what would
therefore the very knowledge of him do, if a man had that? when yt draws, a
thousandfolde more love toward him, then all his faith, in the most perfyt
degree, is able to do. Moreover when the greatness of faith, is of it self
suffycyent and able, to houlde and keep, who so ever has it, from the denyeng
of christ in euere condycyon. And when it is sure also, that the very knowledge
of him, is thereto much more able then it is. How clearly does it follow thereof,
yt who so ever denies him directely never does it ware or wyttyngly? why
therefore do thou say, that he, which dyrectely denies but the least part
of the faith, is not so evil as he, which dyrectly denies chyrst himself and
all together, because although he denies consequently as much as the the other
does, yet he does it vnwars and ignorantly / and the the other ware and wyttyngly,
when there is no such matter or difference between them, as thou thy self can
now, I suppose, not chose but perceive? Therefore not withstanding this, or any
other thing else, which thou have hitherto said to ye contrary. I will yet say,
as I said at the first / yt as great is his evil, which directely denies but
the lest part of the faith / as his evil is, which directely denies christ
him self and all together. As great I say, not in this or that respect, but
utterly in every condycyon / and in diverse cases (as I have showed ye before)
also much wors, not only toward other, but also toward himself. This
dyfference bytwen them only except, that the contrary, fastly remains in the
gross and ignorant judgment of the multitude / the cause whereof I told the
before (as it is in deed) even to be this, that they do see openly, the hole
evil of the tone. And in comparyson thereof, obscurely, so small a part of the
the other / that some takes it more, some less, some very little, and some no
evil at all. what wonder therefore is it, all though ye hole clear trauth
thereof, be far away, from so great a dyuersyte of such a dark ignorance.


The.xix. chap.
Here. HAd I ben at the first so wise to have followed this comune proverb:
Principus obsta.


Ca. what understand thou latin?


He. ye sir somewhat so so.


Ca. Ah I am well apayed for a thing yt I know.


He. I pray you what is that?


Ca. Go forth make an end of thy tale thou art about / and thou shall know
here after.


He. Marry sir, had I ben, I say, so wise at the first beginning hereof, to
have followed this comune proverb, which byddeth a man always to resyste and
withstand the origynall causes of every inconuenyence, this thing had never
come to that point, it is ^ow at. For where as I was than, in deed not all
thing so cyrcu^spect to consider, what thereof at length would follow / as very
auydyous to hear, how you would handle (as me thought) so strange a matter. I
did much more slenderly then I neded, let slyppe and pass over, the very
ground of all together: by the reason whereof, it is now, to say the trauth,
through mine own neglygens, so far gone, that in good faith, I wot nere what
I may more say to it, in the case it is in, then I have done already / where
at the first, I could well have stayed and stopped it all together with ease.


Ca. Countreyman thou do not very well please me, with this manner of
communycacyon: for more do thou now seem, to confute and refell, all that I
have hitherto said with (as who say) this arrogant confession of thine own
simple and feigned neglygens. Then with all the objections, which thou have, or
art able, to make to the contrary: for thou, by this means in manner as who
say sklaunderst it, to be grounded upon a false pryncyple. whereof it must
needs follow, if it were so in deed, that it were but all void and nothing
worth: use therefore I pray the no more such manner: but if thou think the
princyple, whereof it does rise and justly follow, to be insuffycyent in any
point / show where the fault is, and make no more a do.


He. ye know sir it may not well stand with a man's honesty, clean to
overthrow, or greatly to disprayse, that he has seemed long to uphold, and
borne withal.


Ca. why, what menest thou by that?


He. Sir well ye wot, yt I have hitherto made objections again all those
things, which ye have said for the most part / your pryncyple except: but
that have I yet in manner said nothing again till even very now, that I tell
you what I could do: if it were not partly again mine honestye / because I
have seemed to bear withal so long.


Ca. what my friend, wylt thou be there still? have thou such a pretty cast with
ye, that when thou art dreuen to such a straight, as where thou canste no
farther, yet thou wylt leave ye matter in so great a suspycyon of error, that it
shall seem to be all falls / be it never so true. Nay nay, this euasyon is to
manifest and plain, to do the any service at this time. For thou have ben to
full of objections in every thing, that I have hitherto said, to make me now
believe, that thou were neglygent, in lettynge slyppe the pryncyple and ground
of all the hole matter, taking as who say no very good head to that: when thou
ought of all things in especyall thereof, to be most vigilant ware and
cyrcu^spect, as it did right well, even then appear, that (what so ever thou
now say) thou were in very ded: for more therein thou dydest not grant, then
the very inuyncyble strength of trauth, did even compel and dreue the to.
Therefore this being but a feigned excuse, while it is so, that thou have else (as
I perceive by thine own words) no more in deed herein to say / my counsel
utterly shall be this (according to thy first promise) well to content thy
self with reason, whereof (I dare well say) thou have herd herein so myche, yt
thou may rather blame me, for the superfluyte of many things mo then neded.
Then for the lack of any one, which of necessite might be required. wherefore,
somewhat from this matter, will I now to another / for the which I have desired
most chyefly to talk with the.


The.xx. chap.
Hereti. WHat so ever ye say, I suppose ye will not leave this matter thus.


Ca. wherefore not?


He. is not the cause, why any thing is done, more of estymacion, then the
thing it self, which is done for it?


Ca. That I grant.


He. I maruayle therefore greatly, that ye have declared unto me this matter so
largely / and would now thus leave it, showynge me no word why, or for what
purpose ye have hitherto brought it. when without that, it were but in manner,
as who say, half naked and little worth.


Ca. Now countreyman, I can ye very good thank it is surely well spoken. But
thou may se what it is, for the mind to be besyed, with many things at ones
/ by the reason whereof, it chau^ceth sometime, that memory leseth nothing more
sooner / then ye very which, it should keep nothing reddyer. Therefore syns
thou doste require (as reason does bind me to declare) why and wherefore, I
have showed the thus myche hitherto. Doutles there be causes twain / of the
which, one, in very deed is trauth. And the other without fayll is falshed.
For as touching the first / if I had found, any other then trauth, in any
thing that I have said / be thou well assured, I would never have spoken it:
yet yt not withstanding so myche had I not done for all that another / if I had
not thereto, ben greatly moved, by an exceeding and a wonders falshed. The which
in very deed is even this. The time is not yet far out of mind, when of all
euyls, that works man's destruction, there was none taken so grievous and
odyble, as in especyall heresye and treason / and of the twain, yet heresye
the worst. But now, treason abydyng in his old odibylyte still (as god forbede
but it should i^ deed) Heresye has found the means (how so ever it comes to
pass) so to have crept out of that evil fauorde garment of his dew hatred
(wherein it was right worthyly wrapped) and has ride it self thereof so clean
/ yt it is now taken, of some, to be in manner but a commune offense: again of
some, to be very small. And also of some to be none at all: ye and of some
(which is worst of all) to be very relygyon and holiness / in so much that
when diverse of such as be infected withal, are spoken of, rehearsed and noted
in copanyes and of one sort lamented and pytyed for such points as thereof they
have, so plain open and manifest, as in no case can be defended. yet tushe,
says an other sort, a tryfle, a small matter, well is he that has no fault:
the man is very sad sober and wise, for all that there can be no honester man
then he is. And so forth, in such manner, that where as they have not for it,
so myche as any gloss or color of defense / which for feate or shame, they
dare attempt to bring forth / yet so much, as to them is possible / they would
by this means, attenuate and qualyfye the matter so, yt they might swade men to
take it, at the lest very little, or nothing blame worthy atal. wherefore seeing
this word heresye, has / to say the trauth / among very many, against all
right and reason, lost his old proper, and worthylye, most hateful
signyficacyon. And now in the place thereof, has as falsely purchaysed an
other, which is of all things most desyderable, that is to say, the
following of christ / for doutles now a days, one is no sooner to note an
heretic but straight wey, their fails not of ynow, even therein noted him a
follower of christ / seeing therefore / I say / yt this word heresye, has
lost with many, his old sygnificacyon, so far unjustly. And has opteyned an
other as exceeding falsely / ye and both, to the great perdicion of very many.
I would to god therefore, some other word were now put in the stead thereof.
which might dyrectely sygnifie and show men, the self same thing at the
first. which it will surely led and draw, the dew and just order of reason,
to espy and find in it at the last / that is to say. I would to god such a
word were now put in the place of it / as might plainly sygnyfy, the very
denyeng of christ at the first. The which is not in it so obscure and dark /
but that without fail, an apt and a hole mind, may yet easily se and
perceive it at last. Therefore if this were so / there is no man. I think
verily, so crokedly cumberde with that cloud of dayngerous darkness, but
that it would, yet one way or other, some what fraye him, so rashely therein to
use himself, as many one does god knows to the great hurt* not only of them
self, but also of diverse other mo. wherefore that this blind falshed (to make
ye thing wonders light, being among all other, of most greatest weight)
should not be always to ye unknown (as I perceive it has been hitherto) so much
thereof I have disclosed as may (me think) be for the suffycyent. And to that
intent have I treated hereof so largely, and ben therein (I feere) somewhat
tedyous unto the. But even now therefore, will I to my pryncypall purpose
dyrectely.


The.xxi. chap.
Hereti. ALthough ye make me very desirous, ye and even think long to hear
it. yet is there one thing, which does not a little disquiete my mind.
whereof feign would I first, be somewhat eased if it might be.


Ca. what is the matter?


He. Sir now to be plain with you, without fail I have hitherto borne half a
grudge in my stomak against a certain thing, which ye spoke at our first
metynge.


Ca. I pray the what was that?


Here. Doutles a thing I may say to you, that touches the quycke.


Ca. Thou make me greatly muse thereat.


He. Not so much as ye make me, what should move you to speak it.


Ca. I pray the what is it?


He. Marry sir ye said that I am an heretyke.


Ca. I had no such words, to my knowledge.


Here. That is no matter, when ye said that ye would have asked me the
questyon, whether I were one or not, if it had not ben for this, that ye were
sure ye said, that I could not tell, because there is no heretyke that can
tell, or so myche as think, that him self is one.


Ca. And what of this?


He. what of this? does it not thereof plainly follow that I am one?


Ca. why then thou art one.


He. A will ye so sir? I say it must needs follow of your words, yt I am one.


Ca. And I say the^ thou art one in deed / for whyther it must needs follow of
my words, or whereof so ever beside / this is sure, if it must needs follow, it
must needs be so. And therefore by this, one thou art, make of it what thou wylt.


He. Tushe ye be dysposed to tryppe me now, in the manner of my speaking, when
ye know right well, my menynge is this, that it must needs follow of your
words, that you do take me for one.


Ca. O that I do take the for one? what of that I pray the? a great matter and
a grievous, as the world now goes. when there be many even proud and glad
of the name, rather then a shamed or dyscontented withal.


He. Sir I am none of that sort / and therefore it is to me, no small wonder,
that ye will thus take me, never herynge me speak before this time, nor yet now
nothing another syns we came first together, whereof ye might take any
reasonable occasion so to think in me. wherefore, if it be not to far out of
your way, from your purpose which ye have chyefly intended / I would gladly
know, what should move you, to be of this opynion.


Ca. It is no farther from my purpose, but even, I may say to the the very hye
way on to it: ye and more over it is, as who say, but even at the next door by
it. Therefore if thou wylt needs know why, that I do think the infected with
heresye. Dowtles it is (as I promised at ye first, plainly to tell the at the
last) even the report, which I have herd of the.


He. The report? is not here a strange matter?


Ca. why so?


He. I pray you sir, did ye never hear any falls reports i^ al your life?


Ca. yes y wys have I, and that mo then I was, at the first ware of my self.


He. why therefore may not this, yt you hear of me, be one of them?


Ca. Show me first an other thing that I will ask, and I will then quyckly
tell the.


He. what is that?


Ca. Dydest you never hear of any true reports in all thy life?


He. yes and that many, or else it were not happy.


Ca. And why therefore may not this, which I do hear of the, be one of them?


He. Now I perceive what ye mean well enough. But I pray you sir, yet
indifferently judge your self, how great a madness it is, to think that all
reports be true?


Ca. Doutles even no more then it is, to think that all be false.


He. will ye be there still?


Ca. ye where else?


He. yet I promise you that this of me is false, say what ye will.


Ca. And I promise the again (no more but as thou know thy self) the
veryest heretyke in all this world, another could nor yet would say any less,
for his part then ye. And therefore because all these, be but words in waste,
and to the purpose nothing else in deed. My counsel shall be this, to let us
go forth, and stycke no longer upon this point, but let it pass and make no
more a do.


He. Nay sir ye shall pardon me thereof / for doutles it shall not escape me so,
but I will surely try myself therein a little better, ere I go any forther.


Ca. I suppose it not best. For thou may fortune to fail of thy trial
whereby the matter must then, needs appear more plainly to be true, by the
reason whereof, perchance thou shall fall into fumes and multyplycacyon of
words: and so shall all our purpose be defaced and in manner but lost, if it
come ones to that point.


He. Sir ye have many pretty opinions in me be like. For first ye think me an
heretyke* and now ye think me so impacyent, yt I can not quietely abide any
communycacyon thereof. As who say, my pacyence ley in your or other men's
hands, and not in mine own lybertye ye think that ye tart words or sayenges
of other men should pluck it fro me, and ask me no leave, when it shall please
them to mynyster any such occasyon. But nevertheless how so ever the matter
shall be handeled of your side (say or think of me what ye will) I know the
part of an honest man, in tractyng thereof or any other / from the which, ye
shall not se me, much declyne I suppose.


Ca. Thou spekest very well. And therefore where as thou say, thou wylt try
thy self in this matter, ere we go any forder: trewly to me it seems plain
that thou can never bring it to pass, by any means yt thou can find.


He. yes yes that I trow I can.


Ca. which way?


He. Marry sir diverse ways, but specially by the scripture.


Ca. By ye scripture?


He. ye sir by the scripture. For I am sure the trauth of a man's faith can be
tried no way so well as by that.


Ca. As for that is an other matter / which requires a forther disputacyon.
But how by the scripture I pray the, wylt thou try the trauth of thy faith?


Here. Sir ye know what ye scripture does teach.


Ca. what of that?


He. Even so do I believe.


Ca. what manner of trial do thou call this? know thou not, that one
thing can never be tried by an other, except they be both known. Therefore
if thou wylt have thy faith tried by ye scripture, thou most first plainly
declare, and show what thy faith is, and then the scripture and it ones
considered together, it may sone be seen, whether they do agree or not / but
otherwise it is not possible.


He. This have I done all ready.


Ca. what haste thou done?


Here. Marry sir plainly declared and showed my hole faith.


Ca. Not one word to me, that I wot of.


Here. No but yet have I done it to diverse other.


Ca. what is all that, to this purpose? thou know, it is I which do think
the an heretyke. And how therefore wylt thou (as you have pretended) try
thyselfe clear unto me? that is to say, how shall I know that thou art none.


Here. Sir I will bring you those men whom I have showed it unto, and they
shall declare unto you, what it is.


Ca. Shall I believe them, when perchance they will not tell me ye trauth of it.


He. yes yt I dare say they will / for they be men of high lernyng and of
clear judgment in things of the faith.


Ca. They be the more able to deceive me. And whether they will or not, yet
they may do, and to be sure that they shall not I can never be, vnlest I myself
do hear the, declare it unto them before my face.


Here. I will not greatly stycke at that.


Ca. what shall we need therefore of them? for that may thou do now, as well
to me alone.


He. yet it is in the same case, it was before / for when I have so done, it is
for all that, at your pleasure, whether ye will therein believe me or not.


Ca. ye and perauenture I will not in deed.


He. why then what may I do more to it?


Ca. Tell me therefore, where is now all thy trial become, wherewith you would
so feign clear thy self in this matter? is it not as I said?


He. In deed sir, to say the trauth, I was (as I now perceive) therein a little
to rash, to take upon me, not only somewhat more then I was ware of, but
also much more then I neded, for had I ben so wise to consider so myche before,
what should I go about to take away the suspycyons minds of other men which is
there own fault and not mine? And a thing far beyond my reach, when I
have done the best therein that I can. Therefore so long as there is nothing
laid directli to my charge, it is no matter to me, what so ever men think, as
they may do at their pleasure and ask me no leave.


Ca. Then I perceive you art not able to prove thy self to be no heretyke, as
thou dydest in tend and attempt for to do.


He. There is another law nor reason that can bind me to it.


The.xxii. chap.
Catho. WHat if I will therefore, take upon me now, to prove that thou art one.


He. That is another matter. I wot then right well what I have to do.


Ca. Thou shall surely se me, go somewhat more then nere it.


He. Nay sir, nor so much another I trow.


Ca. yet mark it well and tell me anon. And first to begin withal / let me
treuly hear how thou do believe / if you dare be so bold for fear or
shame, to telll me.


He. For fear or shame? what need that?


Ca. Because I do not perfytly know, whether thou be one of them (which are
not a few) that have such a faith, as may not be dysclosed to every man, but
only to trustye friends, and such as be of the same believe or at leest much
like. They little think or consider that all though it were never so true.
yet after that manner, it should never do them seruys. To. 10.
For faith (says saint Poule) is taken with ye heart unto a man's
iustyficacyon, but the confession thereof with the mouth is made, unto his
health. As much to say, that faith in thy heart, shall never iustyfye the so, yt
ever it shall save the, except thou be always willing, so to confess it with
thy mouth, that thou care not who know it. Our sauyoure him self does say:
^at. 10
He that will deny me before men / I will deny him before my father, which is
in heaven. Again in another place: ^. 9.
He that is (he says) ashamed of me and of my sayenges / I will be ashamed of
him, when I come in the glory of my father. (...). 14
Also: He that loves his life before me, is not my dyscyple. All this well
considered, you may sone perceive that he shall be forsaken of christ, and is
none of his flock, which is not always willing and ready to confess, and be
^knowen of him, not withstanding any manner of shame or fere.


Here. Sir your exposycyon does not well me think agree with the text. For by
these authoritees we are bound, that we shall not deny christ, nor be ashamed
of him, and no farther. But yet a man may for all that, keep his faith, or some
part of it, close and secret to him self, if he se cause.


Ca. There can be no such cause that can move him so to do, but other fear or
shame. which by these authoritees be both prohybyt in this case and clean
forbede to have any place. And beside yt, it is none other thing to confess
christ / but to confess his faith and every part thereof. And contrary wise, it
is none other thing, to confess his faith and every part thereof, but even to
confess him. Therefore it must needs follow, that he which does hyde his faith
or any part thereof, does utterly subtract and clean withdraw him self, from
the confessing of christ. wherein he is apertly condemned, of our savior him
self, by these words: Luc. 12.
who so ever (he says) will confess me before men / ye son of man shall
also confess him before the angels of god: But he yt will deny me before
men, he shall be denied, before ye angels of god.


He. Sir here is salvation promised to him that will be aknowen of christ or
his faith. And perdicyo^ to him that will deny it: but here is nothing spoken
of him, yt will do none of them both.


Ca. why, there is no such. For who so ever will not confess christ's faith
and every part thereof, does utterly deny both him and it.


He. Nay sir not so / for there is a mean between confessyng and denyeng of a
thing, the which is, when a man houldeth his peace and does none of the^ both.


Ca. ye but that is never, as touching christ and his faith. For who so ever
will not confess him, does utterly therein deny him / although he hold his
peace and say nothing. For doutles there is no such mean between christ and
us / as there is between us and diverse other things. which we may, be another
with them nor yet again the^ if we will. But christ is utterly none such: As
him self does clearly testifye, where he says: He that is not with me, Mat. 1
is again me. He does not say, He that is not with me, and he yt is again me. As
who say they were twain: by ye reason whereof there might be another understand
between him yt is with him, and him yt is again him. But he says, he yt is
not with me is again me, that is to say / he the self same that is not with me,
is again me sygnyfyenge thereby plainly, that there is no mean, between him yt
is with him, and him that is again him: that is to say / there is no
dyfference between him, that is not with him, and him that is again him, but
both one. Therefore as he is again christ, which is not with him / so does he
deny christ, which does not confess him. And as he does deny christ, which
does not confess him: so does he deny his faith, which does not confess it
and every part of it (for it is (as I said) none other to deny christ then to
deny his faith / nor none other to deny his faith, then to deny him) And as
he that will not confess christ, is not with him, and therefore again him: so
he that will not confess his faith and every part of it, is not with it, and
therefore again it. And who so ever so does, I shall not need (I suppose) to
tell the, that his faith shall never save him. All though it were never so
true. But then, what if it be falls? Therefore because I could not reddely tell,
whether thou be one of ye sort or not. I did bid the show me thy faith, if you
dorste for fear or shame / knowenge very, well that the tone (at least) of
them two, is lyghtely always the cause, for the most part, why that any of
them all, does so craftily cloak and hyde it.


He. Sir I maruayle greatly, what should move you to put any such doutes in
me, when I mynystre no cause why.


Ca. It is not unprofitable to dout now and then.


He. Sir it is yet little wisdom, where it needs not.


Ca. Very well, go to then, tell me how thou do believe.


He. In christ, in whom else?


Ca. I ask the one thing, and thou tellest me an other. I do not ask the in
whom nor in what or wherein / but I ask ye, how thou do believe. That is to
say / I would have the render thy faith unto me, from one article to an other
perticulerly, and thereby shall I perceive anon whether it be true or not /
for tell not me that thou beleuest, as the scripture does teach / nor after
the judgment or counsel of learned men / nor yet in christ another. For their
be few heretykes that will not make any of these answers always. Make me
therefore such an answer as is only proper and does apperteyne to a true
christen man and to none other.


He. Sir deuyse your self how I shall answer you, and ye shall find me reddy
thereto in this matter.


Ca. I have told the, perticulerly and dystynctely.


He. with a good will: I believe in god the rather, and in his only begotten
son Jesus christ, which was borne of a virgyn, and suffered death for our
redempcyon, and rose again from death to life, and ascended to heaven, and so
forth.


Ca. So forth? why then go thou not forth?


He. It were to tedious ye know to rehearse them all distynctely.


Ca. Not one whyt, thou shall have leysour enough.


He. Sir it would in manner yet make me weary, and beside that, perchance they
should not come all to my remembrance. Therefore if their be any article,
wherein ye suspecte my faith to fail, it is a nere way to tell me which they
be, and I shall breuely make you an answer.


Ca. with that am I very well pleased. And therefore among all other how do
thou believe, as touching the blessed sacrament of ye altar?


He. I believe it is the sacrament of christ's very body and blood and therefore
most excellent and chyefe of all other.


Ca. ye but I would know, whether thou think, the very substance of the bread
and wine, to be turned in to the very blessed flesh and blood of our savior
christ, so that he him self be presently in the sacrament or no?


He. Sir god is the judge, and knower of my thought, and no man else. And
therefore I marvel, that ye will require of me, any such thing as
apperteyneth properly unto him.


Ca. Does the knowledge of thy thought, so apperteyne unto god, that thou
sholdes show no man, what thou thynkest?


He. Not without I list my self


Ca. No not in some things.


He. Nay in nothing?


Ca. why, have thou forgot ten thy self so sone?


He. wherein?


Ca. Art thou not bound to show, who so ever will ask the, what thou thynkest
in any article of the faith? O ye say trauth, I had forgotten that in deed.


Ca. why therefore do thou stycke in the matter with me, all this while?


He. It is no article of the faith which ye speak of.


Ca. Hah? what is that?


He. Even as I tell you.


Ca. Thou spekest so strayngely, that I wot nere well what thou meanest. Tell
me therefore thy mind again I pray the.


He. I say it is no article of ye faith.


Ca. what, not that the very blessed lively body of our savior christ, is
presently in the sacrament? is that no article of the faith.


He. None that is necessary to be byleued under pain of dampnacyo^.


Ca. Aa countreman, I thought even as much, all this while. For full well I
wyste, it would out at last, if it were true that I have hard, as I do now
find it in deed. For doutles now I know, yt thou haste taken this cursed false
doctrine of John^ Fryth, which has in the beginning of his book not only the
wicked sentence, but also the self same words, which thou have here
expressed. Therefore because that I have long and often hard, that thou art
wondersly blinded, in especyall with him among all other like, in so myche (as
I hear) his book is seldom out of thy bosum: I have by the reason even
thereof, ben greatly desirous (as I told the at ye first) to talk with the,
to thentent I might se, whether thou have or can inuente and ymagyon for his
defense or excuse, so much as any color of reason, that I can not manyfestly
prove to be utterly plain falls. wherefore let me know, what thou wylt say to
the matter.


The.xxiii. chap.
Here. FOr so myche as it apertely does now appear, that ye bear not so little
grudge, again gentle Fryth, but that ye stycke not thus to exclame him such
an exceeding heretyke. And also me an other to, by the reason I follow the
trauth as he did. How tartly therefore would ye have torn, and (as they say)
under ye foot clean down trodden, his good name, and the good opinyon which
many has in him if god had not provided him to leave behind him, such a book
(for all your saying) as does not only defend him clearly for his own part
/ but also myche comfort and quiet all such lovers of the trauth as he was him
self?


Ca. In deed thou speak properly. How be it I will agree well with the in
this, that god provided him to leave a book behind him / but without fail none
such as thou speak of, nor yet to that purpose another / but utterly to
declare his odyble falshed, and to stop the mouths of all his favorers.


He. Sir to speak of him as ye do and show no cause why, it were a strange
thing. Therefore tell me, what fault ye find with him.


Ca. Doutles it passes one days work. But nevertheless, first I marueyl,
that thou can not espy his excedyng presumpcio^ in this yt ever he would
desire, look after or hope, to be followed believed or hard, of the great
multitude of christen people, and that in so great a matter upon his own only
bare word and nothing else.


He. Sir I merueyl myche more, that ever ye would ley it to his charge, when
there is nothing in his book more plain then the contrary. For there (if it be
well marked, full clearly does he sygnifye, yt he desires in nothing to be
byleued, but only wherein the authoryte of scripture, or the minds of old
holy doctors, or else natural reason, does well and surely make for him, unto
any of ye which he that will not inclyne cleue and consent, is utterly no good
christen man. And therefore in this point, ye reprehende him without cause.


Ca. Not one whyt. For if all these authoritees which he brings for him, make
utterly nothing with him in deed. Thou shall not then deny, but that there
does no manner of thing remayn, wherefore he should be believed / but only (as I
said) his own very naked and bare word. Therefore when he deuydeth his book in
two parts / one wherein he would prove it no article of our faith which we are
bound to believe, that ye very lively body of our savior christ is presently in
the sacrament. An other, wherein he would also prove, yt he is not therein in
deed. Let us omytte ye great and manifest folyshnesse of this division, until
we have somewhat tried how he proves the first part of it. which he calls the
foundation of his matter and does not a little boste it, to be of no small
streyngth. Therefore what so ever thou have found in his book, to make (as thou
thynkest) any more for his purpose the^ other / let me hear it / and thou
shall sone se what I will say to it.


He. Then will I tell you even what he says at the first.


Ca. Go to then quyckly.


He. Sir his very words doutles be even these. First we must all aknovvlege /
he says / that it is none article of our faith / which can save us / nor
which we are bound to believe under the pain of eternal dampnacyon. For if
I should believe that his very natural body both flesh and blod were
naturally in the bread and wine / that should not save me / seeing many believe
that / and receive it to their dampnacyo^. For it is not his presens in the
bread / that can save me / but his presens in my heart thorough faith in his
blood / which has vvashed out my sins / and pacyfyed the fathers wrath
tovvarde me. And again if I do not believe his bodyly presens in the bread and
wine / that shall not dampne me / but the absens out of my heart thorough
unbelief.

Now sir what say you to this?


Ca. In very ded, I say this to it / that first we must all a knowledge (as it
does plainly appear) yt he has here brought for him, none authoryte of
scripture, none of old holy doctors, nor yet so myche as any one spark of
reason or trauth other if thou pou^der and mark it well: for when he says we
must all a knowledge that it is none article of our faith, why does he add
this clause unto it, which we are bound to believe? as who say, there be
articles of our faith, and this is one of them, which we are not bound to
believe.


He. Nay not so, but under ye pain (he says) of dampnacyon.


Ca. O, as who say, yet under some other pain. when even after his own
doctrine there is i^ this case bytwen god and us, none other pain in deed, but
only that: for he does styffely hold, yt there be no pains of purgatory
after this life: and for all the pains that here be, concerning such things,
he does vtterli account and reken, to be but the very cruel tyranny of men,
and does nothing bind us in conscience. Therefore when there does hang bytwen
god and us, no manner of pain upon the defeccyon and faylynge of faith in this
article, but dampnacyon only say we, nor yet that another says he (as his own
apert words does clearly testyfye) Justly to this it must needs come / that,
when he says it is none article of our faith, which we are bound to believe
under the pain of da^pnacyon. It is no more nor none other to say but even yt
it is none article of our faith, which we are bound to believe under any manner
of pain, between god and us. And what so ever is to us under no pain / it is
without fail under no bound at all. For if there be no pain upon it / we may
chose whether we will, or not believe it: if we may chose, plain it is we are
not bound: if we be not bound to bileue it / doutles then are we not bound to
believe ye trauth of christ: for surely ye trauth of christ is in it / or else it
is in deed none article of our faith. Therefore if yt be it which Fryth does
mean, that is to say, that it is none article of our faith in deed. why then
did he so pretely put unto it this clause which we are bound to believe? as who
say, yet it is one for all ye. And again why did he add unto that also this,
under the pain of dampnacyon? as who say, yet under some other pain. But let
all that pass, and mark me this. Other he does think it an article / or else
he does think it none: if he thynk it none, how falls a teacher is he in this
yt he says, we are not bound to believe it, under the pain of dampnacion.
when it must needs follow thereof, yt it is no dampnable thing, to not believe
the trauth of christ which is him self? For if it be not the trauth of christ
/ thou know (as I said) it can be none article of his faith. Again if he
think it no article: how falls a liar is he then, in this yt he says plainly,
it is on^^ as in the.xxvi. lefe of his book, it does apere by his own words,
which be these.

Though it be / he says / an article of our faith / it is none of our creed in
the.xii. articles which are sufficient for our salvation.


He. Marry sir this does open all ye matter.


Ca. How so?


He. He says it is an article of our faith / but yet it is none of our creed.


Ca. A so, and therefore we are not bound to believe it: an holsom doctrine: it
is no article of our creed another, that ye gospels be true / therefore we are
not bound to believe it: it is none article of our creed another, that there was
any such Peter and Paul as we speak of, therefore we be not bound to believe
it: it is none article of our creed another, that any of their epystles be true
/ therefore we are not bound to believe it: here is gay gere as they say.
Howbeit I can find one article of our faith which is none of our creed in
the.xii. articles and yet we are bound to believe it, and that under pain of
da^pnacio^.


He. which is that?


Ca. without fayl that Fryth does teach an excedyng folysh falls and a deuylyshe
doctrine.


He. Tushe not so sir for all this: for although these things, which ye speak
of, be not directely expressed among ye.xii. artycles of our creed / yet
perchance they may be found as surely to follow of some of them, as though they
were expressed in deed / therefore are we as much bound to believe them.


Ca. if that be so, there is no dout but that it is even likewise of this
article, which he laboreth so fast to overthrow. Therefore what a thing is
this, yt he does confess it an article of our faith / and yet does say that we
are not bound to believe it? whereof it must needs follow that we may without
peril leave the believe of it / and come to heaven with a piece of a faith, with a
faith as who say radged rent and all to torn / wonders evil fauourde in
ymaginacion and a thousand fould wors to have i^ possessyo^. Also what a thing
is it, that he does confess it an article of our faith / and yet labor so
fast to prove it none?


He. Nay not so, for he laboreth no more but to prove, that we are not bound
to believe it.


Ca. Then beside that folysh wickedness, and wicked folyshnesse. what a thing
is this (to conclude withal) that he does confess it an article / and yet as
all his hole book does declare, his purpose does none other, but only to prove
that there is no such thing: so yt he would have an article of our faith to be
falls. For when he does hold (as his hole purpose is to prove) yt ye very
blessed body of our savior christ is not presently in the sacrament / and yet
does hold also that it is an article of our faith, who can more clearly
overthrow him, then he does him self. For the very pyth of the matter is even
this, that it is an article and yet it is false, yt is to say, an article and
yet no article / the which comes even to this that it is the trauth of christ,
and not ye trauth of christ / that is as myche to say, as the trauth of christ,
is no trauth / and that is none other, but that christ is no christ. Therefore
while this is enough, to se what manner a thing it is, which he does here take
upon him to prove. Let us now try what manner of probacyon he does make thereof.


The.xx.iiii. chap.
Here. THat sir me think ye might better have done before. For what the thing
is, it is not hard to perceive by the probacyon thereof. whose properte is but
even to show (if it be trewly made) what the very thing is in deed.


Catho. There is yet for all that no labor lost / for often times, there may
be made a falls probacyon of a true thing / the which although be no
probacyon in deed. yet unto some it may seem to be one. And even contraryewyse
/ a falls thing may seem to be trewly proved / but yet in deed it can never be.
The thing therefore well and perfytly known does ever give a clear light, what
the probacyon of it is. But the probacion is not of that effycacyte always to
show what the thing is. Therefore because a man may be sometime deceived of the
thing, by the probacyon / and never of the probacyon, by the very thing. I
have showde the partly, what the thing is it self, whereby thou may
somewhat conjecture what his probacyon thereof will be. And to put the clean
out of dout what it is in deed when (as thou dydest rehearse) he does say.

If I should believe that his very natural body both flesh and blood / were
naturally in the bread and wine / that should not save me / seeing many believe
that and receive it to their damnacio^.

Beside that he does here call it bred and wine, as though it were so in deed,
the which is false (as here after it shall well apere) And beside his folyshe
speaking in this that he says, if I should believe that his very natural body
were naturally therein. As who say because we do believe that christ's very
lively body, is presently and verily in the sacrament, we believe it to be
therein naturally. when we do not believe it to be so in heaven. And yet we believe
it to be verily there in deed for all that. But this man does speak as though
it were always a general rule, that where so ever any thing is presently in
deed, it were there also naturally. As who say, if a bladder were bloen full of
air / and conveyed by violence down to the botome of the water, it were there
naturally. Or as who say, when god took helyas from the socyete, (...). Re. 2
and company of mortal men, and did lift him up into heaven, he passing
thorough the air, was there above naturally. Beside (I say) all this nothing
to the purpose, what is there, in it else, which does prove it none article
of our faith, which we are bound to believe?


He. That many believe it (he says) and receive it to their dampnacyon.


Ca. what means he by that? Are we not bound to believe it, because they
bileue it?


He. Nay not therefore.


Ca. what then? because they receive it?


He. No another.


Ca. Then is it because they believe it and receive it to?


He. He meneth not so another.


Ca. How then?


He. As Poule says, he that eats and drynketh it unworthily, does eat and
drink his own dampnacyon.


Ca. A then he groundeth himself herin upon s. Poule.


He. ye what else?


Ca. In deed it were else but his own dreme, as I wene we shall find it
nevertheless. Therefore if we be not bound to believe it, another because they
believe it / nor yet because they receive it / nor because they believe it and
receive it both, but because of that, that follows, that is to say to their
dampnacyon. Then, why is it to their dampnacyon?


He. For their unworthiness.


Ca. Therefore when his reason is this, that we are not bound to believe it /
because many receive it to their da^pnacyon / and they receive it to their
da^pnacio^ because of their unworthiness. How clearly does it follow that their
unworthiness is the cause why, that we are not bound to believe it? And how mad
a wit has he, which will think, that any man's unworthiness, can set us, of
or on as they say, with the bond of our believe, in any point of our faith?


He. Sir yet ye take him wrong still. For he does not mean, yt the byleuyng
or unworthy receyuynge of it to their damnacyon, is the cause why that we are
not bound to believe it. But he does mean, that it does suerly show, that we are
not bound to believe it.


Ca. that they do believe it, does rather show, that we be bound, to do so
to, then the contrary.


He. what when they receive it to their damnacyon.


Ca. why do they receive it to their da^pnacio^? because they believe it?


He. Nay yt is not his mind ye may sone perceive. For then he would not have
said, we are not bound to believe it / but, we are bound not to believe it.


Ca. Therefore what is this to ye purpose of our bond: if he could have proved,
that such as do not believe it / were in no daynger therefore / it had been the^
an other matter. But to say, seeing many believe it, therefore we may laufully
chose: a wise reason.


He. Sir it is not that another which Fryth intends to show it by.


Ca. why then does he speak it.


He. That shall not skyl / but this is it: yt they receive it to their damnacyon.


Ca. Does that show that we be not bound to believe it.


He. Clearly me think.


Ca. I pray the look yet better upon it / and tell me in good ernest, whether
it does seem rather to show, that we be not bound to believe it, or else that we
be not bound to receive it.


He. Receive it? what we be bound thereto by ye plain words of the gospel.
Luc. 22.



Ca. That I grant to be trauth in deed. But whether of them both does Frythes
words seem rather to show? if he had said, many believe it, to their
damnacyon: had not yt somewhat seemed to show it?


He. It had been plain then.


Ca. Therefore it is as plain now, that his words does show, that we be not
bound to receive it, directely again the commandment of christ. For where he
says that many receive it to their dampnacyon. if he had said (as he dorste
not in deed) that many believe it to their dampnacyon: it would yet that way no
more have followed, that we be not bound to believe it. Then this does follow now
of the the other, that we be not bound to receive it. But while it is clean out
of dout, yt this does nothing follow, that we are not bound to receive it,
For all yt his sentence might sumwhat seem, to sound as it were toward such
a thing. How myche less therefore does this follow thereof, that we are not
bound to believe it, when there is not in it, so myche as one word which can
signyfye any thing toward it? Therefore when these words (which he gathers
out of saint Poule) does in deed show nothing else but this, 1. Cor. ^
that such as receive it unworthily do therein commytte a da^pnable offense /
and does not show (as I said) that we be not bound to receive it: whereof it
might seem to bear in the respect of nothing, as who say some color. yet
would he have us take yt thereof which has another trauth, nor so much as any
lykelyhod of it other: for if this, that many receive it to their da^pnacyon,
do prove or sound any thing like, yt we be not bound to believe this article of
the blessed sacrament. Doutles it does an hunderde times more prove and sound
to this, that we are not bound to receive it. which is dyrectly again the
scripture. ^uc. 22
Therefore where he does consequently say to maynteyne this purpose withal,
these words. It is not his presence in the bread that can save me / but his
presens in my heart thorough faith in his blood / which has vvashed out my
synn^s and pacyfyed the fathers wrath tovvarde me. what is there herin, but
that it is none article of our faith, which we are bound to believe (as he
says) under the pain of dampnacyon, that the very body of our savior christ
is presently in heaven.


He. what I maruayle that ye will so say / for Fryth has no such words


Ca. No it is enough for him so to teach, although it be in other words. For
when he does say, that it is not his presence in the bread yt can save him.
what does he else intend, but thereby to prove, that we are not bound to believe
it.


Here. That I grant.


Ca. Harken well to me therefore, and the self same words that he speaks of
christ's bodyly presens in the sacrament. Thou shall hear me speak them, of
his bodyly presence in heaven, and then tell me thyselfe, whether it be as I say
or not.


He. Sir even forth with, I pray you go to.


Ca. It is not his presens in heaven that can save me / but his presence in my
heart thorough faith etc (now thou know his conclusyon is) wherefore it is
none article of our faith which we are bound to believe: how say thou
therefore to it now?


He. Sir it is a chance / the wysest man that is may ouershot himself
sometime.


Ca. A playest me yt countreman? I told the somewhat of such gloses before,
how be it yt shall hear him therefore a little better: it is not his presence
(he says) in the bread that can save me, but his presence in my heart thorough
faith. And therefore it is no article of my faith which I am bound to believe.
For (as who say) if it were / it should save me all though his presence were
not in my heart thorough faith / yt is to say / although I believed not in him.
(And even again like wise) it is not his presens in heaven yt can save me, but
his presence i^ my heart thorough faith. And therefore all though it be an
article of my creed, it is yet none of my faith, which I am bound to believe.
For (as who say) if it were, yt should save me / although his presens were not
in my heart thorough faith / that is to say / all though I believe not in him.
Here is a blessed doctrine and a gracyous, is it not trowest thou?


He. Sir and ye be so dysposed, ye may make of every man's tale, what ye list
after this manner.


Ca. I marueyll that thou wylt say so. For surely I do make none other, then
thereof must needs follow: for thou see thy self, that even the same words
which he speaks here of christ's bodyly presence in the sacrament. He might
eue^ as well have spoken the^ of his bodyly presence in heaven. And even as
myche make they against the faith of the tone as the the other. For when he says
/ it is not his presens in the bread that can save me. wherefore puts he this
to it, but his presence in my heart thorough faith? but as who say, if it were
an article of his faith which he were bound to believe, it could save him,
without his presence in his heart thorough faith. Even as I might say: it is
not christ's presence in heaven that can save me, but his presence in my heart
thorough faith / and therefore it is none article which I am bound to believe.
For if it were, it could save me well enough without his presence in my heart
thorough faith. Thou say, I make hereof as I list. I would fayn here of the,
how any better might be made of it. Howbeit it were pit to spyll any more
time about it. And therefore where he goth forder and says of the contrary
part. If I do not believe his bodyly presence in the bread and wine / that
shall not dampne me but the absence out of my heart thorough vnbyleue. Look now
thy self if he might not as well have said: if I do not believe his bodyly
presence in heaven, that shall not dampne me, but the absence out of my heart
thorough vnbyleue. How say thou? is it not well proved of him, that christ's
bodyly presence in the sacrament, is none article of our faith, which we are
bound to believe. when he proves utterly by the same reason (as he did before)
even as much, of his bodyly presence in heaven? But where he says if he do not
believe it, that shall not dampne him. How will he prove that? or why does he
not so much as pretend or seem to go about it? but without fail because his
lie therein, is so great, that it will with no manner of thing be couerd, but
only with ye, which hydeth it from him self and such other / that is to say
/ with his false faith. which in deed does so infatuate his wit, and make
him so blind, that if thou mark it well, thou shall find, that he does make
all his dysputacyo^, as though any one article by it self, were suffycyent to
save, who so ever believe it, without the rest. For when he says if he should
believe his bodyly presence in the sacrament, that should not save him: if he
had put this word (only) to it, and said / yt only should not save him. we
must needs the^ have grant him ye. For it were so ye trauth in deed. But than
had it ben dyrectly again his purpose. For it must have followed thereof, that
he were bound to believe it. Therefore he left out this word (only) which
should sygnifye that the believe of one article by it self, can not save us
without ye other, and so remains his sentence plane to the contrary, because
it were else dyrectely, (as I said) Again his own purpose: also when he
would prove, that he is not bound to believe it, by this, yt if he did, it
should not save him: it must needs follow of the contrary / yt if he were bound
to believe it and so did, then it should save him. whereof it appears (as I said
that all his dysputacyon runeth still upon the suffycyence of one article alone
/ when ye trauth is this, that all the articles, one lacking, are not able to
save a man / but clean contrary, one faylynge is only able to da^pne him. As
says saint Poule. 1. Cor. 5.
A little leven does torn the taste of all the hole globe of dowe. Therefore
now, for a conclusyon of all, that thou have yet recyted of his saying, when
he does grant, that it is an article of our faith, and then does so say,
that we are not bound to believe it, that he laboreth all that he can to prove
it: there thou may perceive thy self that he lies both in word and deed.
And when he says we are not bound to believe it / and yet does confess it to
be an article of our faith. whereof it follows, that he would not have us
bound to believe all the faith of christ. Therein thou see he lies again.
Also when he laboreth in all his book to prove that the very blessed body of
our savior christ is not in the sacrament. And yet does say, that it is, an
article of our faith, whereof it must follow, that christ has one article of
his faith stacke false, Therein, I will not tell the, that he lies, because
his falshed is to manifest. For when he does say, that it is an article of our
faith, and then goes about, not only to prove, yt we are not bound to believe
it / but also that there is no such thing in deed another, who would not so
consider therein his double deceyt, that he might betyme, beware not only of
him, but also of any such other like? But now therefore, because we have herin
spent somewhat more time then neded in an error so plain. And yet not half so
much as the folyshe falshed thereof would require, if it should be fully
declared. if he have ought else, that seems to the, any thing more, to
mayntene or make for his evil purpose then this / bring it forth and thou
shall hear what I will say to it.


The.xxv. chap.
Here. MEthynke sir, he has, for all this, in a certain place, such a strong
reason for his purpose, as all the world can not avoid.


Ca. what so ever it be, thou may yet, by this that is past, of one of these
to, be sure / that other it is not true in deed, or else it makes nothing
for him.


He. By that reason, it can make nothing for him whether it be true or false.


Ca. That can be no lie / for there is nothing, that can treuly, make with
falsed.


He. yet ye shall hear it.


Ca. Thereto I grant.


He. In the.iii. lefe of his book even these be his words.

And first that it is / he says / none article of our faith necessary to be
byleued under pain of dampnacyon / may thus be forther proved. The same faith
shall save us which saved the old fathers before christ's incarnacyon. But
they were not bound under pain of dampnacion to believe this point. Therefore
it shall follow that we are not bound thereto / under pain of damnacyon. The
first part of mine argument / is proved by saint Austen ad Dardanu^. And I dare
boldly say / almost in an.L. places. For there is I think no proposicion
which he does more often inculcat then this / that the same faith shall save
us which saved our fathers. The second part is so manifest that it needs no
probacyon For how could they believe that thing which was never said nor
done. And without the word they could have no faith / upon the troth of
these two parts must the conclusyon needs follow.

Now sir how say ye to this gere?


Ca. Countreman as thou say, it is perchance after the judgment of some, a
great and a sore reason. But yet I promise the one thing it seems to the no
more true / then thou shall find it clean false. And for the more surer trial
thereof. Thou must first consider this / ye logyke is a certain.


He. Nay then we have it, and we come in with logyke.


Ca. what soft may thou not abide the hearing of it.


He. Marry yes, I can hear it well enough / but what.


Ca. A then hold thy peace a while I pray the, thou know not what I will
tell ye, logyke (I say) is a certain art, which does teach a co^pendyous
way to dyscerne the veryte, from the falsyte. And that can not be done except
both be known. Therefore among all other, there is for the purpose invented a
certain argument, which is made and formed, of three parts, of the which
three, the first and the second, are called in scooles, two proposycyons, the
more and the less. And when these two, in their conuenyent kind be both
true / then the third part, which of them must needs follow, and is called
the conclusyon, can never be false. And again, when any of these two
proposycyons be false, ye conclusyon which should follow, can by them never be
true. This argument also, when the first part and the second is true,
wherefore their necessary conclusyon must be true to, it is called then a
syllogismus. And when any of the^ both be false, for the which their intended
conclusyon, can by them never be true, it is then called a sophystycacyon / so
that between logyke and sophystrye, there is in this case no dyfference, but
under one manner and one form, the tone holds the veryte, and the the other the
falsyte. This faculte therefore, I dare well say, there is no just lover of
trauth, but he will judge it very necessary to be had / when it is but the
trial of the same: yet is it a thing, which in especyall your scoole does
utterly forbede and cry out upon. But that would ye never do if your teaching
were true. For who be they that teaches a doctrine, and forbede their
dyscyples the judgment of such as can best dyscerne what it is, but only
falls harlottes, which goth about to deceive me^?


He. Sir why speak you this?


Catho. Trewly for this cause, have ye not brought the name of logyke and
philosophy in such a slander of subtyle and false craftynes, among no small
sort of such as knows it not, that they do now suspecte, ye and abhor the
judgment of any man, so much the more, as they think or hear tell that he is
learned therein? But for your this doing, how great and excedyng is your shame in
the syghte of them which do perceive your dealing? And yet how little is all
that, in respect of this, that ye may well be proved to use the same your
self, that is to say / to use very sophysticacyons, and play the only
sophysters your selfs? to ye great illusyon and deceyt of ye people, for all
your craftye bidding them so fast to beware of it in other men, lest by them
perchance they might learn to espy and perceive therein your crafty falshed,
which ye would have crepe still in the dark, unto the time it might put out
and extyncte all the light?


He. Sir I pray you give me leave / we go about the trial of Frythes matter,
what is all this to ye purpose?


Ca. why do thou not perceive it.


He. No trewly / for he never used any such thing as ye speak of.


Ca. No did? shall I need to rehearse to the (which do know it so well) how
he does exclame and cry again sophysters and sophystrye / almost in every
corner of his book?


He. why what then?


Ca. In deed I shall tell the what then / because thou know it not thy self,
inquyre of any man that can skyl of it / if he do not say, that this, which
thou haste now rehearsed of Frythes words, is the self same scolasticall
argument, which I have here dyscrybed unto the, and is daily used in the
scolys, take me for such a one as I say to the that he is. Howbeit I do not
mean, that it is the same argument, which is daily used in scolys when it
holds the veryte, but utterly the same, when it holds ye falsyte, only
with these two dyfferences, that in the scolys, it is put in latin, and here
in english: and again there it is but a feigned falshed, to teach men to
beware of it: and here it is an ernest falshed to teach them to be dysceyued
with it: and to prove this that I say to be true, first I shall not need to
bid the, to bear well his argument in mind, which have rehearsed it unto me thy
self. Therefore if thou mark it well, ye hole pyth of it, does rest upon the
saying of saint Austen, which is this, that the same faith shall save us
which saved ye old fathers before christ's incarnacyon. Now if saint Austen
had not said ye same faith, but another faith shall save us etc. it had been
utterly nothing for frythes purpose. Therefore thou may plainly se thy self,
that all the weyghte of the matter does lie in this word / the same / wherefore
let us now try forther, what manner of word this is / whether it be apt to
build a good argument upon or not. And therefore tell me trewly what thing
thou art.


He. what thing am I / but a man?


Ca. Am I any other thing then that?


He. No that is plain.


Ca. Then am I the same that thou art and thou the same yt I am. But what so
ever the same that I am does. I do / and what so ever the same that thou art
does, thou doste. Therefore it must needs follow that what so ever thou doste I
do, and what so ever I do thou do because thou art the same that I am / and I
the same that thou art.


He. Nay sir that will not follow. For although we be each the same that other
is in nature / we do yet dyfferre in person: for ye be one person and I an
other: and not the same that you be / nor you the same yt I am. Therefore your
acts be not mine / nor mine yours.


Ca. yet you thy self, when thou were first borne were the same in nature, and
the same person then, that thou art now and the same now yt thou were then.


He. That I grant.


Ca. But thou were then, not one yerde long. Therefore it follows no more
thou art now.


He. ye sir? will ye make me believe yt? when it is two things to be the same
in nature and person / and to be the same in quantyte / therefore ye may be sure
that I meant not so.


Ca. yet that except, thou wylt grant thy self to be now, the same that
thou were then.


He. ye that except.


Ca. And then thou coudest another speak nor go. whereof it follows no more thou
can now, while thou art now the same that thou were then.


He. Sir after this manner ye might reason also of mine age and my knowledge with
all other powers and qualytees beside, when ye may be sure I do not so mean.


Ca. Then tell me this, were not all english people an.C. years past, bound
to the common law of this land, and we now living, also to the same?


He. That is no doubt.


Ca. Go to now, and take heed what I say: we be bound to the same law that they
were, which lived an.C. years past. But they that were living an.C. years
past, were not bound to the statutes and acts of the last perlyament.
Therefore it follows no more be we now: except thou wylt say, they be no part
of the law / and then we be not bound to them another.


He. Sir we be bound to the same law that our elders were, and they to the
same that we be. But this is understand the same in general, that is to say,
the law of england, without any respect of parts. For it was none other,
nor no less, then the law of england, which they were bound to / nor it is
no other, nor no more then ye law of england another, which we are bound to.
Therefore when it is no more nor less nor yet none other, it must needs be the
same / but it is the same (as I said) in respect of the hole generally / and
not the same in respect of the parts specially, by as many acts and statutes
as has been syns for consyderacyons added on to it mo then was than. Therefore
your argument is false and can not hold.


The.xxvi. chap.
Catho. COuntreman thou spekek herin very well: and therefore mark what I shall
say unto the. when it is so, that this word (the same (is of a sygnifycacyon
so ambyguous and incertayne / that a thing may be said the same in nature, and
not ye same in ye properte of a person / or the same in them both, and not the
same in quantite / or the same in all three, and not the same in power, or ye
same in one qualite, and not ye same in an other: or the same in general and
not the same in special: or the same in all these, and yet not the same in
many moo beside: when a thing (I say) may be called the same, and yet not ye
same, in so many respects. why did not Fryth with all his sophistery (again
yt which he speaks so sore, and yet used nothing more) why did he not
consider all this in the word, and put away the doutfull understanding thereof
/ before he made there upon his argument? Seeing it might chance to be (as of
him it is) taken otherwise, then the author did intend? other he knew or he
knew not, that he should so do, or else to take it for no ground or pryncyple
to dyspute upon: if he did not know it, that is to say, that if he did not
know that a conclusyon can not be proved by any pryncyple which is
incertayne. Doutles he was then to blind a teacher to be byleued / specially
in so great a matter as this is. For all me^ knows it is again both nature
and reason to come by suerte, by incertitude: again of the the other part, if he
did know it, and yet would, as he did, tumble forth his argument nevertheless:
what other thing coud move him so to do, but only wylfull malice. For be it in
case, that I perceived a word or a sentence the sense whereof, were doutfull
and incerteyne (for the which no trauth there upon were probable) and yet
before the ambiguyte thereof were put away, would ground mine argument upon the
same. what coud cause me so to do, but only to make men think, I prove yt I
prove not / and so make them believe, that thing which is not. For the intent
of every ernest argument, is all way to cause the conclusyon to be granted,
whether it be true or falls. Therefore what motive thereof can thou find, in
who so ever so does, but even a malicyous intencyon to deceive other? wherefore,
whether blind ignorance, or else this wylfull malice, were the cause why, ye
Fryth did bylde his argument upon this flettynge foundacyon, I leave it partly
for this time, to thine own judgment. For of the tone, I am sure thou canste
not excuse him.


He. yes he might chance (as many men does) purposely put forth an argument
taken of an incertayne pryncyple, to hear what would be said unto it.


Ca. Nay nay my friend, that is not it, that can excuse him. For all though that
be sometime used in scolys, to the intent it might thereby be learned, where the
falsyte of such arguments does rest. yet questyonles Fryth had here no such
purpose. For he did not put it forth, to se what would be said to the contrary
or that it should be learned, where ye deceyt of it lay. But his intent was
only by the craftynesse thereof, to draw men into his false and wicked opinyon.
The whice he held so vehemently to be true, that he laid thereupon no less
wayger, then his own self, both body and soul, the loss of the which,
without fail is no less like in both, then it is well known, to be sure in
the tone. Howbeit that shall pass, to come to our purpose again, the which
is to show, the great ignorant or wylfull fasshed of him in his argument: for
who, but he, would as who say, so hedlynge at adventure, judge s. Austeyn (when
he says, the same faith shall save us which saved the old fathers) to mean
the same faith in respect of every point partycularly and dystynctly, and not
the same in respect of the hoole together confusely? For these two
consyderacions do much dyffer in every thing. And that wonders plainly in the
commune law as thou did even now declare thy self. For in the consyderacyon
and respect of the hole confusely together, it is even the same now that it
was an hunderd years paste, and was even than the same that it is now, that is
to say, the law of england now, and none other then: the law of england then
and none other now / the which word does sygnyfaye all the hole thing
together, as it is at the time of the speaking of it, without any dyfference or
any respect of parts. For when thou hear it spoken it does put the no
more in mind of any one part, then of any other / but of ye unite of them all
together, which the word does only sygnyfye. But the consyderacyon of the same
in parts dystynctely, does far dyffer from that. For in the respect thereof,
it is not even ye same now, that it was an. C. years paste / nor the same then
that it is now, by all thactes and statutes which has been added unto it syns
yet can it not follow, but that it is the same law in general still / for all
the new parts which it had not before: also a tree being full of new leuys,
twigs, branches and bows, is yet ye same tree, that it was, years past
before they spronge out of it / but how the same? the same in respect of the
hole, but not the same in respect of every part / for some parts be new, but
so are not all. yet before the new parts were sprung out of it, it was none
other nor yet no less then the same tree, that it is afterward / and
afterward none other nor yet no more, then ye same tree that it was before.
Therefore as the tree, full of new parts, is even the same tree that it was
before / and yet not ye same in every point. And as the comune law of this
land, is even the same now yt it was forty or an. C. years past / and yet not
the same in every point. Even so is the faith of christ now, the same that it
was before his incarnacion / that is to say, the faith of christ then and the
faith of christ now, all one and the same, in respect of the hole but yet not
the same in respect of every point, without any manner of dyfference. wherefore
suppose thou in it but even one dyfference, and tell me where is all Frythes
argument become, when for any thing that is in it else, even the faith of
this blessed sacrament might well be the same, which he laboreth so sore to
overthrow.


The.xxvii. chapi.
Here. AN argument sir ye know right well is not to be avoided by supposycions
or coniecturs but by probable and manifest reasons. And therefore if ye can
prove any such dyfference between the old fathers faith before christ's
incarnacyon and ours now, whereof it must needs follow, that saint Austens words
can not be so understand, as you say Fryth does take them. I wot then what I
have to do.


Ca. without fail, there be diverse dyfferences, not only to sure to be dowted
in / but also to manifest and open to be inquyred of. For had the oulde fathers
before christ's incarnacyon, believed his blessed birth passion resurreccyo^,
and ascencyon to be done and past, as we do: and we to come, as they did. Even
so far therein dyffer we each from other, that it had else ben damnable, both
of their part, and ours to. Also there was contained in their faith diverse
sacraments which we have not in ours / and likewise in ours, which they had
not i^ there is. and that the chyefe of each part. Again their faith, being
myche hyd and couerd with so many fygures, dark shadows, and mystycall
prophesyes, as in manner the hole course of scripture does testyfye that it was.
who therefore would not see it to be then, but obscure, gross and confuse, in
respect of ye pure dystyncte clerenesse, which ours took, by the very coming
of our savior christ himself, and the predycacyon of his gospel? And what
was that same old obscurite, but as who say, a coueryng of many points
together confusely, which the new bright splendor of christ did open and
show dystynctely? More over there is no dowt, but that there were then many
good and faithful folk, of the comune people of the jews, beside the
prophets. Nevertheless, we may not think, that they had the faith in such
manner as the prophets had themself (which were therewith immedyatly inspyred of
god) that is to say, so clearly so specially and so dystynctely, but myche more
obscurely, grossly, and confusely / by ye reason whereof it is plain yt their
faith contained many things mo, then they were ware of them self, the which
things were yet not so hyd and unknown to the prophets ye taught them.
Forthermore it is not to be thought, that each of the prophets had it like
dystynctly another. when some of them be called more and some less: as the
cause whereof does well appear by their works, of the which, some one is far
more large then diverse of the rest together / god showed not dystynctely all to
each of them / but some to one, and some to an other. yet we may not say, that
he, or any of the comune people, which had leest, had for all that, any less
then all together confusely: for who so ever, at the least way, has it not so
doutles has utterly thereof nothing at all: because ye hole faith (as I
showed the before) is preuely hyd and contained in every part of it: finally,
as the manner of having the faith, dyfferd between ye prophets and the common
people, of ye jews then / so does it not only between their time and ours /
but also between some one sort and an other of us even now. For there is no
dout, but the plouma^ has now the same faith, which has the doctor of
diuynete, and the doctor the same that he has, that is to say, the faith of
christ, but yet far unlike. For where the plouman has it in manner but grossly
and confusely: the doctor has it specially and dystynctely. And therefore in
ye ploumans confuse faith / doutles there be many mo special artycles and
mysteryes contained, then he is ware of himself, which be not unknown to the
doctor: yet nevertheless, unto the believe, as well of them, as of the
resydew, the plouman is not vnbownde, for all that he is not ware of them: nor
yet the doctor likewise another, for all yt the same faith shall save him,
which saves the plouman. Therefore when the faith between ye fathers and us,
has by the reason of time, taken one dyfference, and that such as they could
not have been saved, beleuynge in every point as we do nor we beleuynge as they
did. And when it has also taken an other dyfference in things, no less then
very sacraments, and that the chyefe of both parts. And beside all that when
there is between them and us, such a dyfference in the manner of having of it,
that it may be said they had the same and not the same yt we have / and we the
same and not the same that they had / because yt, which they had more grossly,
confusely, and obscurely, we have it, more partyculerly dystynctely and
manyfestely. Saint austeyne (thou may well know) when he says, the same
faith shall save us which saved the fathers before the incarnacyo^, never meant
(as Fryth does falsely understand him) the same faith in every condycyon
dystynctly, but the same, in respect of the hole confusely, that is to say,
the faith of christ generally, without any dystynct consyderacyon of the
parts. As a man does often times speak or think of money, without any dystynct
consyderacyon of this coin or that, or how many diverse coins be contained
under the general name of money.


He. Sir yet still I do somewhat marueyll how ye know, that Fryth (as ye say)
does understand saint Austeyn to mean the same faith in every condycyon
dystynctly.


Ca. And I do marueyl also, how thou coudest else find which way saint
Austens words might so much as seem, any thing to sound for his purpose: for
if there were no more dyfference, between the fathers faith and ours, but even
only so myche, as is in the diverse manner of having thereof / that is to say,
of our part, the partyculer and dystynct clerenesse of it which it took through
the very coming of christ. And of their part the gross and confuse obscuryte
of it, wherein it was, before that same light of the world came forth, and
showed his beams abroad. (...). 8.
There is yet no dout, but this article of ye blessed sacrament of the auter,
may be one of them (as it shall hereafter well appear that it was in deed) as
well as it is plain of the sacrament of baptyme and many other things mo
beside, which then as who say, inuolued and together wrapped, were obumbrat
and couerde with the shadow of that clowdye season, according to the words
of the apostle, Cor. 10
saying our fathers were all under a cloud. wherefore if we should be bound
to the byloue of no mo things, then were open and manifest before christ's
most glorious incarnacyo^, because the same faith shall save us which saved
them than / it must thereof clearly follow, that other our savior christ
himself brought with him no more light of the faith, that is to say, he
reveled no mo secrets and mysteryes thereof necessary for our salvation, then
were known before, or else if he did, we are not bound to believe them. what
wicked person would believe or think any of them both, beside Fryth? I must
needs except him, because it follows of his own doctrine. Therefore where the
manner of scoles is this, that he which makes an argument, must to co^fyrme ye
same, prove afterward, every part of it particularly by them self / the which
form and manner he does not here mysse sophistically to imitate, I will now to
the second part of his argument, because I have showed the suffycyently, what
his probacyon is of the first, except thou have yet any thing else to say herin
to the contrary.


He. Sir little or nothing that I will declare till I hear what ye will say
to the rest.


The.xxviii. chap.
Catho. TRewly the rest, that is to say, the second part of his argument thou
know is this, that the fathers before christ's incarnacyo^ never believed
this point of the blessed sacrament. The which he says is so plain, that it
needs no probacyon / and two causes why, he does allege, which be these, that
it was never done, nor never said. Therefore quyckly te dyspatche the tone of
them, if he will have it follow, that the fathers before christ's incarnacion
never believed it, because it was never done, in their time / by the same reason
it must needs follow, that they never byleued, the blessed birth of christ, his
death, his resurreccyon, nor his ascension: for those things were never done in
their days another.


He. No sir, but yet they were done syns.


Ca. what of yt? Fryth speaks only of their time, and not syns. And that
may thou know by this, when he says, (it was never said nor done) if he had
meant syns the fathers time, it had been no whyt sou^dynge toward his purpose,
and beside yt, to plain false to: for he will, and must needs grant him
self / that it was and always is at the leest, said syns / wherefore it is
plain that he men in their time, as his own words following does clearly
show where he says

without the word they could have no faith.

Therefore this conclusyon which I have now showed the, must by his reason (as
I said) needs follow / that is to say, that the old fathers believed none of
those said articles because they were never done in their time. And so
consequencly, because they same faith shall save us which saved them, and they
after his doctrine believed them not. we therefore are not bound to believe them
another. A fair conclusyon. Now to the the other cause, if it follow that the
fathers never believed this point, because they never hard of it (as in deed
they could not, if it were never said in their time. For as faith comes by
hearing / so hearing comes by saying) it must also by the same reason
follow, that they never believed any of those things, which our savior christ
and all his dyscyples did preach and teach, more then was said before their
coming / so that in all the gospels and the epystels, that is to say, in all
the new testament, there is nothing necessary for ye health of our souls, more
then was said, hard, and understand, before the incarnacyon of christ in the
fathers time: or else if there be / seeing after this doctors mind the
fathers never believed it, because it was never said in their time, and without
ye word (he says) they could have no faith we need not believe it another,
because the same faith shall save us which saved them. How does this doctrine
agree with the words of our savior christ, where to his dyscyples he says:
Blessed are your ears because they do hear those things which many prophets
and just men greatly desired to hear, and yet heard the^ not: what were
those things that made the ears of the apostles so happy and blessed in ye
hearing of them, but the sayenges of christ? And why were those prophets and
just men desirous to hear them, and heard them not, but because they were
never said in their time? Therefore they were not bound to believe them / and
consequently no more are we, because the same faith shall save us which saved
them. Take good head, for this doctor will make the a good christen man anon,
if thou mark him well. Therefore if our savior spoke any things, of more
worthynesse and profit then other / doutles those prophets and just men, were
most desirous to hear them, and yet heard them not. But the cause why was
this, that they were never said, in their days. wherefore they were not bound
to believe the most worthy and profitable things, yt ever christ spoke: and no
more are we another, because the same faith shall save us which saved the^: also
the chyefe things that ever christ taught, are the chyefe things that
apperteyneth to the health of man's soul. But those things were they that made
the ears of his apostles blessed in their hearing of them. And those things
were they that many prophets and just men desired to hear and heard them
not. because they were never said in their time. wherefore those prophets and
just men were not bound to believe, the chyefe things that ever christ taught,
which are the chyefe things that apperteyneth to the health of man's soul,
and therefore no more be we another, because the same faith shall save us, which
saved them. How much time should I spend, if I should not refrain, till I
had shewde the, all such abhomynable inconveniences, as must needs follow of
his sophysticall argument? Therefore because thou have suffycyently heard, how
well he has proved the parts thereof: behold now the hole together after the
same form and manner as he does put it / and se how it will appear in an other
article or two: The same faith shall save us which saved the old fathers
before christ's incarnacyo^. But they were not bound under pain of dampnacyon
to believe, that the sacrament of baptyme is a sacrament. Therefore it shall not
follow that we are bound thereto under ye pain of da^pnacyon. The first part of
mine argument is proved, by saint austen (after Frythes understanding) ad
Dardanu^ etc. The second part is so manifest that it needs no probacyon. For
how could they believe that thing, which was never said nor done: and without
the word they could have no faith. Upon ye trauth of these two parts, must
ye co^clusyon needs follow: yt which is this / that we are not bound to believe,
that the sacrament of baptym is a sacrament. And even by the same argument,
that the blessed sacrament of the altar, is not so myche as a sacrament
another: and other diverse like wise / so, we are (as every man knows) bound
all under the pain of dampnacyon, to receive the sacrament of baptyme, but yet
we be not bound to believe it / that is to say, we are not bound to believe the
same thing, which we are bound to receive. when the just rule is this, that
look of what necessyte the thing is to be had / of ye same necessyte, it is
to be byleued. But thou may se, what a faith this man's argument teaches us,
so new and strange as I dare well say, never true christen man was aqueynted
withal: yet let us behold, the patturne of it in an other case, ones again /
and so (as they say) bless us clean from it forever. The same faith shall save
us which saved the old fathers before christ's incarnacyo^. But ye Jews
dyspersed now in chrystendome (as in Rome and in other places) have the same
faith, which the old fathers had before christ's incarnacyon. Therefore it
shall follow, that the same faith shall save us, which these Jews has now.
The first part of mine argument, (after Frythes understanding of him) is
proved by saint Austeyn ad Dardanu^ etc. The second part is so manifest, that
it needs no probacyon. For the credence of so many, no light persons, but of
sobre wits and good lernyng both, as has come from Rome and other places
(where the Jews be now abiding) and has made report here among us, not
only of their faith to be the same, which was the old fathers but also of
their exceeding dylygens, wherewith they cesse not to keep and observe the old
law and the ceremonies thereof / instructyng teaching and bringing up their
chylderne in such manner therein, yt they be thought, more prompt reddy and
perfyt in the old testament, at xvi. or.xviii. years of age, then be ye most
of our stude^tes at thirty. The crede^ce I say of those so many grave and sad
persons coming from where those jews be, and reportyng these things of them,
with much and many other mo concerning the same / does show an argument
ineuytable, that they have now the same faith which the old fathers had /
specially when in their fast holding and keeping thereof, does consyste all
their great hope, and hole trust of pleasynge god to their salvation. wherefore
upon the trauth of these two parts, must the conclusyon needs follow / yt
which is even this, that the same faith which ye Jews has now, shall save us:
that is to say, without baptyme, without ye believe that our savior christ is
come, or has sufferd death, or has risen again, or has ascends to heaven,
of the which they believe not so myche as any one. Judge now thy self, whether
this be false logyke, or true sophystrye: ye rather the very faith or
abhomynable heresye: is it not a proper argument which can so try our duty
in every article, from one to an other, yt without parell we may leave our
believe of them all together? for surely and without any dout, look how much it
makes again this article, which he would overthrow if he might. Even so myche
it makes not only again many mo directely, but also again them all together
consequently. If it make no thing again all, without fail no more does it
again this one. for any thing again this / and so much again all: nothnng
again all / and as little again this. Therefore where he bosteth him self to
prove his purpose, other by the authoryte of scripture, or by ye authoryte of
old holy doctors, or else by natural reason, so good plenty he had provided
thereof, that for to maynteyne withal, this part of his intent / trust me
trewly, he has no whyt more of any of them three, the^ thou haste hitherto
rehearsed unto me thy self. The which what it is, I think it now, far from
need to declare any forder. All the rest of his babblynge beside, be thou well
assured, is none other, but of his own dremynge swasyons and symylytudes.
whose nature is never to prove any thing, when they proceed of reason and
trauth / myche less therefore, when they spring out of blind error and
falshed. wherefore to spend any time about them, it were but clean lost: seeing
he has in deed so little of these things, by the which he trusted most to
defend him self / and yet also that found other false, or falshely taken and
mysse understand / and in no case, can make for his purpose.


The.xix. chap.
Here. Sir me think ye do this intend to cesse and make an end?


Ca. whereof?


He. Of this matter which ye have been about all this while?


Ca. why not?


He. Nay sir not so. For Fryth would not call it the very fou^dacyo^ of all his
matter, if he had not somewhat else, to make for him then all this that ye
speak of, all though ye would not be aknowen of it.


Ca. I pray the what is that.


He. No less then an other saying of s. Austeyn, which makes as well for
him, as any thing yt ye hard yet.


Ca. I think the same and all one.


He. Nay sir I mean that it makes for him very well.


Ca. who would believe that knowing as thou have hard before?


He. That is no matter / saint Austeyns words he says be these. As many as in
that ma^na, did understand christ, did eat the same spiritual meat that we
do. But as many as sought only to fill and satysfye their hunger with that
manna, did eat and are ded. And like wise the same drink / for the stone was
christ.


Ca. what I pray the will Fryth make of this.


He. Marry sir, Here you may gather / he faith / or ^aynt austeyn / that the
ma^na was unto them / as the bread is to us. And like wise that the water
was to them as the wine is to us. which anon shall appear more plainly.


Ca. How so?


He. He does allege that saint Austeyn says forder these words.

Moses also did eat manna / Aro^ and Phinees did eat of it / and many other
there, did eat of it, and are not ded: why so? Because they understood the
wysyble meat spyritually. They were spirytually an hungered / spyrytually they
tasted, that they might be spyrytually satysfyed. All they did eat the same
spyrytuall meat, and all did drink the same spyrytuall drink utterly the same
mete spyrytually, but another corporally. Because they did eat manna / and we
an other thing / but they the same spyrituall meat that we do. And all they
drank the same spyrytuall drink. They drank one thing, and we an other, but
that was in respect of the visyble thing, the which for all that, did
sygnifye all one and the same, in the spirytuall strength. How drank they the
same drink? of the spyrituall stone following them, says the apostle. For the
stone was christ.

Now sir all this does fryth allege of saint Austeyn. what say you to it.


Ca. This same I say to it. All this same dyffyculte, of this same point,
after this same manner, is well put this same way, clear out of dout. This same
error, of this same fellow, made him of this same blyndnesse, that he was of
this same judgment, that this same word the same / could none otherwise be
understand, but even ye same way, that he thought the same, should draw men,
from the same faith, which all true christen people does hold / and bring
them into the same heresye, which the same Fryth him self does teach. And
And all this same (I say) did he, by the reason of this same word / the same:
For as one in a maze, is he not now in ye same pathe. where he began? And
therefore even just, in the same case that he was than? is there any other
cause, why he does allege these words of saint Austeyn, but that he says
they did eat and drink the same spiritual meat and drink that we do? For
what if he had put in this word / an other in the place of this word / the
same? or else had left them clean out both*


He. Sir that had been an other matter: the text had then, ben nothing for
Frithes purpose, and therefore he would not alleged it / if it had been so.


Ca. Thou say very trauth and therefore all that seems any thing herein to
make for him, thou may well perceive, does only rest (as I say) in this
same word / the same. And haste thou not haerd enough, what a proper principle
it is, being vndefyned, to prove or conclude any thing by? Nevertheless I
would yet wete of Fryth, whether saint Austeyne did here mean, the same in deed,
or the same in effect, which has between them no small difference, as thou
shall hereafter more clearly perceive thy self. And therefore by cause he does
now here again, leave still the menynge of this same word / the same / so
dowtfull and in certain as he did before (the hole pythe of his purpose
consystynge therein) Clear it is that nothing thereof can follow, nor certeynly
be proved by it: as thou thy self have suffycyently seen and haerde all ready.
Beside this / a questyo^ he might al so be asked, of this word spiritual
whether saint Austeyn meant it to be referred / only to ye meat which he does
so call / or also to the intent of them which did eat it: or more over to show
sum dyfference, between our eating and theyrs / or else to show wherein,
their eating agreed with ours. All this (I say) he might well be asked /
because it ought of necessyte to be dyscussed, before any conclusyon theruppon
were attempted: howbeit it is no matter with Fryth, so that he may always first
conclude, what so ever he does intend / and afterward clean slyppe over ye
certitude of his princyple at latter end. As though, where in deed, lies no
less the^ all: there were utterly no matter at all. Therefore while there be
few, of whom this falshed can be perceived: Small wonder it is, though many be
quickly therewith deceived He asks nothing more, of all his dilygent readers /
then to beware of all those same sophisters / which will make them perceive
him, to be one of those warrears / That are of all other, ye chyefe spiritual
murderars. Beware of sophistrye, beware cries he: yet one that uses it more,
dydest thou never set. And therefore of him, what a sophyster find we. But one
of the worste, yt is possible to be: for immedyatly after those words of saint
Austen he brings in the words of saint Beda, which in latin are eue^ these.
Uidete aute^ fide manente signa va^iata. This turned into english: is, thou
know, none other to say. But behold the signs are changed, the faith
abiding.

The which Fryth does english after this manner, saying. Behold that the
signs are altered: and yet the faith abides one. So yt where saint Beda says
no more, but the faith abides: comes he and adds unto it, this same word,
one / sayeynge the faith abides one: to the intent he might thereby make it
sound, that saint Bid had meant, the faith abiding so, that it is all one and
the same in every respect, without any dyfference, as it was before the
incarnacyon. But how false that is, as Fryth does take it / thou have hard
thereof enough at large all ready. Therefore what a raynardes point of him is
this, so craftily (as who say) to drope in such a word, as might soon cause
the holy man's mind to be otherwise taken, then ever he did mean? dyfferth it
nothing to say, it abides, and to say it abides one? A man of.iiii. score
years, so long abides but yet so long he abides not one, for he is one
thing before ten or xii. years of age, the which he is not after.xxiiii. and
an other at.lxxx. which he was not at.xxx. for first a young tender child
increasynge, and after a lusty man at his full strength: but at last, a feeble
impote^t person almost wytherd away / and therefore i^ these caces he abides
not one but rather another and another, and so forth in many other like. This
same word, one, Fryth does not here put it to sygnyfie, as does, one which is
the first beginning of number / but he does put it to signyfye, none other
then does this same word / the same / And this same word / the same / seems
all way (as I told the before that he both and would have it taken) to
signyfye the same, without any manner of dyfference. As in very deed so does it,
in that respect only, whereof it is meant. But that myssed and wrong taken (as
no marvel why that very often times it is so in deed) then does it much deceive
and nothing else. Therefore where he does put in this same word, one, doutles
he might as well have put i^, this same word the same: But that he would not do,
lest by the reason thereof, it should be the sooner spyed, that even only therein,
does rest all his hole presumption, of brynging his purpose to pass, because
he is always so besye therewith, that every man may soon see, that he another
does, nor yet can, claim any thing for him of saint Austeyn, but only ye
word And therefore in the stead thereof, to color the matter, as with some
dyuersyte, he would stele in, this word one / to make another sound in men's
cares, but yet none other signifycacyon in their minds: for trust me trewly,
he has no manner of thing, of faint Austeyn, or any other (which is none / but
only saint Beda in the words before rehearsed) yt can so much as seem, to make
any beke toward this part of his purpose, but only this same word the same /
catch it where he can: And that is the very cause why, that he cleuyth even so
fast and ernestlye unto it, where so ever he can find it. But where he can
not, yet if he may, spy any corner of a sentence where it may but scant seem,
to be sufferd if it were put to it. In with it he goth at aue^ture, trustyng
thereby, to wrynge all ye rest, to his own fond folysshe and evil purpose.
Therefore all though thou have seen and hard enough, to know yt this I do not
feyne. yet that it might more largely apere, let me hear sumwhat of his
own mind, what he says to these foresaid authorytees him self.


The.xxx. chap.
Hereticus Sir that shall ye do / for consequently in that same.v. leefe these
be his words.

(...) these places / he says / you may plainly perceive / not only that it
is none article necessary to be believed under pain of damnacion / seeing the
old fathers never believed it / and yet did eat christ in faith / both before
they had the manna / and more expressly thorough the manna. And with no less
fruit after the manna was ceased. And albeit the manna was to them as the
sacrament is to us / and they eat even the same spiritual meat that we do /
yet were they never so mad / a^ to believe / that the manna was changed into
cri^tes own natural body: but understood it spiritually / that as the
outward man did eat the material manna which conforted the body: so did the
inward man thorongh faith eat the body of crist / beleuynge that as the manna
came down from heaven and conforted their bodies: so should their savior crist
/ which was promised them of god the father / come down from heaven and
strength their souls in everlasting life / redemynge them from their sin
by his death and resurreccion. And likwyse do we eat crist in faith both before
we come to the sacrament / and more expressly thorough the sacrament. And with
no less fruit after we have received the sacrament and need no more to make
it his natural body then the manna was / but might much better understand it
spiritually / that as the outward man does eat the natural bread which
comfort the body / so does the inward man thorough faith eat the body of
christ / beleuyng that as the bread is broken / so was cristes body broken on
the cross for our sins / which comfort our souls unto life everlasting.
And as that faith did save them / without beleuynge that the manna wall altered
into his body: even so does the faith save us. All though we believe not / that
the substance of bread is turned into his natural body. For the same faith
shall save us which saved them. And we are bound to believe no more under pain
of damnacion / then they were bound to believe.

Now sir this is part of his mind.


Ca. Thou say even trawth. And therefore if thou mark it well (sum what after
his own wordys) of these places thou may plainly perceive, not only by
the presence of this word / not only / but also by the absence of this word
/ but also / that he at the first, intended to show us two things. The tone
of the which, notede with this word not only / he has here (as you see)
declared all ready. But the the other dependynge theruppon / and ought to be noted
with this word / but also He does utterly pass over and clean let it go. For
he ro^neth so wonders fast, and can not tell hother / that he forgets tone
end of his tale while he tells us the the other: or else he does purposely
resarue, and keep it in store / till he speak with us him self, to show that
and more


He. Tushe sir ye do but mock him now.


Ca. why cuntreyman, what would thou have me do? for to pytte him, thou
know well, it is to late: To praise him there is utterly no cause. To hold
my peace in this matter, were to far again conscience. And what remains but
always so to speak as he does mynister occasyon? Therefore where he says, that
the old fathers were never so mad, as to believe that the manna was changed
into cristes own natural body / for what purpose does he tell us that, when
every man knows it as well as he (All though no good man would express it in
such terms, consyderyng what persons they were) for that they did not so
believe, there is no man dowteth therein, when it was never so said unto them nor
commanded that they should so do: And a very good cause why. when there was
then, no such thing in deed: for the blessed body of our savior christ in
those days was not. As Fryth I suppose will not deny / but that now i^ very
deed it is. And also said of his own most holy mouth, to be in the sacrament
to / wherefore herein, there is no more to say / but (as it apereth plain)
that all those which believe, that the substance of the bread, by the virtue of
the holy consecracyon, is turned into ye very body of christ. Fryth does note
and acounts to be mad in so doing. That is to wit. All Englyshmen /
welshmen / e^yshmen Frenshmen, scotys, daines, ^^uch men, spayniardes,
portyngals, Italians, with all other true christian nations. For doutles al
those does so believe.


He. Nay sir not all: for all, can not be said, of englyshmen only: nor yet of
diverse other partycular nacyons beside: for some among them, byleuethe other
wise.


Ca. And well spoken: as who say, there is no horse, that may be said all
white, because he is not without sum black / under the tail.


He. Sir in good faith that is but a scornful example.


Ca. yet it is to this purpose sumwhat agreeable, and mete enough, for thine
obieccyon. Howbeit sumwhat better to content the withal, it is said amysse,
that such and such feldes be full of corn, by cause they are not each of them
without some and to much (...) among it? what if there be such heretykes sum
and to many, as Fryth was, among englyshmen, and other true cryste^ nacyons
beside? does that let the trauth of this / that all those nations believe the
very substance of the bread (thorough the holy consecracyon) to be turned into
the very blessed body of christ? All those multytudes (thou see) he does
reckon therein to be mad. He does not except all, or any, true cryste^
princes. About whom there lacks not men, in wit grauite and learning, of the
best sort that may be had. which seem not of all men, to be lightly deceived.
where of in this matter specially, they are utterly most loathe: does the
sadness therefore of Fryth, show us madness in all christian princes / in all
their prudent and wise counsellars / and in all their multitudes of peoples
innumerable under them, or else does the sadness of all those, show us the
madness of him? I require no answer of this, but consider it well with thy
self. Therefore what is there more in all his words, which thou have now
rehearsed, but only his own swasyons: and (as I told the before) his dull
daunsynge still, about this same word / the same / wherewith thou see / he
would conclude, what so ever he bableth before? Nevertheless forth he goes
showing us, after his fantasye, how the old fathers did believe, saying at
the last.

There is no point in our creed / but they byleued it as we do / and those
articles only are necessary unto salvation.

whereof it must needs follow, that without parell of damnacyon (we may deny
all sacraments / for in which of those artycles are they) we may deny that
our sauyoure wesshed the fete of his dyscyples. (And then make we the gospel
not true) we may also deny yt it is damnable to pervert the seyenges of seint
Poule, and other scriptures (all thowgh saint Peter says the contrary) And to
be short, 2. Pe^
we may deny all the hole scripture, those.xii. articles of our creed
excepted, which he says, are only necessari unto salvation: for what so ever
is not necessari to saluacyo^, may be on believed without any daynger of
damnacyon. This does he somewhat more plainly declare, forth with himself,
saying these words.

But the other points contained in scriptur allthowgh they be undoubted
verites. yet may I be sauyd without them.

what is this same, saved without them, but saved without ye believe of them.
That is to say, all thowghe they be true. yet I need not believe them. Therefore
when he notes, all criste^ princes, and al christian people to be mad, for their
believe, which they have in the blessed sacrament. How much may we note him,
more then mad, that will believe and so say, that he may be saved, without the
believe of all or any verytees contained in scripture beside those same.xii.
expressed in the creed?


He. Sir perchance in those same.xii. are contained all the rest.


Ca. Rest thou countreman there upon / and I ask no more. For then say I, as
it is in deed / that this same veryte which he denies, is one of them. and
the old fathers believed it, by the reason it was contained in their faith
co^fusely, as many other were to be reveled and brought to light dystinctely,
by the very coming of our savior christ him self. But Frith was ware of this
well enough And therefore to be sure, that men should not take him so to mean, as
thou supposest (for then were his mouth soon stopped) he does apertely
express the contrary (as I told the) in these words.

But the other points / he says / contained in scripture all though they be
undoubted veritees / yet may I be saved without them.

I have not hard of such a doctor that will not deny, but all the parts of
scripture which be thousands, are verytees. And yet will houlde that we are
not bound to the believe of any mo then.xii. I could never haere of any verite
of the scripture (as there be in it none other) but who so ever would not
believe it, he was utterly therein an heretyke. But this man is, and so teaches
other to be, at liberti with them all.xii. except.


He. It may so be, well enough in certain cases.


Ca. why? what cases I pray the.


He. He does forth with declare.ii. or iii. him self.


Ca. which are they? let me hear them.


He. They be even these.

As be it in case / he says / that I never hard of the^.

There is one.

Or when I hear of them / I can not understand them / nor co^prehende them.

There is another.

We that I haere them and understand them / and yet by the reason of an other
text mysco^strew them / as the bohumes do the words of christ in the.vi.
chapter of Achu^.

There is the third.


Ca. A, be these the cases / wherein me^ be not bound to believe any verytees of
scripture mo then those.xii. expressed in the creed?


He. So says he.


Ca. Then there is no more to say, but if thou mark it well / in his first
case and the second, he does put, whether he hear them, or not hear them.
And in the second case, and the third, whether he understand them, or not
understand them: So that he these cases does not put, but in every case to
avoid, and clean exclude ye need of all the verytees of scripture save
only.xii. For when he says he may be saved without them, where he hear them
or hear them not, whether he understand them, or understand them not. And
therefore, whether he believe them, or believe them not. what need makes he of
them, but meneth away with it in every co^dycion? For if he may be saved
without them (as he says he may) then it is clear, that he has no need of
them to that purpose. if he have no need of the^ to ye purpose Doutles he has
no need to believe them (for the believe of things, ca^ never be of more
necessyte then the things be of them self) therefore if he need not believe
them: in very deed, he has less need to understand them (for more necessary
is believe, then is understanding in things of our faith) and therefore if he
need not believe them, nor understand them / plain it is, that he needs not
so much as hear the^ (for what should he hear that he needs not believe) if
he n^th not so much as hear them, he has utterly no need of them at all: if
he have of them no need at all / then be they (as he would make them in deed)
no parts of the faith: except he will say (as he does so mich as it comes
to) that all the most part of the faith need not be heard / and
consequentely, nor believed another. Thus are we clearly dyscharged of all the
veritees of scripture save.xii. in every condycyon / while we have no manner of
need of any of them / whereof spryngeth an other pretty question why they were
written? But how so ever this deuelyshe doctrine behaueth it self. what other
thing is the faith of christ, but all the verytees of scripture / say he what
he will? And contrary wise, what other thing are all the verytees of
scripture, but the faith of christ? Therefore when all the verytees of
scripture, are contained in the faith of christ / as it is one of them so to
believe. And the faith of christ (as I showed yt before) can not be trewly had,
but all hole together. It must needs follow, that who so ever has the faith of
christ, has also no less then all the veritees of scripture. Falls therefore is
ye doctrine of fryth that says, we may he saved without them all, save.xii.
when ye faith ca^ not be trewly had, without them all. Moreover how say thou
to this? is it not a necessary veryte unto salvation, to believe yt the
commandments of god are good and ought to be kept?


He. Sir what question is that / there is no man does dout therein.


Ca. And is there any parell in it, if a man do not so believe it?


He. In very deed no less then damnable.


Ca. Take heed perchance thou wotest nere what thou say.


He. why what?


Ca. Utterly that fryth is a false lyare. when he says those artycls of our
creed, are only necessary unto salvation: for which is it of those.xii. to
believe yt ye commau^deme^tes of god be good, and ought to be observed and
kept? or that there is any parell in it, if we do not so believe? Those.xii.
only be necessary says he. This veryte thou see is none of the^ (although,
as all other, it may be reduced unto them / the which he will none of in any
case, lest that, which he laborth to overthrow, should so by ye means be brought
in like wise) after his mind therefore without this, we may be saved. That is
to wit, without the believe, that the commandments of god, be good or ought
to be observed and kept. who will not see, yt this were enough, to declare what
a teacher he is? or who has so dull a wit, that he can not perceive, what his
purpose is / and it were but by this, that he can find no way to come to it,
but only by such deuelyshe paths as this is? Behold how feign he would prove
it no need, so to believe in the blessed sacrament of thautare, as does all
true christian people. In very deed so feign, that, to bring it to pass
withal / he stycketh not here (as thou see thy self) to leave us clean
without the need of any and all the verytees of holy scripture, mo then
bare.xii: for in those.xii. verytees of our creed, he thought surely, that this
verite of the blessed sacrament could not be found And therefore he does say,
that they only are necessary unto salvation, to the intent he might utterly
thereby exclude the need of this: the which he would so clean put away, that
even for that cause, he excludes no less, then all the rest, saying.

The other points contained in scripture / all though they be undoubted
veritees / yet may I be saved without them.

And this he declares in every condycyon / that is to say, whether he believe
them or not / where he understand them or not. And whether he mysconstrue them
or not.

All those I say / says he / may be done without any ieopardye of salvation.


The.xxxi. chap.
Hereticus. YE but sir ye must take his conclusyon withal.


Ca. what is that


He. Marry this.

Therefore we believe / he faith / these articles of our creed / in the other is
no parell / so that we have a probable reason to dyssent from them.


Ca. Doutles a conclusyon even like him self. How be it I muse not so much
thereat, nor yet at him another, as I do even at the.


He. At me why so?


Ca. without fail because thou do no more wonder at his blind madness, or
mad blyndnesse chose the whether. How be it I do partly consider ye cause,
for surely if thou thy self were not by him, sumwhat cumbe^d with ye same
cloud of darkness, wherein he was thus inuolued and wrapped him self, thou
sholdest easily. beside his wyly wickedness, perceive him tombled in to ye
greatest folyshnesse, yt ever thou saw any man: For when he says, in the
other is no pacell, so that we have a probable reason to dyssent from them. O
folysh fryth, what if we have none, how then? for how is it possible to have
any probable reason, to dyssent from any verytees, most specially and above
all, from any verytees of holy scripture? for what reason is there probable in
deed, but only that, which is true in deed? and ca^ any one trauth be again
an other? Therefore if thou mark this matter well / thou shall find, that by
these words, he sets us even as myth at lybertye, with our faith in all
these.xii. verytees of our creed to, as he does in all the other: For in them
is no parell another, so that we have a probable reason to dyssent from the^.


He. why sir, we may not dyssent from them in any wise.


Ca. what not with a probable reason? what thing is there, that a probable
reason, does not bynd me to do? A probable reason is ever more true: and shall
not trauth led me to and fro in every condycyon?


He. ye but there can be no such probable reason, to lead us from those
veritees of our creed.


Ca. whi not from them, as well as from the other? be they more trewer, the^
any of the other? Howbeit thou spekest this of thine own head. Frith says not
so / he has no such thing / I must follow his words: he says we may
dyssent from all the verytees of scripture save.xii. so that we have a probable
reason thereto. And I say the same of those.xii. also / if we have a probable
reason thereto. what ought I to refrain, which a probable reason will led me
to? Am I not always bound unto trauth? what other thing is a probable reason?
Therefore in these verytees of our creed, is no parell so that we have a
probable reason, to dyssent from them. Thus takes he from us, the need of all
the veritees of scripture save.xii. which he does except in words / but
utterly not in deed.


He. yes sir for else he would not say

We believe these articles of over creed, in the other is no parell etc.

And also a little before.

For them am I bound to believe. and am dampened without excuse. if I believe them
not. but in the other points contained in scripture. etc.


Ca. what of all this? thou thynkest by the reason of these words, that he
goth abouth to make us believe, that we be bound to the verytees of our creed.


He. what else? for what purpose shosde he speak it / but for that? or to show
us, how he does believe them him self?


Ca. I thought even as much, when he intends none of them hoth: for his
purpose is not to make us believe them / but only to make us believe no more,
but them: for, to go about to make us believe so myche, is one thing / and to
go about, to make us believe no more / is an other thing. Therefore his intent
is (as who say) there to stop in our faith, that it should no farther / and
not to bring it thither, or there to uphold it: For all though his blyndnesse
be so great, and manifest, that even the very same, which he laborth to
improve, he confesses him self, to be a verite of scripture (or else would he
never call it an article of our faith, as in the.xvi. lefe of his book he does
in deed, saying these words.

For though it be an article of our feyth. yet it is not an article of oour
creed in the.xii. articles / which are sufficient for our salvation:

All though his blyndnesse (I say) be so great yt him self does confess this
a veryte of scripture, which he laborth to improve. yet because he thought it
could not be found (as I said) among the.xii. verytees of our creed. Even
therefore would the catchepoule, as it were in a pinfold pyn up therein our
faith, from all ye verytees of scripture beside / and all to the intent it should
not come at this, for the special grudge he bears unto it: Oh, there I was a
little to large: for why should I say, that he beryth a special grudge again
this blessed veryte, when he serves them all a like? yet am I herin sumwhat to
rash to: for why should I say that he serves them all a like, when he would
sley those for this / But this for it self. not much unlike him, which for ye
malice he bore again one innocent, slew an hole multitude. But as he myssed
his purpose of ye one, whom he pryncypally intended. And (to his own
perdycyon) was but a mean of bryngyng all the resydew to a clerar light. Even
so I doubt not of this herod like wise, but that he shall mysse his purpose of
this one veryte, which to destroy he does cheyfly intend / and also in the
multitude beside, although to his own pa^dicyon / yet be but a mean of
bryngyng the^ to a more clear light of knowledge in many one. That herod and
this, persecutours both / and both of christ, wherein they gree / but in the
manner of their persecution sumwhat they dyffer: for that herod did persecute
him dyrectely and apertely / but this he rode, under and with the pretense, of
the contrary. That herod, sent men to find him where he was not / but this
herod sends men to lose him, where he is: Also he, to make him be taken /
but this, to make him forsaken: he with very cursednesse / but this, with very
falls holiness. Therefore, what so ever this new herod does say, as touching
our creed. Never think, that he speaks it, to have us believe so myche as
that: nor yet to show, that he believes it him self (for though he say so, he
speaks it not for ye cause) but (as I said) he intends only to make us
believe no more: for less he thought he could not. And therefore he supposing,
that to be suffycyent (if he might keep us therein) to exclude this veryte of
the blessed sacrament, attempteth us no forder dyrectely. But yet by mean he
teaches us away, to forgo that to: for when he dyschargeth us of our faith in
all ye verytees of scripture, save those.xii. of our creed / he does it by
such a rule as ledeth us even like wise from them to: when he says.

In the other is no parell / so that we have a probable reason to dyssent from
them.

This probable reason (as I have told the) is able to dyscharge us of al manner
of things, none except wherein so ever we may have it / and therefore of all the
artycles of our creed, as well as of any other veritees of scripture beside.


The.xxxii. chapi.
Here. A Sir, I do now perceive, that all this while, ye take a probable reason
far otherwise then Frith does mean it.


Ca. Hah, what say thou? I pray the tell me that tale again.


He. Marry sir I say fyrth does not here, so mean a probable reason, as you do
take it.


Ca. Trowest thou so?


He. No trewly / and that a man may perceive.


Ca. How thanne?


He. ye know well enough, that there be taken two manner of probable reasons:
for all though there be but one, which is the very chyefe / and has in it the
very trauth in deed. yet is there an other, which is called a probable reason
to / not because it has in it, such a trauth as the the other has, but because
it is so like and apparent, that it is very hard to avoid.


Ca. Now in good faith countrema^ it is very well espied: and do thou think
in deed, that this latter probacyo^ is it, which fryth does mean?


He. ye trewly, that do I: for it can stand with no reason, that he should mean
the the other / because (as I now perceive my self) one very trauth can never
led us to dyssent from any other / but rather bind us to it.


Ca. Doutles therein thou hytest the nail upon the head. And therefore it is
utterly no more to say, but this.

In the other is no parell so that we have a probable reason to dissent from
them.

Not that probable reason, which has in it the very trauth in deed. but that,
which is but only apparent / and does but only so seem to have: wherefore what
so ever does but only seem to be true: without fail is not true in deed: and
what so ever is not true in deed / is utterly but a craft or a wyell, which
is ever deceyuable. And therefore ye very conclusyon is this. In the other is no
parell / so that we have any wylye and craftye color, or any deceyuable
conueyaunce, to dyssent from them.


He. Tusshe he never meant so another I am sure.


Catho. what another tone way nor the other? wylt thou have him speak of a
probable reason, and mean it another true nor false? that can not be / except
it be said (as of many one it is when he speaks he woth nere what) his wit is
not his own. Therefore if he mean it true / then it is even this. In the other
is no parell, so that we have that probable reason to dyssent from them /
which is impossyble to be had. And at the lest, how folyshe is he, to suppose
unto us any such case? Therefore if he mean it but apparent, and not true in
deed / then it is this. In the other is no parell, so that we have that
probable reason, to dyssent from them / which is such, and so easy to be had,
yt all we ought, to bless us from it.


He. Bless us from it? what need that?


Ca. Needs it not troest thou, to bless us from that reason, which might
led us to dissent from any verite of scriptur? for what is the scripture but
gods word? Therefore what is any verite of scripture, but the veryte of gods
word? And what reason is that, which ledeth one to dyssent from any veryte of
gods word / but only the very falsite of the dyuels word? yet herin, says
fryth, there is no parell. This you see plainly, he moves us unto: with a
probable reason / he says / we may with out any parell, dyssent from all the
verytees of gods word, save.xii. Does he except those.xii. as he thinks in
deed / or else for fear yt he dare none otherwise do? if he do it, but for
fear / thou know then, what he is well enough. if he do, as he thinks,
how blind is he, that can not se, what so ever may led a man to dyssent from
one verite of gods word, may likewise led him from an other, and an other,
and so from them all together Therefore while Fryth does here plainly show us
a way to dyssent from the veritees of holy scripture which is the word of god
/ what other thing therein does he, but utterly show us the word of ye dyuell?
Howbeit herein doutles he teaceth us no wors than a special point and an hye
mysterye, of his own faculte: for without questyon, by this probable reason,
found he the means to dyssent and come away from the verytees of holy
scripture him self / or else without fail he had bid in them still. By this
also, ryseth ever the first heretyke. By this, deceyueth he an other / by this
genderth they mo and mo / by this of times grow they to a multitude / by this,
they contynew to the dysquyetnesse of the faithful floke of christ: Also by
this reason. which is but apparent probable / which seems just and is not,
which promyseth the trauth and pays falshed / which shows it self one,
and is an other. By this (I say) those heretykes enticed, persuaded and led,
entyce persuade and led, from the veritees of scripture, from the veritees of
gods words, from the verites of life everlasting. By this, they cry to the
people, beware of deceyuers, beware of false teachers beware of subtle
sophysters. And what other thing do they therein in deed, but inuit the people
to beware of them: the which I would to god ye people could so understand / as
thou may easily do here of fryth, if any spark of light remain in the at
all. Therefore let us now return to his third case again breuely to se what
we left therein behind / he says.

Or / be it in case / that I hear them and understand them / and yet by the
reason of an other text mysco^strew them / as the bohemes do the words of
christ in the.vi. chapter of John^.

Here he makes his ensample of this, that ye Bohemes (as he says) does
understand the words of our savior christ, in the.vi. chapter of saint John^,
and yet mysconstrue them for all that, by the reason of an other text. This is
according and even like unto his case. And therefore if ever thou have hard
such a brain / be judge thy self. For how is it possible for any man, to
misconstrue the same thing, which he does understand? it is one thing to
understand, and an other to know? is any man therefore able to take a thing
otherwise, then he knows it is? does not the knowledge or understanding of a
thing, clean put away the mysconstruynge thereof? what is mysconstruynge, but
mysunderstandynge? for mysundersta^dyng or mysconstruyng, does, nor can never
chance, but only for lack of knowledge and understanding: or else will he join
them together this way / that when he understands any veryte of scripture /
yet he can purposely, by the reason of an other text, mysconstrue it
nevertheless, to deceive other withal. But then might he leave out this same /
by the reason of an other text / without the which or any other occasyo^
beside, he can do it even as well of his own mind only, as it shall
hereafter appear plain, that in very deed, I never se him do otherwise.
Therefore all though thou may this perceive, ye great profundyte of his wit
and lernyng both. Notwithstanding I do not yet discommende the just agreement,
that is between his case and his example. For doutles impossyble is the tone
and even so is the the other. And therefore no less then a very lie, is the tone
in case / and even full as much is the the other in deed.

But now to return / he says / to our purpose / if we will examen the
authoritees of saint Austen and Beda before alleged / we shall epsy / that
beside the probacyon of this foresaid proposicyon they open the mystery of all
our matter / to them that have even to se

(those he means which are as blind as he)

For saint Austen says / that we and the old fathers do dyffer as touching
the bodylye meat / for they eat manna and we bread.

Now cuntreman, because thou dydest after him recyt the words of saint Austeyn
unto me thy self. I pray the heartily therefore remember them well, and tell me
trewly, whether saint Austeyn spoke so much as any one word of bread, as this
fellow reports him.


He. Sir therein to confess the trauth, saint Austen says, that the fathers
did eat ma^na, and we an other thing. But in deed he has not this same word
bread.


Ca. Thou may se therefore, what a just exposytor gentell fryth is: He
thought this word bred / would sound sumwhat more for his purpose, then this
word another thing / which in deed sounds toward it nothing at all. And
therefore in the stead thereof, in with bread he comes, but not by and by
immedyately after he / rehersyth the words of saint Austeyn / but at length
long after: For had he brought it in straight way, while the words of saint
Austeyn were fresh in the mind of the reader, he wist well enough, it would
then be sone perceived, and taken, not like a point of falshed, but for very
one and the self same in deed. And therefore he falls first into a long
babbling of his own inuencyon (such as here I have partly declared unto the)
And then afterward when he supposes the words of saint Austeyn sumwhat groune
out of remembrance with the reader in comyth the baker with his bread, where
no man looks after it where no man will eat it, where no man speaks any
word of it. And therefore i^ few words by mine assent, he shall for his about be
this content: what so ever men say, or herin will think / to take his bred
with him, and go ere he drink: for yet hard I never, nor no man else I
suppose, that this word / an other, or an other thing / might be expouned by
this word, bred / before now: having none other circumstance, to lead a man to
it, the^ there is. Howbeit, by this mean, it is brought to pass / saint
Austeyn by this word / an other thing / does mean the holy sacrament. And the
sacrament, fryth does mean to be very bred / by the reason whereof, he does
expoune this word / an other thing / to sygnyfie bred. whereby thou may
plainly perceive, that he expowneth saint Austeyns words, not after saint
Austeyns meaning: but only after his own, as he himself does take it / and
not as saint Austeyn does mean it: And what kind of exposycion is this? if I
expoune thy words after my mind, and not after thine / make I a true
exposycyo^ or a false?


He. That is to plain, to be asked.


Ca. See thou not therefore (as I said) what an exposytor fryth is? if thou
say, that he does not here expoude saint Austeyn, but allege him, in this
word / bread / then does he allege him falsely. For saint Austeyn thou see
speaks here no such word. if thou say, that he does not allege him in this
word bred, but therewith expoune him / then falls is his exposycyon, because he
follows not the mind of his author. For could not saint Austeyn him self
have put in this word / bred / as well as this word / an other thing / if he
had so meant, or had not seen some cause to the contrary? was his mind so
occupied, that he thought not upon that, which was most present reddy and apt
to be thought on? or could he not call ye word to remebraunce? because both
it, and also the thing that it sygnifyeth, was so strange and far out of
use? he stycketh not at manna, but expresses it with the proper name of it
dyrectely: why stays he at this, more then at that? why does he touch this,
with no proper name, but with a word commune and indyfferent, in manner to all
things? would he refrain so reddy a thing, and se no cause why? if he saw
any, what was it? Frith will not put this in dysputacyon unto us: he would not
hear of it / he had lever have us forget it: it makes not for his purpose as
it shall well appear hereafter.


He. yet sir in some other places saint Austen himself does call it bread
dyrectely.


Ca. why therefore does Frith, allege him so here where he does not so call it
/ and will not allege him there, where he does call it so? what meneth he
thereby? does it sygnyfye nothing? I will well, that saint Austeyn so does call
it / and that diverse times: but yet never without such a certain conuenyent
cyrcu^stau^ce with all, as declares what he meneth therein: the which
cyrcumstaunce, Fryth perceyueth to make no less again him / Then ye word
bread, seems to sou^de with him. And therefore because the word and the
cyrcumstaunce, he can not find a sonder / he himself would pryke in the tone,
in some other corner: as thou see him here, this craftily assay / where he
does think, the cyrcumstaunce is away. And this is the very thing I may
trewly say to the, which opens the mysterye of all his matter, to them that
have eyes to se. wherefore take this for a general rule, that when so ever thou
thynkest him to bring in any authorite / yet if he understand it, after this
fassyon. He brings for him in deed, even none at all / but only pretend
that he does, and under the color thereof, brings no more but his own bare
mind a lone, as I will now promise the before, you shall euydently se him, none
other wise do hereafter.


The.xxxiii. Chapi.
Catho. YE but yet sir your co^unycacyon does (me think) myche to this
dyrectely sound / that fryth, even very purposely went about to deceive Howbeit
there is I suppose, no man living, of any conscience at all, which can believe
that ever he, or any other, would be so unhappy, to play ye pranke, in a matter
so great: for what other thing were it so to do, but even wylfully to da^pne
him self? To deceive, and deceive purposely is two things / for one may
sometime chance to deceive and yet be not ware of it.


Ca. Trauth it is: howbeit thou must yet consider this / that the falshed of
his opinion, which he would men should believe / is one thing: but the way
that he takes, to make it credyble / that is to wit, his process or treates,
and all his handelynge thereof / is an other thing. Because the tone is for the
the other / and therefore must they needs be diverse: wherefore as touching the
first / that is the falshed of his opinion / he was perchance not ware of yt,
but took it for true. And although he went about to derceyue, yet peradventure
not wyttyngly therein. But as concerning the the other part, that is to wit, his
hole process, all his dysputacyon and handelynge of the matter, to bring it in
credence withal. It is not possible but he must needs beware of that: for it
was his own studyouse act, and voluntarye labor, purposed for the nonest (or
else, thou know thy self, it had never ben written. And than had he never
left the book behind him) Therefore because all this, was and is, none other
but a certain conueyaunce of him devised, to bring his opynio^ into men's
believe. And because his opinion (by this mean coueyd) in deed is none other but
utterly falls. It must needs follow, that all this mean is none other, but even a
conueyau^ce of falshed. And is a co^ueyau^ce of falshed, any other thing but a
falls conueyaunce? And what other thing, is a false conueyau^ce but utterly
very falshed it self?


He. why sir, by this reason, all that ever he does is false.


Ca. Never dout therein / for what so ever trauth, is ons brought to verify
falshed with all / doutles is even therein falsified it self / because, if it
were not thereto brought, with a false sense / it would utterly destroy
falshed, and not uphold it / it would make it open and manifest, and never
color, nor hyde it. Therefore while this falshed, that is to wit / his false
conueyaunce (which he purposely, wyttyngly, and warly, wrought and provided to
verifye the falshed of his opinyon withal) could not be hyd from him, being
his own proper and voluntarye act, studyously labored (as I said) for you
nonest. Thou can by no reason, excuse him, but at lest in this, he went even
purposely about to deceive men / except thou wylt say, that what so ever he
wrote, he did it, as a man in a trau^ce vnwars, without any intent or purpose
why. And then must thou needs, ascrybe and impute the wylful purpose, cause and
intent thereof, (without the which it could never be done) to some cursed
occult and wicked spryt, by whom he was led therein, as an ignorant instrument.


He. what led with some wicked spyrit? nay sir not so.


Ca. I would thou were able well to avoid it.


He. That can I sone do.


Ca. which way.


He. Even this / suppose that his opinyon were falls, as ye say yt it is.


Ca. why art thou but at the supposycyon thereof yet, so much as thou have hard
of it?


He. Tushe yt is no matter.


Ca. yes it is a matter, and that a lamentable / how so ever thou take it.
Howbeit I do not greattly merueyll thereat, knowing therein as I know.


He. why what know ye therein?


Ca. Forth with yt thou have in hand. I will tell the herafter.


He. Marry sir, suppose (I say) that his opinion were falls (as ye say it is)
for the which it would follow, that all his hole process and conueyaunce
thereof, to make it credyble withal were false to, by the reason of the same.
yet as he is well ware, what his opinyon is, but not that it is false. Even so
is he well ware to, what his process and all his conueyaunce thereof is: but
not that it is the conueyaunce of any falshed / when, so far as he is ware
of, there is in deed none such. For as he thinks his opinion is true. Even
so he thinks is all that ever he does to prove it by. And therefore he teaches
no falshed wyttyngly.


The.xxxiiii. chap.
Catho. TThou spekest well for him. But yet therefore I pray the, how comes
this to pass? that one having not half the wit or lernyng, that he was
thought to have before he fell to these folyshe fond and erroneous opinions /
can sone perceive so much folly and falshed in his book, that there is in manner
no lefe without, and yet he him self, could see thereof none at all? How (I
say) comes this to pass? May we not think, that he met with the faculte,
which causes a man (as they say) The longer he lives the more fool he
wereth? That is to say the more he takes of it the les wit he has: for if he
saw any falshed therein, then went he wyttyngly about to deceive: if he saw
none, where is so myche / what bitter smooke so trombled his eyes, yt he coud
not espy some part of it? was he not taken troest thou in to ye tuition, of
some dark tutor, which (for all thy saying) caused him therein to wander, he
wist nere where? how might we think otherwise, if we with dilygence perpende
well the matter? For the very trauth to say, if the devil him self, were at
the lybertye, to be incarnate / and even so to come among us, only to entyce
and led us from any article of our faith. Let me se, ymagyon thy self, how it
were possible, for that father and founten of all craftye falshed, to inuente
for that purpose any manner of wyell, comparable to this, which we find in
fryth. That is to wit, to hear us in hand, it is indyfferent, and at our own
lybertye, to believe it or not, there is no parell in the matter, take which
part we list: for how many true men is there in this world, touched with
never so little a need / yt might not sone, be brought to stelynge, if they were
borne in hand, and so persuaded to think in deed, that it were an act
indyfferent, and without all manner of parell to them yt would use it? ye what
manner of euyls are they, which men, now full honest, would then forbere and
refrain, wherein if they thought, were to the^ no daynger? Or which way might
they so easily be led unto them, as to be styffely so borne in hand? ye make
them but ones believe that, and led them no fardyr: for it shall then be no need
at all: a marvelous zele of justice has he, that would not sone, pley the
thyfe at a companio^s request / if he were ons brought in opinyon, yt therein
could be, to him no manner of parell: thus learned Fryth / of whom so ever he was
taught / that he had a wonders fast faith in this blessed sacrament, which
would not sone be content to leave it, if he were ons brought in opinion, yt
therein coud come unto him no hurt: he saw it a matter of most difficulte to
bring criste^ people from yt faith direcly: but he saw it again a matter as easy
if they might ons be made believe no parell therein, if they so did: fulwell he
wist, bring them ons to that opynion, and let them then alone them self, it
should be ynowgh, with the help of his own dark doctor which taught him this
lesson: for doutles, from whens it came, the propertees thereof themself, does
apertely show / as much as the most exceeding wylynesse, falshed and
folishnesse yt may be, is able to do: of the wylynesse, (whereof we now speak)
what should I say? but mark it well, with deliberation indyfferently, and be
judge thyselfe, whether it does not in thy consyderacyon, so swel and incresse
that it wexeth in manner incomprehensyble. Of the falshed (about the opening
whereof we have been almost all this while) all though no man be able
suffycye^tly to express it. yet thereof so much have ye hard, as is far from
the need, of any more: Of the folyshnesse, there is not else to be said / but I
am sure thou never hardest nor saw ye like. For who (but he that dwells in
so deep a doungeo^ of darkness, that he can see no manner of light) would make
any manner of dyuysyon in a matter: and yet plainly houlde, that there is utterly
no such matter to divide? For the tone part of his work (whereof now we have well
tried enough to se what it is) is only to prove, that no man is bound to
believe the blessed bodyly presence of our savior christ in the sacrament: but
yet that every man without any parell so may believe, if he will. And ye the other
part / as all his book does clearly testyfye / is to prove, yt there is
utterly no such thing in deed for to believe: whereof / beside his hye conning
dyuisyon, of this indivisible nothing, after his own doctrine / plain it is,
that he teaches us manyfestely (god reward him as he knows best) even to
have a false believe. when he says we may believe, that him self does say, is
not: and yet him self will not believe, that he and we do say there is. For we
say it is an article of our faith / and even so says he. Howbeit he holds it
indyfferent to believe it or not / but yet so do not we. And for that cause he
will not believe it one whyt, till we do both agree. The which he has brought so
nigh the point, that now it will never be. And therefore will I tell the one
thing more / which I had clean forgotten before.


Here. what was that?


Ca. An other pretty cause why, that he / as I showed the / so deuydeth all the
other verytees of scripture, from those.xii in the cred


He. what cause should that be?


Ca. In the last lefe of his book his own words does well declare, which
be these.

There are many veritees / he says / which yet may be no such articles of
our feythe


He. Is this all?


Ca. Nay not so, but first, what articles meneth he, by these no such?


He. No such as be of our creed.


Ca. well said. And what verytees does he mean here, that may be no such
articles.


He. All ye other veritees of scripture.


Ca. Hear his words again, with those that follows, and therein let them be
judge

There are / feyth he / many veritees. which yet may be no such articles of
our feythe. It is trwe that I lay in yrons when I wroote this. how beit I
would not reseyue this truth for an article of our feyth. for you may think
the contrary without all ^^oberty of dampnation.

Consider well now, this gere together. And thou may sone perceive, that this
same ensample of his imprisonment, does clearly show that he meneth not here,
by these same / many veritees / any veritees of scripture, but the veritees
indyfferently of other things: which verytees in general, with the veryte of
his imprysonment in special, he brings for ensample, how he would have us
take all the veritees of scripture: For as the verite of his imprisonement, may
be no such article of our faith, as be those of our creed. Even so after ye
same manner, would he have all those other verytees of scripture lykwyse (which
thensample does plainly teach) But ye verite of his imprysoneme^t, and al
other like beside / are not only none such, but utterly none artycles at all
in deed. The very same therefore is it, which he goes about in all the verytees
of scripture / scantly those except of the creed. Before, yet he left them as
artycles indyfferent, but now will he have them none at all: or else all other
as much as they: what wonder is it though he this divide them, as of an other
kind, from ye veritees of ye creed (seyeng we may be saved without them / and
therefore that we need not believe them) when they be with him, of no more
estymacyo^ the^ be al such other veritees beside as even for ensample, The
styple of Pouls is higher then the cross in cheep? And because ye veryte
thereof is none article of our faith, for all it is a veryte in deed. Therefore
no more be any or all the verytees of holy scripture, save only those
expressed in ye creed: were not a man happy to mete with such a doctor to
teach him his faith? Do thou not perceive the mighty power and strength of
this verite, which he would so feign overthrow, when thou see it give him
so scornful fauls, in every wyell yt he attempteth again it? In all this,
what does he else, but make the verytees of divine things and humane things,
heavenly things, and erthly things, everlasting things and temporal things
/ equal even, and of no more worthynesse or dygnyte, one then an other, when
he will have us no more bound to believe, the tone then the the other? For more I
suppose is no man bound to the estymacyon of things, then he is bound, to ye
believe of them. It is true (he says) that he lay in yro^s when he wrote this
/ but yet would he not receive that trauth, for an article of our faith. And
doutles yet went he than, more nere about to make it one, then (as I suppose)
he was ware of him self: For surely he brought it almost within one word of
it. For had he put in, as the trauth required, but this same word, whorthely,
more then he did. And said, it is true, that I lay in yro^s worthyly, when I
wrote this. without fail it had been then so nigh an article of our faith, that
who so ever were suffycyently instructed of the matter, could never think the
contrary, without great ieoperdye of da^nacyon. For dowtles such as think him
on worthy lie prysoned, knowing the cause, be of the same opinion that he was
(god of his mercy grant them soon to amend it) for how dampnable that
opinion is, and it were but by these his reasons (as to some they seem) which
we have dyscussed hitherto all ready, it may right well and suffycyently appear:
how be it god willing, in the resydue yet to come, it shall be then no dout to
ye most effeccyonat friends, that ever therein he had: those only except,
which gat it by the very same mean, that he came by it him self. Therefore
with this to pause and rest for the time, thou may plainly see, how his
foundacyon (which not a little he bosteth so strong and inuincyble) now lies
all to shaak, toorne, and clean dyspersed every stone from other / except thou
wylt say, that he made it of no such matter, but only of a dyrtye dunghyll
heepe of cannell rakyng / the which few men could find in their hearts so nigh
it to come for styncke, as ons to give a sporne thereat. and therefore it lay so
long in rest. Now cou^treman fare well, till an othertyme


The. xxxv. chap.
Here. MArry sir a fair partynge.


Ca. why what eyleth it?


He. what should it profit to tell you, if we shall leave it this?


Ca. There is no remedy: for I can tarry no longer now.


He. Then sir when shall we mete together again?


Ca. Even when thou wylt thy self.


He. That by my will, shall be no farther hens but eue^ to morrow / while this yt
I have hard to day, is somewhat fresh in remembrance.


Ca. I am well content.


He. But where shall I mete with you.


Ca. In no place better then even here.


He. what time? at after none?


Ca. Nay it is none after nones works, I may say to the, for the hole day
long, I fere would be little enough. And therefore come by nine a clock at the
fardyst. For thou never hardyst such a work of an hetetyke, syns thou were
borne, as thou shalt hear I promise ye.


He. what wors then I have hard to day?


Ca. Be judge thy self when thou hear it.


He. well sir I will not fail mine our / for I shall now think long till it
come.


Ca. God be with the therefore till then.


He. Nay sir I will bring ye homewarde.


Ca. No no it shall not need.


He. yes sir I may not chose for half your way and mine is all one.


Ca. why then come on let us go together / for so far.


He. Then sir is it not yet as good we be talking in our way, for the while as
aught else.


Ca. yes and I am very well pleased therwithall, if thou have any thing to say.


He. yes marry sir, yt have I, and that is this, I would feign know, by what
reason you can prove, that this same article, which we have been about all this
while, is one of them, which we be bound of necessite to believe: ye have
hitherto labord to improve Fryth, for holdyng the contrary: but yet have you
done utterly nothing to the probacyon of it your selfs / for it is two things
to prove Frythes opinion falls, and to prove your own true.


Ca. Trowest thou so?


He. I think so.


Ca. well all though the probacyon of the trauth, can not have his very apt and
most convenient place, till the falshed be clean ^efelled and thorouly put
away, and that in the hole, as it is now, but in the first part only. yet
all void of thy request / will I not leave the, because I see yt somewhat
desirous to hear of the matter. And therefore while Frythes opinion is this,
that it is an article but indyffere^t, and of no necessite for to be believed:
and ours clean and dyrectely the contrary. For the which the tone part or the
the other, must needs be true: it must therefore clearly follow, because the
falshed is found of his side plain, that utterly the trauth remains with us.


He. Nay sir that follows not. For the falshed that is found with Fryth, is
in his probacyon, and not in the thing, which he goes about to prove. For ye
know right well, that a man may mysse in the probacyon of a true thing
sometime, yet is not the thing falls, because the probacio^ is not true.


Ca. Thus may you excuse every falshed which any falls harlot goes about to
prove true. For sone may thou say, all though he fail in his probacyon: yet
is the thing true enough / because a man may be deceived in the probacyon of
a true thing: when in deed the falshed of a thing, is often times more then
half dysclosed / even by the falshed of the probacyon thereof, it being ons
perceived. Therefore although the manifest falshed of frythes probacyons, do not
even very dyrectly prove, the falshed of his opinion. yet makes it at the lest
an ineuytable conjecture thereof. And eue^ therefore as much for the trauth, of
our side. For what does this thing show, that all the reasons that he does
make, or is able to ymagyon for ye purpose, does not only not prove his
intent, but also draw with them such odible conseque^ces beside, as no good
cryste^ ear, will not excedyngly abhor to hear. what does all this (I say)
show, but that the mighty and inuincyble trauth of the contrary part, will in
no case suffer it self to be improued? Moreover what wylt thou sey if Fryth do
suffycyently prove our part him self.


He. what sir it can never be, for all his hole purpose is utterly to ye
contrary.


Ca. yet mark him well / for he intendyng in deed to prove ye contrary, makes
never a reason, but yt (as I have plainly declared unto the) it ronneth even
utterly, as much again the necessyte of any and every other article beside, as
it does again this, for the which he did purpose it. And that were not possible
except this were one of of them, and of the self same nature that they be. For
how should any of his reasons purposed again the necessyte of this article
only, touch the necessyte of all or any other likewise / more then they
touch the light of the son, the heat of the fire, or the hardenes of
dyamondes, and other like / being no more purposed again those artycles, then
again these things / but utterly because those articles, and this, again the
which they were purposed by all one and of the self same nature. And these
things, each of them clean of an other? For what so ever reason is purposed
with or again any thing, so far does it always run, as the co^munite of
the nature of the thing does exte^de, and no fardyr. As be it in case, that one
would take upon him, to prove or improve, thy soul only to be immortal / what
so ever reason he should make with or again it / without fail must needs
ro^ne likewise to ye souls of all men beside: and that were not possible, if
that immortalyte were not comune between their souls and thine. And after the
same manner / you cause why that Frythes reasons does run as well again the
necessyte of all other artycles, as it does again this, for the which they
were purposed, is utterly because ye very same necessyte is common between
them and this / for else, it were not possible, for those reasons purposed but
only again this / to make any thing again ye necessyte of those / more then
again (as I said) the light of the son, or any thing else beside: wherefore
it must needs follow that this article is of as great necessyte to be believed as
any other And therefore where Fryth would have proved it indyfferent and could
not: he has well proved it necessary and would not. Thou gettest no more now.


He. yes sir I pray you tell me one thing more and then will I bid you
farewell.


Ca. what is that?


He. Marry sir I have red Frithes book, I wene as often as ye have done yet
could I never perceive in it this gere that ye have declared. And I marvel
what should be the cause thereof.


Catho. It is no maruayle at all / for dowtles if Fryth had no more virtue wit
and learning in thine opynion / then he had in his own head / thou should
sone have perceived myche more then I have told the. And that shall thou find
by experyence if thou withdraw thine opinion from him.


He. Trow ye so?


Ca. There is no dout of it?


He. well sir here is my way now, and therefore will I trouble you no longer at
this time.


Ca. well then fare well countreman till to morrow


He. God be with you sir.


Ca. And with the to.


He. At nine of the cloak ye say.


Ca. ye what else.


He. I will not fail you.


Finis.
Here ends the first book.
printer's or publisher's device Dominus dedit dominus abstulit sicut domino
placuit ita factum est.


