THE ANCIENT Ecclesiastical Practice OF CONFIRMATION.

Confirmed by Arguments drawn from Scripture, Reason, Councels, Fathers, and
later Writers.

Written, Upon occasion of the Confirmation of the Prince his Highness,
performed on Monday in Easter-weeke, 1613. in the Chapel at White Hall, by
the right Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of Bath and Wels, Deane of his
Majesty's CHAPEL. BY GEORGE HAKEVVILL, Doctor of Divinity, his Highness
Chaplain in ordinary.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by THOMAS SNODHAM, for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at
his Shop, at the Sign of the Bishops-head in Paul's Churchyard. 1613.

TO THE PRINCE HIS HIGHNESS, MY GRACIOUS LORD AND MASTER.
Having been an Eare-witnesse of that full satisfaction, which upon strict and
long Examination, your Highness yielded my Lords Grace of Canterbury, and my
Lord of Bath and Wels, in the Grounds and Principles of Christian Religion, I
was encouraged to add form and life to these ensuing Observations, lately
collected touching Confirmation, that from thence your Highness might not
only be informed how justly the Church of England, together with many other
godly and useful Ceremonies, retayneth this laudable and ancient Custom, but
farther be induced to the receiving of it with the greater cheerfulness in
your own Person, assuring my self that your Highness Example will serve to
draw on many Inferiors, either to take it more commonly and willingly
themselves, or at the least, to esteem it more reverently in others. Now the
God of Heaven, who has planted that Grace in you, which to the great content
and comfort of my Soul, I perceive to increase daily, confirm it in you, and
you in it, to the glory of his Name, the good of his Church, and the Salvation
of your own Soul.

Your Highness Chaplain, and Servant, in all humble duty to be commanded,
George Hakewill.

THE ANCIENT ECCLESIASTICAL PRACTICE OF Confirmation.
CHAP. I.
Of the Nature, and diverse Uses, of Confirmation.
1 CONFIRMATION is an ancient Custom of the Church, used after Baptism:
consisting in Examination, and Imposition of hands, with effectual Prayer for
the illumination of Gods most holy Spirit, to confirm and perfect that which
the grace of the same Spirit, has already begun in Baptism.

2 The benefits of this Confirmation are diverse: whereof the first is, that men
expecting Examination, and trial from their Spir^tuall Fathers, they might
more willingly acquaint, and carefully season thems^lues with the grounds of
Christian Religion, before Malice and corrupt Examples depraved their minds:
as namely, with the Articles of our Creed, which teach us all we are to
believe: the Ten Commandments, which teach us all we are to do: the Lords
Prayer, which teaches us all we are to ask, together with the nature and use
of the two great Sacraments of the Gospel, Baptism already received, and the
Eucharist to be received afterward.

3 Secondly, it serves that when they come to years of discretion, they
should publicly make confession of that Faith themselves, which others had
promised for them in Baptism, to the discharge of their Sureties, and the good
example of others.

4 Thirdly, that by such Confession they might make profession of difference
from all Jews, Turks, and Infidels, out of the Church; Heretics,
Schismati^es, and profane persons in the Church.

5 Fourthly, that then specially, when they first come to the use of reason,
beginning to fall into sundry kinds of sin, and being least able to resist,
for want of experience, by Imposition of Hands and Prayer they might receive
strength and defense against the temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil.

6 Fifthly, that the Prelates and chief Guides of Gods Family, to whom the
Cure of their Souls belongs, finding upon Examination, some part of their
own heavy burden discharged; might from thence reap comfort in beholding
those fair foundations already laid, and glorify God, whose praise they sound
in the mouths of Infants.

7 This kind of Confirmation (were there no authority to countenance it) is
in my judgment so useful in the Church of God, that upon good reason it might
be entertained among Christians: but for farther confirmation of it we are
compassed with a cloud of VVitnesses, and that so plentifully, out of all
Antiquity, as it may seem a kind of ambition, or lost labor, to quote their
Names; wherefore I will only allege the soundest of those, who since the
Reformation of Religion, and clearer light of the Gospel, in their several
VVritings, have approved, and highly commended this ancient Custom.

8 I will begin with Cap. de Confirm. Quare satis est pro ritu quodam
Ecclesiastico seu Ceremonia sacramentali Confirmationem habere.
Martin Luther, who in his Book of the Captivity of Babylon, by which he
understands the Captivity of the true Church under the Romish yoke, though
he allow not CONFIRMATION as a Sacrament, yet he thinks it passable as an
Ecclesiastical Ceremony, or Sacramental complement.

9 Philip Cap. de Confirm.

In ritu Confirmationis fiebat exploratio doctrinae, in quae singuli recitaba^t
summam doctrinae and pala^ profitebantur se improbare ^urores Ethnicos and
Haereticos and velle se esse and manner verae Ecclesiae membra, and non
discessur^s a vera sententia quam tu^ profitebantur. Hic mos erat vtilis ad
e^udiendos homines and retinendus in vera agnitione dei.


Melancthon, yoake-fellow to Luther, in his Confession of the Churches of
Germany, but specially of Saxony, written in the year 1551. to be exhibited
to the Council of Trent, holds it to be very profitable, for informing of men
^n the principles of Christian Faith, and holding them in the true knowledge of
God.

10 Cap. de rel. Sacram.

Confirmatio tum sumpsit exordi^^ quum vulgo caep^tum est infante^ tingi.


Zuinglius, in his Book of true and false Religion, confesses the use of it
to have been as ancient as the Custom of baptizing infants.

Lib. 2. page 72 Talis ritus Confirmati^nis valde multum vtilitatis ad
aedification^m iuuentutis and totius Ecclesiae conferrat, esset etiam
consentaneus and Scripturae, and priori Antiquitati. Et paulo post, Haec in
Colloquio Ratisponensi, Anno 1541. proposita fuerunt.
Chemnitius, in his examination of the Tridentine Council, thinks that the
unprofitable and superstitious Traditions, which as Rust have crept upon it,
being skoured off, it may be religiously used, and be very available to the
instruction of youth, and the edification of the whole Church: and having set
down diverse good and godly uses of it, to prove them all from Scripture, the
practice of the Apostles, and the Canons of Councils, as namely, that of
Laodicea and Arles.

11 Cap. 19. Para. 13.

Vtinam vero m^rem retin remus quem apud vete^es fuisse admo^ nui* priusquam
abor^^^ haec sacramenti larua nasceretur. Et paulo post, Haec disciplin^ si
hodi^ valeret, pro^fecto parentum quorundam igna^ia acueretur, qui liberorum
institutionem quasi rem nihil^ ad se pertinentem, secure negligunt, quam tum
sine publico dedecore ^mittere non possent: mayor esset in populo Christiano
fidei consensus, nec tanta multorum inscitia and ruditas, non adeo temere
quidem nouis and peregrinis dogmatibus ab^^perentur.


John Calvin in his fourth Book of Institutions, in the vpshot of the Chapter
of Confirmation, not only commends the ancient use of it, but the abuse
being removed, heartily wishes it restored. And because his authority is (not
without desert) of great weight, I will set down his very words as I find
them: Would to God (says he) we retained that Custom, which I have already
declared to have been in use among the ancient --, before that abortiue
vizard of a Sacrament was put upon it. And a little after, If this part of
Discipline, were now^adayes in force, the slacknesse of many Parents would be
much quickened, who pass over the institution ( or instruction) of their
Children, as a business nothing pertaining to them; which then without some
public disgrace, they could not omit: besides, there would be less ignorance,
and more concord in Articles of Faith among Christian people.

12 Peter Martyr, as appears in his Common Cl^s. 4. Cap. 7. Sect. 4.

Nec d^splicet vt ea Confirmatio habeatur, qua pueri adul^iores ^ogantur fidem
suam in Ecclesia confiteri, and in externa prof^ssione comprobare quod in
Baptismo illis non sentientibus factu^ est, ita tamen ne ex eiusmodi action
fabricemur Sacramentum.


places, is of opinion that Confirmation, which inioyneth children to a
public allowance, and profession, of that which without their consent or
knowledge was done unto them in Baptism, is to very good purpose: to like
effect speaks Cap. de Confirm.

Non est nobis dubium qui^ Apostoli initio confirmati in die Pentecostes,
c^ntulerint impositione manuum admirandum donum spiritus sancti credentibus in
Christum, vt varijs linguis loguer^ntur: and se^timus vtilissimum, vt pueri and
adolescentes ^a Pastoribus Ecclesi^e suae in Catechismo ex^mmentur, and
siquidem pi^ and recte fuerint eruditi, approbentur; sin ^ra^e, emendentur.


Brentius in his Confession of Wirtenberge, and Cap. 70. Quo^ igi^ur in ista
inquisitione comperieb^nt ita pro^ecisse, vt digni viderentur qui reliquo
coetu^ adiu^gerentur, eos in fide confirmatos impositis man^bus, public sui^
precibus De^ and Ecclesiae commendabant.
Beza in his Antithesis, or Opposition betwixt Papisme and Christianisme.

13 Lastly, among our own men In verse. 2. Cap. 6. Heb. Imposition of hands
with Prayer, which was the old and p^re Ceremony of Confirmation we do
not speak against.
Doctor Fulke in his answer to the Rhemish Annotations allows Imposition of
Hands, with Prayer, to have been the old and pure Ceremony of Confirmation.
And in Et 8. Act. verse. 14. The Primitive Church had nothing in their
Cat^chisme, or inst^uction, that was taught by word of mouth, but that which
was contain^d in the holy Scripture, as all the Articles of the Creed, the
doctrine of Repentance before Baptism, the manner and use of Baptism,
Confirmation by imposition of hands, and such like.
another place affirms that the Primitive Church was taught it out of the
Word of God. And Doctor Raynolds in the second days Conference at
Hampton Court, howbeit he took some exceptions against a supposed difference
betwixt the words of the Communion-Booke, and the 25. Article touching
Confirmation, yet for ought I find, he finds no fault with the Rite it
self, as it is now enjoined in the Church of England. Page 794.
Nay, Mr. Cartwright himself, in the first edition of his Admonition,
confesses that the Confirmation of Children is very ancient, and that it has
been well instituted. Page 197.
Howbeit in another place, forgetting himself, he referres the original of
it to the fained Decretall Epistles of the Popes; understanding thereby, as it
seems, either Melchiades Epistle to the Bishops of Spain, or that of Fabianus
to the Eastern Bishops, or that of John the 3. to the Bishops of Germany.

CHAP. II.
Touching Imposition of Hands in Confirmation.
1 AMong those who allow the use and end of Confirmation, as we have in the
first Chapter unfolded it, there are n^twithstanding some, who either out of
Ignorance, or desire of Contradiction, or too much niceness, except against
the Ceremony of Imposition of hands used in it, as sauouring of Popery:
others, against the restrayning of it to the Administration of Bishops, as a
relic of Antichrist. Wherefore, having cleared these two points, I see no
difficulty but that the most tender in this case (were there no
Ecclesiastical Iniunction to enforce it) might be induced to the entertayning
and embracing of it, considering withal, that as we retain that which is
due unto it, See the 25. Article, and Rogers upon it.
so have we abandoned from it that which latter ages have thrust upon it, as
undue. First then of Imposition of hands.

2 The Hand is a member proper unto man alone, and is by Aristotle termed the
Instrument of Instruments, because it both frames and directs them all: the use
of it being no less diverse then needful as well in sacred and religious, as
natural and civil Actions.

3 But the most general and notable use of the Hands in sacred actions, is the
Imposition of them, either for the blessing and consecrating of them, on whom
they are laid, to God: or for the separating and ordayning of them to rooms
and offices of divine calling: or for the curing of their diseases: or for
reconciling of them to the Church, after sufficient demonstration made of their
repentance: or lastly, for confirming of them in that grace which they have
received in Baptism, that as they believe remission of sins unto
Justification, so they may be imboldened to make open profession of this
belief unto Salvation.

4 Now this use of Imposition of hands in solemn and sacred actions seems to
be founded upon Nature it self, since we find it to have been used in the
Consecration of Liu. dec. 1. lib. 1.
Numa, and that 2 King. 5. 11.
Naaman expected it from Elizeus, for the curing of his Leprosy.

5 Neither was it peculiar to the Gentiles, but more usual among the Jews.
Thus when Israel blessed Ephraim and Manasses, Genesis 48. 14.
Joseph's Sons, he imposed upon them his Hands and prayed. Thus God commanded
Moses to dedicate Joshua, Numb. 27. 18*
as his Successor, by laying his hands on him. At the coming of our Savior
their suites that came unto him for help, Matthew. 9. 18.
were also tender^d in such forms of speech as show that he was himself an
obseruer of that Custom. Marc. 5. 23.
And to step one degree nearer to our purpose, they brought unto him little
Children (says the Text) that he should put his Hands o^ them and pray: Mat.
19. 13.
and to manifest his Approbation of it, he controuled his Disciples for
rebuking them that came unto him.

6 After the Ascension of our Lord and Savior, that which he had begun was
practiced by the Apostles, and has been since continued in the Christian
Church, down to this present time; nay, and in those very Churches from which
it is banished, it is again Hyperius in 6. ad Heb.

Bulling. ibidem. Atq^^ vtinam haec postliminio ad nos redeat manuum impositio,
ritus sanctissimus iuxta^ and v^il^ss^mus.


wished for, as an holy and profitable Institution.

7 And sure for mine own part, when I thoroughly consider that of the Apostle,
in the 6. to the Hebrews, of the fundamental Points of Christian Religion;
namely, of Repentance from dead Works; of Faith toward God; of the Doctrine
of Baptismes, and laying on of Hands; of the Resurrection from the dead, and
eternal Judgment; I cannot think of Confirmation, performed by Imposition of
Hands, but as of a part of the Apostles Catechism, since it is agreed upon
both by Manuum imposition^m cum baptismo coniungit, quia vt du^ erant
Catechumenorum ordines, itaduplex erat Cer^monia: nam qui eran^ extran^i non
ante perueniebant ad Baptismum, quam ed^ta ^ide^ professione in illis ergo
Catechesis Baptismum precedere sole^at, at liberi fidelium quoniam ab vtero
adoptati erant, and iure promissionis pertinebant ad Corpus Ecclesiae Infantes
bap^izibantur: transacta vero infantia, postquam instituti erant in fide, se
quoque ad Catechesin offerebant, quae in illis Baptismo erat posterior, sed
aliud Symbolum ^unc adhibebatur, nempe manuum impositio. Hic vnus lo^us abunde
testatur huius Ceremoniae originem fluxisse ab Apostolis, quae tamen postea in
superstitionem versa fuit: vt mundus semp^r fere ab optimis institutis ad
corruptelas degenerat: finxerunt enim eam Sacramentum, qu^ opus regenerationis
conferrebatur, qu^ figmento Baptismum laceraru^t, nam quod erat eius proprium
ad impositionem manuum transtulerunt. Sciamus ergo a primis authoribus
institutum fuiss^, vt esset solennis precandi ritus, quemadmodum etiam
Augustinus nuncupat Fidei quidem prof^ssionem quam adolescentes pueritiam
egressi edebant, voluerunt approbari hoc Symbol^, sed ni^il minus cogitarunt,
quam vim Baptismi decerpere, quamobrem hodie retinenda pura institutio est,
Superstitio autem cor^igenda. Cal^inus in Comment.
Calvin, Insuis ann^t. and Comm^nt. in hunc locum.
and Capita Catechismi quae summa quidem totius Euangelicae doctrinae
complectun^ur, sed pa^cis and summarie (vt loquuntur) rudibus tradebantur,
professio videlicet Recipiscentiae and Fi^^^ in Deum, cuius doctrinae articuli,
vt vocant, ab extran^is quidem exigebantur statis Baptism^ diebus a fidelium
autem liberis in infantia Baptizatis, quum eis impon^bantur manus inter eos
autem Articulos diserte numerantur duo, nempe, Carnis r^surrectio and Iudicium
aeternum, B^za in annot.
Beza, and Vbi prima f^onte videntur ^numerari, Cap. 6. verum si quis
accurati^s p^^pendet, videbit illa re^ocanda esse ad quat^or vel ad tria,
ete^^^tert^um and quartum videlicet de Baptismate, and Impositione manuum non
videntur hic proponi vt peculiaria doctrinae ^ap^ta, sed int^^poni ^aeteris,
declarandi causa, ad declarandum scilicet circumstantiam temporis quo rudiment
^rij^ fundamenta illa doctrine Christrianae solebant proponi, videlicet eo
tempore quo ad Baptismum admit^ebantur, adulti itemque eo qu^ puer^ in infantia
bapt^zati, and in pueriti^ inst^tuti, coram ^^cl^sia solebant per Impositionem
manuum in fide Christiana confirmari* Pisc. in eundem lo^um.
Piscator, that those four points of Repentance, of Faith, of the
Resurrection, and the last Judgment, were proposed to such as were not
baptized till they arrived to years of discretion before their admittance to
baptism; but to Infants baptized, at the time of their Confirmation or
Imposition of Hands, when they came to the use of reason; Nay, this one passage
(says Calvin) does sufficiently testify that the source and head-spring of
this Ceremony flowed first from the Apostles, it being instituted by them as a
solemn form of Prayer, and an argument of approving that confession which was
made in Confirmation. So then (says he) let us remove the Superstition, but
retain the Institution: having showed before that this Superstition chiefly
consists in making it a Sacrament, and withdrawing from the virtue and
dignity of Baptism, to magnify and enrich it. And lest he might seem
casually to let so much drop from his pen, to like purpose is that in his
Quo autem haec actio quae ali^qui grauis sanctaque merito esse debe^t, plus
reuerentiae haberet ac dignitatis Ceremonia quoque adhibebatur manuum
impositionis. Et paulo post, talem ergo manuum impositi^nem quae simpliciter
loco benedictionis fiat laudo, and restitutum hodie in pur^^ vsum velim.
Book of Institutions, where he affirms that imposition of hands was used
in Confirmation, thereby to purchase more respect and reverence to so holy and
sacred an action: and wishes it restored again to its pure use. It may seem
strange I suppose to some, that Calvin should thus speak but if any make a
doubt of it, and think I do him wrong, I desire his words may be sifted, and
my reputation cleared from such aspersions, which may be (I grant) deservedly
cast upon me, through misunderstanding, but never (I hope) of malice: yet the
rather to win credit and weight to that which I have delivered of Calvin, I
will cast into the same Scale, the opinion of Lib. 2 page 73. Ad quam
precationem sine Superstitione adhiberi poss^t impositio manuum.
Kemnitius, assuring us that Imposition of Hands in Confirmation may now-adayes
be well used without superstition: and of In 4. ad Ephe. Si quae Ecclesiae
contenderent ho^ signum suisse Apostolorum tantum, has Ecclesias damnare
equidem non possem, a sua tamen opi^one eas quoad liceret, reuocarem.
Bucer, affirming that if any Church held this Rite or Sign, as he calls
it, to be peculiar to the Apostles times; I would not too hardly censure such a
Church (says he) yet would I endeavor to draw it from that conceit. And for
making the number full, to these may be added the testimony of In exegesi in
6. ad Heb ver. 2 Confirmationem intelligit, qua per manuum impositionem
confirmabantur, qui fidei susceptae ca^ita Catechetica professi erant, eisque
benedicebatur, sicut hodie quoque fieri in nostra Ecclesia con^ueuit.
Hunnius, In verse. 2. Cap. 6. Heb. Porro autom impositionem manuum post
accuratiore^ institutione^ Catechismi and examinationem initio* cum publica
ardentique precatione adhibere solebant, vt ijs imp^trarent gratiam Spiritus
sancti, sicut Samaritanis, Act. 8. legitur. Credo etiam sic esse soli^os in
Primitiua Ecclesia tyrones ex Catechumenis transfer inter maturiores
auditores, vt iam eis esset fas communicare tanquam dijudicatis and probatis.
Illyricus, In Praelect. in eundem locum. Impositio manuum, quae ^etus fuit
Ceremonia, per quam benedicebatur eis qui Deo consecrabantur, and temporibus
Apostolorum non solum eis qui ad Ministerium voca^antur, verum etiam qui
didicerant, and professi erant doctrinam Catecheticam.
Tossamus, In Praelect in 6 ad Heb. habitis in Academia Hyde^ berg. Accessit
tandem ecclesiastica manuum impositio, in eorum gratiam, qui cum infantes
essent ^aptizati fuerant, and postea adulti edita fidei suae con^essione
manibus impositis confirmabantur ab Ecclesiae Pastoribus.
Grynaeus, who all jointly confess this Ceremony of Imposition of hands to
have been very aunciently used, not only in Ordination of Ministers, but in
Confirmation of such who in the Congregation publicly professed the doctrine
of their Catechism. And the first of them affirms it to have been in use in
his time in the Church of Wirtenberge, and such as depended on that.

8 Now I the rather press these testimonies of later VVriters, because I know
there are some, whose judgments (not without reason) are much swayed with
their Authority: and for the general Concurrence of antiquity, I think
among the learned there is little question.

9 The most ancient Councils of Eliberis in Spain, Can. 38.
and Arles in France, Can. 8.
deliver as much upon record, not only commending, but commanding the use of
this Ceremony in their several Acts. Cap. 8.
And Tertullian in his Book of the resurrection of the flesh, does not so much
advise what should be done in this case, as witness what the Catholic Church
did in his time: Caro manu^ impositione adumbratur, vt and anima Spirit^
illuminetur.
The Flesh (says he) is ouer-shadowed by the imposition of Hands, that the
Soul may be enlightened with the Spirit of Grace: Which words of his,
seeming to ascribe too much to imposition of Hands, give me leave to
interpret, as Calvin does Leo Bishop of Rome, understanding by the conferring
of the holy Spirit, Invocation by earnest and hearty Prayer, that it may be
conferred where it is not, and the Gifts and effectual Operation of it
increased where it is already.

10 Thus does Lib. 15. de Trin. cap. 26. Nos autem accipere quidem (...) donum
possumu^ pro modulo nos^^o, effundere autem super ali^s non possumus, s^d vt
hoc ^iat Deum super eos a quo efficit^^, in^oca^^^.
Saint Augustine himself (whom Calvin seldom leaves) expound the giving of
the holy Ghost, by Imposition of Hands: He (says he, speaking of Christ)
both received the holy Ghost, and dispensed it; received it as man, dispensed
it as God, but we receive it indeed but dispense i^ not, howbeit we call upon
him for the dispensing and pouring of it forth on those on whom we lay our
hands. And in another place, shows what is meant by pouring out the Holy
Ghost, since the ceasing of Miracles: For Lib. 3. de Bap. con. Don. ca. 16
Neque enim temporalibus and sensibilib^^ mira^^lis attestantibus per man^s
impositionem modo datur Spiritus sanctus sicut antea dabatur ad com^endati^n^m
rudis fidei, and Ecclesiae primordia dilatanda. Quis enim nunc hoc expectat? vt
ij quibus manus ad accipiendum spiritum sanctum imp^nit^r, r^pente incipiant
li^guis loqui, sed i^^i^ibiliter and latenter in^elligitur per vinculum pacis
eor^^^ ^ordibus diuin^ ^haritas inspirari.
now-a days ( says he) the holy Ghost is not given through Imposition of
Hands, for the working of outward and sensible Miracles, as heretofore it was,
that so the strangeness of the Faith professed, might the sooner be
entertained; and the narrow bounds of the Church further enlarged: for who now
expects, that they on whom hands are laid for the receiving of the holy
Ghost, should presently begin to speak with strange tongues? but inuisibly
the Love of God is poured into their hearts by the secret working of the Holy
Ghost. To which accords that of Bulling. in Acta Apost, Cap. 8. verse. 14.
Aliquoties ergo (...) Ceremonia est ^dhibita, qua^^ ^^terno sign^ significaret
non homi^^m sed manum, id est, virt^t^^ Dei huius qu^d (...) benefic^^ (...)
esse.
Bullinger on the 8. of the Acts, borrowed as it seems, out of Amalarius: By
the outward Ceremony of the Imposition of Hands, is meant, that the Holy Ghost
is not given by any strength of ours, but by the hand, that is, the Power of
God.

11 I will conclude this Chapter with the words of Mr. Hooker, I^ di^inis
offi^ijs.
in his fifth Book of Ecclesiastical Policy; with Prayers of Spiritual and
personal Benediction, the manner has been in all ages to use Imposition of
Hands, as a Ceremony betokening our restrained* desires to the party whom
we present unto GOD by Prayer.

CHAP. III.
Of the restrayning of Confirmation to the Order of Bishops.
1 THat there should be an Order consisting in distinct degrees, and a
subordination of Offices, as well in Ecclesiastical; as Civil Government, the
common Practice of all Nations, Jewish, Heathenish, Christian, and the voice of
Nature and Reason, seem to proclaim: that disparitie which arises between
the Superior and the Inferior, being the chiefest means of lincking and
uniting the several parcels of the whole Society, in a mutual
correspondence, and reciprocal proportion of Love and Duty. To this purpose,
that Bishops were superior to other Ministers, all Antiquity with one consent
(if you except Aierius, who for dissenting in this point, was accounted an
Heretic by Here Is. 75.
Epiphanius and Here Is. 53.
Augustine) does acknowledge; distinguishing three degrees of Ministers:
Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, answerable to the High Priest, Priests, and
Levites among the Jews.

Ignatius, who lived in the Apostles times, often mentions this distinction,
as namely in his Epistle (...) the S^yrnians: Let the Laymen (says he) be
subject to the Deacons, the Deacons to the Presbyters, the Presbyters to the
Bishop, the Bishop to Christ. And Saint Hierome (notwithstanding by reason of
his Controversy with the Bishop of Jerusalem, he were held an adversary to
the state of Bishops) in his Epistle to Euagrius, calls it an Apostolical
Tradition, That we may know (says he) that the Apostolical Traditions are
taken out of the old Testament, look what Aaron, and his Sons, and the
Levites, were in the Temple, the same let the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons,
challenge in the Church. Now then as among the Jews, Aarons Sons justly
challenged many prerogatives above the Levites, and again Aaron himself above
his Sons: so among Christians, do the Presbyters above the Deacons, and the
Bishops above the Presbyters; specially considering that as the distinction of
Presbyters and Bishops was shadowed, under the Law, in Aaron and his Sons, so
under the Gospel is it established, by referring their several Succession the
one to the Apostles, the other to the 70. Disciples. For that Bishops succeeded
in the room of the Apostles, besides many other testimonies, the Council of
Can. 13.
Neocaesarea witnesses. Irenaeus in his third Book, and 3. Chapter. Ambrose
in his Commentaries upon the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians. Quid est pro patribus
tuis nati sunt filij? Patres missi sunt Apostoli, pro Apostolis filij ^ati
sunt, tibi co^stituti sunt Episcopi.
Augustine upon those words of the 45. Psalm, Instead of thy Fathers shall
thy Children be. And lastly, Fuerunt o Ecclesia Apostoli patres tui, qui ipsi
te genuerunt, nunc autem quia illi recesser^nt ^ mundo, habes pro his episcopos
filios qui a te creati sunt, sunt enim and hi Patres tui quia ab ipsisreger^^.
S. Hierome upon the same words: and again in his Cap. 2.

Ap^d nos Apostolo^um locum Episcopi tenent, apud eos Episcopu^ tertius est.


Epistle to Marcella, touching the errors of Montanus.

But lest I be here mistaken, as also for the opening of a clearer passage to
my present purpose, give me leave to unfold my meaning in what sense Bishops
most properly are said to succeed the Apostles. For the better understanding
of which Position, we must observe, that the Apostles transcendently
comprehended in their persons the whole Hierarchy of the Church as now it is,
and somewhat above them all: for first they were members of the Church, as
being Christians: secondly, they were Presbyters, as being to preach the
Gospel and administer the Sacraments: thirdly, they were Bishops, for
jurisdiction and imposition of Hands: fourthly, they were Apostles, for the
large circuit of their Commission; for being called immediately by Christ
himself; for being furnished with the infallible assurance of his truth, and
visible assistance of his Spirit, ^n speaking diverse tongues, curing diseases,
working Miracles, knowing secrets; and lastly, not only for receiving the Holy
Ghost themselves in miraculous manner and measure, but also for imparting it to
others. In this last regard, I mean for their Apostolic charge, they left
none to succeed them: this calling being extraordinary, and to endure but for
a time, but the other three were all ordinary, and consequently capable of
succession. In the first room succeeded them all that profess the Gospel: In
the second, all the Ministers of the Gospel: In the third, the Bishops and
Fathers of the Church: so that by virtue of this Succession the power of the
Keys, and Imposition of Hands, properly belongs to them. Now that the
Apostles alone imposed hands, not only in Ordination, but in Confirmation,
appears out of the 8. of the Acts, where when Phillip had baptized the
Samaritanes, it is said that the Apostles, Peter and John, came down from
Jerusalem, to confirm them with Prayer and Imposition of hands. Upon which
place Saint Hom. 18.

Igitur h^c ^rat in Apostolis singular, vnde and praecip^os and non ^lios
videmus (...) s^cere.


Chrysostom directly concludes the administration of that Ceremony to belong
to Bishops. And Lib. 15. de Trin. cap. 26. N^que enim aliquis discipuloru^ eius
dedit Spiritum sanctum, orabant quippe vt veniret in eos quibus manum
i^ponebant, non ipsi eum dabant, quem morem in suis praepositis etiam nunc
seruat Ecclesia.
Augustine affirms the Church in his time to have observed it, in suis
praepositis, as he speaks, in her Governors: the like does Epist. 73. ad
Iubaiaum.

Quod nunc quoqu^ apud nos geritur, vt qui in ecclesia baptizantur, praep^sitis
Ecclesiarum offerantur, and per nostram orationem and manus impositionem
Spiritum sanctu^ consequantur.


Saint Cyprian witness of his times: and In verse. 2. Cap. 6. ad Heb.
Impositionis manuum,] per qua^ Spiritus sanctus accipi posse creditur, quod
post Baptismum ad Confirmationem vnitatis inecclesia Christi a Pontif^^ibus
fieri solet. Idem etiam Haymo ibidem.
Saint Ambrose (being himself a Bishop) (as also the former three) gives a
reason for so doing, ad Confirmationem vnitatis: I take his meaning to be, that
the Bishops by approving, in Confirmation, that which the inferior Ministers
had performed in Baptism, thereby established the peace of the Church, as well
by declaring their unity among themselves, I mean of the Bishops with the
inferior Ministers, as also by exacting of such as were confirmed, an
uniformity or harmony of Confessions: To this reason of Saint Ambrose, Saint
Non quidem abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, vt ad eos qui long^ in
minoribus ^rbibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad
inuocationem sancti Spiritus and manus impositionem excurrat. Et paulo post,
Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet, cui si non exors quaedom
and ab omnibus eminens d^tur potes^as, tot in ecclesijs efficientur schism^ta
quot Sa^erdotes.
Hierome, in his Dialogue against the Luciferians, adds another of no less
moment, which is, that the safety of the Church, depending upon the
authority of Bishops for the shunning of Schisms, it was requisite some
eminent specialties of power should be reserved, and annexed to that place, as
namely Imposition of hands, which he there affirms was the custom of the
Church, for the Bishop to perform passing by the Country Parishes, thereby
blessing those whom the Presbyters and Deacons had baptized.

To these reasons of the holy Doctors and Fathers may be added the weight of
Councels. The first Canon of the Council of Aurenge in France: and the 20. of
the first Council held at Toledo in Spain, to which the In. 4. did. 7.
Schoolmen and In 1. did. 95.
Canonists generally agree. Nay, Hic mos olim ^uit vt Christianorum liberi
postqua^ adoleuerant, coram Episcopo sisterentur. Et paulo post, Donec rite
fidei mysterijs instituti poterant fidei confessionem coram EPISCOPO and Populo
edere.
Calvin himself in his Institutions confesses in express terms, that the
Minister of it was aunciently a Bishop. And Bucer. in 4. ad Ephesios. Signum
impositionis manuum etiam Episcopi s^li praebebant, and non absque ratione,
si^e enim sit foedus Domini baptizatis confirmandum, sieve reconciliandi ij qui
graui^s peccauerunt, sieve Ecclesijs Ministri ordinandi, haec omnia ministeria
maxim decent eos quibus Ecclesiarum cura demandata est.
Bucer in his Commentaries upon the Fourth to the Ephesians, Farther, thinks
it to have been grounded upon good reason. And Doctor Raynolds in the second
days Conference at Hampton Court, being challenged by the Lord Bishop of
Winchester, where ever he had read that CONFIRMATION was aunciently used by any
other then Bishops, by not encountering the challenge, seemed to give way unto
it.

I will close up this Chapter also with those memorable words of Mr. Hooker
in the place before alleged: To pray for others, is to bless them for whom
we pray; because prayer procures the blessing of God upon them, especially
the prayer of such as God either most respects for their piety and zeal
that way; or else regards for that their Place and Calling binds them above
others unto this duty, as it does both natural and spiritual Fathers.

Indiuiduae Trinitati sit Gloria.

