A NEW TREATISE OF THE PESTILENCE, containing the Causes, Signs,
Preservatives and Cure thereof. The like not before this time pubished. And
therefore necessary for all manner of persons, in this time of contagion. S.
H. Studious in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by John Windet, for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Fox in Paul's Church-yarde. 1603.

A TREATISE OF the Pestilence.
Having an intent to write certain Precautions and preservatives against the
pestilence, I think not necessary to be over tedious or so precise as those
that write exquisitly and perfectly of the same disease: only I am determined
to set down such things as shall be necessary for to be known by those which
in this case shall have need.

And first, I will make a true description of the pestilence, what it is.
Secondly, the causes, thou the Signs, and lastly precautions and remedies
against the same.

The pestilence is nothing else then a rotten or pestilent fever, Definition.
which being engendered by a rotten and corruptayre by a hidden and secret
property which it has, does kill and destroy mortal creatures. The causes are
said to be four fold, as the first and chiefest cause is supernatural, as
being immediately sent from God for the punishment of sin and disobedience of
mankind, as does appear in Deuteronomy. 2^.15. If thou will not obey the voice of the
Lord thy God to keep and to do all his commandments and his ordinances which
I command thee this day: then all these curses shall come upon thee, and
overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the town, and cursed in the field, etc.
The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee until he have consumed thee
from the Land which thou go to possess, etc. Moreover we read that the
sin of David was the cause that the Lord sent his Angel which did kill the
pestilence in a small time threescore and ten thousand souls.

Now this may be proof sufficient that sin is the original and chief cause
of this most cruel disease of the pestilence.





the Physicians not natural, which are 1. Air. 2. Meat and drink. 3.
Sleep, and watch. 4. Exercise, and rest. 5. Emptiness, and repletion. 6. The
perturbations and affections of the mind.


Now as the true use of these things that are called not natural does
maintain and cherish health, so the abuse thereof is the occasion of disease
and sickness. For which cause I counsel all manner of persons in this time
of contagion to fly surfeting, gurmandizing, and other unseasonable
banketings, whereby the health of the body is at all times impaired, for who
knows not that great and often feeding breeds cruditie, and raw watrish
humors in the body (which cruditie is a fit sediment or subject for the
venomous and corrupt air to work on. For which cause the learned Physicians
as well Ancient as modern give counsel that in the time of pestilence and
contagion, those bodies that are humid and moist, must be by all manner of
means made dry, and those that are dry to be kept and preserved in their
dryness: for by observation it is very well known that the Phiegmaticke and
sanguine body is sooner subject to infection then the Choloricke or
Melancholic, and experience does daily teach us when for the most part women,
children, and men of young years are those that die in this disease of the
pestilence as those bodies that are hot and moist and thereby fittest to
receive putrif^c^ion.

But for as much as I promised in the beginning not to be ouer-tedious as those
that make a long discourse, I purpose to proceed briefly unto the signs
whereby a man may know and perceive when the contagion has taken hold of him,
and thereby run speedily unto such means and helps, as by the rules of
Physic shall be to him discribed.

Signs.
The signs to know when the body is infected, are for the most part an Apostum
or tumor about the ear, neck, under the arm holes, or flancke, with a fever,
and sometimes there arises in some other parts of the body, a dark green or
evil colored sore. These signs for the most port does appear but not
always. But for the more certainty, we must consider these symtomes or signs
that follow, there happens after infection a great pricking, and shooting in
the body and especially in the neck armeholes and flanckes, also extreme
heat within the body, and in the hands, knees, and feet very co^d so that
there is joined with the same a shiuering as in a fever: also their is heaviness
of the head, dryness of the mouth, with extreme thirst; also a drowsinesse
and great desire to sleep: some again are so watchful that they cannot
sleep, so that they ra^e as thought they were in a phrens^e: there happens
also great pain in the head faintness sluggishnesse, weakness of the
l^mmee, pensiveness, no desire of meat with often vomiting, the matter being
bitter and of diverse colors, the urine troubled, thick and stinking and for
the most part without residence.

These are the principal signs of infection and yet not certain, for
sometimes a man may be infected and yet none of these signs apparent. And in
like manner a man may have these signs, and yet free from infection. Some
Physicians are of opinion that there is scarsely any disease where the
Pestilence reigns, but that it is either of the nature of the pestilence or
apt to be turned into the same.

And thus much shall suffice as concerning signs of the infection with the
pestilence: we will now proceed to the preservatives and cure.

Of the cure of the Pestilence.
AS I have already declared that there is a fourefolde cause of this cruel
disease of the pestilence: Cure.
so also there is a fourefold means to cure the same.

The first consists in euacuation and mundification

The second, in a due observation of diet.

The third, in comforting and strengthening of

The fourth, in giving and administering of Antidots, Alexipharmacon, and other
preservatives against

For preservative against the Pestilence they must be such as have faculty of
resisting putrefaction, and even presently from the beginning those bodies (as
I have before said) which are humid and moist, must be by all possible means
that may be made dry, and those that are dry must be kept and preserved. But in
those bodies that do abound with corrupt, rotten, and hurtful humors: it
shall be needful for them before infection, to use purgation and blood
letting by advice of the skillful and learned Physician.

And whereas the Physician in other fevers are accustomed to use a longer
process: that is to say, by preparing the body, by digesting of humors
offending, and last of all by euacuation and purging out of the same: in this
cruel disease which will not ad pacis conditiones descendere* that is, endure
no daliance or delay, we must fly forthwith unto the cure and remedies for
the same.

And for because it seldom happens that persons which are infected with the
pestilence, are visited with the Phisitio^, or Chirurgio^ whereby many want cure
and remedy which live and recover, I am therefore determined by Gods
assistance to set down such means and remedies as shall be profitable to all
those that shall have need to use the same.

And first of all for preservative before the body be infected may be used this
following.

Take Oxysaccharum. Syrup of Sorrel. Oxymel Symplex, of either of them half
an ounce. Waters of Endive, Scabios, Carduus benedictus, of either one ounce.

Let all these be mixed together and taken in the morning fasting, and so
continue it every other day day during the time of the Pestilence.

Pills for the resisting of the Pestilence.
Take Aloes elect one ounce. Myrrh. Safferne of either ii. Dragons. Agarick
prepared. Rhubarbe, elect of either so much. Camphere, 1. Dragme, and 2.
Scruples. Red and yellow Saunders. Red Roses. Red Corrall of either 1. Dragme.
Dictamni. Gentian root. Z^doarie. Tormentil of either 4. Scruples.

Let all those be made into a mass with the Syr^^ ^^l^ed Aeotosi^atis ci^^i,
as much as shall be sufficient, and when any will use thereof, let him take the
weight of one scruple made into a ^il in the evening when he enters into his
bed, and so let him continue every day during the time of the Pestilence, if
you give thereof to children half a scruple shall suffice, these pills have a
wonderful property in resisting venom, and in euacuating of rotten and
corrupt humors with strengthening and confirming of the principal members.

An other preservative against the Pestilence.
Take Of Andromachas treacle of either 1. dram. Of the best Mithradate, of
either 1. dram. Sugar roset. Saccharie boraginati, Sacchari buglossati, Of the
citren rind condite. Of either of them one ounce and a half. Electuari de
gemmis 10. drams. Diarhodon Abbatis. Diatrion santuli of either 1. ounce.

M^xe altogether with the Sirup of the rind of Citrens as much as shall
suffice, and take of the same Electuarie eueryday, or every other day the
quantity of a Chest nutte in the morning four hours before dinner. And for
as much as every man cannot be at so great a charge as to attain these former
things prescribed, they may use every morning fasting one scruple of the pills
called Pilulae Ruffi which does excellently resist putrefaction, or they may
use every morning upon the point of a knife The^iac^ Diates^aron which also is
a preservative against the Pestilence.

They may also take one ounce of London treacle, with the powder of Carduus
Benedictus, and the root of Angelica of either of them half a dram, and
mix them together, and thereof take every morning fasting upon the point of a
knife often times in the day. I omit to speak of the Unicorns Horn, and
Bezars stone, because their value is so great, and the grain held at so dear
a rate: only I advise every man that will seek the preservation of his own
health, to keep their houses sweet, and clean, using in their common rooms
not only fires in the chimneyes, but also in earthen pans, with perfumes and
sweet vapors, which be not only pleasant to the senses, but also have
property to cleanse and purify the air, such as is Rose vinegar, red Rose
water, lignum Aloes, Olibanum, Bengimin, Storax Calamint, Juniper Buris; with
the wood and such like Besides, to be careful not to be much out of their own
doors before the Sumre have been up for two hours space, or after it is set
and gone down. And thus much briefly by way of precaution and preservative
before infection. Now it rests to describe the cure of the Pestilence after
infection according to the practice and cures of Physic.

Of the cure of the Pestilence.
WE have already set down in brief manner precautions and preservatives
against the Pestilence. Now if it happen any man to be infected, let him
presently with all the speed that possible may be, take two drams of this
powder following in half a draught of good white wine.

Take Tormentil. of either 1. dram. Dictamni. of either 1. dram. Zedoari. of
either 1. dram. The root of Gentian, Of the root Carlinae, Of the root
Verbascus, dried in the shade and powdered of either 1. dragme.

Make all these into fine powder and as soon as it may be, let the patient
that is infected take 2. dragmes in half a draught of good white wine, then
let him go into his bed and be covered warm with clothes that he may sweat
thoroughly. And to the intent he may sweat the sooner, you may put into the bed
earthen bottles filled with hot water, and so let him sweat for the space of
two or three hours keeping him from sleep and drink, all that while. In like
manner this powder may be used.

Take the roots of Pimpinella. Of Tormentil, Of Cinnamon, of either 1. ounce.
Lignum aloes, Greek mynts, of either 2. ounces. Juniper berries, Narde seed,
of either so much.

Make all into fine powder and mix 2. drams thereof with Andromachus treacle,
and of choice Mithradat of either half an ounce, with half an ounce of Sirup
de ribes: and give thereof at one time a dragme or better and so provoke him to
sweat as aforesaid, if you add to every dragme or dos. 6. graynes of Bezars
stone, you shall see a maruailous effect for it resists the Pestilence and all
manner of venom.

An other electuarie to be taken after infection.
Take Bolearmonick washed in red rosewater. Two Dragmes. Terrae Sigillatae. Red
Coral, of either 1. dragme. Of the Citren rind, Zedoarie. Safferne, of either
half a dragme. Sugar rosat, of red roses, 6. ounces. Syrupus acetositatis
citri, 10. ounces.

Let all be made into fine powder, and make an electuarie of this electuarie,
the patient shall take one dram, and of Andromachas treacle so much, and mix
them together and receive all presently at one Dose, and drink presently after
a draught of Scabios water or sorrel water with a little of vinegar of roses,
or take the foresaid treacle and electuarie and mix it with the water and so
drink it, presently provoking sweat as aforesaid.

And thus much I think to be sufficient at this time, as concerning this
cruel disease of the Pestilence, I know much more may be written, but for as
much as I promised to avoid prolixitie, I will end only with advice unto such
Chirurgious as shall be called, or shall adventure themselves to the cure of
this so dangerous a sickness.

The chief matter belonging to the Chirurgian is blood letting, extraction,
and maturation of Carbuncles and Apostumes, as for blood-letting, let not the
Chirurgian draw so much forth as may be an occasion of fainting, or sowning to
the patient, but let him draw forth blood by degrees, and iterate the same, as
if the patient bleed in the morning 5. ounces, he may bleed at three of the
clock in the after noone, 3. ounces more, and so again the next morning if
need shall require.

And this is to be noted, that this blood letting is to be used at the
beginning of infection and not otherwise; provided always that there with some
one or other of this Antidots or electuaries before declared be used.

And whereas I have observed that the patient infected with this disease having
absessus tumor or Carbuncle arising either in the groyne, Armeholes or under
the ears, or in some emunctuarie or clensing place of the body weyting the
suppuration and ripening of the same either by nature, or medicine, they have
dyed, which if the Chirurgian would either by extirpation, or incision, with
present application of some ripening and attractiue plaster, nature would
thereby be eased and the venomous and corrupt vapors by nature expelled, for
nature being weak, and not able to expel the venom fast enough, if by
insensible transpiration, the venom returns back to the heart, and so
presently destroys nature. But if the Chirurgian or the patient himself do
follow my advise, he shall presently either with incision, knife, or other
instrument remove that turnor where nature may have way made to expel that
venomous and corrupt matter which is noisome unto it.

And thus by the grace of God and his blessing, whosoever shall follow the
foresaid precepts, and rules, shall preserve both himself and his family from
the Pestilence. And I beseech the Almighty to hold his holy hand over this
Realm of England which by sin has deserved far greater punishments.

FINIS.

