A RELATION of the Funeral Pomp, in which the Body of GVSTAVVS the Great,
Late King of Sweden, was carried from the Castle of Vbolgast, to the Seaside,
to be transported into Swethland.

TOGETHER, With a strange apparition of the Moon the Night before.

LONDON Printed by B.A. and T, F. for Thom: Walkley, and are to be sold at his
Shop, near White Hall. 1633.

THE FUNERAL Pomp of GVSTAVUS ADOLPHUS.
THe fifteenth of July last, being the day immediately foregoing that Funeral
Pomp, in which the Hearse of GVSTAVUS ADOLPHVS the late glorious King of
Sweden, was remooved from Vbolgast to the Sea side, to be so transported into
his own Kingdom, by the Queen his Widow, a prodigious apparition of the
Moon happened. The Carryer or Post of Argentine, was traveling by Night with
three more in his company, of whom one was a man of quality a Doctor of
Physic, and Mathematician; about nine of the clock they were near to a
Village called Eintritt. The Moon was then in her Wane, and grew horned (for
it was four days after the full) at which as they were looking, they
perfectly discerned another little Moon, mooving up and down with various
motions, about the upper horn of the true Moon. At last they joined together;
from which conjunction, a clear and perfect circular figure was made, as if
the Moon had then shined in her full. But long it continued not in that form,
but changed into the shape of a man's head* At which whilst they gazed with
wonder, they began to know the face of the late King GVSTAVUS ADOLPHVS. In that
form, the Moon continued about a quarter of an hour before she took her
own shape again, that they might perfectly discover (not without fear and
astonishment) the Kings head, with all the true lineaments of his face, and
figure of his beard and hair.

From this portentuous apparition of the Moon, were diverse opinions and
discourses raised among the people. Some remembered a propheticke speech which
the K of Swethla^d, whilst living, was heard to make, that after he was dead,
his Armies would continue victorious, and from thence a fame would be raised,
that he himself was living, and his death for a long time not be generally
believed, Others began to make a Religious praediction of it; and comparing the
Christian Church to the true Moon (because the Church in all ages, like the
Moons, has had increases and decreases) and knowing that the Turkish Empire
has borne for their Arms the Moon, they compared that to the false Moon,
which they had seen to move about the horn of the true Moon, and from that
conjunction of them they prophesied, That God would in mercy call the Turks and
join them shortly to his own true Christian Church.

The day following, being the sixteenth of July, the King of Swethlands
Funeral, whose Hearse had long remained in the Castle of Vbolgast, was
removed, to be transported into Swethland. The Solemnity was in manner
following; In the afternoon, Doctor IACOBVS FABRITIVS the King his Chapleyne,
made a Funeral Sermon in the Chapel of the Castle of Vbolgast (where the
Hearse stood. His Text was taken out of the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations of
JEREMY; the words these; The Crown of our head is fallen off; Woe be to us now
because we have sinned. Sermon being ended, the Funeral Pomp began to moove
forward about five a clock to the Seaside, where the Swedish fleet lay to
receive his body. Colonel AXELIVS LILE marched foremost, followed by
fourscore and twelve ranks of Musketeers eight in a rank, in mourning habit,
and covered with hoods; after them in like habit, six and thirty ranks of
Divines two in a rank, singing a mournful Ditty as they past along. After
whom, came fifty Students of the Waldenses, and an hundred and fourteen more,
partly Germans, and partly Swedes, in long mourning Cloakes. Two great brazen
Drums were carried in the next place, after which, came six Trumpeters,
their Trumpets covered with black cloth, and each of them bearing a black
Damask Banner, in which the Arms of Swethland were richly wrought with gold.
After whom again, came two brazen Drums like the former, by men in the like
habit; and six Trumpeters in the same fashion following.

Immediately after, came two Heralds clothed in black silken robes, on which
before and behind were the Arms of Swethland with great cost, and curiosity
wrought in Needleworke of Gold, these two Heralds carried either of them a
Royal Scepter of exceeding great value. Then followed the Marshall Ericas
Guldenslernius, with a wonderful great number of the chief Counselors and
Officers belonging to the Elector of Brandenburgh, and the Megapolitan Dukes.
Next followed, the Master of the Ordnance Leonard Torstonson carrying a red
Damask banner, with him were three and thirty Barons, and Noblemen, every one
carrying a banner of several colors, in which the Arms of those several
Provinces, which had been joined by conquest to the Crown of Sweden, were
most richly wrought in needleworke of gold. After every one of these Barons, a
Horse was led covered with black cloth, upon which, the same work and arms
were displayed in those Banners which the Lords carried.

Then followed Benedict Oxensterne Master of the Horse to the King of Swethland
bearing a black Banner of exceeding largeness, and so heavy that three other
were feign to help him in the carriage of it; upon this banner were curiously
and richly wrought in gold, not only the Arms of the Crown of Swethland, but
of all those other several Provinces which had bin displayed in the thirty
three Banners going before, and here joined into one. After this great Banner,
came a stately Horse, which King Gustavus had used to ride on, his maine was
exceeding large and long. A rich covering of black, hemmed with gold he had
upon him, and was adorned with feathers, black, white, and yellow. Upon his
back in a wrought golden saddle, sat Charles Horn Lord Chamberlain of
Swethland, clad in the Armor of the dead King, and wearing a chain of gold of
exceeding great value. In his hand, he carried that sword drawn, which King
Gustavus most used to wear, and at his saddle hung the Kings pistol yet
stained with blood, as it came out of the battle of Lutzen. After him, came
another Horse covered with black, on which, a white Cross was wouen. Then
went two Heralds clothed in like manner as the former were, carrying two
silver Scepters, with others that carried money, which they threw among the
people, all the way as the pomp passed along.

After this followed the Hearse it self; before which Crailshem the Master of
the Household marched alone. The Hearse was smooth at the top, and round about
it hung those Arms of the several Provinces, which had been before displayed
in those three and thirty Banners which the Barons carried; and immediately
after it, the great Arms of the Kingdom of Swethland, with the Crown Royal,
and Imperial Globe; about which, was the Title written in great Letters,
GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS MAGNUS; with the hours of his Nativity and Death, specified
also. The Hearse it self, was carried by twenty Noblemen close Mourners, under
a large black Canopy, whose four Corners were borne up by four Colonels.
After whom came forty other Noblemen, appointed by turns to carry the Hearse
twenty at a time, and so to relieve each other all the way as the Funeral
should pass. Behind these, came the Captain of the Guard Stenboccius, with
fifty of his Guard, their Spears covered over with black cloth, and
themselves attyred in long Cloakes. Then came two Marshals, and after them the
Elector of Brandenburg himself, the two Megapolitan Dukes, with other great
Princes, besides the Ambassadors of the Prince Palatine and his Lady. Then
followed some great Officers and Counselors of the Kingdom of Swethland; of
whom Herman Wrangell, John Banner, and Steno Beilke, were the chief. After
them came two other Heralds, Adam dam Pentius, and Cassimire, Guildensterne;
then followed the Queen of Swethland the mourning Widow of King GVSTAVVS,
sitting in a black Chariot drawn with six Horses, Gabriell Oxensterne the
Son of Gustavus, and Matthias Soape waited on the Queens Chariot; after her,
came the Elector of Brandenburghs Lady, the Duchess of Brunswicke, the wives
of the two Megapolitan Dukes, the two Daughters of Duke John Albert, the
Daughter of the Elector of Brandenburgh, the Duchess of Croy, and five
Princely Ladies of Anhalt; every one of these great Ladies was led by two Noble
men, one at either hand; after these again, followed two other Marshals, and
then in one fair company came all the Ladies and Gentlewomen that waited upon
the Queen, and that belonged to the Marchioness of Brandenburgh, the
Duchess of Brunswicke, and all those other Princesses that before were
mentioned; behind them came all the Agents, Ambassadors, or Secretaries of the
Cities thereabouts; and last of all, followed a troop of the deceased Kings
ordinary Houshold-seruants, who brought up the rear of this long and great
solemnity.

This Funeral Pomp, though it were great, had been far more magnificent
and solemn, if the Swedish fleet, which arrived the day after being Saturday,
had come at the appointed time; in which there were, an hundred Noble men with
a great number of Soldiers all well provided of mourning attire, and bringing
along with them many royal Ensigns, Flagges, and Armours, which should have
been shown to advance the state of the Funeral.

When they were come from Vbolgast to the seaside, from whence a bridge was
made over to the shipping, they set the Hearse down upon the shore; and Steno
Beilkius standing before the Queen, in her Name, and in the names of all the
States of Swethland in a learned Oration, gave thanks to the Electors, and the
rest of the Princes there for the love they had showed to his deceased Master.
The Oration being ended, and some salutations passed the Kings Hearse, was
borne into the ship to be transported with the Queen into Swethland; which
was no sooner removed, then a thundering peale of Ordnance from the Castle and
Town was given, and on the shore two bodies of Musketeers with a long and
great Volley bad adieu to the body of that Martial King.

An Elegy upon the Death of the King of Sweden.
It Was late (great Hero)
e're we could believe
Thy death; and therefore
late e're we could grieve.
The Fates were pleased to respite Britains tear:
So long a time, till she had gathered fears
Enough to usher such a grief: till doubt
And long disputes had vexed our Souls about
The certain truth, because the silent skies;
The Air; or Earth in threatening prodigies
Forgot to speak so great a Worthies fall;
And nature seemed not sensible at all
Of her deep wound: uncertain rumors here,
In stead of Comets, brought preparing fear
To play his part, e're sorrow came; nor durst
Fame bring thy Story certain at the first.
Intelligence was grown so slow: that we,
Not as intelligence, but History,
Are taught at last the Glorious Sweden's gone;
Just as we know that Philips mighty Son,
That Cyrus, Caesar and the rest are dead.
And now too stale the Sorrow seems, to shed
A tear; our eyes, even as we write, are dry.
It is thy Story, not thy Elegy
That now is sought for, and the wish of all
To hear thy Triumphs, not thy Funeral.
But oh, what pen! what eloquence should tell
Thy deeds, that never found a Parallel?
What towering Muse should reach so high a flight
As thy Heroicke Story must invite
A muse to take? Where should we find a Strain
Though from Elysium we should call again
That Bard, that honored Thetis warlike Boy,
Or him that famed the pious Prince of Troy,
Or that lamented youth, whose stately strains
Enobled once Pharsaliaes tragic plains?
And therefore be content in this as well
To be great Alexanders Parallel
(As in thy Actions, and early fall
Thou were) to find no Poets pen at all.
So much the greatness of his deeds did fright
The Poets of his time, no Muse could write.
Yet were thy acts more full of honor far;
More Just nor less successful was thy war.
What Muse, alas, dares sing thy first renown?
Before thou left'st thy North, to trample down
That high-swolne Austrian Empire (as erst he
His Greece, to crush the Persian Monarchy)
More weighty tasks remayn'd for thee at home
Than him; and stronger foes to overcome,
Before thy prowess could secure thine own
And lay thy future fames foundation.
In stead of Athens, of the Theban state,
And other Grecian Provinces, whose fate
Did exercise the youth of Philips Son:
(Though there his Father had for him begun)
The foes, that gave thee thy first triumphs, were
The warlike Dane, and potent Polander.
The great Moscovian, Monarch of so vast
A territory, by thy sword was chased,
And forced, by yielding up a spacious land,
To purchase peace at thy victorious hand.
What would have crowned another Heroes name
Was but the entrance to Gustavus Fame.
And now the Fates esteemed thee fit to be
The vindicator of great Germany;
The Imperial bird that soared in proudest state,
Gorged with so many Princes falls of late,
Now all vnplum'd, and torn, is forced to feel
The vengefull dint of thy victorious steel.
Not such true fame could Alexander boast
When he subdued the gaudy Persian host
Within those famous Strayts, or after near
Arbella famed for that great slaughter there;
As thou of Lypsicks honored field may do,
And Tilly's fall. To pass with conquest through
The well-arm'd German Empire, then o'rerunne
The effeminate Persians, greater glory won.
But weigh the causes, and proceedings well,
And then no more is he thy parallel;
Whom wild Ambition only did lead on
To rob of freedom, every Nation;
Thou foughtst to set oppressed Princes free,
And to restore the German liberty:
Him every Kingdom, er'e he did appear
Like some great Plague, like mankinds Foe did fear:
The many wronged Countries wished to see,
And by thy just drawn Sword revenged to be.
Which conquered to preserve the conquered Foe
And not to ruin, nor inthrall: And now
Great Alexander yields to thee in glory
And till some second Mars arise; whose Story
May prove hereafter such as thine is now;
Upon the top of Honors house do thou
Without a Rival, great GVSTAVVS, dwell;
Enjoy thy Fame without a Parallel.
The End

