THE QUEEN OF ARRAGON.

A Tragi-Comedie.



LONDON Printed by Tho. Cotes, for William Cook, and are to be sold at his
shop at Furnivals Inn gate in Holburne. 1640.

The Actors Names.
THe Queen of Arragon. Decastro General of the Forces of Arragon in love with
the Queen. Ossuna Friend to Decastro. Florentio General of the Forces of
Castile enamored on the Queen. Velasco a great Commander under Florentio.
Ascanio, the King of Castile disguisd. Lerma a Noble man Privy to his
disguise. Oniate a sober Courtier. Sanmartino, a half witted Lord.
Browfilldora, Dwarf to Sanmartino.
Floriana, wife to Sanmartino. Cleantha, a witty Court Lady.
Captain. Servants. Several Soldiers.
The Prologue at Court.
HAd not obedience over ruled the Authors fear
And Judgment too, this humble piece had nere
Approacht so high a Majesty, not writ
By the exact and subtle rules of wit;
Ambitious for the splendour of this night
But fashioned up in have for his own delight.
This, by my Lord, with as much zeal as ere
Warmed the most loyal heart, is offered here
To make this night your pleasure, although we
Who are the Actors, fear twill rather be
Your patience: and if any mirth; we may
sadly suspect, twill rise quite the wrong way.
But you have mercy sir, and from your eye
Bright Madam, never yet did lightning fly,
But vital beams of favor such as give
A growth to all, who can deserve to live.
Why should the Author tremble then, or we
Distress our hopes, and such tormentors be,
Of our own thoughts, since in those happy times
We live, when mercie's greater than the crimes
The Prologue at the Friars.
ERe we begin* that no man may repent
Two shillings and his time; the Author sent
The Prologue, with the errors of his Play,
That who will, may take his money and away.
First for the Plot, it is no way intricate
By cross deceits in love, nor so high in state,
That we might have given out in our Play-bill,
This day's the Prince writ by Nick Machivill.
The Language too is easy, such as fell
Unstudyed from his pen, not like a spell
Big with misterious words, such as inchant
The half witted, and confound the ignorant.
Then what must needs afflict the Amorist,
No Virgin here in breeches, casts a mist
Before her Lovers eyes; No Ladies tell
How their blood boyles* how high their veins do swell.
But what is worse, no bawdy mirth is here;
(The wit of bottle Ale, and double Beer)
To make the wife of Citizen protest,
And Country Justice swear, it was a good Jest.
Now sirs you have the errors of his wit:
Like or dislike, at your own perils be it.
THE QVEENE OF ARRAGON.
Actus Primus.
Scena Prima.
Enter Sanmartino and Cleantha. Clean. MY Lord, lets change the subject: Love
is worn
So threadbare out of fashion, and my faith
So little leanes to vows.

San. The rage of time,
Or sickness, first must ruin that bright Fabrique,
Nature took pride to build.

Clean. I thank my youth then
For the tender of your service: It Is the last
Good turn it did me, But by this my fears
Instruct me, when the old bald man called Time
Comes stealing on me, and shall steal away
What you call beauty: my neglected face
Must be enforced to go in quest for a new
Knight Errant.

San. Slander not my constant faith,
Nor doubt the care fate has to stop the Motion
Of envious Time, might it endanger so
Supreme a beauty.

Clean. Sure my Lord fate has
More serious business, or Divines make bold
TO instruct us in a scisme. But grant I could
Induce my self, (which I despair I shall)
To hear and talk that empty nothing Love
Is It now in season, when an Army lies
Before our City gates, and every hour
A battery expected? Dear my Lord
Let Us seal our testament, and prepare for heaven:
And as I am informed by them, who seem
To know some part oth' way, Loves not the nearest
Path that leads thither.

San. Madam! he is but
A Coward Lover, whom or death or hell
Can fright from's Mistress. And for danger now
Threatening the City; How can I so arm
My self, as by your favor, proof against
All stratagems of war.

Cleant. Your Lordship then
Shall walk as safe, as if a Lapland witch
(You will not envy me the honor of
The metaphor) preserved you shot-free. But
Who is your Confessor? Yet spare his name
His function will forgive the glory of it.
Sure he is ill read in Cases to allow
A married Lord the freedom of this Courtship.

San. Can you think Madam that I trust my sins
(But virtues are those loves I pay your beauty)
Toth' council of a Cassock? Who has art
To judge of my confession; must have had
At least a Privy Chamberer to his Father.
We of the Court commit not as the vulgar,
Dull ignorant sins. Then that I Am married Madam
Is rather safety to our Love.

Clean. My heart!
How sick am I oth' sudden? Good my Lord
Call your dwarf hither.

San. Garaganta! Boy.


Enter Browfilldora. Clean. Preethee, thy pedigree.


San. Madam! What mean you?


Clean. O any thing, but to divert from Love.
Another word of Courtship, and I swound.

Garag. My Ancestors were Giants Madam. Giants
Pure Spanish, who disdained to mingle with
The blood of Goth or Moore. Their mighty actions
In a small letter Nature Printed on
Your little Servant.

Clean. How so very little?


Gar. By the decay of Time, and being forced
From fertile pastures to the barren hills
Of Biskay. Even in trees you may observe
The wonder, which transplanted to a soil
Less happy, lose in groath. Is not the once
Huge body of the Roman Empire, now
A very Pigmie?

Cleant. But why change you not
That so Gigantick name of Brumfilldora.

Gar. Spite of malignant Nature, I Will preserve
The memory of my forefathers: They shall live
In me contracted.

San. Madam! lets return
To the love we last discourst on.

Clean. This my Lord
Is much more serious. What course thing is that?

Enter Oniate and Floriana. Flor. I owe you sir, for the pleasure of this walk.


Oniate. Madam it was to me the highest honor.


Exit. Oniate. Clean. Welcome o welcome to redeem me. What
Can the best wit of woman fancy, we
Have been discoursing of?

Floria. Sure not of love?


Clean. Of that most ridiculous hobby horse Love;
That fool that fools the world. That Spaniell Love
That fawnes the more it is kicked.

San. Will you betray me?


Clean. Thy Lord has so protested Floriana;
Vowed such an Altar to my beutie, swoare
So many oaths, and such profane oaths too;
To be religious in performing all
That Is impious toward heaven, and to a Lady
Most ruinous.

Floria. Good Cleantha: all your detraction
Winnes no belief on my suspicion.

Cleant. Be credulous and be abused. Floriana!
There Is no vice so great as to think him virtuous:
Go mount your milke-white steed fit Lanceloi
Your little squire attends you there. In suburbs
Enchanted Castles are where Ladies wait
To be delivered by your mighty hand,
Go and protest there.

San. I thank your favor Madam.


Exit. Sanmar. Clea. It is not so much worth sir, come we will follow.


Flor. But stay Cleantha. Prithee what begot
That squeamish look, that scornful wry oth' mouth
When Oniate parted?

Clean. Why? Thou had
So strange a fellow in thy Company
His Garb was so uncourtly, I grew sick.

Flor. He is a Gentleman: and add to that
Makes good the Title.

Clean. Happily he may so
And happily he is enamored on thy beauty.

Flo. On mine Cleantha?


Clean. Yes dear Floriana.
Yet neither danger to thy chastity,
Nor blemish to thy fame. Custom approves it.
But I owe little to my memory,
If ere I saw him among the greater Ladies:
Sure he is some suburb Courtier.

Flori. He Is Noble:
And has a soul. A thing is questiond much
In most of the gay youths, whom you converse with.

Clean. But how disorderly his hair did hang?


Flor. Yet 'twas his own.


Clean* How ill turned up his beard?
And for his clothes.

Florian. Though not fresh every morning,
Yet in the fashion.

Clean. Yes in the soberfashion:
Which Courtiers wear who hope to be employed
And aim at business. But he is not gentile:
Not discomposed enough to Courta Lady.

Flor. His thoughts are much more serious.


Clean. Guard me Fortune*
I would not have the Court take notice that
I walked one hour with that state Aphorism,
Each Autumn to renew my youth. Let us
Discourse with Lords whose heads and legs move more
Than do their tongues, and to as good a sense.
Who snatching from my hand a Glove, can sigh
And print a kiss, and then return it back.
Who on my buske, even with a pin can write
The Anagrame of my Name: Present it humbly
Fall back and smile.

Flor. Cleantha! I perceive
There is small hope of thy conversion;
Thou art resolved to live in this heresy.

Clean. Yes: since it is the Religion of our Sex.
Sweet Floriana, I will not yet suffer
For unregarded truth Court persecution. Enter Ossuna and Oniate with diverse
Soldiers.
But what are they appear there?

Flor. We Will away.


Exeunt Floria. and Cleantha. Ossuna. This is the place for enterview. You
who'ar
Deputed for this service from the Lord
Florentio, use such caution as befits
Your charge. How ere your Generals persons safe:
The Lord Decastro having past his word.

Oniate. Yet it is my wonder, that Florentio
A Soldier so exact, practiced in all
The mysteries of war and peace, should trust
Himself where the enemies faith must best secure him

Ossun. The great Decastro sir, whom our late King
Deputed regent at his death, and whom
The Kingdom judges fit to marry with
His only heir the present Queen (though she
Disdain his love and our desires) has proved
To time and fortune, that he fears no danger
But what may wound his honor. How can then
Florentio (though he now set down before
Our City with so vast an Army) choose
A place for enterview, by Art and Nature
So fortified; as where Decastro's faith
Makes it impregnable?

Oniate. Distrust my Lord,
Is the best Counceler to great designs:
Our confidence betrays us. But between
These two are other seeds of Jealousy:
Such as would almost force Religion break
Her tying vows, authorize perjurie,
And make the scrupulous Casuist say, that faith
Is the fools virtue. They both love the Queen,
Decastro building on his high deserts,
And vote of Arragon: Florentio on
The favor he gained from her Majesty
When here he lived employed by his great Master
King of Castile.

Ossuna. Such politic respects
May warrant the bad statesman to dark actions.
But both these Generals by a Noble war,
Resolve to try their fate.

Oniate. But here my Lord
Enter Sanmartino. Is a full period to all serious thought.
This Lord is so impertinent, yet still
Upon the whisper.

Ossuna. He Is a mischief Sir,
No Court is safe from.

Oniate. What fine tricks he shows
Each morning on his gennet, but to gain
A female Vision from some halfe-open'd window,
And if a Lady smile by accident
Or but in scorn of him; yet he kind soul
Interprets it as Prophecy to some
Near favor to ensue at night.

Ossuna. I wonder
What makes him thought a Wit.

Oniate. A copper wit,
Which fools let pass for current. So false coin
Such very Alchimie, that who vents him
For ought but parcel ass, may be in danger:
Look on him, and in little there see drawn
The picture of the youth is so admired,
Of the spruce Sirs: whom Ladies and their women
Call the fine Gentlemen.

Ossuna. What are those papers,
With such a sober brow, he looks upon?

Oniate. Nor platform, nor intelligence, but a Prologue;
He comes to whisper to one of the Maids
In The Privy chamber after supper.

Ossuna. I praise the courage of his folly yet,
Whom fear cannot make wiser.

San, My good Lord!
Brave Oniate! Saw you not the General?

Onia. He Is upon entrance here. And how my Lord?
I saw your Lordship turning over papers,
What Is the discovery?

San. It may import
Decastro's knowledge. Never better language
Or neater wit. A paper of such verses
Writ by the exactest hand.

Ossuna. In time of business
As serious as our safety, to intrude
The dreams of madmen?

San. My Judicious Lord!
It with the favor of your Lordship may
Concern the General. Such high rapture,
In admiration of the Queen, whom he
Pretends to Love. How will her Majesty
Smile on his suit, when in the heat of business
He not neglects this amorous way to woe her?

Enter Decastro. Decast. No man presume to advance a foot. My Lord
Ossuna I desire your ear.

San. My Lord
I have a piece here of such elegant wit.

Decast. Your pardon good my Lord; we le find an hour
Less serious to advise upon your papers,
And then at large we will whisper.

San. As you please
My Lord you will pardon the error of my duty.

Exit Sanmar. Ossun. The Queen my Lord gave free access to what
I spoke oth' public, but when I began
To mention love.

Decast. How did she frown? Or with
What murdering seorne, heard she Decastro named?
Love! of thy laberinth of Art, what path
Left I untroden? Humbly I have labored
To win her favor: and when that prevailed not;
The Kingdom, in my quarrel, vowed to empty
The veins of their great body.

Ossuna. Sir her heart
Is mightier than misfortune. Though her youth
Soft as some consecrated virgin wax,
Seem easy for impression: Yet her virtue
Hard as a rock of Diamond, breaks all
The battery of the waves.

Decastro. Unkind and cruel!


Ossu. She charged me tell you that a faith less Moore
Who had gained honor only by the ruin
Of what we hold religious, sooner she
Would welcome to her bed; than who to his Queen
And Love had been a Rebel.

Decast. How? A rebel?
The peoples suffrage, which inaugurats Princes,
Has warranted my actions.

Ossun. But she answers
The subtle Arts of faction, not free vote
Commanded her restraint.

Decast. May even those stars
Whose influence made me great, turn their aspects
To blood and ruin; if ambition raised
The appetite of Love. Her beauty has
A power more Sovereign, than the Eastern slave
Acknowledged ever in his Idol King.
To that I bowed a subject. But when I
Discovered that her fancy fixed upon
Florentio (General now of the enemies Army)
I let the people use their severe way:
And they restrained her.

Ossuna. But my Lord their guilt
Is made your crime. Yet all this new affliction
Disturbs her not to anger, but disdain.

Decast. She has a glorious spirit. Yet the world
The envious world it self must justify;
That howsoever Fortune yielded up
The Scepter to my power; I did but kiss it
And offered it again into her hand.

Enter Florentio, Velasco, and others. Oniate. My Lord, the General of
Castile, Florentio.


Decast. He Is safely welcome. Now let each man keep
At a due distance. I have here attended
Your Lordships presence.

Floren. O my Lord! ar' we
Whom Love obleigeth to the same alleigance,
Brought hither on these terms?

Decast. The are terms of honor.
And I yet never knew to frame excuse,
Where that begot the quarrel.

Floren. Yet me thinks
We might have found another way to it.
We might have sought out danger, where the proud
Insulting Moore, profaines our holy places.
The noise of War had been no trouble then,
But now too much 'twill fright the gentle ear
Of her we both are vowed to serve.

Decastro. That Love
Which arms us both, bears witness, that I had
Much rather have encounterd lightning; than
Create the least distraction to her peace.
But since the vote of Arragon decrees
That my long Service has the justest claim
To challenge her regard; Thus I must stand
Armed to make good the title.
This vain language
Scarce moves my pity. What desert can rise
So high to merit her? Were each short moment
Oth' longest lived Commander lengthened to
An age, and that exposed to dangers mighty
As Cowards framethem; can you think his service
Might challenge her regard? Like the heavenly bounty
She may distribute favor: But it is sin
To say our merits may pretend a title.

Decastro. You talk Sir like a Courtier.


Floren. But my Lord
You Will find a soldier in this Arm: which strengthened
By such a cause, may level mountains high
As those the Giants (emblems of your thoughts)
Piled up to have scaled heaven.

Decasto. That must be
Decided by the sword. And if my Lord
Our enterview has no more sober end,
Than a dispute so froward; Let us make
The trumpet drown the noise.

Floren. You shall not want
That Music. But before we yielded up
Our reason unto fury; I desired
We might expostulate the ground of this
So fatal war: and bring you to that low
Obedience Nature placed you in.

Decast. My ear
Attends you.

Floren. Where is then that humble zeal
You owe a Mistress; if you can throw off
That duty which you owe her as your Queen?
What justice (that fair rule of humane actions)
Can you pretend for taking Arms?

Decastro. Pray forward.


Floren. I Will not deny (for from an enemy
I Will not detract) during her nonage, when
The public choice, and her great fathers will,
Enthroned you in the government; you managed
Affairs with prudence equal to the fame
You gained* And when your sword did fight her quarrel,
It Was crowned with victory.

Decast. I thank your memory.


Floren. But hence ambition and ingratitude
Drew only venom. For by these great Actions*
You labored not to advance her state or honor;
But subtly wrought upon the peoples love:
A love begot by error, following still
Apparencie not truth.

Decast. You conster fairly.


Floren. The sun is not more visible, when not
One cloud wrinckles the brow of heaven. For
On that false strength you had in the multitude,
You swelled to insolence: dared court your Queen:
Boasting your merit; like some wanton Tyrant
In The vanity of a new conquest. And
When you perceived her judgment did instruct her
To frown on the attempt; profainely against
All Laws of Love and Majesty, you made
The people in your quarrel seize upon
The Sacred person of the fairest Queen,
Story ere boasted.

Decast. Have you done my Lord?


Floren. Not yet. This injury provoked my master
To raise these mighty Forces for her rescue:
And named me General, whose aim is not
A vain ambition, but to advance her service
Ere we begin to punish, take this Offer:
Restore the Queen to liberty, with each
Due circumstance that such a Majesty
May challenge, freely to make choice of whom
She shall advance to the honor of her bed.
If your deserts bear that high rate you mention;
Why should you doubt your fortune? On these terms
The King, King of Castile may be induced
To pardon the error of your ruin.

Decast. Thus
In short my answer. How unlimited
So ere my power has been, my reason and
My love has circumscribed it. True, the Queen
Stands now restrained: But it is by the decree
Of the whole Kingdom, least her error should
Persuade her to some man less worthy.

Floren. How?


Decast. Less worthy than my self. For so they judge
The proudest subject to a Foreign Prince.
But when you mention love, where are your blushes?
What can you answer for the practicing
The Queens affection, when Ambassador
You lay here from Castile; pretending only
Affairs importing both the Kingdoms? Nor
Can you my Lord be taxt by your discretion,
That by the humblest Arts of Love, you labor
To win so bright a beauty, and a Queen
So potent. Your affection looks not here,
Without an eye upon your profit.

Floren. Witness Love.


Decast. No protestation. If you will withdraw
Your Forces from our Kingdom, and permit
Us to our Laws and Government; That peace
Which has continued many ages Sacred,
Stands firm between us. But if not.

Floren. To Arm.


Decast. Pray stay my Lord. Does not your Lordship see
The advantage I have in the place: with how
Much ease I may secure my fortune from
The greatest danger of your Forces?

Flo. Ha!
It Was inconsiderate in me. But I trusted
To the honor of your word, which you will not violate.

Decast. Go safely off my Lord. And now be dumb;
All talk of peace: We Will parley in the drum.

Exeunt several ways, the Drum beating. Actus Secundi.
Scena Prima.
Enter Sanmartino, Captain, Soldier, and Garaganta. Captain. COme on you
Atlasses of Arragon:
You by whose powers the Castilian cloud
Was forced to vanish. We have ferk'd Florentio,
In the right Arm: made the enamored Donn
Retire to doleful Tent.

Sanmar. We sallyed bravely.


Cap. Thou did in the sally fight like lightning Conde,
Let the air play with thy plume, most puisant Peer.
No Conde Sanmartino now; but Conde
S. George, that Cappadocian man at Arms,
Thou have done wonders, wonders big with story,
Fit to be sung in lofty Epick strain:
For writing which the Poet shall behold,
That which creates a Conde, gold. Gold which
Shall make him wanton with some suburb Muse,
And Hypocrene flow with Canary billow.
Thou Art high in feate of Arm.

San. Captain I think
I did my part.

Captain. Base is the wight that thinks,
Let Condes small in spirit drink harsh sherry,
Then quarrel with promooting knights, and fine for it
Thou art in metal mighty, tough as steel
As Bilboe or Toledo steel. Fight on.
Let Acres sincke, and bancke of money melt,
Forsake thy Ladies lap, and sleep with us
Upon the bed of honor, the chill earth.
It Is that will make thee held a potent Peer,
Mong men oth' Pike, of buffe, and bandeliere.

San. Thou speak brave language Captain,


Captain. I Will maintain
It Is Arragonian, Conde.

Garagan. Captain Cedar,
Though in thy language lofty, give a shrub
Leave to salute thee. Sure we two are near
In blood and great attempt. Don Hercules
Was as I read in Chaldeon Chronicle,
Our common Ancestor. Don Hercules
Who rifled Nymph on top of Apennine.

Captain. Small Imp avaunt.


Garagan. Stout sturdie Oak, that grows
So high in field of Mars, o let no tempest
Shake thee from hence. And now I have with labor
Attained thy language, I Will thy truchman be,
Interpret for thee to those smaller souls,
Who wonder when they understand not. Souls!
Whom Courtiers gaudie outside captives,
And plume of Coronell.

Captain. I must expire.
Not talk to fish. See thou that man of match
Though small in stature, mighty he is in soul,
And rich in gifts of mind, though poor in robes:
Reward like Phillips heir his daring arm,
Which fetched thee off from danger. Once again
Most doughty Don adieu.

Garagan. Great Don Saltpeeter,
I am the servant of thy famed caliver.

San. These are strong lines. Now friend! Art thou oth' garrison?


Soul. If It please your Lordship.


San. It does not please me,
It is indifferent. I care not what thou art.
Art thou extremely poor?

Soul. Ift please your Lordship.


San. No not that neither. Why should I malign
So far thy fortune, as to wish thee poor?
Twere safer for my purse, if thou were rich:
Then all reward were base.

Soul. Ift please your Lordship.


San. O no more Prologue. Prithee the first Scene,
To the business man.

Soul. Then I must tell your Lordship.
I scorn that wealth makes you thus wanton, and
That wit which fools you. Did the royal favor
Shine but on you, without enlarging warmth
To any other, I in this torn outside
Should laugh at you, if insolent.

San. This is saucie.


Soul. I tell thee petulant Lord, I Will cut thy throat
Unless thou learn more honor.

San. What shall I do? Enter Floriana, and Cleantha.
But see Cleantha. Not to be made Grande,
Would I she should discover me in parley
With such course clothes. There fellow take that gold,
And let me see thy face no more. Away.

Throws back the money. Soul. There it is again. I will not owe one hour
Of mirth to such a bounty. I can starve
At easier rate, than live beholding to
The boast of any giver. Lord! I scorn
Thee and that gold which first created thee.

Exit. Sold. Flor. That Soldier seemed to carry anger in
His look my Lord.

San. What should his anger move me?


Clean. O no my Lord: The world speaks wonders of
Your mighty puissance.

Flor. It Is my joy you are safe.
But why adventured you into this quarrel?

Cleant. The Queen will hardly thank your valor: since
They of Castile professed themselves her Soldiers.

San. The Queen must pardon courage: Men who are
Of daring Spirit, so they may but fight
Examine not the cause.

Flori. She does expect us.


Clean. I will attend her here. For here she gives
Decastro audience. I must not loose
This Lord yet, it so near concerns my mirth.

San. Madam! I wonder with what confidence
You after such an injury, dare endanger
Discourse with me.

Cleant. I injure you my Lord?
Whose favor I have courted with more Zeal
Than well my Sex can warrant? Triumph not
Too much upon my weakness; cause you have
Got victory ore my heart, take not delight
To make my grief your sport.

San. Be witty still,
And keep me for a Trophie of your pride,
I hope to see that beauty at an ebb;
Where will be then your overflow of servants?
You Will then repent your pride.

Clean. O never, never.
If you will particularize your vows to me;
You who toth'title of the Courtly Lord,
Have added that of valiant. And beshrew me,
She Is no good huswife of her fame, that wants
A daring servant.

Sanmar. This perhaps may work.


Cleant. If she live single; he preserves her name
And scarce admits a whisper, that the Jealous
May conster points at her. And if she marry;
He awes the husband, if by chance or weakness,
She have offended.

San. This cannot be fiction.


Clean. Then if she use but civil complement
To a Courtier Bachelor; He straight be speaks
The License, and the Favors, and calls in
Some wit into his Council for the Posie,
While I feel no tentation to such folly
But with a married Lord.

San. How gentle Madam?


Clea. Our walks are priviledg'd, our whispers safe,
No fear of laying contracts to my charge,
Nor much of scandal. And if there be cause,
Who is so fond a Ghamster of his life,
As merely out of spleen to stake it? But
My Lord I now suspect you conster'd ill
That language I used to your Lady, when
I told her of your love. But I presume
You were not so dull sighted as in that
Not to discern the best disguise for love.

San. What a suspicious ass was I? How captious?
I nere mistrusted my own wit before.
Mischief how dull was I?

Clean. Pray turn your face
Away. Now know when worth and valor are
Led on by love to win my favor. But
The Queen.

Enter Queen Decastro, Ossuna, Floriana, etc. San. Divine Cleantha! Noblest
Lady!


Decast. Ossuna let me beg thy care. Though we
Bravely repulst the enemy: They seem
To threaten a new assault.

Ossuna. Command your servant.


Decast. Bear then a vigilant eye, and by your scouts
Learn if they any new attempt prepare. Exit. Ossuna.
May't please your Majesty, command these many
Ears from your presence.

Queen. Good my Lord! you who
Have power to guide your Queen, may make our presence
Or full or empty as you please.

Decast. Then with
Your license Madam they may all with draw.

Queen. Not with our license. If your usurped greatness
Will banish all attendance from our person;
I must remain alone. But not a man
Stir hence with our good liking.

Decast. If your will
(Averse from sober council) would submit
To safe advice.

Queen. You have instructed it
To more obedience, than I guess my birth
Did ere intend. But pray my Lord teach me
To know my fault and I will find amendment
If not, repentance for it.

Decast. Then great Madam
I must acquaint you that the supreme Law
Of Princes, is the peoples safety: Which
You have infringed, and drawn thereby into
The inward parts of this great state a most
Contagious Fever.

Queen. Pray no Metaphor.


Decast. You have invited war to interrupt
With its rude noise, the music of our peace,
A foreign enemy gathers the fruit,
The sweat and labor of your subjects planted.
In the cool shadow of the Vine we pruin'd
He wantonly lies down, and roughly bids
The owner press the grape: that with the juice
His blood may swell up to lascivious heates.

Queen. My Lord I answer not the effects of war,
But I must pay Castile all thankful service,
For his fair charity.

Decast. Do you then Madam
Reckon on mischief as a charity?

Queen. Yes, such a mischief as is merciful,
And I a Queen oppressed. But how dares he
Whose duty ought with reverence obey,
And not dispute the counsels of his Princess,
Question my actions? Whence my Lord springs this
Ill tutored privilege?

Decast. From the zeal I owe
The honor of our Nation: Over which
Kings rule but at the Courtesy of Time.

Queen. You are too bold: And I must tell your pride
It swells to insolence. For were your nature
Not hoodwinked by your interest, you would praise
The virtue of his courage, who took Arms
To an injured Ladies rescue.

Decast. It Was ambition,
Greedy to make advantage of that breach
Between you and your people, armed Castile;
Unpittyed else you might have wept away
The hours of your restraint.

Queen. Poor erring man!
Could thy Arts raise a tempest blacker yet
Such as would fright thy self. It could not for
One moment cloud the splendour of my soul.
Misfortune may benight the wicked, she
Who knows no guilt can sink beneath no fear:

Decast. Your Majesty mistakes the humble aim
Of my address. I come not to disturb
The harmonious calm your soul enjoyes: May pleasure
Live there enthroned, till you your self shall woo
Death to enlarge it. May felicities
Great as the Idaeas of Philosophy
Wait still on your delight. May fate conspire
To make you rich and envied.

Queen. Pray my Lord
Explain the riddle. By the cadence of
Your language, I could guess you have intents
Far gentler than your actions.

Decast. If your ear
Great Madam, would convey into your heart
The story of my love. My love, a flame.

Queen. Leave off this history of love, and flame*
And honestly confess your fears my Lord,
Least Castile should correct you.

Decast. Correct me?
No Madam, I have forced them to a retreat.
And given my fine young General cause to wish
He had not left his amorous attempts
On Ladies, to assault our City.

Queen. But he is not wounded?


Decast. Not to death perhaps,
But certainly w' have opened him a vein,
Will cure the Fever of his blood.

Queen. O stay!


Decast. Torment! And does she weep? I might have fallen
Down from some murdering precipice to dust,
And mist the mercy of one tear: though it
Would have redeemed me back to life again.
Accursed be that felicity that must
Depend on woman's passion.

Queen. Florentio!

If in my quarrel thou too suddenly
Art lost in the shades of death; o let me find
The holy vault where thy pale earth must lie,
There I will grow and wither.

Decast. This is strange!
My heart swells much too big to be kept in.

Queen. But if that Providence which rules the world
Has to preserve the stock of virtue, kept
Thee yet alive.

Decast. And what, if yet alive?
Pray recollect your reason and consider
My long and faithful service to your crown:
The fame of my progenitors, and that
Devotion the whole Kingdom bears me. How
Has nature punished me, that bringing all
The strength of argument to force your judgment,
I cannot move your love?

Queen. My Lord you plead
With so much arrogance, and tell a story
So gallant for your self, as if I were
Exposed a prize toth' cunningst Orator.

Decast. No Madam, humbler far than the tand slave kneeles.
Tied to the Oar, I here throw down my self
And all my victories. Dispose of me
To death, for what has life, merits esteem?
What tie, Alas, can I have to the World?
Since you disdain my love.

Floria. Will you permit
The General kneel so long?

Queen. Fear not Floriana,
My Lord knows how to rise, though I should strive
To hinder it.

Decast. Here statue-like I Will fix
For ever, till your pity (for your love
I must despair) enforce a life within me.

Alarm and Enter Ossuna. Ossuna. O my Lord!
To arm, to arm. The enemy encouraged
By a strange leader, wheeled about the town,
And desperately surprised the careless guard.
One gate's already theirs.

Decast. Have I your license.


Queen. To augment your own command, and keep me still
An humble captive.

Decast. Madam! your disdain
Distracts me more, than all the assaults of fortune.

Exeunt all but the Queen, Floriana, and Cleantha. Queen. My fate! O whether
do thou lead me? Why
Is my youth destined to the storms of war?
What is my crime, you heavenly powers! that it
Must challenge blood for expiation!

Clean. Madam!


Queen. Fortune! O cruel! For which side soever
Is lost, I suffer: either in my people,
Or slaughter of my friends. No victory
Can now come welcome, the best chance of war
Makes me how ere a mourner.

Cleant. Madam, you
Have lost your virtue, which so often vowed
A clear aspect, what cloud soever darkened
Your present glory.

Queen. I had thoughts Cleantha:
But they are vanished: what shall we invent
To take off fear and trouble from this hour*
Poor Floriana. Thou art trembling now
With thought of wounds and death to which the courage
Of thy feirce husband like a headstrong jade,
May run away with him. But clear thy sorrows.
If he fall in this quarrel, thou shall have
Thy choice among the Castilian Lords. And give
My judgment faith, there be brave men among them.

Flor. Madam, I have vowed my life to a Cloister
Should I survive my Lord.

Queen. And thou art fearful
Thou shall be forced to make thy promise good.
Alas poor soul! Enclosure and course diet,
Much Disciple and early prayer, will ill
Agree with thy complexion. There Is Cleantha!
She has a heart so weaned from vanity,
To her a Nunnery would be a Palace.

Clean. Yes, if your Majesty were Abbess. Madam,
But Cloister up the fine young Lords withus,
And ring us up each midnight to a Masque
In steed of Mattins; And I stand prepared
To be professed without probation.

Drum beats. Flor. Hark! What noise is that?


Queen. It Is that of death and mischief.
My griefs! but I Will discemble them. Yet why,
Cleantha being the sole beauteous Idol
Of all the superstitious youth at Court;
Remainst thou yet unmarried?

Cleant. Madam I
Have many servants but not one so valiant
As dares attempt to marry me.

Queen. There Is not a wit but under some feigned name
Implores thy beauty, sleep cannot close up
Thy eyes, but the sad world benighted is,
Or else their sonnets are Apocriphall.
And when thou wakest the Lark salutes the day,
Breaking from the bright East of thy fair eyes.
And if mongthy admirers there be some
Poor drossie brain who cannot rhyme thy praise,
He wooes in sorry Prose.

Enter Servant. Ser. Half of the City
Already is possessed by the enemy,
Our soldiers fly from the Assailants, who
With moderation use their victory.
So far from drawing blood, the abstain from spoil.

Queen. My comforts now grow charitable, This
Is the first dawning of some happier fortune.

Flor. Where did you leave my Lord?


Ser. Retiring hither.


Queen. And your good nature will in time Cleantha
Believe all flattery for truth.

Clean. In time
I shall not. But forth' present Madam give
Leave to my youth to think I may be praised,
And merit it. Hereafter when I shall
Owe Art my beauty, I shall grow perhaps
Suspicious there is small faith in Poetry.

Que. Can thou think of hereafter? Poor Cleanthal
Hereafter is that time thou art bound to pray
Against. Hereafter is that enemy
That without mercy will destroy thy face,
And what is a Lady then?

Clean. A wretched thing.
A very wretched thing. So fcorn'd and poor
Twill scarce deserve man's pity. And I Am sure
No Alms can ere releeve it.

Queen. Floriana,

You yield too much to fear. Misfortune brings
Sorrow enough: It Is envy to our selves,
T'augment it by prediction.

Enter Sanmartino. Cleant. See your Lord.


San. Fly Madam fly. The Army of Castile
Conducted by an unknown leader, masters
The Town. Decastro yielding up his fate
To the prevailing enemy is fled.

Cleant. And shall the Queen fly from her friends my Lord?


Sanmar. You have reason Madam. I begin to find
Which way the Gale of favor now will blow,
I will address to the most fortunate.

Exit. Sanmar. Queen. Some Music there, my thoughts grow full of trouble,
I Will recollect them.

Clean. May it please you Madam
To hear a song presented me this morning.

Queen. Play any thing.


During the Song, Enter Ascanio, Lerma, Sanmartino, etc. Ascanio. Cease the
uncivil murmur of the drum:
Nothing sound now but gentle, such as may not
Disturb her quiet ear. Are you sure Lerma
The obedient Soldier has put up his sword?

Lerma. The Citizen and soldier gratulate
Each other, as divided friends new meeting.
Nor is there execution done but in pursuit
Of the enemy without the walls.

Asca. It Is very well. My Lord is that your Queen?


San. It is the Queen sir.


Asca. Tempered like the Orbs:
Which while we mortals weary life in battle,
Move with perpetual harmony. No fear
Ecclipseth the bright luster of her cheek.
While we who infants were swathed up in steel,
And in our cradle luld a sleep by the Cannon,
Grow pale at danger.

San. I Will acquaint her sir
That you attend here.

Ascanio. Not for a diamond
Big as our Apennine. She Is heavenly fair.
And had not Nature placed her in a throne;
Her beauty yet bears so much Majesty,
It would have forced the World to throw it self,
A captive at her feet. But see, she moves!
I feel a flame within me, which does burn
Too near my heart: And it is the first that ever
Did scorch me there.

San. Madam here is that brave Soldier
Which reinforc't the Army of Castile.
His name as yet unknown.

Ascanio. And must be so.
Nor did I merit name before this hour,
In which I serve your Majesty, enjoy
The fortune of my sword your liberty.
And since your Rebel subjects have denied
Obedience, here receive it, from us strangers.

Queen. I know nor sir to whom I owe the debt,
But find how much I stand obleig'd.

Ascanio. You owe it
To your own virtue Madam, and that care
Heaven had to keep part of it self on earth
Unruin'd. When I saw the Soldier fly,
Sent hither from Castile to force your rescue,
Their General hurt almost to death. I urged
Them with the memory of their former deeds,
Deeds famed in War. And so far had my voice
(Speaking your name) power to confirm their spirits
That they returned with a brave fury, and
Yield you up now your own humbled Arragon.

Queen. My ignorance does still perplex me more.
And to owe thanks yet not to know to whom,
Nor how to express a gratitude, will cloud
The glory of your victory, and make
Me miserable however.

Ascanio. I must penance
My blood with absence, for it boyles too high. aside
When we have ordered your affairs, my name
Shall take an honor from your knowledge Madam.

Queen. You have corrected me. Sir we will expect
The hour your self shall name, when we may serve.

Ascanio. I Am conquered in my victory. But Iletry
A new assault: And overcome, or dye.

Exeunt. Actus Tertius.
Scena Prima.
Enter Velasco and Oniate. Oniate. MY Lord it shows a happy Discipline
Where the obedient soldier yields respect
To such severe commands. Now when victory
Gives license to disorder.

Velasco. Sir our General
The Lord Florentio, is a glorious Master
In the art of war. And though time makes him not
Wise at the expense of weakness or diseases; yet
I have beheld him by the easy motion
But of his eye, repress sedition,
When it contem'd the frown of Majesty
For never he, who by his Princes smile
Stood great at Court, attained such love and awe
With that fierce viper the repining people.

Onia. Our Kingdom owes its safety to that power.
For how dejected looked our Majestrate
When conquest gave admittance to the Soludier*
But how their fears for sooke them, when they saw
You entry with such silcence?

Velasco. Sir, c^astile
Aimed not at spoil or ruin in this war,
But to redress that insolence, your Queen
Did suffer under, in Decostros pride.

Oniate. And yet Auxiliaries often turn their swords
To ruin, whom they come to rescue.

Velasco. The Barbarous keep no faith in vows. But we
We of Castile, though flattering advantage
Persuade to perjurie, have still observed
Friendship inviolate: No Nation suffering
To which we give our oath.

Oniate. You speak my Lord
Your glories Nobly. And it is our joy
Your Generals wound but frighted us.

Velasco. The Surgeons
Affirm there is no danger, and have licenced
His visit to the Queen.

Oniate. It Is thought how-ere
His Love had not obeyed such a restraint,
Though death had threatened him. But in his health
Consists the common safety, since those Forces
Decastro in the morning did expect,
Ere you the Town assaulted, are discovered
To which he fled expelled the City.

Velasco. Sir,
We shall contemn and with ease break that Army,
Whose General we have vanquished: having won*
The City and your Queen into our power.

Enter Sanmartino. San. Save you my Lord! Sir your most obedient!
And how likes your good Lordship the great Acts
Of the strange Cavaliere? was not his conduct
Most happy for you, in the late assault?

Velasco. He happily supplied the Office of
Our General* Howere your City had
Been ours. For though our Spanish Forces may
At first seem beaten, and we to retreat
A while, to animate a giddie enemy.
Yet we recover by our Art and patience
What fortune gives away. This unknown leader
(I know not how to style him) pressed among
Our Soldiers, as they were returning back
After a small repulse: Encouraged them,
(Though it was much superfluous) and got honor,
Perhaps not so deservingly: But 'twas well.

Oniate. Your Soldier speaks his glory even with wonder.


Velasco. The ignorant are prone to it. But sir
I think in our whole army there fought none,
But who had equal spirit. Fortune may
Bestow success according to her dotage.
I answer not for that.

San. This is pure Castile.
But what is his birth, Country, quality,
And whether is he bound?

Velasco. I seldom trouble
My language with vain questions. Some report
(It not imports who are the Authors) that
His Country's Sicily; his name Ascanio,
(Or else some sound like that) that he is a Lord:
(But what is an Island Lord?) and that he came
Into our continent to learn men and manners.
And well he might: for the All-seeing sun
Beholds no Nation fiercer in attempt,
More stayed in council.

Oniate. He Is of a brave presence,
I never saw more Majesty in youth
Nor never such bold courage in a face
So fashioned to delight.

San. The Queen commends him
Almost with wonder.

Velosco. Did the Queen regard
A man unknown?

Oniate. His mirits spoke his worth,
And well might challenge a particular eye.

San. But his, as if in that dumb Oratory,
He hoped to talk all the history of love,
Still sixth upon her.

Velasco. Your most humble servant.


Exit. Velasco. Oniate. This is abrupt.


San. What most pollitique flea
Is got into his Donships ear?

Oniate. Now must
The Junto sit till midnight, till they rack
Some strange design from this intelligence.

Enter Cleantha and offers to go out. San. Nay on my honor Madam!


Clean. Good my Lord!


San. Benight us not so soon. The short lived day
That gives the Russian in the winter hope
Of heat yet fails him; not so suddenly
Forsakes the firmament. Stay fairest Madam*
That we may look on you and live.

Clean. My Lord
I fear you two were serious.

San. Never I
Upon my Conscience Madam.

Oniate. No I Will swear:
Nor none of the whole form of you at Court,
Unless the stratagem be for a Mistress,
A fashion, or some cheating match at Tennice.

Clean. But happily that Gentleman had business,
His face betrays my judgment, if he be
Not much in project.

San. You mistake him Madam.
Though he talk positive, and bustle among
The Sober Lords, pretend to Embassies
And state designs all day; He Is one of us
At night: He Will play, he will drink, you guess the rest,
He Will quarrel too, then underhand compound.
Why for a need he will jeere and speak profane,
Court and then laugh at her he courted. Madam
Forgive him his pretense to gravitie;
And he is an absolute Cavalier.

Clean. My Lord
He owes you for this fair certificate:
Yet I fear your character's beyond his merit.

Oniate. Madam dissemble not so great a virtue.
Nor to obey the tyranny of custom,
Become the Courts fair hypocrite. I know
This vanity for fashionsake you wear,
And all those gayeties you seem to admire
Are but your laughter.

Clean. Sir your charity
Abuses you extremely.

Oniate. Come you cannot
Disguise that wisdom, which does glory in
The beauteous mansion it inhabits. Madam
This soul of mine, how course so ere it is clothed,
Took the honor to admire you, soon as first
You shined at Court. Nor had a timorous silence
So long denied me to profess my service,
But that I feared I might be lost in the crowde
Of your admirers.

Clean. Nor can I perceive
Any strong hope now to the contrary.

Oniate. Nor I. But give me licencet' undeceive
The world, that so mistakes you. This young Lord
Flatters his folly that indeed you are
Sick of that humor, you but counterfeite.
Believes you are frail and easy; since if not,
His courtship were without design.

Cleant. My Lord
What means the Gentleman? He hopes to talk me
Into a virtue I near practiced yet,
And much suspect I never shall.

San. Pray Madam
Pardon his ignorance: it is want of breeding.

Onia. Pardon your mirth fair Madam, and brush off
This honored dust, that soyles your company;
This thing whom Nature carelessely obtruded
Upon the world to teach, that pride and folly
Makes titular greatness the envy but of fools,
The wise man's pity.

Sanmar. Sir your words are rude.


Oniate. Sure no, my Lord: Perhaps in times of yore
They might be conster'd so, when superstition
Worshipped each Lord an idol. Now we find
By sad experience, that you are mere men,
If vice debauch you not to beasts.

San. The place
Is privileged sir.

Oniat. I know it is, and therefore speak thus boldly,
If you grow hot, you have your grots my Lord,
And in your Villa you may domineere
Ore the humble Country Gentleman, who stands
A loofe and bare.

Clean. My Lord leave off the combat
Yea're hard matched. And see the Lord Florentio. Enter Florentio and Velasco.
The Queen attends his coming. Sir voule find
A more convenient school to read this lecture.

Oniate. But none so beatifull to hear me.


Exeunt several ways Sanmartino, Cleantha, and Oniate. Floren. And are you
sure my Lord, he durst presume
To look up at her?

Velasco. Yes, and she commends
His person and his spirit.

Floren. It Was too much
TO observe his person. Sure his spirit's great,
And well may challenge the Queens memory:
I have not seen him yet.

Velasco. Nor I my Lord.


Flor. He had a fortune gentler far than mine.
In envy of that service which I vowed
To Arragon; heaven used a strangers arm
In this great action: I was judged a thing
Unfit for use.

Velasco. Your glory was the greater,
Your courage even opposing against your fate
In the attempt.

Floren. But yet mistaking man
Esteems the happy only valiant.
And if the Queen ( Velasco) should smile on
His merits, and forget that love I have
With such religion paid her. But these doubts
Are impious: and I sin, if I but listen
To their disloyal whispers. And behold, Enter the Queen, Floriana,
Cleanitha, etc.
She opens like a rock of Diamond;
To the curious search of the almost banckrout merchant,
So does the Pilot find his star, when storms
Have even sunck his bark. Divinest Madam!

Queen. Welcome my Lord! But pardon me my joys
If I must interrupt you with a sigh.
I cannot look upon Florentios arm,
But I must grieve it bled for me.

Flo. O spare
The treasure of those tears! Some captive King,
Whom fortune has locked up in iron, wants
One such to buy his freedom. Madam all
Those streams of blood which flow to warm my earth
Least it congeale to death, cannot compare
For value with the least drop shed for you:
By such a quarrel made inestimable.

Queen. The war I see has only been the field
To exercise your fancy. Your discourse
Shows that the Court was kept beneath your tent;
Yet cannot I my Lord be jealous but
It Is mingled with some love.

Floren. It Is a pure love,
Unmixt as is the soul. The world perhaps
May judge a kingdom has enamored me,
And that your titles dress you forth, to raise
My appetite up higher. Pardon love,
If it grow envious even of your fortune;
And that I me foc't to wish, you had been daughter
Of some poor mountain cottager, without
All dowre but your own beauty. Then I might
Have showed a flame untainted with ambition:
And courted you. But now the circumstance
Of greatness seems to challenge more than I
Have power to give: and working up my love,
I serve my fortune.

Queen. You have not my Lord
Found me uneasy to your vows. And when
The troubled stream of my tempestuous state
Shall meet a perfect calm: you then shall know
How worthy I esteem your virtue.

Flor. Speak but those words again, and seat me in
An Orb above corruption! O confirm
Your thoughts but with a promise.

Queen. How, a promise?
I shall repent my favor if I hear
A syllable that sounds like that. Upon
My marriage day I have vowed to bring my self
A free oblation to the holy Altar.
Not like a fearful debtor, tender love
To save my bond. My Lord I must not hear
One whisper of a promise.

Floren. I Am silent.
And use me as your Vassal, for a title
More glorious I shall never covet. But

Queen. No jealousy my Lord.


Enter Lerma. Lerma. Your Majesty
Is great in mercy: And I hope a stranger
Shall meet it, if his speech be an offense.

Queen. Your pleasure sir.


kneeles. Lerma. The Lord Ascanio charged
Me fall yet lower if the earth would license.
For to so high a Majesty, obedience
Cannot bend down enough. Then he commanded,
I in his name, should beg the honor for him,
Before he take his journey from your Country,
To kiss your hand.

Queen. Pray sir lets know the hour,
But let it not be sudden. Years should sweat
In preparation for his entertainment,
And Poets rack invention till it reach
Such praises as would reach the victories
Of the old Heroes.

Lerma. Madam, if his arm
Did actions worthy memory; it received
An influence from your quarrel: In the which
Adwarfe might triumph ore an Army: But
He humbly craves, his audience may not be
With croude and noise as to Ambassadors;
But with that silence which befits his business:
For it is of moment.

Queen. Sir, we will obey
His own desires, though ours could wish his welcome
With a full ceremony. I attend him.

Exit. Lerma. Floren. Madam this stranger.


Queen. Pray my Lord let Love
Not interrupt your business. I believe
The Army which Decastro so expected
Being now arrived, your soldier tired, the City
Ill settled in her faith, much council will
Be needful. When your leisure shall permit,
Our joy shall be to see you.

Floren. I Am all obedience.


Exeunt Queen and Florentio, at several doors. Manent Sanmartino, and
Cleantha. San. And when sweet Madam will you crown our joys?
Lets not like riotous gamsters throw away
The treasure of our time. Appoint the hour,
The hour which must wear garlands of delight,
By which we will make it the envy of the age.

Clean. My Lord what mean you?


San. What all fine Lords mean,
Who have plenty, youth, and title.

Clean. But my fame?


San. It Is the fools bugbeare.


Clean. Then my conscience*


San. A scarecrow for old wives, whom wrinckles make
Religious.

Clean. What will the Court say?


San. Why nothing.
In mercy to themselves, all other Ladies
Will keep your council.

Clean. But will you not boast it?


San. I Will be degraded first.


Clean. Well I Am resolved.


San. But when sweet Madam? Name
The moment.

Clean. Never. For now I weigh things better,
The antidote against fear is innocence.

San. Will you delude my hopes then? Pity Madam
A heart that withers, if denied this favor.

Clean. In pity I may be induced to much;
And since you urge compassion, I will meet.

San. Where excellent Madam?


Clean. In The Sycamor walk.


San. The minute, o the minute?


Clean. An hour hence.


San. Felicity! fit for thy envy Love!
You will not fail now Madam?

Clean. To be such
As you shall count that hour your happiest.

Exeunt. Enter Browfilldora, and Oniate. Oniate. This is a challenge! Prithee
my small friend
May not a man take the height of thy Lords spirit,
Looking on thee?

Browfill. Pray sir leave off your mirth
And write my Lord your answer.

Oniate. Little sir,
I never learnt that pretty quality;
I cannot write. Only by word of mouth.

Garagan. Your place sir?


Oniate. The market place.


Garag. It Is fantastic: and my Lord will take it ill.
Your weapons sir.

Oniate. Two English Mastives, which
Are yet but whelps, and not transported hither:
So that the time will be I know not when.

Garag. Your sport is dangerous. If my Lord forgive you;
I must resent the affront as to my self,
And will expect a most severe account.

Onia. Thou less thought angrier thing than waspe, farewell.


Exeunt. Enter Queen and Ascanio. Queen. I am informed my Lord that you have
business,
And it is of moment:

Ascanio. Great as that of Natures
In her most mighty work, Creation.
For to preserve from dissolution, equals
The gift of our first Being. Not to hold
Your Majesty in riddles, it is to beg
Your pardon for a Soldier doomed to dye;
Inevitably doomed: Unless your mercy
Step between him and death.

Queen. My Lord we use
TO examine well the fact, for which he is
To suffer, ere we pardon. There be crimes
Of that black quality, which often makes
Mercy seem cruel.

Ascanio. That Is the fear which frights
Me to this palenesse: sure his crime is great
But fondly I presuming on the service
My fortune lately did you, gave my vow
Never to forsake your ear with earnest prayers,
Till you had granted.

Queen. Would you had not vowed.
For by the practice of my enemies,
My fame is among the people yet unsettled,
And my capacity for government,
Held much too feeble. Should I then by this
Provoke them to disdain me, I might run
Apparent hazard even of ruin, now
War so distracts our Kingdom. But my Lord
Your merits are too ponderous in the scale,
And all respects weigh light, you have his pardon.

Asca. Your hand on that. The Down on the Swans bosom, kisses and holds it.
Not white and soft as this: Here Is such a dew
As drops from bounteous heaven in the morning,
To make the shadowie bank pregnant with violets.

Queen. My Lord!


Ascanio. I kissed it, and the Phoenix seemed
(The last of the whole race) to yield a perfume
More sweet than all his dying Ancestors
Breathed from their funeral piles. O shrink not back!
My life is so concomitant with love,
That if you frown on either both expire;
And I must part for ever hence.

Queen. How strange appears this ecstasy? My Lord I fear
Your brain feels some disturbance: If I cause it,
I will remove the object.

Ascan. Pardon Madam
The error of my fancy (which often seems
To see things absent) if my tongue did utter
What misbecame your ear. And do not forfeite
Your servant to perpetual misery
For want of a short patience.

Queen. No my Lord;
I have the memory of your great deeds
Ingrav'd so deep; no error can have power
To raze them from a due respect* You begged
To have a pardon. speak the offenders name.

Ascan. The offenders name, is Love. His crime, high treason*
A plot how to surprise and wound your heart;
To this conspirator I have given harbor,
And vowed to beg your mercy for him.

Queen. How?


Asca. And if you break your grant, I will hereafter
Scorn all your Sex, since the most excellent
Is cruel, and inconstant.

Queen. Pray my Lord
Go recollect your reason, which your passion
Has too much scattered. Make me not have cause
To hate, whom I would ever strive to honor.

Ascanio. Madam you happily scorn the vulgar earth
Of which I stand compacted: And because
I cannot add a splendour to my name
Reflective from a royal pedigree;
You interdict my Language. But be pleased
To know, the ashes of my ancestors
If intermingled in the Tomb with Kings
Could hardly be distinguished. The Stars shoot
An equal influence on the open cottage,
Where the poor sheepheards child is rudely nursed,
And on the cradle where the Prince is rockt
With care and whisper.

Queen. And what hence infer you?


Ascanio. That no distinction is 'tweene man and man,
But as his virtues add to him a glory,
Or vices cloud him.

Queen. But yet heaven has made
Subordination, and degrees of men,
And even religion does authorize us
To rule; and tells the subject it is a crime
And shall meet death, if he disdain obedience.

Ascan. Kind heaven made us all equal, till rude strength
Or wicked pollice usurped a power,
And for Religion, that exhorts to obey
Only for its own ease.

Queen. I must not hear,
Such insolence against Majesty: And yet
This less offends than love.

Ascanio. If reason bends
You not to mercy; let my passion plead,
And not meet death from her, in whose fair quarrel
I could each moment bring a life to the hazard.
Philosophy, has taught me that content
Lives under the course thatch of Laborers
With much more quiet, then where the sam'd hand
Of Artists, to the life have richly drawn
Upon the roofes the fictions of the Gods.
How happy then might I lengthen my life,
With some fair Country Girl, so ignorant
She knew not her own beauties: Rather than
Endanger death and scorn in your denial,
And in your grant nothing but pomp and envy.

Quee. My Lord be wise, and study that best content.
This bold presumptuous love, has cancelled all
The bonds I owed your valor: henceforth hope
Not for that usual favor I show strangers,
Since you have thus abused it: would I might
With safety have appeared more grateful.

Exit. Asca. She Is gone, as life from the delinquent when
Justice sheathes up her sword. I feign would have
Concealed lov's treason, but desire to obtain her
Put me to the torture, till each Nerve did crack,
And I confessed, then died upon the rack.

Exeunt. Actus Quartus.
Scena Prima.
Enter Cleantha and Floriana. Floria. THy pride is such a flatterer of thy
beauty,
That no man sighs by accident, but thou
Do pity as enamored.

Clean. Floriana!

Not so kind natured surely. I have put
The sighs of Courtiers in a scale, and find
Some three score thousand may weigh down a fether.
IN have tried their tears, which though of briny taste,
Can only season the hearts of fools, not women.
Their vows are like their duells, ever grounded,
Upon the idlest quarrel.

Floria. This, experiences
Perhaps instructs you to. But yet your pride
I fear is over easy to believe.
It Is merely to fly idleness, that my Lord
Has troubled you with courtship. If the Queen
Would make a statesman, she might cure a Lover.
Want of employment made him dream on beauty,
And yours came first to his fancy.

Clean. I begin
To think his making love but vanity,
And a mistake in wit.

Floria. And you begin
Perhaps to fear it?

Clean. True, perhaps I do.
For though we care not for the Lover, yet
We love the passion. Though we scorn the offering
We grieve to see it thrown away, and envy
If consecrated to another. Woman
Has no revenge against the injury of custom,
Which gives man superiority, but thus
To fool him to subjection.

Floria. Yet Cleantha!
I could have wished your charity had spared
This triumph over my Lord.

Clean. You see I take
The next way to redeem him. This the hour,
And this the place. Here he resolves to raise
A trophe in my ruin. And behold Enter Sanmartino, winding up his watch.
The just man of his promise. Not a minute
He fails; when sinne's the payment.

Floria. I Will endanger
His virtue to a blush: And happily
Convert an Infidel.

Clean. This is my province,
Nor shall you envy me the honor of
A work of meritorious. Let him walk
A while, and sin with his own fancy: Then
I Will undertake him: and if there be need,
Be you prepared to assist me.

Floria. Thou do build
Such Forts on the opinion of thy wit.

Exeunt Floriana and Clean. San. It Is a full hour, and half a minute over.
And yet she not appears? How we severe
Strickt Creditors in love, stand on the minute?
But yet the payment never comes unwelcome,
Until the gold, through age grow soul and rustie,
We stand not on a grain or two too light. Enter Dwarf.
Now your discovery?

Dwarf. My Lord I have
Made search in every Ally, every Arbor,
Not left a bush, wherein my littleness
Could creep without due scrutinie. And yet
No whispering of taffetie: No dazeling
Of your bright Mistress forced me to a wincke.
I saw no mortal beauty.

San. Sure she will not
Be so unworthy to delude me now?

Dwarf. But I had a more prosperous fate in love,
My Lord I met my mistress.

San. You, a mistress?


Dwarf. A Mistress to whose beauty I have paid
My vows, most fervent vows, ere since I was
Of stature fit to be an Amorist.

San. One of the Maids of honor to Queen Mab?


Dwar. Your Lordship guesses near. For she is one
Oth' Chamberers to her Fayrie Majesty;
A Lady of most subtle wit: who while
She puts a handkerchiefe or gorget on
Her little highness, holds intelligence
Abroad, and orders payment for the Spies.
She raises factions, and unites the angry.
She Is much upon design.

San. Where found you her?


Dwarf. Walking alone under the shadow of
A Tulip, and inveying against Court Arts,
'Cause one of Oberons Grooms had got from her
The Monopoly of transporting gnats,
A project she long aimed at.

San. No more fooling.
I am grown angry with my patience.
Boy, sing those verses, were presented me
This morning.

Dwarf. I will creep behind a bush,
And then for voice, vie with the Nightingale:
If seen I am so bashful.

Sanmar. Take your way. Song Without. As the Song ends Enter Cleantha veiled.
She breaks forth like the Morning in a Cloud.
It Is for the safety of my eyes, you veil
The glory of your beauties, which else might
Dazzle, not catch the sight. But I discern
A fair Cleantha through this gloominesse.
Appear, and speak bright Madam. Why such silence?
O famish not my ear, which greedily
Longs to devour the Music of your Language:
Is it to teach me that delight must be
Entombed in secrecy? Or else to show
How mad a spend thrift I Am to talk away
The treasure of this hour. Come fair unveile.

Clean. O give me leave, yet to retain my blushes.


San. Deceit of timorous modesty! Traitors
To love your blushes are. Your fears are envious
Of your delights. Lets vanish hence and near
To the vulgar eye again appear: Till we
Grown old in pleasure be transformed to a Vine
Or Ivy, so for ever to entwine.

Clean. Then I unveile.


San. O fly into my arms,
As a rich odor to the ravished sense*
Perfume me with thy kisses.

Clean. Stay my Lord:
Actions of moment (as I take this is)
Must be maturely thought on. I have called
My reason to account.

San. Your reason Madam?


Clean. Yes my good Lord. That only does distinguish
A woman from brute beasts; or what is more sensual,
A vain loose man. What sin scandalls my carriage
To give encouragement to this presumption?
What priviledg'd this attempt?

San. That tempting beauty.


Clean. It is a traitor then to my pure thoughts:
And to preserve your eye, would it were wrinckled;
I could much easier suffer the reproach
Of age, than your bold courtship. If a Lady
Be young and sportive, use curiosity
And perhaps Art, to help where nature seemed
Imperfect in her work, will you, from the
False argument of your own loose blood, conclude
Her guilty? Or if she select a friend;
Whose innocence gives warrant to her faith,
Will you infer their whispers have no aim
But that of Brothels? Cause you find your self
Naught but loose flesh, will you turn Heretic,
And thence deny the soul?

San. This language Madam
Sounds nothing to the purpose of our meeting.

Clean. More to the benefit. But in your patent,
Among all the privileges of a Conde
Where find you lust inserted? Without which
Till age has made you wise or impotent,
You think your honor is defective. 'Cause
Your clothes are hansome, and mine too; must we
Deforme our minds? Is it sufficient motive
To sin, if opportunity and youth
Persuade us? Such as you, are those foul plagues
Infect the air which breathes our fame, and make
The cautious sirs oth' Country shun us.

San. Madam?


Clean. When we admit you to our bedchamber,
Powder, or happily bath before you. What
Of honor's here more than a groom may boast,
Our maids are tired with? Yet this with a smile
Is whispered to your friend, and you infer
How easy a more near approach will be.
My Lord learn virtue, and your wit may then
Not serve you to so fond a purpose. If
That courage you are famed for be no slander,
Go to the wars. Twill be a far less maime
To lose an eye there than your honor here.
If peace enamour you, and the Court, live honest;
And hope the heir who shall succeed you, may
Be yours. Revenge destroys more chaste it ie,
Than all the temptings of such Lords as you.

San. You shall not talk me Madam from that pleasure
This hour does promise me.

Clean. You Will not commit
A rape my Lord?

San. That is a question as
Yet unresolved. For force is my last refuge.

Clean. Think on the danger; for the sin I see
Little distracts your conscience.

San. I propose
Felicity, which none can merit, who
Refuse so poor a venture. Here I vow
No prayer or Art shall free you. If you will
Hazard a life devoted to your service,
I Will dye your Martyr.

Clean. Come my Lord, I Will free you
From all such hazard.

San. There spoke harmony.


Clean. I Will not be cruel. You shall have kisses, such
As will melt your soul into your lips. And what
Is sweetest, no repentance shall be the issue Enter Floriana and Oniate.
Of your delight. Look here my Lord. She Is yours.

San. No halter now? Not tree convenient? O!
A steeple would be precious for my purpose!
But Oniate's there. I Will fight with him;
Be killed, and be redeemed. Sir you received
A challenge from me! but returned no answer.

Oniate. My Lord I had other business: you will excuse me.


San. What satisfaction do men give, when challenged?


Oniate. According to their spirit. If they be
Regardlesse of their fame, then they submit.
If not, they fight.

San. What Sir, will you then do?


Oniate. Let me consider. Neither.


San. Come you shall fight.


Oniate. My Lord I will not.


San. Then you shall subscribe
Your self a coward.

Oniate. Not for the whole world:
Such an apparent lie would be a sin
Too heavy to my conscience. I subscribe
My self a coward? If I should; no soldier
Would think but that my hand were counterfeited.

San. Then you must fight.


Oniate. My Lord on no condition. Hope not for it.


San. Then you shall swear, never to speak my name
But with respect.

Oniate. Hereafter, if you can
Deserve it. For the present, I must crave
Your pardon with much mirth to laugh at you.

San. Sir I shall meet you.


Oniate. It shall contradict
All my endeavors then.

San. I go sir. But.


Exit. Sanmar and Floria. Clean. For mercy sake go with thy Lord. Repentance
May turn to desperation.

Floria. I Will preserve him.


Clean. Have you no business sir, imports you more
Than t'hold discourse with me? Troth I shall pity
You want employment.

Oniate. Madam, what can be
More serious?

Clean. Nothing more: If your design
Be to convert me; for I know you hold
All Ladies in a Schism, who are young and proud.

Oniate. Your pardon Madam. I believe in cunning,
Court Ladies choose some petty venial errors,
To set perfection off. For should you not
Usurp a hansome pride, your fame would lie
Like unwal'd Cities, open to the prey
Of each invading youth. Did you not show
A scorn, you would deserve it.

Clean. Sir take heed.
Hope not to win my favor, by extolling
What in our better thoughts our selves condemn.
Iam so wearied out with vows and oaths,
With impious praises and most tedious flattery:
That nothing but plain speaking truth, can gain
On my affection.

Oniate. Madam! your affection?


Clean. Pray sir do not comment upon the word;
It does portend no danger to you.

Oniate. And if it did, where is the beatitude?
For though I grant you virtues great as beauty
Can entertain; and foolish I resolved
To captivate my stock of life to a woman:
Yet would I not adventure on you, if
You did not vow to perform Articles.

Clean. Suppose the business come to Articles.


Oniate. In The first then you should covenant love, not squinting
On every finer youth, or greater Lord;
But looking straight on me.

Cleant. To the second sir.


Oniate. No dotage on the Court, so far that my
Estate must rue it: and no vanity
Be started up, but my fond Lady must
Be melancholy, and take physic, till
She get into it.

Clean. Why! You envy then
Us our own trouble. Keep us from the expense
And leave us to our discontent for penance.

Oniat. No. I would have the mind serene: Without
All passion, though a masque should be presented;
And you in the Country. I must have you wise,
To know your beauty mortal: which you must
Preserve to warm my eye: not aid by Arts,
To keep the Courtiers wit in exercise.
From his so practiced flattery, your care
Must turn with a brave scorn; and when his eye
Does offer parley, seem so ignorant
As not to understand the language.

Clean. Sir
You happily will debar us our she friends too?

Oniate. As secret enemies who'se first betray you.


Clean. You Will not allow us, wearied of our husbands,
To send them on discovery of new worlds?
Or if we take a toy our selves to travel,
Perhaps to Barbary, or Tartary,
Or the remotest parts?

Oniate. To Bedlam sooner.


Clean. Or if our Sex should warrant it by custom,
To play at Tennice, or run at the Ring,
Or any other Martial exercize;
I fear me scrupulous sir, you will condemn it
As dangerous to my honor?

Oniate. Sure I should.


Clean. I then perceive small hope of our agreement.


Oniate. But I a confidence. For I discern
How much you loath these follies, you pretend.

Clean. Good sir no more of this so kind mistake,
You Will find some other Lady more deserves it.
And I aspire not to the honor.

Oniate. I Will try yet farther.


Exeunt Oniate Cleantha. Enter Lerma and Velasco. Lerma. My Lord you offer
nobly.


Velasco. It Is a step
Beneath Florentio's greatness, whether you
His birth consider, or his place. Sir the Queen
By natures seated and her high deserts,
Where only mighty souls (such as the Generals)
May offer to aspire.

Lerma. My Lord your laps
To this proud language is so injurious, that
I must be forced to purge the humor. That
The Lord Florentio offers by a duel
To show no man can have fairer pretense
To serve the Queen; must be allowed. But that
You dare cast disregard upon this Lord
Although a stranger, urges me to' entreat
Y'ould draw your sword:

Velasco. It has seen light, and made
Way through an Army, when fond victory
Smiled on our enemies. It has done wonders,
When the thick troops of Moors invaded us,
It fears no opposition.

Lerma. Show the effect of 't.


Velasco Not in a cause so trivial. Each small breath
Disturbs the quiet of poor shallow waters:
But winds must arm themselves, ere the large sea
Is seen to tremble. Pray your pardon sir:
I must not throw away my courage on
A cause so trivial.

Lerma. As you pelase my Lord;
But to omit all circumstance, you bring
A challenge to my Lord Ascanio:
The reason of the Lord Florentio's anger,
A rivallship in Love.

Velasco. You speak it right.


Lerma. I Will bring you back his resolution,
Before you have attended many minutes.

Velasco. Sir 'twill be descent, for my nature knows
Not how to wait. And if no delays
Be used, 'twill show a fierce valor in him,
And happily prevent discovery.
For you may easily conjecture, that
A Generals absence soon will wake the eye
Of the suspicious Soldier.

Lerma. Is my Lord
In readiness.

Velasco. He walks not far from hence


Lerma. You shall have use then but of a short patience.

Exit.
Velasco. It will be grateful to us sir: My Lord.


Enter Florentio. Floren. And will Ascanio meet?


Velasco. Immediately.


Floren. I had no other way. Yet this is rough,
And Justice whispers it is unsafe to tread it.
If to love her be sinful, what am I?
How dare I call his passion to the bar,
And nourish it my self? Why may not he
Who has as bold a fortune, entertain
As bold a love; and in the fate of war
Having outgone by service, why not then
Present it to the selfsame Altar? But
We cannot harbor both in the same Port;
Or he or I am shipwrack'd: for the storm
Is raised, and to appease it, death must be
The sacrifice.

Enter Lerma. Velasco. My Lord here is the second.
This stranger dares not meet with your great spirit.

Floren. Suspect him not my Lord. He has a courage
Above the sense of fear. Well sir your answer?

Lerma. My Lord Ascanio could have wished his life
Might have been destind to a happier purpose.
And charged me tell your Lordship that he had
Much rather have been lost with common dust,
In the cheap Churchyard, than endangered fame
In this great duel.

Floren. Sir explain his reasons.


Lerma. He calls to his sad thoughts, the mischefes which
This Kingdom needs must fall into when you
Shall perish by his sword; certainly
You cannot escape it, thus provoking death.
Then to what ruin may the Queen, whose safety
You both have labored, be engaged? He could
With patience almost suffer on his name,
The infamy of coward, rather than
Hazard the quiet of her estate. But you.

Floren. Let me consider; It Is an idle rage
That heates me to this quarrel, Let her fate
Remain unshaken, though she choose my foe
Into her love and bosom. If she live
Above the fear of ruin; I am mighty,
Mighty enough, though by my griefs grown feeble
And weakened too, diseases fright the healthy.
I will refer my cause and life to her,
And never dispute it by the sword.

Velasco. My Lord!


Floren. Velasco, I am safe enough against
The taint of Coward. Spain bears witness that
I dare, as far as honor dares give warrant.
But in this cause.

Velasco. My Lord you will lose the glory
Of all your former Actions; and become
The mirth of Courtiers, empty things who braule
Not fight, if you return after a challenge
Without performance.

Floren. It Is a serious truth.


Velas. Moreover this young Gentleman has hope
To talk you from your resolution:
The Lord Ascanio will too much exult,
If this way too he can overcome you.

Floren. It must not be sir, tell my Lord I wait
His leisure.

Lerma. And your Lordship shall not have
Reason to think it long. Prepare your self
His only prayer is now; that when he comes
There may be no discourse to take up time,
He has desire the business may be all:
What he can say, has been by me delivered.

Exit. Floren. We will obey him. Tyrant Love! Why is
Thy cruelty so wanton to delight
In murder? Like that impious Roman Prince,
Thou joyest to smother, whom thou love, in Roses,
And stifle them with the choysest perfumes. But
This is no place for reason; She may hold
Dispute in sober schools, where study raises
The soul to knowledge. Here Is the Theater
For the brute part of man to fight his last,
I must redeem the Laurel, fortune crowned
His Temples with, or perish in the attempt.
My fate decrees it.

Enter Ascanio, and Lerma. Lerma. Here Is my Lord Ascanio.


Floren. Why does he turn his face away as if
He durst not look on danger: Do his fears
Now triumph ore his courage.

Lerma. Put it to the trial.


They fight. Floren. He Is more than Mortal sure. He strikes like lightning
Himself not passive. But I Will try again,
And disinchant the Sorcerer. I there
I reached him home. You bleed, open your doublet
The wound perhaps is dangerous.

Ascanio. But a scratch.


Floren. Sure I have heard that voice, and seen that face,
Velasco it is the King.

Ascanio. My Lord what mean you?


Floren. Some Planet strike me dead, and fix this arm
A monument to tell posterity
The treason of my error: Mighty sir,
Show mercy to your Creature, that my death
(Which hastily steals on me) may not be
Too foul for after story.

Ascanio. Rise Florentio,
This act cannot endure the name of Treason.

Floren. Some Surgeons quick to search the wound! O sir
How do you feel your self? speak life, or I
Shall sink down to my Center.

Ascanio. Not a man
Stir hence, thy sword was loyal as thy thoughts,
And scarce has peirc't the skin. O my Florentio.

Floren. My Lord and King! But why did you engage
Your sacred person into danger? It Was not well;
How many thousand lives depend on yours?

Ascanio. Envy oth' greatness I possessed, without
The merit, and desire to know those perils
We wantonly our subjects cast upon
On every weak exception; wrought my youth
Into this action. Nor can I repent
The experience of this waire?

Floren. But oh great sir,
Why did your Majesty suffer this duel?
It Was cruel and unkind. How easily
This hand might have committed sactiledge?
The very thought whereof, like some pale vision
Congeales my blood.

Ascanio. Search not that wound to deep.
Florentio! I shall blush, blust like some Lady
Surpised in sin, if you too far examine.

Floren. Conceal it not great sir, though in the speaking
Poison steal through my ear. Be confident,
Unvaile your thoughts.

Ascanio. You needs must hate me then:
And will have Justice to throw off that duty
You owe me as a subject. Let it be
Unspoken still; though smothering it be death
Good heaven desend. What is an Army of us
Exposed to certain slaughter, if compared
To the shortest moment that should serve your quiet?
And shall I live and see my Sovereign wear
A sorrow, on his brow?

Ascanio. Florentio! thou
Art glorious in thy virtue. So was I
Till looking on the Queen I grew oth' sudden
Darker then midnight?

Floren. O my cruel fate!


Ascanio. I grew a thief, a most ungrateful thief
In my designs, and labored to have stole
The Jewel of thy life from thee. A Jewel,
My self so freely had bestowed upon
The merits of thy youth.

Floren. My soul foresaw this.


Ascanio. How justly had I perished by thy sword.
How happy for my safety. Then had I
Been lost in my disguise; or dyed, my crime
Unknown unto the world. Now if I live
I must wade through a sea of injuries,
T'attaine an unsafe haven.

Enter the Queen. Floren. Cheer your self
Dread sir: Though as I give the Legacy
I breath my last; yet will I show a heart
Thankful to your great favors. Madam, here
Behold the Sovereign of Castile.

Queen. You have
Been cruel in your kindness Sir, to keep
So long your sacred person hid from us.

Floren. He is your Lover Madam, and deserves
The title. Whether you observe his youth,
So beauteous, Nature dotes upon her work:
Or weigh his greatness powerful to defend you,
Should fate and all mankind conspire your ruin;
And add to that, he merits you, his sword
Having restored you freedom: when poor I
Was judged like some old instrument of war
Unfit for service. All my interest
I here resign to the Author of my fate;
My Love I cannot, which must still remain,
Companion to my life. But I Will take heed
My wound appear not, though it inward bleed.

Exit. Ascan. I wait here Madam, and attend your sentence
For it is my doom.

Queen. Sir I am that sad wretch,
Stands trembling at the bar. I know your merit,
And know a gratitude, great as ere was owing,
By an injured soul releev'd. I duly weigh
That double tie which does obleige me yours.
First when you sent your soldiers to my rescue;
Then by exposing your most sacred person
To the dangers of a war.

Ascanio. A trivial nothng.


Queen. What honor can come equal to my state
As by so high a match? And against your person
The envious cannot find a quarrel.

Asca. Madam
All this is circumstance, the politic
Busy their fancy with. I bring a love,
An humble love, which is of value to
Enoble the parcht labourer, and force
An Emperesse listen to his vows. Consider
In me nothing of fortune, only look
On that, to which Love new created me.
If once received your servant; what is Castile
In the comparison? For Princes are
Too bold, if they bring wealth and victory,
To enter competition with those treasures
A Lover aims at in his Mistress favor.
May I not hope your smile?

Queen. You must command it.


Asca. Then give me leave to whisper to my hopes
What strange felicities I shall enjoy.

Queen. But sir, consider how you gave away
To your Florentio, all that claim, you might
Have to me, as so great a neighboring Prince.

Ascan. It was a gift my ignorance made, which I
Was cozened in. For had my eye been honored
With sight of such a beauty; safer he
Might have petitioned for my Scepter: And
The grant had not so soon begot repentance.

Queen. But promises of Princes must not be
By after Arts evaded? Who dares punish
The breach of oath in subjects; and yet slight
The faith he has made them?

Ascan. But my Florentio,
Has given me back his intrest.

Queen. That gift
Was like a vow extorted, which Religion
Cancels, as forced from Conscience.

Asca. But your self
Are free, and never by an oath made his.

Queen. My resolution, grounded on his service,
Ties more than formal contracts.

Asca. I Will not urge
You father, but by these, which never yet
Found passage through my eyes not he, nor all
Mankind contracted to one heart, can harbor
A love that equals that I burn with, Madam
Think on it: and let your thoughts find out that path
Which leads to mercy.

Exit. Ascanio. Queen. How I am dazzled,
Placed on a precipice by tyrant Love?
The King is Noble, and his merits claim
A retribution great as I can make.
He loves me; and yields only to Florentio,
In the priority of service. My sad soul! Enter Florentio, looks on the
Queen, sighs and goes in again.
Between these two I might stand distracted!
But Virtue guide me: Nor can I ere stray
While that directs, and honor beats the way.

Exeunt. Actus Quintus.
Scena Prima.
Enter Decastro and his Army. Decast. MY fortune yet forsakes me not. There Is
something
Whispers my soul, that though a storm did cloud
My morning, I shall set the envy of
My yet prevailing enemy. Had you
My fellow soldiers not been three hours march
From ayding us, when the Castilian Army
Made the assault: we had given their fate a check,
And taught them how unsafe it is to Court
Dangers abroad. I must entreat your courage
To suffer for some moments, a short time
Will bring us the Queens answer. If she yield
(As reason may persuade her) we shall spare
Much loss of blood, if not your valor will
Have liberty to show it self. Yet still
Remember that the Cities forced to obey
A stranger; in their votes they fight for us.
Did no man see the Lord Ossuna since
Our fight in the morning?

Capt. He appeared not since
We left the City to the enemy.
Which has bred jealosie, my Lord, that he
Changed with the present fortune.

Decast. Doubt him not.
He has a heart devoted to the greatness
And safety of his Country. Well he may
Be lost in the number of the slain. But fate
Cannot enforce him stoop beneath the vow
Of rescuing Arragon from foreign Arms. Enter two common Soldiers, haling
Ossuna in as an Hermit.
What insolence is this? Unhand the man,
Me thinks his hahit should beget respect.

Sold. My Lord we guess he is some spy, he came
Sculking from the enemies camp. Pray guard
Your person, mischief often lurkes in shapes
As holly.

Decast. I allow your care and thank it,
Leave him to me; and for a while retire.

Exeunt. Ossuna. Your Lordship knows me not?


Decast. Ossuna, welcome!
Blessed bethy better Angel who preserved thee!
How happy to the fortune of this war
Art thou restored? I should have fought unarmed,
Had I not had the fare to embrace thee thus.
How was my friend preserved?

Ossuna. By virtue of
This sacred habit. In the mist of war
Disguised I thus escaped, though close pursued
By some of the Queens faction. To this weed
I owe my safety.

Decast. Quickly throw it off,
And reinvest thy body in that steel,
With which thou still have triumphed. O my Lord*
How often have we all bathed in blood and sweat,
Though clouds of dust found out the way to force
Back victory to our side; when fortune seemed
To doat onth' enemy. We two have grown
Like Caedars up together, and made all
Seem shrubs to us, no man sleeping secure
But in our shadows.

Ossuna. Yes; we have been happy.


Decast. Thou speak so hollow, as there were a doubt
We might not be so still.

Ossuna. But there is is no faith
In humane fate. An Emperor did serve
As footestoole to the Conqueror: and are we
Better assured of destiny?

Decast. What strange
Unworthy faintness weakens his great soul,
Who heretofore, near understood the language
Danger speaks in? Has one defeat lost you
That mighty courage, which has fixed upon
Your name a glorious memory? Reassume
Your self my Lord: Let no degenerate fear
Benight the luster of your former acts.

Ossuna. I call your self and Arragon to witness,
My life has yet been such, ye reverend shades
Of my great Ancestors, need not look pale
Or blush, to know my story. To your self,
To whose brave youth I tied my youth a servant;
I ever have performed all Offices
Due to so brave a friendship.

Decast. It Is confessed.


Ossuna. And here I vow, setting aside those fears
Distract me as a Christian; I could smile,
Smile like some wanton Mistress, upon death
What ever shape it wears.

Decast. My Lord this war.
Is warranted by Casuists for lawful*
But they (you will say) flatter the present state,
And make divinity serve humane ends.
But in it self its just. A war your judgment
Gave approbation to; and urged me first
To undertake. Therefore make good your own,
And throw off this unusefull habit

Ossuna. Never.


Decastro. What said my friend?


Ossuna. By all things sacred, never.
In this I will grow old, and with the weight
Of years bend to the earth* In this I Will breath
A happier air, then you in all your soft
And varied silks.

Decast. Some coward devil sure
Possesses him.

Ossuna. My Lord I am instructed
TO a patience far above your injuries.
Nor shall your scorn or anger triumph over
My resolution. I Am fixed here, unmoov'd
As is the center.

Decast. I was much to blame.
This may be a brave virtue. Pray my Lord
Give me your reasons, why you tread this path
So little beaten by the feet of Courtiers.
I would not have the world mistake your aim,
And conster it to fear or melancholy?

Ossuna. That cannot shake me. He who by the Card
Oth' worlds opinion steeres his course, shall harbor
In no safe port. But to your care my Lord
I give this free account. Seven winters past
When I set sail from Scicily, a storm
Ore took the ship, so powerful that the Pilot
Gave up the Stern to the ordering of the waves,
His Art and hand grown useless; Those kind stars
The Sailors use to invoke, were lost in the tempest
And nothing but a night not to be seen
Was seen by us. When every one began
TO advance himself toward death as men condemned
To the Axe, when hope of pardon is shut out.
I spite oth' envious cloud looked up to heaven
And darted my faith thither: vowing to
Forsake the flattered pomp and business of
The faithless world, if I with safety might
Attain the Land.

Decast. Was not I there my Lord?


Ossuna. You were.


Decast. And made no I the self same vow?


Ossuna. Heaven has recorded that we both did vow it.
Oth' sudden night forsook us, and the loud
Unruly winds fled to their unknown dwellings;
When a soft breath began whisper to our sails
A calm was to ensue.

Decast. My memory
Afflicts me much. But these are feeble vows
Made only by our fears: We ought to have
Our reason undismaid, when ere a promise
Can force performance.

Ossuna. I dispute it not.
Soon as I reached the shore I courted on
Those vanities which had my youth enamored,
Yet still with some remorse. Honors betrayed me
Into a glorious trouble, and I grew
Proud of my burden. But if heaven had been
Severe to my delays, in this diseased
Surfeit of pomp, my soul might have been called
TO her last account: And O my Lord where then
Had breach of vow been safe.

Decast. These are sad thoughts.


Ossuna. But necessary. When the mornings loss
Made me search out a shape for flight: this habit
It self presented; and again redeemed me,
And know I am resolved, near to forsake it
Till in the vault, my earth and it together
Shall wear away to dust.

Decast. My Lord you have
Good title to your virtue. Pray retire
Into my tent. This sudden change, if known,
May much amaze the Soldier, and endanger
The glory of the attempt. I shall entreat
Your prayer, since you deny your arm.

Ossuna. My Lord may heaven direct you.


Exit. Ossuna. Decast. What have I obtained
By all this sweat of business? Like the wind,
Prosperous ambition only swelled my sail
To give me courage to encounter with
A tempest. Early cares and midnight frights,
Faint hopes and causeless fears, successively
Like billows have moved in me. What a fool
Is humane wisdom; what a beggar wealth;
How scorned a nothing that proud state we doat on?
Time laughes us out of greatness, and shuts up
Our wide designs in a dark narrow room:
Whence when the valiant Monarch shall creep forth
He will like some poor coward, hide his eyes
And hope to scoulke away. But these are thoughts,
And now it is time for Action.

Enter Soldier to Decastro. Soul. If your Lordship
Will please for some few moments to retire
Into your tent, her Majesty in person
Will give you parley here.

Decast. In person sir?
The favor bears some omen! she who in
The tempest of misfortune still did spread
Her sail at large; why does she strike them now,
The wind so prosperous? This is a descent
Beneath her greatness.

Soldier. I reach not, my Lord,
The mysteries of Princes, but this message
She charged me to return.

Decast. The Acts of Princes
Are governed often by as frail a Passion,
As those are of the vulgar, the same rage
That stirs two footmen to a fray, creates
War between Kingdoms; but the zealous subject
Gazing a far, on the actions of the proud,
Finds towers and Lions in an empty cloud;
But I Will obey her leisure. Watch you here
Till you discover her advanced this way.

Exit. Decast. Enter Ascanio, Florentio. Floren. Sir you created me; and raised
me up
Toth' state of Duke, when I was common dust.
And had not fortune given me interest
In The favor of the Queen, I had continued
In the worst fate of man, ingratitude.
Now I can boast I have restored you back
A love rich as the bounty you showred on me.
It Is all the stock of my poor life.

Ascanio. Sad fate!
That I must wound thee to the heart, to cure
My Leprosy with thy blood. Florentio search
In The stock of women there is some other beauty,

Floren. O no! no other.


Ascanio. I Will endow her with
The wealth of all Castile.

Floren. Poor empty nothing!


Ascan. If Soveraignetie be the Idol of thy soul,
I will devide my Kingdom: thou shall reign
As independent as my self.

Floren. Great sir,
Continue but your favor, and my stars
Cannot afford a greatness equals it.
The treasures of the ambitious, are the scorn
Of those who seriously contemplate life:
My fortunes high enough. And now my thoughts
Grow temperate; not for the Empire of the East,
(Which yet retains the treasures, man enjoyed
Ere he grew black with sin) would I have wanted
This blessed occasion to express the zeal
I owe my Prince. Here with as free a soul
I give her to your Arms as ere you threw
A smile upon my service.

Ascanio. Thanks dear friend!
(That word must speak our loves) by this great gift
Thou have redeemed me from the tortue, and
Possessed me of the fairest.

Floren. O!


Ascanio. The fairest, Nature ere made for wonder.


Floren. She is fair.


Ascanio. Enjoying her thy King shall live, who else
Were desperate beyond cure. He shall be envied.
And every year as age threatens decay,
He shall regaine new life from her. Florentio
Beleev't there is miracle in such a beauty.

Floren. Surely there is. Enter Queen Sanmar. Oniate, Cleantha, Floriana.
And see sh' appears. How like some heavenly vision
That kills with too much glory.

Ascanio. Stand still, and wonder with me.


Queen. Cleantha! O the prodigy! And how
Will thou endure his serious face? Can thou
Whom nothing tempted but wit parcel guilt
And the last fashion, suffer Oniate?

Clean. Madam! I undertake him for a penance:
Perhaps he was enjoined me.

Queen. It was love
You went to shrift with then. And yet how that
Young wanton idleness, should counsel you
To this conversion still is more my riddle.

Clean. The Court is full of wonders Madam: and
It Is hansome to do things extravagant.

Queen. But how in th'heate of war, your thoughts should be
So apt for loves impression.

Clean. Love will dance
As nimbly to the Trumpet, Fife, or, Drum,
As to those many Violins which play
So loud at Court. Moreover it concerned
My safety. I so straightly was beseig'd
And by so strong a Caesar.

Queen. O my Lord
I am informed with how fierce a spirit
You do assault our Ladies.

Sanmar. Pray your mercy,
And if your Majesty will please to banish
The Art of making love quite from the Court;
I Will not be out of fashion.

Queen. For your sake
I will contrive it so: And good my Lord
Will you begin the example; you will see
How soon the fine young Lords will follow you.
Your pardon sir, had I but seen your highness,
I had not lost so much of language from
A most expressive gratitude.

Ascanio. Madam you pay a trivial debt with too great intrest
For how contem'd a slightness was my life
Until employed to serve you?

Florentio. She glanced this way,
And Loves Artillery played from her eye.
Unhappie banchrout what a Kingdom have
I forfeited? So often in a caime
Some vessel rich in fraught and proud in sail,
Does spring a sudden leake, and sinckes for ever.

Ascanio. But Madam is there hope your heart can yield
To an exchange in love? My title's good,
Florentio having given up his claim.

Enter Decostro, etc. Queen. But sir the estate is still my own nor have
I need to sell it. But Decastro's here,
And if your Majesty will daigne your presence
Unto the parley'twill advance the honor
And purpose of our meeting.

Ascanio. I Am your servant.


Queen. My Lord you see how near the safety of
Our subjects touches us: We can stoop thus
Beneath our Majesty, and enter parley
Even with a Rebel.

Decast. Madam, it is in vain
To hold dispute against what you will condemn.
And it were insolence to boast my power,
Or speak my right, now when the hearts of all men
Confirm the justice of my taking Arms.
Cast but your eye on this vast body, which
The Kingdom does unite in my defense,
And see how ruinous is your error, that
Must lean to foreign succors!

Queen. It Is a refuge
Your practice forced me to.

Decast. But would your highness
Had lent a gentler (...) the safe counsel
Of him who had no crime but too much love.

Ascanio. My Lord, that word fell rudely from your tongue,
And I may say, unmannerly; It Is duty
You owe the Queen.

Decast. Right sir, an humble duty,
Ambitious to expose my life to dangers,
Greater than any other soul dares fancy.

Ascanio. Pray stay Florention: this is now my cause,
And I (proud man) will tell you, your great heart
Does want expansion to receive a love
Worthy her scorn.

Decast. And I will answer you
(Proud Monarch of Castile) what mold
Soever Nature casts me in, my mind
Is vaster than your empire. And I can
Love equally with him whose name did Conquer
Kingdoms as large as yours.

Ascanio. Your Majesty
Must license here my rage, to teach his folly
(Presumptuous folly) a submisse repentance.

Decast. Sir here I stand prepared.


A shout within. Queen. What noise is that.


Oniate. The Cities all in Mutiny: and vow
To perish in the Lord Decastro's cause.
They Are ready now to lay rude hands upon
The Garrisons of Castile. Your Majesty
Should hinder mischief; if you suddenly
Return, and by your presence stop their fury.

Decast. Pray Oniate take this signet: tell
The Magistrates, her Majesty and I
Are now accorded, with a due regard
To the public safety. Take some of my army
To give authority to what you say.
Assure them all is well.

Exit. Oniate. Ascanio. What means this wonder?


Floren. This speaks him Noble, even to our envy.


Queen. My Lord in this you have obliged us: Pray
Inform us of your thoughts, that we may studdie
To make this parley happy.

Decast. Mighty Lady,
I find my love has not been dressed so smooth
To tempt your liking; and I must confess
My passion (like the spleen of witches) has
Begot whirlewinds and thunder. Would I might
Have found a softer way to have wrought my ends.
For by your beauty (the most sacred oath
A Lover can swear by) that was the mark
The sole fair mark I aimed at. For if pride
Had overswayd my love, I could have stood
Oth' level with that Prince, so much your people
Were vowed to my devotion*

Queen. On my Lord,
You fairly speak your virtues.

Decast. And but view
The vastness, and good order of my Camp;
Your best towns sworn to run my fortune, and
You Will say 'twas love did beg this enterview.

Ascanio. My Lord your language cannot fright us from
The Queens defense.

Decast. Great sir, she needs it not.
Down on your knees my fellow Soldiers, and
With me bow to your Sovereign: swear with me
Never to lift your Arm against her command.
Thus as your subject. As your Lover thus,
Thus to the earth I fall, and with my lips
Seal my obedience.

kisseth the ground. Queen. Pray rise up my Lord,
Would I could merit thus much favor; but.

Decast. Pardon I interupt you. But you cannot
Find love to answer mine; nor will I force it
Be happy in your choice, and wheresoere
You six, shine ever glorious. From this hour
I Will never more distube you.

Queen. Now beshrew me,
Me thinks I feel compassion. Good my Lord
Write in that blancke all your demands, and by
The honor of a Princess, I Will deny
Nothing you shall insert.

He looks on it and returns it. Decast. There it is again:
The paper innocent as when you gave it.

Queen. My Lord you have writ nothing.


Decast. And it is nothing
Now I have mist your self, I can demand,
Fortune contract thy treasure from all Nations,
And guild it ore with honor and with beauty;
Yet have thou not the power to force one wish;
Now I have lost this Lady.

Ascanio. A great spirit.


Decast. One humble prayer I have which must not be
Denied. And it is your Majesty will give
Me leave near more to see you.

Queen. O my Lord.


Decast. My vows irrevocable. I shall secure
Your Kingdom best by absence, and my eye
Will never brook so rich a treasure made
The purchase of another. To a Cave
Some undiscovered Cave, to which no path
Does lead the wandering Lover, I have vowed
The remnant of my days.

Enter Ossuna. Floren. A strange conversion,
And 'twill behoove my fate to follow him.

Decast. My Lord Ossuna here, and I have sworn
Our lives to solitude, which we will observe
Religiously; And since I cannot prove
Possessor I Will be Couqueror in Love.

Ascanio. Pray stay my Lord. Behold Florentio there
He has out done you. He for love of me,
Has done what you for love of heaven. All
The interest he had in that bright Queen
He has resigned to me.

Decast. He has paid you for
Your favors.

Floren. It Is confessed; what is mine is yours.


Ascanio. Thanks my Florentio. For with her my youth
May be still happy, and my age disdain
To know a weakness. From her eyes I may
Draw still new vital heat, and find what fools
Have studied for, the Elixar. In her Arms
I may be safe against all invasion from
Abroad, or civil dangers nursed at home.

Quest. Your highness pardon. I confess how high
Your merits rise in my esteem, but must not
To honor your deserts, my self become
Unworthy after story, blemished with
That scorn which still defames our Sex, registerd
A most Inconstant woman, or what is much
More infamous; one who reserves her love
To serve her profit, and exposes it, to the Merchant that bids fairest.

Ascanio. Madam spare that breath to clear
The air when poisoned by contagion.
I know your settled thoughts, and that my power
Or title weighs not in your love. Plorentio
I will no longer rack you, though the Queen
Beth' only fire ere warmed this heart, and I
Despair ever to love again; I will
Disdain to be unjust. I will not be
Overcome in friendship; reassume thy right.

Floren. Sir you undo me; In your injury,
I was less wretched, like a banckrout, now
Without all hope of payment I must owe.

Ascanio. The ambition of my service, and disguise
Was to advance your fortune Madam: Nor
Can I attempt you farther though the conquest
Would wreath my Temples with a prouder Laurel,
Than the addition of the world unto
My Scepter. Be safe in your choice and happy.

Queen. This goodness grows even to a Miracle.
In his behalf sir, I must vow my self
A subject, and your servant.

Ascanio. O command
For I have nothing Madam but obedience.
My Kingdom shall be proud to share with yours
In danger, and I Will glory to be styled
Your Soldier.

Floren. I am lost in wonder. Sir
I know not how to entertain this blessing
I fear my Joys will be my ruin.

Decast. Be both happy.
And may time never father that black moment
Which shall appear to you less fortunate.

Ascanio. Join then your hands for ever. He does live
Mighty indeed, w'hath power, and will, to give.

Exeunt. The Song in the second Act.
NOt the Phoenix in his death
Nor those banckes where violets grow,
And Arabian winds still blow,
Yield a perfume like her breath.
But o! Marriage makes the spell:
And it is poison if I smell.
The twin beauties of the skies.
(When the half suncke saylors have,
To rend sail and cut their mast)
Shine not welcome as her eyes.
But those beams, then storms more black,
If they point at me I wrack.
Then for fear of such a fire,
Which kills worse than the long night
Which benumbs the Muscovite:
I must from my life retire.
But o no! for if her eye
Warm me not; I freeze, and dye.
The Song in the fourth Act.
FIne young folly, though you were
That fair beauty I did swear,
Yet you near could reach my heart.
For we Courtiers learn at School,
Only we are sects to fool,
You Are not worth the serious part.
When I sigh and kiss your hand,
Cross my Arms and wondering stand:
Holding parley with your eye,
Then delate on my desires,
Swear the sun nere shot such fires,
All is but a handsome lie.
When I eye your curle or Lace,
Gentle soul you think your face
Straight some murder does commit,
And your virtue does begin
To grow scrupilous of my sin,
When I talk to show my wit.
Therefore Madam wear no cloud
Nor to check my love grow proud,
For in sooth I much do doubt
It is the powder in your hair,
Not your breath perfumes the air,
And your Clothes that sets you out.
Yet though truth has this confessed,
And I vow I love in Jest
When I next begin to Court
And protest an amorous flame,
You will swear I in earnest am:
Bedlam this is pretty sport.
The Epilogue at Court.
WE have nothing left us but our blushes now
For your much penance, and though we allow
Our fears no Comfort, since you must appear
Judges Corrupt, if not to us severe:
Yet in your Majesty we hope to find
A mercy; and that our pardon find.
And how can we despair you will forgive
Them who would please, when often offenders live;
And if we have er'd, may not the Courteous say;
T was not their trade, and but the Authors Play.
The Epilogue at the Friars.
What shall the Author do? it madness were
To entreat a mercy from you who are severe,
Stern Judges and a pardon never give,
For only merit with you makes things live:
He leaves you therefore to your selves and may,
You gently quit or else condemn the Play,
As in an upright Conscience you will think fit,
Your sentence is the life and death of wit.
The Author yet has one safe plea, that though
A Middlesex lury on his play should go,
They cannot find the murder wilful, since
T was Acted by Command, in his own defense.
FINIS.

