

THE HOUSE OF CORRECTION: OR, CERTAIN SATYRICALL EPIGRAMS. Written by I. H.
Gent. Together with a few Characters, called PAR PARI: OR, Like to like, quoth
the Devil to the Collier.

Ficta voluptaetis causa sint proxima veris.

Hor. de art Po. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, for Richard Redmer, and are
to be sold at his shop at the West end of Saint Paul's Church. 1619.

The Author to his Book.
COme hither Book, take counsel. He that goes
Into the world, meets with a world of foes.
Thy Mother was my Muse, a gentle Dame,
Who much adored Appollo's sacred name:
Then being freeborn, know that thou art going
Unto a world of Wits; still fresh, still growing:
Yet wonder not, that I have got no friend
To write in thy behalf! What! should I send
Thee, like a Seruingman, with Letters? No.
The World shall see thee first; and seeing, know
Whether thou merit'st praise: none shall have cause
To be condemned of folly in the applause.
Of thy harsh lines, the worst that can be thought
Is this, That none would write, they were so naught.
Alas, poor Book, hunt not thou after praise,
Nor dare to stretch thy hand unto the Bays
Upon a Poets head: let it suffice
To thee and me, the world does us despise.
For it is a mad World, and it turns on hinges,
Whilst some a birding go, and set their springes
For to catch Woodcocks. Others sting and bite
Like Wasps and Mastiffs, and do take delight
To quarrel with their shadows, nay, themselves,
And their own brood. Sure these are spiteful ^^^es.
(...) at all Writers strive to have a l^rke:
Meddle not with them, lest thou get a yerke:
And yet their venamous breath (as on a Glass)
No sooner lights, but away does pass.
Then fear them not. The Wise, which know thee best,
Will entertayne thee, as a welcome Ghest;
Praise that is prayse-worthy, wink at faults but small,
Like thy conceits, and praise thy vain withal.
Yet be not proud, though thou their praise do gain,
Remembering what is writ is writ in vain.
It Is for a better pen then mine to say
By God it is good, and if you lik's you may.
EPIGRAMS.
Lectori.
MY Epigrams, like to a wandering Guest,
Or tattard Soldier, that is but lately Pressed,
Your favor craves, to grant a Pass unto them,
A greater kindness you can never do them.
Bibens his bounty.
BIbens, to show his liberality,
Made Lusus drunk. A noble quality,
And much esteemed, which Bibens feign would prove,
To be the Sign of his familiar love.
Lusus, beware, thou wilt find him in the end
Familier Devil, no familier Friend.
I^ Ducum.
DVcus keeps house: and it with reason stands
That he keep house, that sold away his lands
Omne Simile non est Idem.
TOgether as we walked, a friend of mine
Mistook a painted Maddame for a Sign,
That in a window stood; but I acquainted,
Told him, it was no wooden Sign was painted,
But Maddam ( --.) Yea true, said he,
Yet it is a Sign of little modesty.
Gr^^e pondus.
WHat tell you us that Milo bore a Bull!
Is that so strange? Yon silk and silver Gull
Bears a Country Church upon his back.
The lighter Bull made Milo's shoulders ache:
A Steeple on his head, and at his heels
A Ring of Bells, and yet nor stoopes nor reeles.
On a Shoemaker.
WHat boots it thee to follow such a Trade
That Is always underfoot and vnderlayde?
On Fuscus his valor.
FVscus the Bragart being, in field to fight,
Protesting of his valor ouernight,
Shaking his Sword, he swore, Now by this hand.
I Will fight and kill so long as I can stand.
The Field was pitched: and now begins the fray;
And Fuscus now begins to run away,
Nor ever stints his course, until by flight
He had outrunne the danger of the fight.
The Combat ended, Fuscus he was wanting,
And found ere long, where he for fear stood panting.
And thus they mocked him; You swore by your hand,
You Would fight and kill so long as you could stand.
It Is true (said one,) but pray do Fuscus right;
For Fuscus neither stood to kill nor fight.
Ad Rinaldum amic.
SEe, see, Rinaldus! Prithee who is that
That wears you great green Fether in his hat,
Like to some Tilter? Sure it is some Knight,
Whose wits being green, his head must needs be light.
In Lusiam.
LVsia, who scorns all others imitations,
Cannot abide to be out-gone in fashions:
She says, she cannot have a Hat or Ruff.
A Gown, a Pettycoate, a Band, or Cuffe,
But that these Citizens (whom she does hate)
Will get into it, at nere so dear a rate:
But Lusia now does such a fashion follow,
Whose Hair is Flax, and Band as Saffron yellow,
That there is no Citizen, what ere she be,
Can be transformed so like an Owl as she.
In Lincum.
LIncus the Draper, for his more avail,
Dams up his lights to set his Ware to sail;
And counts it (in his Art) a mystery
To gain by lying, oaths, and flattery:
But take this rule, If Lincus his lights stop,
Deem you his conscience darker then his shop.
Destruit aedificat mutat quadrata rotundis.
A Man there was (which here shall not be named)
that with great cost a wondrous building framed;
But as the building rose, the Builders purse
Did pine in substance, (Builders common curse.)
It cost him many a pound: but that is no matter.
Slightly being built, the building began to tatter:
And by mischance, down falls of it a part.
The Workmen (they being glad with all their heart
Come to their Master, thereof to complain,
And asked his leave to ^ayse it up again.
Nay soft (quoth he) it is a question whether
More may fall down; let us set up all together.
Canutus reformation.
CAnutus now will be no more a Ranger,
But Married live, and lie at Rack and Manger.
So means not she. Well, if she go to grass,
He Will prove an Ox, that was before an Ass.
On a Maidens thoyse.
A Parent to his Child this counsel gave,
Quoth he, My Girl, two Suitors thou must have,
The one is young and fair, virtuous and wise,
Of worthiest Stock, and rarest qualities:
The other different, both in age and nature,
N^yther so fit, nor yet so sweet a Creature;
Yet be resolved, and make that Suitor blessed
Whom in thy love thou think the Worthi^st?
Straight she replies, Since choice is left to me,
Nature commands, that Age with Age agree,
Virtue and Love compel my heart thereto
To love the youngman; and in truth I do.
Why, but (said he) be not mistaken than,
Conceive, the Elder is the better man.
How so, quoth she! it is a Paradox to me,
How being the worse, he can the better be?
In Pigmeum.
LIttle Pigmeus wears his Mistress Glove,
Her Ring, and Feather, (Favors of her love.)
Who could but laugh, to see the little Dwarf
Grace out himself with her imbrodered Scarf?
It Is strange, yet true, her Glove, Ring, Scarf and Fan,
Makes him (unhandsome) a well favored man.
Flemminius Sickness.
FLemminius nere was sick; yet was it sed
Flemminius he was sick, yea, sick and dead:
His Friends lamented, shedding many a tear:
At length it came unto Flemminius care,
Who thus ^aue answer; Never let them fear it,
The News is ill, yet am I glad to hear it.
In Oblitum.
I Wondered much (as I had wondrous reason)
Oblitus should, within so short a season,
Forsake, forget his old and ancient friend,
For whom he often had vowed his life to spend:
I was not altered much, but so was he,
From low estate, to higher dignity,
Yet knew I him; has he forgotten me?
Preferment then has spoyld his memory:
Yet this I know, It Is but his paltry pelf.
He knows me well; but he forgets himself.
Lucus Journey.
LVcus that trauel'd with an hundred pound,
Was robbed, and left well beaten, and fast bound:
But when to share their prize they had begun,
No miracle was wrought, yet he undone.
Nimis Amor.
TWo friends (that had not met a long time since)
Together supt: but at their parting thence,
Tom swore he would have Kit home: but all in vain.
Kit swore as fast he would have Tom back again.
In kindness thus they strive, and striving go
From home to home: nor could they end it so;
But too and fro, walking through many a Street:
It now being late, the Constable they meet.
He gave command; his Bil-men quickly staid them,
And took the^ thence, and in the Compter laid them.
And thus by Fortune was a means provided
To end the strife, which could not be decided:
All which was well, but that that fell out worse;
They saved their oath, but could not save their purse.
In Priscus commendations of his Mistress.
PRiscus commends his Mistres for a Girl,
Whose lips are Rubies, and whose teeth are pearl.
They need prove so, or else it will be found
He pays too dear, they cost him many a pound:
Vltra posse non est esse.
HOw should Rattillo lose his purse last night,
And 20. shillings in it? was it not by slight?
Why? he came in no crowd. What, did he play?
No. He Is no Gamester. Did he no debts pay?
Nor Fee no Lawyers? Neither. Was he not drunk?
Neither. Nor did bestow it on his Punke?
Why, then the question's this; If none of these,
How should he lose what he had not to leese?
In Rufum.
AS Rufus praised his Beauer Hat of late,
One that stood by (striking him over the pate)
Said it was felt. Rufus would not believe it.
He stroke again, till Rufus did conceive it.
So dark was the conceit, that out of doubt,
He nere had found, had he not felt it out.
In Cornutum.
WHy should Cornutus Wife lie in the Strand,
And he, poor silly man, lie in the City?
Belike the Shop was not sufficient manned.
To part the Head and Members yet it is pity:
But what cares she for head; I hope she scorns
Were he seven heads, she would crown him with ten horns.
Richards mourning.
WHen his old Master buried was with cost,
Dick had a mourning Cloak, but it was lost.
The Corse to Churchward goes, each takes his turn,
But Dick took none: for Richard could not mourn.
Yes, that he did; the Company he forsook,
And mourned not in, but mourned for his Cloak.
Flaccu's payment.
FLaccus came to a Tavern, there to dine,
Called for good store of meat, great store of wine,
The Reckoning brought, Flaccus says not a word,
Nor draws his purse; but out he draws his sword:
Some say he proffered wrong; but how think you?
He drew upon the Drawer, paid his due.
He owed him the reckoning but of late:
Has he not scored, and paid him on the pate?
On Justice her entertaynment.
Justice came down from heaven of late to be
A perfect Judge, without partiality:
But when that Justice to the Bench was come,
The Bench it was so full she had no room;
So back she took her flight unto the heavens,
And left the world again at six and seauens.
Justice her reward.
Justice fled up to heaven, some say was blind:
Why so is many a Justice left behind:
But Justice being blind, the cause regarded,
R^spected none nor never was rewarded.
So say not all, some of the Bench agrees,
That Justice kept a Clarke to take her fees.
In Briscum.
HIs Father being dead, Briscus was told,
And found ere long where was his fathers gold,
All Angels rich, but poorly clad in leather.
Briscus took pity on them, and straight hither
Sends some for Satin, other some for Tissue,
Gloves, Scarfes, Hats, Hangers: but now mark the issue,
They all being freed, did all consent together,
And took their flight, poor Briscus knows not whither,
which he lame^ts, blaming those former kings,
Who made a Law, he might not clippe their wings.
In Ledaem.
BEcause I Am black and swarfe, Leda does scorn me,
And if I marry her, she vows she will horn me:
But Leda, know (I speak't not in disgrace)
Your red and white is but a pybauld face.
Enigma.
AS often as I please it changes form.
It is no Coward, though it do no harm:
It Is never hurt, nor ever does it feed,
It Is nothing worth, yet nothing does it need.
Swiftly it runs, yet never makes sound,
And once being lost, again it is never found.
It Is a fit Servant for a Gentleman,
And a true pattern for a Seruingman.
It Is borne a Giant, lives a Dwarf, and nigh
Unto its death, a Giant does it dye.
Ad bonos socios.
Old Women told us tales long time ago,
Of Robbin Goodfellow, what he would do,
Who now they say is gone: but yet we find,
There Is many of his name are left behind.
In Pratum Iur: cons.
I Asked Pratus what was his Profession?
He savd a Lawyer, who by h^s discretion,
Could right and wrong, according to the Law,
To cherrish Virtue, and keep Vice in Awe:
I know it contrary, and full of Ire,
Setti^g his Awe aside, I called him Lier.
On Captain Drake his Voyage.
SOme think it true, whilst other some do doubt,
Whether Capt. Drak^ compast the world about.
Some say he did it in the Devils name,
And none ere since could do the like again:
But these are al deceived, why should they doubt it?
They know each year there is some that go about it.
Ad amicam.
I I Am the happiest ere inioy'd a Love,
u. You are the first did ever constant prove:
ly. Lie down my wandering thoughts, the^ take your rest,
an. An blessed once, continue ever blessed.
Answer.
na. NA, he that shall: tour affections grutch,
ill. Ill be his Fortune, since my prayer is such:
u. You love me now, let not affections sever,
I. I love you now, and I shall love you ever.
Will's error.
WIll says his Wife's so fat, she scarce can go:
But she as nimbly answers, Faith sir, no.
Alas, good Will, thou art mistaken quite,
For all men know that she is wondrous light.
Spinus his choice.
SPinus would wed, but he would have a Wench
That has all Tongues, Italian, Spanish, French,
But I diswade him; for if she has any,
She has enough; if two, she has two too many.
To Mr. Richard Moore, one of the Masters of the Chancery, on his name.
FOr to be Rich and hard, or hard and Rich,
Is not thy nature, though thy name be such:
For to be Rich it is hard, but thou have store
Of Riches, Honor, yet of Virtue more:
Which Virtue, Honor, Riches now adays
Being hard to get, More great must be thy praise,
So I, and all that know thee, do agree,
The More's the pity there is no More like thee.
To the Bookeseller.
NAy, fear not Bookeseller, this Book will sell:
For be it good, as thou know very well,
All will go buy it; but say it be ill,
All will go by it too: thus thou sei'st still.
Vulcans Marriage.
VVlcan and Venus were together wedded:
But Mars charged in, and Vulcans Venus bedded.
what though the Smith were black, and she were white,
She might have ask't him leave, for leave is light:
Why so is she, what then? why then she scorns
But to make up the weight with Vulcan's horns.
In Borachium.
BOrachio said, Wine made his head too light,
And therefore would not drink it: yet last night
Carowsing healths, so heavy was his head,
He fell asleep, and there was left for dead:
Within a while he wak't, and found for right,
The Wine had made his purse, not head, too light.
In Dominam Membrosam.
MAdam Membrosa had to me a suite,
To set forth her good parts: and thus I Will do it:
Setting a side thy judgment, and thy wit,
(Which though but little is) for thee more fit:
First, of rare Complexion thou have store,
And when it is gone, 'knowst well where to have more.
Then, for thy Hair, (nay, think not I do flatter)
It cost thee to the Tire man, no small matter.
Fingers like Spiders claws; nay, not so thick,
And yet to pick a Pocket far more quick.
Thou a small Foot, nor a short Heel do lack,
Which makes thee fall so often on thy back.
As for thy other Parts (which I know least)
Thou get'st thy living by; sure those are best.
Thieves falling out, true men come by their goods.
TWo cheating Mates, whose only trade was shift,
To chea^e a Country fellow was their drift:
The place being fi^, they quarreled, and fell out,
And needs at Buffets they would have a bout:
The honest man slept in to part the fray;
But they in bustling, Nim'd his Purse away:
Which after missing, he (poor man) laments,
And that he parted them, greatly repents:
But they being parted, part what they had got,
And laughed a maine at the poor simple sot,
Swearing, the Ancient Proverb they had crossed,
Since they fell out, and he his goods had lost.
On the six Cases.
No. NAnta was nominated for a Whore,
Gin. For that she had bin Ginitiue before:
Da. Notice hereof was to the Justice given,
Acc. Who her accused, that she had loosely liuen;
Vo. But she cried mercy, and her fault vpript',
Abl. And so was taken away, and soundly whipped.
Her Case was ill: yet will the question be,
Being thus declined, in what a case was she?
Ad Lectorem.
Is It possible that thou my Book have bought,
That sayd'st 'twas nothing worth! why was it naught?
Read it again, perchance thy wit was dull,
Thou may find something at the second pull:
Indeed at first thou naught did understand,
For shame get something at the second hand.
On Luce's maintenance.
He that takes pains shall get, the Proverb go^s;
But Luce takes pleasure, yet does nothing lose.
Poor laboring Porters, with much toil and sweat,
Scarce get sufficient Victuals for to eat:
But if that Luce at any time does lack,
She with her belly can maintain her back.
Peter's trouble.
PEter is troubled with a froward Wife,
Whose curstness makes him weary of his life:
The simple fellow, (with her railing crossed)
Has often wished that she her tongue had lost.
Alas (poor Peter) sure thy case is ill,
When she will nor lose her tongue, nor keep it still.
Parnels comfort.
PArnell, being taken in the very Act,
Was sent unto Bride-well, for such her fact:
But be contented, Parnell, cease to mourn,
Thou Art at the Wheel of Fortune, make it turn.
In Duellum.
STratus and Stremon went to Field to fight,
Stratus was slain, and Stremon taken straight;
He being condemned, was saved: yet by this strife,
The one, his living; the other lost his life.
In Bachum and Venerem.
BAchus and Venus well accord together:
And whither Bachus goes, Venus goes thither:
Bachus backs Venus; Venus for his pain,
Pleasureth Bachus on her back again.
On Venture the Merchant.
Venture the Merchant is run mad, they say,
On the report his Ships are cast away.
What, did he Venture with his goods his wits,
That he is fallen into these frantic fits?
Then, peradventure, it may well be found,
The Sea his goods, and he his wits has drowned.
To the Gentlewomen Painters.
APpelles, famous for the Art of Painting,
Unto whose work there naught but life was wanting;
Had he co^par'd, or held with you the strife,
He had not won, yours comes so near the life:
Your Portractures you make to speak and go,
Appelles workmanship could nere do so.
Tempora mutantur and nos mutamur in illis.
TO be a Whore-master, in former time,
Was by our Fathers counted a base crime:
How much the world's worse then it was before,
Each Gallant makes his Mistress of his Whore.
Ad Iur: cons.
WOrds wisely set are worth much gold,
So were we by our ancient Fathers told,
And so we do believe: Experience then
Does teach us, Lawyers are the wisest men.
Tom's bargain.
TOm should have paid ten shillings for a Sword
But would not take it on the Cutlers word;
He bid him try't, he did, at the first stroke
It proved not worth a point, the point was broke.
To Mistress E. S.
LEt but thy beauteous eyes look on this line,
To see, as in thy Glass, thy beauty shine,
Which beauty nature gave thee to disgrace
Our latter Artists, who make up a face
Of seeming beauty, for to blind such eyes,
As with Pigmalion them do Idolize.
Should I not praise, what I praiseworthy see,
I should do wrong to nature and to thee:
Yet, whilst I speak thee fair, so short I come
Of thy perfection, that I Am deemed by some
To light the shining Sun: Yet from my hand
Receive this grain unto thy heap of sand.
Epitaph.
STay, do not pass! here fix your eyes
Upon a Virgins Obsequies!
Pay Tribute to a troubled heart,
It Is but a tear before you part:
And what are tears? They are but streams
Of sorrow, which, like frightfull dreams,
Disturb your senses- Yet I crave
No other Sacrifice to have:
But if you pass, and let fall none,
You Are harder then this Marble stone.
Your love is colder, and your eyes
As senseless of my miseries.
On my Venture in Sir Walter Rawleigh's Voyage.
I Being persuaded (not by reason led)
For Gold unto Gwyan adventured;
Great were our hopes of good success; for none
Expected less to gain then five for one:
But following Fate (she fickle) thither led,
Where neither they of Gold nor Silver sped:
But, poor, distressed, homeward return again,
Money, lives, labor, all was spent in vain.
The hopeful neck of their design was broke;
For all their Gold was vanished into Smoke.
Thus I lost all; wherefore it is a sign
The found no Mine of gold, yet gold of mine.
A Data fata sequtus.
The Motto on Sir Walter Rawghlie's Arms.

In Costum.
COstus his custom stole; but by the way
The Wayters met him, and his goods did stay:
He it denies, and proffers those to bring,
Should prove it was no unaccustomed thing.
He meant to steal. If so? why should they choose
Such Customs, rather to find then loose.
On Smithfield.
It Was Fair at Smithfield once, but once a year;
At Bartholmetide: but now the Cities care
Has mad^ it fair at all times, paued it round.
It Is twenty shillings better by the pound.
Nor have they much bestowed their cost amiss,
Since there is no Soil so plentiful as this;
Here Is Hay in great abundance, heads of Cattle;
As Horses, Oxen, hither come to battle:
Yet what is strangest, It nere needs dressing.
Here is the horn of plenty. Vulcans blessing.
Epitaph on a Foote-man.
THis nimble Foote-man ran away from Death;
And here he rested, being out of breath.
Here Death him ouertooke, made him his slave,
And sent him of an Arrant to his Grave.
Censures on the Voyage to Gwyana.
Sundry oppinions abroad are spread,
Why the Gwyanians no better sped;
Some say, they were prevented out of Spain,
Others, because some did return again:
Some say, 'twas sickness: others, their abode
So long ere they put from the English Rode.
Some say, their General's absence: but the most
Say, Captain Kemish death, when he was lost,
All was overthrown, he only was to do it,
And that Sir Walter came but Rawly to it.
On a Scriuener.
I Told a Scriuener of his Briberie,
His Broking, Forging, Cheating, Knavery,
He said, he heard me not; so't may appear,
How could he hear, that had no Ears to hear?
Ad Templum pro bonis.
Hail to this holy place, this ancient seat,
Where Justice, joined with wisdom does entreat
Of right and wrong, and reads her sacred Laws,
More for devotions sake, then for applause.
This is the place chosen to be the helm,
Where Justice sits, to steare about the Realm.
Both law and equity, hence Justice drives
The Chariot of fair peace, and leads in Gyues,
Wrong, and oppression, throughout the Land,
Whilst peace and plenty ride joined hand in hand.
This is Astrea's Temple, which is greac't
With many a golden Vessel, which are placed
In places eminent. Those Astrea bless;
And blessing, make their number numberless.
De Templo in malos.
SAint Peter's and S. Paul's are in disgrace:
The Middle Temple, that ^ the only place,
Whither both City and the Country come,
As to the Temple of Jerusalem,
To hear the Law, and many a Jew to proffer;
As many an angel. None must come to offer
A Widows mite: For how should live the Scribes,
But by false profits, and by double bribes?
Doves are brought hither to be bought and sold,
And Country Clyants bring their bags of gold
Hither to change Both friends, and foes, and strangers
Are used alike, for these are Money changers.
This is a Sanctuary that is free
For all but Sarjants; yet we do agree,
There Is many good, and grave, whom these things greeues,
Were not for them, 'twere but a den of thieves.
Sextus Purchase.
IT may be true (for Sextus in it stands,)
That he has purchased great store of Lands:
But it is conceald: yea marry, so't may be,
For I am sure 'twas never known to me.
What if he lies? Why, then the question's, whether
The Truth and Lands be both concealed together.
Yea, that they are: for if the truth were known,
The Lands would soon be found, but few or none.
Mirabilie Visu.
WHen old Penochio came first to town,
And saw the Coaches running up and down,
Staring upon them long, he hoopt alowd:
The people thronging round him made a crowd,
And asked him, what he meant? Quoth he I hooted
Because before I nere saw women booted.
On the Lotteries.
SOme do condemn our late great Lotteries,
And say they were but tricks and fopperies
For to get money: This is all the thank
They give the Founders; yet all were not blanke.
One miracle it wrought, say what they can,
It made a Tailor for to be a Man.
Currit mercator ad Indos.
SOme fondly think our great East India Trade
Has all our other Merchants beggars made;
And that they carry men, and money store,
To kill our Mariners, and make us poor.
These are confuted all, and held as vain,
In eighteen Months they now return again:
Return a gain said I? Nay, but a loss,
If they lose men and money, but for dross.
On the High Spring tide at the Shows at the Palsgraue's Wedding.
THe Sea fled in, willing to see this sport,
That to the neighboring Lands she might report
Their valiant Prowess, and each glyding flood,
Came rolling in; and each stream would have stood
For to particip^te these warlike Shows,
So that the Thames could hardly them enclose:
For some, to be spectators of the sight,
Got up upon the bancks to see them fight.
On Justice Balance.
SOme do paint Justice sitting in her state,
With Scales and Balance to give each his weight:
Surely her Scales are even, so think I,
And that the beam hangs not in Justice eye.
Old Siluium.
SIluius by Simmony a Living got,
And he lived well upon it. 'Pray why not?
For he the poor did pill, the rich did lurch,
And so became a Pillar of the Church.
De perochia beatae Mariae de Arcubus.
AN Archer, bragging, said, he well did know
How to bring any man unto his bow:
Yet, when he put his knowledge into use,
He hardly could say Bo unto a Goose.
Ex abundantia cordis es loquitur.
THe mouth speaks from the abundance of the heart,
So were we taught: but they have found an Art,
Lately at Westminster, which is far worse,
Most mouths speak from the abundance of the purse.
Ad Lectorem Candidum.
MY Book arraigned for causes criminal,
Must dye a death which is unnatural:
A Jury Ignorant have past upon it,
And found it guilty: So there is thrown on it
Many contemptuous speeches, insomuch
As I appeal to you, whose wisedome's such
As errs not, and crave Judgment from your breath,
Whether it shall be burnt or pressed to death.
CERTAIN CHARACTERS, Called PAR PARI. OR, Like to like, quoth the Devil to
the Collier.

-- Ego nec studium sine diuite verna,
Nec rude quod prosit video Ingenium; alterius sic
Altera poscit opem res.
Hor. de Art. Po. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, for Richard Redmer, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the West end of Saint Paul's Church. 1619.

Certain CHARACTERS, Called PAR PARI: or, Like to like, quoth the Devil to
the Collier.
A Pirat is an excellent Bow-man.
WHo from his childe-hood being much bent to rouing, is in time become a
cunning Shooter, and thereby has won many a Prize. If you purpose to outgoe
him, you must betake you to your flight: but if once he Board you, your game is
lost. Adam Bell and his Archers gave him first example to be an Outlaw; And
because in times past he has been a beneficial Soldier to the English, he
is sent unto the Marshalsey; for whose sake, there is a Stake or two set up at
Wapping, for him, or any of his Companions to make use of.

A Drunkard is a Master of Defense,
WHo dares challenge any Dutchman or German. He takes no felicity at the
single, but dares any man at the double. He is but too to cruel: for
oftentimes he seeks the blood of the Grape; ye^ has he in many a Duel bin
^eft for dead, when his Friends, taking of him up, have f^und his crown
cracked. Once he had almost lost his eyes, insomuch as he was led home to his
lodging. And if at any time he be not able to stand, he may be well excused,
because he has got a cut in the leg. Many times have I seen him so stonied,
he had not the power (...) speak; yet w^ll he justle any man in the Street,
and very manfully fall upon all fewer at a time. If ^erchance he meets with a
Constable, he prepares for the Encounter, and betakes him to his word.

A mere Gallant is one that plays at Noddy.
ONe and twenty ends his game; for the like number ended his Nonnage, and made
him flush, which if perchance he be, expect him to show it very openly: But if
there come a sequ^ns, you shall have him keep close. For fear of a pair of
knaves, you we^e best to look to his d^aung, lest that he shuffle with you
But of all things, take need how you fall out about scoring; for he is known
to be a great Cutter. If it be you fortune (...) get to twenty, it is
impossible for you to loose the gam^, because you are sure to have a Noddi^ in
hand.

A Curtezan is a Musi^ian.
WHo from her youth being brought up to pricksong, has lost no time, but is
become a Woman of note. She learnt it of the Nightingale, and in imitati^n of
he^ sleeps, always against a Prickle. She sings sometimes in Paris* but they
are not much respected, because they are grown common; yet never was she put
down by any but only in the closing, and the reason, as some say, is because
she falls often too flat, she steals away your cares with her voice, and in the
mean time has many crotchets in her head how to strain courtesy with your
purse. A large and a long she is well affected with; but a brief or a
sembriefe, nothing pleases her. Of all Instruments she loves not the Recorder
because it makes her too melancholy. She has played at many a Marriage, yet
never could affect the Bride-well, although she has been paid largely for
her pain. Imitating the ancient Poets, she sings her Poems in Cars, and the
people being much delighted therewith, for the maintenance of her voice, have
bestowed many an Egg upon her, which oftentimes have proved as rotten as her
self. Feign would she have been a Quarrister at Paul's, but that she loves not
to stand in a Surplisse: yet many times she repayres thither, especially unto
the lower end of the Middle I Will. She is never out of the moods but when she
meets with a Be^dle or Constable, and then she begins to quarter, because
she fears to sing a Counter tenor. If you have a desire to hear her, either
she is gone to Lambeth to take the air; or else you shall meet her at the
next Tavern with her conserts.

A Gull Traveler is the Ball at Tennis,
WHo, by reason of the later Racket in France, has left it, and now has took
up his place of residence in the Court of England. After his passage hither,
he held us with a long discourse of the several hazzards he had bin driven
into: How he was tossed from this place to that place, having not a few times
past under the line. Neither forgot he his rare exploy^s done in the Field, in
the late banding of faction: nor what great services he had been proffered so
his g^od parts in Court: but because he lies for his v^^tage, which in him in
a fault, it is fit he be whipped out of the Court.

A Swaggerer is one that playe^ at Ruff,
FRom whence he took the denomination of a Ruffin. Take heed how you deal
with him, for he is much given to packing; and at play his usual oath is
Renounce me. He cares but for one good suite at a time: and the four orders of
Knaves are his most familier Companions. Let no Wenches trust him, for he is
never well but when he is taking up their Coats, who for his sauciness is
oftentimes sent to the Stocks, where every one is glad to find him.

A broking Scriuener is a Barbersurgion.
WHo in his Apprenticehood being brought up to the Art of Poleing, is now made
free of the Shauers. He has his Shop fully furnished with most rare and cunning
Instruments. His chief customers consists of Usurers and madmen, which
madmen he so hampers, keeping them fast bound, that in six Months many of
them recover their wits again. He begins to have some practice in Physic;
(...), ^f any young Gentleman be troubled wi^h a looseness, he can give him a
bynding potion* and again, if he be bound, he can minister unto him a purging
pill, that shall fetch an extraordinary quantity of yellow stuff from him.
He never mist of his cunning but once, when looking into the Marketplace
through a window, he lost one of his ears, and never since could be cured.

A Gamester at Irish is a Merchant Aduenturer.
THe Dice are his Ships, the Men are his goods, which lie in several parts to
to be brought home in safety. In the return, many times, his goods are taken
by Pirates, who lie in wait for them: but if in the pursuit he can but safely
bring them ore the bar, he cares not a point for them. If ^he weather be so
tempestious, that he be constrained to lie at Hull, ten to one but the Ships
are cast away. When he comes to make up his accounts, he bears away as much
of his goods as he can possible* for then is he compelled to break, which is a
great bi^^ to his credit: and his adversaries imediately enter their actions,
and attache his goods: so are they carried back again to the bilbowes, where
they lie wind-bound vntiil such time as he has spent most part of his estate.
When his adversaries having got their will of him, more of constraint the^
pity, release him.

An Amorist is a Painter.
WHo paints forth his passions in black and white, and carries his Mistress
Colors in his Hat. He has made her Picture in a Sonnet, and does Idolize her
like Pigmalion. If you make any comparisons with her, he will draw, although he
be beaten black and blew in the quarrel He is so obseruatiue, that he will
not omit her shadow, and accounts it the heig^t of his happiness when he can
frame his demeanor to please her. The utmost end of his study. is but to
attain to the secrets of the Art of L^^ming, wherein being unskillful, he
sometimes lays his Colors on a false ground, whereby they fading he himself
is disgraced.

Lectoribus.
FRiends these are like to like, my iudgme^t's such,
The Devil to the Collier said as much.
-- Vitani denique culpam,
non laudem merui.
Hor. de Art. Po. FINIS.

