MOST TRVE AND MORE ADmirable news, EXPRESSING THE MIRACVlous preservation of
a young Maiden of the town of Glabbich in the Dukedom of Gulische: And, THE
STRANGE YET WORTHY execution of John Honaver, of Brunholf at Wittenberg, this
present year 1597.

Condemn not ere ye read, and having read, wonder at the Almighties work.

LONDON. Printed by Adam Islip for Thomas Stirrup, dwelling in Pouls
Churchyard at the sign of the George, 1597.

To his especial friend, Master Ed. Harc. Merchant in London.
SIr (as you have desired) I have done all my endeavor to satisfy you with
the truth of such noteworthy things, as in these parts happen; being
recompensed by you with like for like from London, our natural and beloved
City. So it is (that being certified of a matter beyond all natural reason
wonderful) that at this instant is to be scene at the town of Glabbich in the
Dukedom of Gulische near unto Colaine, from whence I departed not believing
the strange report of many my good friends, till mine eyes had assured my
heart, of that which mine ears could not persuade it unto. And to be plain
with you, though I did see it, so admirable the report is, that I am doubtful
to deliver it, least you should call my known credit in question, and count me
a reporter of fabulous lies.

But to clear my self of that supposition, I have sent you the names and
dwelling places of diverse our countrymen ^ that inhabit in and about London,
who saw what I did see, wondered as I did, and will witness on their oaths
the truth of what I write. Besides I have sent you the Town seal to a
certificate of the truth, signed by the Magistrates, with the occasion, why it
was gotten: and first will I name my witnesses.

Bartholomew Powels. Gerrard Powels. Harman Rutters.
These three above written dwell in the parish of Saint Olaue, commonly called
Saint Touleys in Southwarke.

Henry the post, Of the parish of Saint Katherines by the Toure. Henry Powels,
Dwelling in the late Dukes place near Algate. Henry Hester, Of Waltham Stow in
Essex.
These to my knowledge did see this admirable wonder, which yet continues for
any to see that have occasion to travel into those parts.

NOW having in some part cleared my way, and strengthened my self with
witnesses dwelling by you, I will the boldlier tell you this strange and
admirable accident; which in my conscience (among many other wonders) is in
this wicked age by God ordained to reprove the folly of those fools, that say
in their heart, there is no God, that jest at the promise of his coming, that
blasphemously affirm nature to be conseruer of all things. For no natural
Philosopher in the world can yield reason for this admirable wonder. Longer I
will not hold you from it the substance and truth is this.

portrait of maiden
The miraculous preservation of a young Maiden of the town of Glabbiche in the
Dukedom of Gulische.
ONe John Iohans, and Mary his wife, dwelling in the village of Wincklen, being
people of honest report had a daughter called Veit en Iohans, who from the
feast of holimesse in the year 1593 to this very instant has never received
any kind of sustenaunce, nor done those necessary works of nature which every
creature naturally is forced to, yet is she fair, of a very good complexion,
and to all men's seeming of perfect health. Her parents by no means can yield
reason of this her strange kind of life, but do confess she has eaten,
drunk, and done as other children have. Only this they say, that in Anno 1593
she had a very grievous sickness, and upon the recovery she fed but little,
and daily less and less, till at length indeed she took not any food: t^
last of any, being as I before said, upon ho(...)ay Anno 1593. At the first her
parents gest it to ^^se from sullenness or wantonness, but neither strip^s nor
entreaty could since make her take an^ s^enance: but what beyond compass of
all man's reason God inwardly nourishes her withal.

Me thinks ( M. Harc.) I see a humor growing in you, or if not of your self
it come, some humourous person does persuade you, that the parents of this
child do get unto themselves profit, going about to make their daughter be
thought another Joan the Pucelle, or such a one as was our Hypocritical holy
maid of Kent. But I can assure you, that they are no such people, but wealthy
persons of peaceable and godly conversation, such as make no gain by their
child, but are rather much hindered by entertaining those that come to see her,
neither do they cloister her up nor chamber her so close, but she conuerseth
daily with neighbors children, at church, at work, at play, and never leaves
company, till they go to meat, which it seems her stomach loatheth.

To add more credit hereunto, I send you as I promised, the copy of the
certificate, which the Governors at the earnest request of Bartholmew Powels
dwelling in London as aforesaid, did get; who will show you the original and
the Town seal at it: The copy follows.

We John Stambe, William Hertzigh, Herman at Stappen, and John Spangen, with
the rest of the magistrates of the City of Glabbith in the dukedom of
Gulische, do by these our letters give to understand to all manner of persons
whatsoever, before whom these presents shall come, that at the writing hereof
there was before us one John Iohans with Mary his lawful wife, dwelling at
Wincle^, being a village in the Dukedom of Gulische, who said that they were
of the age of sixty years and upwards, who brought with them a maiden child of
their own, of the age of twelve years, and there they did depose, that the
said child had neither eat nor drunk, nor taken any kind of food to sustain
nature, neither yet done the necessities of nature, since the feast of
Holymesse in the year of our Lord; 159^ unto this present 28 of July in the
year of our Lord 1596, and that always before the feast of Holymesse before
named, she did and had lived by eating and drinking as all other children do,
until it pleased God to visit her with a great sickness, in which sickness
she began to leave her meat by little and little, but yet continued a small
time only by drinking of milk: and at Holymesse aforesaid, she altogether
left all food whatsoever, and so she does continue: and yet she is of as
read a color and as fair a complexion as most be, as this picture does
show: which picture was brought before us with the child: also she does
increase in strength according to her age. And for the fuller certifying
hereof, there were at the same time before us these three witnesses, Matthias
Hennen, Peter Hennen, and Vitgen Engels, neighbors unto the said John Iohans,
who deposed that this child was often with their children playing, and that
they often offering it meat, she always refused it, and yet they tried her
diverse times with diverse things, and always found her to loath meat so
far, that when any meat was either given to their children or stirring in
their houses, she would go away: so that they said upon their oath, that
they thought that the smell of meat was loathsome to her.

These our present letters are sent forth at the request of one Bartholmew
Powels dwelling in the City of London in England, who desired our letters for
the fuller certifying of the truth of the premises: and we being assured of
the truth hereof, both by the witnesses and other epperiences, thought it good
not to deny his request, that the truth of so strange a thing might be abroad
known, to the praise and glory of God. Written and sealed in our presence, the
28. of July. 1596.

OF this ( M. Harc.) I have said all that I can, only I conclude, the Lord is
mighty in all his works, and wonderful in all his ways, he will have his
glory known, neither shall any thing in heaven or earth be joined as an aid
with him, so full of Almighty majesty and jealousy is he: in his kindled
wrath shall unbelievers fall, and the scorners shall be as stubble before fire.

I suspect sir, that my tediousnes does weary you, but have a little patience,
and (it may be) I will be briefer and merrier in this that follows.

portrait of John Honaver
The strange yet worthy execution of John Honauer, of Brunholfe at Wittenberg,
this present year, 1597.
IT has been reported for truth a long time, that the Duke and State of
Wittenberge had gotten a fellow for the nones, so excellent an Alchimist, as
the wide world had not his like, The knowledge of the Philosophers stone was
his as sure as ever it was Salomons. Oh he was a perrillous fellow by report,
he intended to paue Wittenberg with silver, and cover the houses with gold. As
for the Indies and their excrements gotten with so long travail, so dangerous
fightes, and such like attempes, he held them in scorn, the Elixer of life was
his, and thereon he would venture his life.

NOw sir he was not a thin, peaking beggarly Alchimist, futelesse,
bloodlesse, freindlesse, none of them that had smokt out their eyes with
tumentations, nor wrinckled their checkes like a dried Neates tongue, with the
ill speed and long practice of their sure loosing science: But this was a ioly
fat faced Gentleman, nay by your leave a Nobleman he would needs be, and
lord of Brunholfe, his appartell covered with gold, at his hair and ears gold
hung carelessely dangling, chains, carkanets, bracelets, garters, hatband, all
true gold, so that he seemed another Plutus, that god of metals whom the
Poets feign so many rich fables of. To make short, so this gallant crept in
credit with the duke and State, that he was employed at their charge about his
rare practice, a multitude of expenses they were at, and still still some
cross chance happened that hindered the going forward of this golden
blessing. At last perceiving themselves to be palpably abused, they grew
round with this squaring gallant: telling him that they would punish his
deceit, if he did not speedily perform his promise. My young master having
good hope to give them the slip, (as all such slippery Gentlemen of his
unstayed faculty strive to do) set them a day when they should see the admired
experiment he had promised, or if he failed he offered his life in
satisfaction. The day came, but no Philosophers stone was ready to turn all
things to gold, as Midas did by touching: depiction of man being hanged

Therefore the State adding more to their loss prepared a gallows of a
quadrangle form most artificially wrought, being iron work gilt ever, with
bowls on the top and other curious forge work. It was plated on a square of
stone, and from the top in the middle of the quadrangle went up an upright
bar of iron and another crossing yet in manner of a gibbet, this held a broad
Vane, upon which was engraven these words.

Here hangs the crafty Alchimist that escaped from Struckgart, who pretended
to make gold of iron, and because he lied and did deceive, he is hanged on
iron gilded. The day of his death was on April the second day 1597, he was
brought to the gallows with a hundred and fourscore horsemen, and a multitude
of footmen, penitent he was, and did confess his error, yet a little
bragged of his art.

ANd by the way ( M Harc.) I here note, all of his kind, have that kind of
fault how ever they be overtaken, yet they have a mad desperate hope to attain
that in one hour that thousands of them could never meet with in an age. You
know some about London, that shall be namelesse, who still lack purging in
the master vein, against this mad frenzy of Alchimist, and will take no
warning by the daily issue that runs and vapoureth from their friends
cofres and their inheritances.

But leaving them to beweepe their own loss, return we to John Honauer, by
himself named lord of Brunholfe, a captive captain in that beggarly beguiling
art. He was suited in cloth of gold, his stockings silk, his hat thrumd with
gold and silk, his band of gold about his neck, a chain of gold and in this
habit he was hanged dead, on a bar of iron crossing from the Vane, like the
cross post of a gibbet: being dead he was disrobed, the hang man seazing on
his gallant suit, and in four gilt iron chains, his body was hung up.

On a pillar by the gallows was his lively picture with verses of high Dutch
written to this effect.

Here justly hangs John Honauer,
The consuming Alchimist, deceiuer
In Methernland this youth was borne
Who now is made his countries scorn,
He took upon him that he would
Convert plain iron to rich gold,
Many lords beleeud his knavery
And made him rich with costly bravery
But as lies did get him fame
So his ^alshood brought him shame,
The Duke of Wittenberg commanded
At Struckgart he should be imprisoned
But thence he escaped to his great cost
For by his flight his life he lost,
Condemned he was hanged to be,
Gilt iron was his gallow tree,
He cost the State two tun of gold
And by his craft his life was sold
Three hundred pounds they more bestow
To hang him with a golden show
So ended he before he wist
Because he was an Alchimist.
These rimes I can no better translate, the sense I am sure they hold. He was
brought to execution with a hundred and fourscore horse, and an exceeding
number of other people crying, There goes to hang the Algomist: which is a
by-name they give Alchimists in this country. Thus ended this young cousener
being but four and twenty years of age: if some of th^se old companions of
that kind which bootlesly trouble other States were so served the occupation of
Alchimie, I mean in the most shifting professors, would prove like the
profession of stealing, it indeed being a secret kind of theft.

Thus ( M. Harc.) have I done with these two nouels, commending me to you, and
referring you to the post scriptum, for one matter I omitted in this last
business.

Your friend to use, Alexander Gurth.
Post scriptum.
It is not to be forgotten, that when Honauer had broke his day, he was
imprisoned at Struckgart: where escaping, proclamation was made, that any one
who apprehended him, should have three hundred guildrens: and so in short time
he was soon caught.

Once again farewell. Coleyn Sept. xxii. 1597. A. G.




