A letter sent by F.A. touching the proceedings in a private quarrel and
unkindness, between Arthur Hall, and Melchisedech Mallerie Gentlemen, to his
very friend L.B. being in Italy. With an admonition to the Father of F.A. to
him being a Burgess of the Parliament, for his better behavior therein.

To the right worshipful Sir Henry Kneuet Knight, the Printer wishes, worship,
health and long life.
AFter by an extraordinarye means (good Knight) this letter with the
appurtenances in written hand, came to be met withal by me, I was of diverse
minds, one way not to bestow the cost on such a trifle, an other way not to
consent to the smothering of well disposed (as I take it) persons, thirdly not
to thrust out what I found presupposed, with partial mind to harm innoce^ts
(as I conceive it) and having preferred will (be it so) before reason, I yield
to you my labor and the setting my letters together, praying with all, that my
good will may be accepted by you, who (I ca^ well gather) a party in this
tragedy cou^tes himself much beholding to: and tho I might direct perhap my
travel to men as it seems of very good avail, and friends to master Hal
in this case, yet (good Sir Henry) you shall have it, refuse it not, take in
good part and glory that your well doings deserves and has thanks, not for
benefit growe^ of your good motions, but for the rote of virtue joined with
gentleman lie mind, which not in this only but in many other actions lays
open to the world, and therefore needles for me to repeat: I leave as I
began, wishing you all prosperity.

I Know you have ere this expected my ordinary letters, which are to you into
Italy from me out of England the remembrers, and I hope preseruers of our old
acquaintance, I measure you by my self, for I am most glad to read his
friendly lines, whose presence, if I might, I would more willingly embrace.
You may not misdeeme for that I wrote not to you this last month: so it is
that since my last being with you in Italy and else where, at which time, I
desired to make my self acquaynted with the state of forrayne countries, I
have sought as well to learn what the horse means, as the carte, that is, in
my return, I supposed I kn^we all, because I had seen more than my
neighbors, but finding mine own weakness, being questioned withal of mere
England, wherein for want of experience, I could not answer, I found I had
begone at the wrong end. I ran to gaze upon France and knew not Kent: I
vewed Spain, and never was in Deuonshyre: exactly (as I thought) I judged of
Italy, and never traueyled Wales: I came home by large Germany, wherein I
supposed I had a pretty sight, and yet not able to wade with you how the poor
kingdom of Man is sited. And as I was ignorant of the seat of this land, so
was I further to seek in the ancient rytes and usual government thereof.
Which considered, and finding my self a member of that body, I sought to mende
my want, and to begin to take a better course, rather late than never:
wherefore I have since my arrival here, endeavored my self to understand mine
own country: and my Father your well wisher, as you know, advised me at my
home coming, to be content rather to learn than teach, to be more willing to
hear than speak, and that (quoth he) you shall well find, that young men
stand better for the most part in their own conceytes than there is cause. I
am a membre of the grave, great, and considerate Council of the Parliament,
the which my rowme, I will labor you shall have this next Sessions (if God so
please) wherein what you shall find, declare at your home coming. For
wrastelers (quoth he) think themselves strong men, till they meet with their
betters: good wits specially standing in their own lights, for affection
sake, can abide no disputacion. Take the best and leave the worst, and you
shall reap in few lines the travels of my old years. Read me this short
advice, which here I give you and with that retched me a small Book of his
own hand writing, the copy whereof, I send you herewith. All this some will
think needelesse, as things not according to our usual aduises. I so
confess, but because I mean to leave the occurrents daily looked for, as
news, and to write to you of a case happened of late here, which tho it be of
no great importance, being the action of mean and pryuate persons, yet two
causes moves me thereto, which are these: The first for that men willingly
hear matters of those, with whom familiarity and acquayntance has been:
Next, because I have heard it often spoken, that it is evil to belie the
Devil, and that I see and hear such untruths spredde abroad, and also I
must needs say, of some, who know their words are wrongfully wrested, to
the great prejudice of the credit of Master Arthur Hall, whose company at
Padoa, the year 1568 you once were glad of, and thought it a contented
meeting, which happened in that town between you two, I in company, at
Antenors tomb, where first you had sight one of an other, is the second
occasion, that I write of this matter, at this present unto you. First assure
your self, that what I deliver unto you, is most directly told, without
leanyng either to the one side or to the other, for I have taken great
observation in my collections, tho some perhappe will think, the matter
deserves no such travail. To describe the man unto you, I think I need not,
your knowledge of him in Italy, can sufficiently judge what he was: then you
may remember, God has done his part on him, (as we say in English) his
capacity, his sensible tongue at will to utter his mind, no want of
audacitie, of sufficient courage, well disposed to liberality, loving and sure
to his friend, secret where he is trusted, and I have found him to have
great care of his word, not wholly unlearned, with a smacke of the knowledge
of diverse tongues: the inclination of the good parts which do budde in him,
I may not omit, and so likewise not forget the taches of his mother Eve,
which I find in him, which are these: Ouerweenyng of himself, which brings
many infirmities to the person which is infected with that canker, furious
when he is contraried* without patience to take time to judge or doubt the
danger of the sequel, as your self is witness of his dealings at Rome, at
Florence, in the way between that and Bollonia, and at Bollonia it self, the
year above named, so implacable if he conceive an injury, as Sylla will
rather be pleased with Marius, than he with his equals, in a manner for offenses
grown of tryfles. But herein I have told him my opinion, which is, that
sith he will lean so much to his own inclination, that God will send a
shrewde Cow short horns, which hitherto he has done to him. Also spending
more time in sportes, and following the same, than is any way commendable, and
the less, because, I warrant you, Non friget ludus, for it is, ^ine lucro: the
sums be great are dealte for. Thus much for the first person of this
Tragedy. Now as touching the other, which was Master Melchisedech Mallerie, I
need spend no great time about him, and that for two causes, one, for that
you knew him in Flanders of late time, as I could put you in remembrance by
good tokens if I would: The other, for as much as God has taken him, and
therefore, as De absentibus nil nisi bonum, so, De mortuis nil nisi optimum, he
was (as you know) of a good spryte, ready tongue, in audacitie forward, what
else he was disposed to this needelesse, for the causes before recited, as I
have partly said before. Some wise me^ will marvel, if this come to their
hands, that I spend my time, to write to you so long a treatise of so small a
matter, as of the unkindness or quarrel of two so mean Gentlemen, and
therefore think I have little to do, or less wit* I have meruayled often what
the writers meant, to put to our readings the Round table knights, Beuis of
Hampton, the Knight of the Swanne, the four sons of Amon, Amadis, Orlando
furioso, Espandion il Caualleire del sole, Valentine and Orson the Greeks,
Olgarden the Dane, and a thousand more such tryfling Fables, yet do I see many
men of judgment read them, some for the tongue, and some for the matter, reap
benefit of both: likewise I may not so wholly condemn this my travel,
wherein only truth is reported, and ( Durus est sermo, some will think)
assuredly no falsifying of any matter of substance, neither is my conscience in
minimis, but as casually men may fault: but that a man may profit himself in
one of the two parts, that is, for the matter, which if he well consider, he
shall find more than perhap is looked for in so simple a Title: there is not
so evil a flower but the Be may gather honey of it. Who so desires to be
delighted with Eloquence, let him spend his time in other store houses, for
here he shall but loose his labor. If you will keep to your self this Letter,
or rather missi^e Pamphlet, I shall be assured to avoid the diverse verdites of
manyfolde judgments, and I am well pleased that you deem thereof as best shall
like you. See the fruit of play.

In the year 1573. there was one Robert Phillipson, who in Lothbery in London
kept a table of xij. pence a meal for Gentlemen, where the xvj. of December
the (...) ere, M. Hall, M. Mallorie, M Edward Cordall, M. (...)-house, my self,
and diverse honest Merchants of the town supped, supper ended, the dice was
thrown on the board, who must pleasure the good man of the house by paying the
^oxe, and displease the whole company, by occasions, daily guinitye to so good
an exercise: the sport lasted not the throwing out of every bodies hand
about the bourde, (and yet all the company did not play) but M. Mallerie gave
the lie with hard words in heat, to one of the players, who either for
quietness sake, or for other cause, made small replye, whereupon M. Mallerie
followed as he began: I can yield you no reason, neither yet if I could would
I, for I am reporter now of the truth in all parts, and not a declarer of my
opinion as a judge. M. Hal seemed to take the matter in hand, a thankelesse
office (for speaking before he was feed) and said, I marvel, M. Mallerie,
that where there is such company, which seem honest, you will to the
prejudice of their small reputations use such unseemly words. Mallery made
challenge that he would say so, who so ever durst be his contrary. Whereupon Hal
tickled, swear, as he will not stick to lend you an oath or two, that for his
gallant challenge, it were a good deed, (being no greater a man, for he was
but little as you know,) to throw him out at the window. Here Etna smoked,
daggers were a drawing, one rose from his place, the other walked up and down,
they would have gone together, but as god would they went not, the goodman
lamented the case, for the slander, that a quarrel should be in his house, the
rest of the company wished quietness: and for my part, I found the parties
themselves reasonably well disposed to friendship. The matter was ended for
this fit, with commemoration, how well one loved an other: as many times of
evil beginnings comes worsse ends: so now again on the other side, honest and
friendly dealings well meant, settes the Towe on fire, for in Februarye following
Master Rich. Drake, a gentleman well bearing himself always, thou attending
upon my L. of Leicester, but now ye Queens maiestyes servant in ordinarye,
advised M. Hall as his friend, to take heed to himself in play, forasmuch
as he had some ways understood of indirect dealings touching the same: and
specially for the giving signs of his game at Mawe, a play at cards grown
out of the country, from the meanest, into credit at the court with the
greatest. Hal, took his friendship in good part, as he had good cause, and
craved withal to show, whom he mistrusted, who as one not making tales on his
fingers ends, named Melchisedech Mallery, as a man to be doubted off. In troth
quoth Hal, yesternight he trod on my foot, I being at Maw at Mistress
Aru^dels, the old and honorable ordinary table, as I may term it of England,
but what he meant thereby I know not, I think no evil.

The eight of March after, there was at supper at one John Crokes, who kept an
ordinary table in White cross streate of twelve pence a meal, Master William
Daunsey, Master Drake before named; Master Nicholas Gorge, Master Frauncis
Woodhouse, M. Hal, M. Mallerye, and one or two Merchants: some of them had
bin at o^^ sport, some at an other, as I heard themselves repo^t, and some
showed openly, what cunning might be used at pl^^: in ye talking whereof I met
them coming out of the ^ore about ten of the clock at night. Hal being passed
not above twenty yardes before ye rest in ye streate homewardes to his lodging,
discoursing one with an other of the premises. Master Drake detesting such
vngentlemanly shifts, began to condemn such practices, and withal recited what
reports went of some (no^ naming any) who kept company with the usual best
gentlemen in ye town, condemning their degenerate kind, professing themselves
of ye breed) in yielding, to so base, so abject, and shameless an occupation,
as to take the worst part of al parts of the play in hand, which was, to give
by secret signs notice of his cards and play, whose good meaning would have
trust a horsekeper with a greater matter. At these words or such like, M.
Mallery replied, and said, that it were good he were known that used such lewd
practices: why quoth Master Drake, you are suspected to be one of the number,
with hye words he denied it, desiring where, how, and of who^, he had bin so
touched. In generality, master Drake told him the opinion of many, his own
judgment, and withal, Hinc illae ^^^brima, master Halles speeches to him here
before recited, yet that he had small cause to deem evil of him, forasmuch as
he had delivered the^ in so good sort, as he did. Two days after, being y^
tenth of March, Mallerie came to Hal in Poules, and within my hearing charged
him very hotely, that he had reported him too be a Cousiner of folks at Mawe.
Hals answer was this, Master George Freuel a ge^tlema^ of my lord of Susser
his being by, M. Mallerye I never said so believe me, for I desire not to have
to do in your causes, in any respect. I went to Toys shop a Stationer at the
sign of the Helmet, supposing this mat^er had bin ended, where I saw together
Hal, Mallerye, Freuel, and as it were with the^, Master Robert Audeley, a
gentleman and fellow to master Freuel perceiving the^ to cluster together like
John Grayes bird, vt dicitur, who always loved company. I inclined to
understand some more of the matter. Mallery vouched that Drake would veryfie,
that Hal had said as much as he had charged him with in Poules* wherewith M
Hal told him that he was assured so much of Master Drakes honestly, as he
would never do it, also that he desired Mallery to choose some body else out,
to show himself on, rather than on him, for that he desired quietness, and of
al me^ would have no question with him, as from whom he could purchase no
reputation, The same after noone it was my chance to be at John Crokes, where
there is a bowling alley of ye half bowl, whether does repair many Merchants
and sundry ge^tlemen, and in a Chamber above diverse were at play: there was
standing by M. Hal Master Drake, Master Richard Rich. M. Mallery and four
or five Londoners. Mallery called Hal aside, told that now Master Drake was
there, who would to his face affirm what he had given out, to him of his word
in Poules: they two went to him: he told Mallerye he had done him and M. Hal
wrong, for he never reported Hals speeches in such sort, nether could justly
do, but that M. Hal did not only give judgment of him in evil part, but rather
seemed to excuse, or at the least leave in suspense the evil conceived opinion
of him, M Hal, was patient, tho M. Mallery were hoate, and went his ways, not
seeming to hear hard words, which Mallerie sent after him. So te^perate an
end was much marvelled at of many, and M. Hal being demanded what he meant by
so much suffraunce, answered he was forced to be quiet, for as I understood
after, he was then bound to ye peace in no small sums for troubles in his own
shire, wherewith I have nothing to do, it touches not this matter.

Till the last of June. 1574. following, nothing happened yt I can learn, worth
the registering, between the parties, but evil words in corners one of
another, small to ye reputio^ of him who^ they were reported of, and less to
him who was the reporter. The same day at one Worms who kept a table beside
Fleet bridge, in ye late house of Courtely and courteous Gilbert Walker, at
dinner time, being there present my lord Cromewel, M Thomas Farmer, Master
Finchame, Master Boother, M. Sidnam, Master Thomas Fisher, and others, M.
Mallerie very warmely began to play with M Hall (if such rough pastime may
be counted play) reporting him to be a knave, a fool, and a boy, and Master
Farmer (like himself) hearing these words, said, he meruayled that Hall
should be such a man, hardly believing the same, because he knew him as well as
any other present. Mallerie followed again and prayed him to deliver too Hal
his words, for (quoth he) a knave he is in denying his words he uttered of
me to Drake: a fool, for that the last Parliamente he used in the house such
speeches, as he craved pardon, with protestation, abandoning the^, and
confessing his folly: a boy, for that he durst not go into the field with
me. Master Finchame, much misliking such extraordinary table talk, and that
of one absent, tho Master Farmer were appointed to do Malleries message, yet
did he determine to give M. Hall knowledge of the same, and coming into
Paul's* met with him walking there, to whom he declared the fore recited
speeches of Mallerie, wherewith Hal fetching as it were a great gron^, said,
Master Fynchman I am greatly beholding unto you, for this your courtesy, and
wherein I am able you shall find me ready to pleasure you. But what an unhappy
man am I, too have any question with such a one as he is, whose company^ I have
always (as I might) avoided, what injury is this to b^ thus spoken of in, open
place, where I am not to answered but be you with indifferent ears judge, what
unkind dealing this is. As for the first part, wherein he charges me to be a
knave, for reporting him untruly to master Drake, and then denying the same: I
have witness enough how Drake himself did in all points discharge me to his
face, of all sinister dealings therein. For that I am a fool, for matters
paste in Parliament, I mean no disputations, you have heard enough thereof.
But how fondlye so ever I did behave my self there, I suppose it not a fit
communication for an ordinary table. A boy forsooth I am, for so it pleases M.
Mallerie to term me, for not accepting his offer, to deal in quarrel with him.
Assuredly on my fidelity he never himself or by other moved any such thing to
me, if he had I would have kept my self from the same: I trust you take it
not for fear: but if any gentlemanne of account will accept the quarrel, I
will so deal as belongs to me, or else confess M. Mallerye has well
reported: so ending with thanks to Master Finchma^, they departed. M. Halles
stomach began to boil, as some cause he had, and more if al had been true,
and presently he went to Master Farmers lodging, which was hard by Worms,
desirous to enquire more exactly of the matter, tho Master Finchams honesty
and credit is such, as no doubt were to be made of his report in a far
greater cause. Not finding Master Farmer, he went into Worms, desirous either
to meet with him or M. Mallerye, the one for small good will, the other for
friendship. In the dyning room he found master Edward Gryuell, and master
Butcher, and saluting them, he demanded for Farmer, though his errand were as
much to Mallerye: they made answer he had bin there, but now was gone:
wherewith master Hall spying through the glass window, my Lord Souche,
talking with another, and supposing it had been M. Mallerie, in some have
went into the cockpitte yard too him, and seeing my Lord putting off his
cappe, left him, and still restless in his mind, he retournes to Poules,
where he meets Master Farmer, of who^ he receives as much as Master Fincha^
delivered, and so much more, as it is strange that any man should have the
disposition to utter: At Master Frauncis Woodehouse, lying in Charter house
Church yard, at a lodging of my Lord Pagettes, and there met that night at
supper, master George Cheworth, master Farmer, master Fincheam, and master
Roberte Bale, where Malleries words were again recited. Supper ended, Hall
went forth in some soddaine, being required earnestlye to tarry, but he
promising partly to return, departed, and finding three of his men at the
door, (as in very deed he has kept more than his ability, as it is
thought is able) though he had more in the Town, who were slacker in
attendaunce: with them (whose names were Edward Smalley, John Nicholas, and
Henry Woodward) he went to Worms, and found in the place, Master Butcher,
Master Fisher, and others, and at tables M Mallerie playing with Master John
Spenser, son and heir to sir John Spenser, and drawing his dagger, mente (as
he says) too have stroke M. Mallerie therewith on the face, though^ his back
were toward him, Mallerie having a glaunce of his hand, bowed down his head
crying out, wherewith M. Hall being ready too have followed with an other
blow, he was held, the house growyng full, as with my Lord Souche, many
Gentlemen and other, by the noise of the struggeling, and Malleries cry, in
which time so recovering himself, drue his dagger, and might as easily have
slain M. Hall being in hands as he had pleased: but what was his stay
god only knows. M. Hall seeing himself in this danger, and his dagger also
in that moment wrested out of his hands, with great furis said, will you
hold me, while I am murdered* with that his three men, not knowing any part of
the quarrel came in, of the which John Nicholas, having his dagger drawn,
stroke over his Masters head to have hit Mallerie: and he stouping down
before M. Hal, escaped the blow, saving a small cut in the back part of his
skul, with ye point, ye hilts light on his Masters pate, and with the part of
the blade next y^ same, cut his forehead. M. Mallerie would have run out of
the door, but Woodward having his sword drawn, and knew not who^ to strike,
made him doubt. The blood fell fa^^ in M. Hals eyes, so that with the company,
and the want he was quiet, yet wiping the same out as fast as he could, he had
a sight of M. Mallerie, and taking one of his men's daggers ^^o^ the^, was
pressing to Mallerie, who with a great shreke, ran with all speed out of the
doors, up a pair of Stayres, and there alofte used most hard words
against M. Hal, as are before recited, moreover auouching he was a traitor,
and in deed left nothing out, which might almost be to ye prejudice of any
honest man's good fame, and that in the bearing of Sir John Conway, Worm ye
good man of the house and others. My lord Souche used some hot speech too M.
Hal, as he was a dressing, for y^ he used such disquietnes in his lodging, but
sir John Conway did very worshipfully satisfy my Lord, so that no matter grew
thereof. Among the rest I remember, yt M. Hal smarting in being dressed, advised
ye surgion to use him well, saying he was beholding to his horns, that the
wound was not great: there was that remembered, the old proverb, yt it was
not good jesting with edge tools. The next day being ye first of July, M.
Mallerie was at dinner at Worms, and therefore his hurt was not very great,
where master Fincha^ was etc. there he gave it out, yt he carried a revenging
mind, and would be revenged on Master Hal, if he could take him at any
advantage. To veryfie such meaning, Master Edward Ra^dal of London sent M. Hal
word, that M. Mallerie had affirmed, yt he would show him an Italian trick,
intending thereby to do him some secret and unlooked for mischief. Til the sixth
of this month M. Hal lay at Master Frauncis Woodhouse his house, not being fit
to go abroad for his hurt, but with a mufle in manner half over his face,
yet upon business he had in ye country of Lincolneshire where he dwells, he took
his journey thitherward, yt same day, hiring post horses, and taking with him
one Roger Moore, servant to master Wodhouse, w^^ was very fi^ and in a manner
acquainted with ye dressing of such hurts as M. Hals was. In his absence M.
Mallerie reported, yt he was gone out of the town disguised, took none of his
own men with him because he would not be known, how himself lay to meet
him by the way (as indeed he did) and mist ye knowledge of him, and in
diverse open places offered te^ pound to any man could bring him into the
field, that he might try the cause.

The 22. of July M. Hal came to London, where he had knowledge of many of M.
Malleries defamations of him, yet yt time so served for it, it had pleased
their noble good minds my lords, the Earl of S^ssex, and Leicester, to accept
in matching at shoting M. Hal, that he directed himself to attend on their
honors ye time of the progress, to perform ye matches set down between
the^, and therefore with as much speed as as he could he dispatched his
business to yt purpose, which sooner he had done, with fulfilling of his duty,
if his forehead had bin full hoale. The second of August he went to the
Courtward, and at Sudley, the house of ye Lord Shaundoys late disceased, now yt
old Ladies ioynture, he found her majesty, and so remained, til his highness
came to Winchester, where leaving the court the 14 of September, he came to
his own home into the country. At Mychelmasse term following he came up to
London, and so continued M. Mallerie and he many tims in sight one of another,
and no harm done: but fatum is ineuitabile, else Troy perhap had stood, so it
might have bin this stage show had not made so many laugh.

Of all days in the year it was the 29. of November, M. Hal dyned at James
Lumelius in Bishops gate streate, the son as it is said of old M. Dominicke,
borne at Genoa, of the loss of whose nose there goes diverse tales, but tho he
wa^ted a piece there, he wa^ted nether honesty, nor sensible good judgment.
And coming by master Arundels, lying in his way to his lodging, for ye men who
owe money in Cheapside like not always to be pluckte by the sleue, and
therefore took Saint Martines the next way from Bishops gate to Pater noster
Row, he found at dice master Anthony Rush, master Drake, master Jasper More,
master Benjamin Hanam, and master Rich. Green, and fell to do as the rest:
having tried the pastime a while together, master Drake left, the rest
continued, in which time came M. Mallerye up, and pressed nere M. Hall who
was throwing the dice, who seeing his haw^^e gate and cou^tena^ce, plucked off
his gown from his right arm, having a short gown of velvet on, and threw his
chance out. Mallerie went through the rowme out of the upper door, as he had
had to do with some Gentleman in his chamber in the house, wherewith Master
Drake came to Hal, and said, you stand in doubt of him, he answered no, but
least he strike when I am otherwise occupied: quoth he, tend your play,
mistrust not that, I will mind him He had no sooner spoken the word, but
Mallerie returned, Hall still throwing the dyce, and with his hand on his
dagger pressed forward, Master Drake, stood between them both, which
Mallorie perceiving, or whether he would not disquiet the company, went to
the end of the board, it being square, and used the same behavior, and then
with the countenance he entered the house, he departed. M. Hall as soon as he
had ended his throw, left play, and coming into the hall, met Smaley his man,
to whom he said, Jesus can you not knock the boys head and the wall
together, since he runs a bragging thus? Smaley made answer he had not seen
him: with this John Nicholas who had hurt Hal his Master, as you have heard,
began somewhat to be sorry that he had not done as much as was spoken of, and
swore he should have it. Whereupon M. Hal charged them in any case not to hurt
him with any weapon, but if he sought any matter, to cuffe him about the
ears, saying, for the rest I my self will take order. To Powels M. Hal comes,
finding in the Church M. Roger Townesende, M. Thomas Farmer, and Master
Frauncis Woodhouse, with whom walking, he declared M. Malleries behavior, at
Arundels, in the midst of whose speech Mallorie entered the Church, and passing
twice or thryse by Hal, with great looks and extraordinary rubbing him on the
elbowes, with spurnyng three or four times a Spaniel of M. Woodhouses
following his master and master Hal, John Nicholas went out of the Church at
the weste door, and so did a pretty while after him into the Churchyard M.
Townesende, and M Woodhouse, who both entered a bookesellers shop, to look on
Books. M. Mallerie with his man after him, went out at the same door. Nycholas
spying Mallerie past him* hasted after, and ere he came to the two stoupes as
ye go to Ludgate, stepped before him, wherewith Mallerie drew his rapier, and bad
his man take him to his sword and buckler, which both were done, Nycholas his
sword not yet being out: a few blows they dealt together, they two upon Hals
man, who they put in such danger, and might have done more, if they had well
set themselves to it, as M. Townesende and Woodhouse were about to will same
of their men to go to his reskew: but at the instant, Edward Smalley drew to
his fellow, and strikyng at M. Mallerie, cut him down the cheek, and so the
play was marde. Also after Smalley came one James Chamber, a servant of M.
Hals, who likewise drew his sword, and his Master charging him therewith, he
did proteste he did it to save M. Mallerie from more hurt, and to part the
business. Smalley returns into Poules, and laughing came to his Master, telling
how he had given him a boys mark* wherewith M. Hal was greatly offended,
beshrewyng him very earnestly. John Nycholas was taken by the Conestable, and
M. Hyggins the Seriuener being bound for him, he was delivered. After supper M.
Hal came to Mistres Arundels, where Master George Scot took him aside, and
demanded of him whether he were pryuie to M. Malleries hurt, he answered of
his fidelity and credit no, but was more sorry for it: yet withal, that he
had ought him a wors^e turn, but not to have been in that ^orte: yet, quoth
he, what is done cannot be undone, therefore now it must be borne off with the
head and shoulders: And that if any Gentleman will defend his cause, I will so
answer him as shall be accepted of; and tho my men have done that which with
all my heart I wish undone, yet may I not refuse them, nether will: withal he
told M. Scotte much of M. Malleries dealings to him ward, with offer to prove
them by men of worship and credit, so that M. Scotte seemed satisfied, and
very friendly advised M. Hal to take heed to himself, whom he greatly thanked
for his good warning, tho he answered he mistrusted no harm. The first of
Dece^ber M. Mallerie for his hurt, had the advice of M. Silua a Piemontois, a
practiser in Physic and Surgerie, to whom he uttered such tho^dering speeches
against M. Hal, and such heavy threats, yt M. Silua mistrusted some great
co^sequent would follow, and being very often with the L. Katherine Duchess of
Suffolk, where diverse of M. Hals name and kindred be many times co^uersant,
and some attendant on her, as a bountyfull well wisher to the whole family,
declared to her the danger he conceived was contrived against M. Hal: she very
honorably gave him notice thereof, yet in part did condemn the hurting of M.
Mallerie, for that some untruths touching the same, had sounded in her ears.
The iij. of December M. Hal late in the euenyng being at M. Howes house a
goldsmith in Cheapeside, and his men atte^ding at the door, Smalley was
arrested at M. Malleries suyte of an action of the case, the damages a thousand
marks, for his hurt: his Master desired M. Henry Gilbert a Goldsmith next by,
and M. How to stand bound for him, which most willingly they did as persons
to whom not only at this time but at al other occasions M. Hal had greatly
been beholding. During this pastime, M Hal had great warning to have respect to
himself, and whereas he was often to pass between London and his house in the
Country, the iiij* of December M. Drake very frie^dly told him he had heard
speeches, which were, that he should hardly recover his own home when he
should return, for such as lay in the way for him. The next day after M.
William Hill, and one Walter servant to Worm, gave M. Hal to understand how M.
Mallerie had with great protestation vowed to slay him. Tho these parces must
needs be disquietnesse to the person of whose death so many determinations
were given out, yet surely I found M. Hal made virtue of necessity, what
soever he thought, he showed he bare ye matter light.

The xviij. of December the Court being at Hampton, master Hal supt at
master Comptrollers, Sir James Croftes, then and now holding the office, where
was my L. Talbote, my L. North, Sir Henry Sidney now Lord deputy of Irelande,
M. Gilbert Talbot, M. Henry Gray, and M. Thomas Cornwallis, with others, as my
self etc. After supper the Comptroller and the Lords going to the presence,
M. Corwallis in the court where the Conduyte stands, called M. Hal, and
desired to speak with him. I remember the time well, for I walked by,
attending M. Hal with whom I had then somewhat to do: M. Cornwallis told him
how Frauncis Mallerie a brother of M. Malleries, had been at the Court, and
there with open mouth so exclamed of the misusing of his brother, as M.
Cornwallis himself seemed to mislike M. Hal for some wantes laid to him, as
that he durst not go into the field with Mallerie his contrary, how he set
his men to hurt him, and durst not do it him self, how shamefully he was
ouermatched and stricken behind: and this did not only M. Cornwallis conceive
against M. Hal, but many of the best stood now in suspe^ce (by this means) of
their judgment of him, of whom heretofore they never made doubt. M. Hal
opens the matter to M. Cornwallis, and withal what he durst do, they were
both as it pleased him to believe the^, but I think he departed better
satisfied. The next day after, Sir Jerome Bows hearing al places ring how M.
Hal should die the death, gave him warning carefully to look to himself. The
xxviij. day M. John Wotton gave M. Hal notice that Francis Mallerie and his
brother had it in talk, with secret fire in his lodging to be revenged on
him. The xxiij. of the same month M. Hal went out of London, and safely came
to Grantham to his house. The xxij. of January he returned to London, and the
xxvj. of the same word was brought him, that M. Mallerie had caused Edward
Smalley, John Nicholas, and James Chambers, at new gate Sessions to be in^ited
for drawing their swoordes in the Churchyard on him, the law being that
therefore they should lose their ears. The xxiiij. of the same month M.
Mallerie supte at the Popes head in Lomberdstreat, where were M. Cotton and
other Gentlemen, and many marchantes of the town, as Thomas Wilforde, Richard
Smith, Henry Sherland and other: he began to fall to his old bya^, with like
words as you have heard heretofore, alleging he had heard Hal was perjured,
but he would not say he was a perjured knave, with speeches as some seemed
soundly to harken to, so M. Wilforde as one not forgetting (tho now professing
merchandise) that he came from the blood of gentry, could not allow of such
vngentlemanly wrongs, and therefore very roughly replied against M. Mallerie, a
part more commendable than common, among men of his Cote, who I have found
oftener readier rashly to believe evil reports of a Gentleman, than
deliberating indifferently to judge of the truth. The xxx. of the same month
M. Hal was driven to trudge to stay the proceeding against his men for their
inditeme^t, for M. Mallerie followed it with hoate suyte* he repaired to the
court to my L. of Leicester, to whom he reported the danger his men stodde at,
and craved his letter to M. Fleetewood the Recorder of London, that favor
might be showed therein, the case being very hard, the which my Lord most
honorably and willingly performed, and thereby the matter was a while stayed.
The vj. of February M. Hal arrested M. Mallerie upon the action of the Case,
for his slanderous reports, and Mallerie having about him a pocket dag
charged, delivered the same closely to one Ward a Sergeant. Smaley the next
day hearing hereof, came to his Master with the news, who presently resorted
to the Coun^er in Woodst re^te to the said Ward, and most earnestly and
courteously desired to see the dagge, which at the first he denied he had, but
the slanders by vouchyng the contrary to him, dog fashion he consented, but
answered he would not show it. M. Hal, went to Anthony Gamadge, an occupier
of linen clothe, then Sheryfe of London, finding him in his shop in
Cheapeside by the end of Soper lane, to whom he declared that M. Mallerie
carried dagges in his hose to murder him, as himself did report: how M. John
Wottons man two days past sent him (...) that Mallerie had watched him in the
night diverse times to mischief him, how Ward the serge^t had the dagge yet
charged delivered him yesterday by M. Mallerie. With much ado Gamadge sent for
Ward, (I Master him not, because in Norfolk I know his pedegre) who brought
him the dagge: him self found it charged. M. Hal desired some order might be
taken therein. I think in my conscience rather to have Mallerie troubled, than
for any fear he had of the matter, but all was one, for he had a cold answer
of our London Sheryfe, yet such a one as he must be contented with.

The xxj of February M. Hall was at Guyldhall to see the end of Malleries
action against Smalley, and with him M. Roger Townesende, M. Frauncis
Woodhouse, and diverse others, till which time M Mallerie had deferd for the
trial, because he would have the Jury fall in that part (...) Cheapeside,
where his father did before his death dwell, for so is the manner of the Iuries
in London, that they serve by turns, yet the number not being full, it was for
this time dashed. The next day again they came thither: M. Mallerie brought
for his counsel M. Bromley the ^. Solyciter, M. Weeks, and M. Fuller: and
Smaley had for him M. Daniell, M. Maltas, and M. Kitchen: the issue was, Quod
transgressio per Edwardum Smaley facta fuit ex iniuria propriae, which he did
deny it read as the manner is to the Jury appearing and called good men and
true, as M. Crier said: M. Fuller first began to speak to the matter, and
very earnestly charged M. Hal with malicious and implacable dealyng, with such
a desire of his own will to be satisfied, as he cared not for the casting away
of five hundred pounds if he might purchase the same: how he came to Worms,
how he hurt M. Mallerie, how still he followed the revenge with an Italian
mind learned at Rome (although M. Fuller never came in Italy and less at Rome,
neither yet was ever acquaynted with M. Hal, and therefore as blind men be to
be borne withal if they commit an error, so M. Fuller speaking for his
clyent is not wholly to be condemned,) tho M. Hal was never named in the Nisi
prius, neither touched in the records: M. Recorder advised M. Fuller to go to
the matter and not to tarry upon the declaration of Hals disposition* After
Fuller followed M. Solicyter, not with vain speeches, and as very learnedly,
so no less gravely and discretely: the^ were deposed for M. Mallerie in his
behalf, his own Servant, and one Thomas Hewes: his man alleged that three of
M. Hals men were upon him and his Master, how Nicholas drew first. Hewes could
say little, but that he saw them together and M. Mallerie hurt. Eglestone a
Goldsmith also being sworn, affirmed he saw three men upon his Cousin
Malleries man (for so he called him) and his Cousins cheek hurt and ^^ing on
his shoulder. Of the contrary part were (...) honest and worshipful
Gentlemen, who stood by and aduis^dly marked the whole fraye, M. Roger
Townsende, and M. Frauncis Woodhouse before named: their free hold which in the
common Law of England is in such (...) much respected, is large, and yet not so
large, as their (...) their upright dealings, which among al men is in oaths
to be most accounted of: they avouched that as soon as John Nicholas M. Hals
man had passed M. Mallerie, that he drew his rapier and dagger, and bad his man
draw his sword, before Nicholas had his weapon out, and that they dealt
certain blows together before Smaley came in and yt with such danger to
Nicholas, as they themselves looked he should have been mischieued. Further of
Malleries hard usage of Hal as is recited before, the Council argued the
matter to the Jury, who went together, and M. Hal and the rest to dinner to
the horse head in Cheapeside, where there dyned M. Townesend, M. Woodhouse, M.
Frauncis Leake, M. Drake, John Crouke, and I my self: at the sitting down to
dinner M. How the goldsmith came in, who had heard the matter past in Guilde
hall, saying he was (...) the Jury would give great damages: wherewith M. Hal
demanded with what conscience they could do it, if they considered their
evidence, the manner of the act, and the condition of the persons between
whom the action depended: every man spoke his judgment, not being of M. Howes
opinion. In fine, they grew to particular (...), what would be awarded to M
Mallerie, and M. Hal gave How a Portegue, he to return two for it if they
condemned Smaley in less than lx. pound, if above he to have it. This time M.
Mallerie rested in Guylde hall, for two causes, one to see the sequel of his
matter, the (...) he dur^^ not come forth, understanding that M. Hal had laid
to arrest him again for the action of the case of more words: during which
time Their the foreman of the Jury came forth, enquyring for M. Mallerie, who
was not found, for he had hid himself for fear of arrest: he (...) Richard
Mallerie his brother, walking with (...) in the hall, which one Guy took
exceptions too, because the verdite was not given up: Their goes in again to
his fellows, and presently they gave up their verdite, which was, Smaley must
pay a hundred pounds for damages, and ^ij. peace for co^tes. Guie brings this
news to M. Hal at the horse head, and with him M. Edwards the goodman of the
house: whereat who rages now (...) the matter in dugion but M. Hal, who
exclames (...) and well spoken of ^^iends the Londo^^^^, (...) now repents of
the defenses to his ability he has made for them in all places, where any
thing was spoken to their rebuke: who now condemned himself for standing so
much in his own conceyte, to believe well of their good wills to him and his:
who now finds that the paying of xxv. in the hundred in usury, and more than
is reason gain in a yard of silk or stuff, did make him have so many Caps,
and fair countenances but he? and yet must I needs confess, that in all his
choler and heat he acknowledged himself as much bound to some Merchantes
within the walls of London, as any Gentleman ever was, allowing many to be
worshipful, grave, and wise Cytizens. Well what will you have more? the kill
is a fire: the next day M. Hal gettes him to his footecloth, and trottes to
Grayes Inn: there he desired M. Kitchen to show M. Sergeant Louelace who was
at the reading in the hall, that he was desirous to speak with him about the
business in hand, who understanding between whom it was, refused to be of
Counsel therein, for that M. Mallerie had made him privy thereto before, and
desired that he would be assistant to him: then to the Temple goes M. Hal, and
confers with M. Anderson what now is best to do, being not so careful to save
the money his man should pay, as desirous to Cross M. Mallerie, and to make
him reckon therein without his host. M. Anderson did marvel at the excessive
damages that the Jury ^ounde, and advised that (...), which no way liked M.
Hall, alleging that it was impossible to touch them with perjury, who
should be tried by their neighbourly peers, and that he could not find any
president in the like, whereby any hope was to be had: agreed it was, (...).

(...) M. Anderson (...) to Guildhall, there sitting Sir James Hawes then
Mayor, Sir Lionell Du^ket. Sir Rowland Hayward, and the (...), be alleged
diuers^ points wherein erro^r was committed, also the (...) with Richard
Mallerie, wehrevpon judgment was stayed. The next day after, the Mayor,
diverse of the Aldermen, and the Recorder sitting, M. Daniell and M. Kitchen
moved the Court for stay of judgment, and so was it granted till the first
day of the Term following, with craving heed to be taken for amendment of the
Record, which by M. Recorder, and M. Seabright the town Clerk, was
willingly and perfectly granted. The first of March M. Mallerie w^nt to the
Court, and used very hard reports to my Lord Chamberlayne, then the Earl of
Sussex, and now also, of M. Hall, whose sound and honorable judgment is not
carried away suddenly to deem evil of any Gentleman with the affectioned mind
of an adversary. The next day after M. Mallerie went but to the highest,
opening his grief to her Majesty how lewdely he was (...), how violently
laid to, how unable to revenge the injury offered him, how empouerished in
purse, and damnified in person, most humbly desiring her highness of Justice,
and not to grant her pardon to M. Hals men, who stood^ indicted as you have
heard: her Majesty's (...) was, that he should have Justice, and that she
never was hasty in pardoning, neither need he fear the same. This tale must
he needs deliver also to my Lord Threasorer, my Lord Burley, to the which
giving good ear, as his manner is to all suyters be they never so mean, no
usual thing to men in his place, he told M. Mallerie he was sorry if all were
true he told him: and I surely think he would so have been, for how tenderly
he has always loved M. Hal in his youth being brought up in his house at
Schole, how carefully he has favored him being (...) servant, and what
bounty he has used toward him, since he preferred him to her Majesty's
service, all the world knows.

The ix. of May M. Mallerie arrested M. Hal in Westminster with a byll of
Middlesexe for hurting him at Worms. The xviij. of May 1575. at the Sessions
at Newgate was M. Mallerie and his man indicted upon the Statute, for drawing
weapon in the Churchyard. The tenth of June M. Sergiant Harper, and M.
Sergiant Manhood Justices of the common pleas came down into Guyldhall in
London, where the records were read, and found by Smalleys counsel to be
amended. The xiij. of the same month M Hall went to M. Seabright the town
Clerk, and found him self grieved for the mending of the Record, who made
answer that the Mayor with charging words commanded him to do that which he
did, which was that whereas there was no mention in the Record, that Smalley
did appear in the Mayors Court there, by himself or his attorney, that he
should put in his appearance, for that forsooth M. Hodgeson Smaleys Attorney
confessed he had received his fee, therefore. The xxij. of June the Judges came
again to Guyldhall, and sat about the errors, appoynting the first Friday of
the next Term, for the further proceeding in the matter. The viij. of
September M. Mallerie died at the sign of the Antlop in Smithfielde, he
forgave M. Hall, yet with confession that if he had lived, he would have been
revenged; he departed well leanyng to the old Father of Rome, a dad whom I
have heard some say M. Hal does not hate. In Noue^ber following William Huyt the
servant of M. Andrew Mallerie, taking the administration of M. Melchisedech
Mallerie^ goods and cattels, by the advice of his Master, although, Francis
Mallerie and an other of ye brothers were appointed by the dead man, executors,
sued the recognisance which was knowledged, for the following of ye writ of
error with effect. The xxv. of January M. Harper and M. Manhood came down to
Guildhal, and there according to the first verdite and judgment given by the
Recorder, whereupon the writ of error was brought, they proceeded with the
like, so ye Smaley must pay 104. pound ij. shillings, the overplus of which
sum, it being above a 1^0. pou^ds and xij. pe^ce given by the Jury at the
first, was for charges. The judges appointed that a warrant should be made
out, for the attaching of Smalley, it retornable xv. days after, during which
time if he could not be met with, Huyt should have out execution against the
suerties, who were as you have heard M. Henry Gilbert, and M. Richard How, both
very sufficient men for an other manner of sum. During this time wherein
Smalley should be found, M. Andrew Mallerie with tooth and nail followed the
execution of the judgment, for drawing in the Churchyard, mounting that if he
could not prevail therein, yet at the least he hoped that the terror thereof
would make Smaley absent him self, and so at the term appointed for the
attachment of him, there should be returned a non est inuentus, which was his
desire, knowing very well that the suerties would make ready payment of the
condemnation: for thus much you must take with you, although William Huyt servant
to M. Andrew Mallerie, were the administratour of M. Melchisedech Malleries
goods and Cattels, yet was the matter wholly followed by M. Mallerie. The
reason why Huyt took this office on him, was, that the benefit of this money
had, it should be paid over as best pleased the deceased Malleries brothers:
for that I think his wealth was not great nor hardly of sufficiency to
answer his debtes. The iiij. of February M. Hal brought to the Towne-clerke a
Cerciorare out of the Kings (...) to remove the Inditements of his me^, whereby
they were stayed till the next term, intending that if there were a pardon at
the Parliament, they would be dispensed with. M. Hal found M. Seabright very
willing to do what he might by law, and accordingly dealt therein, not sending
the Inditeme^ts up. The vij. day M. Hal sent Smaley and Chambers to the
Counters to put in a Caveat that he was of the house, therefore that none of
his men should be arrested, and also wrote by Smalley to M. Onessey Clerk of
the house, for a writ of privilege for him, who returned answer he could
not do it, till he were arrested: M. Mallerie on the other side for the
Inditements, hastes the case so, that the former helps may not serve, and for
not performing the first course taken, a fine of xl. pound was set upon M.
Seabright, wherefore a new way must be had. M. Hall hyes him to Grayes Inn
and to the Temple, where the viij. of the same month by his counsel it was
concluded to trauerse the Inditements, and presently to put in the same, wherein
was used speed enough, and so was this gappe stopped, and M. Malleries labor
lost: during this Smalley had been at the Counter diverse times, and demanded
whether there were any process out against him, none was found. The very same
day the Parliament began, of the which M. Hal was a Burgess for the town of
Grantham, whereof we have talked often: the next day after Smaley goes to
Guildhall, and takes with him Matthew Kyrtleton his Masters Scholemaister, and
then not seeming they were of knowledge one with an other, Smalley walked up
and down in the hall, and Kyrtleton goes to the ordinary place where M.
Mosley one of the Secondaries of the Counter sat, and said, if you have any
process against Edward Smalley, yonder he is, attache him, for I am M.
Malleries friend: nothing was done in the cause, for in truth, the warrant
was not yet out. The next day being the last day of the return, and that by
two a clock, Smaley sent to the Counter, to hear of this warrant, all was
whusht, at Westminster all the Courts rising, it was delivered by the younger
Mallerie to M. Mosley, who seeing it retornable, in a manner within two hours
after (quick speed pretended or not to find they looked for expected) said
how may I do any thing with so small ^ warning? M. Mallerie answered, return
non est inuentus, quoth he, that can I not do, for I see the party every day
before my face, well this man must be sought, who would be found, and that for
two causes, one, some small hope he had, (tho ^is learned counsel ^ad told
him the contrary, as M. (...)* and (...) Judges of the Law) that the
pryueledge of the Parliament would discharge him, if they would unadvisedly
attache him: the second, being greatly desirous to show himself honest
toward his sureties, knowing that he should not long lie in prison, if his
Master were able to provide the money: about one a clock he goes into the
Counter in Woodstreat and demaundes again after this warrant, where one of M.
Mosleys men said, his Master would speak with him, he answered he would anon
go to him. Mosleys man coming out of the gate, called Grace a sergeant to
him, and said, see you yonder yeman going in the red hose with his fellow in
the green cloak? he answered yea: will him (quoth he) to go to my Master,
for thither he must: Smalley told the Sergeant he would willingly go, and
so they three (the third being James Chambers M. Hals man) went to M. Mosleys
house, where they coming before him, he thus began to Smaley or in such like
words. What do thou mean fellow to rotte in prison, and to lose thine
ears? if my hap be such (quoth he) I may not do withal, I would not have my
suerties troubled: will thou then (replied Mosley) yield thy self prisoner,
and discharge thy suerties? Chambers hastily answered no, that he should not:
whereat M. Mosley was offended, and therewith followed Smalley, and said, he
would not so do. M. Mosley persuaded him to sue to Mallerie for agre^ment: ^e
answered, he had so done, and caused it to be broken to the Judges, and that
they did make no end: Mosley then commanded the Sergeant to the arrest,
bidding him show his mace, the Sergeant demanded wherefore, M. Mosley gave him
the warrant and read it, which done and Smalley arrested, Mosley told him he
was now in a good case, to rotte in prison and loose his ears: The Judges were
this afternone to hear what was done touching the last proceedings, and
therefore Smalley as a prisoner was had in Guyldhall to attend the coming of
them. M. Hal came also thither, and told Mosley; that he had done his man
wrong to arrest him, he being of the Parliament, who seeming sorry therefore,
excused him self by ignorance, and that he would not have so done for I can
not tell how much, if he had had notyce thereof: M. Hall alleged that he
had sent to the Counter to declare the same, one of his own men being in
the office when it was done, and one Thomas Ulmes an officer also. He persuaded
talk to be had between the Malleries and M. Hall, they being in the place,
but great heart would not suffer the parties to meet, for between courtesy
who should begin, proud men looked one on an other, till the Judges came,
who set, the prisoner was brought in, M. Mosley declaryng the exceptions Hal
took that his man was arrested, and desired some end, because he was loathe to
have the matter brought in question in the house, confessing that Smalley did
not willingly yield him self: the administratour was demanded for by M.
Harper, who not appearing, Andrew Mallerie answered, he had his Attorney, and
him self was he, M. Harper asked whether he would take execution or no,
breathing a while he said, if he should refuse it he had no remedy, and
therefore he must accept it. M. Manhood moved some end between the parties,
alleging that the cause was motioned to them both before this, for that
purpose: M. Hall said that he remained the man he was, and did condiscende
thereto, so that they would very shortly deal therein, M. Mallerie also
agreed, provided that Hall should not proceed touching the liberties of the
Parliament in the mean time. The next day was appointed for ye hearing, in
Sergeants Inn in Chancerie Lane, of all matters touching this question, and
were compromitted to M. Justice Harper, and M. Justice Manhood. Smalley took
up his lodging in the Counter in Woodstreat: according to appointment the
parties met in M. Sergeant Harpers chamber, Andrew Mallerie bringyng with him
his brother Richard: where M. Hall laying for himself the excessive damages
the Jury ga^e, and the benefit of the Parliament which he meant to try,
withal the mean estate of his man, the party also being dead, persuaded
consideration to be had, and the inconsiderate largess of the liberal Jury,
to be mitigated by the just and conscionable dome of so grave vmpeers: M.
Andrewe Mallerie did aggrauate the hurting of his brother, his often
mol^station by arrestes, his charges in the suyte, the great delays therein,
the danger Smalley and his fellows stood in for the Indictment, the
advantage was had for the breach of the recognisance, not omitting the question
might be made for the death of his brother, who died within the year after his
hurt: many speeches paste what would be given and what accepted. M. Hal came
to a hundred pounds, for the ending of all controversies, tho for the death of
Mallerie he made no rec^ening, neither yet took any care for the Indictment.
The Justices moved M. Hal to a (...) and twenty pound, and would willingly
have had him (...) to a hundred and ten pound, which he refused, laying
therefore that the whole condemnation was but a hundred four pound and two
shillings. Thus time spent and nothing done: the Chamber court brake up, till
the (...) M. Hall looked whether his offer would be accepted, and that morning
brake the matter of arrest to M. Robert ^el the speaker before he went in, who
willed him to mo^^ the house thereof, which at his coming in he did. It was
agreed he ^houlde way till the company were full: shortly after M. Hal took
this master in hand, declaring as much (...): wherewith (...) Grant the
sergeant, and Huyt should (...) before them the next morrow: According to (...)
Sergeant attended, but the other not: M. (...) that the Sergeant was (...),
(...) had arrested Smalley by Mosleys commandment, declaring word for word
the whole matter, at the cou^ter, and in Mosleys house, as ye have heard.
There were appointed by the house, sir Nicholas Arnold, sir Owen Hopton, and
Sergeant Louelace committees to examine and search out the whole dealings of
the cause. After dinner, the two knights came to Master Louelace his chamber
in Chancerie lane at Sergea^ts I^ne, the place appointed for the conference,
with whom was also Master Hall. The speaker sent to the Committees, praying
them to come to his chamber, which they did in the Temple: there they found
himself, Sir Wyllyam Winter, master Popham a Lawyer, and master Roberte
Snagge: master Mosley confessed he had caused Smalley to be arrested, and
laid nothing for himself, but that he knew not M. Hal to be of the house:
it was answered him, he ought to take notice thereof himself, it was proved
thereby Thomas Ulmes one of the Counter, that James Chambers had before the
arrest given knowledge at the Counter of the same: Mosley forced much that
Smalley yielded himself, yet was it proved that he demanding him the same
question, he answered he would not: because there was some speech of
cantelous dealyng in the matter, and that not wholly clearyng M. Hal to such as
are more curious to spy a moate in an other man's eye, than a great block in
their own, and will not stick to spend great time to defame men with
untruths, and no piece of an hour to consider their own wantes. M. Hall
declared to the Committees how he had sent to the Counter word of his
being a member of Parliament, had caused Smalley to repair with his letter to
the Clerk of the house, for a writ of privilege, how after the arreste he
was content to put the matter to comprimise, and offered a hundred pounds.
where the whole condempnation was but C.iiij. pound.ii.^. how six pound more
had whisht all, how after he stayed from the.xi. of the month, wherein no
order was taken, till the.xv. of the same, aspecting some good end, and giving
the Malleries time to breathe sufficiently: The Speaker and master Louelace
very desirous the matter should be talked of again the next day, and the
rather by cause the Malleries were not now there, but should have warning
against that time, and prob^e should be made for agreement, tho unwillingly
master Hall agreed thereto. Accordingly in the Speakers chamber, where met M.
Hopton no more of the committees, there were M. Popham, M Dalton, and M.
Ploden, who was no parliament man. Master Andrew Mallerie and his brother was
moved to agreement: The speaker offering him fiftye pound, but not hearing on
that side, with determination to declare to the house their doings the next
morning, the company severed. In the morning in the void place before the
Parliament door, M. Hopton, M. Arnold, and M. Louelace called M. Mallerie to
the^, who would have no less than a hundred pounds for ye execution, and the
other matters, to determine as law might: Hal would none of that, to the
committees laboring in vain, defer the cause to the judgment of the house,
yet such bills were in hand, as there was no convenient time to make the
report. The.20. day M. Louelace declared directly to the house their whole
doing touching the arrest, whereupon M. Hal followed, craving consideration of
the cause, alleging that if the Queens ordinary servants, soldiers in
garrison, men with protections granted from the Prince, had great freedom
from arrestes, which no man could deny, how much more should ^he members
of that house have privilege? And whereas it was urged of some, that it was
against law to deliver a man of an execution, and therefore the party therein
could not be delivered, but that the playntife should be punished by
imprisonment. Hal declared that that was no sufficient mendes, saying, that one
might make a letter of att^rney to an abject in respect of the arresting of
diverse knights and burgesses of the house upon statutes, which are executions
of themselves, to which they must obey, lean their country unserved, and the
worker thereof to be imprisoned a small penance for so great a fault, no
recovery to the party wronged by the offense, nor sufficient punishment to
the careless preferrer of his own private profit before the whole and
universal benefit of the Common wealth. Master Comptroller, sir James Crofte
repug^^d Halles speech, M. Recorder in very ancient presidents, wh^ri^ he is
^el seen, having red much, stood fast for the liberties of the house, master
Frauncis Alford, master Sentpoole, mas^er Binb^^g, Master Nidigale soundly
followed on. What moved him I know not, unless some report brought him, M.
Hall should use of a near mere friend of his, which as I have heard Hall
protest most assuredly, he never thought of, so are they better ouerslipped
than put in writing: M. Speaker desired leave to show his opinion, which
granted, he advised the house to have regard to their doing, and not to
proceed to the discharging of an execution against law, which if they should
do, the Judges would rule them over, which he should be loath to see. M. Bricket
replied to him, saying, yt they were not to be ruled ^uer by any in those cases,
but others to be directed by the^. The speaker would have had the matter
deferred, which would not be, the^ he moved, whether M. Hal should depart the
house, because he seemed to be a party, ye most were of opinion yea, and so he
went forth. The question was put whether Smalley should be delivered of his
execution or no, the yea was the greater, yet must the house be divided, and so
was it found. In the afternoon M. Hal went to ye speaker to the Temple, with
whom he found no body but (...) Hal his man: and among other talk, praying his
man might be delivered, he told him that he meruailed that he dealt so
extraordinarily against him, as to crave leave to speak in ye prejudice of ye
privilege: he seemed to be moved therewith, and said he had done no more tha^ he
might, which he would do, and that M. Hall did not well so to take exceptions to
him* He answered, he had not seen the like before, and therefore took it
vnkindlye. With this M. Bowyer the Sergeant came in, and had M. speakers man
go out M. Speaker affirmed, that M. Louelace, had favorably reported the
matter, and not as it was, which if it had fallen out for him to do, the
consequente would have been other wise. In ^he, he could take no order for the
deliverance of Smalley, forasmuch as the manner how he should be discharged was
not determined in the house, but advised Master Hall to move the Parliament of
it, and he should be heard, confessing that Mallerie for his wilfulness, had
well deserved to loose his execution, if it had been much more. Hall offering
him so largely. The next day Hall called upon his man's business: there were
appointed master Saint Poole, master Recorder, master Sackford master of
the Requests, master Bromley Attorney of the Duchy, and master Roberte
Snagge, to meet at the Rolls in the after noone, and to make search how the
judgment of the house should be executed, whether by writ, or by the mace
with the Sergeant. Accordingly master Bromley made report of their travail,
alleging they could find no president, where any were delivered by writ
upon an execution, but upon arrestes diverse. It was agreed, the Speaker
should direct a warraunt to my Lord keeper of the great seal, Sir Nicholas
Bacon, to make a writ for the enlarging of the prisoner, and that master
Hall should go to my Lord, and be sworn, that Smalley was his man. After
diner, he attended at Suffolk place where my Lord lay, of whom my Lord
demanded what his man's name was, who was in execution, Hall answered,
Edward Smalley: the book being held, my Lord asked him whether he knew
Edward Smalley or no? which he did: whether he were his man or no? which he
was: How long? Three or four years: whether he was attached before the
Sessions of the Parliament or since? Since was sworn. My Lord very honorably
used master Hall, and hade him farewell, who presently repaired to the Speakers
chamber at the Temple, whom he found at Supper, and with him master Sands,
master Norton, Parliament men, master Onsley the Clerk, and master C^nisby:
Hall told the Speaker he was sworn, whereupon he directed master Onsley to make
a warrant to be sent to the Chancerie for the writ to discharge the arrest:
Onsley required master Hal to send him a note of the procedings therein, by the
which he might the more particularly pen it. The notice given to the cha^cerie
for this writ, Hall sent by James Chambers his servant to master Di^ters
office, who denied he had any president in the like case, yet with him repaired
to master Garth, also a Chauncerie officer, to whom this matter was french,
not being acquainted at any time with the like, he sought out master Couper,
who durst not deal in so extraordinary a cause. To my Lord keeper he goes, who
answered he was not to receive messages from the house by any body but by the
speaker, and willed that he should come to him. The next morning Hall made
relation to master Speaker, what had bin done, who determined to go to my lord
himself at the rising of the house, and so he did. My Lord desired certain
words more to be put in the warrant, which the speaker sa^ he would put too in
the after noone. The Speaker delivers Dyster the warrant, which being brought
to my L. keeper, his lordship presently directed two letters, one to the
Cursitaries of the Chancerie, and an other to the ^x Clerks. The xxvij. of the
same month: (for these actions from day to day, and daily for the most part now
continued.) The Speaker declared to the whole house, what he had done, and the
Clerks of the Chaunceries answer to the L. keeper, how there was no president
to be found among them in that case, wherewith Hall found himself grieved in
his man's behalf, saying, the Att^rney of the Duchy, who was a committee to
search the Records before knew that well enough, and that the Speaker did
determine that cause, whereby the delay^ was great: the Speaker replied, and
said, It was not well done so to charge him: for he did nothing but what was
determined by the house, which Hall denied. Master Nidigate wished the
liberties to be preserved* Sir Francis Knolles Treasorer of her Majesty's
household, master Comptroller, and Sir Water Mylde may agreed as much, yet
aduisyng recompense to be had. Master Popham and master Norton could not
brook that executions should be dispensed withal* Sir Henry Kneuet unripped
part of master Malleries behavior to master Hall (...) consideration to be
thought (...), for that Mallerie dyd^^ touch Hall, for speeches in that house,
as you have heard before, and place not meet to be tabbered (...) of the
execution he ^huft be^^ continue with the sergeant til further deliberation.
Accordingly he was brought to the bar, but not by the sheriffs, for they
seemed to good to execute that office, two sergea^ts served the turn: and as
you have heard it decreed, so was it done. M Recorder ran hard on that string,
that Smalley should yield himself, yt he should cautelously deal, and
indirectly with that place, praying breathing in the matter, and tho they had
passed in the cause (as is recited, yet they should not doubt upon good occasion
to reuerse the judgment they had past, producing a president happened in a
Parliament wherein he was, which fell out in a bil for ye Uintners of London. It
was so, yt they labored for a statute to pass touching wines, which was to be
red and argued in the after noon on the Saturday: Many of the Parliament were
that day at diner feasted by them. Their good chere ended, to counsel they
go: Bacchus spoke in the parliament (as ye sequel does declare) for his
ministers ye Uintners: what more the law had free passage. It was but a dare
between, as master Recorder said, a Monday morning they found a fault with
their Saterdays after noone work, and made no bones advisedly to dash that
which (...) Uinteners good chere had vnad^^sedly caused them to (...) late a
sat^rday: this tale and (...) no (...) Co^mittees were appointed for the
examination of the ma^ter, and recompense to be had to Mallerie: The whole
counsel of the house* who were Master Treasorer, M. Comptroller, sir Thomas
Smith, and master Frauncis Walsingham Secretaries ^ir Raul^e Sadler
Chauncellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, (...) Walter Mildmaye, my Lord
Russel* sir Henry (...) also with them Master Hatton, Master Louelace, their
place of meeting was the Checker Chamber, the time, the second of the next
Monethe, which was the Wednesdaye after: The Speaker by (...) we not (...) of
the house, (...) he delivered from the Sergeant upon M. Halles words for his
forth coming, when he should be required, it (...) conse^ted to Tha. ^^. of
March in ye (...) by what means (...) I have enquired of, who were sir Owen
Hopto^, sir Nic. Arnold, sir Will. Winter, M. doctor Wilso^ master of ye
requests, M. Popha^, M. Colby, M. Croke, and M. Norton. In ye after noon in ye
escheker chamber came together, master Tresorer, M. Mildmay, M. Hatton, Sir
Henry Kneuet, sir Nic. Arnold, sir Owen Hopto^, sir Will. Winter, M. Louelace,
M. Wilson, M. Popha^, M. Colby, M. Croke, M. Norton, and toward ye evening, M.
Comptroller. Hal declared unto the^ yt he marueled to see so many co^mittees in
the cause wherein he was a party, and they to be named without his consent, he
specially took exceptio^s to M. Norton, who was well plesed to depart. But M.
Mildmay told M. Hal there was none there would be ruled by him, where upon he kept
his place: In the beginning of Hals spech to the co^mittees for the appoyntyng
of them, one with some choler said hespake not truly. A hard word (you know)
among some precise ga^ders in forain places and sufficient, as you have seen
it, to make Hal far forget himself: but proceeding, he declared the occurre^ts
between M. Melchise (...) Mallerie and him, which he did but lightly pass
over, because he was dead, and so coming to ye dealings, since he delivered
the^, as you have herd the^ mentioned, and therefore I think it nedlesse to
repete the^ again. M. Andrew Mallerie followed urging his brothers hurt, his
charges, his arestings his death, denying part of Halles allegations,
protesting Smalley was arested agoinst his will, forcing cautele and fraud at
lest to be in him, if not also in his master, at whom he glanced diners times,
with terms might well have bin left, as M. Mildmay and M. Wilson did advise him.
The Secondaries of the two Cou^ters, M. Mosley, and M. Christoffer, were
examined upon their (...), apart, some of the sergea^ts, Mosleis men and
others, also Smaley, who upon ye interrogatories confessed, he knew Kertleton,
that he was his masters scholemaster, (...) he was willing enough to be
arested, because he would have his sureties discharged: he was demanded whether
M. Hal was privy to the Scholemaisters doings and his or no in (...), whereto
he asked whether they would have him accuse his master, answer of sufficient
importance to bring suspicion of him, whether he had been a partener in the
(...) Mildmays and some others, very honorably confessed it should be
extraordinary proceeding: and therefore dealt no further therein being very
late, about seven of the clock are they rose, they deferde their final
resolution what they would awarde Mallerie till the next morning, which they
would agree on in the Treasury chamber, at their rising. Hal was very
inquisitiue of some of the Comittees who were most his friends and contraries
in the matter, and was certified more than I would he had been, and more than I
will put in writing. Tho nothing were done but with wise and grave
consideration, the unkindness was and may be conceived, can do no good, I saw
him enter into the chamber: the Co^mittees upon earnest talk from whom some
words were over hard, which might be wrested to be spoken of great affection
against him, he followed M Hatton to the Court, showing him, that he gathered
there were some stiff on the behalf of Mallerie that he forced not of the
money, that he would cast away five times as much, rather than his enemies (so
terming the Malleries) should enjoy any thing. A charitable man to make a
Bishop of, that himself was cause he had put the matter to comprimise, that he
reposed his confidence chiefly in him and Sir Henry Kneuet, as well he might,
to whom he was most assuredly beholding, praying him in what he might, to
withstand and restrain the liberal giuers away of his Coin. In the morning in
the Treasury chamber by M. Treasurer, M Comptroler, M Mildmay, M. Hatton, M.
Hopton, M. Kneuet, M. Winter, M Wilson, M. Louelace, M. Papham, M. Colby, M.
Croke, and I think Sir Nicolas Arnold, Hal and the Malleries were called in,
where M. Treasurer declared to them that it was agreed, Hall should pay a
hundred pound to the Administrator of the deceased Mallerie, between that and
the beginning of the next Term. He and the Malleries to release all matters
touching the suits between them. Hal intemperately swear he would never
perform the same, alleging that some of the Co^mittees were not indifferent,
neither agreed on by him, and being demanded who they were, he took such
exceptions to: he named Sir William Winter, M. Wilson, M. Popham, M. Colby, and
M. Croke: he willed to yield his reason, which was, because they were against
the matter, when the house was divided, he said they would not in their
dealings but confirm their own opinions. M. Winter found him self most
grieved, saying, Hal was not to rule his conscience, tho he were a better man
than he was, comparisons be hateful, but if betternesse may go by worthiness
in all respects and Hal be his own judge he will give no place to M. Winter
tho he be a Knight, M. Wilson to whom M. Hal has always singularly been
beholding, and E conuerso the other to him as far as his small ability and
good will could stretche, was much miscontented that he should be named among
the rest, to whom Hal said, that he would commit a matter of far greater
importance to his hands. But for as much as in private talk between them, he
was so much against the discharging of the prisoner, he would not have
admitted him a judge in the cause. Well the matter was grieuouslye taken, and
thereof complaynte (some said) they would make to the house: by the advice of
Sir Henry Kneuet, and M. Hatton, much against Hals will, the money shall be
paid. When the Malleries saw that Hal was entreated, they sued also to be at
liberty, and that they should leave all things as they found them, the
Malleries pleased as I think, tho they made face otherwise, Hal almost mad for
anger, diverse of the Committees disquieted, some to the Parliament, others to
their own business departed. The vj. of March M. Wilson with unlooked for
speeches of M. Hal, and his friends, considering the frie^dship had bin between
the^, inueyed in the house hardly against him, how he had very warely charged
the Co^mitters, and that there appeared great fraud and cunning in his man,
whose word^s did importe, that his Master was the procurer and Counceller
thereof. M. Winter, M. Snagge with others shot their shaftes into the same
hole, M. Treasurer as indifferent bare him self, M. Mildmay, M. Hatton, M.
Colby, and M. Alforde and others directly impugned Wilson and Snagges
allegacions: it was ordered, that Hal, Mallerie with his Council, and Smalley
the next day in the afternone should come to the house: as it was appointed,
the parties appeared. Hal being within, and the others attending without, after
a bill or two read, M Snagge called on the matter, Hal desired that the house
might be ^ull, and that as diverse inuectiues speeches greatly to his reproach
had passed in the same, he might clear him self before as great an assembly,
or else be condemned of all craving further, that the Committees of the cause
might be there who were best acquaynted with it. As the request was reasonable,
so to my thinking it was not refellde, for they turned to other bills: shortly
after came in M Co^ptroller, M. Mildmay, M. Sadler, and M. Hatton* M. Snagge
must needs on with his chase, the abuse of the place was horrible,
consultation must he had, resolution determined, and judgment given. The
speaker stood up, saying it was very convenient to know, whether Hall and the
Malleries would stand to the awarde or no? Andrew and Fraunces were called to
the bar, Andrew besought the house he might be at liberty, yet rather then
that company should conceive amiss of him, he and his brother condescended.
Hal being also demanded of his determination, required first to be satisfied
in two poin^es, the first whether it was ordered, that he should choose three or
four for the Awarde, and the house as many: It was answered no, tho I know he
was, and I think is of an other opinion, the second why without his knowledge
after the first Committees named, there were more put to them, that the speaker
and some other denied, I suppose of ignorance. For true it was nevertheless,
he agreed to perform the Awarde, if they would so wish it, tho earnestly he
desired the contrary: it was set down the Malleries and Huyt should release
and discharge all bonds, controversies, and questions, dependyng upon the
first quarrel and this great action: That Hall should enter bond in two
hundred marks in Recognizance for the payment of a hundred pound the first of
the Term following, M. Sergeant Louelace, and M. Recorde^ were the men should
see this done accordingly. M. Meredith of the Temple (a man whom I never
heard speak before) forthwith called out for the abusing of the house: his
earnestness was great, his thrust to punish abuse much, which if he
regarded only without affection, sure he deserved commendations, tho small
thanks of M. Hall or his man, for both (as he affirmed) had couenously,
fraudulently, and cunningly dealt with that Council, and therefore he requested
sharp penance for such misdemeanour. M. Hal stood up to have answered him:
but sitting between Sir James Harrington, and M. Leyton, they plu^te him
down, aduising him to let others first speak, who were in hand to cast
licour in M. Merediths fire. M. Gente of the Inner temple was at hand to put
dry water to increase the ^ame, and M. Frauncis Alforde was ready at one
instant with clear running water to suppress the inconvenience was like to
grow The question grew who was up first, Gente alleged, he was he, and
would not lose his advantage, clayming the prerogative in the same case, De
lana caprina was the contention, he had it. Do you remember the inuectiue
orations that passed between Tullie and Cateline, thanks be to God the matter
was not so great, Gente is Cicero, Halles man must be an example, (woe be to
him, for so it is said) his Master must not pass free by his motion, yet so
good he was to him, that some difference should be had, and lighter hand
laid on him than the servant, whose fault was not venyable: M. Comptroller
with no less gravity than good conscience, and as much experience as years
could give, advised no further proceeding: the more to persuade: he brought
forth the dealings of considerate Princes, who having what is convenient to be
obtained, be not to scrupulous of needelesse consequences: he had no sooner
done, but with the rest of the Council Master Hatton and others of the house,
he departed to White hall to the Lords about a Commitee. At which time M.
Hatton wisshed M. Hall to procure the cause to be stayed till their returns:
Sir Henry Kneuet was very full, whose good mind might not broke (as he took
it,) such hard measure he dealt, not as a changelyng, one day in one sort,
and the next in an other, but as you have heard, denied punishment of the
Servant, and much less of the Master in the beginning of his speech. The
Speaker would needs put a question, whether Hall should avoid the house or
no, away he must, let him hereafter take heed of speaking against London
minstrelles. Master Harrington and M. Leyton did him no good, staying the
vtteryng of what he meante to speak as you heard: for after he never had
convenient occasion for the purpose. M. Winter had not been at Anticyra, his
choler and melancholy was not purged, the failing of his voice was show
sufficient of the affection of his mind, many words to aggrauate the matter,
some ordinary as in such cases, but some otherwise, auouchyng that Hall as the
day before in the afternone was at Arundels at dyce, and therefore the house
abused, in that it was there reported he was sick, which as he had of hear
say, as him self confessed, so did he roue at randone.

Further coming to bring in question, how Mallerie was hurt by Halles man, he
wisshed the Master always not to command that act to be done by his
servant, which him self durst not do, Durus sermo, and specially of his
mouth, who as he is known to be of sufficient courage, so ought not to
co^d^mne a Gentleman of pusillanimity who he never tr^ed, for his words can no
less importe. M. Fraunces Alforde whom M. Winter had touched in part of his
tale, for saying M. Hall was sick the day before, desired the answearing of
him, in whose speech M Snagge did somewhat intermeddle, but as M. Alforde
lackes no sufficiency in his arguments he deals with, so has he audacitie
answeareable to deliver his opinion maugre interruption. He charged M. Winter
that his speech did declare his affected mind him self also, for the zeal to
equity and favor to his friend. M. H^ll did offend in the same kind by his
own open confession: he dissuaded the punishment, he advised al men to suppose
that one Gentleman durst do as much as an other, that of all others M. Hal was
not to be touched for any collation, laying down his large offers and direct
vsages: his man as little, in seeking to discharge his suerties, a part
deseruyng praise rather than misdeeming that ye officers should themselves have
looked not to touch any belongyng to that assembly, that the administrator
should worthily lose his execution, for volenti non fit iniuria, if any wrong
was done he was the cause of it. M Norton and many others were of contrary
mind, persuading the punishment of the Scholemaister, who is named heretofore:
M. Sentpoole, M. Digges, M. Dannet, M. John Talbot and others followed M.
Alforde, especially for cleeryng M. Hall and the Scholemaster, and also left
not that part of M. Winters tale vnansweared, wherein he made mention of the
hurting of Mallerie. M. Beale took of his conscience Hal was guilty of the
fault: before they came to the question, it grew very late and dark, being
past seven of the clock: many would have departed, the door was kept by
commandment of the Speaker Sir Owen Hopton. M. Bricket, and M. Dalton moved
either an end to be made of al those causes since the money should be paid, or
else to defer the whole till the house was full, they would not be heard:
wherefore they all standing with more disorder than I must touch so grave a
Council with: the Speaker presents two questions, the first, whether Smalley
should to the Tower: thither must he: the second whether Kertleton the
Scholemaister must drink of the same cup or no, the judgment was doubtful,
the division of the house was desired: but whether latenesse, lack or will was
the cause I know not, with many disconte^ted minds, it is ruled over that the
yea was the greater, I am sure the Clarke could not see to enter judgment,
diverse of M. Hals friends came to him, he being without at the door, finding
themselves greatly grieved with the events, and at their wits ends, what
direction to appoint: wherewith (I shall not forget him) he repeted two verses
used by Aeneas in great extremity, the one Troy al in flame and past hope of
recovery, and the other in extreme hunger and misery happened in his search of
Italy, Vna salus victis nullam sperare salutem: that is (quoth he) for me. For
you Durate and vosmet rebus seruate secundis. He yielded them great thanks
whose favors so liberally used toward him, did answer more contentement tha^
the adverse hap misliking: he was advised to make virtue of necessity, to
yield when as there was no other remedy, he first lamented to be evil spoken
of in that auditory, having by his large offers showed sufficiently the small
regard he had to a hundred pound to be injured by the deceased Mallerie, and
that in so hie a degree, his man wounding him to be so deeply condemned,
considering the evidence, the debt grew of nothing disbursed, to be paid to an
administrator, whereby no penny to Malleries creditors should be answered,
that being discharged of the execution by the house, and consenting to pay a
hundred pound, for the quieting of al causes, his two men should be committed
to the Tower, that he and others requesting but time to have the company full,
could not obtain so reasonable a suit, that the door was kept, that the
house might not be divided being desired, and that (as he said) it might be
termed op^s tenebr^rum, being in the afternone, and wanting time to enter ye
decree. These sp^eches passed from him with great heat, saying he would drive
out one extremity with an other: he seemed to be touched at the quick,
protesting he was not able to bear the opprobrie his cont^aries would in
corners spread abroad: he seemed to make light of ten times the value of the
money, tho it were not his ease to pay it, and so great account of the recited
premises, as it was told him by them that wished him well, that a Princes heart
with a poor man's ability was an ill medley, that continual kicking will make
the back ache, and many enemies breed disquietnes, taking leave one of
another, in the Palace, he plucking his hatte about his ears mumbling the old
wives Pater noster, departed. M. Hal had scarcely entered his own lodging in
little Woodstreate, but the Sergeants man was there to summon him, Smalley and
Kertleton, tomorrow to be at the house, to whom answer was made, they were not
Domi. Hal gave commandment to his folks to deny his being at home if any
came to enquire for him: the next day in the afternone the same case was again
argued, wherein M. Comptroller, Sir Henry Kneuet, M. Hatton and others favorably
moved for M. Hall and his people* it was set down, Smalley and the
Scholemaster must to the Tower, but shortly to be delivered: that the Sergea^t
should leave word at Hals house for the bringyng in of the parties, and if he
neglected the same, to proceed with further consultation accordingly,
So^monance were given the day following, no man appearing from Hal: they took
in very evil part, among whom M. Louelace thought he was much abused,
declaring how long he waited for him to acknowledge the recognizaunce, and to
see the order of the house performed between the Malleries and him, 500 marks
fine by his consent is little enough to be set on his head for this contempt. A
great cantell to be cut out of so small a lose as Halles is: that he should by
Parliament be disabled for ever to be of that Council* a hard Censure: but
motions be no laws, if they had been, nether would the losses have been
irrecouerable, nor the wound past help of surgery. Agreed it was, that once
again warning should be left for these hiders of themselves, and if they
would not be seen, the house should proceed to judgment. The day after M.
Hall was persuaded by many of his very good friends to procur^ Smalleys
appearance, which in no case he would be brought to, and till he was charged
that he gave his word for his forth-co^ming at al times when he should be
demanded, also that his impriso^ment should be no longer tha^ during the
Parliament, he stood too wilful in his own determination, yet answering those
two points that he undertook for Smalleys appearance. So the vij of this
month, at which time judgment was given against him, upon the Sergeants
notice, he brought him to the house, and there attended the rising thereof. And
for his short imprysonment, he doubted (as the sequel declared he had good
cause) affirming he would never have condescended to the Awarde of 100 pound,
but for ye shutting up of al questions. In the morning M. Recorder brought a
bil into the house, wherein it should have been enacted, that Hal should pay
the 100. pound, and to be turned out for a wrangler, for ever being member of
that assemble. But multa cadunt inter poculum supremaque labra, for at that
very instant word was brought Smaley was at the door. Yea quoth M. Recorder, I
thought of some such matter, for I gave knowledge to Mistres Hall of this
gear this morning, I doubted not but she would send her man, I mar^ell how he
could hit so right, but as women be vaineglorious, so can they not abide such
an infamy to fall to their husbands, and he doubted not but that M. Hal was
(as some wiser men than he are,) content many times to be advised by their
wives. Smalley brought from his Master a letter to the house, which being
delivered to the Speaker, he brake up and red to him self, after openly, and
well taken, saying he had thought the direction had been to him: I cannot
think the Speaker so unadvised, but somewhat he meant thereby which I know
not, the Copy thereof follows, word for word.

To the Parliament house the seventh of February. 1575.
RIght honorable and worshipful my duty m^st humbly remembered toward you al, I
^am right sorry being a member of you, who ^aue bent my poor good will toward
the ^ruice of my country among you in all ^outh and plainness, that upon
opinion ^ceued of me, otherwise than I have given ^ause in knowledge of my
self, have proceeded against me, as a ^tranger, and not with that favor as a
member of such a body might in good eq^itie have looked for, which has forced
me sore to my great disco^tentation to withdraw my self till a time of better
favor, ass^ring your honors and worships al, that if my cause h^^ hi^ heard
and judged in a f^l court, in the presence of the chief of the committees,
who were absent, I should have abidden your uttermost sentence even to the
loss of all that I had. Had I understand that every s^nal error of mine is
made an heyn^us offense, as the exception against certain of the co^mittees,
for want of their good wills toward me, is accounted a derogation to the
authority of the house, and much impayring to their worships and cred^t^, an
exposition truly very hard, and in troth contrary to my meaning. And whereas
by the entreaty for the delivery of my man I am grown in suspicion among you,
and by some in apparent speeches made pertaker of his frau^: i^ procuring his
own execution: what so ever is conceived of me I assure you al it is without
cause, as both my offer may w^l declare before I moved the house for his
privilege, which was a hundred pound, whereof are witnesses master Justice
Harper and Ma^hoode, is well is known to Master Sergeant Louelace, as also my
willingness since, to submit my self to your orders for the parties
satisfaction: of absenting my self I pray you consider no otherwise than as of
one, who is much grieved of your offense conceived of him, and as one that can
not endure the continu^l herd speeches brought to mine ears, much sounding to
my discredit, as also to see the imprisonment of my servants, for whose
liberties I would have bin contented too have paid so dear. I might justly
have looked for some consideration in respect of the great injury offered too my
name and credit, whereof the quarrel first grew, as on the other side, for a
blow given without my knowledge god is my judge, sore against my will. But in all, I submit my self to your honors wisdoms, as one who is most desirous of
your good opinions and favors, and wish you good success in all honorable
proceedings. Written this seventh of February. 1575.

Your honors and worshippes to command Arthur Hall.

THe messenger was called in, was committed to the Tower there to lie a month,
and then to be delivered if his Master did in the mean time enter bo^d for the
payment of the 100 pound, if not there to remain til the money were paid, if
the day expired when it should be answered or the bond not acknowledged
before: also M. Hal must pay the Sergeant, M. Bowyer 40. shillings for his
pains about these affairs. Here some of M. Hals friends touching this
imprisonment reckened without their hosts, which he forgot not to lay to their
charges, swearing by no beggars, yt if he had known so much, he would have
bidde^ the extremity of al. I do not recite the particular arguments in these
two days, the ix. and x. of this month, because they are but to the purpose
you have heard in the other disputes. Hal not wanting fauor^rs, tho he had many
oppugnants, the xv. of the month Hall sent one of his men to the Tower to
speak with Smalley, which was denied him, whereupon the day after he willed
him to repair to the Speaker to show the dealing of the Leuetenaunt. M. Bell
answered, the prisoner had wrong to be close kept, since the judgment was not
according. The xix. of the same month Hal sent James Chambers his servant to
the Leuetenaunt to declare he maruayled his man should be so straightly
imprisoned, his answer was, his usage to be very good. His Master could not
speak with him, but if he would write, after the co^tents were seen the
letter should be delivered. The xxvj. he went himself to the Tower, Sir Owen
Hopton not being there, the prisoner could not be spoken with. The xxviij. M.
Hal seeks out M. Recorder, who advised to pay the money presently or to put in
sureties for the same, for I tell you the Shreues of London, who now seem to
have interest in the matter, because Malleries administrator had no stake to
stick to if Hal had denied payment. But they would not I deem, take a
Gentleman's single bond, neither would M. Recorder but use them to their best
liking. The next morning comes M. Mofley to Hal and he persuades the like, but
more than covenant will not be performed. Wherefore in the morning Squyre and
Hal goes to Doctor Clerk in Pater noster Row, where he knowledges a
recognizaunce of 200. marks to the administrator for the payment of one
hundred pounds the first of the Term following: the same day for the good
service the Scholemaster Kertleton had done, he was discharged his service,
whereat Cecill Hall his masters son was no whit disco^te^ted. M. Hal also in
the afternone rides toward his Country home at Grantham, leaves the
recognizaunce in his servant James Chambers hands to be delivered to Huyts
use, and to receive the Releases accordingly, loking for the delivery of
Smalley at the day preffred: until the viij. of April he was posted over from
one to another, to M. Recorder, to M. Mosley, etc. And because Andrew Mallerie
the agent of all these causes will not be found, tho Hall have performed the
decree, yet for his pleasure his man is like to lie longer than his time by the
heels: other of the Malleries were spoken withal, who directly answered, that
if the case were theirs, they would make no releases, Hals insufficiency
considered, without a good suerty to perform the money. Speeches not so much
to the discredit of him as to the whole Parliament, whose consideration did
inhable him for the same. Cha^bers repaired straight to M. Co^ptroller,
declaring to him ye usage of this matter. The ix. day of April the Recorder
came to M. Comptroler, who willed him to frame a letter in the names of
himself, M. Treasurer, sir Walter Mildmay, and M. Walsingham, to be directed to
the said Recorder, whereunto they would set their hands, the contents whereof
to be, That whereas M. Hal had performed the order set down by the house, and
knowledged his recognizance, and the time expired of his man's punishment, he
should make certificate to the Lieuetena^t for his delivery. M. Comptroller
also he commanded that the recognizance should be taken to M. Recorder, he to
keep it, till Huyt and the Malleries had passed the releases, to whom answer
was made, that by his former appointment it was left with M. Richard Litler his
near neighbor and Hals Attorney. Cha^bers atte^ding on ye Recorder, he will
have the recognizance enrolled, else nothing shall be done, which should the^ have
been in force against Hal, and he to seek for his releases back, which he
forsaw, giving his man commandment in no case to part with his bond with
one hand, but to receive the discharges with the other: which to do, there was
time enough, for that the Recognizance was knowledged the xxix. of March, and
the month came out for Smalleys imprisonment after the shortest reckening, the
vij. of April, days sufficient to end a greater cause. Chambers sent with
speed for his Masters pleasure touching ye delivery of the recognizance to the
Recorder, which he gave him warrant to do, and offering the same, it would not
be received, til the releases from the Malleries were performed: nether yet will
any certificate for thenlargement of the prisoner be had, so must M. Hal be
unkindly handled, pay well, his man against justice lie fast, beside being
laughed at by his enemies in their sleeves, the judgment of that high Court of
Parliament contempned. Chambers retornes to M. Comptroller the Recorders
answer, praying the delivery of Smalley, that the recognizance might be in the
custody of the Leuetenant, till Huyt and the Malleries had ended what was to be
done on their behalfes. M. Comptroller allowed of his mocion, and willed him to
repair to M. Treasurer for his opinion therein: he appointed that the Recorder
should come to him, who having knowledge accordingly: answered he had letters
from my L. Treasurer as he had in deed, and therefore could determine no time:
further yt unless the Malleries would come in and discharge the Sheryues, or
else that Hal did put in sufficient suerties for the payment of the money, the
prisoner should not ve enlarged for any ma^s pleasure. A sore speech, but,
stet pro ratione voluntas, I think must be alleged as the best reason for
such proceedings. When thus much was brought to M. Hal, I heard him say: that
at M. Recorders hands he always looked if not for favor, at the least for
equity, and that he had well deserved the same. M. Recorder can tell whether
he says truly or no, yet thus much for mine own part, with good testim^ny
I can prove, that Hal has not spared his great good speeches like a friendly
Gentleman in the co^mendations of M. Recorder, against the inuectiue (I think
slanders of diverse lauishe tongues. The xxiij. of April M. Treasurer sent the
Recognizance to sir Walter Mildmay, desiring him to deal with the Recorder
therein, who the next day having word, went to him, Andrew Mallerie and Huyt
his man were sent for by a pursiuant, and with them the Secondary and Squyre
came: M. Recorder was or would be sick, the matter debated a while, M. Mildmay
commanded Chambers in, told him the day of payment was at hand, that the
Recognizaunce being in the Malleries hands would with difficulty upon the
payment of money be cancelled, that also charge would grow thereof, and
therefore persuaded Donari contanti, which he excusing, M. Mildmay demanded
some to give their words to the Malleries for the more assurance, which he
could not do without his Masters directions, urging still performaunce
according to the order in Parliament. M Mallerie could not be contented with a
Recognizaunce of M. Halles as it was decreed, but must have his mind
satisfied with the infringement of the resolution of that place, and what
soever co^mes of the rest, his quietness must be provided for for forsooth he
doubted further trouble: nothing done, Chambers was willed to prove a day or
two for provision of the money, which if he could, he would not have done,
without commission thereto: he therefore might have played Coleprophetes part
if he had pleased, one of the xxiiij. orders, and told his message before he
went about it. The recognizaunce M. Mildmay keeps, and Chambers goes about
to see if he can find an hundred pounds in the streates, or meet with some
one will give him so much M. Mallerie has Smalley fast and the bond no doubt
if the worst fall will at length be paid, (tho it tarry long) spite of all M.
Halles debts, for yet he is a free holder. The viij. of May God be thanked the
money is reddy somewhat before appoyntme^t with hard shift enough: for beggars
without danger of law cannot have money when they would: before sir ^ater
Mildmay it is by Huyt and the Malleries received, the releases performed, a
warrant for the prisoner to go play him self signed by M. Mildmay, the which
now the Recorder firmes with William Fleet^wood, the ix. of the same, paying
xij. pound to the Leuetenaunt, M. Hals cosen, without days given, and other
charges besides of xliij. shillings and ten pence, he was turned forth. and
because he ha^h song in so worthy a Gayle, his Mast^r thought him not meet to
chaunte in so m^ane a Cadge as the best house he is like to have, so that now
he may, being Summer, learn a new note in the green fields Here have you the
end of this great cause thu^ far, to the excessive charge of M Hal one way and
other, trouble of Friends and mind, and slanderous report among such as know
not the truth, and therefore to the more prejudice of his simple reputation. My
excuse I made to you at the beginning, and I nothing doubt of your good
accepting of my well meaning, if by accident or otherwise than I desire or
hope, this private certificate hap to the hands of any who be offended for not
being soothed, bear malic^ for being contraried, think unkindness because
they are not commended as other quarrel because I wrote the truth, or for
affection sake can dance nothing but their own galliarde. I must thus
answer, that I have wronged them for naming any person in this manner
particularly and not put too my name, your self knows my style (simple God
wot) and therefore need I the less to avoid further question (if my letters
should be intercepted) to set to my hand, Contra verbosos nolo contendere
verbis, I love no disputation but where I may learn, Quoniam senex esse volo,
cito si possem e^o, old I must be or die young: And therefore will I yield
over to the younger to play with the world, who careless hope with uncertain
likyng for great things, while I with regard to my white hears coming on
with co^tentement am glad to enjoy mine own small portion: for my pains, I
crave no thanks of any stranger, neither yet of M. Hall him self, whose good
parts I must of force confess I do unfeignedly love, for the rest I am sorry,
and remain with his enemies in one predicament for the conceyuing of his
wantes, but differ in desire with them toward him, because I pray the
amendment, which I doubt not of, and they gape for his overthrow; which were
pity if my request would come to pass: I wish truth to be reported in all
causes, which if it had been, I had saved this labor, for at my being at
Killingworth in the beginning of April last, where what great company were
assembled, what liberal cheer spent, what familiar welcome used, and
Honorable consideration of all sorts had, I refer to them that know what is
incorporate to that house since it came into the hands of him that now has
it: There I say I saw M. Hall by his own brother in law M. Henry Skipwith,
by M. George Holte, M. James Cressey, and others who love the man well, so
laden with evil fame and opinion yt went of him for the premises herein
recited and that untruly, as of mine own knowledge I am assured, that I
pitying the case, determined at the last with you who tenders him, not to
suffer so unjustly his credit, (tho small) to be so wildly tired on, with my
old and accustomed well thinking, and praying for you, I leave you.

From London the xix. of May. 1576. Your Friend no chaungeling F. A.

(...) have obtained for you my place in the common house of Parliament, for
the increase of your knowledge, you growing to the world and I from it: I
thought to bestow a few lines upon you, tho I had long since yielded my pen to
be quiet, my ability to write being decayed, which never was great, and my
memory always bad, now in a manner grown to litargie: wherein to lay before you,
as well as I could, such aduises as to follow I have found profitable. But
considering mine own wants, I withdrew my self from my determination. Yet
minding, with who^ I should deal, whom I should counsel, to whom I should
set abroad the show of my experience, in good hour I hope I proceeded
herein, for strangers will take thankfully, what is don by others of a good
meaning for their behouf, and much more children, that which is done in the
same kind by their parents. I suppose it not needelesse lightly to run over
(as I can call to mind) by what Laws this Realm of England has been
governed, where altered, where clean abrogated and others confirmed, which
last of al is your Parliament, whereto I mean to come. We allow the report of
Brutes arriving and inhabiting this I Will the year of the world after the most
writers. Brute.
2855. before the incarnation of Christ. 1108. He builte London, calling it
Troynouant, wherein he stablished with the name, the Troyan Laws: what they
were I find no record, but that King Alured about ye time of Christ's birth,
872 did gather the same Laws together, and translated them into english. But
for ye religion, it seemed he followed the Paganism then used through the
whole world, as a great number of years after it did continue. Til the 441
year before the coming of Christ, this land was ruled, now with law and now
without law, because of the ciull dissension therein, Mulmutius.
at which time, Mulmutius Dunwallo, or Dunwallo Mulmutius chose you, the son
of Cloten Duke of Cornewayle, by strong hand bringyng the new right called
Law Moluntine, which granted great privileges to Temples, to plowes, to
fayres and markettes, and too the way leading to them, prohibiting men to be
troubled for any cause in the same, the wars among themselves had so wasted the
subjects, as liberty and freedom must, now bring people together again, to
join in a new corporation of friendship. And to exclude al fear, he pardoned
most freely al offenses past. These ordinances did holy Gildas about the year
of Christ. 543, translate out of Brytishe into latin: and Alured as before
about the. 872. out of Latin into the English: Gurgunstus.
Gurgunstus of some Gurguintus, ye son of Belinus, before Christ. 375. was ye
first (it should seem, that imposed death and loss of lim for transgression,)
did also grievously punish the peace breakers. Quinthelinus his son married a
noble gentlewoman to name Martia, who erected certain decrees of government
which were called after her Martian Laws, Martia.
brought likewise into English by king Alured, leaving the^ the little
Marthehelage as much to say, the law of Martia. Lucius (it is said) the eight
year of his reign, Lucius.
of Christ ^88. (some small controuersye there is of the time) was christened,
Eluthrius being Bishop of Rome, and counted the first christened King of this
Island, of the most credible writers, tho some would have Aruiragus 138. year
before to have ye pre-eminence, as well by the preaching of Simo^ Zelotes one of
the (disciples of Christ here martyred and buried, as by Joseph of Arymathy who
had Mutryn now Glastenbury, his place appointed of habitation, sent hither
with twelve disciples by the Apostle Philip then preaching in Gaul now
France, too sone to come to Christ, unless we would fellow him better. Lucius
was very timely, considering the late repair to him of many nations, nerer the
plat of his birth and passion, whom I would recite, but I have digressed too
long. Lucius set to Eleutherius, desiring him he might have the imperial and
Roman Laws to guide and govern his country, who returned him this
answer: As touching the rightes of the Church, and service of God which you
have received, they must remain always one, untouched, the policy for civil
rule may be abrogated and altered as occasion shall serve: you have the book
of the old and new precepts, the Bible, with the advice of your kingdom,
make a Law, thereby to govern your subjects. Here some will say was your
first Parliamente, and the very original thereof, which I no way can agree
to: and the cause hereafter I will show you. Lucius, died without heir: for
the space of fifteen years or more all went to havoc, Seuerus.
till Seuerus the Emperor descended rightlye from King Lud, took ye
government upon him about the year 208. some account less, the Romans
seldom quietly, but for ye most part to their excessive charge and trouble
held the domynio^, Constantine.
til the death of Co^sta^tine the year.445. then neglecting the same as a
country not worth the keeping, who leaving behind him Constant or Co^stantin
for his simplicity in his fathers time shorn a monk at Winchester. Vortiger.
Vortiger alias Vortigern, of some the Duke of West Saxons, of other the Duke
or Earl of Iewesses, who after were called West Saxons, took him out of the
Cloister, and crowned him king, whom yet he caused to be murdered the first
year of his reign, so that for those. 240. years few laws were made, and
fewer executed. Vortiger usurping or being chosen king the, 448. year, so
continued but a while in rest, for not only his nobles, but the Pictes and
Scotts laid so sore to him, that driven to extremity, he sent into Germany
for the Saxons and Englishmen to aid him in his waxres, not only against the
foreign enimye, but his own people, promysing too them habitation, which he
might well spare, the land being in a manner wast by the means of the great
mortality by pestilence, the Scotts and Pictes invasions, and the civil
slaughter. Their request was accepted, and Horsus and Hengist brought hither
certain soldiers Panims by whose valor Vortigers contraries were tamed: by
the continual repair and flocking hither of those strangers, the
inhabitaunts were put to the door. For before the year of our Lord 1498, there
were three kingdoms erected by the Englismen and Saxons, the first of Kent by
Hengist, Hengist.
the second by Hella and his three sons, of the south Saxons, comprising
Devonshire and Cornewal, Somersette and Southery, or rather Hampshire for
Southery (according to the more probable writers) The third of east Angles by
Vffa, co^teining Norfolk and Suffolk. These broils being no time for laws or
letters, Arthur.
but for fire and blood, Arthur ye son of Other Pe^drago^ was crowned king of
Britayne, tho a great part (as you hear) were taken from him. The year, ^16.
he fought twelve great battayles with the Saxons, in all the which he put the^
to the worse, yet could he not avoid them the Land, Cerdicus.
neither yet so subdue them, but that Cerdicus the fifth year of his reign
began the fourth kingdom of west Saxons, which consisted (as I gather) of
Worcester, Dorcet. Wiltish* Stafford, and those western parts adjacent. About
the year 547. the two Kingdoms of Northumberland, that is the fifte and sixte
principality of the Saxons took root. Ida.
In ye one, called Breuitia, Ida first had rule. In the other called Deira,
Ella.
Ella was governor. These two kingdoms had in the^ the countries from Humber
northward to the Scottish sea, and continued sometime under one king and
sometime under two. The year 586. the Britains were driven into Wales, and
presently the Saxons had the dominion of the whole land: At which time was
the Christen religion thereby extinct, and not thought on but among the
Britaynes in Wales. Sebertus.
After some, Sebertus leader of the East Saxons 614 gave first beginning to
that kingdom, and had in it Essex. Penda.
Not long after Penda the Miscreant the year 626. made the kingdom of Mertia,
who governed Huntingtonshire, Hertfordshire, Glouc. War. Lecester, Cadwallader.
Nottingham, Northumberland and others. Cadwallader ye last king of Britain
died at Rome the year of grace. 656, about which time according to some
writers, but I think rather the year, 712. Inas otherwise called Iue or Jew a
Christian, Inas.
held the rule of the West Saxons He set down certain laws, the preamble to
the which is this. Inas by the grace of God king of west Saxons, with the
consultation and advise of Kenred my father, Hedda and Erkenwald my Bishops,
of all my councillors and the old wise men of my people in the great
congregation of the servants of God, did labor to confirm Justice and
equity to be executed in my whole territory. These particular edictes are
not to my purpose to wright: but the first, entitled Of the manner of the
living of the ministers of God, touches somewhat ye matter, which goes thus:
First we command that Gods ministers do observe the order of life already
set down: and further we will that to the rest of our people, the laws and
judgments be in this manner: and so goes on. This also is alleged for the
confirmation of antiquity of our parliament. Egbert.
I find that Egbert, who was an under King in West Saxons, was expelled by
Brithricus the King there, and fled into France: but Brithricus being poisoned
by his wife Ethelburga, Egberte returned, and obtained the whole principality,
the year 793, others say, 802: and withal brought the most part of England
under his obeisance, tamed the Welchmen, and took from them Chester, by means
of which his good fortunes, he called a counsel of his Lords at Wynchester,
and by their aduises and agreements was crowned king and chief Lord of the
land: whereupon he sent forth commandment through out his country,
straightlye charging the people thenceforth to be called Angles and no more
Britains, and the kingdom Anglia and not Britain. In the year, 800. some
account thirteen less, the Danes being also Paynims first entered this
region, Danes.
according to the most. The Danes invaded the second time the year, 838,
Athelwolph raygning, who of himself first granted the tyth of corn, Hey and
Cattle to the clergy. And after took such fast footing, as they continually
infested this Island with cruel wars, usurpation and conquest, til ye death of
Hardicanutus or Hardiknought ye last king of that breed. 1034, Alured.
some account two sewer, Alured, alias Alphred before spoken, began to govern
the West Saxons, who being a most just Prince, very well learned, and careful
for the making and execution of good laws, collected and caused to be brought
into the Saxon or English tongue, al such as by the kings his forgoers were
stablished, selecting out of them such as were thought most fit for the
government, confirming them, and secluding the rest, reciting many of the
commandments and precepts given by God to Moses, and the message that the
apostles and elders sent to Antiochia, Siria and Cilicia, by Saint Paul,
Barnabas, Judas, and Silas, touching the diuerting of themselves, as we have it
in the Acts of the Apostles, and also by the assembly and conference of the
Bishops and other noble and wise counselors, diverse money penalties and
others were appointed, and the same not only declared in their sermons, but
also put in writing. He proceeds in ye beginning of such as are allowed by
him, In haec verba. These decrees and ordinances I Alured King have gathered
together, and caused to be written, a great part whereof, our ancestors
have carefully kept, with many other, that I have thought worthy in this
our age to be held and maintained with the like observation: and other some
which I have thought not to be so needful I have with the conference of
considerate cou^sellors in part abrogated, and partly established. And because
it may seem a point of too much rashness, of a man's own head to add any
thing more, also that it is uncertain what credit our posterity will give
thereto, which we make great reconing of, what ever I have found worth the
regard in the Acts of my kynnesman and countryman Inas, of Offa the King of
Mertia, or of Ethelbert, the first christened of the Angles, I have brought
together, omitting the rest. And in the consultation of them, I Alured King of
West Saxons, have used the counsel of the grauest of our people, to all the
which I have commanded that the same be executed and kept. Moreover in this
kings time, Gutteron, alias Gowthram alias Gythrun, alias Gurmund, of some
named king of Danes, by some king of Denmark, arrived in this land, and
sometime having the better in arms, and sometime put to the worse, was at the
last christened, and named by Alured, Athelstane, the year. 878, to whom he
gave the kingdom of East England with the gouernemente of Saint Edmundes
kingdom, and also some write Northumberla^d: with whom making league, and
agreing in the confynes of their countries, begins in this manner, The truce
and aliaunce which Alured and Guthrun kings have agreed by the advice of the
wise of the English nation, and of all the inhabitauntes of East England, to
the which they not only for themselves, but also for their children to come
are sworn. Edward*
Edward the first before the conquest called Edward the elder his eldest son,
beginning to reign next after him the year 900. made and confirmed also
certain laws, the first chapter whereof is entitled, Of controversy and
judgment, and goes thus: 1 king Edward do again and again command all
those who bear office in the common wealth, that they bear themselves as much
as in them lies, just ^udges to all men, as it is written in the Judicial
book, without fear, boldly and freely, to declare the common law, and do
appoint denounced days wherein they will deal in every question and
controversy. This Edward also confirmed the league with ye fornamed Guthrun
the Dane in this manner, adding also to the former decrees by equal co^sents,
these be the councels, institutes and ordinances, which first Alured and
Guthrun, then Edward and Guthrun kings at those days, were agreed on, when
both the Danes and English accepted the treaty of peace. Athelstane
Athelstane King Edwardes eldest son, by whose prowess and valor it is
affirmed this land was reduced into one Monarchy again, and laid so sore
too the Danes, that since their first landing they were never so hard driven,)
did also constitute certain laws and ordinances, beginning them with these
words: Athelstane King, by the council of the grave father Vlfhelme
Archbishop, and other my Bishops, do will and command to al officers, and such
as have charge of Justice. 1 Athelstane king, give notice to all put in
authority in our dominions, that with the advice of Vlfhelme Archbishop, and
other Bishops and servant of god, have ordered and set fourth. In the end of
all he closes with these words: These be the ordinances and decrees
determined of, in the honorable counsel of Grantamlean, where was present
VVolstane the Archbishop, and with him great company of the best and wisest
sort called together by Athelstane. The asse^bly parted, the king had
enquired how the peace was kept among his people, and fynding it and justice
smally to his mind dealt, enjoined more laws to his first, and thus shows the
cause: ^ Athelstane king, will all men to know, that having demanded why our
peace is not manteyned according to my commandment and the decree at
Grantamlean, I am certefied from the experienced of my dominions, that the same
is happened by my ouermuche sufferance and remissness in punnishing. But now
at Christmas last at Exeter, being attended on with grauewise men whom I found
most ready to venture their faculty, themselves, wives and children, to most
great hazard, that these peace breakers might utterly without retourning be
expelled the land.

Edmunde.
The year 946. Edmund his brother began to rule after him, in whose time the
Danes held Lincoln, Nottingham, Darby, Stafford and Leicester: who also
erecting and confirming laws, shows this, by whom they were consented on,
Edmund King held the solemn Feast of Easter at London, where were met a
great company of the Clergy and laity, among whom were Oda and VVolstane
Archbishoppes, and many other Bishops, to provide for their souls health,
and theirs whom they had the cure of: And in an other place, I Edward King to
all both young and old in my jurisdiction give knowledge, that I in the
solemn assembly of the best seen of my kingdom, as well ecclesiastical as
temporal, have carefully enquired, and so forth.

King Edgar his second son the year. 959, Edgar.
was likewise a law maker, and thus entitles them: The laws which 1 Edgar
King, in the freequented senate, to the glory of God* the dignity of my
Majesty, and the profit of the common wealth have past.

Etheldred or Eldred or Egelred the second son of Edgar, Ethelred.
the year, 979, which alter a little, who by the murder of Edward his elder
brother, named ye Martire, came to the crown, in whose time the Danes so entered
this la^d, as ere they had done, the king fled into Normandy, and left his
kingdom to Swanus, the Tyrant Dane, after whose decease retourning, he not
long after died: he also being doing with laws terms them thus: The council
of grave fathers which king Ethelred, had at Woodstock in Marcia for the
preservation of the peace, which is governed by the english laws: at the end
of such perticulers as are agreed on, he concluds on this manner: This our
commandment and decree if any shall neglect etc. He shall pay to the king one
hundred twenty shillings. There was a league made also by the said King with
the army of Aulavus, Justinius, and Gustimundus the sons of Stegetie the Dane,
and goes thus: The agreement or part which once or of late king Ethelred by the advice of his wise confederates with them aforesaid did enter in.

His son Edmund, Edmunde,
surnamed Ironside, parted the Realm with Canutus or Knought King of Denmark,
who being slain by the treason of Edricke, Canutus enjoyed the whole
principality: and tho Swanus were the first Danish King here, yet held he not
the kingdom so absolutely as this man did. He made more laws than any one
before him, which are thus entitled, The decrees which Canutus, king of
English Danes and Norwayes, at Winchester at Christmas has appointed by the advice of men of knowledge, to the honor of the God of heaven, the renoume of
the kings Majesty, and the benefit of the common wealth. Again in an other
place he uses these words: These are the human and laws politic, wherein
using the counsel of the wise, I command to be kept thorough England. He
began to reign alone the year of grace, 1019.

Edward.
Edward the Confessor after Hardikenitus the last king of the Danish blood,
1043. began to reign: he founded many wholesome laws, and was the first
erector, as it is written, of the common law, which William Conqueror did
after confirm, whereof this I find. After the conquest of England, the
foresaid King William, the fourth year of his reign, by the persuasion,
advise and council of his nobility, did sommon throughout his land the nobles,
the governors, the grave heads, and the Learned in the law, to hear of them
their rights, customs and ordinances, whereof chosing twelve of every county,
who taking their oaths before the king, directly, truly, and so forth, to show
and declare the same, they brought the laws of Saint Edward as we have them
now, and the king established them in that manner.

William Conqueror
The Conqueror him self began to rule this Island, 1066, (some reckon a year
more) who also adding certain ordinances in the entrance, has these words:
Here begins what William king of the English nation, after the conquest,
with his nobility has appointed to be performed. I read that Henry the first
his son, Henry. 1.
who governed after William Rufus his brother, did at the beginning of his
reign lighten the great exactions imposed by his father and brother, reduced
and amended Saint Edwards laws, which as it should seem, were either
forgotten, or would not be remembered, for all the fathers confirmation, or
rather show thereof, reformed measures, and appointed directions to be observed.
About the thyrtith year of his reign he held a counsel at London, wherein
it was thought good, he should have ye Clergy within his censure. Maude ye
Empress his daughter, first married to Henry the fourth Emperor of Almayne,
and afterward to Geffrey Plantagenet Earl of A^iou, the 31. of his reign, had
by her husband shortly after a son named Henry, upon the knowledge whereof he
called his nobles together, and decreed, that his daughter and the heirs of
her body should succeed him in the Kingdom. Grafton in the thirteenth year
of this King, in his Cronicle says thus: And in this time began the Parliament
in England first to be instituted and ordained for reformation and
government of this Realm. The manner whereof (as I have found it set out in
an old pamflet) I intend at large to set forth in the reign of King Edward
the third, when and where Parliaments were yearly and orderly kept. the
which I sought to find, but promise was not kept. Turning his book, I
found in his preface to the Reader these words. And where I have in the ^3
year of King Henry the first promised to place the manner and order that first
was taken for the holding of the parliamente, in the time of king Edward the
third, I have since that time for sundry good causes thought meet to omit the
same, and therefore admonish the Reader not to look for it. Hereof judge you,
and if you will have his reason, he is not far to seek.

Stephen in a manner no sole sybbe to the Crown, Stephen.
the right heirs being alive, was by the nobilitye admitted King. In his time
the Empress by the aid of her Basterd brother Robert Earl of Gloucester, the
civil wars grew great, wherein the King being taken, and who now but the
Empress, as it were confirmed according to her just title: she was moved for
the restitution of Saint Edwards Laws, but she was deaf on that side. The
last year of this Kings time, he and Henry the Empress son, grew to
communication and agreement. The King commanded his Lords to assemble at
Winchester, where Duke Henry was honorably received, and there it was agreed
he should adopte the Duke his son, and confirm too him the Crown of
England after his deceasse.

Henry the second his follower in the government, Henry, 2.
of another claim held a council at the beginning of his reign at
Wallingforde, where the Barons were sworn to the King. The eight year of his
reign, he caused all the subjects to swear fealty to his son Henrye,
touching the inherytaunce. In the ninth year Fabian says the king called a
Parliament at Northampton, and so termed it, (as also, in some other places he
does Councels and calling togethers of the Lords by the prince) wherein him
self vouches, nothing was done, but a pretense to reform and somewhat gelde
the preueleges of the Clergy. The same time a council was held at
Claringdone, and before the King, the Bishops and nobility were sworn, to
keep and confirm many decrees and ordinances. John Stow writes in his Summary
of the Cronicles of England, that the 34, of his ragne, at Geldington about
ten miles from Northamton he should hold a Parliament^ touching a voyage to
be taken to the holy land. But if you consider the haste the king made
thither, the state at that present he stood in, the place, ye shortness of the
time, and the matters there communed of, you shall find that in terming this
or such like consultation Parliaments, Master Fabian, Stow, Harding, and
other English^ writers do rather use the word, as in deed it is proper, where
any conference is, than that it carries with it, where it co^mes, the same to
be understand to be the great Court of Parliament, in such general form and
universal manner, as now and since the time of King Henry the third, we
have and do use it, as you know the word is French, and this much imports,
A debating together, A conference, A consultation, A conferring, An
enterspeech, A Communication, A discoursing one with another, which may be
as well with Ten for the word, as with Tenscore.

Richard* 1
King Richard the first, in the eighte year of his reign, retourning from the
holy land, his brother John, in his absence usurping the Crown, summoned a
counsel of his Lords at Winchester, where by auctority of the said counsel,
(...) ments, and lands, which before he had bestowed on him.

After Richards deceasse he possessed the Crown, John.
and in the first and third year by the holding of two counsels (as some
affirm) he had certain exactions agreed upon, for the maintenance of his
wars: others write, that of himself he levied the said sums. The eleventh
year all men, took the oaths of Allegiance too him from 12, years upward. The
fourthteenth year (here is some difference for the year,) the Lords and Barons
required the use of Saint Edwardes Laws, and the reuoking of other wicked
ordinances, the which he (not harkening to the civil war begone,) yet at
Barhamdowne the king and nobility meeting, they confirmed so much, as they
departed quietly. The sixtenth of his reign, the king being slow to perform
that which he was brought to perforce, the nobility took them again to arms,
and so hardlye set him, as in a meadowe between Windsor and Staynes in a
manner Nolens, volens, he granted their liberties: and the Charter for their
confirmation thereof, is dated at Rhyme meade, between the places beforenamed,
to the which all the Realm was sworn. In the same year the Lords perceiving
the Kings disposition, to shifte from that he had agreed on, sent into
France for Jews the son of Philip the French king, who arriving here, was
received by the Barons and Londoners honorably, who swear fealty to him, and
did him homage, and then al with one cry they seek out the king, who being
at Winchester, was driven to fly, which town yielded and was sworn to Jews,
whether also repaired in a manner all the nobility. For all this stir, King John
procured the Pope by means of Pandolphe the legate, to dispense with his oath,
to reuerse the Charter and liberties granted, and also excommunicate the
Barons and Frenchmen.

Henry his son, Henry. 3.
of the age of nine years, young enough (...) Kingdom, and specially during
such garboyles, yet by the good gouernemente of Marshal Earl of Penbroke, many
of the Lords drew to him, and very shortly after Jews was driven to leave
the land, and being released of his excommunication, the peace was agreed on
the ninth year of his reign, of his age the seuententh, or thereabout. At the
motion of the Archbishop of Caunterbury and other the Lords, the king
granted and confirmed the great Charter: whereupon (as I can gather by some
records) the ward and marriage of our children was granted to the king and his
successors: the twelfth year the king refused to perform the liberties and
Charter granted as before, for that ye ratification past in his minority, and
that now being of full years to bear the sway himself, he would be better
advised. The twentieth of his reign is found the first Parliament of name and
record, and yet not to be so thought a Parliament, as now we use ours. It is
entitled, The statuts made at Merton. And further he says, It was provided in
the Court of our sovereign Lord the king holden at Merto^ the morrow after
the twentieth day of Saint Vincent, the twentieth year of the reign of king
Henry the son of king John, before William Archbishop of Caunterburie and
other his Bishops and suffraganes, and before the greater part of the Earls
and Barons of England there assembled, etc, without addition of the third
state of this land. Also you have a statute made the year after, entitled for
the leap year, beginning, The King unto the justices of his Bench greeting.
The 42. year, or after some the 41, the barons unwillingly bearing the kings
driving off for the restitution of certain ancient laws, there was a
Parliament at Oxforde, which was called the mad Parliament, yet not so mad,
but the king his brother king of Romans, and Edward his son, must and did
agree thereto, tho much against their wills, because many matters were
ordained greatly and too much against the kings prorogatiue, for the sure
establishing and execution whereof, there were (...) charge and auctority to
see ye ordinances made maintained, whether for the small worthynesse of the
laws, or the disorder in making, or the shortness of the continuance I know
not, but I find not any of those statutes with the rest which are rekened to
be King Henry ye thirds. These twelve noble me^ were no sooner in commission,
but they began roughly, presently exiling four of the Kings brethren by ye
mother. The 43. and 44, year of his reign there were certain assemblies,
sometime of ye nobility without the King, and of the king without the Lords,
without any mention of our third interest, and al called Parliaments. This
year in a Folkmote at London were al above twelve years sworn to the king. In
the 45. year he had obtained from Rome a dispensation for his oath, and all
others of his, which he and they had taken for the maintenance of Oxforde
folly. The peers during this pastime, unwitting, and unwilling, the king
discharged Hugh le Spencer chief Justice, and put an other in his place,
expelled officers and Sherifes admitted by the king, and appointed other to
supply their romes. Further, the king was grow^n to hard terms, which was,
he should not pass over the Seas having large Territories in other
countries, without license obtained, as in this year appears. The next year
as before in the. 44, were al men in London above twelve years of age sworn
too the king and his successors. The 47 of his reign, the barons armed
themselves, the King and Queen fled from the tower to Windsor, and by the way
were too too unkindly used of the Londoners. The king and Lords fell to
agreement (as Fabian writes) and were contented to be ordered by the doom of
ye French king who they agreed to be judge between them: the king, giving
sentence, the Barons refuse, and fall to war. The year following, the King, his
brother and son were taken in the Battle at Jews, by means whereof the
king grauntes a new the confirmation of the former statutes; and till matters
accordingly be performed, Prince Edward, and the king, of Romans son,
remaynes pledges with the Barons. The 49. year Prince Edward being delivered,
a Parliament or rather a counsel (because I find no statute thereof,) was
held at Winchester, and all matters and decrees passed at Oxforde were utterly
undone, revoked, and called in, and all writings and assuraunces sealed for ye
same, were cancelled and defaced. You have certain statutes concluded, I
think, at Winchester, in your first volume, made in the year 51, of this
king, in all the which you find no other words for the most part: but the
king wills or he commands: Unless he first allege an inconvenience
happened, which to redress, he uses, it is therefore provided and ordained.
The year after there were certain statutes passed at Marlebridge or
Marleborowe, where you have this beginning. The year of grace, 1267. the. 25.
year of the reign of king Henry, son of king John, in the vtas of Saint
Martine, for the better estate of the Realm of England, and for the more
speedy administration of justice, as belongs to the office of a king, the
more discrete men of the Realm being called together, as well of the higher as
of the lower estate, it was etc. in all these statutes no word of enacted or
ordained by the aucthority of this present Parliament, etc. is found, but it
is provided and agreed, which shall be and shall not be, as the matter which is
stablished does importe. In the end of these laws and decrees, and conclusion
of agreement beetweene (...) king and his subjects, the Bishops do
pronounce a^ men accurssed who shall go about to break, infringe or alter the
liberties and free customs contained in the Charts of the common liberties and
of the Forest etc. The preamble to the which Charters is in this manner:
Henry by the grace of God etc. To all Archbishoppes etc. our faithful
subjects greting: know ye that we unto the honor of almighty god, and for
the salvation of the souls of our progenitors and successors kings of
England, to the aduauncemente of holy Church, and amendment of our Realm, of
our mere and free will have given and granted, etc.

Edward his son confirmed these Charters granted by his father, Edward. 1
and the third year of his reign held a Parliament, wherein were made
diverse statutes, and thus it says: These be the acts of King Edward son to
King Henry, at the first Parliament general after his coronatio^, on the Monday
of Easter vtas, the third year of his reign, by his council, and by the
assente of the Archbishoppes, Bishops, Abbots, Pryors, Earls, Barons, and all the comunaltie of the Realm being thither sommoned: etc. And for diverse
considerations named, the book says, The king has ordained and established
these Acts underwritten, which he entendeth to be necessary and profitable
unto the whole Realm. And in the first Chapter, First the king wills and
commands, etc. The year following, other statutes were set down, by this
Auctority: In the presence of certain reverend fathers, Bishops of England,
and others of the Kings council, the constitutions under written were
recited, and after heard and published before the King and his council, for
as much as all the kings council, as well Justices as others, did agree that
they should be put in writing for a perpetual memory, and that they should
be stedfastlye observed. The next year he made certain laws at Gloucester,
and has thus: For the great mischiefs etc. Our soueraign lord the king for
the amendmet of the la^d etc. has provided and established these Acts
underwritten, willing and commanding that from henceforth* they be firmly
observed within this Realm. In the end of the Chapters of the same Parliament
there is an explanation of it, termed, Expositions upon the Statute of
Gloucester, which begin: Afterward by the king, our sovereign Lord and his
Justices, certain expositions were made upon some of the Articles above
mentioned etc. The seventh year other statutes were made: the notice of the
first was given to the Justices of the Kings Bench, with this preamble, Edward
by the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitaine, to
his justices of his benche greeting. Whereas, etc. as it folowes in the act.
And now in our Parliament at Westminster, after ye said treatise the prelates,
earls, barons, and the co^munaltie of our realm there assembled, etc, we
command you that you cause these things ^o be read before you in the said
bench, and there to be enrolled, The ninth, the 11.13. in the which he had
three Parliaments as it seems, the first wherein the statute of Acton Burnel
was made, the second, he held the parliament at Westminster, wherein very many
statuts passed, the third was at Westminster, the eighteenth, the
20.21.24.25.27.28.29.30.33. and the thirty four year, there were statuts made
as apeares by the records, in all which these words pass of Authority for
enacting and confirmation: The King has commanded, our sovereign lord the
king has ordained, the king charge all his justices, upon their faithes and
oaths that they owe him, that they shall see this and that executed according to
the statutes: It is provided: our sovereign Lord the King to abate the power
of fellons, has established a pain in this case, and for as much as the king
will not that his people should be sodainelye impouerished by reason of this
penalty, that seems very hard to many, The king grants, The king and
his council at his Parliament holde^ at Acton Burnel has ordained these
establishments: our sovereign Lord the king at his Parliament holden at
Westminster in the eightenth of his reign, of his special grace and for the
singular affection that he bears unto his prelates, Earls, and Barons, and
other of his Realm, has granted. Wherefore our sovereign Lord the king
considering fraud etc. has straightly commanded: our sovereign Lord the
King in his full Parliamente holden the day after the feast of the
Purification, in the twentieth year of his reign, by a general counsel has
ordained, and from henceforth has commanded to be straightly observed, our
sovereign Lord the king at his Parliament after Easter the 21. year of his
reign, at the instance of the nobles of his Realm has granted and
commanded, too be from henceforth firmly observed: we have also ordained by
the advice of our council at the Parliament of our sovereign Lord the King
holden at Lincoln in the vtas of Saint Hillarie, the twentieth year of his
reign, of his counsel it was agreed, and also commanded by the king himself,
it is provided by a common accord: We will and grant that this statute shall
take effect: it as agreed that such a writ of Indicauit, shall not be granted.
In the 34. year of his government, and last statuts the first Chapter, he
grants in this manner. No Tallage or aid shall be taken or Levied by us or
our heyrs in our Realm, without the good will and assent of Archbishoppes,
Bishops, Earls, Barons, knights, Burgesses, and other freemen of the land.
The fourth Chapter, he says thus: we will and grant for us and our heirs,
that all Clarks and laymen of our land shall have their Laws, liberties, etc.
as when they had them best, and if any statutes have bin made by us and our
auncesters, or any customs brought in contrary to them, or any manner Articles
contained in this present Charter, we will and grant that such manner of
statutes and customs shall be void and frustrate for evermore. In the 6
Chapter, where there is a curse set for ye not performaunce of the premises,
he has, In witness of which thing we have set our Seal to this present
Charter, together with the Archbishops, Bishops etc. which voluntarily have
sworn, that as much as in them is, they shall observe the tenor of this
present Charter in all causes etc.

Edward his son (as I find in your printed book) made many statutes in his
first year, Edward. ^
his ninth, his tenth, his twelfth, his fifteenth, his seue^teenth, his
eighteenth, in all the which he uses the like manner of words, as for the
most part be recyted before. As Our sovereign Lord the king has granted:
our sovereign Lord the king wills and commands: The king decrees this is
added of new By the kings counsel. Also it is desired that our sovereign Lord
the King, and the great men of the Realm do not charge. etc. Our sovereign
Lord the king intending to avoid and eschew such evil oppressions etc. By
the assent of his prelates, Barons, and other great estates, has ordained
etc. It is provided by our sovereign Lord the King and his Justices, and also
granted unto the Citizens of London, etc. And also Forasmuch as some points
of the statutes heretofore made had need of exposition, our sovereign Lord
the King, Edward son to king Edward, desiring that right be done to his
people, at his parliamente holden at York the third week after the feast of
Saint Michael, the twelfth year of his reign, by the assente of the prelates,
Earls, Barons, and communaltye of his Realm there assembled etc. We will
also, that this our ordinance shall take effect etc. But specially be it
commanded on the behalf of our sovereign Lord the king, by the consent of
the whole Realm.

The measure of our sovereign Lord the king was made, etc. in the twentieth
year of his reign, by some of his nobility and Isabel his queen, badde Lords
and worse wife, as their doings in other cases after declared. He was
imprisoned, and thereupon a Parliament was called, where Edward the Kings
son, not yet of the age of fourthteene years, was elected by the common
decree king in his fathers rome, and in the name of the whole parliament, as it
remaynes in some Authors: diverse of the cleargye and of the nobility were sent
to the quondam King, to show* him their determination: who seeing no remedy,
and smaler hope of recovery of his former estate, renounced wyllingly (when he
could do no other) his interest and principality. If you will have this a
lawful and full parliament, I must pray god to keep us from many of them,
because of the hardness of the example: for the king was badlye murdered,
within less than a year after, and yet you see what words of Aucthority it
has.

Edward. 3
Edward the third held the crown fifty years and odd months, and had in
his time 26. Parliaments at ye least, in some of the which there was not
above one statute made, and that of no great importance. In the first
Parliament ye books go upon certain petitions and requests made to him,
That is: the king in the said Parliament upon such Articles above rehearsed,
by the common council of the prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men, and
by the communaltie of the Realm there being by his commandment, has
provided, ordained etc* the same Sessions at the request of the communalty of
his Realm, by their petition made before him and his (...) Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and other great men assembled at the said Parliament, has granted
for him and his heirs etc. and so proceeds to grant and confirm always the
liberties of the great Charter and the Charter of the Forest, whereof for the
most part there is mention first made in every Parliamente, in all the which
(few excepted) he uses these words or such like, and specially til his 14.
year, in which he had a liberal extraordinary aid or subsidy granted him, By
the assente of his Prelates, Earls, and Barons and other noble men of his
Realm: and at the request of the commons, after many times he puts in, The
consent of the Commons, whole commons, full parliament, and that chiefelye when
as he obtained of them subsidy, Task, fifteenth, Disme, or custom, as if you
turn the records you shall find: and yet often he names them not at al, but
has thus: Council and treaty there upon had with the Earls, Barons, and our
wise men of our said Realm, etc. We considering, etc. have had there upon
deliberation and treaty with the Prelates, and the nobles and wise men
assisting us, of whose mutual council it is ordained etc. often putting in with
the assent of the commons, oftener, at their request and petition, which he
uses not when they granted him subsidy, Tax, aid, custom, fifteenth,
Tenthes or Lone. But then the statutes carried these words, With the consent
of the commons, which they well deserved. And also deeds of congratulation
as well as allowance in terms, for like most liberal, dutiful, and considerate
Subjects (I will think) willingly did grant their large contrybutions, no
larger than often, nor ofter than needeful considering the diverse wars of their
prince, they did ninteene times bestow toward his charges their money help
(if I did put in more, as I suppose I should not lie, so should I not incur
any offense) and that diverse of the^ to continue two years, three years, and
six years. A new kind of willing duty, if you look how always before, like
matters in a manner were perforce extorted scou^ them. In Lieu whereof, as a
gracious prince thankefully accepting their doings, as good cause he had, ^aue
the^ at ye least, nine general pardons, with some exceptions yet not many. And
whereas for the most part the Wolles of this land before other commodities
were most exacted of, in his 36 year it was enacted, that no subsidy nor
other charge should be set nor granted upon the Woolles by the Merchants,
nor by any other from thenceforth, without the assent of the Parliament: rare
presidents to find before the conquest in William Co^querors time, or since in
a manner at all til this kings days.

Richard. 2
Richard the second his successor, held even on as his Graundfather began,
had almost every year a Parliament, according to the statuts, that there
should be one yearly at the least. In the beginnings of all the which,
almost the great Charter, and that of the Forest, with all Liberties to holy
churches, fraunchises, etc. were granted, stablished, and confirmed, and the
authority of passing the acts, is as you have in his predecessors time Edward
the third, sometime with one manner of words, and sometime another. He had very
many, free and bountiful aids of his subjects by money, in number for his two
and twenty years time, no whit wanting with his Graundfathers, and likewise by
diverse pardons he declared his good accepting of them.

Henry. 4.
King Henry the fourth, first Earl of Darby, then Duke of Herforde by his father
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster the fourth begotten son of king Edward the
second, also invested with the title of ye Dukedom, no more against king
Richard (...) than against law, right and justice, did claim the Crown, and
at London called a Parliament in king Richards name, as much without his
direction, as without just aucthority, and how far without the full parts of
an English Parliament, which we brag of and justly may, I refer me to the
judgment of deeper heads than mine own. In this Parliament forsooth is 31.
Articles at the least laid to our King Richard, a shrewd and an unaccustomed
president. Well, it was thought by the most part that he was worthy to be
deposed, and provision according was provided. But King Richardes friends
going to bed without candel, when none was to be had, persuaded their master
too yield (contented) the Crown from his head, which otherwise would have
been snatched off perforce, and brought the skyn with it. He does resign, he
craves life without reign, it is liberally granted, but more liberally broken
with hasty and shameful slaughter. As who searches shall find, to who^ I rather
commit ye reading, tha^ I to call to remembrance such undutiful hard dealing,
and specially when the Parliament has any interest in the same, or should be
noted with error. This Henry the fourth reigned thirteen years and somewhat
more, in whose time there was almost every year a Parliament, in all the which
for the most part, first the Charters and liberties be confirmed to all men,
and the Acts be thus aucthorized, Henry by the grace of God. etc. of the
assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and at the instant and special
request of the commons of the same Realm, assembled at his Parliament holden
at Westminster. etc. Al establishme^ts, co^firmations, and makings of statuts
in his time, you shall find still at the request, ernest instance and prayer of
the commons, yet was he king, as you have heard, and in the first year of his
reign he had such a heavy Tax granted him, as it was conditioned it should
not be recorded for a president: diverse others he reaped the benefit of, and
returned also sundry pardons to the freeing of many of his subjects.

His son Henry, Henry. 5.
was King nine years and somewhat more, and yearly (as it seems) held a
Parliamente, but his sixth year, in all which wherein the commons were named, he
says as before, for himself and the Lords he has at the special instance and
request of the Commons in the same Parliament, etc. Has don to be ordained
etc. The liberties of holy Churches, the Charters and privileges are enacted
and agreed soundely to abide in force. I can not perceive for all his great
Conquest and wars in France, that he troubled his Subjects in a manner at
all to speak of, with Tax or Subsidy. That small aid he had, rose (as I can
gather) of some Tenthes, and Fifteenthes, were granted him. And yet did he for
custom, courtesy, or congratulation sake, also imparte his pardons.

Henry. 6.
He left his son Henry in his place, being but eighte months old, during
whose reign, the Parliamentes were very thick held, as in the former times.
As this Prince was very young at the death of his father, so was he when he came
to age, more given to quietness and Religion, than to worldly affairs or
weapons: And therefore it may be gathered, that the nobility and commons stood
not in doubt of the infringing by him of great Charters, and liberties.
Wherefore they labored not every Parliament, the confirmation of them, as in
his Predecessors time they did: for in his Parliaments, we find no such
mention made of them, as usually is had before his government for making of
Laws, most commonly I see, Our sovereign Lord king Henry the sixth, at his
Parliamente, etc. By the advice and assente of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and at the special request of the commons of the Realm, being in
the same Parliament, have done to be made. etc. There is also, Our sovereign
Lord King Henry. etc. For the weal of him and of his Realm; by the advice
and assent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of the same
Parliament assembled, has made, ordained etc. This last manner of mencioning
the commons, it is in ye middle of the kings reign, which might proceed of
some occasions, which your self may find out, if you turn over the
cronicles. I take it needless to be written. In the th^^tie three year of his
reign, there was something enacted in a Parliamente touching the Lord Richard
Duke of York, and also in another, in his thirty three year, concerning the
same Prince, which I cannot be persuaded that King Henry de mero motu
consented to, I do not understand that he burdened his subjects in a manner
at all with exactions, for all his continual and great wars in France, but
rather contented him self with the loss, and so far, as in less than forty
years he forewent the Crown of France abroad, and lost his kingdom of
England at home: And tho by his friends he recovered the one again, yet
would it not be kept, but he that received it first, efte obtained it, so
that King Henry was deprived the second time not only of his regalty, but
presently of his life.

Edward Earl of March right heir of the house of York, Edward. 4.
was the man that Kinged it in King Henry's rome, and so continued it twenty
two years, and somewhat more, during which government he had at least
ten Parliaments, in all the which he names his auctority, and the nobilityes
advise and consent, and the insta^ce and request of the commons, but only in
the Parliamente the third year of his reign, wherein he says, At the
Parliament summoned at Westminster. etc. the third year of king Edward the
fourth after the conquest, diverse statutes. etc. By the advice and assent of
his Lords, spiritual and temporal, and the commons of the same Parliament
assembled, and by auctority of the same were made etc. During which Sessions he
had granted him by statute the tonnage and pondage of wines and wayres, not for
a year, or two, but during his natural life. In his second year he had
liberally yielded him large sums upon his privy Seals: he had also diverse,
fifteenes, Loanes, and beneuolences. In his first Parliament, Charters,
privileges and liberties were confirmed. But I see no stoare of general
pardons in his time, although it was and had been a busye age, by means of the
quarrel between the two great houses of York and Lancaster.

His brother Richard by yt unkind making away of his nephews ruled the roast
two years, Richard. 3.
two months, and a day, whose statutes are enacted, as before, at the request
of the commons of the same ^^^lme, yet sought he by all the favorable ways
he could, too purchase him self natural subjects, though he unnaturally
came to the kingdom.

Henry. 7.
Henry the seventh after him obtained the Crown, in the beginning as it were
by force, next confirmed by the marryage of Elizabeth eldest daughter to
Edward the fourth, who called diverse Parliaments, and in them al takes this
course of auctority for enacting of the statutes of the same, The King our
sovereign lord, Henry the seventh. etc. in the first year of his reign, to
the honor of god and holy church, and for the common profit of the Realm, by
the assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in the same
Parliamente assembled, and by auctority of the same Parliament, has done to be
made certain statutes. etc. He had sundry exactions, subsidies and
beneuolences, whereof ensued some dangerous and troublesome civil wars,
besides the putting in execution of many penal statutes, more profitable to
him, than welcome to those who paid for them. If you look Master Hal the
Cronycler, you shall find more than enough touching the same, and specially so
broadely to touch Councillors for doing their princes commandment in matters
lawful, tho in deed (I must confess) odious to the people. King Henry being
not like to recover a sickness had taken him, either by remorse of
conscience, or by other occasion it pleased him to conceive, did pardon those
matters for ye which he could not chose but hear the grievous repining and
murmr of his subjects.

Henry. 8.
Henry the eighte followed him, in whose time were made a Bible of statutes,
and till the two and twentieth of his reign, h^ ^ad the very same words, as
his father used in the beginning of his Parliamentes, and tho then the same
still followed not in course, yet the Parliamentes were held of the estates,
wherein the commons were one. What subsidies, and aides of money he had, and
what and how many enacted pardons he gave, now to repeat is but loss of
time, since we are come thus far.

To go through with king Edward, Edward. 6 Queen Mary. K. Philip. Queen
Elizabeth.
queen Marie, king Philip, and our most gracious Princess her majesty that
now is as I have with the rest, were burning of daylight.

Since we have hitherto brought the Parliament, now let us shortly gather what
we can of these Collections touching the original Antiquity and the manner
thereof.

First Brute in the year of the world, 2855. before the year of grace, 1108.
began the Empire of this I Will. He found it without laws, he made some.
Mulmutius, 441. years before christ added more. Gurguintus put a little to.
Marcia that noble Queen, about the 360. year before Christ confirmed many:
and so remained this land, governed (I suppose) without our form of
Parliament, for I cannot perceive there was any state of nobility. The great
Cities and Borowes were long a building, some 300.400.500. years, one after
another, and more: The Shires nether divided, nor inhabited: a nation living in
civil wars, theft and rauyne, barbarous, often for want of foresight and
law so dispeopled, as hardely there remained sufficient to manure their
lands, and less, too defend their Territories. The year. 51. before our
savior took flesh, Julius Caesar ye Roman made conquest of this region, and
anexed it to the Romayne auctority, who had tribute (tho sometime it were
denied) and governed by their Captains and Emperors, took the defense of the
same upon the^, as their often hither coming with armies and building of
walls between the Scotts, Pictes, and Britons, does well witness, til the
443. year of Christ's Nativity, at which time they neglected the matter, not
willing, as it seemed, to buy a trifle too dear, nor daily to be troubled to
come from Rome, but a step, to defend them who had no ability to hold their
own feet, nor (as it is to be feared) would learn. And although in this
time somewhat is indicted by Eleutherius the Bishop of Rome to Lucius, who is
accepted the first Christened king, yet if you wey the matter well, you shall
find, that will not do^ About the year 450. the Saxons and Angles being sen^e
for, entered, and look how many kingdoms they erected, how long in wars
before, how they continued, how they were brought to one Monarchy, and the
sequel then, and you shall find there was no leisure for Parliaments. In
reading, I have gathered many flowers out of Master William Lamberts garden,
a gentleman after my verdict, tho unknown to me, for his payneful, rare, and
learned Collection, worthy to be known, and then (no doubt,) of all well
disposed too learning and knowledge of the antique customs of our Country, to
be greatly honored: I could make many Nosegayes for you out of his well set
plants: but you are young enough to gather them your self, and I will yield
that to Caesar which is Caesar's due, tho perhaps I would be glad to be worthy to
be Caesar my self. Yet thus much I will put you in mind what you shall have in
Master La^bert, for the seasons of the Saxons and Angles kingdoms: They
divided the Shires, the world is their^, they parted into hundreds and
weapon-taxes, the speech is old English, Folkmoot and Sheremote was appointed
by them, compounded Saxo^ words, of the which there were two uses in the Saxons
time, for there were two sorts thereof, one in the same nature that we have le
County Court, the other, le Turn del Vicont. S. Edward in his laws
appointed also two kinds of Folkmotes, which were given notice of by the
ringing of belles, in old English called Mothel. The first was when any
unaccustomed peril or danger, was doubted to the common wealth: And then were
the hundreds and Weapontackes within the Shriualties gathered together. And
also within them selves the Burgesses of Cities walled, Borowes and fortresses
of strength (to the which liberties and privileges were granted, because
their force was better able to keep together and defend the people in the
time of Hostility,) assembled to council what way were best to be taken in
such times. Also in the same Folkmote, which often times is named the Common
council, the subjects of this Land did their fealty, and were sworn as here
before diverse times. Touching the oath to the prince I have recyted to you: And
for sufficient proof hereof, the Londoners of late years have used the word,
and at this day directly in effect keep the matter, when they assemble
themselves, as often as need requires, to their common council, the Folkemote
in deed. The second Folkemote was for the electing of Sherifs, and officers
under them, for taking order yt the watches were kept, and great heed had to
scath fire. In the Saxons government there were at the last, two kinds of
regiments, by the which the country was directed: the one, the West Saxons, the
other the marches: who as they were proceeded of two nations, so each held ye
rights received fro their ancetors. The Saxons kept themselves kings here, tho
wc much a do and great continual slaughters, not only wc the ancient
inahbitants of this land, but with themselves, one king with another, til ye
yers 1018. during which time you see many ordinances established, but how far
from the way of our Parliament your own discretion will conceive, if you have
good consideration of ye times, people and manner of lawing. Canutus the Dane
the year. 1018. was absolute king of the whole Realm, which the Danes claymed
first by conqueste of Swaynus their king, father to Canutus: ano next, by
agreement made between Edmund Ironside and him: his laws you have: see what you
find there. So gratco^querors do not commonly grant such large freedoms to
subjects, to have interest with them in ye common wealth, neither yet do bind
themselves to so hard terms, to establish nothing without the consent of the
other two states. Far unlike it is, that of Danes he had full supply too
furnish the whole state of nobility, and the whole Borowes and counties: But
grant he had, shall I believe he would set down another manner of government
than ye Danes do at this day, and almost have always maintained, which is, al
things to pass by ye kings auority and the nobilities, without the third
estate. He was not constrained at any time against his will: for the poor
English nation, God knows, were laid low enough. The Danes reigned not here
above twenty five years, allowing Canutus the first king. Yet would I feign
learn, whether by Parliament and general consent of the three estats thereof,
the excessive Tributs were granted, and the exaction called the Dane gelt
which ye English people only even from the beginning of the reign of the Danes
were compelled yearly to pay to their kings, was Parliament wise enacted. Saint
Edwards laws, if you look over, you shall find nothing to serve your turn.
The Conqueror William in the year 1066 obtained the Crown: how straight a
hand he held on the subdued inhabitauntes of this I Will, is well known. Til the
twentieth year of Henry the third I hear of no Parliament, unless you will
have al consultations Parliamentes, as in the fortith of Henry the 8. I see a
statute made for one Richard Strode a Burges in that Parliament, for that he
was condemned in 160. pound at certain Courts of the Steynery, and by
auctority thereof imprisoned for the same, because he had (as it was aleaged)
greatly hindered by his speeches in the Parliament their liberties and
privileges. Upon his complaint to the three estates, the Act was made for his
discharge, in the end whereof an enquiry is appointed touching the digging of
tin: and the letter is thus: Be it enquired for our sovereign Lord the
king, that whereas at the Parliament holden at Crokerentor before Thomas Denis
deputye too sir Henry Marney knight warden of the Steynery etc. Here you have
your word otherwise applied than we accustomably do. So that the word carries
not away with it always the fullness of the matter. Some would long since have
comprised in it, how King Henry the third was by arms constrained to do
what he would not. You have recited to you what auctority he uses in enacting:
you also have, and likewise I have gone through all the Parliaments of the rest
of the Kings, which I have thought needful: the exact ouerloking whereof, and
due noting of the form of the nobility in time past, after the Danish manner,
great sway bears in this commonwealth: the aids, subsidies, exactions and
customs generally so often consented to, with better wills, and more
quietness, than in former ages: the number of penal statutes and general
pardons of the Prince, will dissuade the Antiquity of our third voices, which
many do defend, and also will show a light of the admitting the third person
in this trinity. I cannot meet with the name of the Knight of a Shire or
Burges of the Parliament, or any such men, mentioned till now of late days. In
the twenty seventh year of Edward the third, in the beginning of a Parliament
he says thus: Whereas good deliberation had with the Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, and great men of the Countries, that is to say, of every country one,
for all the counties, and of the commons of Cities and Burgesses of our Realm
etc. The fifte year of Richard the second there is a statute, That if any
knight of the shire, Citizen of City, or Burges of Borow, did not upon
sommons come to the Parliament, not having lawful excuse, should be amerced.
Anno 12. of the same king you have an act for the Kings wages. Anno 7. of
Henry the fourth it is enacted touching their elections. Anno. 1. of Henry
the fifth you have the like for chosing of Knights and Burgesses. In Henry the
sixts time and after, there are sundry Acts concerning the same matter. If you
consider the late enacting of these things, you shall find later use of our
new Parliament, than of some is thought: for I think Knights and Burgesses
never could nor might appear in Counsel before they were autorised, and the
manner of their apperance known. It may be that you and some other who shall
mete with this my proceedings in this matter, will marvel why I make so long a
preamble, and that in such form, to so short an advise which I send you.
Again, the world is many times so aukwardely disposed, as it will deem the
worste of men's meanings. And least the repeating of these things to you should
of Malbouch, who never said well, be conceived, that I shote to disgrace that
noble, grave, and necessary third state of Parliament (which if I were so
lewdly disposed, I never were able to touch)* I first protest before him who
knows the secrets of al men's workings, it is furthest from my thought. The
cause of this my long recital of one thing and other, grew of three parts.
One, to show how happily we obtained that rare interest in the common wealth,
where the monarchial government strikes the stroke, thereby to thank God,
without whom far less matters cannot stand. Secondly, that we should not be
forgetful of the great, gracious, liberal, and continual favor of the Princes
of this land, who have not only consented freely to the confirmation of this
third estate, but more tha^ that, never undoubtedly repented the allowaunce
thereof, as well may be proved, for that they never cauilled therein. What
contented minds of late ages, the kings and Queens of this Realm have
carried in matters of Parliament, when things have not fallen out current to
their expectations, I think not only al Parliament men, but ye whole cuntry
knows. And if I desired to pick thanks the most allowed way, which is, in
telling truth, I could make a long libel of her majesty's) that now is)
particular patience, favor, great suffering, and well accepting of matters of
Parliament: but I will leave it to a better workman to be booked by it self,
because it will ask a great volume. Thyrdly, to show what a Jewel you have of
this most free, general, and universal consultative kind of Lawmaking, thereby
to be careful, not only to keep and preserve that odd grace granted to no
nation, but to our selves, in such like regiments, but also in all respects
dutifully to put to our endeavor to be worthy members of so great a council, I
will but remember you of a few lines of Plato, who never knew England, and
much less the English Parliament in his book of his common welthe he makes
mention of three kinds of rule, viz. Monarchia, Aristocratia, and Democratia.
Where the Prince does al (says he) laws shall be made as best shall like him,
without regard to others: where nobility, and a certain number of the greatest
hold the helm, the ship will be directed to what haven they please. If decrees
and ordinances lie in the multituds heads, they will be popular. See you these
imperfections for the want of combyning these three kinds together, which
done, and no law pass without all their consents, who shall have cause to
complain? who is exempted out of this common wealth? who is wronged or put to
the wall? who agrees not to his own wealth or want? O Anglia terque quaterque
beata, that does enjoy that blessed privilege, which to maintain, as I
beseech all men, so to my best I will proceed to advise you, of whom I have
most tender care, to take such head in all your actions touching the same, as
it by you may be ( Pro virile) stre^gthned, you experienced and well deserving
thereof, and I joyful to hear of the considerate discharging of your duty.
First is to be considered what your auctority is, and how far it does
reach, from whence you had the same, what trust they have committed to you,
and what they expect at your hands that elected you thereto: Then by what means
you shall best discharge, without ye indignation of the Prince or misliking of
the nobility, that trust, to the profit of your electors. The former parts are
easyer to be set down than the latter points, drawn into assured aduices and
infallible precepts. But because (as I said in the beginning) I am to write
too you, who I am sure will take in good meaning my well determined
remembraunces, rather than scrupulously pick out the insufficiency thereof
(which I must confess is great) yet not wholly so fruitelesse and
unfurnished, but that you may gather some few Apples out of a small Orchard.
Our Parliament consists of three estates: First, the Prince: the second, the
nobility, such as are admitted by their succession, whose ancestors have bin
of the house, or the king, does call, and the Bishops: all the which without
special license must be personally present: and if they be by any means
absent, they give their voices to some one they best like, who is resiant. The
third of the Commons, wherein is comprised the younger sons of the nobility,
and in a manner all the heirs apparante, very few except, ye fathers ^^ing, al
ye gentry and the whole rest. It is thus furnished: there are two Knights
chosen of every county, but in Wales where the Shires have but one, and of
every City and Borrowe Corporate two Burgesses, few except, who of late time
were made corporations, and also the Cities and Borrowes in Wales, who follow
as their counties do. Of these knights and Burgesses is your third house.
Without the consent of these three bodies no new invocation has power to
deprive the subjects of this land of life laweful inheritance, or goods. The
authority thereof does stretch to them all, to take away life, inheritance, yea
of the Crown of this Realm, and every man's chattels, and has full power to
make and alter laws, and to use the English phrase, the law lies in their
hands: the Prince is sole of her self, and enacteth nothing alone: the
nobilitye and Bishops are upon the point of eighty, and rather under,
sometime more or less, as some may be under age, and some Bishoprikes void,
who offering a law, do make none of themselves. The third and great body of
this council consists (the king, nobility and Bishops foreprised) of all the
inhabitauntes of the country, and therefore of a mighty number of members: yet
can it stablishe no ordinance absolutely suo iure. But see the great and to
other people untasted of benefit of this law making, as I have said before:
shall one enacte? no: shall two estates bind the third? as little: shall the
whole three stricke it up? god forbid else: for (as before) who can complain
when his agreement is (...) and who denies, when al men say yea? So when the
greatest number of the Lords, and the most of the commons consent, tho some be
far off, yet it does importe general ratification: else how shall you labor? in
vain: for it is not possible that so many should directly bit upon one mind
and judgment in things argued: we can have no more that just Harmonye of
concente, that the.77. Interpreters of the Bible had, and yet no doubt (I
trust) the best for the most part taken. Your authority you see, now go forth:
who put you therein? The lower or common house of Parliament stands of 442.
persons, 78. Knights, and 326. Burgesses for England, and for Wales (Monmouth
Shire accounted no part thereof) 12. Knights, and as many Burgesses: for the
ports, which are now 7 accounted, fourtene, which are called Barons portium,
who are chosen by the whole commons of the Realm, under which name is
understood (as you have before) not only the artificer, the Beggar, the yoman,
the husbandma^, al and the whole, al of those sorts, but also the universal
gentry and many of the nobilitye of Birth, who are not Barons of the higher
house. The Knights are elected by the county, and should be inhabitaunts in
the same: the Burgesses in the corporations, which by statute are appointed to
be dwelling Burgesses in the town from whence they are sent. So that it is
plain, that you have your au^thority of the greatest in number, the mightiest
de se in force, and by whom the Prince is maintained, the country from age to
age manured and peopled, and the Lords remain Lords, whose rentes and
services could not be due without them. Now think with your self what
confidence these persons have in you* when they appointe you in this Rome of
enacting or disa^nulling. Your number of Parliament men you see in your house
are few to the huge multitude of the^ whose consents are bound by your
agreemente. What think they when they chose you? First that you are
religious, wherein is comprised many parts, as to fear God and to be
charitable. And the there be many other points which particularly might be
recited touching religion, yet in the love and fear of god and the Charity
toward a man's neighbor I conceive al other branches to hang: next, that you
do entirely favor your Country and tender the wealth thereof: thirdely, that they
are persuaded of your wisdom, grave judgment, experience, and diligent
consideration: fourthly yt you will not be abused with fair words, terrified
with threatenings, corrupted with brybes of the great ones: fifthly, not wrested
by gifts of equals, nor moved with the affection of the friendship of them:
sixthly, not frette with the Canker of malice and envy, nor subject too sudden
fury, the ouerthrower of al good procedings, which will procure you careless of
your trust: Seventhly, not expecting co^mendatio^ by eloquence and Oratory
words, rather than by substance of direct matter, reason, and truth, but above
al things, wholely and only hoyse up your sails to serve in all respects
that body whereof you are a member.

They commit unto your considerations their libertyes, no^ only of person but
of living, their goods, their lands, their lives, their attainders of blood, al
yt they have, shall have, or ca^ have, their wives and children already borne,
their posterity to come, whose inheritance to accrue by discente and honor
from ancient predecessors too be invested with, they yield into your hands,
and not only to bind them hereafter to stand to your doom and decree from
time to come, to allow of your possitiue direction not already passed, but
also submit themselves and all before recited, unto what you shall dispose of
it, with a loking back consideration whereby you may nerely touch them: the
confidence placed in you is so great trust, Iterum iterumque Cunctando, as
Quintus Fabius Max. did, to be thought of in this case. Now let us see by what
means you shall discharge this trust, without the indignation of the Prince,
and misliking of the nobility. First touching the nobility and prince, Qui
vadit plane vadit sane. Take this matter in hand Uirginlike, in the
simpleness of your mind, and well meaning of all things. Take heed of two
faces in one hoode: deal with reverence to the prince, with duty of
betternesse to the Lords, and with waking care with your fellows. I may not
deny but perchance some Prince may be willing to procure the passing of a law
more beneficial in particular to him self, than pleasant to those who are
represented in your house. And also the nobility may do the like in their own
causes: may you not duetifully repugne such demaundes? may you not argue the
inconvenience is like to ensue? may you not diswade? may you not boldly yield
your no? Yes assuredly, and incur no displeasure at al. And although you may
be frowned on by the Prince and others, yet they will know you well enough,
commend you in secret, glad to win you to employ in service, judge you
wise, honest, and one worthy to be trusted, and not a Butterfly, a six weeks
Bird: Whereas if you follow their humors, if their turns be served, if you
play, the hireling, they perhap will smyle upon you for the time, never trust
you, but in the end shake you off. Princes be glad of traitors of their
enemies subjects: Yet what Prince would have any of his own people so? or
will trust the others in any action, but to serve a present turn? As Demades
answered the Ephores very well, who moved him to commit the leading of
certain Soldiers to a traitor: you shall pardon me (quoth he) for trusting him
with mine, who has betrayed his own. If you will sooth and iuggle, you shall have
John seruingmans reward, yea at the princes hand and the nobilities. Although
possibly you have heard the tale of this well shotten John, yet thus it was: A
gentleman not best experienced, stood well in his own conceyte for judgment
(as commonly the simplest do) his chance was to entertayne a servant wiser
in deed than the master, but too plain a dealer to profit himself, and
therefore no worldely Doctor. This Gentleman taking his opinions conceived,
always to be infallible, would break them with his man, not so much to confer
for his advise, as to set out the ripeness of his own capacitye, who perce
iuing his Master was in a manner always in a wrong Box, and building Castles
in the air, or catching Hares with Tabers, could not sooth such unlikely
toys, whereby he must seek him a new habitation: who would keep such a
contrarying Knave? report goes this man is out of service, and why? forsooth
ye cause is recited, Master John a currifauour meaning to thrive where the
other could not, among his Emes and kindred taken a proper nurtured hynd,
sekes out this gentleman with very low cursey, gyues his worcester: the time of the
day, demaundes if his worcester: wants a servant, and worship and Maistership has
much ado with him. This clean speeched manne is entertained, the master
confers nothing with John, but John plays the John, he highly commends his
Masters devises, he praises his judgments: what so he speaks be it never so
fond, John sweres does proceed of a good wit. As Stephen the fool of
Huntington was wont so say, time teaches experience, far he goes that never
returns, and very simple he is, that daily swalloweth flies and will not learn
to keep his lips together. This gentleman began to find that John did guyle
with him, whom too prove, he brought into a very fair meadowe, and as it were
out of a great study demanded of John how to most pro^it he might employ ye
same: John musing what to answer: his Master followed, now (quoth he) can I
tell how to reap great benefit hereof, Salt is at a high price, I will sow the
Meadowe therewith, if God send me a good croppe, I shall be a made man. John
hereat clappes his hands on his thighs, Jesus, Master (says he) you shall
drink before me, for I thought upon the like matter. Here is flattering John
taken: by whom? by a simple man, by one who delighted in his music: he
pluckes his Coat over his ears, he knaves Master John, and tournes him out
of the doors like a Rascal marcha^t. If you play John's part with Princes,
whose experience and wisdom of themselves is great, and much by council, do
you think to avoid John's reward? If you John it with the nobility, do you
deem them children? will not nobility follow in deed the nobleness of
blood, to abhor and detest such shameless shifting Iackeryes? yes
assuredly, to your utter infamy and overthrow. But take the other course, and
truth may be blamed, but it will never be shamed It may be looked big on, but
it will not be out of countenance: it may be shut out of the door, but it will
be sent for in again and set at the table with the best, when Courteous
Master John shall be glad to take the leaving of the Pages: and hereof
assuredly persuade your self, unless your mind be so far possessed with
mischief, too think ye Falcons can feed of carrion, or Dolphyns delight in
puddels, which as by nature they do abhor, so do Princes and nobility by long
succession norished and bredde in honor, reiecte and contempne all such
servile disceyte and treasonable shifting.

Now are we come to consider how to answer the office your trusters put you
in, not for any particular profit, but for the whole common good. Hoc opus hic
labor est. But if those good parts be in you which they persuade are, as is
recited, the burden is soon discharged, to all your commendations, welsh and
quietness* First they account of you as one religious etc. and after as you
have heard. As touching that part I presume not to deal, because the Cobbler
may not pass the shoo: but with fear I will reverently with all good meaning
embrace the sound and perfect opinion of the Learned, which for the two
parts, the one duty to god, and the other to a man's neighbor, lies open to all
men by Deuines, the latchets of whose shoes I count not my self worthy to
unloose. Marcus Tullius Cicero, let me remember you of, and of his treatise de
Amicitia, which being a boy, (as Scollers do) I did unwillingly acquaint my
self with. He maks not (as I take it) above four pair of friends, whose
names being so common, to repeat again, were but spending of ink and paper.
He co^mends, when men would so far (as I may term it) believe in other for
friendship sake, as they drew cuts who should go to the hacke first: and not so
only, but the one would face down a lie, to be tormented to save the other.
Tulli said true, for he said it Historically. I am sorry the Paganism may
cast in our noses four rare examples, and we not able to afourde them one such
coupple. If you had such a one your self as Eurialus was to Nisus, Damon to
Pythias, Orestes to Pylades, and Theseus to Perithous were one to another, you
could not but make of such a Jewel. And if you would beguile him who should
have the loss? your self only, in respect of all extremity among ye best,
(by who^ I mean the virtuous and not the Turks Bassaes) for why? ingratitude
should rather deserve quartering, tha^ clipping of coin. This friendship for
such affiance and trust between party and party is rare, is commendable, is not
to be found, and yet depends upon particular action between two: it is
determined between them, that is, at the death or absence of either of both,
and then so far as well wishing may extend. But see what the commons of England
put in your hands, when you are chosen a spokesman for them. They end not with
their lives that make you a Parliament man, but with the perticulars, and al in all that I named before. Will you have more than all given you, of him that demes
well of you? you cannot. Do they store up in you by trust conceived, what
depends upon the^ (as it is recited) it seems so: judge your self. Will you go
to Law of nature, to the Law of God, to the Law of Princes, too ye Law of
Confederats? will not al condemn you if you iugle? I have found it so. Although
in very deed some men accept iuggling for an English word in good part, yet I
never understood it in Chaucer or old English, neither in the conscience of
the professors of Charity or well dealing: part the words at your pleasure
enter too Ethnickes or too Christianes. Here is the war, here is the danger,
here is both your credits, that is, the electors theirs and yours, upon a mum
chance, (pardon me if I offend in words, I have playde at the dice). If you
discharge your trust well, they are in your debt, and they well may vaunte of
the perfection of your execution, not more that you have done a thing
commendable in general, tha^ yt they have chosen in particular, so sufficient a
member in so great a cause: here is a good Harmony, the well and true singing
of which so^g makes al me^ merry at midnight, at al times, in all things, and
always, not now only present, but to come, yea those who never smelt of the
matter, if you go a trewa^ting, if you play Legerdemayn, if you will be bridled,
if you gape for ambition, if you play y^ Mongrel, if fair words abuse you, if
carelesnes make you hold no hand of your doings, if fury make you dronk, if
affection blind you, hereof will proceed not only to your trusters and theirs
now borne and unborn (I use the word still, because I know not how so rightly
too hit the mind of your choosers who commit trust in you) Ploratus and
Stridor dentium, but the same to you and yours, in like predicament, although
some present outward show may make you think the contrary. And therefore what I
have gathered of others, for Praeter auditum nihil habeo, I will follow, which
and God grant, you may receive as much benefit thereof, as I desire, if you
want from me, the fault is not mine, you have the best I can upon the manner of
writing of letters. I persuade with my self you cannot possibly play the
spider with these my barren flowers, tho it were in May or June. If you make
any honey of them, I will be ye gladder to go to my grave in consummatione
aetatis mei, for that to you and to my country, (two parts of my greatest care)
I shall be assured some benefit will redowne by the relics of my collections,
which I never tended for my own prefermente* so much as for the
aduauncemente of the common wealth, as is to be gathered by my beggary, which
perhaps I might better have withstoode, if I could have given my self Adulari,
and Sycophantari. Your countries welfare must always be your only and
greatest care. The flourishing whereof is the Princes strength and toylity, the
nobilities quietness and greatness. For as a King cannot King it, without
people, nor Lords Lord it without Tenauntes, no more can nations live in
commo^welths without the higher aucthority: The music of which three joined
and agreing in one, does make the old onelegged man, hop for joy, and the
white hears to dye in peace. See how god has given to all men the liking of
the land and soil whereout they are bred. I will not speak of delicate France,
of fat England* of fruiteful Italy, of careful governed Spain, of wanton
Germany* and other like countries, wherein we have not only more than
sufficient to feed and cloth ourselves with, besides many nice and superfluous
delights, but never dered with extremity either of cold or heat, or for want
of civil rule to condemn our quietness. But go to the naked Ethiopes in
Afrike, whose sowty color and cave dwelling, declare ye persecution they
suffer by heat, banning and cursing the sun going down who leave them for all
the shifts they can make as smoking brown bread new drawn out of the Oven,
their homely diet serpents flesh, with a few sterued cattle which they have
in estimation as their lives, naming their children by their names and not
after their fathers, for that they acknowledge the sustentation of their being
of them, and for the same, live in continual wars among themselves. I count
not thick English Beef, or Bacon, neither yet the Licor which presently
either they must quench their thirst with or dye, the wine of Orleaunce. Not
far from these fair babes dwell the Tawny Moors the Azanegies, who feed not
to fill their bellies, but measure their hunger by the stoare of victual which
most baronly and scarcely their Country yeldes them. Your Acradophagi, as fair
as goodman Negro, is pleased to leap at Saint John Baptists locust, and
contents him self without change with that viandrize. These people live not
above forty years, and in fine most pitifully are consumed with flying Lice
naturally breeding in themselves. Also the Icthiophagi, birds of the same
bushe of Ethiope, who live only by fish, not for Religion as Charterhouse
Monks, but as hungry Dogs, without sauce, for necessity. These and other
infinite numbers under that scalding heaven and in^terile soyles suffering their
purgatory in this world, yet home is homelyest with them, they will not away.
God and nature has so combyned and changed their likings too their country,
as they will say with the Scottish man when he comes to London, or to the
fairest Town in Europe, ye Edenborowe except) it is the godlyest place he ever
set his foot in: even so will the nations recited not stick to fall out with him
yt will disprayse their dwellings, although as there is statelier buildings than
Edenborowe, so is there more pleasant clymates and fertyler grounds than
Ethiope: I may not go through with so many southren people, as by books I
could recite unto you, for spence of time, and chiefly when a few may
suffice. But now let me lightlye run over some particulars of the unmerciful
sternenesse of the Northern Pole, as heavy to the inhabitaunte felers for
extremity of the cold, as the parching sun importable to the vggly Moors,
and yet Country quart, is good quart. The vrchins will not out of their Den,
they will rather live in native land with these discomodities following, than
change for the Paradise of France, or the Kitchen of England. First go no
further than to Islande a corner at hand, which in Solstitio Hiemali, enioyes
small sun, but the people there for that time at our noone days (if they have
no candel) may play at blindman buffe, their cold is horrible, their mansions
Conney fashion, their drink is running Water, weak califaction for such
Wether as is there: Their dread dried fish, Corn, and Licor* not fit for
Ladies. But if they hap of a candels end, some course barley Cantel, and a
soap of small beer, they are so gallant, and well pleased, that they desire not
my Lord Mayor of London too be their kinsman. I will not talk of Norway, nor
of Sweden, Finlande, or Gothland, nor those adjacent countries too Denmark, in
the warmest whereof we English old beaten soldiers would oftener blow our
fingers tha^ wash our faces. and like to Naples, the Paradise of Italy, in
comparison too Muscouia, part of Ruthinea, Temthia, Bothinia, Lappia, Tornia,
Striphinia, Finmurchia, and Piarmia, in the which, such bitter winds, such
great hills of Frost and Snow, such thick uncomfortable clouds, such large
nights of half a year long, such seldom sights of that comfortable
gentleman Master Phoebus would make a man lay the key under the door, and wish
the devil too heat the country, and the sun to warm them. What should I
tell you of the incredible operation of that country, congeling of the most
violent and as it is unnatural (in respect of forcible moving) of the winds,
the terror that ordinarye tempests and lightnings brings, no less to be
believed than liked? what of that penetrating cold that boring out the
inhabitants eyes gives them the sauce of hunger, Optimum Condimentum, and small
soppes to their dinner, flees their skins of without edged tool, makes them
blow away their noses in their napkins, and yet plages them with catars
rewmes, and will you have the English word truly, the plain snotte and
sniuil, so as though the nose be gone, they must wipe where it was, or else some
vnsauerly matter will run in their mouths. I ouerpasse a great company of
incommodities, the lest of the which would send many of our nice fault
finders once a day into a slow of Cow Casins, and glad they had it too. Al
these inconveniences and wantes, huntes not the borne whelps to seek new
footyng, neither makes them ye less careful with manlike war to defend their
endeavors. Thus see you barbarous Ethnickes, wild Christians, and superstitious
nations at this present if you search their professions, to the which (I mean
not too digress) to leave their native country. Well I tell you, but yet I
must further, because I cannot omit those country lovers, whose memory, well
meaning writers to us, have sent us, for a token to follow. I cannot run
over all their actions: some I have perused and more forgotten, but too a
wylling mind, a few honest examples may enduce too the contrary. I shall but
Lateram lauare, tho I were never so curious, an unprofitable office to me, and
as little beneficial to my Brick. But have at you (which is no fair play as
old gamsters report) with such matter as I find in ancient writings. At the
laying of the first stone of Rome, Romulus made an Edicte that no person
should pass the appointed bounds of the City, which Remus smyling at, and
coming out of the same, Fabius Celer Ce^turio with a spade slew him, wholly
respecting the stablishment of the common wealth, and not regarding the peril
might ensue his rash stroke. Look upon Horatius Cocles valiantness, and
great venturyng of himself iu the wars, Porsenna King of the Tuscanes, the
resolution of Mutius Sceuola for the dispatching of the same Prince, the whole
house of the Roman Fabians in the wars against Veranius, were utterly
extinguished, one child except, whose lack of years preserved his life,
being more beneficial to him and his posterity, than the country zeal of the
rest. By means whereof they yielded their dead Carcases. Decius Muries ye elder
Consul with Manlius Torquatus in arms against the Latins, had both one
^reame, that those people would be vanquished, whose captain should be left
dead in the field: They brake one with another, and agreed, that which of
their bands did first give place, the leader must vow himself to the infernal
ghostes, contented to dye: which Decius his chance was to do, and thereby with
great slaughter of the enemies, the gain was the Romans. Publius Decius
Muries his son did ye same. Titus Manlius Torquatus stroke off his own sons
head, for putting in ve^ture by fight contrary to commandment, the soldiers
of the Commonwealth: The prisoner Mar. Attilius Regulus his return to Affricke
to Barboras tyranny, with his considerations alleged in the Senate, which
induced him thereto. Publius Scipio Nasica chosen Consul of Rome with unlucky
show of the Auspices coming, would in no respect take upon him the dealing of
the office, doubting the inconvenience might hap to ye Empire, not by his want
of ability, or good will, but by evil fortune to the state, and contrary
aspects of the superor Planets, so tender a mind he had of his Country. Silla
surnamed the happy, for all his reuengeful mind, when he had obtained his own
will, and held hard hand on his country, was content to restore the old
government of Rome, and to die a private man. Quintus Curtius his willing
decay for Rome: Codrus ye Athenia^ king for his people: also Themistocles that
cou^triema^, for all the injuries he had received at home, would rather
willinglye drink his own bayne, than see his natyue kind harmed: Melsiades
of the same breed at Marathon against the invincible scull of the Persians:
Epaminondas the Thebane, and thousands more, for their wilful, entire, only,
and auowed love to their countries, have sustained more travail, suffered
greater torment, dyed assured deaths, and with better contented minds, than
men of this age can believe, to be able to be endured by mortlings which we
al are. If Paynimes did go so far in supremo gradu, look to your self
somewhat, who is a Christian, and so far credited as Parliament men are.
They expect in you gravity, wisdom, experience, and diligent consideration.
Part of the which, as they be only the gifts of God, as wisdom and
gravity, so experience and diligent consideration, be the confirmers that
strengthen, and the artificers that beautify their work, and proceed of payn^
taking, and good disposition of the mind. The foremost two be the most
beneficialst Ladies with their acquaintance, and the other handmaydes, or
rather fellow dames, so necessary, as they cannot be divided, furnishe most
commodiously the place where they come. These four met in one man, make a
happy person in particular, and where they join in Law makers, there must
needs be a flourishing Commonwealth. What inconvenience does follow, if you
should pipe after other men's whistles, induced thereto by a busy treble
string, or a slight Scottishe Iygge, in one respect I have already told you,
that is, how master John will be thought of by the Prince and nobility. Now
see what harm lights thereby on those, who put their confidence in you, and
what a John you shall be made and thought of the whole world. If you serve the
Princes turn, he finds no fault: if you broke for the Lords, they have no
loss* but they will take you still for a John, if against your trust you be
won. In this second part, if you dance drunkenly, you will break your
shinnes, and beray your trusters, to whom you are bound by all the laws
possible. If all the Knights and Burgesses in Parliament were Vlisseses, the
Syrenes might fall to a new occupation. But of that huge multitude that came to
the war of Tryoe, he was taken the odd manne for wit and judgment. If
but one Ulysses could escape those fiendish monsters, and so few Vlisseses in
so great an army, what peril is to be feared to fall upon our Common wealth,
if many Syrenes, or any at all should be in the trade of our whole traffic
of wealth and welfare. They allured unto them by all pleasant means the
passengers, to spoil the^ for their own direct and particular gain: if you
sing their songs, you are brought to it to please and to profit others, the
act in them is not so discommendable but you shall be the John, and rewarded
at the second hand: your fault is greater t^an the Syrenes, who harm but
the present persons for their own lucre, you, present, absent, and posterity,
you cut large thongs out of other men's lether: you fle^^e not, but you ^ley:
you write not laws with Milk, but blood: you send not the Pyper to make
poor men dance in the country, but the Hangman to tie up the rich, and take
from the needy no more but all they have: and thus must your trusters suffer
for other men's pleasures, who never after will trust you, knowing you are such a
mercinarie. The Parliament Sirene if he be of the Lords breed, as many times
in your house you have of their children, if of the familye of gentry, assure
your self he is a Basterd: if he look never so big fear him not, he is a
Coward: if he flourish with never so fair a tail, he is an Ass. Noble and
gentleman's blood, will not be won against his duty, and specially where it
touches his country, neither with honor, threatenings, great Territories, much
calling, gay apparel, nor a ship full of red Ruddocks. A valiant mind does
detest such chafe. A wise man will see the infamy of the fact, and with both
his hands keep his face from such a wound. Who then must be your Parliament
John, if you have any? some durte daubers son, or Cobblers brat, or such like
whelpe of a worthy Kenel, who will play Cat after kind, do the best you can:
he is Camelionte mutabillo^; yet for his heart the pretty prick cannot be
white: he lives by air (a food of a small substance) and he is of small
contynuing, he is Proteus Cousyn Germayne when he fails in hand with his
matter. But mark how like Jack lokes the father, his eye shows the relics of
his thoughts, his countenance is forced, his gesture not natural, if his
speech be not learned without book, for the most part he ^acks it hardly
out, he sweates, there is no joy in his face, he fears how he shall be taken,
he lokes as he were fearde with Hobgoblyn. But what will you more? tho Master
Morris dauncer be drunk, yet will he dance til he sweat for a clap of the
back of the chief man of the parish, tho he be the worse for it as long as
he live: even so this your Morris footer shakes his Belles among you, hoping
he makes good music, as the fool with the Town Morrishers, forgetting his
masters horse collers be robde of their trinckets: if he ring for the prince
he lays on load, if for the nobility, he shakes both legs at once, he
commends liberality, he praises mercy, he extolles just execution of laws, he
matches religion where it should be, he soundes out zealous care on poor
subjects, he preserues deligent watches for the enemy, he forgettes not to tell
what a virtue frugality is in the highest. All these and many more good taches
as may be, the King and Lords are at full furnished with. He has bin forsooth
perhap at Cambridge and learned the fragments of a little Sophistry, wherewith
he with his glosing tongue and white studied words may move many well meaning
Gentlemen, who for want of deep judgment may say yea to their own
prejudice, and the grauest heads without diligent heed may be brought to yield
to consent to matters they would be ashamed of upon ripe consideration, which
inconvenience, if it happen, what mischief shall fall to your whole state, who
so blind does not see? When this fine shaking tripper has done what he can, I
have told you the thanks he shall have of the prince and nobility: and when
you shall so dear pay for your learning, will you not with open throat hunte
the fool with Basins? sure yes, unless your simplicities be such, that for
the sure keeping of your private houses, you esteem a girning pattering ape
before the sad and true mouthed mastife. To turn the Cat in the pan, and to
be a hirelyng, or a penny boy ^or any particular person, to have clientes in
matters of Parliament, is token of too much vilitie ^ for couetyse is the only
occasion of too much forgetting your self. What should I write of this most
filthy, unnatural, and servile vice, which shall for a few angels make you
plead as parcially in parliament, as in any other Court, not regarding your
country, but the Iinks in your pocket. Such spokesmen I warrant you have the
matter at their ^ingers ends, the writer out of the Copyes of Bills is set a
work, and many times too for drawing the cause they come into the house, and
sit with paper books, often read them, well consider of them, and why? for
countries benefit (you may believe them if you will) but mark the
circumstances, and their pence are as well heard chocke in the Sachel, as the
white paper seen in hand. Why? the bil is either private touching some one,
else some very few, or else some one corporation of City, town or Marcha^ts,
else the fraternity of some occupation, or such like: for in deed we
dryehanded men, can not well tend the penning and copying out of Laws,
without a little moystnyng. But if they had any spark of virtue in them, they
would not prefer Chauke before Cheese, they would not like better of Carryn
than of new kilde victual, neither blind-feele them selves, and as much as
they may others, with so foul a sauering veil. The mind of many noble Panims
have abhorred such errors, and yet we Christ's professors to often run
headlong without backloking. Crates when he went to study Philosophy, cast his
worldely wealth into the Sea, blessing them with a mischief, and that he would
rather drown them, than they should choke him. Byas in the havoc of his
country when every one was busy to save somewhat, made no fardels of his
substance, but Roge fashion in that respect, walks away with his ordinary
weed, and being asked of some, why he had so small care of that which every
one so stirred for, replied, that he had all his with him, meaning, Learning
and virtue. Themistocles, after the overthrow of Marathon, seeing a ^ead
Corpse with Chains and Jewels, willed one to spoil it, saying, you are not
Themistocles him self, disdayning that vngentlema^ly hunger. Pittacus being
offered as much of his own conquest as he would, measured his ferme by launcing
of the spear, and more took not (a small field to make a park of, unless he
threw further than I can): Cocles (...) an Erledome for his service to the
commonwealth, he thought himself content, when great matters were pressed
upon him, with so much land as he himself being lame could plowe in a day, a
recompense that my Baylie of husbandry for two years service will frown at:
Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus was holding the plowe when he was elected Dictator,
performed great matters, returned to his Clownish husbandry again, and
twenty years after was eft called to ye room, which he discharged better
than any feed speaker in parliament can do, that I know: so that money did not
the deed: Menenius Agrippa, a well deseruer of the Roman Empire, for want of
his own purse was buried by contribution of the people: Martius Curiolanus
refused great matters, and accepted a tryfle: Curious Dentatus hoysing Pyrrhus
out of Italy, allotted to every Pol forty Iugeri of land (every Iugeri being
taken for our Acre,) and reserved as much and no more to himself, affirming
that there should be no man whom so much would not satisfy: to him from the
Samnytes (he being a rosting rapes,) was presented a great Mass of gold, but
despising that goodly show, he told them he liked very well to eat such
dainties as he had in hand in an Erthen dish and to rule those who had gold. Of
all the large and welthy spoils by him recovered of the enemy, he reserved but
one gay wodden chain, it was no doubt some matter of great price for the
workmanship: The few bags of P. Scipio Aemilius, M. Aemilius Scaurus father
a Patritian of Rome, getting his living by playing the Collyer: the nedynesse
of Epaminondas who was driven to borrowe thirty shillings when he entered Morea
in arms, refusing Iasons Crowns and the mighty king of Persians thousands:
Photion was no money man, who^ when Antipater would with great sums have
hired, to have unjustly delte, answered he could not both be a friend and a
flatterer. Many hundreds might be named, that were sound stakes to their
countries, and for all their poverty, would not cry Quid vultis mihi dare,
neither yet received when it was forced. O would to god, that in places of
judgment and iu^tice, and in ye hearts of al executioners and makers of Law,
Epaminondas his opinion were graven, not to be bought from his country with any
price, not to be l^d to do a thing unlawful for any gain, and what right and
virtue did require for virtues sake, freely to do it. Cato Vticensis, was of
the same mind. Come not into the sacred Senate (for so may I well term it)
with that ragged robe of covetous and Bribery, eschew it worse than the
infection of pestilence, leave it to brokers, to exchaungers, lay it in the
merchants warehouse, bequeath it to the usuring Jews: for if it catch hold in
you, farewell religion, farewell morality, farewell Justice, farewell discharge of
duty, farewell truth, farewell care of good fame, yea farewell your own
contentemente how gay so ever the matter seems: If for affection you stretch a
string, you cannot be excused, for tho it carry some show to bear with your
friend, yet is it none indede, for your Country is the only mark you must
shoot at. As for particulars, they are not incidente to the cause. Aristides
(termed the Just) was so precise in the time of his government of Athens, that
he avoided the amity and familiarity almost of all, because he would not be
entreated by any to do unjustly. Cleon, when he took the charge of the common
wealth upon him, called al his friends, renounced their friendships,
alleging that amytie was a stop many times to the right course of Justice: he
renounced affection, he cried out of envy, he detested too well standing in his
own conceit. Another way Sir Thomas Androwes, a worshipful Knighte of
Northampton Shire, was by a yeomanly man his neighbor thought to be sometime
to much affectioned to the matter he liked well, to whom he brought a great
Brawne: the servant letting his master the knight understand of this present,
returned him to know the giuers name, which hearing, he could not call to
remembrance any such, but forth he comes, the presenter does his errand,
prays his maistership to take in good part this poor pigge, and with very
low cursey wishes it better. Sir Thomas saw the Swyne was good with mustarde,
accepted the gift, demanding his neighbor why he was at that cost with
him, since he neither knew him nor ever had done him any pleasure. True it is
(quoth he, with a long leg in his hose) neither will I require you too do me
any: But I bestow this hog on your worship, that you shall do me no harm.
Here is a new kind of Brybery, which this country man was driven to (as he
thought) by the parcial affection he feared in Sir Thomas. The like in effect
fell out between an Essex farmer and master Anthony Brown in Q. Mary's time,
a while chief justice of the Common pleyes, a man of good spirit and well
read, who having used the help of his neighbors toward his building besides
Burnedwood, till they were weary, and denied further supply: the house must up,
my Lords Balife will have carts for love or money, and so he offers largely
both: the turn is served, my friends Carters must al dine, out comes the
steward, willing such as bounded for good will, to come and feed in the parlor,
and the money people too hind it in the Hall: my farmer at the Oyes went and
walked his stations abroad, and being demanded whether he would be a
gentleman or a yomen, he said neither in this respect, for (quoth he) for good
will I do it not, for I owe him none, nether for money, for I force not of so
much, but for fear, and therefore I see no rome for me. I pray you aunsweare
me, if you had a matter in law before any judge in England, and he should
either by corruption or blindefelde affection wreste a pin against you and
overthrow you contrary to justice, would you not judge hanging too good for
such a coyfe manne, yes assuredly. Then in the parliament, where you sit to
make Laws, whereby Master Judge himself and al ye rest are to be governed, if
you be brybed wc pelf, or led by liking of a particular to beguile your
trusters, to bind and poll innocents, to wrong the righteous, and to set the
welfare of your cuntry at naught. If Cambises pluckte the skin over Sisamnes
ears for lewd judgment in particular causes, what fleying and torment is not
too good for the corrupt lawmaker, who is supra iudicem? If malice and envy
shall so reign in you, as to disgrace the wholesome aduices of your country,
you will refuse the matter, because you fancy not the man, and cavil without
cause, not only to have the motion rejected, but also the party deserving
well unseemly to be barked at, not only by your self, but by other pupsies of
your own hear, the like detryment as before shall happen too your country. Yea
and more infamy if more may be, shall light on you, if it so were that
unkindness or rather implacable wrath, yea the Northern deadely fude were
between you and some other, ye ought to come to the Parliament counsel lincked
in amity, sound in fidelity, and perfect in sincerity one with an other, and
as a teame of horses must draw all together, so must you wholly join too your
business. There are many times unruly Iades, vnagreeing and la^ching one at
another, being out of their gares, but in the carte they fall to as they should,
else he that loyters most, or plays to much the galla^t, is well lambde for his
labor, co^mes home as weary as the rest, is up in Royles stable, and if he
sooner mende not his manners, Master Miller must have him, who will cool his
courage with half a dosen Sackes on his back, and he on the top. The weight
shall make him amble and manerly tread, and sooner he shall be laid on for
groaning, than for kicking: so if malice and displeasure to others shall make you
to stomach them abroad, yet in counsel for your country draw together, else will
you be ready for the Miller, who will lay hard hand on you. I mean the honest
and wise meaning gentleman, not by batting, but by conde^ning your unruled
apetite, and lame^ting your mayme. The serpent (for so are all venomous things
named) that crepes on the Earth, when for breed sake at the water side he
seeks out the Lamprey, he first puts forth his poison, and as nature has
taught, calls, to whom the Lamprey as willing comes forth: The act of their
kind performed, she to the flud, he to the Earth, taking up again his venom,
returns, which if perhap he find not, present death ensues. Here do you see
that of all creatures the vylest and most accursed does in danger of his life
put aside the whole substance of the same, by pureness and cleanenesse to
associate him self with that Creature whom he well knows does not hold of his
mixture, and will rather venture his own undoing, than hinder yt which
naturally is appointed. If the Serpent does this, following but only a course
by kind, and is allowed of. How much more is a Parliament man, who by nature,
by the commandment of God, by the profit redownding to himself, the duty to
his Prince and country, bound too vomit up and to bury in the greatest deepes;
that consuming and pestiferous canker of Malice, by the which so many
mischiefs light upon the Lampreys good souls that think no harm. This
Serpent is venomous from the beginning, the lack whereof is his end. Man by
the first fall proceeding by the delusion of the Serpent, is subject to
intemperate choler, hate, despite, envy, and many weaknesses more, yet this
subjection brings no such necessity, y^ malice is so incorporate in a man, as
the poison in the Serpent, for the one cannot have being without venom, the
other most quiet and assured life here without malice and a very good token of
a better turn after his disceasse. What a Jewel love and unity is, dignity
does teach: what overthrow to states and kingdoms does hap by division and
discord, scripture does no better show, than daily experience confirms, this
great Mon^ter, this dangerous consumer, this unrecoverable spoy^e^, most
commonly takes foot by trifles, is nourished by trifles, grows mad by
trifles, and triflingly in the end brings it self to naught, and as many more
as it can. A^ small sparks kindled in backcorners many times spredde to such
large flames as the finest buildings and the greatest Cities be thereby brought
to ashes, so first unkindness conceived of tales increased with ouerweaning of
a ma^s self, and made ripe with choler, overthrows the making of wholesome
laws, the due execution of those be made, brings continual disquietnesse to all that any way ^e sib to the matter, private slaughters, furious actions,
neglected duties, hateful companies, ielious assemblies, civil wars, ruin to
the commonwealth, and condemnation for the immortal power. Themistocles and
Aristides, the rulers of the Athenians state, did often iar, and were but
hollow friends: but when they joined in the service of their country either to
field to strike it out, or to Embassage to reason the business, they laid
aside their old and usual heart burnings, and at their return resumed the^
again. Phocion for no offense would be displeased with his neighbor Citizen
Liuius. Salinator being Consul with Claudius Ne^o his contrary, sought his
friendship, least by their disagreeme^t, the commonwealth should receive
harm. Cato Vticensis as he most stoutely stood against al men, yea Caesar him
self in ye behoof of the commonwealth, so did he never stur up in mind any
unkindness or injury done to him in particular. Cretin of Magnesia seeing ye City
in danger by the coming foreward of Methridares conquestes, and doubting more
peril to it by the ambition of Hermias his fellow countryma^ and his misliker,
perceiving y^ the stomach of one town could not digest two so (...) mate^,
made him this offer, to choose whether he would defend y^ town (...) home, or
spend his time abroad? (...) left y^ helm to him, departed the town well
furnished by Cretius liberality, who contrary to all expectation holds his
own. where the (...) Hermias (...) his (...) than ye enemies weape us. In
these persons their (...) to the (...) considerations rare, and their treading
(...) of affections a thousand thousand times too be extolled. The
Lacedaemonians, because they would have their children eschew drunkenness,
they used their slaves by ouermuche taking in their Cups too play the
^anykin beasts, and then were the ^outhis broug^^e to see that so swinishe and
unnatural sight, which they could not but abhor, and the sooner bear away,
to avoid such errors. In like manner, if you will behold the malicious and
collericke man in his vain, all the parts of his body shakes, he is
Paraliticus, his color either is earthly, or very extreme Crymson, his eyes
fyry, his visage wryed unnaturally, his voice lost and abated, his experience
forgotten, and lastly his senses clean overthrown: he presupposes that his
wilfulnes in setlednesse, his threatening currage, his cruel disposition a
token of an invincible mind, his scolding hate of vices, his heat zeal, that
he is temperate and yet Tombedle^s worse, and in fine judging him self not to
want any virtue, he wants all: that he is sober, yet berayes him self every
day fowler than the beastly Bacealean: that forsooth he is a good Master of
sense, and yet well knocked by every boy, and in his best cunning breaks his
foles face with his own weapon. These persons be of weak natures, void of
learning, deprived of reason, blind in judgment, forsaking remedy, refusing
aduices, given over to their own appetites, careless to loose their friends,
h^delesse to purchase enemies, ready to strike for every wagging of astrawe,
patter they care not what, and so assuredly graceless and not to be
accompanied with. If you would be rid of this infirmity, behold your self in
a glass when these passions come upon you. If you be scratched by the face,
you will call to see your hurt, to view your malicious collericke mind, which
will appear in your visage with greater disgrace than tearings to the bone:
will you send for Galen, if he were alive to help your head ache? will you
entreat the Merchant from the Mollucce to bring you spice, to comfort your
disgestion, and will you not put to the sea, send your factours, yea go your
self to Anticera out of that friendly I Will, to bring home the hole bottomes full
of that beneficial herb Helleborus so mollify your malice, to banishe your
collar and to make you for swear your fury, stick not to bestow some pence
upon the confection Nepenthes, which will ease this want. Children and fools,
and some weak women grow in frensies when they may not have their own wills:
the child says, give me some of dat, or I will tell my mother: the fool if you
please not him, he will bite his own flesh and see who shall have the worste:
the good wife, if her trinckets be forgotten, she puts the finger in the eye,
bytes the lip, and perhaps swears knave, and all for lack of a ladle or such
like. Let the furious envious man at his home-comming reuolue his actions, and
he shall perceive not all well, unless he will perforce be blind: If he have
shamed himself, and injured his better, what help? how can this be salued?
with crying Peccaui? that goes hard in a Parliament house, in secret so to
say will not serve, for that the party wronged has no full recompense. Behold
some of our ordinary creatures, and you shall see such implacable disposition in
them, a^ show greatly the Collerick man. The Back being in hand, will not leave
biting her self: the Badger kept perforce from his usual liberty, makes no
spare of his own flesh: and master Jack Dawe (a daily acquaintance of our
poor men that dwell in thatched houses) will rather dye for peevishness, than
take bread at their hands who willingly give it. Such a bug beast was
Stesiphon, who would bite his Moyle by the ear for stumbling and kicking,
Moyle it with his heels at the poor Ass. I once knew a gentleman at Boules,
who not liking of his fortune, made a quarrel to his Boule, fynding fault
therewith, often throwing it against the pales in great choler, by chance or
what I know not, at last it rebounded against his shynnes, and welfauoredly
brake the^ both, wherwyth the Dagger comes out to revenge this mischaunce on
this poor piece of wood, and snapping therevppon, the Scottishe blade was
snapt in pieces: O dirum facinus and quouis animo creduli dignum, Alexander
that glorious Conqueror and great Monarche, endued with so many good parts and
gifts of nature, never touched his honor, but by this filthy choler and fury,
which he being possessed with, most unadvisedly slew his faithful and well
advised follower Clito, brother to Hellanice, nurse or rather mother to
Alexander, as him self accounted, who had at the journey of Granico saved his
life from the blouddy fistes of Spithridate. And Phesas played the Tirant upon
Calisthenes, most cruelly inured up with a Lion that odd Macedonian leader
Lisimachus. The lettes that Olimpias his mother conceived against Antipater the
Lieuetenante of al Macedony in his absence, her continual complaints to her
son of him, made Alexander first loose a good servant, and after his own
life, Cambises that frantike king of Persia, by fury and light taking of
displeasure, slew his own brother Smerdis, killed and repudiated his wife
Atossa, for conde^ning the Act, and upon a time putting a Lion and a dog
together to prove maisteries, the dog put to the worse, an other of the same
litter taking part to help, at which sight his other wife Meroa ruing the
death of Smerdis, who found no succor or aid, at the last he commanded to be
dispatched. Presastes his sound and assured at all assaies, upon his own
demand for cou^celling some abstinence from his daily carowsing (a thing
misliked among the Persians) led with fury, forgetting all reputation that the
duty to him had well deserved, and so much of justice as is lamentable, playde
Will Summer, stroke him (as it were) that was next, took the son of
Presaspes, claue his heart with a spear for dispite before his fathers face,
caused it to be plucked out, and showed how right he could hit for all his cups.
Sophias the Emprises peuish mind and malice did hardly reward that famous and
fortunate defender of the Empire Narses, to the great detrymente of the same:
and many more but for spence of time, might be rehearsed, whose sudden
choler, fury, and intemperate rage, has caused full o^^ to be wise after, and
repent their blindfelde executions. Did not Xerxes that mighty king of Persia
in an other manner of distemperature, for the effect of his doings, show him
self a tal gentleman, at his coming down upon Grecia with an vnvsual army
for the greatness of the multitude, and understanding Mardonius his forgoing
Captain had lost many of his people at the mountain At^os in Thracia by
means of the Streightes and perilous passage thereof: he writes his
threatening Letters to the Rock, that he will hew it in pieces, bury it in the
sea, make an Island of it (which with an inestimable charge he did) if he
suffered no better passage to the Persians. Himself coming to the sea at
Hellespon^, commanded a bridge to be made to pass him and his company over,
which overthrown by Tempest, some of the workmen he hangs, some other he
cuttes their noses off, some other puttes their eyes out: he makes the sea to
be canuast with cudgels, he throws fetters and gives into it, to imprison the
waters. What lamentable folly is here, that Xerxes shows, which unadvised
choler brings him to, and makes him follow so soon with roted and implacable
malice, on such who receive no detrime^t thereby, but him self diverse ways
greatly harmed. Be it that injury be offered you wrongfully and unworthy, by
odyous speeches, or unseemly acts, remember Philip of Macedone, of who^
Arcadian did nothing but rail and lie, and that openly always, and in all
places. It so happened that this Squire was met with in Philips country by the
kings servants, who advised sharp paymente for his pains: that would not be
heard, but Philip sent presents to his lodging, and gently dismissed him. After
demanding of Arcadians behauior, it was returned, that none bestirres
himself so much in his comme^datio^s now as he. Thus may you see (quoth
Philip,) what a Physician I am: It was told him how the Gretians murmured
hardly against him, and was moved by some to revenge the wrong: No (quod he)
then will they in deed fourd me bad enough, for if I had ever hurt them, what
shall I presuppose they would say. Socrates patiance every body knows, who among
other parts of the same, having once drawn his weapon over his servants head
to strike, staying, remembered he was a Philosopher, and in fury, and therefore
held his hand. Pericles, that noble (...) bring most opprobriously skolded at
in the streates, at the heels followed to his own doors by a lewd person, bare
it as belonged to so worthy a gentleman, and commanded his man with torche
light too bring this gentle guest home. Teleclus king of Lacedemonia answered
a brother of his very well, who found himself grieved that the Citizens of
Sparta delte hardlyer and less dutyfully toward him, than to Teleclus: quoth
he, you misconceiue the matter, for you cannot bear any small injury.
Antigonus being to his teeth told of his unseemly shape and laughed at,
coldely replied, that then he was much beguilde; for he took him self to be a
proper fellow. One showed Diogenes varlets that mocked him, and I, quoth he,
find not my self mocked. King Archelaus having water powered on his head,
satisfied those that would have him punish the doer, that the party threw it
not upon him, but on one he took him for. Diverse Philosophers would not
chastise when they were angry.

But to come to our own time as it were. Let me not trouble you with too long
a rabble of those pacient people, but make an end* with two notorious examples,
the one of a late great and worthy Emperor Charles the fifte, known to many
in England now living: The other, of a poor Friar Gentleman our countreymanne
Dan Peto, well kende to many in Queen Mary's time. The Emperor lying before
Landersey, where he had certain English soldiers in his aid, in his greatest
glory amidst his own and waged strangers, a Spaniarde so laid at him, as no
more marvelled at the lewdenesse of the person (whose country yeeldes obedient
and patient men to the magistrate and no lauishmouthed whelps with such furious
extremity, than at the mildness and curtious answer of so mighty a prince.
The Spaniarde hightes him the son of a whore, a Bougger, a Marano, the most
odious name wc that nation, and as many more, as either Ruffian or Rogue can
devise. Charles lokes at him, saying, Habla Cortesment saldado without any
further stir. Father Peto I mean for age of whom I might also well think,
but that his Friars weed who purchased him a king Henry knock, stays me for
saying to well of him: yet his patience and answer, showed him no ordynary
Franciscane, but a well meaning Friar, if any of that Court can so do, at the
old swan beside London Bridge, with two or three with him, the old fellow
takes boat to the Court at White Hal, which new launched from the shore,
one from land sendes him a brickbatte, and therewith such a pa^te on the breast,
that down fell the feeble* Friar half dead: some of his company bussling to the
Steare to reprehende this lewd or laudable doer (take him as you will) Peto
stayde, saying, the stone was not cast at him, but at his graye robe, for
(quoth he) if the party knew me, he would have staide his hand. If such
charitable forbearing be commendable where men are so hardely delte with, how
much then is to be condemned, that ire and choler, which as I have said,
kindled of nothing, grows of that most pestilent plage of envy and malice.
Follow ye sound doing of him who is wary what speeches he uses, and glories in
sufferaunce, and not that fether headed fellow, who braues in his furious and
chollerike words, and loves himself ye worsse when he bears any thing.
Plutarch gave good council to Trayan the Emperor, willing patience in all
occurents, mildness in actions, and to forbear the hasty witless Brains.
If by your speeches in the Parliament you seek vain glory by far fetched
eloquence and nedelesse phrases, delating the matter to show the ripeness of
your judgment more than directly to go to the cause and make it understood,
you may well show some great flourish of great substance, which in the end will
be found but froath, and all the stir but ^il men's ears full of dynne, who will
find yt the stuff smelles of the Candel, and deem you had bin better
occupied to have spente a Torche in traueling to learn the nature of the law
you would speak of, than a candels end in study to play the Charlatane, to
put your self to sale. The old, grave, wise and well experienced Parliament
man, if he discourse of any cause, if he show his opynion, if he lay before
you what his long years has taught him, he plays not, as the Hob of
Hornechurche, who having never seen London before, nor London seen him, in his
Christmas suit sent to Bartholmewe fair, entering at White Chapel, buys
nothing but gaping seed, persuaded that as he is delighted to gaze, so others
omit not too look on him, whereby it is night ere he comes to Aldegate, and
so as wise as Waltons Calfe, is feign to return home more fool than he came,
for spending of horsemeate. And why forsooth? because he has bin so long in
the suburbs, as he lost his market in the City. This man (I see makes not a
millers thumb of his Oration, whose head is bigger than all the body,
unproportionable, neither yet without head and all tail, neither Like fashion al
belly, but as much of every one as is needeful. English man like he uses
good words, the matter well declares his sound meaning, his countenance
shows the inward manne, the welding of his body tells me he has bin trained
in other places than Horn Church. He is as well contented to hear as to
speak. He confers patiently, with modesty, he yeeldes to reason, loves
himself not the worsse if his Arguments be confuted, nor enuies him whose
reason is better allowed of, but embraces the manne greatly for him self. If
his advise carry the house, he prowdes not, but reioyces, his country takes
good, and the house reputation: he does not with fleering taunting words, nor
importunate yelling, snatch at his contraries, nor desire their wantes to be
seen, but fellow counselor like, lays some reasons before them, famyliarly
confers with them, and friendlye many times bears with the Collerick and
unseemly speeches which men too well deeming of themselves too often utter
without cause. If he play Alexanders part, by being a man, as errare, labi, and
decipi hominis est, if he kill Clito wrongfully, if he tread amiss, he
shameleslye bears it not off with head and shoulders, he repentes virginlike
his error, and does not Pickepursse fashion face out a lie, til just mends be
made, he bewailes his mishap, as Alexander did most nobly in that his action,
he conceiues no privilege by being in Parliament to injury any man with
opprobrious tauntes, a lamentable fault in such men: he plays not the part,
which once an ancient gentleman and grave counceller told me he had seen
some do, which was, so intemperatly, rudely, rashly, and maliciously to use
some in that place, as he assured himself he thought they durst not do in an
Ale house, for fear of a knock with a pot. There are some who always love to
hear themselves talk, and think their smokye forced eloquen^e sweet perfume
and pleasante melody to men's ears. They whip it, they lay (...) load, tho
sometime and for the most part they want learning: their Accentes are heeded,
the Pa^^^heses performed, Allegories not forgotten, old stories brought in,
Sackfuls of ancient sentences, and after the Spanish Friars manner, they more
harm the pulpit with knocking thereon; than benefit the audience, more
disquiet themselves by broyling in their woollen weeds, than move the hearers
with matter of substance, and finally, have so great care of gay words, picked
speeches and phrases, ordering of their voices (and as I may say,) traversing
their ground, as they so much forget their matter, that as they never know
what they have said: so parts their church Auditors as well taught as my
Lord Majors horse when his good Lord is at the Sermon at the Cross Stratocles
and Democlides were Orators at Athens, yet so may I not well term them, but
rather Italian triacle sellers* who never were but prating to the people, not
to profit the common wealth, but to fill their own purses by their Lamp
studied ware, rather to delight than to do good, in so much as they used
between themselves in mockery, to ask whether they should go to their gold
harvest. These men who carry their hearts in their tongues, and not their
tongues in their hearts, these women's children Orators, these goselings
talkers, should be delte withal, as a very friend of yours and mine Master
Nicholas Beamonde (whose honest gentlemanlye mirth yet remaynes) dealt with a
man of good countenance of Leistershiere in his own house: The tale is
somewhat homely, but no homelier than well done, and so well, as tho it were much
homelier, it were the homelyest part of all too leave it forgotten. A company
of good fellow gentlemen, being at bourde with this housekeeper, with whom
Master Beamonde made one, the goodman of the house had all the talk when the
cups were well gone about the bourde, others would have also had some words,
but it would not be. When mine hoaste had wearied all the company, and him self
very well contented with the harmony of his own ^iddle, which still he was
doing with, Master Beamond who as you know, is not amiss made for the
purpose, let go a rouncing poupe, which base was heard above the
Countertenor, or past mean of the wearysom melody, not only of the
assistants, but of the Musician, who demanding what the matter was, master
Nicholas answered, he craved leave for a word that way, for otherwise he could
get none. Whether it were well done or no, I can not tell, but I am sure it did
and has moved good laughter, and perhaps done no harm to some great talkers
that hear the same, I would to god these talkatiue folk would but think how
little good they do, what great pains they take, how they weary themselves and
others, how men smyle at their follies and they see it not, sure they are
always of the wise used, as Aristotle used one, who with a long process de Lana
Caprina had pattred unto him, in the end, quoth he, Sir I have thus troubled
you with my speech, not a whit (quoth Aristotle) for I took no heed to any
word you spoke. Demosthenes was an odd Orator of his time, as his Orations
now extante do very well witness, and would you not think yt he that found
fault with the^ for length, went about to find a knot in a rush, and yet
Phocion was prefered before him, whose works (more the pity) we have not, for
his short compendious substanciall and sound speech. If Demosthenes be long,
who is short, to speak of our common talkers? Again, there are diverse other
very grave, wise, learned, and perfect deeming men, who never or very seldom
speak in parliament, of which some I have known my self and lamented their
dumnesse, because their speeches I am assured most plentifully would profit our
co^monwelth. The men I honor for themselves, but more for the good parts in
them, which since god has so liberally bestowed, I would beseech the^ and al
others able to speak, not to put their lights under a Bushel. Pithagoras made
a law, that the tongtyed man who could not speak, should be driven out of the
state: and then (with reverence I write it) what blame are they worthy to have,
who can, and will not, and in that place where most need is whereby their
vttrance most fruit may begathered (and their ability most able to perform
it) As no man can commend a young experienced man who shall put forth himself
in counsel to show his opinion before the aunciente and year beaten fathers,
so what good mind will not grieve to see the studied Doctors still, and the
Children dispute in matters of great weight: both does well. Do not mistruste
your own hability, as Thophrastus did, who taking upon him to play the Orator,
when he came to it, could not utter any one word. You speak among your
countrymen, you speak for your countries advancement, and like a Countryma^
of the wisest you shall be accepted. Although happily all things should not fall
out so point devise as either you wish or others look for. Isocrates that
famous Orators childishe timerousnesse who can allow of, who in Concione
never durst open his lips? As this maidenly bashfulnesse is to be diswaded,
so again Cicero the Dad of the Romayne eloquence, his carful head is to be
followed, who with a warely fear entered Oratio^s. The erst named Pericles,
unwilling spoke publikly, yet never ommitted his furtherance where it could
profitte his Country. Wherefore as dainty regard of speech is to be embraced,
so dumnesse according to Pithagoras is utterly to be bannished. If you will not
speak, dare not, or cannot, let another have place. England is no graunge, it
can sufficientlye supply Parliament men. Thus (as you see) have I tumbled my
tubbe, and found my self occupied to lay before you with good meaning
(whereout I trust you may reap some profit) ^he notes minded in my passed
years, and now for this present called to remembrance. I beseech god you and
al of this counsel of Parliament both now and always hereafter, in all causes
and at al times may be lincked in one concord, friendship, and amytie,
embracing and respecting the wealth and estate of your Country, that
experience, learning and wisdom abound in you, that your hearts be of
flynte, not of wax, wherein threats may not enter, fair words have working,
nor briberie leave print, private affections to be quite vanished, malice and
fury utterly forsworn, selfelyking detested, vain bablatiue speeches cried
out of, needful words and times observed and tended, and finally, your trust
(as becomes your lykes) discharged, whereby religion shall be stablished and
maynteyned, the Prince strengthened and assured, the Nobility honored and
increased, the meaner sort merelye enjoy their labor with duetifull minds to
serve with body and pursse their country and king, and with acknowledging due
honor to their Peers, which will make not only ^ present age, but our
posterity continually to sing Te deum and Hosanna in excelsis for the
pleasant and adamant state which England dwellers may justly vaunte off, which
to grant and continue in seculum seculorum, God send. Amen.

FINIS.

