THE GLASS OF MAN'S FOLLY, AND MEANS TO AMENDMENT, for the health and wealth
of soul and body.

The second Edition.

This Glass of Man's folly, is that we may know,
The cause of the cruelty, which daily does flow.
Such powling, such pilfring, such gryping for gain,
And great greedy gathering, as purchase our pain.
Such Whores and such Thieves, Bankrouts, and Beggars,
Quarrellers, Fighters, and merciless Murderers.
Such wrangling for wealth, and care for to get,
Such loss of soul health, as canker shall fret.
Such evil, and such envy, heart-hatred, and strife,
Such serving of Satan between Man and Wife.
In this Book is showed, diabolus devises,
And also reproved, his subtle enterprises.
Therefore (gentle Reader) deal thou not so rashly,
To reprove with reproching the thing that mislikes thee.
The Learned allows this, which virtue embrace,
For none but ill actions, it seeks to deface.
And if it do touch thee, turn prating to praying,
Least Zelotipus Deus, correct thy gaine-saying.
LONDON Printed by T. C. for I. H. 1615.

TO LOVERS OF Virtue, and Haters of vice, be Grace and Peace.
BLessed and dearly bought by Jesus, this book does disprooue, that most do
love, and is liable to the leaude.

It is like that such as love their sins herein reproved, will mislike it,
and me, for reproouing: for strikers at vices, are struck with calumnies.
Therefore to Gods children is my dedication, to patronize it when the impious
despise it. I made it that God may be glorified, you comforted, the wicked
rebuked. I beseech you accept it, as a Mite cast among greater Teasures, for
Gods word is the warrant. If any object there be many good books extant, It is
requisite: for people be many, and sins do multiply: Grudge at no good
books, grieve for sin. We may admire and lament for those of ridiculous
Ribauldrie, which derogates Gods glory. The Inuenter, Printer, Seller, and
Buyer, must remember they are means to win the devil darlings. It is odious
how by many they are perused and iterated, but the good refused. It does
divulgate that satan win and winew us, and that the tares his Adherents,
spring thicker then the good Corn.

It is grievous to think how we grieve our good God. Impiety is so spread
that there was never more need of reproof. The best Books please not the
proud, Momus maligneth. Herein is expressed comfort for the contrite, severity
for the obstinate, whose stony hearts deserves hammers, for them sharp speech
is requisite. Valete.

Combibo counsels not to be counseled, and would the Author alter.
WHy trouble you my merry mind?
I cannot love nor like ye:
Unto my corpse you are unkind,
So much to move and mind me.
It is your loss it gets no gain,
Your Pen your profit hinder:
For to refrain from pot is pain,
My joy is carnal pleasure.
My Mates and I will look awry,
With frowning face we view ye:
Boore Bibax back-bites bitterly,
Superbia do iniure thee.
Capillatus he will work thee hate,
If you make books to braide us:
We are at ease, com, be our mate,
In pleasures great not grievous.
Astutia will thee despise,
Aleator casts in his lot:
Salax against thee does devise;
Refuse thy Pen, let us fill the pot.
Constancy consented to.
Fear not the face of Fancy fine,
No leaud life, nor love lust?
Seek thou the safety of their souls,
In God put thou thy trust.
Thy Book good people well does like,
Send forth therefore this Dove;
To bring with joy in Arc aright,
By means of God his love.
Pray thou to God this work to bless,
That it may hale to Heaven:
GOD glorious is, all praise to him,
Good people say Amen.
Optime Deus esto nobiscum, nunc and in auum.
THE GLASS OF MAN'S FOLLY.
ALthough little considered of some, (yet are they not ignorant of this) that
we should live according to Gods will revealed in his word, and be careful to
win each other; doing our industry to show the things he has commanded,
detesting and reproouing that he has forbidden. And amity does animate us to
illustrate Gods glory in all our actions, (which is the final cause of man's
Creation) therefore mentioned in this praeludium. Such follow not their
pha^tasies, as our adversaries of the truth do: Psalm. 97.7.
for ietting Jesuits and bloody Papists call stocks and stones Laye-mens
books, yet God Omniscient does convince it. Confounded be all they that serve
graven Images, that boast themselves of Idolles. Esaias, 42.8. I am the Lord,
that is my Name, and my glory will I not give to any other, neither my praise
to graven Images. Saint David teaches us the true way that directed him right,
Ps. 119.105
Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. In which as in a
myrrour if we search with true prayer, we shall see light more fulgent then
the bright Sun beams, to show us the way to walk to Gods glory. From which
Canonical rule Satan makes an aberacion: Therefore in hate to him, and love
to man, here is reproved, Not using the Victuling-house for necessity, but
the common and accustomed sin of Drunkenness, that daily increases: From
which except with speed we refrain, we procure Gods high displeasure to be
powered ever upon us.

The Apost. S. Paul, endued with a heavenly spirit, foreknowing future things,
with praemunition, gives a caveat; 2. Timoth: 3. This know also that in the last
days, perilous times will come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves,
which is to be understood of the inordinate love of their bodies, for while we
live so, we are enemies to our souls, which are our selves. Corpora nostra
non sunt nos. Our bodies are not us, Rom: 8.12. To the which we are debtors,
but not to live after the flesh. Yet till we the belly, and fainte the soul:
delighting so in liquor that thereto we lust. Belly-gods abuse their bellyes,
they can carouse at all times, thyrstie or not, as much in one day as might
serve some men ten: So impudent and shameless, that they rather boast thereof
then be ashamed. Bibax addicted to Bibaculus, in Cliant to Bacchus,
frequenting Bachanal till he be Bacchatus. The deceyuer inticeth to excess to
torment us. Some seldom cease, but are exorbitant from goodness, flexible to
folly, pliant to impiety, with delectation in such doings. Their odious
actions shows affections are not fixed on God to love him, and with fear to
offend him, except a servile fear, as Satan has, it is to be feared, some
want it. For though some do boast they are saved by Christ, they deny him in
their deeds. The fruits bewrayes the heart to be false. Psalm: 14.
The fool has said in his heart, there is no God: their deeds say, so do
they. The sucking sin is as common as the Cartway, which is to be deplored,
and daily reproved. Much festinacion not to be fasting, to fatting, turning
pot after potfull into wide weasands, and bias bellies making them gutters of
gulpers, and swiltubs for swyne. Insatiable in receiving, and ready in
expelling, near the Door so perspicuous, as their priuities may be perceived.
Then again, into the Den with an Anthem, fill and fetch, have for half, not
having ariditie, yet a pint at a draught drawing destruction. Cauponula
catches them, the Tap-tarrier inticeth them, to power in pots plentifully,
trip and turn a Dye daintily, swear and stare, iet and jest, cogge and lie
leaudly, in the blind Alehouse not licenced, where the Host sits half rotten,
void of fealty, full of fallacy, like the Image in time of blindness, which
shaked the head meriliest to them that gave most: So excess makes men beasts
and worse; Modum adhibent apperitui, They measure their appetites by the rule
of necessity: but men with reason, become unreasonable, of whom it is written,
Esaias 22.23. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. Ede, bibe,
lude, is the Epicures felicity. Christ says, Ioh. 6.12.
Let nothing be lost; but they spill and spoil. Combibo carous till Colon
crack, Bibbers are bountiful to abuses, not to good uses.
he blows and boasts he must not be miserable, not remembering the misery of
thousands ready to miscary for want of that he wastes. Math. 5. Blessed are
the merciful; but excessive Suckpots show themselves miscreants without
comiseration, sympathy, or fellow-feeling of famished folks and children. They
pity not their own spiritual misery how Satan deludes them of the Benisson;
but are foggie, full of fastiuitie, loath to linquish, like to languish, and
illiterated, not knowing a letter, he fills the Chimney end with Praebibo tibi;
and Lice often fitter for that place then Latin. Lazy Lads likes it, and
calls for liquor lively. Meretrix is an inticer to the slaughter. The lewd
are delighted; for they reprove not impiety, but get impiously, and spend
prodigally, till that got with a reach, is lost by a stretch. True dealers are
spighted, which mislikes their misdoings, and spends as riches extends. There
be Victualers far off and near me, that honor God by their victualing: they
reprove their guests for great drinking, rude talk, and swearing, not having
their houses dens for Devils. Some others, like Proteus (which would change
himself to al likeness) frame themselves as every man is affectioned,
flattering those that plye the pot fastest; no assiduitie delayed. So youth
prove poor, and without a penny, departs in anxietie. Luke 15.13.
The prodigal son wasted his substance with riotous living, so long as
lasted his portion he was in estimation; but when all was gone he would have
filled his belly with the husks that the Swine did eat, and no man gave unto
him. Even so, when men are poor and purse empty, their absence is liked more
then their company. Yet people, whose delight is to peep into a pot, will not
be warned; but may be compared to Philoxius, Arist. Eth. 3.10.
which wished his neck longer then a Cranes, to feel the more pleasure in the
long running down: which mind is far from the faithful, whose affection is
in heaven. Therefore, ye Corpulents, all for the corpse, that frequent quaffing
and riot, like untamed Tigers, and bruites unbridled, if you would use
military resistance against Mille-artifex, which conquers you like Cowards,
ye would tame your bodies, and nourish your souls: but not feeling his
circumuents, ye live to your lusts, ye drink and eat at ease, not having
the combat Gods children have. O, let us repent, lest we have our portion in
this life. Psa. 17.14.
Lament. 3. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed. To him be all
honor for ever, Amen.

Sit laus Sanctae Trinitati.

Effects of drowsy Drunkenness.
THe receipt of men's money superfluously spent is odious to a good conscience.
Their wives and children want sustenance, she knows not at what Alehouse to
find him: and seeing her goods consuming, and children crying, she tells him
his fault, and entreats him to be frugall. The Beer piercing his brain, he
counts her counsel hostility: he stamps and staggers, stares, swears, and
blasphemes the Almighty, which hideous oaths, whereby Gods wrath is kindled. He
gives her blows, no beef, whereby love decreaseth, hatred increases. When
they should pray, they prate, and depart, or live peruersely. The patrimony
might have maintained family hospitality, and been left to the posterity:
but two years drinking caused the dissipation. The sequel is evil; great
disturbance to good people, whom they cosen, theeue, and purloine from,
procuring the Prison: there they have hunger, thirst, cold, lamenesse, lice,
loathsome, noisome: a Dogs death is procured, which was by means of wasting.
At the Gallows they cry out of Alehouses, evil inticers, licentious living,
drunkenness, whoredom, theft, and chambering, which erst would not be told
of; neither will many that now are dissolute: but power into the paunch, till
(alas) had-land is lousy.

Good Hoasts foresee this, and give good counsel: but an (Antithesis) evil
Host does not; they and their colleague companions are flexible, but to
virtue adverse. He that idely spends his patrimony, deserves this Epithete;
(Spend-thrift,) but such as consume it in Drunkenness, are execrable creatures.

O ye consumers, ye are thieves to your families, enemies to God and to your
own souls and bodies, and robbers of all the needy. Woe be to such as cause
the poor to cry, and procure GOD to withdraw his blessing from Land and Sea.
Yet Colon increases Cholera, procuring profusion, the full gorge foames froth.
Present pleasure seems sweet, not regarding that bitter gnashing follows
quaffing: for it does contaminate the soul. Excess of cold Frumenty fills
men full of infirmity. Genesis 19.
Lot thereby committed lust and incest. It causes Lethargy and sleeping, and
quails good qualities. Ierom. Venture mero aestuans spumat in libidinem: The
belly inflamed with Wine, bursteth forth to lust. Beere-belly is inflamed, but
not ashamed; yet the woe of woes is pronounced. Oh, Esaias 5.11.
ye that can drink at all times, and think it mellifluous to be immoderate,
as instigators entice others, wound not your souls with woes.

Refrain from quaffing, it is a Hecticke, inflaming the soundest parts of the
body. It makes a good sanguine complexion puffed; if not pocky: but dead drunk,
pale. Quaffing makes men unquiet, intemperate, incontinent, envious, fierce,
wrathful to fight, curse and brawle. It hurts the brains, head, eyes, and
hearing, it causes plurisie, dropsy, to scorn, jest, and talk of bauldry:
as a quotidian Fever, it infeebleth the whole man, breeding diseases. It
infecteth soul and body, and procures plagues from the Almighty: it destroys
his benefits, and brings plenty to scarcity, and causes the poor, the aged,
and infants to cry for food. It offends the Omnipotent God, and is an
offense to all Gods children. All kind of sins wait on excess. It makes
men prompt to evil, perverse to piety: it gains the Gallows, and hell
without repentance. Yet Milleartifex, with excuse, says it makes him acute:
but how? to serve Asmodeus and Asotus: and therefore to be rejected as Aspis,
very venomous. It makes none ingenious to goodness, the evil effects are
monstrous. It dulles and takes away the senses, sets the eyes in the head
anstere and strange to behold. It makes a man a monster, metamorphosed from the
Image of God, to the image of the Devil: their actions are irksome to good
people, though the rude rejoice to see it. Quaffing is the occasion, if not the
cause of felonious thieves, and flattering thieves ( alias couseners:) the
first are dangerous; the last liker hypocrites, to insinuate and say they love
you, but it is the adiunct of your purse, promising, but never paying. I
restrain to particularize any by-qualitie or name, yet many deteine that is
not their own, but prosper not. The effect of drunkenness and gluttony is
poverty: Pro. 23.
Woe, sorrow, contentions, babbling, wounds without cause: redness of eyes,
are adioynts to them that tarry long at the wine. At the last it byteth like a
Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. Thine eyes shall behold strange Women,
and thine heart shall utter perverse things. Wine and Women lead wise men out
of the way. The best wine and worst women are prouokers. Much eating and
drinking makes Idiocie and dotage, whereby men are allured to the indiscreet,
as Herod, to grant the head of blessed John Baptist, to a deceytfull Dauncer.
Hosea 4. Whoredom, Wine, and new wine, infatuates the heart. Excess makes men
estranged from themselves, excluding all honesty and humanity. Some cannot live
on their lands, nor others by good Occupations, Psalm: 107.
and therefore spoiled in prisons. A fruitful Land is turned into barrenness,
for wickedness. Drunkenness destroieth Gods benefits and does auert his
blessings. Ye Commonwealth consumers, deuote not your selves to the Devil.
Your sursetting excess, so raises the price, that the poor cannot maintain
their Families, but are distressed, some distracted. Ye are the death and
undoing of thousands. How can you answer for those ye cause to starve; and
for the death of your selves, by your excess? All the world have the less and
worse success for you. Millions of men have been undone, by haunting such
Houses, Be counseled
where they lost their living, and learned lewdness. Young men think on this
(for your sakes I write this) before your Land be gone, before ye be in
thraldom, and dis-franchised of your liberties.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles: 12.
before thine eyes be dim, and thou tremble. Do not procrastinate; It is
apparent, that superfluous pouring in of drink, has provoked God to power
down extraordinary Floods: and for your foaming out, to make the Sea break
out, whereby People have perished, Cattle drowned, Goods and Bridges borne
into the Ocean. The Sky cries against us, Thunders are fearful, Devils
irefull, Trees rent, Houses brent, People killed, many things destroyed, God is
displeased, wind and weather auerre it; often, Ships are sunk: Oh we are
obdurate, we pull down greater vengeance, and amend not. Many use Dolus, to
pamper their paunches with Dives, till with that Epulo, they taste dolorificus.

Oh soul, think how the devil does pollute thee, make not so much of thy
body. Excess brings not salubritie, nor sanctity, wholsomnesse nor
holiness, but contrary. Proverb. 20. Wine is a mocker, strong drink is
raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. Such are deceived and
unwise as quaffe Quartes in a day, but one were better, and he fitter to any
good action. Yet protract they the time at Alehouses, and make their bodies
unprofitable receptacles. Prouokers fat themselves and others for the day of
slaughter, hindering many, but profit not any.

Oh a dearth is to be dread. Be not a sucking Sodomite, the mouth shall be full
of earth. Quaffing leads to the lake of quaking. Pray and repent.

Our prosperity, tranquillity, and truth many years taught, will be witness
to reprove us, for want of love to God, and for our self-love to impiety.

Consider this ye that forget GOD. Be not brutish; they are worse then Brutes,
that are bond-slaues to evil Affections. Therefore hate that which God
abhors: to him be all honor for ever. Amen.

DEO omnis Potestas and Gloria.
Drunkenness, and Excess of drinking reproved.
COmbibo persuades his accomplices that they commit no Drunkenness so long as
they can talk and walk, although their Bellyes be bladder-blowne. But remember
oh Swyne, and manners worse, what the Prophet says; Woe be unto them them that
are mighty to drink wine, Esaias. 5.22.
and men of strength to mingle strong drink.

Now know that God hates the inordinate Drinker, although he do not stagger.

Some are gyddie by Age, Sickness, or Imbecility, yet little drinkers: the
Drones are the Drunkards; Woe, and the woe of woes are denounced to them. Esaias.
5.11. Woe unto them that rise up early in the Morning, that they may follow
strong drink.

They have woe and sorrow, Prou. 23.
that tarry long at the Wine. Yet Bibulus whose best behavior is barbarous,
uses the Alehouse, and abuses it as an euill-house; woes will not warn him,
he neglects his Vocation, to the detriment of his Wife and Children.

But if any provide not for his own, and especially, for those of his own
House, he has denied the Faith, 1. Tim: 5.8.
and is worse then an Infidel.

Many provide for the worms, that shall wring their corpulent Carcases. Christ
gives a Caveat, Luke, 21.34. Take heed to your selves, least at any time your
hearts be ouercharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. Let menacing or
Admonition amend us. Ephesians, 5.18. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess, but be filled with the Spirit.

Alas, the Carcas is filled, and the spirit of God excluded. Heluo hastes to
hell, and gormondise his guts, till he euacuates as he received.

A Swyne is a swallower, immoderate to moisture, Matthew. 8. The Gergesenes lost
many into whom the Devils entered, drove them into the Sea, and drowned them in
that moisture; and the Devils drive Swinish minds, to drown them with drink.
1. Cor. 10. Our eating and drinking must be to Gods glory, to eat and drink
to live, and not live to eat and drink. Drunkenness and reuellings are fruits
of the flesh, Gal: 5.
they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. A fearful
Enthymeme, to them not mortified. Embrace the saying of S. Paul, not the pot.
Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in ryotting and drunke^nes, not in
cha^bering and wantonness, nor in strife and envying, but put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 13.13
and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Except we abandon the deeds of darkness, we put not on the Lord Jesus, but
the devil. To see him makes such to quake: but they entertain him, serve him,
and fear not. The Lord says by the prophet Joel, 1.5. Awake ye drunkards,
weep and howl ye drinkers of wine: He menaceth and admonishes them to
prevent the Anger to come. Ierem: 35.6. The Rechabites abstained from drinking
of wine, at the commandment of Ionadab; Much more ought we to refrain from
drunkenness at Gods command. The Lord reprooueth the Adultrers, that love
agons of wine. The prophet complains, Esaias. 56.12. Come ye (say they) I will
fetch wine, Osea. 3.
and we will fill our selves with strong drink. That Come, drives to
detriment, and we go willingly. Math: 11.28. Christ says Come, for our
comfort, but we will not: It Is the fashion to call and provoke each other to
excess of drinking. It was not so, at that royal Feast, Hester 1.8. And the
drinking was according to the laws, none did compel. The great God, little
regarded, denounces woe to inticers.

Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottle to him,
Abac. 2.15.
and make him drunken also, that thou may look on his nakedness. Solomon
would draw us from the means that moves delight to drinking, least we be
drunken. Prou: 23. Look not upon the wine when it is red. Oh that Parents
would not be sanage, but sage as Solomon, to counsel. It is odious and absurd
for youth to drink much. Except in labor, a modicum suffiseth nature. To give
wine to a young man, is to add oil to fire: Wine and strong drink are fit
for the weak and sick. Prou: 31. Give strong drink to him that is ready to
perish, and wine unto those that are of heavy hearts. Alas, such lacks, when
lazy livers gulps gallons, and judge that those which join not with them, do
think themselves righteous; but they that feel their sins most, use means
to tame their flesh: So did prudent Paul, 1. Cor: 92.7. I keep under my
body, and bring it into subjection. It appears that pamperers are
Iustitiaries and feel not their sins, which defiles their souls. Did they,
they would strive and resist it, and not so nourish it. Immoderate nutriment
procures imminent punishment.

Saint David being thirsty, desired water, and it was brought him.
Nevertheless he would not drink. 2. Sam:
verse 17. And he said, Be it far from me o Lord, that I should do this;
Is not this the blood of the Men that went in ieopardy of their lives?
Therefore he would not drink it.

A carnal mind would think wine had been fitter to strengthen him against
his visible enemies: but being then not fit, Excess with us is much more
unfit, and to be refrained, that we may overcome our invisible enemies the
devils. He refused that he had need of: much more ought we to refuse needless
excess: such effusion causes confusion, in the lake of lamentation. Daniel: 5.
Balthazar being drinking of his cups, heard and had a cooling. God grant us
grace to be prepared, and in well doing at Christ's coming. Lamentat: 3. It is
of the Lords mercies, that we are not consumed: to him he all honor for ever.
Ame^.

Laus Deo.
A perfect proof that Gods children must not be associated with Drunkardes,
nor with other impious.
Solomon says, Be not amongst wine bibbers. Prou: 24. Be thou not envious
against evil men, neither desire to be with them. Prou: 28. He that is a
companion of riotous me^ shameth his father. The Psalmographe says, Pro: 23.20.
Psalm. 26. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with
dissemblers. But Drunkards count such no companions. They lose a lofty title
that shake not hands with the devil. The foremost in leaud life is the bad.
But it is better to be hated and go to Heaven, then of them to beloved and go
to Hell. Virtue shall ascend, when Vice shall descend, James 4.
their amity is enmity. Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is
the enemy of God. Therefore good men dare not flatter them in folly. Ps.
139.21. David hated the^ that hated God. He shows where the true hearted shall
dwell. Ps. 15.4. He shall abide in Gods tabernacle, in whose eyes a vile person
is contemned, but honoreth them that fear the Lord. 2. Tim: 3.
But this world will grow to an Antipathie.

Evil people shall be esteemed, and good people contemned. Yet if thou have
ignominy refrain their company: for though thou be expert with a good Book
in thy bosom they will frame thee to their fashion, and so to confusion. If
they cannot win thee, they will wrong thee. They that are dissolute of their
duties to God, are careless of their souls, and of thy safety. It is a
probability, that their euocation and provoking, is many men's undoing.

Say then with the princely Prophet, Psalm: 119.115. Depart from me ye evil
doers, I will keep the commandments of my God. Ver: 63. I am a companion of
all them that fear the Lord. Be thou so, and not a Chamelion for all
companies.

Cato counsels thee to walk with good men. Shall an Ethnic excel us in good
conversation, that never had our means of conversion? He does admonish us,
and Christ does menace us, Math: 24. He that eats and drinks with the
drunken, shall be appointed his portion with Hypocrites: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of Teeth.

S. Paul reproouing the impiety of people, showing the wrath of God for the
same, says: Be not therefore partakers with them. Ephesians. 5.7.
They that let Drunkardes have drink may prosper a time, but such gain is
like to prove pain. He or she that give weapons to those that wound
themselves, A Caveat to fillers to Drunkards.
are culpable. Thou art forbidden their company and society. It is odious to
attend them.

Consider this, ye that have houses for such. Reprove and remove such
slowbellies, you had better do any slavery then be accessory to their
actions. Math: 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul?

Abhor their behavior though they hate thee, Ephe: 5.11. And have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. If
they will not hear they are barbarous. Prou: 12. He that hates reproof is
brutish. Win them with lenity, else refrain their society, 2. Cor: 6.14. What
communion has light with darkness? Gen: 25.22. Esau and Jacob strugled in the
womb: So do Gods servants and satan's adherents; and so did Christ and his
Apostles with the wicked world. Let us not serve sin, but our good God, to who^
be all honor for ever. Amen.

Laudate IAH.
Drunkards hatred to those that abhor their behavior.
THe primarie prophet, Ps. 119.139
a Paragon of ardent amity to God, says: My zeal has consumed me, because
mine enemies have forgotten thy word. A man to mourn for his own sins in
sincerity, is not common: to mourn for sins of others is not much in custom.
He was a mourner for his own sins, and for the sins of his enemies, which
thing so admirable, few do imitate. Yet when he wept, it was to his reproach.
He was a Proverb, and song of the drunkards; Psalm. 69.
Gods spirit excited him to reprove such as impeached Gods glory. But
malefactors could not, neither ca^ they abide such mislikers. Ps. 35. The
abiects did tear him, and with hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed
upon him with their teeth. He says, False witness did rise up: they laid to my
charge things I knew not, they rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my
soul. Yet in their sickness he mourned, in his adversity they rejoiced. It was,
and will be false filbellies, hate their unlike with cruelty. The sighi^g
singer of Israel had many enemies: Patheticall affections are with afflictions
unmercifulness are adioynts to miscrea^ts, like tyra^ts in time of blindness
against the modest martyrs being patients, when fierce age^ts threw fagots on
their faces: Effecting their craft without mercy, that the martyrs might not
profess their master. Yet did they, eleuati^g hearts and hands in fire and
flames, sing psalms to God, to who^ be all honor for ever. Ame^.

Whether Papists or Atheists, some Alemates observe this Adage, No^ amo te, nec
possu^ dicere quare: I like thee not, nor can I tell thee why: their Eglogue
comes of envy. But sance for the false tongue, Byrche for black tongues
are Psalm: 120. Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of Juniper. Yea,
Psalm. 101.5. Such shall be cut off. Yet armed with Ale, they euaporate that
such and such are miserable, because they are frugall, and to better uses
liberal (not haunting nor delighting with Drunkards.) Younglings hearing this,
spend till their purses be pennilesse: For a false tale with Ale, is in steed
of a toast. They harken to the fiction: of such is made mention, wherein they
think it strange, that you run not with them to the same excess of riot, 1.
Peter. 4.4.
speaking evil of you. So such kissers of Culigna frequent excess and riot,
and contemn those that will not. Quaffing mockers confabulate with petulancy
against painful Preachers, which renounce pomps and vanities, and are
industrious to draw us to goodness, by their good conversation, and profitable
preaching: which do pray, watch, and study, to deliver Doctrine in the best
manner, to send souls to salvation: but intemperancie use continually, and
will not behold the lives of good livers Asmodeus do spite and not delight
them. If any did prove a ply pot, ready to riot, they would count him quiet,
though a pleasurable plague.

If Drunkards could draw any to be as Simon magus awong the Disciples, and as
insatiable Judas among the Apostles. Or to refrain from the counsel of Saint
Peter. 1. Epist: 5. and from the life of Timoth: 2. epist: 3.10. and from the
charge given him, 2. Tim. 4; Satan had his seeking. Or to forget the great
menacing: Ezechiel, 3.18. and Chapter. 33.6. that blood might go with blood,
and destruction for want of instructing. Or to be like the tree Caprisicus,
that God might reject them. Or adverse, to aim at the virtuous, and quench god
begins, the Pope, were eased, and the Devil pleased. Good men are prudent
and innocent, and have Gods blessing, by preventing evil occasions: for
Inticers flatter them in the face; but prate in private. The Scorpion has a
fair face, and a foul tail: so some have sugared words, but bite the back.
They cannot abide reproouers of impiety; but are like the rude rout which said
of Paul: Act. 22.22. Away with such a fellow from the earth; for it is not fit
that he should live. Many quaffers have such Jewish qualities. There can be
no true concord between men moderate, and Monsters inordinate: good and evil
agree not. Genesis 3.15. Enmity is between the Serpents seed and the Woman's. 2
Pet. 2.7.
Just Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked: but they were
destroyed, and he was delivered. The Be has honey on her legs, but a sting
in her tail: so, though sin seems sweet, when God does strike the stroke,
the sting shall strike the soul. If such were said to; Leave hibbing, your
houses and a burning, they would not grudge to haste home: much less must such
be angry, but faster run, being warned from excess, that their souls be
not burned. Alas, men run to ruin. It is of the Lords mercies that we are
not consumed. To him be all honor for ever, Amen.

Laudate Deum.
A profitable Preparatiue for the Excessive.
I Beseech all such as would have happiness, to leave excess, and seek for
safety, that they may arrive at the Haven of Heaven: to that purpose I
express a Preparatiue as a means to bring the body in subjection to the
spirit. It is a Fasting joined with true Prayer, not thinking thereby to
merit, as sond Papists affirm, Luke 17.10. When ye shall have done all those
things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants. Of Fasting,
we read, Leuit. 23.14.27.29. Judges 20.26. Daniel 9.3. Joel 2. Jonas 3. Moses
and Elias fasted. Ezra did appoint it, 8.21. David says, Psa. 35.13. I humbled
my self with fasting. As it is commanded, so it is commended, and of Christ
and his true servants has been used, Lu. 4. Acts 9. Acts 10. Acts 13. 1. Cor.
7. 2. Cor. 11. Omnis Christi actio nostra est instructio: Every action of
Christ is our instruction. When he had cast a Devil out of a child, he said,
Matthew 17; Howbeit, this kind goes not out but by Prayer and Fasting. This
might excite us to Fast and Pray, it is requisite and required. Luke 2.
Anna, a Widow, departed not from the Temple, but served God with fastings and
prayers. The excessive serve Satan in feasting and playing, and gormondize
their guts in gluttony. Be prepared for thy profit, accomodate thy self fit
for fruits of faith; for fasting is a means to help forward the virtues and
graces of the mind. Enter thy chamber, remember what thou art; a blast of
breath: how short thy time is; not sure of an hour: and when thou dyest, thou
go to him thou seruest. Hilarion gives us a lesson, as Hierom relates; Ego
(Asine) faciam, te vt non calcitres: O thou Ass (said Hilarion to his body) I
will make thee that thou kick not: meaning, to tame it. Saint Paul was minded
so to subdue it, 1. Cor. 9.27. Fasting is a means to humble men, and to bridle
their affections. 2. Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature:
the mind is changed, actions altered, evil company avoided. Not to drink
between meals is profitable and peaceable for people that labor little. If
work requires it, drink not so strong as shall make thee stagger; rather use
small Ale, and better Meat.

Loyterers need not drink as Laborers. If wantons would be warned, they
might find it a means to temperance, sobriety, lenytie, chastity, health,
wit, and wealth: then would they consider that abstinence is needful, and
excess needless.

Some will not fast truly, because Papists fast falsely; and refuse many good
means, which others use to no good end. We ought to fast, Gods word requires
it: our gracious King commands it: our bodies shall be the more obedient to the
spirit, and more spared for the poor: which not to regard, is a defect of
charity, no effect of faith, but of infidelity.

The sin of Sodom was, Pride, fullness of bread, Eze. 16.
abundance of idleness, neglect of the needy; which sins abound. Christ
says, Luke 6.25. Woe unto you that are full; for ye shall hunger. Woe unto
you that laugh now; for ye shall mourn and weep. One says; Foelicitas and
moderatio diuiduum contubernium habent: Prosperity and moderation dwell in two
houses. It is dainty to find them dwelling together. Saint James 5. threatens
the wicked rich men; Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries
that shall come upon you. verse. 5. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and
been wanton: ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.

If such could consider of this, and that thousands mourn for meat and
drink, which they have too much of: their pleasure, would be pity: their
wantonness, weeping: their feasting, fasting: which surfeting preuents: for it
is rare for such as pamper their paunches, to overcome evil affections.
Therefore I pray you use this preparatiue. And the peace of God be with us,
Amen.

Halelu-iah.
A Letter to the Licentious.
GRace and peace be with us. I pray you consider why impiety is reproved. The
final cause is, that God may be glorified: for the son that loves his
father, grieves to see him dishonored. The material cause is the
commandment from God: the efficient in this manner formal: Leuiticus 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily,
1. Pet. 4. As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one
to another. A good conscience procures it, and amity binds it. Iam. 5.20.
Let him know, that he which conuerteth the sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. We ought
to succor each other. Commiseration is a pulsiue cause, which moves Gods
children: They grieve to see a Bear tear a child; much more to see Satan
devour souls. If we see a house ready to fall on a man, and not advertise
him, we are guilty of his death: so, if we see one seek the detriment of his
soul, and not admonish him, we are culpable.

Think on this, Masters of families, Victualers, Keepers of Tauerns, and all
others; godly zeal exciteth us, Mat. 7.12.
and God commands us to do as we would be done unto. And good people do
desire to be taught: the bad, like the Devil, draws others to evil; and
boast, they shall to heaven; but will not tread the strict path. Oh, it is
unpleasant: but being profitable, let us with lenity admonish each other, and
desire to be admonished. A blessing is promised, They that turn many to
righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3.
He means faithful Ministers, and others of the faithful: the which hope of
felicity do quicken to vinification. They endeavor to do good, and are
grieved that the greedy Devil gets many into his net. It is furnished with
leawd delights, alluring baytes, and sugared sins. If a Calumnor take his part
to confront my labor, I wish him, first to consider; Satan does cosen him, to
hale him to hell; I do counsel him, and haste him to heaven.

Eschew the Devils net full of false bayts.
Partiality, for the careless Officer: superfluous speech, for Buyers and
Sellers: evil excuse, for Swearers and Liars: false hope to escape, for the
Thief and Filcher: false hope of gain, for the Dicer and Gamster: needless
break, for the base Bankrout: calliditie for the Cousener, which for favor
will lie, and say he is a kin to good men. Infidelity for the Atheist:
brag boldness for the Blasphemer: wilfulnes, for the Wayward: envy, for the
Ambitions: revenge, for Quarrellers. Murder, for the Wrathful. Lone of
loathsome lust, for Drunkards, Gluttons, and filthy Fornicators. Inordinate
love of the carcass, for the proud and painted. Gryping gain, for Usurers and
greedy Extortioners. Worldly affection, for the covetous. Cruelty for the
unmerciful. Desperation and destruction, for the faithless. Disdain of Gods
word, for negligent hearers. No regard of God, for riotous Roysters.
Dissimulation, for Iudas-like hypocrites. Vainglory, for pickthankly
world-pleasers. Deceit, for seducers. Carnal pleasures, for profane livers.
Hate of truth, for Sectaries. Desire to get, for the Empericke, which by
unskillfulness causes death or long sickness. Enticings to all evil, hastinge
from heaven, halings to hell. Many look like Lucifer to quarrel with the
quiot: but cowards to resist Satan; he conquers them, and snarls them in his
snares to torment them ever. To prevent it, repent, pray for a clear heart,
and a right spirit, rest not till you have it: abandon the deeds of the flesh,
embrace the fruits of the spirit; Gal. 5.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.
With faith and amendment apprehend Christ's merits, then God will behold thee in
him, thou shall have favor with our heavenly Father. Consider my Letter: and
the Lord assist us. Abhor Satan's snares. Iam. 4. Resist the Devil, and he
will fly from you: draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. With a
Memento: Embrace amendment, have it in sempiternam rei memoriam. Sic fiat.

Rocede a malo, and fac bonum.
Reproof of Whoredom, a collateral consort to excess, attendant to the same.
Sublata causa tollitur effectus.
Take away the cause, and the effect falls.
QVaffing is so accustomable, that Whoredom commonly is the sequel; so
monsterous, as, to avoid long period; I will not express. Much youth betimes
frequent Fornication; the which coition is execrable. 1. Cor. 6.9. A reproof
of Fornication.
No Fornicator shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. verse. 18. Flee
fornication: every sin that a man does, is without the body: but he that
commits fornication, sins against his own body. He defiles his own
soul and body, and also the party with whom he is so filthy. Think thou to
make amends with mariege? repent, remember the dreadful sentence, Revel. 22.
Such shall be shut out from heaven. Ephesians. 5.3. Fornication and uncleanness
must not be once named. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain
from fornication. It is so heinous, and God does so abhor it: 1. Cor. 10.8.
that there fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Consider this, ye
shameless fornicators, with dogs and bitches qualities, your sins cry for
vengeance, Genesis 19.13.
as the sins of Sodom. Re. 14. It is written that no man could learn that
new song, but they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. And
would you sing in heaven? repent lest ye sigh in hell. Young men and maidens,
if sinners entice you, consent not: take example of chaste Joseph, An example
for youth. Genesis 39.8.
when he was offerrd, he refused; for he feared God. The body is not for
fornication, but for the Lord: yet such forsake Christ; and make themselves the
members of an harlot. They are repugnant to those that keep themselves chaste
for the kingdom of heaven sake, which Christ has set in a place of price, and
says, Mat. 19. He that can take it, let him take it: but a varlet takes an
harlot. He that has not the gift to live single and chaste, may seek for
marriage, lawful for all men: 1. Cor. 7.9. Heb. 13.4.
and is an Antidotarie against fornication, to be used in the fear of God,
for the procreation of children, and for the mutual society of each other.

Yet many of the sauadge sort married know not the right use of marriage, but
linger after lusts like bruit beasts, and like a Nicholaitan, not content, is
common with an other proud Paramour. The unmarried and married of leawd
disposition must be advertised by Solomon; Pro. 23.27. A reproof of Adultery.
A whore is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit. Pro. 6. He that
commits adultery, destroys his own soul. Her house inclyneth unto death,
and her paths unto the dead. None that go to her return again, Pro. 2.
neither take they hold of the ways of life.

Oh drudges of drudgery, ye refuse the heavenly felicity. Adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, laciuiousnes, Gal. 5. All kind of vnleannesse must be
abandoned. Pro. 15. Psalm. 113. Ier. 23. Amos 9. A means of chastity.
are fruits of the flesh, the co^mitters thereof shall not inherit the kingdom
of heaven. It is to be feared, that fornicators and adulterers are Atheists:
for durst any do such a thing before a king? they do it before the All-seeing
King of kings. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and
the good. Yet Asotus serves Asmodeus, in Cities, towns, and countries. Psa. 97.
Ye that love the Lord, hate evil.

A means of chastity is mediocrity in diet, labor, watching, prayer, reading,
hearing and meditating: refrayning from wa^ton company, unchaste speeches,
gawish apparel, gazing on the disguised, and from wanton looks: therefore rule
thy rolling eyes. Just Job says, 31. I made a covenant with mine eyes, why
should I think upon a maid? If thy heart be clean thy eye is ruled; if thy
heart be wicked, thy eye is wa^dring, which fills thy heart full of pollution.
Christ faith, Mat. 5.28. Whosoever looks on a woman, Mat. 5.28.
to lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his heart. Keep
in thy eye, the heart will be the better, use it to thy book. 2. Sam. 11.
David looked on the wife of Vriah; he liked, lusted, and for it was perplexed:
and having a new heart, he prays to the Lord, Psa. 119.37. Turn away mine
eyes from beholding vanity. Genesis 12. Pharaoh was plagued, and all his house,
with great plagues for delighting in Sara, unknown to them to be a wife. Ye
Lust-louers, leave it. Ye Fornicators and Adulterers, in pretense and action,
how shall ye escape the vengeance to come? your idleness and drunkenness
brings Bastards. I grudge not your collections, but grieve at your small
corrections. Oh, Salax, be sanctified, resist Satan. Susanna consented not,
but withstood the stout Adulterers.

Be warned, youth was never more wayward.
Consider this, you that are married, and are inordinate in abusing your bed: O
fear the Lord, lest your propagation be untoward, extraordinary and stange,
abortiue or untimely. Imitate Tobias, 8. He being newly married to Sara, rose
out of the bed, and said, Sister, arise, and let us pray, that God would have
pity on us: and the latter end of his prayer was this; verse. 7; And now, o
Lord, I take not this my Sister for lust, but uprightly: therefore, mercyfully
ordain that we may become aged together. And she said with him, Amen. And I
pray God more may be so minded, Amen.

Timete Iehouam.
Starch is here reproved: Poking-irons are ill used.
AS by Gods word Drunkenness and Whoredom is convinced: so is Starch, made of
that which is the chiefest food for the sustentation of us, here reproved.
For, whereas poor people that want bread should be nourished and fed
therewith; many, to fulfill their fond affections, feed their great Ruffs;
which shows we have more desire to carnal delights, then love to relieve the
needy. Many men, women, and children, want bread, which earth does use for
pride. But Loue-lusts say they buy it, and the efore not culpable of the
making; a ridiculous excuse: for if there were no buyer, there should be no
seller.

There be wealthy Houswiues, and good housekeepers that use no starch, but
fair water: their Linen is white, and they look more Christian-like in small
Ruffes, then Light of love looks in her great starched ruffs; look she never
so hie, with eyelids awrye.

The princely Prophet says, Him that has an hie look and a proud heart,
will not I suffer. Psalm. 101.
Presuppose pretty pleasure did say: Where find you in Gods word starch
forbidden? It is like it was not used in the time of the Apostles, therefore
not named. But the Devil has invented it, and many such devises, in these
last lustful days.

I find that CHRIST says, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
even so do you to them. (Therefore consider) would you the poor should use
unprofitable means to make you suffer hunger and cold? No, Math: 7.12
no, pricked pride, your fruits are faulty. Whatsoever will serve necessarily
for the suste^tation of man, ought not unprofitably to be spent: but the Meal,
Starch is made of, will serve necessarily for the sustentation of man. Ergo, it
ought not unprofitably to be spent.

This Syllogism consists of no false principles. And if you think it not
spent unprofitably upon great ruffs, consider the effects. First, it hinders
our food: Disco^modities of starch, and starching.
it wastes our wood, it spends the precious Time, that might be spent better.
And people live greedily, and needily, to maintain it. It frets out much
Linen, and the poking-Irons sear it: and wasting that people want (it is to
be feared) it has often moved GOD to sear the Corn and Grass upon the
ground.

Wanton wenches are tempters and Inticers, that ruffs must be great, and
starched. Good men must resist them; for Eve by enticing, brought Adam to
ruin. There is as much spent in that heinous order, as might sustain many
poor people which ask Bread; The answer is, I have it not; when Newe-guise
has it about the neck. Many spend Days and Nights unprofitably to set great
Ruffs, yea often when they should hear and learn Gods word.

Oh shameless Mares, more liker then bashful Maids, that spend most part of
their life time about Starch and starching, patting, pulling, thrusting,
rubbing, wearing, tearing, and starching of cloth with hot Irons.

Lucifer inuenter of Pride has invented an exercise, wherein Minion Meretrix
takes alacrity. Much wood is spent friuolously, and the poor unable to buy
it. Much linen by them is burnt, and the Poor want cloth to shifte them.
Starch is taken from wheat Meal, and many cry out for course crible. Yet
fancy fine, with ruffes up to her eyne, likes not to be reproved. To cull and
kiss, her pleasure it is, say what you will.

I say the poking irons whereby they destroy good stuff, is meeter for a
Plummer, and punishment meet for Pride. Oh careless Caterpillars, that spend
up peoples Food, for the leaude lusts of their hearts! How can you answer it
before GOD?

Excuse says, it shows cleaner the longer. I answer, it is rotted the sooner.
(And further) twice washing is not so much labor, as patting and starching.
And they that have bread can wash often. But take away the bread, the life is
lost, whereof one is more precious then all starch. And will thou be culpable of
death by thy great Ruffes? which stand stiff, agreeable to thy stoutnes. Be not
a beast bold and past shame, to do such hurt by thy hauty heart. Set not out
thy great Ruffs, as though thou would take unhappy flight with Icarus. It is
a means to make thee love the lusts of thy body, to look big with
stiffe-necke, as though thou were the popes brother, or should marry Ienny
Ietter.

Oh earth look to thy feet: when breath is out, thy body is a fearful
Anatomy. But Salax loves not to hear of Earth nor Death: the excuse is,
starch is made of bra^ne. If so, good for Horses, and other good uses, to
sustain that which has life, the more Oats and Pease should be spared for
the poor, which wish to be suffised with branne, and want it. But it is
apparent, it is made of that which may make good bread.

Solomon says, Cast thy bread upon the face of the waters. But many keep it
from the poor, Eccles. 11.
and cast it on great Ruffs. Solomon uses an Ironie, and says, rejoice. Then
he shows the ignominy: that such rude rejoicing brings judgment. Yet some
that so walk in the ways of their heart, and sight of their eyes, do adulate
that they are addict unto: and when white starch is stale, then they use
yellow, or blue, and know not how soon to taste of green among worms, or of
blue Brimstone in destruction. Be warned, thy time is short. Pray that thine
eyes may be opened: to that end I write to leaud life that walks in the
broad-way, as most people run from Heaven to Gehenna.

The cause of Cousening, Dearth, and Scarcity.
VOrax, devouring of much, yet grudging. The more such get, the more they want;
they gape with guile, yet have they scant. Riot, bibbing, painted back, makes
many daily lack. Bringing Dearth and scarcity, murder whoredom, bribery.
Till excess of Belly and Back be left, all Vices will abound with theft.
Turn therefore superfluity, to mean and mediocritie, and then this Realm to
penury, shall not decrease by poverty.

Of abuse in Apparel.
IN this reproouing of superfluous Attire, three things are to be considered.
First, the manner of excess. 2. the evil effects. 3. the reproof by Gods
word. Concerning the manner, I purpose to reveal the folly of such as are
pounced pompions, dead man like, with all their substance on their backs.
Exceeding wealthy men and matrones which keep hospitality for the hungry,
and are plainly Apparelled, when being ouer-worne, are given to the needy.
Such refrain from excess, and do spare for the poor. But as some gormandize
their guts, that their backs are bitten for want of shifting: So Superbia
pincheth the belly, and painteth the Back, and ieopardeth the best ioynte to
iet in colors, that mediocritie is excluded from either.

We ought to wear decent Apparel to cover our nakedness: But they which abuse
Gods benefits in cutting Cloth full of flashes, makes them unmeet to cover
Nakedness, or to keep off cold, or for any good purpose for the Poor. As
there is Velvet for superiors, so Russet fits inferiors: but many of the
meaner sort have brought cloth to excess price by indiscreet wasting, that the
poor deplore it. And they bestow as much cost in their capes, cuttes, iagges,
lace, and needless Novelties, as the outside comes to. Were it not for fond
fashions which we learn from other Nations, famous Britain should be more
famous. Excessive delight of the carcass, does digress from our religion, and
is a scarre to our true profession.

Myriades of fashions are followed. It is to be admired how brag boys and
wenches will paint their bodies. It Is to be feared they seek not suits for
their souls. Parrat is arrogant, she has her Apology, though no other
Divinity, that Pride is not in her Apparel. I wish her to learn this and
avoid it: that Pride is Matercula and origo omnium vitiorum the mother and
nurse of all mischief, rooted in the heart, and breaks forth as a
leaprosie, in obstinate words, perverse deeds, and outrageous Apparel, which
are fruits of proud and vain delighted hearts, that are not weary of this
world, but wedded to it. Such as are proud in rags (had they wherewith) would
illustrate their pride by Attire. If any object, that it is a small matter, and
as Mynte and Anyseede, in respect of greater; Consider the effects.

Effects of excessive Apparel.
GOd which forbids it is disobeyed, and his anger procured. Many to be
concinnate and finely apparelled, buy, and are trusted. It is pleasant in
buying, but it pincheth in the paying. Man and Wife look awry, and are at
contrariety. Concord decreaseth, they persevere, and are not placable. Their
thrift is turned to shift, they part, or live not in love. Some prove Thieves,
and whores, by whom people are perplexed, that they apprehend and hang them.
Some are so hanty they will be as brave as the wealthy, and have it, quo iure,
quave iniuria, by hook or crook, till at length that is pledged which
purchases no honesty nor profit.

Others of pretty wealth (seeing that presumption) step past their degree,
attired triumphant: So evil is imitated, goodness neglected. They live
deceitfully, and wickedly, to painte their houses of clay. Some will have great
Ruffes, though hose hang out at heels, and they prove hackneys. In time past
one might have clad himself as cheap as two great Ruffes and starching comes
to; many rich painte and pamper themselves. Excess makes one to pine at
another prosperity, and both chase away true amity. They want, yet have too
much, they consume it on their lusts, by starch and great ruffes. The world was
never so greedy, fierce, and full of fury. One couets another house over his
head: If Diogenes were here, he would be enuyed for his tun. Men cannot live
of much; Land and living is too little. That which should sustain the hungry,
is spent in prodigality, gawish Garments, frivolous fashions, tufts, trifles.
People may perceive by view of Verdigalls, that if some had made themselves,
their buttocks had been big. Excess of the carcas causes
Common-wealth-consumers, true dealing to be excluded, Sensuality maintained,
the needy not nourished.

Much is spent in pride, which causes Dolus to have Dives qualities, with face
of Avarice and anstere countenance, to pinch the Poor, the Fatherles, and
defraud the Friendles. The proud do preye upon such. If they miss of their
purpose, they menace and malign them. God has forbidden it, Mal: 3.5
and will be a swift witness against such. Yet people procure the heavy curse,
to painte their haultie corpse.

Excess of Apparel procures covetousness. A Cormorant sells any thing that
an other may not own. Rents are raised, Bribes embraced, Timber goes down,
without regard of Navigations. Ouidius. Crescit amor nummi quantu^ pecunia
crescit: as thy money increases, so does the love of it. Yet read we, The
covetous has no inheritance in the kingdom of Christ. Ephesians: 5.5.
Bursa auari os est diaboli. The purse of a covetous man is the mouth of the
devil. The eyes of the excessive are like Hell, never satisfied, Tam deest
quod habet, quam quod non habet. He wants that he has, as that he has not:
All is to maintain pride. The body is decked, the soul neglected, the Saboth
is broken by tricking and trimming meat for maddes. In steed of a Book to see
our sins, some foot two hours in a glass to frame a frontlet. Ruffs must
have Rebatoes. If she turn her face, her body turns, else the ruff is
bruised. So her neck stands stiff stretched, like her sisters of Syon, and
showing her shameless labor, she comes to the Cathedral, when Sermon is
half done, in time to be seen, though not to learn; far finer then at the
doale the day before. She fears no arresting, her husband is hidden. Excess
brought his distress. Yet if drinked drop on her great ruff, a change
present, some shall pay for it.

O Earth, think on the fearful Judgment showed on a woman in Antwerpe (as it
is related) to whom the devil appeared to set her Ruffs, which when he had
finished, he kissed her, and wroong her neck in two. Her body suddenly
changed black and blewe, painted and colored small to her profit. Laid in a
toumbe, she was suddenly gone, and a black deformed Cat in the room. If
curious Ruff-mongers, be incredulous of this, I wish them beware, least to them
come the like.

Acts 12.
Gay Attire is a means to pull the mind from heaven. Herod in his Royal
Apparel, unmindful of God, was smitten of the Angel. The attire of the
Daughters of Syon, procured the sword. Esaias. 3.
Iezabel presently after her Attyring and painting had pain. Many procure
their poverty and pain; Fellows profane, consume their substance to please
their Paramours. Oh ye that are overcome by Venus, rather by Venerie, be not
led by ignorant, arrogant wenches, whose wanton attire bewrayes a Harlots
heart, I am painted to play with.

Oh Worm for worms, thy carcas shall be Carren: thou have pricks in thy
forehead, be pricked with repentance. O Salax be sanctified, be clothed with
Sobriety, repent with Fidelity. Remember thy winding sheet: when that is
consumed, thy carcas shall be naked. Coseners are Thieves, as wasps among Bees.
Do not for inordinate love thereof, undo thy self. Following fashions
procures briberie, and chaseth brotherly society. Some brave, do brag they
are of hability. So get they goods in credit, but flee in falsehood. Others to
allure, like the Harlot. Prou: 7.
The Leopard by his spotted skin inticeth Beasts and kills them. His skin
is good, his flesh is naught. So Sepulchers are painted, yet full of
putrefaction. Fine are some outsides, as if the insides were answerable, it
smells of Hypocrisy, we are full of corruption.

It was the saying of an Emperor, Sumptuousnes of Apparel is Vexillum
superbiae, Nidus Luxuria: The Banner of Pride, the nest of Lust. Herodotus
writes in his Book, that Judah Dictator of Rome, had a Son, being pricked up
in gay apparel, had no mind of his book, but delighted in pride, and at
length was hanged, as many are in these days, whose Parents far inferior
deck their bodies, and neglect their souls; which makes them so hautie, that
their Hattes are heavy in presence of Magistracy: Pride makes them forget the
God of might, to whom be all honor for ever. Amen.

Superna curate.
Excess of Apparel reproved,
S. Paul wills that Women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shamefastnes and sobriety. Whereby we must learn that modest apparel sister
in equality to shamefastnes and sobriety, does more adorn and beautify. But
the contraries are common. Immodest apparel out of measure, boldness and
light behavior. A Garment is fittest to modesty, void of superfluity. Who
go more in gaudes then great men's Idiotes? Yet many imitate the same, with
needless vanities and tokens of wantonness. Excess is so in use, that
shamefastnes and modesty with many are absent, when Curiosity, gay Tufts,
great Ruffs, stiff Necks, Stout-looke, with small Grace, is present. Bold as a
Bull, with tokens of dishonesty, blushing no more then a beast.

The holy Ghost fordiddeth Broydered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly
Array. Some say, It is not costly, so long as they can maintain it. Consider,
The Lord threatened to punish the Princes and the Kings children, and all, such
as are clothed with strange Apparel. Much more ought Cincinnata to fear,
Zephan: 1.8,
which is poor, yet pompous.

We must not clad clay to the outmost of ability, but learn the Apostles
meaning; for gold, pearls, and costly Array is not only forbidden, but also
broided hair (which is not costly) but plaited, bushed, or laid out: whereby
all po^p and prouocations to evil is forbidden) which wanton women procure, in
decking themselves. For it is is a means to draw the heart to delight the
body, and leaude pleasures thereof, the World, and vanities thereof, to
renounce Gods Kingdom, and the Joys thereof, to have Hell and the torments
thereof. Therefore such vanity is forbidden, and the habit agreeable to
modesty, shamefastnes, and sobriety commanded.

Noah's Arc was pitched without and within: So the outward habit must be as the
humble heart, and our hearts must be reformed, else our actions are abhorred. 1.
Peter. 3. Whose adorning let it not be that outward, of plaiting the hair,
and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of Apparel. It requires the Ornament
of a meek and quiet spirit, as holy men which trusted in God adorned
themselves. Cap: 5. He bids them be clothed with humility; For GOD resists
the proud, and gives grace to the humble. But many are clothed with
haughtines, as if pleasures were their God.

The 7. commandment is, Thou shall not commit adultry: which is to be
understood, the evil act, and prouocations; as unchaste behavior, 1 Thessalonians: 5.
wanton apparel. Abstain from all appearance of evil: That has any show of
evil. It is written Deuteronomy: 22.5. The woman shall not wear that which
partaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put on a womans garment.

This seems a small matter: so did it to Eve, to taste forbidden fruit. Oh
foolish flesh! it follows: for all that do so, are abomination unto the Lord
thy God. It seems some care not to be abhorred of God, they will be as fine as
D. in their Dubblets, liker men, then women: wanton apparel is forbidden, verse
11. Thou shall not wear a garment of diverse sorts, as of Woollen, and Linen
together: but where the lusts of the flesh are delighted, God is not regarded:
for some at Font for fashion, vow to him that they forsake the Devil and all
his works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, tha carnal desires of the
flesh, and that they will not follow nor be led by them, yet painted for a
Play, ruft like a royster. Some that have hair of their own are not content
with the color God gave it, but wear hair none of their own. Others launch
out their hair dyed a Trim-tawny: then must be musk, to prevent the sent: so
perseuering in wanton behavior they break their fidelity and covenant made
with God, promise in Baptism is forgotten. Oh be not hypocrites, but
Christians in deed: promises to men must be perfomed, Psalm. 15. much more
vows made to God. Forsake your vanities, follow righteousness, Psalm. 76.11
Deu. 23.21
lest ye feel your folly, Esa. 3. The Lord says, because the daughters of
Zion are hautie, and walk with stretched forth necks, and wanton eyes,
walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet: he
would take away their bravery, and give them in steed of well set hair,
baldness; which came to pass with much misery.

You with great Ruffes, and stretched necks, leave it: when pride is at the
highest, it is nearest the fall, 2 Kings 9. Iezabel painted her face, and
attired her head, but presently trodden under feet, and torn with Dogs: yet
painting and making the face shine like a shoing-horne, is common.

Qui se pingunt in hoc seculo, aliter quam creauit Deus, Cyprian.
metuant ne cum dies resurrectionis venerit, artifex creaturam suam non
recognoscat. Those which paint or color themselves in this world otherwise
then God has made them, let them fear, lest when the day of Judgment
comes, the Lord will not know them for his creatures. Some will have their
beauty decored, it is to be feared their souls are deformed. And as their
souls are alienated and estranged, so their bodies are metamorphosed, and
changed from the fashion God framed them.

Exornation has no order: Many make themselves gasing-stockes till they prove
poor, and are kept on the Parish, Prou. 7. She that enticed the young man was
clothed in harlots attire; whereby we gather by the holy Ghost, that intincing
attire is whorish, Tit. 2. Temperance is an adiunct to Christians: if Adam and
Eve had continued in their first estate, garments had been needless: and
shall we extol our selves in that which our perfidious act procured? Will a
Thief gild the rope his theeuish act has purchased? If a Sempronian say: The
rope bereft the life, but apparel preserues the same: I say, costly array
which is by Gods word forbidden, is a means to kill Body and Soul, Prou. 3.5.
Lean not unto thine own understanding: the least sin deserves damnation;
yet we forsake heavenly directions, and follow fleshly affections. Suus
cuiusque crepitus, sibi been olet: every one thinks his own ways best. O be
not wey-ward, but warned, for the holy Ghost speaks not in vain. God made
Adam and Eve coats of skins, Genesis 3.21.
and clothed them; yet they had the superiority of the whole Earth. Therefore
this prepared apparel for them should be as a glass to us, to see and fly
from Folly: and a Pedagogie to teach us to use it for necessity, not for
sensuality.

But how agree the comely coats of these wealthy Governors, with the
superfluous fashions of Wat Waste-all. and fooleries of Minion Marre-all, which
go past their ability, shameless and graceless with all their wealth in
vanities to be viewed? And how agrees fancy fine nobles, with iagges, welts,
gardes, gay tufts, great Rufs, confused sets, supporters, bushes to make their
bodies straight, and want of Gods word to rule their souls right? their corked
heels set up so hie, that some do tread awry. They despise and didiget at
those that wear small Bands, and plain decent apparel, which are worn for
four causes. First, to be obedient to God, and agreeable to his word.
Secondly, for a help to pull down our pride. Thirdly, to win others.
Fourthly, they maintain it with truth and honesty. Boe ashamed you and
yours, that consume all by your excess.

Pride is combined with witless fashions: Some men are like monsters, with
Ruffes, far exceeding former Ruffins: Boys have shall haired heads; some
bigger, a curious cut; locks for pediculus, long of each side, stigmaticall
like. He that subjected his body, says: Does not even Nature it self teach
you, that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto him? 1 Cor. 11. Nitimur
in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata. We desire things forbid, and covet things
denied us. Spanish pomp, and Spaniards pride has long locks, as if they were
ashamed of their ears; with Shirts hanging out at knees, disguised from top to
toe, as if they went to the pit infernal.

A man's attire, and excessive laughter and gate, Ecclus. 19.30.
show what he is. Ambr. 1. Officior. Est in ipso motu, gestu, and incessu
tenenda verecundia: habitus enim animi in corporis statu cognoscitur. External
actions bewraye internal affections: some exceed in variety as though they
might spend much a year by Land, yet nothing. Men of Nobility, Gentilitie, and
Yeomen of ability go decent and plain, when far inferiors are shin-trim,
and guarded with others goods got by guile. O earth be humble, Genesis 2.7. thou
were made of that beasts tread upon, Genesis 3.14. and of that Serpents eat on.
Our first Parents were Gods Vicegerents, and God could as easily have clothed
them in gorgeous apparel as in plain coats of skins. Then mind it, it
was to move us to mediocritie.

Those garmenes speak to us that GOD allows us cloths to cover our nakedness,
but not to abuse them in excess. Christ nor his Apostles gave no such
examples: Christ's garment was without seame. Math. 3. John had his raiment of
Camels hair, and a leathern pelt about his loins. Gods children have been
content to wear sheep skins, and Goats skins. Heb. 11.37.
Garments according to every man's calling, plain and comely, are commendable:
we may use them, but not abuse them. It is lawful to eat, drink, and wear
apparel: but excess of either incurres Gods displeasure. Having food and
raiment, Tim. 6.
let us therewith be content. It is more then God owes us, and we (proud
beggars) deserve nothing but damnation. Content must be when we have but food
and raiment: if riches, we must not consume them on our lusts: If a Ruffin say
that he and his do use excess to please his Wife, he is not fit to rule a
householde, and unlike the good Centurion, to say, Do this, and it is done.
Says Joshua, 24.15. As for me, and my household, we will serve the Lord. Pray
that she which allures thee, and often rules thee, be not a let like Eve, but a
help as Sara: not sauadge, but sage. Pro. 31. The price of the virtuous is
far above Rubies. If she be such, so is thy household, praise God for her; if
she be not, pray God to convert her. Be not Cynicus, som^^ suffer sorrow:
admonish her quietly, love her, and win her with lenity. If she see that
you grieve indeed, that she offend God by her excessive attire, she cannot
love thee and use it, but leave it if she love thee. Love God and leave it, he
forbids it: it is an offense to Gods children, whom he has such care of, that
it were better for their offender, that a Mill stone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea, Math. 1^. Mat. 18.
Some lawful thing to avoid offense is to be omitted: much more unlawful, as
such excess. And who dare disobey Gods word? except such as in heart have him
not: his word is sufficient to convince: yet the sayings of the Painims
incomparable in efficacy to heavenly Divinity may be expressed, because their
careful doings excel careless Christians.

Monta.
Hate pride, desire to be cleanly, not gorgeous in apparel: He touches the
Momes, not men, which spend all at the Alehouse till hare skin appears: and
dirtie (not deyrie) women, which launch their hair out long, and leave it in
whitmeat.

Oh fool, gorgeous apparel is not an Ornament, Sophocles.
but a shame, and manifest show of thy folly. He touches those that would be
extolled, but have shame in stead of fame: for Ruffians speak rashly of their
dishonesty.

Gay apparrelled women stand forth as bayts to catch men. He touches the
disguised with foreheads frizled, Aurelius.
which buy Complexion, and cause an evil action standing more bold then
bashful, painted to play with.

The women of Lacedemon refused the rich Roabes King Dionisius sent them,
saying they would do them more shame then honor. If such were now offered,
stretched out arms would reach them, and greedy Gehesa would have them.

Some so delight the flesh, that good sayings nor examples do not amend their
misdoings. Demas forsakes the heavenly conversation of Saint Paul, and
imbraceth this present world: (the Vipers garled skin, whose venomous sting
is deadly.) Oh eleuate thy heart to heaven: Romans 8.
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

Now let us examine our selves: Does the Spirit of Christ, which is always in
sharp and painful battles with the flesh, and locked in that dungeon of
dung, delight to set out, the same in excess? No, for it is a means of
carnal desires: it has respect to the soul, by whom the body lives. It
allows the body that is needful, and lives for life, not for lust, longs to
be with God, and delights that native Kingdom. It joys in the delivery from
the inticements of the flesh, world, and devil, with whom it fights, seeking
to subdue the flesh by often abstinence, watching, prayer, and forsaking pomp
and pride. But our painting is apparent that we are not in battle, but are
inordinate lovers of our bodies.

Good God give us grace to amend, that with a lively faith we may apprehend
Christ's merits, and be clothed with his white Roabe of righteousness: to whom
with the Father, and the holy Ghost be all honor forever, Amen.

Seruite Iehouae.
News to the poor, too good to be true:
All will not believe it that does it view.

THe Devils rejoicing does decrease, men show good words and deeds:
In mutual comfort, joy and peace, we croppe up cursed weeds.
The Milsayld Ruffs do all go down, and little Bands in place.
Gods word preuailes in every Town; for Pride has great disgrace.
Starch is turned into Bread, ye poor have often desired it,
Pride-popiniay does learn to kneade, which lately did mislike it.
Light of Love is not so fine, but frames her self to thrift;
And learnes good houswifery in time, frequenting no evil shift.
Minion now must make White-meate, full fit she is to learn it:
To garden, plant, to sow and set, which brings this Realm much profit:
Cabadge, Mill'ons, Onions, Leekes, betimes in time of year:
Good news, you poor shall have fat cheeks, food will not be so dear.
A recompense she now will make for all her time ill spent:
Rememberance does make her shake, and now she does repent.
The needle and the spindle she full quick often time does use,
And loves in heavenly word to see, and does all vice refuse.
She that did watch great Ruffs to set, and sleep the Sabbath day,
Attentive is and vigilant to hear Gods word and pray.
The Poking-yrons bar the doors, goods safe in house to keep,
From such as do like knaves and whores, molest men in their sleep.
Great holes in cloth cut shall not be. Good cloth it will be cheap.
The poor pray God this thing to see, their hearts for joy do leap.
Pinkt Hats on thorns shall hang no more, plain stuff will last 3. year;
You shall them have good Brethren poor ere rugge begin to peer.
Valete in Christo.
A reproof of hideous Oaths.
THE accustomable sin of Swearing, and detestable taking Gods Name in vain,
apparently appear such little or nothing estimate his Majesty. The manner,
Acrothorax and Acolastus swear by him, with dialect disorder and a bravery in
common talk, as it they swear by John or Ione, and so used in sporting places,
as to hear may move a true believing heart to bleed. Not so only, but by
all the parts of Christ particularly: not considering how his parts were
pierced for our sins, and we exclude our selves from that benefit. The Jews
rent him with nails, stripes, and thorns; and Swaggerers still do tear him
with their tongues.

Some use it in buying, selling, and guilefull getting: they are covetous to
borrow much, but sparing to pay. They promise, but break performance,
Assertorie, promissorie.

Others use a perilous petition to get goods: So GOD judges them: not
considering the dreadful Judgment and severe sentence pronounced; Mat. 25.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire: when they shall obey to their
decay.

Some; As God shall have part of their soul. Oh wicked wretch, thou owe not
thy self: GOD will have thee soul and body, or the Devil soul and body.
Some by their faith: Heb. 11. But without faith it is impossible to please God.

Others swear by creatures, whereby they displease God greatly, which is
jealous of his glory; and says, Ierem. 5.7. How shall I pardon thee for this?
thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods.

To reprove this and the like, Christ says; Mat. 5. Reproof of Swearing.
Let your communication be, Yea, yea: Nay, nay: for whasoeuer is more then
this, comes of evil.

When we swear we must use the glorious Name of God with great reverence and
fear: Deuteronomy. 6.13. Heb. 6.16.
(viz.) Where the glory of God is sought, or the salvation of our brethren, or
before a Magistrate in witnessing the truth: not in our communication, or
otherwise vainly. It is forbidden, Leuit. 19.12. And ye shall not swear by
my Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God, I am the
Lord. Regard it: Deuteronomy. 5.
For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

The Lord has said, Zacha. 5. That the curse shall enter into the house of him
that swears falsely by his Name.

Leuit. 24.
God commanded, that he which blasphemed his Name should be stoned. It was
effected, and now is to be wished such should be punished. Although it be
reproved, it is to be feared few will refrain: for Satan is subtle to
seduce before Christ's coming, and is industrious to draw us to that God has
forbidden: so that some, as in their health did swear and curse; so have they
in their sickness, and departed fearfully. Esaias 45.9. Woe be to him that
strives with his Maker. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I take you
away, Psa. 50.22.
and there be none to help.

Oh if you knew him, you would quake to blaspheme him: his glorious brightness
excells the Sun in the Firmament, so that sinful eyes cannot behold him.
Esaias 6. Seraphins cover their faces in Gods presence. Thou blast of breath, be
not so saucie with the GOD of Might and Majesty. Jeremy 10.6. Forasmuch as
there is none like unto thee, o Lord, thou art great, and thy Name is great in
might. verse. 10. At his wrath the earth shall tremble.

Oh, brag beggars, bold to dishonor him, you must from wealth, Psa. 8.
or wealth from you, it is none of yours, honor the owner. The Psalmographe
does ingeminate this; O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the
earth! Our Savior taught us to say; Hallowed be thy Name. Let us not derogate
it. Bad children grieve to see their father misvsed: much more Gods children to
see our heavenly Father abused.

Some leawd of the vulgar hear, and bear with Sweaters and Drunkards; but
check such as abhor it, for any small infirmity past for want of
foresight; and with lying make a myte a mountain. I would I and others had
but infirmities; I have millions of sins, and GOD knows of more then I can
remember. Good God assist us to resist and hate sin in our selves and others,
that with silence we see thee not blasphemed.

Common Swearers, are commonly Cursers, and askers of evil petitions, impious
people are wrathful like the Devil, asking plagues, pox, and all kind of
evil. So often times they have that they crave. Our tongues are not to be
unruly evils, but to pray to God and praise him.

He that vilifieth his Name, shows himself worse then a tode, which by
singing sets sorth Gods praise. Psalm. 148. Zealous David exhorts creeping
things vnrationall, to praise GOD, yet men with reason blaspheme him: which
none can do that love him.

A president repugnant was S. David, Bless the Lord, o my soul, and all that
is within me bless his holy Name. Psalm: 103.
Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. And shall Man having reason
blaspheme him? Psalm: 150.
Oh it is odious to a Christian. Therefore when thou hear any take Gods name
in vain, say; Blessed be his Name. If he regard it not, exhort him with
leuitie: If he be perverse, refrain his company.

Joseph, by keeping Pharaohs Court, learned to swear By the life of Pharaoh:
Genesis 42.
but he returned to such virtue as is to be feared few do, for sin is now so
available it seems to be inevitable

O arrogant earth, fear the Almighty. Be not an Infidel, worse then the
Devil; The Devils believe, and tremble. True Faith and true fear has care to
eschew evil, and do good. Prou: 8.13. James 2.19.
The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, pride, and arrogancy, and the evil
way, and the froward mouth do I hate.

A Blaspheamer with his froward mouth and black tongue makes his soul black.
GOD made it to praise him, not to dishonor him. He says, 1. Sam: 2.30. For
them that honor me, I will honor: and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed.

Pray to GOD, and praise him; none can save thee but he, and he abhors
sin. Heb: 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not
look on iniquity.

Now let us consider this, how we procure Gods anger, and grieve him with our
sin, by Satan's seducing. To see him makes man to quake, but the Swearer
seems to be possessed, and fear not. Both must be admonished.

You that with silence hear it, and ye that use it, leave it, least in Hell
ye languish, with blaspheming and cursing the time of birth and being. To
prevent it, Repent: Love God and laud him; Else at Judgment day thy
conscience will accuse thee, Christ will refuse thee, the Host of Heaven
abhor thee, and Devils ever torment thee.

From which good Lord deliver us, for JESUS sake, that bought us. To the which
GOD Almighty, three persons in Trinity be all possible praise for ever. Amen.

Benedic anima mea Iehouae.
An Inuectiue for Sabbath-Prophaners.
THe abuse of the Sabbath does greatly derogate the glory of God. Used of some
in the Church, of some out of the Church. Concerning evil behavior in the
Church, There are certain seduced in greedy getting, or needless decking;
that they go late, attyred meeter for a Play, then to pray. Whose eyes wander
in every corner, and the finest fashion is their prospect.

They by watching about their folly, and others (too full fed) do slumber and
comber the Church, offending God, and grieuing the good. The hungry sleep not
at dinner; to sleep at a Sermon shows no hungry desire: the paunch full is
unfit to pray.

Sermon-sleepers, whether Papists or Neuters, intrude among the Protestants.
They ease the corpse by leaning. So should they the Conscience, and avoid
sleeping by standing, but Pinguitie preuents it. Ignorants went far to fall
to an Image: Far and near, fall thou to the true God. Go sooner, and be
better prepared to pray, and praise him.

Parents rebuke your boys.
Some Ruffians and rude ones, yea, brag boys, have hattes on their heads,
when Psalms are read or sung (being Prayers and petitions.) 1. Cor. 11.4.
Every man praying or porphecying, having his head covered, dishonors his
head.

To beg of a King covered, is uncomely; Much more so to beg of the King of
Kings. Some sittes, praying the Lords Prayer.

Matthew. 26.39. CHRIST did prostrate and pray because of our sins; and shall
not we sinners kneel when we pray? S. Paul did it. Acts 21.5. If we kneel
not, standing is fitting, so did the poor Publican: Luke. 18.13.

GOD ordained body and soul, and will be acknowledged by both. 1. Cor: 6. For
ye are bought with a price: Therefore glorify God in your body and in your
Spirit, which are Gods. And if we will not willingly, he will be glorified in
our destruction.

Therefore stand in awe, with inward and outward obedience, Esaias, 66.5. Hear
the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word. Psalm 134. Lift up your
hands in the Sanctuary, and bless the Lord. Blessed Preachers perform it,
so ought the people.

Devout David says, Psalm: 63. I will lift up my hands in thy Name. Nehemiah.
8.3. The people did with willing minds hear the Word of God, from the morning
until Midday, and the ears of the people were attentive. Verse. 5. All the
people stood up. Verse. 6. And Ezra blessed the Lord the great GOD; And all the
people answered, Amen, Amen; with lifting up their hands: and they bowed their
heads, and worshipped the Lord, with their faces to the ground.

Such Agilitie moves vigilancie, as a means of amendment: but be free from
hypocrisy, God abhorres it. Be ever more zealous then thou seem. Lift up
thy hands, with heart annexed, for hands without heart is abominable. verse. 8.
So they read in the book of the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused them to understand the reading. Their Teachers did comfort them, Verse.
9. For all the people wept. Alas, little is our weeping, much sleeping. Pride
omits submission. Re. 1.7. But all the kinreds of the earth shall wail because
of him. And some, so soon as Sermon is done, wrangle of worldliness, and are
more stout then studious. Love of Riches chokes the Word.

A good Cow chewes her cud increasing good blood, and we must meditate in the
word when we have heard. If we were pricked in our hearts we would say to the
Preacher, and each to other, as the people to Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, Acts 2.37. Men and Brethren what shall we do? Then Peter said unto
them, Repent. We know it, God grant we may do it. Mark: 11. Jesus went into
the Temple, and cast out them that did abuse the same. Ver. 16. And would not
suffer that any should carry any vessel through the Temple. Ver. 17. And he
taught saying unto them, It is written, My house shall be called of all Nations
the house of Prayer.

Slack we are to pray, or repair that House: but where bodies are fed, and
lasts fulfilled, building is not spared. For the neglect of building the Lords
House, Haggai.
by them that dwell in their steled houses, the Lord stayed Heaven from deaw,
and the Earth from her fruit. Nabuchadnezzer gloried in his building, Dan.
4.30.
but heard a woeful voice. Many brave buildings are burned. God make us more
mindful of his House, and to use our selves well therein. Amen.

Of evil behavior out of the Church.
THe more a man neglects the means of true knowledge, the liker he is a Beast:
the more endued with that light of life: the liker he is his Creator. Yet
Church-sleepers and slack-goers can on the Sabbath have to an Alehouse, and
say, the Preacher was too tedious, which shows they felt not the sweet taste,
for such sits longer in leaude demeanor and loves it. Men can watch a day to
compass a match for back and belly, or to keep ill company: but to hear
glad tidings, is thought tedious. He that is weary of Gods word, is weary of
God: Look into it, It is his Image, by whom the Son has revealed him.

As some are careless, so their Children grow graceless: Boys are in
back-lanes, swearing and swaggering, in open Streets wrangling, in houses
playing, in yardes worrying Dogs and Cattes, committing merciless actions.
Had not Man sinned Beasts had not striued: Some rejoice in the sight, and in
sin. Good Parents do keep children and Servants to their books, repeating
to them that the Preacher taught: when lewd ones are in streets desturbing
them. They that instruct not their Family, are like to feel of their folly.

Jacob reformed his Household, Cornelius feared God, Genes. 35. Acts 10.
with all his house. When children disfigure their faces Parents are grieved:
but they see them disfigure their Souls and suffer it. Let not your Boys be
rude in streets, to people that pass: graceless youth grieve them daily,
casting scornful words or worse.

There is difference of Youth; the well trained up are virtuous, the idle are
vicious: and have cause to cry; Nocet indulgentia nobis: Sufferance does hurt
us. Some such, at ten years are past recovery, hanged by twenty. Securitants
consider it.
Then they cry out of their parents. Had they feared God their children had
not miscarried: For this is his Edict, Leuitic. 19.30. Ye shall keep my
Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary; I am the Lord.

But such regard not, they scorn the Aged, that give them good counsel: yet
Age is a Type of Eternity. And God says, Verse. 32. Thou shall rise up before
the hoary head, and honor the face of the Old man, and sear thy God; I am
the Lord.

They that fear God, dare not profane his Sabbath. But some travel all that
day.

Others hear a Sermon in the Forenoone, and an other in the after: but spend
the other part of the Day in bargaining, and other unprofitable pastimes.

GODS WORD is compared to a Hammer, to break a stone. Oh Sabbath-prophaner art
thou harder? Clay, does the Sun make thee hard? Pharaos heart, art obdurate?
Be submisse and mollified. Amend, pray, and praise God.

Laudate nomen Iehouae.
A proof that the Sabbath must be observed.
SAbbat signifies holy rest, not riot. God has commanded and reserved that
(one whole day of seven) to be celebrated to his Majesty. He gave the
example. And he rested on the seventh day, Genes. 2.2.
from all his work which he had made. The keeping of the Sabbath is a Moral
precept. God spoke it, Exodus: 20. God wrote it, Exodus: 31.18. and the Tables of
stone being broken, God wrote the second time on tables of stone, Exodus 34.
as he did on the first. The Sabbath was commanded for a perpetual covenant,
Ex: 31.16. God allowed us six days to work, and reserved to himself one,
which men would rob him of. The wicked would have all days, and the devil
would have all souls. To work therein was death, Ex: 35. On which day, Exodus:
16.
the Jews might kindle no fire. Six days they might gather Manna, on the
seventh there was none to be found, they were forbidden to seek it that day,
and every man commanded to abide in his place the seueth day.

God took away the occasion from their labor, signifying how holy he would
have the Sabbath kept. It is a Sabbath of rest, Leuit. 23.
an holy convocation, and was commanded to be celebrated from Even to Even. S.
Paul kept the whole day, and continued his preaching till midnight. Acts 20.7.


On the preparation to the Sabbath, the body of JESUS was begged by Joseph to
be buried, Mark. 15. Luke 23.
for observing the sabbath. God has commanded the keeping thereof, with a
Memento. Sunday was the first day of the Worlds Creation, and the day of
Christ's Resurrection. S. John calls it Dies Dominicus. I was in the spirit on
the Lords day: for it was by the Apostles established, Reu. 1.10.
and Saturday, the Jews Sabbath abolished. Therefore it behooues us carefully to
keep Sunday, the Lords day. The Law is perpetual, so is the Sabbath: and is
to be sanctified to Gods service. For though (being under the Gospel) we are
delivered from the shadows of the ceremonial law; yet it follows of
congruity, that we endeavor to keep the moral precepts, and be obedient to
Gods commandments; else we are not grafied in Christ, which says Math: 5.
Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets, I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfill. If we belong to him, we will do our industry. God
is jealous of his glory, which men diminish, dishonouring him more on that day,
then in all the week. His Memento is not minded. Man and beast must rest. Yet
rude ones ride on the Sabbath upon small occasions. All within thy gate must
rest (that is) within thy power. Children servants and stranger. See it
performed, prevent eternal punishment. By Christ we have Christian liberty, to
do things of necessity, for preservation of life, and of things in utter decay
on the sabbath. Christ then healed a man, and the Jews did lift sheep from the
pit: and we must be careful that the thing we do be such as cannot well be
deferred to further time.

Needless worldly works, words, and worldly thoughts, must be abandoned.
Nu^b: 15. God commanded all the people to stone a man that gathered sticks on
the sabbath. Math: 1.80.
Oh ye that follow lusts, be obedient, least ye be perpetually punished. God
looks for our Obedience: to obey is better then sacrifice. Nehemiah 13.
reproved them that brake the sabbath, in bearing sheaues, and loading their
Asses, and that sold ware; he told them that evil came on the City, because
their Fathers did so. The Lord by Jeremy 17.21. dehorteth from breaking the
Sabbath, and exhorts people to hallow the same. God promises a blessing if
they obey: if not, a destruction. Joyful promise is for performance. For thus
says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things
that please me, and take hold of my Covenant verse. 5. Even unto them will I
give in mine house; and within my walls a place, and a name better then of
sons and of daughters. I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be
cut off. In this Mayor is a Benisson, to him that knows not a woman, if he
apply the Minor. To every man that keeps the sabbath (not doing his own
ways, nor speaking his own words) God has promised a blessing. But God is
forgotten, and present pleasures thought on. Some substantial whom the world
esteem of, talk on their trash, subtilty, and sensuality on that day: and for
a mess of potage, with Esau, lose their birthright. Young Men, some of them are
like a generation of Vipers, starting aside like a broken Bow.

Neuters, that delight not Gods Law, say, they believe as the Church
belieueth; and how that is, they know not, as though they had a taste of the
Whore of Babylon. Lurking Masse-mongers do seduce and make them lukewarm.

The body of Iezabel was devoured, but her Feet, skull, and hands remained.
And though the light does disprooue Idolatry, some with deceived taste thereof,
would burn incense to the Queen of heaven: which God reproved, and severely
punished. Consider it, ye that are thereto addicted. They that love darkness,
ha e the light, least it should reprove them. Ierem. 44.
Such are wilful Absenters, and some that hear, are Sabbath-prophaners. The
true use of the Sabbath is, with the Assembly to hear Gods word read, and
preached, to receive the Sacrament with thanks and repentance, to pray for our
gracious King James, Queen, and Royal progeny: and for all Gods children,
(being the Church universal.) O Lord we thank thee for our dread Sovereign
his great preservation, from Iannes, Iambres, and traitorly Judas: and we
beseech thee to deliver us from such merciless papists. Amen.

As at all times, so chiefly on the Sabbath, we must feed on the word, and
thank our good God; meditate, comfort, and counsel each other, from evil to
good; and provide for the poor at such time of the day, as shall not hinder
the seed sown in us. S. August. makes mention of 3. kind of works, that must
be done on the Sabbath, viz: The works of godliness, instructing the ignorant:
the works of Charity, giving to the poor. The works of necessity, to save
things in utter decay. As at all times, so on this day, let us comfort the
distressed, and praise him, which rose then for our consolation and and
Justification. The Jews sabbath did put them in mind of their deliverance
from the cruelty of Pharao unto the desert, where they were fed with Manna, and
so to the promised Canaan. Our Sabbath puts us in remembrance of our
deliverance from the fiery Pharao the devil: and that we shall possess
eternal rest, if we obey God, and keep the true Rest.

An absenter says: God heard Job on the dunghill, Daniel in the den; so may
he me in my house. Saint David says, Psalm. 122. I was glad when they said unto
me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Psa. 84. My soul longs, yea even
faynteth for the Courts of the Lord. He accompanied the holy convocation:
Psalm. 42. I went with them to the house of God with the voice of joy and
praise. It must be the final cause. The sweet Singer says, Psalm. 81 Sing
aloud unto God our strength; make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob. The
ruder sort make not a joyful noise; they can sing few tunes for Psalms, nor
in tune, but disturb the Congregation. David's heart and sweet loud voice
makes harmony, illustrating the glory of God, which ordained heart and voice.
He a type of Christ, says; Psalm. 35.18. I will give thee thanks in the great
congregation, I will praise thee among much people. Lovers of God are joyful
to praise him among many, and to see God praised by many. Let us not let it,
but love it: embrace the truth, and praise God for it. To the which blessed
Trinity be eternal honor, praise and glory, Amen.

Tota ipsa anima laudet Iah.
Against the evil effects of Dicing and Carding.
DIcing and Carding are accustomed with company that uses excess: they go to
an Alehouse, and call for an Out-house, and sit wrangling, dishonouring God,
serving of Satan, and cause vexation. The winner spends it prodigally,
procuring Gods displeasure. The sad lozer gripes for money greedily; to be
revenged, rashly he ventureth more, which turns still to the less. Then the
youth enters into a Shop book; the day come, money he has none, his Land
is accepted, friendly he is excited: he makes a sale, and sets up that buyer:
the money soon spent, he sets up a wispe, and is drudge to swearers and
drunkards.

If that serves not, then begging, theening, and killing; venturing soul and
body for money: but tied at Tiborne, take example: The cry of the careless.
Our woeful Parents loved our bodies, but hated our souls; woe to the time of
that liberty. Yet some will not be warned, they are remiss in that duty, and
bring their children to misery. O securitant, thou art the cause of thy childs
destruction, if not damnation; and thy child the means of thine. Had thou
been careful, his precious time had not been spent in play: whereof came
idle speaking, strife, swearing, poverty, theeuing, hanging, (prejudicial
effects of dicing and carding.) Some say, My son is no Dicer nor Carder: but
thou permitst him to a proparatiue by such like play. All evil is so prompt to
spring from our corrupt natures, that evil learned in youth is hard to be
removed: if good, it is like to be settled. Therefore rightly are children
compared to Vessels which commonly keep the taste of the first liquor. Yet
many will not be counseled, but give evil example to their household.

Tully touches them: Plus nocent exemplo quam peccato: They hurt more by the
example then by the thing it self. The actions of Housekeepers do animate
the household. Ephesians. 5.16. Men must redeem the time. Virtue must be annexed to
faith. Let us use holy conversation and godliness. Pet. 1.
Pass the time of your soiourning here in fear. To prevent youths vicinitie
to vice: in stead of dice and carding, read good books, pray, and praise God.
Every minute requires the advancement of Gods glory, and good of each other.

Unprofitable actions become not Christians, they are no motives to move men
to praise GOD. Careless Libertines must leave them: they are no good works of
the Gospel, nor the light Christ gave charge should shine among men: but
means to have God blasphemed, and the Devil served. They are no holy actions,
no fruits of the Spirit; rather wantonness, whereof ensues contentions and
fruits of the flesh. A good tree brings forth good fruit, Matthew 7. The
fruitless combers the ground, Mat. 21.19
like the wild Fig tree that Christ withered.

Forasmuch as the effects of carding and dicing are evil, and the exercise
thereof may be left without damage to any, it is sufficient to prove they
ought not to be used. To reprove many things in brief: 1. The. 5.22
Abstain from all appearance of evil; (that is) from things that have a show
of evil, much more from things means of evil.

The effects show that dicing and carding causes evil: Not to me, nor by
me, says one. Oh, thou spendest the time that might be spent better, and
show an evil example far from gravity and integrity. Whatsoever are
appearance of evil ought to be omitted: but dicing and carding are appearance
of evil; ergo, they ought to be omitted. The assumption is proved by the
evil effects; besides, the offense given to the godly. Matthew 18. Christ
pronounces woe to Offenders. 1. Cor. 8 13. Some needful things are to be
omitted to avoid offense; much more, needless.

Whatsoever is unprofitable, and may be omitted without damage, ought not to
be used: but carding and dicing are vprofitable and may be omitted without
damage: ergo, they ought not to be used.

Dicing and carding, which consists merely upon blind hazard, lot and
chance are to be rejected. Dicing consists in lot-casting, being a religious
ordinance for serious matters to determine doubtfulnesse. Lotte was cast for
Mathias, Acts 1. God is the disposer of the Lot. Pro. 16.33.
Oh it is base to be used in boys play.

Publius; Quanto alcator in art melior est, tanto nequior est: How much the
Dicer is cunning in his Art, so much the worse he is.

S. Amb. lib. 1. De offic. chap. 23. Plays and pastimes are sweet when they
are repugnant to the rules of christianity.

Ciprian; Play at Cards is an invention of Satan, which he found out that he
might the easier bring in Idolatry: for the coat cards which are used, were
sometime the Images of Idols and false gods. Justinian the Emperor abhorred
Dice play, and by his Authenicall Laws suppressed it. Magistrates forbid it;
Preachers reprove it; for the word of God does menace it; the Fathers reject
it; and the Pagans detest it. Genesis 1.27. Man was invested in Gods likeness: we
should imitate Gods properties: he wrought that could make all things at a
thought: Genesis 2.15.
and so appointed us. And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the
Garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it. If man in his inocencie ought to
work, much more now being polluted. Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall
thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground. Some will not work in
Winter, and therefore beg in Summer. It is written, 2 Thessalonians. 3. That if any
would not work, neither should they eat. If thou be wealthy, and wilt not
work: Adam was wealthier, and he wrought. Walk thou in the Fields, behold
Gods benefits, and praise him. Walk in thy house, pray, read, and meditate:
for dicing and carding is unwholesome, and breeds Gout and Dropsy. They be
called honest recreations; yet Satan's inventions. The profane are called Good
fellows; so have been Devils. Gods word does direct us to pass the short
time of our pilgrimage: James 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray.
Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. But prayer seems unpleasant, and Psalms
too much solemnity. Hymns and spiritual songs some have no skill in, when
bawdy catches delight them.

Mat. 12.
Idle words, for which men shall give an account of at the day of Judgment,
seem sweet. Idle words are, Vanae and inutiles nugae in quibus plerique vitam
terunt: Vain and unprofitable tryfles, in which many waste their life.
Idleness is the cause of idle words. Otium puluinar est Satanae: Idleness is
a Feather-bed of the Devil. Idle words are with idle actions. You turn the
Dye, think how you turn to folly. Thou do cast thy Card, think how you
cast away time. Thou bidst thy Bowl rub, think thou shall be rotten. Refrain
from vanity, and also cruelty: see no blind things fight, nor blind Bears
whipped. Mat. 5. Blessed are the merciful. Pro. 12.
A righteous man regards the life of his beast. Let good motives be a means
to prevent such pastimes as are means to prevent repentance. Christ says,
Watch and pray. Mat. 26.41.
The world says, Watch and play. The holy Ghost bids us, Heb. 12. Follow peace
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. But
common Gamesters are commonly wranglers, and seem void of peace and holiness.
O ye that have play used in your houses, lose not Paradise for pelf. It was
decreed in the time of Justinian, that such houses should be confiscat. In
stead of Cards and Tables, have a Bible on thy Table. Put off and abhor
evil. Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on that new man, which after God is created
in righteousness and true holiness.

Christ nor his Apostles were no gamesters: yet the Libertine that should
learn to read, makes gaming his summam voluptatem, and says it refreshes his
wit: but that which is sweetest refreshes the wit soonest. The Prophet says;
Psa. 119. verse. 103.
How sweet are thy words unto my taste: yea sweeter then honey to my mouth.
verse. 62. At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy
righteous judgments. That time is pleasant to play; but not for them to give
thanks and pray. Then they throw pots at each other, with such swearing and
blaspheming of God, as is grievous. Verse. 148. Mine eyes prevent the night
watches, that I might meditate in thy word: but others refuse their rest, to
riot. He desired Gods word far above fine gold, Psa. 19.
and thought it sweeter then the honey comb. Others refuse it, for dice, cards,
and wanton company. The sanctified, grieuing for their sins, seek in Gods
word for sweet comfort: but such as love leawdnesse get false comfort by
lasciuiousnes. They refuse Gods word: playing, wantonness, and foolish
jesting, is a salve for their sore. Blessed is he that can say in his heart:
Psa. 119.97. O, I love thy Law, it is my meditation all the day. Pray for that
mind, ye that profane every day. Deuteronomy. 6.
Gods precepts must be as frontlets between men's eyes: they are Gods
childrens pastime. The impious use an Antithesis, and pass their time with
contraries; they say they are the apter; but it is to evil. So the Devil
seduced Eve to think, that by eating the forbidden fruit their eyes should be
opened, and be as Gods: Genesis 3.
but it was to the ruin of them and theirs. Re. 4. In heaven God is praised
continually; and can not thou endure it at void times? O rich earth, poor
earth, proud earth, love God, and use it on earth. Be not graceless and
shameless to omit virtuous singing, reading, conference, prayer, and
meditating, to use dice and carding. Do not procrastinate, amend speedily, and
spend thy short time profitably. Be expedit for the day of the Lord: Luke
21.35. For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the
whole earth. Verse. 36. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of man. 2. Pet. 1. And give diligence to make your
calling and election sure.

O consider, we can spare no time for idle playing, nor idle speaking. Heb. 6.
The earth which brings thorns and briars is rejected. 1. Pet. 1.13.
Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end. Let
us do well, lest God come with devouring fire and find us evil occupied. Let
the remembrance of his sudden coming prevent evil in thee; again and again,
I beseech thee. Soli Deo laus and gloria.

A means of amendment.
FOrasmuch as many live liker Atheists then true Christians, here are certain
motives to excite to amend. Many serving Satan, can boast they shall be
saved, not come to the step of piety, to hate iniquity, that they may apply
Christ's righteousness to their conscience. That most of this world shall be
saved, many places of holy writ refelleth. Mat. 22.14. Multi sunt vocati, pauci
vero clecti: Many are called, but few are chosen. It follows, few shall be
saved: O fearful sequel! O consider thine estate, he without whom is no
salvation spoke it. Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of
many: yet few saved relatiuely in respect of the damned. His death is
sufficient; but few have that seruent faith, whose effect is a godly life.
Christ gives a cauent: Mat. 7.13.
Enter ye in at the straight gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way
that leads to destruction: and many there be which go in thereat. 14.
Because straight is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life,
and few there be that find it. Consider the oppositions: The broad way to
destruction many walk: the narrow way to life few find. The entrance is
straight, the passage troublous, sharp, and full of difficulties, unpleasant
and repugnant to the pleasurable broad way. Gods word is the right rule from
which men make an aberration. And Christ is the true way; but he that is in
Christ is a new creature. And to such as begin so to be, so many temptations,
rebukes, and trials, wait on that virtuous life as few endure. Troubles with
piety is a Christians livery: here is little or no Alcion time. We must
through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. Act. 14.22.
Christ says, Luke 13.14. Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I
say unto you, will seek to enter, and shall not be able. This command and the
reason might excite us to cut off all obstacles, and have godly strife, rife to
excel in virtue. Alas, our striving and seeking is in the broad way, having a
form of piety, denying the power thereof: few leaves, fewer fruit. The five
foolish sought and craved, Mat. 25.
but were excluded: the faith that brings forth good fruits is required.
Belialls may Iaunce themselves. Iusticiaries whippe themselves, without true
touch of conscience, as appears by their present committing of incontinencie,
and bloody massacry. The profane may follow iniquity, presume on Gods mercy,
and sin in such seeking: the best is neglected, the worst is delighted. Many
are perfidious, else they would believe Christ's words, and be zealous to amend.
Consider severe sayings, Matthew 20.16. 2. Esd. 8. The most High has made this
world for many; but the world to come for few. Saint Aug. affirms it; Si omnes
liberarentur, foret, vt absconditum esset quod peccato debetur propter
iustitiam; Sin autem nemo liberaretur, foret, vt non appareret quod per gratiam
donatur. If all should be delivered, that were hid which by Justice is due for
sin: but if no man should be delivered, that should not appear which is
given through grace. We are all by nature the children of wrath: it is Gods
mercy to save any.

The Elect shallbe saved: they with a lively faith are lovers and livers of
righteousness: to that end such are delivered, being fewer then the faithles.
Luke 1.17.
Christ's death is sufficient for all, but not effectual to all; the fault is
in us sinful people.

Oh let us pray and repent, with auersion from sin, and conversion to
godliness: for right believing has good liueing, without which lively faith
we pertain not to Christ; for that lively faith apprehends him, which makes
us just, in that respect we are justified: not formally, as it is inherent
righteousness in us; but relatiuely, in respect of the object: for we are
unrighteous; Be a good Soldier.
therefore we must resist sin continually, which is so sharp a life as few
use. Luke 8. Seed was sown in 4. places, but one fertile. Impious people are
plenty; sanctified are dainty. Arist. Plurima pessima: The most men are the
worst. Preciosa non sunt numerosa: Good men are least in number. When all the
world was drowned in the deluge, but 8. faithful were preserved: before, many
heard of it, but few would be warned. Genesis 19.
When the Lord rayned upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from
heaven, three were segregated from thousands. Exo. 12.37. And the children of
Israel iournied from Ramases to Succoth about 600000. on foot that were men,
beside children. God said; Surely, there shall not one of this evil generation
see that good Land which I swear to give unto your Fathers. Deuteronomy. 1.35.
Caleb, Joshua, and little ones were accepted; the other were commanded to
turn back. How many were excluded from the heavenly Canaan, which this Land
was a type of, I leave to the Lord. It is a fearful example, Psa. 95.11: for
he calls it his Rest. It is mentioned, Eze. 14.22. Among many God reserved but
a small remnant for his Church. Romans 9.27.
S. Paul does parallel the place of Esaias 10.22. Esaias also cries concerning
Israel; though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea,
a remnant shall be saved. These documents, rather threatenings, should deter
men from their own detriment. 2. Pet. 2.4.
God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell. And spared
not the old World. And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes,
condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after
should live ungodly. Yet conscience is scant, sin is excessive. Mat. 24.37.
As the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

Consider the comparison. They eat and drank, so do we superfluously: they
bought and sold, so do we deceitfully: they loved the world, so do we
egregiously: here repugnant; they planted, we pluck up, to the prejudice of
the next possessors. Every one for himself; the Proverb is fearful. Many
are deluded, and from Heaven excluded; For God is not feared. Christ bids us
watch for his sudden coming. These motives might move us to contrition,
vigilant expectation, and supplicate for mercy every hour.

When Sodom and her sister were consumed, and all the world drowned, few
faithful were found. How few God shall find, when he comes with fierce Fire,
he Omniscient knows. He shows by his Word, the world shall be worse. Luke
18.8. When the Son of man comes, shall he find Faith on earth?

Alas, what order of life will this world lead? No true Faith, no Salvation.
This excites to examine our selves, not doing as most do. For Atheism,
Neuterisme, Self-loue, Idolatry, and all other impiety cries in the ears of
the Lord that lively Faith is little, and that Christ shall find very little.
The Devils lease draws to end, therefore he is greedy to get. Reu. 12. Woe
to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down
unto you, having great wrath, because he knows he has but a short time.
Mark. 9. When Christ commanded him out of a Child, Verse. 26. He cried, and
rent him sore, and came out of him. So now his time is short, and he makes
havoc, fiercely seeking whom he may devour.

He aims at the virtuous: so do his Adherents. He spares such as serve him,
he knows they are his; they help him to entice Gods children. Hilarious.
Dulce Diabolo, nos poccare. It is sweet to the Devil to see us sin. Leo:
aut impetrat mortes, aut impetit mores. If he cannot kill a man, he will
corrupt him. He is subtle to seduce. This world grows ungodly, the nearer
the end, the more ungodly.

Saint Paul prophesied, 2. Tim: 3. This know also, that in the last days,
perilous times shall come. He expresses a Catalogue, whereby is apparent,
that men shall be committers of capital sins. Traitors, heady, high-minded,
lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God.

It appears people will grow graceless, God little regarded, but dishonored,
and lusts fulfilled: so that such as run to riot, shall live most in quiet, and
that any thing that increases sin, will be much gain got by, the Devil and
all quickly. Bawdy Books will be perused, the good less used. A flood of
wickedness will flow. The profane shall be extolled: Good people not esteemed.
For haters of that which most shall love, shall be hated: and most men shall make
pleasures their God.

That which men shall love most they shall make their God.

But men shall love pleasures most. Ergo,
Men shall make pleasures their God.
It may be said then of Self-love, Pride, and Pleasure, Haec tria pro Trino
Numine mundus habet. This is the Trinity which the world does worship.

Noah forewarned the old World; which was drowned. Preachers do teach us,
Laws does enforce us, yet our hearts are unreformed. The righteous soul of Lot
was vexed at peoples impiety, which were destroyed, and he preserved. 2.
Peter. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and
to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.

If Gods severe threatenings, nor loving admonitions, the multitude destroyed,
the small number preserved, make us not to amend: Yet think of Christ's
words, whereby is showed few are saved in respect of the damned. A malefactor
fears no halter till he have it; and many fear no Hell, till they feel it;
Therefore to such I express an Epitome of pains.

A short discourse of long Destruction.
THe Pangs of Hell are so unspeakable, as no mortal tongue can express. The
Damned shall feel the severe wrath of God lie upon them for ever; which is
greater and sharper then all Fire, Swords, Pains, and Plagues of this world.
They shall be environed, filled, terrified, and tormented of dreadful Devils
whom they have served. Soul and body for ever shall suffer horror. A living
death, pangs must be abided. A dying life never ended. An everlasting burning
intolerable, yet in explicable: Our fire may be extinguished, but yt is fire
that never shall be quenched, the destruction is everlasting. Mark. 9.
2 Thessalonians: 1.9. Infinite pangs are prepared for the enemies of the infinite
GOD. Had they ever lived here, they had ever been obstinate, therefore ever
punished.

Fear and tremble, ye that derogate God of his glory, and attribute it to
creatures. Ye profane Prodigalls, bold to blaspheme him, burn not in
Brimstone.

Oh Atheist, believe in the Almighty; O Neuter, nourish no iniquity. Brutish
Bawds, sucking Sodomites, Corne-hoorders, sore-stallers, poore-staruers,
pitilesse partialls, which concur to defraude the friendles, in hell is
direful eiulation. Our fire is ordained to comfort, that to torment: ours
gives light, that utter darkness. Our fire is substantial, so is that. But our
fire wastes that it burns: but hell fire much hotter, burns souls and
bodies, yet wastes them not. Math: 5.22. Christ threatens with hellfire.
There will be Passion, Propassion, Sympathy, and fellow-seeling of soul and
body: And for finite lewd pleasures together, they shall have infinite pangs.
Ps: 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup. The sulphurous pit is
deep and doleful. Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all
the Nations that forget God. Math: 22. They shall be bound hand and foot, and
cast into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Couseners,
Thieves, and Murderers, which flee with men's goods, shall there be stayed.

Thou starter return, least death and hell follow thee. As the affections of
the Impious ascended not to Heaven, but were holden down to the lusts of their
bodies: So soul and body shall descend down to Hell torments, and therein be
holden. Ezekiel: 32. The prophet speaks of the wicked, that they are gone down
to hell. Ps. 55. Let them go down quick to hell.

And the smoke of their Torment ascenth up for ever and ever: And they have no
rest day nor night. Hell is below, fearful, and far from Gods favor.

There is no hope of health, no remedy for relief, they sigh and sorrow in
death ever, but die never. Here children see parents, and parents their
children run to hell, and may help it.

In inferno nulla redemptio: quoniam nec pater ibi potest adiuuare filium, Aug:
nec filius patrem. In Hell is no redemption, for the Father cannot help the
son, nor the son his Father. Luke. 16.24. Dives could not have one drop of
water to cool his tongue, tormented in this flame.

If Securitants did but touch our fire, and think of Hell fire, they would
consider. To see the Devil here in his ugly shape, would distract the
stoutest; and to hear souls skreeke, affright them; to look down so deep,
dismay them.

Oh unspeakable to see and feel the Devil draw them down, and torment
them. O ye which consult to deceive the friendles: and if ye obtain it not,
it is him you aim at: use not oppression, make restitution. Haste not to Hell,
there Pangs pricketh, Fear frighteth, Fire frieth, Devils dismay men, and
grief of Conscience gripes them. To be terrified in hell torments one minute,
is more bitter then a thousand years pleasure here is sweet.

Ye Sarcasticall scorners, that rejoice in Sodisme, consider this. And ye that
blaspheme Gods Name, Presuppose (I pray) that one in hell were here again,
upon condition to be a true Christian; A supposall.
Oh he would fast, pray, cry for mercy, and mourn for peoples misery: not
ceassing, but saying, People repent, turn vice to virtue; It may be, his
consorts erst in sensuality, would mourn and admire it, which now hear of
hell, and amend not.

Pray and repent, for none can come from hell to make restitution, but are
holden in chains, ever in pangs, easelesse, hopeless, and remediless.
Embracers of Whores shall be bruised of Devils. Mirth with Meretrix, will cause
sad conflicts.

Leaud eyes shall see Lucifer. For light regard of Gods Vbiquitie, they shall
have misery. For detaining goods wrongfully, foul Fiendes shall wring thee.
He that borrows like a lamb, and detaineth like a Lion, speaking evil in
steed of payment, shall be pained. Lions have pity. Masties mitigate their
fury. But the Devil is ever furious. His adherents here are merciless, to
make the aged ioylesse.

They spite at their prosperity, rejoice at their adversity: they do them
wrong, make them sad, and account them Melancholy. The stout are astonished, when
God sends thunder and Lightning: much more shall they fear, when fierce Fire
shall pierce them, and Satan torment them in the loathsome Lake of lamentation.

The fearful flashing Fire, the spite of dreadful Devils, the sobbing
sighs of souls, the roaring of fierce Fiendes, filthy savors, and doleful
deane, though they felt no other pain, will be able to break the heart; if
so, pains would not decrease.

Curses then shall be effected. Deuteron: 27.19. On him that peruerteth the
judgment of the Stranger, Fatherless, Zach: 7.10.
and Widow; the feeling of the full revealing of the wrath of God will be
woeful.

Virgil speaking of the punishment of men for vices, said in this 6. book of
Aeneydes, A hundred tongues cannot express the pains men suffer in Hell. For
loathsome Lust, they have lost the unspeakable Joys of Heaven, and procured the
Pinching pangs of hell; banished from God and his Saints for ever, to be with
vgglie Devils, Judas and Iulians.

To be excluded from Heaven, and included in a Prison, without pain were
yrkesome: But to be in that Pit in unspeakable pangs and endless, is most
grievous.

They shall be ever shut out from the door of Gods mercy: CHRIST will say,
Depart from me, ye cursed, Math: 25.
into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels.

Christ's coming to such will be terror, his severe Sentence more terror, Hell
torments most terrible. Christ will divide his Sheep from the Goats. Math: 3.
And gather his Wheat into the Garner, but will burn up the Chafe with
unquenchable Fire.

All the workers of iniquity shall be where is weeping and gnashing of teeth,
when they shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Luke 13.
and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God.

As Dives saw Lazarus with Abraham, so shall the damned see Gods Children. And
thereat be vexed and amazed, sighing and saying they had such in derision.
Scurrilous Sarcasmus shall confess his foolishnes.

Mockers shall mourn.
Couzeners which scorn true dealers shall lament with Heart-smart, and heavy
Hey-hee. 1. Cor: 3.18. Had they been Fools of this world, and belonged to
CHRIST, they had been dignified, not damned.

The crafty crew shall have scalding. For lewdness, languishing. For abusing
of Wealth, wayling. For Adultery, Destruction; uttering and iterating, Woe
worth the time they hated to be counseled.

If a malefactor were cast into a burning Brickkill, he would stare and start,
stamp he could not, but be quick dispatched. Why then are we so far from
serving God, and near Satan in sinning, to procure endless Hell fire?

Men hear this, and live amiss, because they are graceless: the Neuer-dying
worm, and dreadful second death is procured. We embrace present pleasure, and
fear no future pain.

Some live as though there were no Hell, and ask where it is, hasting thither.
O our evil Affections are below, and Hell is lower. Prou: 15.24. It is
beneath, unpleasant, Painful. Hell is deep. Prou: 9.18. The Damned are void
of hope and recovery. The insatiable shall feel, that (Prou: 27.) Hell and
destruction are never full.

It is large and deep for many, yea for most. The wicked Rich, and wicked
Poor, shall into the gulf of garboyles.

In the two last Chapters of the Revel: is mentioned a Catalogue of many that
shall into Hell, they shall find and feel it so Circumscriptiua, that they
shall never be in Heaven, which GOD has prepared for his Elected; and
ordained Hell for the Rejected: they are Opposites: For in this there is
partition of Affection, and the contrariety of effects ever shall be.

In Heaven Joy, and praising of GOD amongst Angels: In Hell horror, cursing
their Parents, Birth, and being amongst Devils. Hideous sights will affright
them, and eternal Fire afflict them.

Thou Loyteror, that can not abide to labor; how will thou then abide then
to languish? Satan enticeth thee to tush, but tush will be turned to terror; for
deeds of darkness, thou shall have fire and darkness.

Devils will daunt thee, they roar irefully, Souls skreeke mournfully: the
intolerable torments are abidelesse, and endless.

Minos examen, Radamanthus dat cruciamen: tertius heu Frater, tertia iura
tenet. One Devil rippeth up thy examination: an other Devil tormenteth thee;
and the third is not behind to add one torment to an other.

Thou shall be pricked for thy Impiety, pierced for thy Perjury: thy hatred
to such as abhorred thy leaude life shall hurt thee. Thou shall feel how the
Devil deceived thee here, to torment thee there.

The partial, that do evil one for another, shall be in Hell together. Here is
Time, men must redeem it; after this Life, no time but Eternity. Once in Hell
and ever, without mitigation, or intermission.

Oh how shall the soul and body abide such torments, as are sharper then all
the diseases of this world are, being upon one lying alive here in a fiery
Furnace? A minute of time would kill us.

When millions of millions of years are expired, the end there is not the
nearer. It is no Lease, but endless.

Consider this. ye that seek out the helpless, and borrowe their goods by
great protestations, yet detaining, not fearing Conviction; as if for a dish of
Apples, ye could prevent the right of the Friendlesse: Judas restored, you
store it.

A little Thief goes mourning to the gallows, when a greater rejoices in
guilefull getting. Shifters that assist him, are not much unlike him.

In Hell such wrongers shall be wrung. There will be Roaring, Skriking,
Garboyles, Grief, Gingling, Glaring, Staring, Crying, Mourning, Howling,
Sighing, Sobbing, Stretching, Panting, Gasping, Gnashing, wringing Mouths,
Hands and Bodies: think on Death, think on this, it is fearful to hear,
worse to feel. Many are willing to escape it, but love of Lust lets it.
Tooth-ake is painful, and Heart-ake gives the Vltimum Vale; but in Hell, all
parts are ever perplexed.

Satan has cousened some to shorten their days, that could not endure
grief: which they would never have done, had they known the pangs of Hell:
they that regard not GOD here, shall fear, and feel his Judgments there.

Oh hard heart, that no call can penetrate, thou shall relent, too late shall
be thy contrition. For in Hell is woe and wayling, horror, and terror. Reuela:
20. It is a bottomless pit, for the pitiless, a Lake of fire and
Brimstone. Where the Beast, and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented
day and night, for ever and ever.

Quarrellers shall quell in hell, Murderers shall mourn, the bloud-thirstie,
shall be thirsty. Thieues booties shall be bitter. Pangs endless, will make
them comfortless. The worm of Conscience remains, fierce Fire endures.

O Idolator pray to God, to no creature. Saints search not thy heart, but only
thy Creator: the Cursed shall be crushed in the burning Lake, which is the
Second-death.

When so many years are expired, as in Earth and Sea are sands, and drops of
water, the end is not the nearer. Leave leaudnes, believe this; It Is better to
be a toade, then to feel this. Seruers of sin, shall be subject to Satan.
Hautinesse causes heaviness. Psalm: 50.22.
Now consider this; ye that forget GOD. Art thou covetous and voluptuous,
flattering Superiors, defrauding Inferiors? let not pleasure, mucke and money
hale thee to hell, give that which hurts thee to them that have not. Art thou
wealthy and wilful? it is woeful: with a naughty matter do not persevere, and
undo men for ever. Adulaters be no assisters, repugne evil doers. Burn not;
for, bona omissa, mala co^missa: the pangs are so intolerable, as to think on
is terrible. Thou that flatterest thy friend with league of lenity, and with
thy mates seek his infamy; Judas the Traitor was such a deceiuer. And ye
that are mercylesse to the aged, and to the poor in their sickness, the same
quality has the Devil: if he have thee in hell, he will fray thee, fry thee,
and with brimstome baste thee, and in stead of cool liquor, give hot Lead: if
thou will not come there, resist all things that draw thee thither: Mat. 10.28.
Fear him that can destroy both body and soul in hell. Good God, we pray thee,
keep us from Gehenna; it is thy mercy to spare us, we all deserve those
torments. Blessed Trinity, guide us to felicity: to thee be all honor and
glory for ever, Amen.

Sit Deo laus in seculo. Sic fiat.
Comfort for the contrite.
WE find in sacred Scriptures that few shall be saved in respect of the
damned; and that the pangs are unspeakable, infinite, and in explicable. Mic.
6.8.
He has showed thee, o man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
We must turn from sin, and walk in newness of life. To be a new creature
is required: we sin often, abhor it, and prevent it. Repent with detestation,
have daily renouation and amendment: have Oil with thy Lamp. Saving grace and
regeneration must be with a Christian profession. Be faithful, as Peter; well
doing, as Dorcas: have a good desire, despair not; no disdence, confidence;
hate thy sin: Mat. 11.28
Christ calls such to give them rest: Mat. 12.20. A bruised reed shall he
not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench. Ezech. 18.
Come to him with a spark of grace, he will not despise thee. Repent truly,
God will forgive thee. Persevere in piety to the end. Sorrow for sin, joy in
Christ, with two contrarieties at once in one subject. Fight a good fight,
finish thy course, keep the faith. Shrink not like Balaams Ass under his
burden. Psa. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall
strengthen thine heart. Put on the whole Armor of spiritual weapons; Iam.
1.12.
fight, and faint not. Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he
is tried he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
them that love him. Resist sin strongly, fly to Christ humbly, he shed his
tears and precious blood for thee. Weep thou with Peter, crave with blind
Bartemeus; see Christ by faith, and show forth fruits with Zacheus. Persist
with the woman of Canaan. Mat. 15.
Imitate David, void of pusillanimity, full of magnanimity, yet mourned; Psa.
6.6. I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to swim; I water
my couch with my tears. The sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: Psalm.
51.17. Luke 15.7. Psa. 103.11.
a broken and contrite heart, o God, thou will not despise. Joy shall be in
heaven over such. Therefore with submission use contrition. For as the heaven
is high above the earth: so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. God
give us repentante, that we may be faithful applyers of Christ's righteousness,
Amen.

Dum spiro spero.
Of the joys of heaven prepared for Gods Children.
FOr the faithful penitent which war against wickedness is prepared a place
so joyful as is unspeakable: such have not only immunitie, and freedom from
bondage, but also interest to the privileges of Gods children, who are heirs
with God, Romans 8.17. Revel. 7.14.
and coheyres with Christ in his Kingdom: which is by the blood of Jesus,
which washes us white, without the which is no purity. God imposed the
punishment for our sins upon him, Romans 8.
and he has fully satisfied the Justice of his Father for them. The holy
Spirit speaks to faithful perseuerers: Reu. 2.10.
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the Crown of life. Revel.
3.21. To him that ouercometh will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as
I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. Revel. 21.4.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying: neither shall there be any more pain: for
the former things are passed away. Verse 7. He that overcomes shall inherit
all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. 1. Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor care heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

When the Queen of Sheba was come to Solomon, she said, 1. King. 10.7.
Behold, the half was not told me. So Gods Saints shall then see that the
thousand part of those joys were not told them.

Aug. O gaudium, super gaudium, vincens omne gaudium, extra quod non est
gaudium, quando intrabo inte, vt Deu^ meu^ videam, qui habitat in te? O joy
above all joys, surpassing all joys, without which there is no joy, when
shall I enter into thee, that I may see my God that dwells in thee? Profecto
in me totum non intrabit, sed ego in illud totus intrabo. Truly it will not
enter wholly into me by my knowledge, that I may comprehend it, but I shall
enter wholly into it by fruition that I may enjoy it for ever. It is such
freehold, as is good for us to build there; an inheritance incorruptible, 1.
Pet. 1.4.
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us. There is
beauty, brightness, iubilation, exultation, mirth without mourning, heavenly
harmony, delectable, unspeakable. Saints shall sing with Angels and heavenly
habitants, All glory to the Trinity. There is health, rest, riches, abundance
with continuance. A Paradise exceeding all pleasure.

The Trinity in unity shall joy all hearts, his beauty is glorious, the longer
viewed, the more desired. O excellent Sovereign, Exo. 34.29. 2. Cor. 3.7.
brighter then the day Sun: the skin of Moses face shone bright by being
with God: glistering and glorious then shall men be, being glorified and ever
with God. Sin shall no more disquiet us, the flesh and the spirit shall then
be at quiet; having perfect knowledge, perfect holiness. For now we see
through a Glass, darkly: but then face to face: 1. Cor. 13.12. Exo. 33.20. 2.
Tim. 4.8.
now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known. The Lord
God said; There shall no man see me and live: but there we shall see him, and
live. All that reign with Christ shall have crowns of righteousness. 2. Pet.
1.11. It is an everlasting Kingdom. Luke 14. Blessed is he that eats bread
in the kingdom of God. Joyful is the society of those heavenly Citizens: the
Region is Royal, and a Kingdom exceeding all kingdoms. Reu. 21. It is likned
to a City of pure gold, which had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon
to shine in it: for the glory of GOD did lighten it, the Lamb is the light
thereof: verse. 25. And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for
there shall be no night there. We here are in danger of the Devil and his
darlings: but there shall be no enemy to hurt nor annoy. The glorious Heaven
of heavens is not contaminate, but immaculate: there shall enter into it no
unclean thing. Mat. 13.43. Esaias 25.6.
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of their
Father. God will feast his faithful: at his right hand is fullness of joy;
everlasting joy shall be upon them. Aug. There is mirth without moan, place
without pain, life without labor, light without darkness: there youth always
flourishes and never decays; there is no torment felt, nor howling heard; no
sorrow seen, but possession of joys everlasting. How glorious things are
spoken of thee, thou City of God? true rejoicing is in thy habitation. We
shall be rid from warfare, and be in welfare, from sin, Satan and his
adherents, from hunger, thirst, heat, cold, weariness, infirmities, dread,
doubtfulnesse, sickness, vexation, death and damnation, and be ever with God our
preserver. Good children are glad to see their father here; much more to behold
our Heavenly Father, his son our Savior, the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier
there. S. John sprang in his Mothers womb, at the tidings of our Savior. Luk:
1.41.
Angels praised, and said, Lu. 2.24. Glory to God. The shepherds went and saw
him, published the news, and gave praise unto God. Old Simeon took him in his
arms, rejoicing. Old Anna gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him
to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Oh when men and all the
hoasts of Heaven sing to his Majesty, most glorious is that harmony. We
shall sing in the presence of God, Halleluiah, Salvation, glory, and honor,
and power, be to the Lord our God. Oh heavenly harmony, mirth, and melody;
Blessed are they that are called to the Lambs supper. M. Bradford ye Martyr
believed this beatitude, and thus did animate the young man at the fire. Be of
good comfort Brother, for we shall have a merry supper with the Lord this
night. All faithful hearts crossed with calamity, and grieved for iniquity, be
comforted, ye shall inherit a kingdom. We shall come to the mount Sion; not
Sinay where the Law was given, but to the innumerable company of Angels. S.
Peter said, for the sight he saw on the mount. Lord, it is good for us to be
here. Math. 17.4
But then we shall be in light unchangeable, and see Christ ever in felicity,
whom his enemies had in obloquie. Those Joys infinite pass all Joys finite.
The voice of Joy and gladness shall be ever with the righteous. Oh happy heirs of
heavenly inheritance, without our deserts. Aug. Deus coronat dona sua, non
merita nostra. God crowns his own gifts, not our merits. O bless the Lord:
who redeemeth thy life from destruction: Psalm: 103.4.
who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies. Fear not little
flock, Lu: 12.32. Reu: 4.8.
for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom. O let us say,
holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. We
shall be Citizens with the saints, and of the household of God, dignified and
glorified. In Joy we shall rejoice that our names are written in heaven,
franchessed freemen, irreuocably enrolled, as sure, rather surer, then the
estate of Angels. We shall have the fruition of Christ's Resurrection, and be
manumissed from the bondage of death and destruction; Free denizens, freed from
miseries and proud peoples malice. Those Joys pass all Jubilees. Good Jesus
bring us to that bliss. As there is no equality betwixt the Creator, and us
here sinful creatures: So is there none between the joys of Heaven, and
worldly pleasures. These are joys transitory, the other Joys eternal.

Romans 8.17.
We shall be joint heirs with Christ, and partakers of true happiness. There
is no sighing, singing. No heaviness, Ioyfulnes. No ignominy, glory. Holy,
holy, holy, shall be ever ascribed to Jehovah. The Virgins could learn the new
song, which follow the Lamb. Revel. 14.
Oh the Joyful harmony that we shall hear, and be glorified ever in glory.
We shall have a palace unspeakable, being delivered into the glorious liberty
of the Children of God. Luke 20.36
Neither can they do any more, for they are equal to the Angels, and are the
Children of GOD, being the children of the Resurrection. If a man here sick
heard those joys, he would not feel his pain.

Oh joyful shall we be when we be there, hearing, seeing and having
unspeakable joys. Aug:
Erit in Coelo domus tua aeterna, si modo been in hoc tabernaculo vixeris:
Thine house shall be eternal in heaven, if now thou live well in this
tabernacle. Lose not that permanent Paradise for this pleasure, which in
respect thereof is pain: for the Barley corn, lose not the precious Pearl:
for carnal copulation, eternal benediction: for a minute of self-will, Reu:
3.20.
millions of years joyful. Ah, God forbid, he bids us return and reteyne
him: Behold, I stand at the door and knock. Receive him, and he will receive
thee, to sit in glory with his Majesty, which is a dignity of all dignities.

Job. 19.25.
This did mitigate Jobs misery; For I know my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin, worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. S. Paul says, Phil. 3. For
our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body, etc. A Comfort.
Our bodies shall be conformable to the body of Christ our Head. We shall be
like him: ill thoughts, bad motions, and perturbations shall be excluded. We
hear this; but he that believes it, and hopes to have it, his affection is
fixed in heaven. Therefore pray and repent, so shall thou have; what? A worldly
commodity for which thou do venture soul and body? Ah, thou shall have a
Throne of triumph, exceeding all earthly treasures, to reign in joys for
ever. If thou had all earthly riches, plentiousnes, pleasures, and
pleasantest place on earth, with all elegant objects, Princely prospects,
dainty delicates, musical Instruments, sweet singers, persumes, and fine
savors, with all thy unfeigned friends, and choice of chief lovers: yet all
this were pain in respect of heaven, where we shall over be with our good God:
to whom be all praise, honor, power, and glory now and ever, Amen: with heart
and tongue, again, Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
PSALM. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.
PROVE. 23.26. My son, give me thine heart.
Pray heartily.
OH heavenly Trinity, one God in unity, to thee be all honor. Glorious God,
at thy brightness, the Sun, Moon and Stars are abashed and impure in thy
sight: much more I, a sinful creature, which by mine iniquities have stained
those bright creatures. Omniscient God, thou knowost my thoughts before I
think them, and know me before I was. I was conceived in sin, borne in
sin, in sin I live. I am by nature the child of wrath: O give me grace to
be borne from above, that I may enter into thy kingdom. I am not worthy to
look up to thee, I deserve to be cast down to hell; but I appeal to the
Throne of thy mercy, in the Name of Jesus my Savior, which calls all
penitent sinners to him to give them rest. Oh Savior, refresh my silly soul
which cries to thee out of my sinful carcass, that I may apply thy
sufferings, merits, and promises to my soul and conscience, and be accepted
through thy righteousness. My Lord and my God, out of (...) side issued the
blood of my redemption, and water of absolution to purge me from pollution:
thou stand at the door and knockest, give me grace to open the door of my
heart; touch it with the finger of thy Spirit, that it maybe a fit receptacle
to entertain thee. Create in me a clean heart, o God; and renew a right
spirit within me, that I may resist all exill, and walk in righteousness and
holiness all the days of my life. Let the assurance of thy love wipe all
tears from mine eyes: so come Lord Jesus. Good God forgive me all my sins
for Jesus sake, in whom thou art well pleased: cloth me with his righteousness,
and behold me in him. I do deserve damnation, but he has paid my ransom.
Lord let me find and feel thy mercy. Give me grace to redeem the time, and
spend it to thy praise. Bless this Realm, our King, Queen, and Royal
Progeny: bless and comfort all thy children. Make us love those things that
thou do love; and hate that thou hate, that we may keep faith and a good
conscience. And if it be thy will, forgive and convert our enemies: Good God,
prepare me and thy children fit for thy kingdom. O Christ give us grace to
examine our selves whether thou be in us, that we may express the power of
godliness in our lives. Lord receive our souls when we depart this life, that
we may praise thee in heaven eternally. The which peace God bring us, for Jesus
sake that bought us: to whom with thee, o Father, and the holy Ghost, three
persons and one God, be all might, majesty, praise, honor, glory, power and
dominion, now and ever, Amen.

Watch and pray, praise God.
FINIS.

